 Jürgen Stark: Contributions of central bank statistics in a global context 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the World Statistics Day, Frankfurt am Main, 20 October 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  global  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  high  quality  statistics  are  essential.  The  crisis 
underscored  the  need  for  statistics  to  keep  pace  with  changes  in  the  financial  landscape. 
These changes can transform the nature of financial intermediation and the transmission of 
macro-financial shocks in the economy. Let me give you a few flashlights of how the global 
harmonisation of statistical concepts would support higher quality analysis. 
Global inflation rates have rebounded from their bottom, but they have remained subdued. 
However, these measures of inflation are not fully comparable. Data for the euro area and 
the  UK  (as  for  the  whole  European  Union)  refer  to  the  Harmonised  Indices  of  Consumer 
Prices  (HICPs)  calculated  according  to  a  harmonised  methodology  and  a  single  set  of 
definitions.  The  US  and  Japan  headline  rates  of  inflation  refer  to  their  national  ways  of 
compiling Consumer Price Inflation.1 Both countries also compile a price index that comes 
closer to the European Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices. 
One  of  the  main  differences  between  the  two  types  of  indices  is  the  treatment  of  owner 
occupied housing costs.2 The HICP does not cover the expenditure for buying a house or a 
flat,  as  it  is  methodologically  very  demanding  to  agree  on  one  method  given  the  different 
national circumstances. Data collection is complex and some argue that buying a house is an 
investment rather than consumption. Both the headline inflation measure in the US, as well 
as  in  Japan,  do  include  a  measure  of  owner  occupied  housing.  Comparing  the  euro  area 
HICP (1.6% for August) with the US CPI (1.1%), it appears that inflation is lower in the US. 
Taking the harmonised measure, the HICP, US inflation was higher (1.9%). I emphasis here 
that harmonisation for international comparability needs to be weighed against the specific 
needs for policy makers. The HICP provides the best measure for comparisons of consumer 
price inflation and for assessing price convergence and stability for the purpose of monetary 
policy – the HICP is hence used to measure the success of the ECB’s aim to achieve price 
stability. 
Excessive debt and leverage have been at the core of the financial crisis. This slide shows 
household debt levels in the US, the UK and the euro area, taken from financial accounts 
statistics. These statistics are part of the national accounts and provide, in principle, a good 
framework for international comparison of financial data. However, US data depart from the 
national  accounts  standards  in  some  areas  which  makes  them  not  fully  comparable;  for 
instance,  the  US  household  sector  is  narrower  than  in  the  other  economies.3  To  some 
extent, the data can be adapted to make them more comparable: in the slide, the US data on 
income  have  been  adjusted  to  better  conform  to  the  other  two  economies’  income  data.4 
                                                 
1   For  the  US,  the  headline  figure  is  the  “All  Items  Consumer  Price  Index  for  All  Urban  Consumers  (CPI-U)” 
reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, whereas the “General Consumer Price Index” in Japan is defined 
by the Japan Statistics Bureau. 
2   Other  differences  include  for  instance  the  coverage  of  households:  Whereas  the  HICP  includes  the  rural 
population in its scope, the US CPI only covers urban population. 
In the euro area and the UK, sole proprietorship and partnership without independent legal status are included 
in the households sector, but they are included in the non-financial corporations in the US. 
3  
4   Subtracting interest paid from the US measure of income, inter alia. 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 1
 These  caveats  notwithstanding,  there  is  a  remarkable  difference  in  household  debt  levels. 
The greater home ownership in the US and the UK compared with the euro area due to a 
more developed mortgage market has certainly contributed significantly to the higher levels 
of household debt in these countries.  
This chart illustrates a comparison of total household wealth. In this context, it is my pleasure 
to announce that the ECB will publish for the first time quarterly data on household wealth in 
the next statistical press release “Euro area financial and non-financial developments” to be 
issued on 28 October 2010. The proportion of financial wealth to total wealth is much higher 
in the US, mainly because of the higher weight of private pension schemes, and it is also 
more volatile, owing to the higher weight of equity assets in total wealth. The large drop in 
equity prices and house prices in some countries and in residential investment is reflected in 
a pronounced decline in the ratio of wealth to disposable income, particularly so in the U.S. 
Moreover,  in  the  US,  the  gap  between  total  wealth  and  financial  wealth  has  narrowed 
substantially.  
I will turn now from a typical lender, the household sector, to the typical borrower, the non-
financial corporations’ sector. The main difference between the euro area and the US is the 
weight  of  bank  financing.  In  the  US,  the  recourse  to  equity,  debt  securities  and  loans 
channelled outside the banking sector is much more widespread than in the euro area. One 
can  assume  that  during  times  of  robust  economic  growth,  the  relative  weight  of  market 
financing decreases, while in the most recent period of financial distress it has increased and 
substituted for bank financing.5  
This slide provides a picture of the development of bank loans and the most important part of 
loans  by  other  financial  intermediaries:  securitised  loans.  The  slide  for  the  euro  area  only 
provides an approximation to securitised lending, assuming that all OFI loans are securitised 
loans. In the near future, ESCB statistics on loan securitisation vehicles will enable a more 
detailed breakdown and thus a better comparison with the US. In terms of funding sources, 
securitised  lending  was  an  alternative  source  of  financing  to  deposits  collected  from  the 
public:  banks  obtained  the  funds  for  new  lending  through  bonds  issued  by  securitisation 
vehicles. While there is a significant drop in lending in both the euro area and the US and 
financing by banks has now turned negative, it is striking that a dramatic drop of securitised 
lending by ABS issuers started at the end of 2007.  
Let me now move to a  subject which is a key determinant of the euro area’s international 
competitiveness  –  productivity.  Productivity  growth  impinges  on  the  monetary  policy  of  the 
ECB:  it  has  an  influence  on  potential  output,  unit  labour  costs  and  potential  risks  to  price 
stability. In response to the crisis, the gap in labour productivity (per person) between the US 
and the euro area has widened significantly. As evident from next slide, this is partly due to 
the use of shortened hours’ schemes in a number of euro area countries had a significant 
impact on developments in productivity per head.  
While  shortened  working  hours  were  also  used  extensively  in  the  United  States  over  the 
course of the crisis, US firms were also much more likely to lay off workers. Along with the 
relatively larger contraction in economic activity seen in the euro area, this helps to explain 
the more significant fall in productivity growth per person employed in the euro area than in 
the US, over the course of the recession. 
At  a  sectoral  level,  the  euro  area’s  recent  favourable  labour  productivity  performance  has 
been mainly driven by positive cyclical developments in “industry excluding construction”. In 
contrast, productivity growth in services has not improved much, despite a few modest, but 
nevertheless encouraging, signs in the financial and business services sector. 
                                                 
5   One  explanation  may  be  that  in  periods  of  uncertainty  the  large  well-known  enterprises  with  good  ratings 
continue  to  attract  funds  at  favourable  conditions  and  may  then  channel  funds  to  smaller  enterprises  via 
intercompany loans or via trade credits. 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2010
 It  would,  of  course,  be  useful  to  compare  productivity  developments  in  a  wider  range  of 
sectors  in  the  euro  area  with  those  of  the  United  States.  But  this  is  not  yet  possible,  as 
quarterly productivity developments are not produced at the same sectoral breakdown in the 
US.  (The  US  disaggregates  only  to  the  non-farm  business  sector  and  the  manufacturing 
sector.)  
The main comparable indicators used for fiscal policy analysis are the general government 
deficit, expenditure and debt. Harmonised deficit figures show strong deficit deterioration in 
the euro area and in the US for the last two years. These were driven by sharp declines in 
tax  revenues  as  well  as  expansionary  fiscal  policies.  Japan6  displayed  a  deficit  between 
6 and 8% of GDP for most of the early 2000s as a consequence of the Japanese crises in 
the  1990s,  with  some  improvement  for  the  period  2006–2008.  In  2009,  the  fiscal  outlook 
deteriorated  again  with  an  estimated  deficit  of  around  7%  of  GDP.7  Again,  a  direct 
comparison is not possible without adjustments,8 due to methodological differences in their 
compilation.9 
The  expenditure-to-GDP  ratio10  indicates  the  size  of  the  government  sector.  Comparable 
figures show a convergence of expenditure levels in the US and Japan, at around 37% of 
GDP. The relative importance of the government sector in the euro area is much higher, with 
a  current  expenditure  ratio  just  above  50%  of  GDP.  When  interpreting  these  figures,  an 
important  caveat  concerns  the  institutional  differences  between  the  social  security  of  the 
countries. Mandatory private insurance schemes for pensions, unemployment or health care 
reduce  the  headline  figures  for  government  expenditure  in  the  US.  State  contributions  to 
compensate  for  households’  voluntary  payments  into  social  security  funds  increase 
government expenditure in the euro area. 
Comparable figures show an increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio11 between 2007 and 2009 in 
the euro area and the US, amounting to 12.8 percentage points and 19.2 percentage points 
respectively.  In  Japan,  the  government  debt  ratio  stood  at 162.2%12  of  GDP  in  2008  after 
rising more than 40 percentage points in the last decade. This is due to the accumulation of 
high deficits and low GDP growth.  
                                                 
6  
It is straightforward to compile government data for Japan according to the European definition on the basis of 
the Japanese national accounts as they are based on the international System of National Accounts (SNA), 
which is compatible with the European System of Accounts (ESA 95). 
7   According to the European Commission forecasts (Spring 2010), the deficit-to-GDP ratio for 2009 is projected 
to be 6.9%. It is important to highlight that no comparable deficit figures for Japan are available for 2009 yet. 
This is due to the fact that Japan releases national accounts data of the year t-2 in the year t (2009 data will 
be available only by the beginning of 2011). 
In terms of deficit, the main  methodological discrepancies between the  US methodology  and the European 
standards are mainly related to the sector delineation (public corporations are included in the US government 
sector), the recording of some military expenditures and the inventories held by governments. 
8  
9   The euro area deficit and debt indicators are based on the European System of Accounts (ESA95) and on the 
Excessive Deficit Procedure (EDP) concepts. In Japan, the deficit and debt indicators are compiled according 
to  the  SNA2008  concepts.  The  US  deficit  data  are  based  on  the  National  Income  and  Products  Accounts 
(NIPA) methodology, which deviates to some extent from the SNA2008, while the US debt data are based on 
the Flow of Funds methodology used by the Federal Reserve. 
10   Government expenditure covers social payments, subsidies, other current transfers, interest, compensation of 
employees, intermediate consumption and capital expenditure. 
11   “EDP debt” definition. 
12   One should highlight that the Japanese government holds financial assets worth around 90% of GDP [2008] 
(with a high percentage held by its social security system – around 40% of the total), which represent a buffer 
from a solvency perspective. This yields a net government debt-to-GDP ratio in Japan of around 86% (2008). 
Net  debt  is  calculated  from  the  Japanese’s  balance  sheet  data,  as  the  difference  between  the  government 
liabilities (177.4% of GDP in 2008) and the financial assets (90.9% of GDP in 2008). 
BIS Review 138/2010 
 3
 Progress and plans to fill gaps 
These  examples  illustrate  the  importance  of  internationally  comparable  statistics.  The 
statistics  should  only  reflect  differences  in  economic  developments  and  the  impact  of  the 
underlying  phenomena.  They  should  not  be  clouded  by  differences 
in  statistical 
methodology. In close cooperation with statisticians globally, the ECB is contributing to the 
G20 initiatives13 to provide harmonised and transparent global financial statistics in real time. 
These initiatives had significant input from the ECB and were welcomed recently also by the 
International Monetary and Financial Committee of the IMF Board of Governors.14 
“Statistics  may  be  defined  as  a  body  of  methods  for  making  wise  decisions  in  the  face  of 
uncertainty.” W.A. Wallis15  
Globalisation has increased this uncertainty. Globalisation continues to impact decisively on 
statistics  and  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  merits  of  comparable  statistics.  We  need  globally 
comparable  statistics.  And,  there  must  be  investment  in  closing  gaps  and  enhancing 
comparability of statistics at the global level. There is a global momentum and we must all be 
part.  The  World  Statistics  Day  is  an  excellent  occasion  to  give  a  new  impetus  to  this 
momentum. 
                                                 
13   Please see, Progress report on the "The Financial Crisis and Information Gaps" prepared by the IMF Staff and 
the FSB Secretariat, May 2010, at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_100510.pdf. 
14   Please see: http://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2010/pr10379.htm. 
15   President of the University of Rochester, 1962–1970; United States Under Secretary of State for Economic 
Affairs 1982–89. 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2010
  BIS Review 138/2010 
   5
    6 
 BIS Review 138/2010
 BIS Review 138/2010 
    7
    8 
 BIS Review 138/2010
 BIS Review 138/2010 
    9
    10 
 BIS Review 138/2010
   BIS Review 138/2010 
 11
