Bojan Marković: Dinarization strategy in Serbia 
Speech by Mr Bojan Marković, Vice Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at The Financial 
Markets Association (ACI) Serbia Annual Assembly, Zlatibor, 18 September 2010. 
 Judging by the experience of many other countries, Serbia has gone through the crisis well. 
The decline of the country’s output was among the lowest in Europe, inflation was on target, 
the rise in unemployment was contained. The banking system, well capitalized, came from 
the crisis largely unscathed.  
Yet, rather than boasting about successes, my purpose here is to speak about what could 
have  gone  better  and  what  the  key  stakeholders  –  the  central  bank,  government  and  the 
banking sector – should work on to increase the resilience of our economy and its financial 
system against potential future shocks.  
In contrast to the banking sector, the financial system on the whole, was hardly the source of 
strength  during  the  crisis.  Money  market  existed  only  on  the  shortest  maturities.  Spot  FX 
market  almost  disappeared  during  the  crisis,  and  only  recently  started  to  recover  higher 
volumes of trade. Market making initiatives of the banking sector and the ACI – the drivers of 
the  markets  development  in  the  past  –  have  been  scarce  in  recent  times.  And  the  few 
existing initiatives – such as the one on the development of basic hedging instruments – are 
stifled by low trust and credit limits among the market participants.  
These are important but small problems. What requires more attention and concerted efforts 
is to prevent a potential vulnerability of our financial system to the exchange rate risk in any 
potential  future  crisis.  It  is  not  the  toxic  assets  such  as  ABSs  that  were  the  risk  for  our 
financial  sector  stability  during  the  crisis,  it  was  the  sheer  quantity  of  FX  indexed  or 
denominated  loans  to  households  and  businesses  who  were  often  unhedged  against  FX 
risks.  
And I think we will all agree that if there was one single important problem for management 
of  the  crisis  in  Serbia,  it  would  be  the  high  level  of  financial  euroization  and,  related  to  it, 
excessive reliance on foreign resources.  
For us at the central bank – and also I believe for yourselves – it was a wary experience to 
watch the exchange rate swings during the crisis. On one side, depreciation was welcome 
since it was sheltering the economy from the world crisis. On the other, the consequences for 
the unhedged private and public sector balance sheets were potentially risky, especially in 
case of individuals who (although in minority) were quite vocal.  
Policy mix on occasions had to act as a compromise in steering the economy through the 
turbulent waters.  
Now, with these memories still fresh and vivid, it is a good time to think how we could reduce 
the  level  of  euroization  and  thus  improve  our  capacity  to  deal  with  such  situations  in  the 
future.  Indeed,  the  post-crisis  environment  provides  a  genuine  window  of  opportunity  to 
speed  up  our  efforts  towards  a  greater  use  of  dinar  and  building  dinar  based  financial 
markets.1 Rather than de-euroization, I therefore call this – the agenda of dinarization.  
                                                 
1   The post-crisis period offers a fairly predictable macro-environment with low inflation. Many bank clients are 
now  acutely  aware  of  the  FX  risk  and  so  are  the  banks  of  the  implied  indirect  credit  risk  to  their  balance 
sheets. The dinar balance sheet may also be a prospective way of expanding the retail banking business in 
the future, as the FX financing may be more constrained in terms of quality and price than in the past. 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 1
One  should  not  be  naive  –  the  size  of  the  problem  is  large.  Serbia  is  one  of  the  most 
financially euroized countries in Eastern Europe. More than 70% of both assets and liabilities 
in the banking system are either held in a foreign currency or indexed to it. The high level of 
euroization in Serbia reflects a history of macroeconomic instability (hence a dearth of local 
currency deposits), as well as abundant availability of foreign currency funding pre-crisis, and 
underdeveloped financial markets.  
Dinarization  will  therefore  be  a  long-term  process  to  gradually  transform  both  sides  of  the 
balance sheets of both banks and nonbanks. This long-term process will consist of a series 
of small steps that must be well coordinated. Some of these steps are already being taken, 
but there is no time to waste.  
What gives me hope is  the fact that reducing the level of euroization is certainly possible. 
Several countries have achieved sustained reductions in euroization or dollarization levels in 
the recent past. In our vicinity, it was Turkey or Poland. Turkey, for instance, has reduced the 
share  of  FX  deposits  from  60  to  30%  and  the  FX  loans  from  40  to  10%  in  the  decade 
preceding the crisis. Several Latin American countries have been successful too.  
Another  good  thing  is  that  we  are  not  alone  in  this  process.  The  development  of  local 
currency markets has become a priority item in the global agenda of creating a new world 
financial  infrastructure.,  This  is  reflected  in  a  number  of  initiatives  by  the  G20,  IMF  or  the 
World Bank. In our region, the EBRD is playing a key role in coordinating these efforts under 
the Vienna plus initiative.  
So, what should be the key requirement on our dinarization strategy? The strategy needs to 
have  realistic  objectives,  and  be  technically  feasible.  It  also  has  to  involve  all  key 
stakeholders and to minimize the risks of adverse side-effects on the economic recovery or 
other segments of the economy.  
Next,  what  extent  of  dinarization  is  achievable?  I  believe  increasing  the  share  of  dinar 
corporate  loans  in  the  banking  sector  from  the  current  28  to  around  45%  in  the  period  of 
2–4 years is a simple and appropriately ambitious objective.2 Under plausible assumptions, 
such an objective implies a net addition of circa 800 bn of new dinar denominated loans in 
the next 4 years compared to the existing stock of almost 300 bn.3 Although ambitious, this 
objective still provides enough room for the expansion of the FX credits – they could continue 
growing at 20% in nominal terms, which was the rate of growth of corporate credits in 2009.4 
Now, are there enough dinar sources for such dinar credit expansion? Yes, and the central 
bank  is  ready  to  supply  as  much  as  needed  (as  long  as  collateralized  by  dinar  T-bonds), 
should there be a structural dinar liquidity shortage in the future. Our analysis (based on an 
average multiplier from the recent years) shows that the current stock of repos and dinar part 
of  FX  required  reserves  should  comfortably  support  the  needed  dinar  credit  growth  in  the 
next 2  years. However, I would like to send a strong signal that the NBS is ready to start 
liquidity providing repo operations, if need be, so that the banking sector is not worried about 
the  sufficient  sources  of  dinars  in  the  future.  Also,  we  have  already  prepared  all  the 
necessary  infrastructure  for  such  potential  move,  although  we  do  not  expect  the  need  for 
such a move to arise this year. 
The  dinarization  strategy  must  involve  all  the  key  stakeholders  –  the  NBS,  banking  sector 
government,  and  the  public.  Most  activities  will  inevitably  be  done  by  the  NBS  and  the 
banking sector. However, increasing the public awareness and receiving an active support of 
                                                 
2  
I am assuming the cross-border loans are granted only to entities with FX denominated revenues and will not 
be a focus of dinarization campaign. 
3   Assuming that the real credit volume in the corporate sector will grow at an average annual rate of 20% (the 
average between 2007 and 2009). For simplicity we also assume a full roll-over of the existing stocks. 
4   With declining inflation along the targets, this implies rising real rates of FX credit growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2010
the government are also key conditions for success. For instance, government policies in the 
past had sometimes prioritized euro over dinar, not really providing a good example to the 
public.  Subsidies  extended  to  FX-based  financial  products  until  last  year  is  yet  another 
example. Also, a vast majority of government debt is in foreign currency, making fiscal policy 
exposed  to  FX  risks.  Some  public  companies  continue  to  make  FX  deposits  and  take  FX 
loans regardless of the nature of their hedging needs. Fortunately, the situation is changing 
rapidly and the government started actively to prioritize the use of dinars.  
The  dinarization  strategy  we  have  in  mind  has  three  interconnected  pillars.  Although 
activities in each pillar can be pursued independently, the progress is mutually reinforcing. 
However,  careful  coordination  is  needed  to  minimize  potential  adverse  effects  on  other 
economic activities.  
The first pillar is the most general but also the most important. It calls for strengthening the 
macroeconomic  environment  by  delivering  low  and  stable  inflation  through  a  flexible 
exchange rate, alongside durable economic growth and stable financial system.5 
Understandably, the NBS should continue and further reinforce its flexible exchange rate IT 
policies  under  this  pillar.  Similarly,  we  should  be  strengthening  our  capacity  to  provide  for 
stability  in  financial  markets.  Structural  reforms  in  the  real  economy  and  sustainable  fiscal 
policies delivering long-term growth are equally important. Although they rest outside of the 
monetary policy control, the NBS will support the government efforts in this area.  
We should also bear in mind that the real success in this pillar will come only over a long 
period,  requiring  prolonged  efforts.  We  are  positive  that  targeted  measures,  subsidies  and 
campaigns will increase short-term dinar savings and loans. However, a sustained period of 
macroeconomic stability will be needed before the trust in dinar as a means of storing wealth 
is re-established.  
The second pillar in our dinarization strategy should consist of measures creating favorable 
conditions  for  the  development  of  the  dinar  bond  market.  The  measures  should  facilitate 
expansion  of  the  dinar  credit  activity  of  banks  through  promoting  dinar  denominated 
instruments and markets. Development of an actively traded dinar yield curve is an important 
milestone of this pillar.  
In this sense, much activity is already taking place. Several commercial banks have started 
programs  offering  longer-term  dinar  credits  under  both  flexible  and  fixed  terms.  The 
government has been raising the local currency share in government debt, trying to extend 
the yield up to 2Y. Several initiatives under the Vienna plus are taking place focusing on the 
secondary  market  for  government  bonds.  Also  some  IFIs  expressed  an  interest  in  issuing 
dinar bonds locally.  
However,  more  still  needs  to  be  done  before  we  can  see  tangible  results.  The  secondary 
government bond market remains illiquid and the Treasury has been struggling lately with its 
T-bill program.  
The third pillar of our dinarization strategy aims to promote hedging of the existing foreign 
currency  risks  in  the  nonbank  sector  and  to  discourage  further  buildup of  these  risks.  The 
NBS has been taking a leading role in this field. It has worked with the banking sector on 
introducing  basic  hedging  instruments  both  in  the  inter-bank  market  and  in  client 
transactions.  It  has  also  introduced  regular  FX  swap  auctions  to  ease  the  liquidity 
management of banks.  
                                                 
5   An analysis undertaken by experts from the EBRD and IMF has identified the macroeconomic environment 
– low volatility of exchange rate relative to volatility of inflation – combined with hysteresis and bad memory as 
the  main  source  of  high  euroization  in  Serbia.  (See  the  forthcoming  EBRD  Working  Paper  by  Chailloux, 
Ohnsorge, and Vavra.) 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 3
In the coming months even more attention will be paid to consumer protection. Our goal is to 
increase  the  risk  awareness  of  banks’  clients  and  to  improve  basic  financial  literacy.  The 
NBS  has  launched  a  public  educational  campaign  through  a  series  of  FX  hedging 
conferences and a page at our website.6 We encourage the banks to take an active role by 
marketing dinar based and hedging instruments, and building FX risk awareness with their 
clients.  
Finally, further regulation remains an option, but the one we would not like to use as a main 
means. The regulatory measures should be used to restrict the most vulnerable segments 
from  FX  risk  exposure,  and  to  ensure  that  a  banking  model  based  on  a  blunt  pass-on  of 
exchange rate risk to clients is not viable.  
The NBS has been making regulatory changes gradually always careful that potential side 
effects  do  not  jeopardize  the  still  fragile  economic  recovery.  We  reduced  dinar  reserve 
requirement to 5% from 10%, with 2.5% remuneration. We have also amended the prudential 
debt  service-to-income  ratios  to  differentiate  by  currency  matching  with  borrower  income. 
Also, the compulsory deposit for loans taken in dinars has been abolished, whereas for loans 
indexed to foreign currency it is still 30%. Government has been on board too, and from May 
2010, state-subsided cash and liquidity loans are extended in dinars only.  
The  NBS  is  cooperating  and  intends  to  further  intensify  its  interactions  with  the  banking 
sector and ACI in all of these pillars. We would very much wish this to be a two-way process 
with the banking sector taking a lead in many areas. For instance, we welcomed the decision 
of the domestic banks to discontinue entirely their small lending programs in Swiss francs. 
We  would  be  happy  to  see  further  voluntary  restrictions  to  target  consumer  loans  to 
unhedged retail customers. We are ready to discuss and encourage any well meant initiative 
to  help  with  dinarizing  the  economy.  For  example,  formal  market  making  or  primary 
dealership arrangements could be considered if there is consensus that such arrangements 
could help.  
All in all, strengthening the resilience of our financial system must be based on increasing the 
use  of  dinars.  The  aim  of  the  dinarization  agenda  is  to  discourage  the  buildup  of  foreign 
currency risk in the nonbank sector, to hedge any remaining risks, and to develop the market 
for local currency financial instruments. It involves a number of very different activities – from 
pursuing an Inflation Targeting regime to educating borrowers about the FX risk. And it also 
requires a good coordination among the banking sector, government and the NBS.  
A lot has already been done in the past 18 months, but more rests ahead of us. In the period 
from  March  to  June  this  year  the  share  of  dinar  denominated  bank  assets  increased  from 
24.6% to 27.4% and more than 40% of the newly granted credits were in dinars. True, much 
of  it  drew  on  the  government  subsidy  programs,  but  several  banks  have  started  offering 
fixed-term  dinar  credits  with  a  maturity  of  several  years.  However,  we  are  not  seeing  any 
movements in the currency composition of savings so far. This is despite the fact that saving 
in dinars has been a more profitable strategy than saving in Euros in the past several years 
(see charts).7 But as I said earlier – changes in savers’ behavior require years of sustained 
macroeconomic and financial stability, and they will come gradually.  
The NBS is assuming the leading role in the dinarization agenda, but will cooperate closely 
with the other stakeholders – most notably the banking sector. We therefore welcome your 
initiatives and encourage an active approach to our common task. 
                                                 
6   NBS-FX Hedging (http://www.nbs.rs/internet/english/64/index.html). 
7   Among others, the NBS has conducted recently two studies on this topic. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2010
Exercise  1)  Deposits  worth  EUR1000  in  a)  dinars  and  b)  euros,  are  deposited  on  saving 
accounts in January 2001 and August 2006 for the period of year. Every year at the end of 
the term, the deposits increased by interest are rolled over, until April 2010. 
 Exercise  2)  Between  2001–2010,  EUR1000  worth  of  deposits,  in  euros  and  dinars,  are 
placed each month on saving accounts for a) one year and b) three-month periods. At the 
end of the term period, the yield on dinar saving deposits were compared to the yield on euro 
saving deposits (without rollover, interest calculated at the end of the period). 
 BIS Review 126/2010 
 5
