European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
13 January 2011. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. Let me wish you all a very Happy New Year. I would also like to take this 
opportunity to welcome Estonia as the seventeenth country to adopt the euro as its currency. 
Accordingly,  Mr  Lipstok,  the  Governor  of  Eesti Pank,  became  a  member  of  the  Governing 
Council  on  1 January  2011.  Following  the  adoption  of  the  euro  by  Estonia  there  are  now 
331 million citizens using the euro as their currency. We will now report on the outcome of 
today’s meeting, which was also attended by Commissioner Rehn. 
Based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council confirmed that 
the  current  key  ECB  interest  rates  still  remain  appropriate.  It  therefore  decided  to  leave 
them  unchanged.  Taking  into  account  all  the  new  information  and  analyses  which  have 
become available since our meeting on 2 December 2010, we see evidence of short-term 
upward pressure on overall inflation, mainly owing to energy prices, but this has not so far 
affected our assessment that price developments will remain in line with price stability over 
the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the  same  time,  very  close  monitoring  is  warranted.  Recent 
economic  data  are  consistent  with  a  positive  underlying  momentum  of  economic  activity, 
while  uncertainty  remains  elevated.  Our  monetary  analysis  indicates  that  inflationary 
pressures over the medium term should remain contained. Overall, we expect price stability 
to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro 
area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of 
inflation expectations is of the essence.  
Overall,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative.  The  stance,  the 
provision  of  liquidity  and  the  allotment  modes  will  be  adjusted  as  appropriate,  taking  into 
account the fact that all the non-standard measures taken during the period of acute financial 
market  tensions  are,  by  construction,  temporary  in  nature.  Accordingly,  the  Governing 
Council will continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following the 0.3% quarter-on-quarter increase in euro area real GDP in the third quarter of 
2010,  recent  statistical  releases  and  survey-based  evidence  confirm  that  the  positive 
underlying momentum of economic activity in the euro area remained in place towards the 
end  of  2010.  Looking  ahead  at  2011,  euro  area  exports  should  benefit  from  a  continued 
recovery  in  the  world  economy.  At  the  same  time,  and  particularly  taking  into  account  the 
relatively high level of business confidence in the euro area, private sector domestic demand 
should increasingly contribute to growth, supported by the accommodative monetary policy 
stance  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system. 
However,  the  recovery  in  activity  is  expected  to  be  dampened  by  the  process  of  balance 
sheet adjustment in various sectors. 
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  this  economic  outlook  are  still  slightly 
tilted  to  the  downside,  with  uncertainty  remaining  elevated.  On  the  one  hand,  global  trade 
may  continue  to  grow  more  rapidly  than  expected,  thereby  supporting  euro  area  exports. 
Moreover,  strong  business  confidence  could  provide  more  support  to  domestic  economic 
activity in the euro area than is currently expected. On the other hand, downside risks relate 
to the tensions in some segments of the financial markets and their potential spillover to the 
euro area real economy. Further downside risks relate to renewed increases in oil and other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
commodity  prices,  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of 
global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 2.2% in December, 
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, after 1.9% in November. This was somewhat higher 
than  expected  and  largely  reflects  higher  energy  prices.  Looking  ahead  to  the  next  few 
months,  inflation  rates  could  temporarily  increase  further.  They  are  likely  to  stay  slightly 
above 2%, largely owing to commodity price developments, before moderating again towards 
the  end  of  the  year.  Overall,  we  see  evidence  of  short-term  upward  pressure  on  overall 
inflation, stemming largely from global commodity prices. While this has not so far affected 
our assessment that price developments will remain in line with price stability over the policy-
relevant  horizon,  very  close  monitoring  of  price  developments  is  warranted.  Inflation 
expectations over the medium to longer term continue to be firmly anchored in line with the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments are still broadly balanced but could 
move to the upside. Upside risks relate, in particular, to developments in energy and non-
energy commodity prices. Furthermore, increases in indirect taxes and administered prices 
may  be  greater  than  currently  expected,  owing  to  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the 
coming  years,  and  price  pressures  in  the  production  chain  could  rise  further.  On  the 
downside, risks relate mainly to the impact on inflation of potentially lower growth, given the 
prevailing uncertainties.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  increased  to  1.9%  in 
November 2010, after 0.9% in October. This strong increase is in part related to base effects 
and  volatile  factors.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  also  increased, 
rising to 2.0% in November from 1.5% in October. Looking beyond the special factors that 
operated  in  November,  broad  money  and  loan  growth  is  still  low,  corroborating  the 
assessment that the underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that inflationary 
pressures over the medium term should remain contained. 
The  interest  rate  constellation  continued  to  exert  a  significant  impact  on  the  growth  of 
monetary aggregates. Looking at M3 components, the interest rates paid on short-term time 
deposits  remained  higher  than  those  paid  on  overnight  deposits.  As  a  result,  annual 
M1 growth  continued  to  moderate,  standing  at  4.6%  in  November  2010,  while  the  annual 
growth  rate  of  other  short-term  deposits  continued  to  become  less  negative.  At  the  same 
time,  the  yield  curve  has  lately  become  steeper  again,  implying  that  the  attractiveness  of 
short-term  deposits  included  in  M3  has  declined  somewhat  compared  with  more  highly 
remunerated longer-term assets outside M3. 
The  annual  growth  rate  of  bank  loans  to  the  private  sector  continued  to  increase  in 
November,  partly  owing  to  special  factors.  At  the  sectoral  level,  this  strengthening 
increasingly  reflects  the  upward  movement  in  the  growth  of  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations,  which  stood  at  –0.1%  in  November,  after  –0.5%  in  October,  thereby  further 
confirming that a turning point was reached in the course of 2010. The growth of loans to 
households  remained  stronger,  at  2.7%  in  November  after  2.9%  in  October,  but  the  latest 
data point to some signs of a levelling-off. 
Over the past few months banks have expanded the provision of credit to the private sector 
in  an  environment  in  which  the  overall  size  of  their  balance  sheets  has  remained  broadly 
stable. The challenge remains to expand the availability of such credit when demand picks 
up  further.  To  address  this  challenge,  where  necessary,  it  is  essential  for  banks  to  retain 
earnings,  to  turn  to  the  market  to  strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  to  take  full 
advantage of government support measures for recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates still remain appropriate. We therefore decided 
to leave them unchanged. Taking into account all the new information and analyses which 
have become available since our meeting on 2 December 2010, we see evidence of short-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
term upward pressure on overall inflation, mainly owing to energy prices, but this has not so 
far  affected  our  assessment  that  price  developments  will  remain  in  line  with  price  stability 
over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the  same  time,  very  close  monitoring  is  warranted. 
Recent  economic  data  are  consistent  with  a  positive  underlying  momentum  of  economic 
activity, while uncertainty remains elevated. A cross-check of the outcome of our economic 
analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  indicates  that  inflationary  pressures  over  the 
medium  term  should  remain  contained.  Overall,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained 
over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Inflation expectations remain firmly  anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations is 
of the essence.  
Turning to fiscal policies, in view of the ongoing vulnerability to adverse market reactions, 
countries need to do their utmost to meet their deficit targets and put government debt-to-
GDP ratios firmly on a downward trajectory. In this regard, the Governing Council takes note 
of the recently announced measures in some euro area countries to reduce their very large 
fiscal  imbalances.  Where  necessary,  additional  corrective  measures  –  preferably  on  the 
expenditure side – need to be swiftly defined and implemented. At the same time, all euro 
area countries should pursue ambitious and credible multi-year consolidation strategies. This 
will help to strengthen confidence in the sustainability of public finances, reduce risk premia 
in interest rates and improve the conditions for sound and sustainable growth. Any positive 
fiscal  developments  that  may  emerge,  reflecting  factors  such  as  a  more  favourable  than 
expected  economic  environment,  should  be  exploited  to  make  faster  progress  with  fiscal 
consolidation.  
Substantial  and  far-reaching  structural  reforms,  complementing  fiscal  adjustment,  should 
be  rapidly  implemented  to  enhance  the  prospects  for  higher  sustainable  growth.  Major 
reforms  are  particularly  necessary  in  those  countries  that  have  experienced  a  loss  of 
competitiveness in the past or that are suffering from high fiscal and external deficits. The 
removal  of  labour  market  rigidities  would  further  support  the  adjustment  process  of  these 
economies. Increasing product market competition, particularly in the services sectors, would 
also  facilitate  the  restructuring  of  the  economy  and  encourage  innovation.  Such  measures 
are crucial for enhancing productivity growth, which is one of the main drivers of long-term 
growth. All these structural reforms should be supported by the necessary improvements in 
the structure of the banking sector. Sound balance sheets, effective risk management and 
transparent, robust business models remain key to strengthening banks’ resilience to shocks 
and to ensuring adequate access to finance, thereby laying the foundations for sustainable 
growth and financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
