William C Dudley: The national and regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey, 
18 August 2011. 
 Good morning. I am pleased to be in Newark this morning and to speak to the members of 
the Newark Regional Business Partnership. 
In the aftermath of the financial crisis, as we wound down our emergency meetings, I asked 
my staff to develop an ambitious outreach program so I could visit the different parts of my 
District. Over time, I plan to visit all parts of the region. 
Each trip gives me a chance to deepen relationships with the people I represent. As you may 
know, the New York Fed’s District includes 12 counties here in northern New Jersey; all of 
New York State; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico; and the U.S. Virgin Islands. In 
June, I met with community leaders, businesses and elected officials in Brooklyn, and in May 
I travelled to several cities in the mid-Hudson Valley north of New York City to meet with the 
leadership  of  those  communities.  Today  and  tomorrow  I  will  meet  with  a  wide  range  of 
people and organizations here in northern New Jersey to talk about what I do and to learn 
firsthand about the economic and financial issues important to you. These conversations will 
help me to represent all of my constituents in my work at the Fed as I consider how best to 
manage interest rates and make other monetary policy decisions. 
Northern New Jersey is important to me not just because it is a large and important part of 
the New York Fed’s District but also because it is my home. My wife and I have made our 
home in Cranford – her home town where she can be near her mother.  
While my colleagues and I are pleased to work with the business community – and I know 
that Jason Bram and Rae Rosen of the Fed have addressed this group in the past – we also 
have a number of initiatives specifically targeted to help low- and moderate-income groups, 
particularly here in Newark. 
For the past three years we have provided the Newark/Essex County Foreclosure Taskforce 
with  data  and  analyses  on  the  latest  mortgage  conditions  and  trends  through  a  range  of 
outlets including round tables, presentations and newsletters. This Taskforce was formed in 
response  to  the  rise  in  foreclosures  in  Newark  and  surrounding  towns  in  late  2007.  The 
Taskforce is comprised of representatives of over 40 community development corporations, 
nonprofit  housing  counseling  and  legal  service  providers,  government  and  community 
development officials and advocacy organizations working to address this serious issue. 
Over  the  past  two  years  we  have  partnered  with  Bank  on  Newark.  Bank  on  Newark  is  a 
private/public  partnership  developed  to  bring  unbanked  populations  into  the  financial 
mainstream  by  providing  assistance  in  establishing  bank  accounts  and  receiving  financial 
education. The New York Fed serves as an advisor and data monitor for Bank on Newark 
and its sister program, Bank on Manhattan, as well. 
This fall, we will launch our Financial Awareness Video Competition in Newark and Essex 
County  in  partnership  with  the  City  of  Newark.  The  goal  of  this  video  competition  is  to 
promote  financial  awareness  in  the  Greater  Newark  community.  The  video  competition 
invites university- and college-level students to produce original videos that encourage young 
adults to practice sound personal financial decisionmaking. We have successfully launched 
similar video competitions in Puerto Rico and New York City. Last year’s videos were judged 
by a panel of professional film makers and leading advertising agencies. The winning videos 
ran for two weeks as “shorts” in major movie theaters in Manhattan and Queens. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I thank the Newark Regional Business Partnership, PNC Bank and NJ PAC for inviting me 
here to speak to you today. I would also like to thank the SGA Group PC for sponsoring this 
breakfast.  Over  the  next  two  days  I  look  forward  to  meeting  with  your  elected  officials  in 
Newark,  visiting  Newark  Now,  sitting  down  with  the  Episcopal  Community  Development 
Housing  Counselors,  as  well  as  meeting  with  New  Jersey  community  bankers  and  credit 
union officials, visiting the manufacturer Accurate Box, touring Jersey City and learning more 
about the pharmaceutical industry – my staff has booked a packed schedule. 
The role of the New York fed 
By way of introduction, let me briefly review what the New York Fed does and what makes 
my  job  so  interesting.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, 
also known as the FOMC. I am vice chair of the committee and we meet eight times a year in 
Washington, D.C., to set interest rates and make other decisions about monetary policy. 
At every meeting of the FOMC, each committee member presents his or her current outlook 
for their region and for the overall economy. For these assessments, we augment input from 
our research departments with critical information about local economic conditions supplied 
by  our  board  of  directors,  regional  advisory  councils  and  conversations  with  local 
stakeholders, such as the feedback I will get from you today. 
At the regional level, we continually track economic conditions in our District, and we have 
created a number of tools for this purpose. For example, to fill a void in timely measures of 
regional  economic  output  my  staff  produces  monthly  indexes  of  economic  activity  for  New 
Jersey,  as well  as  for New  York  State  and  New  York  City.  These  measures  are similar  in 
concept to measures of gross domestic product (GDP). We have also initiated a consumer 
credit  panel  so  we  can  monitor  local  household  credit  conditions,  including  the  amount  of 
debt being carried per person and the composition and payment status of that debt. 
Furthermore, we have a new survey to track credit and financing issues for small businesses, 
which create a lot of jobs. The poll takes a fresh look at borrower demand by asking firms not 
only about credit applications but also about reasons for not seeking credit. In all, 876 small 
businesses from the tri-state area responded to our May 2011 poll, and 14 percent of these 
were from New Jersey. 
To  share  the  information  that  we  gather  and  produce  about  our  diverse  District,  we  have 
created  a  rich  website  with  localized  current  data  and  maps  on  conditions  in  the  region.  I 
invite  you  to  visit  us  at  newyorkfed.org  to  explore  the  highly  detailed  information  on  small 
business, credit and housing conditions that we provide. 
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  our 
colleagues in Washington and at other agencies in the United States and abroad to help put 
the nation’s financial system on a firmer footing. Yet, much remains to be done and we are 
determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis business as 
usual – whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep my colleagues busy even in normal times. 
Macro conditions 
The statement issued by the Federal Open Market Committee earlier last week presents a 
sober  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  U.S.  economy.  Economic  growth  so  far  in  2011  has 
been quite a bit slower than we expected earlier in the year. While jobs growth picked up 
early  in  the  year,  in  the  last  few  months  conditions  in  the  labor  market  have  deteriorated 
again and the unemployment rate has edged up. Household spending has flattened out, and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  housing  sector  is  depressed.  Business  investment  in  equipment  and  software  is 
expanding, but investment in corporate offices and other commercial buildings is weak. 
Some of the weakness in economic activity in the first half of the year was due to temporary 
factors such as the hit to household income from higher food and energy prices, and supply 
chain  disruptions  following  the  tragic  earthquake  in  Japan.  These  restraining  forces  have 
abated and thus, we should see stronger growth in the second half. But it is clear that not all 
of the weakness was due to these one-time factors – and in light of this, I have revised down 
my expectations for the pace of recovery going forward. 
On the inflation front, the committee noted that inflation has moderated recently as energy 
and commodity prices have declined from their peaks – having picked up earlier in the year, 
mainly  reflecting  higher  prices  for commodities  and  imported  goods,  as  well  as  the  supply 
disruptions from Japan. Longer term inflation expectations remain stable, and the committee 
now expects inflation to settle over the coming quarters at levels at or below those consistent 
with our mandate to promote full employment and price stability.  
In light of the current outlook, the FOMC in its statement noted that we now anticipate that 
we are likely to keep short-term interest rates exceptionally low at least through mid-2013. 
We  also  discussed  the  range  of  policy  tools  available  to  promote  a  stronger  economic 
recovery in a context of price stability. Further details on the discussion at the meeting will be 
available when the minutes are published later this month. I will not comment on monetary 
policy any further today. 
Following the release of the FOMC’s statement, market interest rates generally moved lower, 
which should help provide some additional support for economic activity and jobs. I would 
note, however, that conditions remain unsettled and the equity market in particular has been 
quite volatile recently.  
Regional economic conditions 
So how is our region doing? Let me start by saying that New Jersey is well-positioned for 
growth. The state has a population of 8.8 million, the 11th largest state, and despite the fact 
that this is a fairly mature region, the state’s population expanded by 4.5 percent over the 
past decade. More than 40 percent of the population 25 years of age and older in the state 
have  a  college  degree,  a  full  5  percentage  points  higher  than  the  national  average.  Our 
population is quite ethnically diverse: roughly 20 percent of the state’s residents were born 
abroad, and that share is even higher in Essex and Bergen counties. Significant numbers of 
the  foreign  born  residents  in  the  state  come  from  India,  Mexico,  the  Philippines,  the 
Dominican Republic and Korea.  
The state’s economy is also quite diverse, and its industry mix mirrors that of the national 
economy.  A  sizeable  number  of  jobs  in  the  state  are  in  the  healthcare,  professional  and 
business service, wholesale and retail trade, and leisure and hospitality categories. When we 
look at the northern part of the state, we see a somewhat greater concentration of jobs in 
finance,  particularly  in  Hudson  County,  in  goods  distribution,  related  to  the  ports,  rail  lines 
and  trucking  and  warehousing  activities  that  are  prominent  here,  in  pharmaceuticals 
manufacturing and research and development, and in the private education sector. 
The area also has important links to New York City. For example, the data centers here in 
the  state  serve  many  of  the  city’s  financial  firms.  In  addition,  a  large  number  of  residents, 
including  myself,  commute  each  day  into  the  city.  A  smaller  but  still  sizeable  number  of 
New Yorkers commute into this state. 
Now, how did the state fare during the downturn and how is the recovery proceeding? As I 
mentioned,  the  New  York  Fed  produces  indexes  of  economic  activity  to  help  monitor  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
performance  of  the  region.1  Based  on  our  index,  the  downturn  in  activity  in  New  Jersey 
began  about  the  same  time  as  the  Great  Recession  was  beginning  nationwide  –  that  is, 
around December 2007. While activity in the state is no longer declining, and there has been 
a  slight  pickup  this  year  in  the  level  of  activity,  to  date  there  is  still  no  sign  that  a  strong 
recovery has taken hold. Quite frankly, this modest recovery in New Jersey contrasts with the 
relatively sturdy recovery in activity in New York City over the past 18 months. 
Employment in our region also declined substantially during the Great Recession. Job losses 
in New Jersey totaled about 250,000 – on par with the roughly 6 percent loss nationwide. 
The pattern of job losses here in northern New Jersey was very similar. In New York City, job 
losses were also large but somewhat less severe, with employment in the city down a little 
over 4 percent. 
The  jobs  recovery  in  New  Jersey  to  date  has  been  sluggish.  The  private  sector  has  seen 
moderate  gains,  with  growth  in  some  of  the  key  sectors  I  mentioned  earlier,  particularly 
professional  and  business  services,  education  and  health,  and  leisure  and  hospitality. 
Businesses in these sectors, on balance, expanded jobs at a faster rate than in the nation. 
But the state continues to shed jobs in manufacturing and residential construction. Notably, 
overall  employment  in  the  state  has  been  weighed  down  by  declines  in  public  sector 
employment. Like many states, New Jersey faced large projected state budget deficits during 
the downturn, and, as in many states, the adjustment to those gaps included job cuts through 
a  reduction  in  state  government  jobs  and  cuts  in  state  funding  for  local  government 
programs. 
Because  the  jobs  recovery  has  been  weak,  there  has  been  little  progress  in  reducing 
unemployment.  The  unemployment  rate  among  New  Jersey  residents  currently  stands  at 
9.5 percent, the same rate as a year ago, and slightly above the national rate. 
Underneath the slow overall job growth, however, there is a considerable amount of churning 
in the labor market. Taking a closer look at the patterns of job gains and losses during the 
recession and recovery reveals some interesting facts about the labor market in New Jersey. 
Of particular interest is that job creation in the state and the nation since the recession ended 
has  been  closely  balanced  between  hiring  into  industries  that  lost  jobs  lost  during  the 
recession  and  jobs  in  expanding  industries.  Thus,  many  unemployed  workers  may  be 
returning to work without needing to retrain or look far afield from the job they lost. However, 
an  equal  number  may  need  to  search  outside  the  industry  they  know  best  and  this  may 
require  retraining  in  some  cases.  Thus,  the  need  for  job  search  assistance  and  training 
opportunities is likely to be high in New Jersey and the nation in the near term.2 
Now  let’s  look  at  the  situation  of  New  Jersey  households.  Here,  too,  there  is  room  for 
improvement. While the median household income among New Jersey families is the second 
highest in the nation – at about $68,000 in 2009 – about 9 percent of residents are in families 
with incomes below the poverty line. This rate compares favorably with the national rate of 
13.6 percent, but varies by city across the state: here in Newark that share is 24 percent. 
Reducing  poverty  is  a  major  challenge  for  policymakers.  Local  organizations  like  Newark 
Now are working hard to create greater economic independence for low- to moderate-income 
residents. 
More  broadly,  how  are  the  state’s  families  doing  in  restoring  their  finances?  During  the 
recession, all across the nation, the number of debt delinquencies soared and many families 
had to reduce their debt to more sustainable levels. The New York Fed keeps track of credit 
conditions in the region – including the average debt carried per person and whether they are 
                                                 
1  Regional Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators 
2  See, for additional discussion of this topic, William Dudley. 2011. “Job Creation in the Region.” Remarks at the 
Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York City. August 12. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
current  with  their  payments  –  using  the  special  consumer  credit  panel  we  developed.  The 
report for the second quarter of this year was just released on Monday.3 
Families in New Jersey are reducing their debt levels. As of the second quarter of this year, 
for those people with a credit report, average debt per person was about $60,400 down from 
$63,000 three years ago. But the crisis has taken its toll. Delinquency rates on the debt are 
high: 7.4 percent of all debt in the state is seriously delinquent, roughly the same rate as the 
nation. The comparable figure for the state just three years ago was 4.1 percent, so, like the 
nation,  households  in  the  state  still  appear  to  have  a  considerable  way  to  go  before  they 
reach more comfortable debt levels. 
While there have been indications that home prices in the area have been firming in the past 
few months, the mortgage crisis continues to take a toll on New Jersey homeowners. As of 
March of this year, 10 percent of all borrowers in the state were either 90-plus days delinquent 
on their mortgages or their homes were in foreclosure – above the national rate of 7.7 percent. 
In Essex County, that rate had reached 16 percent, and in Newark it was 30 percent. 
In our recent small business survey, which we conducted in May, we asked firms to report on 
their  first  quarter  sales  and  their  future  outlook.  The  results  were  encouraging.  Over  two-
thirds of firms told us they had stable or increased sales in Q1, up from 50 percent last year. 
When asked about their future outlook, while the majority of business owners, 56 percent, 
were neutral – many more said they were optimistic than pessimistic – 37 percent compared 
with only 7 percent.  
Conclusion 
These  debt  and  delinquency  figures,  together  with  the  weak  jobs  picture,  suggest  that 
New Jersey faces a number of challenges. In the near term, the key issue will be to expand 
jobs and reduce unemployment. At this point it is difficult to say when the pace of recovery in 
the state will pick up, but several factors appear encouraging. 
A  continued  expansion  of  output  and  employment  nationally  would  clearly  help  to  expand 
activity  and  employment  in  a  number  of  industries  in  the  state,  including  professional  and 
business  services  and  the  goods  distribution  industries.  Also,  the  pace  of  contraction  in 
public sector jobs in the state has slowed from the sharp declines that occurred last year, 
and  has  thus  become  less  of  a  drag  on  job  growth.  Further,  continued  job  growth  in  New 
York City should create opportunities for New Jersey residents, particularly in this part of the 
state. 
Longer term, one of the key challenges will be for the state to build upon and expand the 
human  capital  –  by  which  I  mean  the  education  and  skills  –  of  its  workforce.  A  region’s 
human capital determines a large part of its economic success. Even though it already has 
one of the most educated workforces in the country, New Jersey needs to continue to attract 
and train workers who can do a range of tasks that an advanced economy demands, such as 
start  innovative  firms,  operate  sophisticated  capital  equipment  and  design  websites.  In 
addition, a broad expansion of education and skills goes a long way to broaden participation 
in the economy to all residents of the state. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                 
3  Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit, August 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
