Peter Pang: Policies adopted by authorities in different jurisdictions with 
respect to international reserves 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  Independent  Evaluation  Office  (IEO)/Hong 
Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR) Workshop, Hong Kong, 24 March 2011. 
 It is a pleasure to welcome all of you to this event co-hosted by the Hong Kong Institute for 
Monetary Research (HKIMR) and the Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF. 
The  HKIMR,  as  some  of  you  already  know,  is  a  subsidiary  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority. Its objectives are to promote research on longer-term and wider policy issues of 
relevance to the monetary and financial development of Hong Kong and the Asia region; and 
to  foster  cooperation  and  cross-fertilisation  of  research  efforts  between  academics, 
international financial institutions and the HKMA research activities.  
For this reason we are particularly pleased to co-sponsor this workshop which deals with the 
important  topic  of  policies  adopted  by  authorities  in  different  jurisdictions  with  respect  to 
international  reserves  and  with  the  advice  the  IMF  gives  in  this  regard  in  its  consultations 
with policy authorities.  
The  accumulation  of  international  reserves  has  become  one  of  the  issues  at  the  center  of 
debates about the functioning of the current international monetary system as well as about 
reforms of this system. 
One lesson that authorities in this part of the world drew from the financial crisis in the late 
1990s  was  that  strong  policy  fundamentals  are  not  always  enough  to  guard  against  the 
vagaries of international capital flows. A sizable cushion of international reserves is important 
as a buffer to guard against sudden changes in market sentiments that can lead to capital 
outflows and pressures on the currency.  
Starting shortly after the Asian financial crisis reserves were thus accumulated in the region 
to build up such buffers. 
But  holding large  amounts  of  reserves  is  of  course  costly as  they  are  typically  invested  in 
highly  liquid  assets  with  relatively  low  yields  compared  with  some  alternative  uses  of  the 
funds. It is partly for this reason that authorities in the region have taken steps to create a 
mechanism for pooling some of their reserves in the form of the Chiang Mai initiative which 
started in year 2000 and its multilateral extension which was agreed on in 2010. 
While the size of the pool of reserves under the Chiang Mai agreement is relatively modest 
compared  to  the  potential  needs  for  some  of  the  larger  economies  in  the  region,  the 
importance of the agreement goes far beyond the aggregate amount of reserves involves. It 
reflects a desire by authorities in the region to foster financial cooperation in the region while 
at the same time creating arrangements which will help safe-guard financial stability. 
But  the  accumulation  of  reserves  in  the  region  in  recent  years  is  not  only  the  result  of  a 
desire  to  build  buffers  against  future  shocks.  It  is  also  the  consequence  of  large  capital 
inflows into Asia in the wake of the financial crisis in the United States and Europe. Loose 
monetary polices in response to the subdued economic prospects in these regions as well as 
the  strong  growth  performance  in  Asia  have  led  to  large-scale  capital  inflows  into  many 
economies in Asia. 
The reversal of such inflows could put domestic monetary and financial stability in jeopardy if 
they  lead  to  overshooting  of  interest  rates  and  asset  prices.  The  recent  experience  of  the 
region  at  the  height  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008  raised  the  concern  that  even 
reserves considered of very high levels in normal times may not be sufficient to cushion the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
forces  of  abrupt  outflows.  This  has  led  to  discussions  about  the  need  to  reform  the 
international monetary system, including the creation of a global financial safety net. 
While  I  understand  that  the  evaluation  the  IEO  is  undertaking  on  IMF  advice  and  country 
perspectives on international reserves will not deal with all the questions related to reform of 
the  international  monetary  system,  I  am  sure  it  will  provide  very  useful  inputs  into  this 
process. 
I  am  therefore  very  pleased  that  the  HKIMR  and  the  IEO  has  brought  together  such  a 
distinguished  group  for  this  workshop,  and  I  look  forward  to  very  interesting  and  fruitful 
discussions. 
With these words of welcome I now turn the floor over to Mr. Moises Schwartz, the Director 
of the IEO to set the scene for the discussion of the workshop. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
