Ric Battellino: The Reserve Bank of Australia’s thinking on the economy 
over the past year 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The 
Economist’s Bellwether Series: Australia, Sydney, 23 August 2011. 
 Over the past year, the Australian economy has been subject to a number of strong, often 
countervailing,  economic  forces:  strong  demand  for  commodities,  rising  global  inflation, 
global  financial  market  instability,  consumer  caution,  slower  population  growth  and  slow 
productivity growth. The economy has also been affected by severe weather events. Today I 
would like to look back over the year and review how these forces have shaped the economy 
and the Reserve Bank’s thinking on monetary policy.  
If we start by casting our minds back a year ago, you will recall that the Bank at that time was 
starting to contemplate whether it should move from a relatively neutral setting of monetary 
policy to one that was slightly restrictive. The global economy was growing at a solid pace, 
though  with  clear  downside  risks.  Domestically,  a  rebalancing  in  demand,  from  public  to 
private  spending,  was  starting  to  take  place;  the  outlook  for  business  investment  was 
particularly strong. Employment was growing very quickly, unemployment had fallen back to 
just above 5 per cent, and inflation was forecast to reach the top end of the target range over 
the subsequent couple of years.  
The  Board’s  assessment  of  these  circumstances  was  that,  if  they  continued  and  the 
economic outlook evolved as expected, there would be a case to raise interest rates a little at 
some point. However, the uncertainty in global markets, due to the spread of sovereign debt 
concerns beyond Greece, was seen as posing downside risks to the global economy, and 
consequently  to  Australia.  Also,  the  strong  exchange  rate  and  weak  demand  for  credit 
pointed  to  financial  conditions  perhaps  being  somewhat  tighter  than  might  be  indicated 
simply by reference to interest rates. These considerations were seen as reasons for caution 
and, in the event, the Board held interest rates steady through to November 2010.  
By the November meeting, financial market volatility had declined and the Chinese economy 
was  continuing  to  grow  strongly.  Earlier  downside  risks  to  global  growth  had  diminished 
somewhat and it was becoming clear that global GDP would record a very strong increase 
for 2010 as a whole. Domestically, employment had continued to grow very quickly. While 
there  were  significant  differences  in  the  performance  of  various  sectors  of  the  economy, 
overall it appeared that resource utilisation in the economy was tightening. The CPI outcome 
for  the  September  quarter  had  been  a  little  lower  than  expected,  but  the  assessment 
remained  that  the  downward  trend  in  inflation  had  largely  run  its  course.  The  forecasts 
envisaged a strengthening economy, with the effects of the rising terms of trade more than 
offsetting those from fiscal tightening. Also, inflation was testing the top of the target range by 
the end of the forecast period. The Board therefore concluded that the balance of risks had 
shifted  to  the  point  where  a  move  to  a  slightly  restrictive  stance  of  monetary  policy  was 
prudent, and it decided to lift the cash rate by 25 basis points to 4.75 per cent.  
Banks  responded  to  the  November  increase  in  the  cash  rate  with  substantially  larger 
increases  –  around  40  basis  points  –  in  interest  rates  on  housing  loans.  The  size  of  this 
increase, and the controversy it created, seemed to have a noticeable impact on household 
behaviour.  Consumer  confidence  fell,  though  to  levels  that  were  still  above  average. 
Coincidentally, there was a renewed step up in financial market volatility, stemming from the 
widening government debt problems in Europe; this probably also contributed to households 
becoming less confident.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
At the same time, however, the prices of commodities important to Australia – i.e. coal and 
iron  ore  –  continued  to  strengthen  and  prospects  for  the  terms  of  trade  were  revised  up 
further. The outlook for investment in the resources sector remained very strong.  
The Board concluded at its December 2010 meeting that, having moved in a forward-looking 
way in November, there was scope to hold rates steady for a while to see how conditions in 
Australia developed and how the various risks to the economy evolved.  
As  we  moved  into  the  early  months  of  2011,  domestic  economic  activity  was  severely 
disrupted by floods and cyclones. The two main economic impacts were the sharp fall in coal 
production, and the destruction of the Queensland banana crop. The former meant that GDP 
was likely to fall in the March quarter, before recovering in the June and September quarters, 
while  the  latter  meant  that  CPI  inflation  would  spike  higher  over  the  year  ahead  due  to  a 
sharp, yet temporary, increase in banana prices.  
Neither of these factors, by itself, was seen by the Board as having  direct implications for 
monetary  policy,  although  it  was  recognised  that  they  would  make  reading  the  underlying 
economic trends more difficult over the months ahead.  
Global  economic  data  generally  continued  to  be  strong  in  the  early  months  of  2011, 
particularly in Asia but also in the United States and Germany. Commodity prices continued 
to rise, and there were increasing signs that this was feeding, via rising cost pressures, into 
inflation  outcomes  in  a  wide  range  of  countries.  As  a  result,  there  was  a  general  trend 
towards tightening monetary policy through Asia and Latin America.  
Domestically,  the  effects  of  the  floods  were  becoming  clearer  in  the  data,  and  liaison  with 
mining  companies  was  starting  to  point  to  a  more  protracted  recovery  in  production. 
Economic indicators were mixed: business conditions were around average, the outlook for 
investment was strong, unemployment was holding steady at a low level but retail sales had 
been  growing  only  modestly.  Financial  market  uncertainty  had  lessened  following  further 
measures  taken  by  European  governments,  though  social  unrest  in  the  Middle  East  and 
North  Africa  was  keeping  markets  on  edge.  Against  this  background,  the  Board  saw  little 
need to change the level of interest rates at its February, March and April meetings.  
In May, the Board again held the cash rate steady. However, the CPI outcome for the March 
quarter was higher than expected and inflation forecasts were scaled up somewhat. Global 
economic  growth  was  expected  to  continue  at  an  above-trend  pace,  notwithstanding  the 
disruption to global supply chains caused by the Japanese earthquake in March; commodity 
prices  were  higher  than  earlier  expected;  and  global  inflationary  pressures  had  risen. 
Therefore, while the Board saw the existing mildly restrictive stance of monetary policy as 
appropriate for the time being, its assessment was that if conditions evolved in line with the 
outlook, another rise in interest rates would likely be required, at some point, if inflation was 
to remain consistent with the medium-term target.  
By  the  June  meeting,  signs  were  emerging  that  economic  growth  in  many  developed 
economies  had  lost  some  momentum.  Increased  financial  volatility,  as  the  debt  problems 
within Europe spread, added to the downside risks. Growth in China and most other parts of 
Asia, however, remained a bright spot.  
The March quarter national accounts suggested that the impact of the floods on Queensland 
coal production had been significantly larger than expected and the timing of the recovery in 
production was pushed out further. While the outlook for mining investment was very strong, 
non-mining  investment  was  looking  softer  and  households  were  showing  more  signs  of 
caution,  with  confidence  declining;  households’  perceptions  of  their  own  personal  finances 
over  the  coming  year  were  particularly  weak.  It  was  also  more  apparent  that  employment 
growth had slowed, though this appeared to be taking place against a background of slowing 
population growth, and unemployment was holding steady at a relatively low rate of around 
5 per cent.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
While the Board remained of the view that, if conditions evolved in line with the forecasts, 
further tightening of monetary policy would be necessary at some point, the recent flow of 
data  had  not  added  any  urgency  to  the  need  to  adjust  policy.  Accordingly,  the  cash  rate 
continued to be held steady.  
At the time of the July meeting, global economic growth had eased, and the downside risks 
stemming  from  the  European  debt  problems  looked  more  significant.  In  Australia, 
households remained cautious and the housing market was soft. Also, it now appeared that 
the slow recovery in coal production would mean that earlier GDP forecasts for 2011 would 
not  be  met.  Nonetheless,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  Australian  economy  remained 
strong. In these circumstances, the Board continued to hold rates steady, noting that the CPI 
outcome to be published in the next month would provide an update on inflation.  
The state of the global and domestic economies had not changed much by the time of the 
August  meeting,  but  the  CPI  outcome  for  the  June  quarter  again  surprised  on  the  upside. 
Price increases for a range of manufactured goods were larger than expected in light of the 
appreciation of the exchange rate and the ongoing caution among consumers. There was the 
possibility that the slower growth in productivity that had been evident for some years was 
pushing up unit labour costs at a pace faster than was consistent with the inflation target. At 
the  August  meeting  the  Board  therefore  discussed  whether  there  was  a  case  to  tighten 
monetary policy further. The general case to do so was that the economy was continuing to 
operate  with  relatively  little  spare  capacity,  and  the  staff  forecasts  showed  inflation  rising 
above target during the forecast period. On the other hand, activity in parts of the non-mining 
economy was subdued and downside risks to the global economy had increased significantly 
due  to  the  volatility  in  financial  markets.  Also,  the  softness  in  credit  demand  and  the  high 
exchange  rate  pointed  to  financial  conditions  exerting  a  reasonable  degree  of  restraint. 
These considerations led the Board to conclude that it would be prudent to continue to hold 
rates steady.  
Summarising all this, the general pattern that has emerged over the past year has been as 
follows: 
 
First, the effects of the mining boom have turned out to be stronger than expected a 
year ago. The terms of trade are noticeably higher and forecasts for national income 
and mining investment have been revised up over the year. 
Second,  despite  this  strength  in  the  mining  sector,  overall  economic  growth  is 
turning out to be weaker. The forecasts published earlier this month reduced growth 
in GDP for 2011 to 3¼ per cent, versus 3¾ per cent expected last November. Part 
of this downward revision reflected the higher exchange rate as well as a softening 
in some components of demand, stemming partly from consumer caution. However, 
some of the revision also reflected a slowing in the economy’s capacity to supply 
goods and services, due to weather events and slower growth in the labour force. In 
recent  quarters,  growth  of  the  working  age  population  has  been  running  at  an 
annualised rate of only a little more than 1 per cent, down from a peak of around 
2¼ per cent a few years ago. In these circumstances, while employment growth has 
slowed noticeably, there has been little change in the unemployment rate. 
Third, inflation outcomes for 2011 are likely to turn out to be higher than thought last 
November, both in headline and underlying terms. Inflation forecasts for the longer 
term have risen to be a little above the top end of the target range. 
  This was the situation as it stood at the time of the last Board meeting. As you know, since 
then market volatility has become more extreme. An important issue ahead of us will be to 
assess  what  impact  this  is  likely  to  have  on  global  and  domestic  economic  activity, 
commodity  prices  and  inflation.  As  yet,  there  is  little  information  on  which  to  base  such 
judgements.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
The  main  reason  for  running  through  this  material  has  been  to  make  the  point  that  the 
environment for monetary policy over the past year has been challenging. As the year has 
progressed, the resources boom has strengthened, but the divergence between the mining 
and non-mining sectors of the economy has increased and the mix of growth and inflation 
has  turned out  to  be  less  favourable  than  expected  a  year  ago  –  i.e.  there  has  been  less 
growth but more inflation.  
Decisions  about  monetary  policy  through  the  year  have  sought  to  balance  these  various 
forces. This challenge remains. In fact, with the recent volatility in financial markets adding to 
the uncertainty about the economic outlook, it does not look like the challenge will become 
any easier over the months ahead.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
