Ardian Fullani: Economic and monetary developments in Albania in 2010 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Parliament presenting 
the Annual Report of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 9 June 2011. 
 Dear Madam Speaker, 
Dear Members of Parliament,  
It is a pleasure for me to be here today to present the Bank of Albania’s opinion on economic 
and monetary developments of the past year.  
Pursuant  to  legal  requirements  and  our  institutional  commitments  to  enhancing  the  central 
bank’s  transparency  and  responsibility,  in  this  presentation  I  will  share  with  you  the  main 
highlights on Bank of Albania’s activity over 2010. This activity, in its entire spectrum, aimed 
to fulfil our mission and legal obligations, and reflect the Parliament’s recommendations for 
2010.  
Let me begin my presentation with a brief overview of our conclusions.  
During  2010,  the  Albanian  economy  experienced  an  overall  positive  performance.  The 
economic  activity  posted  growth,  while  the  macroeconomic  stability  and  financial  health 
indicators improved.  
Economic  growth  reflected  mainly  the  foreign  demand  for  Albanian  products  and services, 
affirming, above all, the dynamism of our private sector. It was also supported by a sustained 
macroeconomic environment, with downward risk premia and improved liquidity indicators.  
In particular, reflecting developments in the financial and real sector of the economy, as well 
as our monetary policy, consumer price inflation remained in line with our 2010 target.  
Also, during this year:  
 
   The economy’s external position improved;  
The ratio of budget deficit and public debt to GDP dropped;  
Financial stability consolidated;  
Financial intermediation expanded further; and  
Interest rates and risk premiums in financial markets decreased.  
 
On  the  other  hand,  2010’s  developments  underlined  the  need  to  continue  and  intensify 
structural reforms, which are pre-requisites for a sustainable and long-term economic growth.  
First,  the  new  agenda  of  structural  reforms  should  aim  at  establishing  the  requisites  for a 
more balanced and sustainable growth in the long run.  
Greater orientation of Albania’s economy to export and overall higher competitiveness of our 
products  in  international  and  domestic  markets  dictate  the  need  for  continued  structural 
reforms at macro- and microeconomic levels.  
Second,  macroeconomic  stability  consolidation  requires  more  work  in  the  future.  The 
greatest  lesson  that  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  taught  us  is  that  prevention  is  better 
than cure.  
Maintaining  the  country’s  internal  and  external  balances  requires  further  development  of 
decision-making  architecture  and  macroeconomic  coordination,  as  well  as  economy  and 
market supervisory and regulatory mechanisms. Analytical forecasting and decision-making 
skills of public and private economic agents should also be further improved.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Third, ensuring the country’s financial stability requires coordinated action by all supervisory 
and regulatory institutions, and a greater attention by private agents of the market.  
A sustainable financial system, oriented to new long-term horizons and prudential to risks, 
serves to channel savings into the most competitive sectors of the economy.  
In the following, I would like to address the above-listed topics in more details, focusing on 
key points of the Bank of Albania’s work.  
 Economic and financial developments in 2010  
1. 
According to INSTAT data, the Albanian economy is estimated to have grown by 3.9 % this 
year. Compared to 2009, economic growth is more balanced in terms of sectorial distribution 
and demand components.  
During  2010,  the  Albanian  economy  was  characterised  by  gradual  improvement  of  the 
aggregate  demand  and  further  consolidation  of  the  macroeconomic  stability.  Economic 
development was followed by price stability, while the public debt and current account deficit 
narrowed.  
Economic  growth  relied  mainly  on  foreign  demand  and  increased  Albanian  exports, 
while  domestic  demand  was  sluggish.  The  latter  decelerated  due  to  public  finances 
consolidation  and  budget  deficit  reduction  in  2010,  while  consumer  spending  and  private 
investments were affected by insecurity about the future and presence of spare capacities.  
Fiscal  policy  was  oriented  towards  fiscal  consolidation  in  2010,  following  the  stimulating 
nature in 2009. Fiscal consolidation accelerated especially in 2010 H2, following the approval 
of  the  revised  budget.  This  consolidation  was  present  on  both,  income  and  expenditure 
sides. Budget revenues increased by 8.4% y-o-y, reflecting the economic growth, expansion 
of  taxpayers’  base,  and  privatisation  receipts.  On  the  other  hand,  budget  expenditures 
decreased by 4.5%, attributable to reduction of government capital expenditures.  
Budget deficit for 2010 settled to around 3.0% of GDP, reduced by 52% compared to a year 
earlier.  This  deficit  was  funded  mainly  through  the  issue  of  domestic  debt  instruments. 
However,  deficit  financing  was  a  novelty  in  2010,  with  the  issue  of  the  first  Albanian 
Eurobond. Its issue, at EUR 300 million, met a part of the public sector’s need for foreign 
currency and was accompanied by reduction in domestic borrowing.  
Current account deficit narrowed by 21.5% in 2010, to 11.9% of GDP. This was reflected in 
augmented private and public sectors savings. Increased exports as a result of invigorated 
foreign demand, depreciated exchange rate and improvement of trade terms over this period 
also  contributed  to  it.  Notwithstanding  the  improvement  recorded  in  2010,  current  account 
deficit  remains  high.  As  we  have  continuously  stated,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that 
compilation of structural policies to dampen the external economy misbalance should be a 
priority.  
Net flows in the capital and financial account recorded a decline by 11.2% in 2010, leading to 
current  account  deficit 
foreign  direct 
investments  were  estimated  at  9.3%  of  GDP  and  constituted  the  main  source  of  foreign 
financing of the Albanian economy. Foreign reserve increased by about EUR 178.8 million 
and its stock of EUR 1.9 billion may cover 4.8 months of goods and services import.  
Positive developments in the external sector of the economy, primarily owing to expansion of 
exports  and  foreign  currency  inflows  from  the  Eurobond,  contributed  to  the  generation  of 
contained  pressures  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  From  the  macroeconomic  viewpoint, 
to  87.5%.  Excluding  privatisations, 
financing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relative exchange rate stability during the year reflected a new equilibrium in foreign currency 
demand and supply.  
In sectorial terms, the Albanian economy development relied chiefly on growth of industry 
and services sectors, while construction sector continued to contract in 2010. Industry and 
services  sectors  benefited,  to  a  great  extent,  respectively,  from  foreign  demand  and 
structural shift of the domestic demand to short-term consumption goods.  
In the short- and mid-term horizon, both sectors are expected to remain the main supporting 
pillars  of  the  Albanian  economy.  Agriculture,  the  other  important  sector  of  the  Albanian 
economy,  marked  a  positive  performance  in  2010.  Even  so,  based  on  the  broader 
concentration  of  the  country’s  population  and  the  great  potential  for  development,  the 
increase in this sector’s productivity remains a long-term priority.  
Money and financial markets  
Monetary developments in the past year were in line with the performance of the real sector 
of  the  economy,  reflecting  simultaneously  the  fully  restored  confidence  in  the  financial 
system,  improved  supply  and  demand  ratios  in  the  financial  markets  and  prudent  liquidity 
management policy of the Bank of Albania.  
Expansion of monetary stock by 10.6% on average complied with the economy’s demand for 
money and did not trigger any inflationary tendencies in the economy. Deposit to GDP ratio 
was  64.2%  at  end-year,  higher  than  its  level  prior  to  deposits  withdrawal.  In  addition,  the 
profile of deposit time structure reflected a higher preference for saving, characterised by a 
shift to longer maturity-term deposits.  
Easing lending terms during 2010 H2, stimulating measures taken by the Bank of Albania, 
and  decreasing  uncertainty  and  risk  premiums  were  followed  by  a  gradual  credit  growth. 
Private  sector 
influenced  by 
foreign-currency  credit  growth.  This  performance  reflects  prudential  bank  policies  on  loan 
portfolio quality and economic agents’ moderate demand for loan.  
In  general,  lending  continues  to  suffer  from  lack  of  demand  and  realistic,  qualitative  and 
valuable business plans for crediting.  
Restoration  of  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  and 
regulatory and supervisory measures taken by the Bank of Albania led to stabilisation and 
improvement of banking system capitalisation, liquidity and profitability indicators.  
loan  portfolio  expanded  by  10% 
in  2010,  principally 
targeted  band. 
Inflation and monetary policy  
Inflationary  pressures  were  more  concentrated 
2. 
Annual consumer price inflation was on average 3.6% in 2010, remaining within the Bank 
of  Albania’s 
in  
2010 H1, mostly triggered by a rise in some administered prices. Average annual inflation in 
2010 H1 was 3.9%. In the following two quarters, relative stabilisation of the exchange rate 
and low inflationary pressures from the domestic demand contributed to the average inflation 
rate convergence around the Bank of Albania’s target.  
Negative  output  gap  generated  contained  inflationary  pressures  throughout  2010,  thus 
balancing  the  national  currency  depreciation  effect  and  the  international  market  price  rise. 
The prospects for the future show that the Albanian economy is expected to operate below 
its potential even in the medium-term, putting downward pressures on inflation.  
As I highlighted earlier, in 2010, the Bank of Albania’s monetary policy was implemented in 
a  macroeconomic  environment  with  positive  growth  rates,  contained  inflationary  pressures 
and  anchored  inflation  expectations.  This  environment  led  to  retaining  the  stimulating 
monetary policy stance that has been conducted since 2009. It triggered downward interest 
rates and completed even further the stimulating effects from the exchange rate depreciation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Low  interest  rates  favoured  rise  in  domestic  consumption  and  investments,  whereas  the 
depreciated exchange rate supported growth in Albanian exports.  
Reduction of the fiscal stimulus in 2010 H2 expanded the space for monetary policy conduct. 
In July 2010, the Bank of Albania lowered the key interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 
its historic low of 5.0%. Improvement of banking system liquidity condition and weak public 
sector demand for money supported the transmission of an easing policy to all segments of 
the financial markets in the last months of 2010.  
In  parallel,  the  Bank  of  Albania  supplied  the  financial  market  with  the  required  liquidity  to 
support  financial  intermediation.  Aiming  at  adopting  the  most  advanced  models  of  central 
banking,  and  particularly,  convergence  with  Euro-system  practices,  the  Bank  of  Albania 
changed the form of its operational objective.  
Since  June  2010,  our  liquidity  management  operations  are  oriented  to  targeting 
short-term interbank interest rates and minimizing their volatility.  
 The banking system supervision function is another important aspect of central bank duties.  
Banking supervision and financial stability  
3. 
Year  2010  was  characterised  by  increases  banking  system  activity,  improved  banking 
soundness and profitability indicators, as well as a good capitalisation of the system. On the 
other  hand,  the  banking  system  was  characterised  by  increase  in  non-performing  loan 
portfolio, reflecting also the active policy of the Bank of Albania in terms of enhancing the 
transparency of bank balance sheets.  
Banking system development  
The banking sector continues to remain the main actor of financial intermediation in Albania. 
At  end-2010,  banking  system  assets  doubled  compared  to  a  year  earlier,  accounting  for 
about 81% of GDP. The banking system continued to be financed mainly by public deposits 
and focused on lending to the private sector.  
On the other hand, the economy’s below-potential growth and the depreciated exchange rate 
contributed  to  increasing  non-performing  loans,  to  14%  of  total  loans.  However,  this 
indicator’s growth rates decelerated in 2010.  
Capital adequacy ratio remained at satisfactory levels, to 15.4%, obviously higher than the 
12% benchmark set forth under the regulatory framework. The system’s shareholder equity 
increased by 10% in 2010.  
Credit risk remains the main risk to the banking sector. In response to this risk, the banking 
sector  has created  adequate  provisions  to  weather  big  shocks  to  borrowers’  solvency  and 
market equilibria.  
Banking system supervision  
In  early  2010,  the  Bank  of  Albania  changed  its  banking  supervision  organisational 
framework, orienting and relating it directly to risks associated with the financial activity. In 
parallel,  the  Bank  of  Albania  re-conceptualised  its  supervision  focus  and  strategy  in 
accordance with risks posed to Albania’s banking and financial system.  
Transparency and publication of information on banking and financial products and services 
were in focus of supervision in 2010. Encouraging enhancement of private financial agents’ 
transparency is also reflected in amendments made to regulatory framework during the year. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
High  commission  fees  on  banking  products  and  services  were  a  sensitive  issue  that  was 
addressed over the past year and will constitute a priority in the upcoming period. The Bank 
of Albania, through its analyses, played a key role in discussions about this matter, aiming to 
tackle it timely and duly.  
Also, issues related to anti-money laundering, transparency and compliance with prudential 
regulations were an important part of the supervisory process in 2010.  
In view of strengthening the supervisory process on banking institutions, the Bank of Albania 
has signed a number of cooperation agreements with central banks in the region and with 
European ones, where parent banks have their headquarters.  
Strengthening the supervisory regulatory framework  
In 2010, the Bank of Albania finalised drafting of several new regulations and amended some 
other  regulations  on  banking  supervision.  This  process  aimed  at  compliance  with  Basel 
Committee standards and EU Directives, taking into account international best practices and 
Albanian banking system developments.  
New regulatory acts and key amendments to actual acts on banking supervision approved 
during 2010 are:  
 
Regulation “On management of risk from open foreign exchange positions”;  
Regulation “On risk management in the activity of non-bank institutions”;  
Guideline “On conservatorship and liquidation of banks”.  
   Besides  the  main  aspects  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  work,  such  as  monetary  policy  and 
banking  supervision  and  regulation,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  activity  was  also  focused  on 
fulfilment of its other legal obligations and institutional commitments.  
Sparing the details, I would like to emphasize that the Bank of Albania has done a great job 
in 2010 for:  
 
Developing and sophisticating the payment system;  
Supporting the integration processes of the country, in accordance with our scope of 
activity;  
Enhancing our communication with the public, as an essential instrument to foster 
transparency and central bank independence;  
Further  developing  the  monetary  statistics  and  those  of  the  external  sector  of  the 
economy;  
Strengthening research capacity, in support of analysis and decision-making.  
 
All  these  activities  serve  the  financial  system  development  and  support  the  free  market 
economy in Albania. A detailed analysis on them can be found in our Annual Report  
    Dear Madam Speaker, 
Dear Members of Parliament,  
Turning back to our analysis on economic and financial developments in the country, during 
and after the crisis, I would like to highlight a structural weakness of the Albanian economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that has accompanied it throughout the transition: high current account deficit and still low 
degree of our economy’s competitiveness in global markets.  
Today  we  live  in  a  global  world,  with  integrated  capital,  product  and  labour  markets.  As  a 
developing country, Albania is facing (and will continue to face) a rising competition, not only 
in the region but also beyond it.  
In  our  opinion,  the  long-term  sustained  development  of  the  country  and  reduction  of  our 
structural  weaknesses,  imply  necessarily  increase  of  competitiveness  of  the  Albanian 
economy.  Ongoing  structural  reforms  should  be  driven  by  ambitious  goals  and  a  realistic 
time horizon.  
Structural reforms should aim at creating a more attractive climate for foreign and domestic 
investments, encouraging employment and further growth of welfare, providing:  
 
A sustainable macroeconomic environment;  
An efficient and reliable financial system;  
A legal, complete and transparent functional framework;  
A modern infrastructure;  
A qualified and competitive workforce in terms of cost; and  
A clear perspective for a faster integration into the European Union, which will open 
the way to convergence funds.  
     Fulfilment of all these criteria requires a joint commitment, and the Bank of Albania will play 
its role. Personally, I remain convinced that increasing effectiveness of these reforms in light 
of this, would enable Albania to make a qualitative step towards its integration. 
In conclusion, allow me to remind you that, besides the Bank of Albania’s Annual Report, the 
Bank  of  Albania’s  financial  statements  and  balance  sheet,  as  certified  by  auditors,  are 
submitted.  
Thank you for your attention  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
