Heng Swee Keat: Dealing with the implications of the crisis and 
implementing policy reforms 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Opening of EDHEC-Risk Institute, Asia, Singapore, 21 January 2011. 
 His Excellency Olivier Caron  
Ambassador of France to Singapore 
Mr Richard Simonin  
Chairman, EDHEC International Advisory Board 
Mr Olivier Oger  
Dean, EDHEC Business School 
Professor Noel Amenc  
Director, EDHEC-Risk Institute 
Associate Professor Frederic Ducoulombier 
Director, EDHEC-Risk Institute, Asia 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
1. 
Risk Institute’s Asian centre in Singapore. 
Good morning. I am very pleased to join you today at the grand opening of EDHEC-
Key observations from the crisis 
2. 
The financial crisis has fundamentally changed the way  we perceive and manage 
risks and uncertainty. Assumptions and models that had been taken for granted are being 
challenged,  and  new  developments  are  changing  the  risk  landscape.  Let  me  share  three 
observations about risks. 
3. 
First,  the  growing  complexity  and  interconnectedness  within  the  financial  system, 
and  between  the  financial  and  economic  systems  have  multiplied  risks  significantly.  There 
are now many more potential sources of failures and the transmission of shocks from one 
market to another have become faster and more unpredictable.  
4. 
Prior  to  the  crisis,  financial  and  capital  intermediation  had  increasingly  shifted  to 
relatively  unregulated  non-bank  financial  institutions.  Complex  securitisation  structures  and 
off-balance vehicles that were thought to disperse risks led instead to concentration of risks 
and excessive leverage. The crisis highlighted the complex webs of inter-linkages between 
financial institutions, financial instruments and financial markets. As liquidity and confidence 
evaporated  and  the  financial  accelerator  kicked  in,  credit  markets  and  financial  institutions 
experienced severe stresses. This in turn dragged down the real economy, and world trade 
collapsed.  With  globalisation,  even  though  financial  markets  in  emerging  markets  did  not 
suffer the same problems, the collapse of trade and investors’ confidence, exacerbated by 
credit cutbacks, brought most developed and developing countries across the world into  a 
deep and synchronous recession.  
5. 
My second observation is that we should not underestimate how fast risks can build 
up. In the years leading up to the crisis, many new financial products developed and grew 
very swiftly. Credit default swaps for example, grew from just US$919 billion in 2001 to more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
than $62 trillion within 8 years. In 2004, outstanding mortgages held in non-agency MBS in 
the US were just US$670 billion. It tripled to over US$2 trillion within 2 years. It is a similar 
story with the origination of subprime mortgages. In the same period, global CDO issuance 
more  than  tripled  from  US$157  billion  to  about  US$550  billion.  These assets  were  held  in 
banks and non-banks globally. When the financial crisis struck, the world was shocked not 
only by its severity, but also by the speed in the transmission of shocks throughout financial 
markets.  There  is  no  better  illustration  of  how  new  sources  of  systemic  risk  can  build  up 
rapidly. 
6. 
In a similar vein, the sharp deterioration of the fiscal positions of many governments 
has  also  led  to  a  re-assessment  of  sovereign  risks.  About  10  years  ago,  investors  were 
concerned  that  the  strong  budget  surplus  of  the  US  Federal  Government  might  lead  to  a 
severe  reduction  in  the  supply  of  US  Treasuries.  Today,  bond  vigilantes  are  focusing 
attention  on  not  just  the  short  term  fiscal  health  of  governments,  but  on  the  impact  of 
demographic  changes,  large  entitlement  benefits  and  unfunded  pension  liabilities  on  the 
longer-term fiscal health of these governments.  
7. 
My third observation is the speed of structural changes in emerging economies and 
transformation in the patterns of global trade and investment. As these are superimposed on 
cyclical  changes,  it  is  often  difficult  to  disentangle  the  two.  Emerging  markets,  especially 
Asia,  have  weathered  the  crisis  relatively  well,  and  recovered  quickly.  This  year,  the  IMF 
expects emerging Asia to grow by nearly 7%, almost double the rate forecast for the global 
economy as a whole.  Many analysts expect the differential in growth rate to persist in the 
coming decade. The global economy went through stagflation in the 1970s, disinflation in the 
1980s,  and  a  roaring  decade  in  the  1990s.  In  2000s,  we  had  the  dotcom  bubble,  and  a 
severe  financial  crisis.  How  the  coming  decade  will  turn  out,  especially  for  emerging 
economies, will change many of the risks and return assumptions on a wide range of asset 
classes.   
Dealing with the implications 
8. 
The growing complexity and interconnectedness in financial and economic systems, 
the  increasing  speed  of  change,  as  well  as  the  ongoing  structural  changes  in  emerging 
markets  will  have  profound  impacts  on  all  sectors  of  the  global  financial  industry.  These 
driving forces will shape the evolution of the financial system and the economy, as well as 
the  risk-return  profiles  of  a  range  of  financial  products.  Financial  institutions,  investors, 
regulators,  policymakers  and  researchers  will  have  to  make  significant  changes  to  their 
mental models, policies and practices. Let me touch briefly on some of these implications. 
Implementing policy reforms 
9. 
Given Asia’s changing dynamics, Asian policymakers face some difficult balancing 
acts  in  navigating  the  challenges.  They  need  to  grow  the  financial  system  to  support 
economic growth and promote the efficient intermediation of savings, but in ways which are 
safe  and  stable.  They  need  to  deepen  capital  markets,  and  permit  the  growth  of  hedging 
instruments and derivatives while keeping out instruments that are complex or opaque. They 
need  to  reduce  the  opportunity  for  regulatory  arbitrage  across  different  sectors,  and  treat 
similar  risks  in  similar  ways,  without  adopting  a  one-size-fits-all  approach  that  reduces  the 
diversity  of  players  in  the  industry  which  might  in  turn  reduce  the  overall  resilience  of  the 
financial  system.  There  is  merit,  for  instance,  in  having  diverse  players  such  as  pension 
funds and insurance companies that have different investment horizons and requirements in 
their asset-liability matching. Policymakers must support the global reform agenda, to help 
build  a  more  resilient  global  financial  system,  while  taking  into  account  local  and  regional 
circumstances. In particular, as Asian economies undergo rapid transition, policymakers will 
have to evolve their financial systems to meet the rapidly changing needs of their economies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As the systems become more complex and more plugged into the global system, the risk to 
financial stability will increase. 
10. 
Indeed,  post-crisis,  central  banks  and  regulators  are  focused  on  financial  stability 
and the need to be proactive with regards to the risk of asset bubbles. Many parts of Asia in 
particular are vulnerable to property bubbles, not only because of current liquidity conditions, 
but also because many investors believe that in a growing economy, the property market can 
only move up. Many have forgotten how the property markets in the region slumped during 
the 1997/98 Asian Financial Crisis. 
11. 
As I mentioned earlier, risks can build up rapidly. Hence, not surprisingly, there has 
been  much  debate  on  the  types  of  policy  tools  to  address  potential  asset  bubbles.  In  my 
view, there is no single tool that works best in all situations. We need a combination of tools 
that addresses the different facets of the issue. These tools should be simple and easy to 
understand. More importantly, for these tools to be effective, the intention of the authorities 
has to be clearly communicated. Policymakers must leave no doubt of their resolve to tackle 
the  potential  build-up  of  risks.  This  may  mean,  for  instance,  the  willingness  to  take 
progressively  tougher  measures  where  the  situation  warrants.  This  in essence  is what  the 
MAS and other agencies in Singapore have done recently on the property cooling measures. 
Let  me  add  that  these  measures  are  not  a  substitute  for  banks’  own  risk  assessment 
processes. Banks should continue to maintain prudent lending practices. This includes taking 
into account potentially higher interest rates in their credit assessments, and not assuming 
that  current  low  interest  rates  will  last  indefinitely.  MAS  will  continue  to  monitor  banks’ 
activities and practices closely.  
Understanding Asia 
12. 
Asia’s growth prospects have attracted global interest and a surge of capital inflows. 
Asia  is  now  the  second  highest  contributor  to  global  trade,  and  is  expected  to  overtake 
Europe  in  a  few  years.  China,  India  and  Indonesia  are  growing  rapidly,  registering  GDP 
growths more than four times that of US and Europe. The prospect of greater Asian currency 
appreciation has drawn greater fund flows into the region. In 2010, inflows into Asian local 
bond markets reached record levels.  
13. 
However,  investing  in  Asia  is  not  without  risks.  The  huge  capital  inflows,  if  left 
unchecked,  have  the  potential  to  increase  inflationary  pressures  and  fuel  asset-price 
bubbles.  In  an  informal  survey  by  MAS  of  30  major  fund  managers,  almost  half  cited  the 
possibility of a hard landing of major emerging economies in Asia as a key risk. While inflows 
have been swift, we must be prepared for a rapid outflow as well. Several years ago, most 
major  investors  were  investing  in  Asia  but  based  thousands  of  miles  away.  Today,  many 
investors  are  realising  that  a  ground  presence  in  this  time  zone  is  necessary.  The  rapid 
structural  changes  of  economies  in  Asia,  the  differences  in  the  stages  of  economic 
development, in political systems, regulatory regimes and corporate governance standards 
mean that investors must not only understand the differences within Asia, but they have to be 
able  to  respond  to  swift  changes  in  outlook,  and  to  take  into  account  ongoing  structural 
changes in their assessments. In short, the ability to distinguish noise from trend is essential. 
Having the right risk mindset 
14. 
Apart  from  responding  to  policy  reforms  and  initiatives,  investors  and  financial 
institutions will do well to continuously rethink and challenge the fundamental tenets of their 
investment  and  risk  management  tools  and  methodologies.  To  do  so,  it  is  imperative  for 
investors to have the right risk mindset.  
15. 
We  should  put  once-neglected  risks,  such  as  counterparty  credit  risk,  model  risk, 
liquidity  risk  and  technology  risks,  at  the  forefront  of  risk  considerations.  We  have  to  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
mindful that falling back on historical experience may not necessarily provide the guidance 
especially  when  developments  are  unprecedented.  In  this  regard,  boards  of  financial 
institutions play a vital role in driving the level of risk consciousness in their institutions and 
exercising  effective  risk  management  oversight.  MAS  will  mandate  all  local  banks  and 
significant insurers, following their Annual General Meetings this year, to have a dedicated 
Risk Management Committee, and for members of this Committee to have the appropriate 
balance of skills and expertise to discharge their responsibilities. Starting this year, we will 
also  be  requiring  mandatory  training  for  all  members  of  the  Boards  of  local  banks.  At  the 
management level, MAS expects risk management units have to be sufficiently empowered 
and adequately plugged in to the risk-taking activities of the firm.  
Enhancing collaborative partnerships 
16. 
Underlying  these  specific  measures  is  a  basic  emphasis  on  having  the  requisite 
knowledge, skills and expertise throughout the organisation’s hierarchy in managing risks. In 
this  regard,  research  and  executive  education  programmes  help  to  increase  the  body  of 
knowledge and critical understanding of risks in the Asian financial industry.  
17. 
One function of research is to explore unchartered territory and break new frontiers. 
Many in academia do this important blue sky research. Another significant role of research is 
in bridging the gap between theory and application. This form of research accelerates market 
practices in a more immediate and direct way. Many research institutes here in Singapore, 
including  EDHEC-Risk,  is  focused  on  direct  application.  MAS  welcomes  this.  Research 
institutes can use their presence in Asia to work with the financial industry in the region and 
help the region navigate the challenges ahead.  
Conclusion 
18. 
EDHEC-Risk is setting up its base in Singapore at a time of great transformation of 
the  economic  and  financial  landscape  in  Asia. A  deep  understanding of  risks  provides  the 
foundation for stability and growth. The research and educational activities of EDHEC-Risk 
Institute  will  help  enhance  our  understanding  of  risks,  and  the  development  of  talent.  We 
welcome  EDHEC-Risk  Institute  to  our  research  and  financial  community  in  Asia.  Your 
presence  adds  to  another  important  strand  in  the  deepening  relationship  between  France 
and Singapore. I congratulate EDHEC-Risk Institute on the opening of its Asian centre, and 
wish Professor Amenc, Professor Ducoulombier and your colleagues every success.  
19. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
