Ravi Menon: Resilience, integration, opportunity – the ASEAN story 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Merrill Lynch Asian Stars Conference 2011, Singapore, 18 May 2011. 
 Mr Brian Brille, Mr Peter MacDonald, Mr Richard McCormack, distinguished speakers, ladies 
and gentlemen, good morning. 
Resurgence of Asia 
1. 
 According  to  estimates  by  the  late  British  economist,  Angus  Maddison,  two 
thousand  years  ago,  India  had  the  largest  GDP  in  the  world.  China  was  close  behind. 
Together, they accounted for more than half of global GDP. Asia ex Japan was 75 per cent 
of world GDP. And this was at the height of the Roman Empire in Europe, which accounted 
for  just  10  per  cent  of  global  output.  Over  the  next  1,800  years,  the  two  Asian  giants 
remained  the  largest  economies  in the  world, with  China pulling  ahead  of  India  about  500 
years ago. For much of this period, Asia ex Japan was typically about three times larger than 
Western Europe. 
2. 
Then came the Industrial Revolution in Europe. By the start of the First World War, 
Europe and America accounted for more than half of global GDP, with the combined share of 
India and China falling to less than 20 per cent. By 1950, the share of India and China fell to 
less than 10 per cent. Asia less Japan was only about 15 per cent. 
3. 
Since then, the story has been of Asia’s resurgence. By the end of the last century, 
Asia less Japan had doubled its share to 30 per cent of global GDP. China is already the 
second largest economy in the world, India the fourth largest, and you are all familiar with the 
various projections of when these two economies will become the largest and third largest 
respectively. The rest of Asia will continue to be the most buoyant region in the world, as it 
has been for the last 50 years. 
4. 
The story of China and India as the new growth engines of the world has been told 
numerous times. I would therefore like to tell the story of the third growth engine of Asia – 
ASEAN. 
The ASEAN value proposition 
5. 
ASEAN is a two-trillion-dollar economy, the fifth largest in the world at purchasing 
power parity terms, ahead of Russia, Brazil, France and the United Kingdom. The external 
trade  volume  of  the  ASEAN-5  economies  (Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  Philippines, 
Singapore) is more than three times that of India’s total trade and about 60 percent that of 
China’s.  ASEAN  provides  good  diversification  for  investors’  Asian  portfolios.  Last  year, 
foreign direct investments into the ASEAN-5 totaled nearly US$70 billion, roughly three times 
the inflows into India. 
6. 
First, ASEAN is resilient: it rode the global financial crisis very well. I will assess how ASEAN 
is now coping with the post-crisis risks of inflation and capital inflows. 
Second,  ASEAN  is  getting  more  integrated.  I  will  discuss  the  progress  ASEAN  is  making 
towards  a  single  market  and  production  base,  which  will  create  a  more  seamless 
marketplace for businesses. 
Let me touch on three aspects of the ASEAN story. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Third,  ASEAN  is  opportunity.  I  will  focus  on  the  significant  investment  opportunities  in 
ASEAN, especially in the area of infrastructure. 
Resilience: managing inflation and capital inflows 
7. 
Let me begin by touching on ASEAN’s resilience in the face of external shocks. The 
Asian  financial  crisis  of  1998/99  was  a  life-changing  experience  for  many  countries  in  the 
region. They were badly affected by the crisis and resolved never again to be so vulnerable. 
Macroeconomic policies have become more sound, financial regulation and supervision has 
tightened,  national  balance  sheets  strengthened,  structural  reforms  stepped  up,  and 
corporate governance enhanced. 
The  ASEAN  countries  consequently  showed  remarkable  resilience  in  the  recent 
8. 
crisis. While credit tightened and trade plunged during the height of the crisis, there was no 
systemic financial fallout, especially in the banking industry. The region rebounded strongly, 
with the ASEAN-5 growing by 8 per cent in 2010. This year, growth is expected in the range 
of 5 to 6 per cent. 
9.  
But strong growth has come with a new set of challenges. ASEAN and the rest of 
Asia  are  now  grappling  with  rising  inflation.  Consumer  prices  are  forecast  to  increase  by 
5.1 per  cent  in  the  ASEAN-5  this  year,  compared  to  3.8  percent  in  2010.  Several  factors 
underpin this. 
10. 
First, elevated food prices. In the ASEAN-5 economies, food accounts for about a 
third  of  the  consumption  basket,  much  higher  than  advanced  economies.  Given  this  high 
weight of food, food price increases have a strong direct impact on headline inflation. 
11. 
Second,  strong  inflows  of  capital  adding  to  asset  price  and  domestic  demand 
pressures. Low interest rates in the advanced economies have prompted global investors to 
seek higher returns in emerging economies, especially in Asia. 
12. 
Third,  Asia’s  strong  recovery  from  the  crisis  has  led  to  high  rates  of  capacity 
utilisation and tightening of labour markets. This has prompted a gradual build-up in wage-
price pressures. 
13. 
light attitude towards inflation risks – but I do want to put the issue in perspective.   
14. 
Some of the price pressures facing Asia are no doubt structural. We can expect the 
relative price of food – and commodities in general – to increase over the medium to long 
term on the back of growing global demand especially in the emerging economies. Likewise, 
capital  will  continue  to  flow  from  advanced  economies  to  emerging  economies,  reflecting 
growth  differentials  and  a  shift  in  global  portfolios  towards  higher  yielding  Asian  assets. 
These two factors will be a source of inflation bias in emerging Asia over the medium term.  
15. 
But  a  good  part  of  the  inflation  in  Asia  is  also  temporary.  The  pace  of  food  price 
inflation and capital inflows into Asia will moderate compared to the last two years. Much of 
the recent food price increases reflect the impact of supply disruptions, and these are largely 
expected  to  be  of  a  temporary  nature.  Capital  inflows  are  also  unlikely  to  persist  at  the 
volumes seen in the last two years, as monetary policy settings in the advanced economies 
are normalised. 
16. 
More importantly, policymakers in most Asian economies are not behind the curve, 
or at least not anymore. Central banks in ASEAN are deeply cognisant of underlying inflation 
risks. They have either hiked interest rates or allowed the exchange rates to appreciate over 
time  or  done  both.  Malaysia  and  Thailand  have  raised  policy  rates  by  four  and  six  times 
respectively since early 2010. Key ASEAN countries are also relying more on exchange rate 
appreciation to dampen import price pressures. 
I do not want to minimise the inflation risks in Asia – no central banker would take a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  Singapore,  MAS  preemptively  tightened  exchange  rate  policy  as  early  as  April 
17. 
2010. Subsequently, exchange rate policy was tightened in October 2010 and again in April 
this year. Allowing the Singapore dollar to strengthen has had a dampening effect on inflation 
in Singapore, which would otherwise have been much higher. Headline inflation has probably 
peaked in Singapore and is expected to average 3 to 4 per cent this year. Core inflation – 
which excludes private transport and accommodation costs – is expected to be 2 to 3 per 
cent this year. 
18. 
ASEAN policymakers have also been complementing monetary policy actions with 
macroprudential  measures  aimed  at  managing  the  inflationary  effects  of  strong  inflows  of 
short-term capital. Indonesia has increased the holding period for its short-term debt, while 
Thailand  has  imposed  a  withholding  tax  on  interest  and  capital  gains  earned  by  foreign 
investors  on  Thai  bonds.  Singapore  has  also  implemented  a  series  of  macroprudential 
measures  to  curb  speculative  activity  and  to  ensure  a  stable  and  sustainable  property 
market. 
19. 
expansionary fiscal policies introduced during the crisis.  
20. 
In  short,  ASEAN  policymakers  have  been  proactive  in  addressing  inflationary 
pressures  but  will  need  to  remain  vigilant  because  the  risks  are  not  over  yet.  Inflation  is 
expected to peak this year and moderate going into 2012. The ASEAN economies’ hard-won 
macroeconomic  stability  will  give  them  the  resilience  to  ride  a  challenging  external 
environment.  
Most  ASEAN-5  economies,  including  Singapore,  have  also  scaled  back  the 
Integration: towards a single market 
21. 
Even  as  they  build  up  their  resilience,  the  ASEAN  countries  have  been  working 
steadily towards greater economic integration. ASEAN has committed to building by 2015 the 
ASEAN Economic Community (“AEC”), a single market and production base. This will allow 
goods, services, investments and capital to flow more seamlessly across the ASEAN region. 
More importantly, it will give ASEAN an economic heft and relevance that corresponds to that 
of China and India. 
22. 
The different levels of development within ASEAN has been often cited as a reason 
why integration will not work in ASEAN. On the contrary, the different sources of comparative 
advantage and therefore factor prices across ASEAN, offers a powerful incentive to develop 
an  efficient  pan-ASEAN  production  network.  Indeed,  this  has  already  happened  in 
manufacturing, especially electronics. It needs to happen across a broader set of economic 
activities. The economic case for ASEAN integration is strong. It is a matter of political will to 
make it happen. 
23. 
Progress  in  integration  has  been  strongest  in  merchandise  trade.  The  ASEAN-6 
countries have eliminated tariffs on 99.7 percent of goods. Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and 
Vietnam have committed to reduce tariffs on 98.6 percent of goods to zero to five percent. 
But as all cross-border businesses know very well, enhancing trade links is not just 
24. 
about  reducing  tariffs.  It  is  equally,  if  not  more,  about  reducing  non-tariff  barriers  and 
streamlining regulations. In May last year, the ASEAN Trade in Goods Agreement (“ATIGA”) 
came in to effect. The ATIGA not only entrenches tariff reductions, it also lowers the cost of 
doing business and simplifies trade-related transactions through enhanced trade facilitation 
measures and customs procedures. 
25. 
Liberalisation of cross-border services in ASEAN has also intensified, albeit slower 
compared  to  goods.  ASEAN  has  committed  to  remove  substantially  most  restrictions  on 
trade  in  services  through  eleven  packages  of  commitments  under  the  ASEAN  Framework 
Agreement  on  Services  (“AFAS”). 
to 
progressively  liberalise  the  insurance,  banking  and  capital  markets  sectors.  The  aim  is  to 
financial  services,  members  are  working 
In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
provide  financial  institutions  operating  in  ASEAN  better  access  to  the  entire  ASEAN 
customer base, and facilitate regional expansion. 
26. 
In  addition to  facilitating  internal integration,  ASEAN  has  been  active  in  linking  up 
with other Asian economies through its strategy of open regionalism. ASEAN has a number 
of  Free  Trade  Agreements  with  key  Asian  economies,  including  China,  Japan,  India  and 
Korea.  These  pan-Asian  linkages  enable  ASEAN  to  serve  as  a  springboard  for  investors 
seeking access to key markets in Asia. 
Indeed, measured by the degree of intra-regional trade, Asia is already the second 
27. 
most integrated region in the world, after the European Union. And ASEAN is at the nucleus 
of this expanding network of trade and transport connections spanning Asia. 
A  resilient  and  integrated  ASEAN  offers  considerable  investment  opportunities, 
This  gap  between  demand  and  supply  needs  to  be  met.  Better  infrastructure  will 
Opportunity: investment in infrastructure 
28. 
especially in infrastructure. 
29. 
The  demand  for  infrastructure  investment  in  the  region  is  significant.  A  report 
released  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  (“ADBI”)  estimates  that  the  total 
investment  needs  for  national  infrastructure  development  in  Asia,  from  2010  to  2020,  will 
total about US$8.2 trillion, or an average of US$745 billion per year. 
30. 
But supply – in terms of actual public and private infrastructure investment – has not 
matched demand. The World Bank has estimated that private sector investment into Asian 
infrastructure from 1990 to 2008 totaled just US$423 billion or an average of US$22 billion 
per year. The four ASEAN nations (Malaysia, Vietnam, Indonesia and Thailand) included in 
the ADBI study, allocated in the fiscal stimulus packages introduced during the crisis a total 
US$37  billion  to  infrastructure  spending.  Comparatively,  the  four  nations’  estimated 
investment needs from 2010 to 2020 total US$874 billion, or an average of US$80 billion per 
year. 
31. 
enhance connectivity, reduce the cost of transactions, and help to grow markets. 
32. 
While  Asia’s  infrastructure  needs  have  traditionally  been  financed  largely  by 
government  debt,  Asian  governments  are  increasingly  recognising  that  their  own  balance 
sheets cannot support the required scale of infrastructure development. Thus, private sector 
participation is welcome in the region. 
33. 
But  public-private  partnerships  (“PPP”)  in  Asia  face  not  insignificant  risks.  PPP 
policies are not always well-defined, regulatory and legal systems are sometimes weak, and 
there are varying restrictions on foreign ownership. 
34. 
Robust legal frameworks and clear PPP policies need to be put in place. Singapore 
has been supporting such efforts in partnership with multilateral agencies such as the World 
Bank.  
35. 
In  2009,  we  established  the  World  Bank-Singapore  Urban  Hub  to  bring  together 
Singapore’s  public  agencies,  research  institutes,  and  private  sector  players  to  share 
experiences  with  developing  countries,  especially  in  areas  such  as  water  and  waste 
management,  land  use  planning,  and  urban  development.  To  expand  the  Urban  Hub’s 
infrastructure finance advisory work, an Infrastructure Finance Centre of Excellence (IFCOE) 
was launched last year. 
36. 
The  Urban  Hub  has  also  partnered  the  Singapore  Cooperation  Enterprise  –  a 
platform  that  leverages  on  the  public  sector  expertise  of  Singapore.  Together,  they  have 
implemented six projects in Indonesia, Vietnam, China and Mongolia. This includes helping 
these governments develop a regulatory and financing framework to prepare PPP projects 
for private sector investment. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Regional governments  have also introduced schemes to encourage private sector 
37. 
investment.  For  example,  the  Indonesian  Ministry  of  Finance  has  worked  with  the  World 
Bank to set up the Indonesia Infrastructure Guarantee Fund. This fund provides guarantees 
to  the  private  sector  against  risks  arising  from  government  actions,  so  as  to  improve  the 
creditworthiness and quality of PPP infrastructure projects. 
38. 
A critical success factor for achieving Asia’s infrastructure investment potential is a 
well-developed  financial  sector.    Asia  needs  financial  markets  that  are  deep  enough  to 
effectively intermediate its considerable savings pool and broad enough to provide a range of 
suitable instruments for risk mitigation. Although ASEAN has made progress on these fronts 
since  the  1997  crisis,  more  needs  to  be  done.  These  include  strengthening  legal  and 
regulatory frameworks, increasing market access, harmonising cross border regulations, and 
raising the level of corporate governance. 
39. 
ASEAN has set in motion several initiatives. It has drawn up a scorecard to identify 
gaps  in  the  development  of  bond  markets.  Its  capital  markets  regulators  are  working  on 
initiatives  to  harmonise  domestic  laws,  regulations,  and  practices.  It  has  introduced  the 
ASEAN  Plus  Standards,  which  are  disclosure  requirements  based  on  the  standards  on 
cross-border  offerings  set  by  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions 
(“IOSCO”). And last month, some ASEAN exchanges announced plans to establish linkages 
to  facilitate  trading  among  them  as  well  as  to  jointly  market  themselves  to  international 
investors. 
40. 
It  is  early  days  yet.  ASEAN  is  still  some  way  to  having  a  well-developed  and 
integrated capital market. But the resolve is strong, important steps have been taken, and 
progress has been made compared to ten years ago. And as ASEAN’s capital markets grow 
and integrate, long-term investments such as infrastructure will become much more attractive 
to private sector players. 
Conclusion 
41. 
Let  me  conclude.  ASEAN  is  a  diverse  collective  of  nations  at  various  stages  of 
development. In some ways, this is a disadvantage compared to sovereign economies like 
China and India. But in other ways, it is an advantage, providing investors in Asia a good 
diversification  opportunity  and  the  value  proposition  of  a  network  of  value-adding  activities 
leveraging on the different comparative advantages of its member countries. 
 I  congratulate  Bank  of  America-Merrill  Lynch  for  organising  this  impressive 
42. 
conference.  You  have  put  together  a  comprehensive  line-up  of  topics  that  go  into  the 
specifics of investment opportunities in Asia. I wish you fruitful discussions and an enjoyable 
time in Singapore.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
