Jean-Claude Trichet: Reforming EMU – time for bold decisions 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference  of  the  Group  of  the  Progressive  Alliance  of  Socialists  and  Democrats  in  the 
European Parliament “What future for the euro?”, Frankfurt, 18 March 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
honourable members of the European Parliament,  
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at your conference this afternoon. 
We meet at a time of multiple challenges for our world. For more than three and a half years 
now, we have been focused on the challenges to  our economies and our societies by the 
unfolding financial crisis. But the tragic events in Japan over the past week remind us of even 
greater threats. 
The potential impact of the earthquake and its aftermath on both the Japanese economy and 
the  world  economy  is  something  we  will  be  thinking  about  deeply  in  the  coming  days  and 
discussing with our friends at the Bank of Japan. For the moment, my heartfelt thoughts are 
with the people of Japan, whose lives and whose livelihoods have seen such havoc. 
Your conference today asks “what future for the euro?” In addressing that question, I would 
first  like  to  speak  about  the  achievements  of  the  past,  before  focusing  on  the  challenges 
ahead for Europe’s economic and monetary union (EMU). 
I would like to reiterate and explain the need for what I have called a “quantum leap” in the 
economic governance of Europe. And I would like to outline what that means in practice and 
what more needs to be done to make that quantum leap a reality. 
Achievements of the euro  
1. 
First,  let  me  take  a  brief  look  back  at  the  history  of  the  euro.  Having  had  the  privilege  of 
serving  as  a  member  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  Governing  Council  since  the 
launch of the euro and as the ECB’s President for the past seven years, I can report that we 
have achieved a great deal. All Europeans should take pride in these achievements. 
The key to understanding the current challenges is to recall that the specific construction of 
our  modern  economic  and  monetary  union  rests  on  two  separate  economic  and  monetary 
pillars.  Under  the  monetary  pillar,  there  is  only  Europe:  the  single  currency,  the  single 
monetary policy and the single central banking system – with the ECB at its core.  
The economic pillar is decentralised, with responsibility for fiscal and economic policies in the 
hands  of  individual  countries.  These  policies  should  be  steered  by  overall  rules  and 
coordinated to ensure that national economic policies are fully compatible with the fact that 
we have a single currency without being part of a political federation. 
When it is working properly, this structure balances the independence of nations and their 
economic interdependence that is at the heart of EMU.  
It  should  represent  an  approach  where  sovereignty  is  shared,  meaning  that  it  is  neither 
exclusively national nor exclusively European.  
When  EMU  was  first  established,  many  people  asked  how  monetary  union  could  function 
effectively in a Europe of sovereign states.  
The answer is that it can function effectively with an appropriate economic union.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The “M” in EMU 
2. 
Let me discuss the two pillars in a little more detail, first the “M” in EMU. In monetary policy 
terms, the ECB has a clear assignment: to deliver price stability. 
According  to  our  primary  mandate,  our  definition  of  price  stability  means  an  inflation  rate 
below  but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  And  over  the  12  years  since  the  launch  of 
EMU, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. 
This is the best result of a major central bank in the euro area over the last 50 years.  
For Germany, the inflation rate has been even lower than the average since the euro was 
launched. From 1999 to 2010, inflation averaged 1.5% per year.  
And  we  achieved  this  during  challenging  times,  not  just  in  the  period  since  August  2007. 
Over the years, we have had to cope with the bursting of the dot com bubble, the aftermath 
of the events of 11 September 2001, the jump in oil prices to $145 per barrel, rising prices of 
food  and  commodities,  and  then  of  course  the  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  Great 
Depression.  
Yet  throughout  these  very  different  economic  shocks  –  which  could  have  been  either 
inflationary  or  deflationary  –  citizens  in  the  euro  area  have  remained  confident  in  our 
commitment.  Proof  of  this  is  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been 
firmly anchored in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. 
Observers and financial markets are also expecting in the years to come that price stability 
will  be  maintained.  For  the  next  five  years,  professional  forecasters  currently  foresee  an 
inflation of precisely 2%.  
These achievements have not come at the expense of employment. On the contrary, since 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  began,  employment  in  the  euro  area  has  risen  by  over 
14 million, compared with about 8 million in the United States.  
And  these  achievements  have  not  come  at  the  expense  of  growth  either.  Adjusted  for 
population growth differences, growth in the euro area has been almost the same as in the 
United States over the past decade, at about 1% per year in terms of GDP per capita growth. 
The “E” in EMU 
3. 
Let me turn to the economic pillar, the E of EMU.  
Here, we need fundamental reforms.  
Economic union is a fundamental counterpart to monetary union. 
A  single  market  with  a  single  currency  calls  for  a  very  solid  framework  for  handling  the 
collegial governance of national fiscal policies and macroeconomic policies.  
I  recall  the  1989  Delors  report  that  stated:  “an  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  could  only 
operate on the basis of mutually consistent and sound behaviour by governments and other 
economic  agents  in  all  member  countries.  (…)  Uncoordinated  and  divergent  national 
budgetary policies would undermine monetary stability and generate imbalances in the real 
and financial sectors of the community.” 
The need for better coordination is recognised by the citizens of Europe, particularly those in 
the euro area. The recent Eurobarometer survey has shown that, on average, more than four 
out of five euro area citizens are in favour of greater policy coordination between countries to 
overcome the crisis.  
This is very important: citizens want a stronger coordination of economic and fiscal policies 
among the countries of the euro area. European integration has led the people of Europe to 
appreciate the value of cooperation, especially in difficult times. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So what does more coordination require? At its core, it means strengthening the economic 
governance  of  Europe,  a  project  to  which  I  know  that  the  European  Parliament  is  fully 
committed. 
Let  me  share  with  you  our  view  at  the  ECB  on  what  progress  has  been  made  and  what 
remains to be done. 
The ECB’s position on reforming economic governance 
4. 
The ECB has recently published its legal opinion on the economic governance proposals. In 
a separate publication on our website, we have highlighted 10 points where we have called 
for more ambitious steps. We believe that we must draw not just some, but all appropriate 
lessons from the crisis.  
In essence, the thrust of our message is as follows.  
More  automatic  and  speedy  procedures,  a  broader  range  of  enforcement  tools  and  more 
ambitious policy requirements are all urgently required at euro area level. But these will not 
be sufficient if they are not solidly anchored at national level: the gap between the EU and 
national  level  must  be  closed.  An  effective  way  of  achieving  this  would  be  to  swiftly 
implement strong national budgetary frameworks in the Member States. 
Earlier  this  week,  the  Ecofin  Council  took  some  steps  forward.  In  particular,  the  Council 
accepted  the  introduction  of  an  annual  fiscal  expenditure  benchmark  and  a  numerical 
benchmark (the 1/20th rule) for debt reduction.  
The  fact  that  the  Council  “expects  to,  as  a  rule,  follow  the  recommendations  of  the 
Commission, or explain its position in writing” – is a step in the right direction. It would be a 
big step if there were assurances that it would be implemented in a strict and rules-based 
manner.  
As  regards  the  anchoring  of  the  objectives  of  EU  fiscal  coordination  in  national  budgetary 
frameworks, it is of the essence that the directive is transposed into national law as faithfully 
as possible, and no later than by the end of 2012. It would be helpful if the Eurogroup could 
issue a formal statement to that effect. 
The  Ecofin  Council  also  agrees  with  a  framework  for  the  prevention  and  correction  of 
excessive macroeconomic imbalances, including an early warning mechanism and eventual 
sanctions in the case of euro area countries. The ECB welcomes the intention to channel any 
fines collected to the crisis resolution fund.  
Nevertheless, in our view, still more ambition on governance is warranted.  
The need for greater ambition in governance reform 
5. 
Let me briefly highlight the main points and explain why we find them so important. You will 
see that my remarks are very specific. This is because we are at a point where it is time for 
decisions,  and  the  matter  before  us  is  complex.  Parliament  has  received  about  2000 
amendments on the six legal texts. Therefore, specificity in recommendations is essential.  
Let me summarise them under four headings. 
First,  all surveillance  procedures  have  to  be  faster  and  more  automatic,  including  the  new 
macroeconomic surveillance framework.  
We  have  seen  more  than  ever  the  importance  of  a  timely  correction  of  fiscal  imbalances. 
Therefore,  we  cannot  wait  months  or  even  a  year  until  policies  are  corrected.  In  the 
meantime, spillovers would hurt other Member States.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  the  past,  the  Council  has  often  suspended  the  procedures  of  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact,  thereby  weakening  its  credibility.  This  must  not  happen  again.  The  newly  agreed 
“comply  or  explain”  principle  under  fiscal  surveillance  still  leaves  too  much  room  for 
discretion. Moreover, it does not cover the new macroeconomic surveillance framework.  
Beyond  this,  the  ECB  believes  that  the  use  of  reverse  majority  voting  could  be  extended 
further across the various surveillance provisions – not just the two regulations on financial 
sanctions for euro area countries.  
Second,  the  enforcement  tools  also  need  to  be  more  effective.  For  example,  the  new 
macroeconomic  surveillance  framework  needs  to  provide  clear  incentives  by  envisaging 
financial sanctions already after the first instance of non-compliance. Discretion to reduce or 
suspend financial sanctions – either on grounds of exceptional economic circumstances or in 
response to a reasoned request by a Member State – strongly reduces the effectiveness and 
sets the wrong incentives. This should not be permitted: it will help nobody.  
Third, the policy requirements should be more ambitious to match the current reality of the 
euro  area.  The  new  macroeconomic  surveillance  framework,  as  amended  by  the  Council, 
does  not  yet  provide  a  clear  focus  on  the  euro  area  countries  with  large  current  account 
deficits, significant losses of competitiveness and high levels of public and private debt, as 
well as any other vulnerabilities challenging our economic and monetary union. 
As  regards  fiscal  surveillance,  ambitious  benchmarks  are  needed  when  establishing  an 
excessive deficit. The scope for considering “any relevant factors” in case of an excessive 
deficit should be clearly reduced. 
The adjustment path towards a country’s medium-term budgetary objective also needs more 
ambition.  In  this  context,  the  annual  improvement  in  the  structural  balance  should  be 
significantly  higher  than  0.5%  of  GDP  when  a  country’s  government  debt  exceeds  the 
reference value of 60% of GDP, otherwise there are fiscal sustainability risks.  
Fourth and finally, it is also crucial to guarantee the quality and independence of fiscal and 
economic  analysis.  We  propose  the  establishment  of  an  EU  advisory  body  of  recognised 
competence.  It  goes  without  saying  that  remaining  weaknesses  in  the  collection  and 
reporting of data have to be addressed immediately and rigorously. 
These are my main areas of recommendation.  
It  is  clear  that  implementation  of  the  new  governance  framework  will  have  a  significant 
impact on national policies, which will call for enhanced democratic legitimacy. A key issue 
will  be  to  anchor  the  forthcoming  reforms  firmly  at  national  level  by  means  of  strong 
budgetary frameworks.  
For euro area countries, independent national fiscal policy institutions should be mandatory. 
Clear borrowing frameworks should also be considered. 
I welcome the euro area countries’ commitment of 11 March to transpose the EU fiscal rules 
into national legislation and including for sub-national levels.  
The  ECB  and,  I  believe,  also  the  citizens  of  Europe  count  on  the  European  Parliament  to 
drive these changes forward. We are mandated as European institutions to take a broader 
perspective.  We  are  independent  of  specific  national  circumstances.  And  we  are  here  to 
think long-term, as do our citizens.  
Let  me  borrow  the  words  of  Willy  Brandt,  speaking  as  the  first  Head  of  Government  of  a 
member  state  of  the  European  Communities  to  address  the  plenary  of  the  European 
Parliamentary Assembly, back in 1973. “This is where the political will should, at long last, 
carry  the  day  over  the  many  national  administrative  egoisms,  which  may  be  justified 
individually, but all in all can no longer be tolerated. Having gone so much astray in the past 
years, we must now achieve a better harmonization of our economic policies. New decisions 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  needed  which  place  more  precise  obligation  on  us,  and  bind  Member  States  more 
closely.” 
The quantum leap 
6. 
If  the  European  Parliament  were  to  go  further  in  this  direction,  it  would  provide  a  true 
“quantum  leap”  in  the  rules  that  regulate  how  countries  make  their  national  economic 
policies. Countries need clear rules to guide policy-making, and sanctions if they stray from a 
sustainable path. 
For those still hesitating whether to go that far, let me recall what happened some years ago: 
after  a  period  generally  acknowledged  as  a  period  of  economic  fair weather,  governments 
decided to weaken the Stability and Growth Pact in 2004 and 2005.  
This  initiative  was  led  by  the  euro  area’s  largest  economies.  The  ECB  voiced  its  “grave 
concerns” at the time. Governments had not used the more benign years to put their fiscal 
houses in order. I now see that many acknowledge that the weakening of the Pact was a 
serious misjudgement. 
The crisis has given us an opportunity. It has made plain the flaws in the Stability and Growth 
Pact that allowed countries’ fiscal policies to become a problem – not just for themselves, but 
for everyone else within the monetary union.  
We now have an obligation to fix the flaws. All of them.  
We now have to lay the ground for policies towards sustainable and balanced growth. It is 
only such growth that will contribute to lasting job creation and social harmony.  
Conclusion 
7. 
Let  me  draw  to  a  conclusion.  As  I  have  indicated,  the  history  of  the  euro  is  something  in 
which all Europeans can take pride. I have every confidence that the future of the euro will be 
one in which we can equally take pride. But to get to that point, several improvements need 
to be made to our economic union.  
As I have indicated, progress is being made. Yet we need to draw all the lessons from the 
current situation to complete the work on Europe’s economic and monetary union. 
We  must  ensure  that  the  well-functioning  monetary  union  is  complemented  by  an  equally 
well-functioning economic union.  
All of this should be done to achieve the common goal: a union of individual freedom and 
collective  respect;  a  union  of  responsibility  and  cooperation;  and  a  union  of  stability  and 
prosperity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
