Christian Noyer: The Euro area – challenges and responses 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at a breakfast for the Economic Club, 
New York, 18 April 2011. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here today. It is also a privilege to address such a distinguished 
audience. I would like to take this opportunity to present my assessment of the situation in 
the euro area, particularly with respect to the difficulties we meet on sovereign debt. 
Three views on the sovereign crisis in Europe 
Broadly  speaking,  opinions  and  views  expressed  on  the  euro  area  by  people  outside  the 
Eurozone,  can  be  divided  into  three  categories:  hostility  for,  at  least  very  few  people, 
skepticism and support. 
First, outright hostility. It is unfortunately true that, in some circles, there is a spontaneous 
and  deeply  ingrained  opposition  to  European  integration.  Since  the  euro  is  the  most 
accomplished  part  of  the  integration  project,  it  is  only  natural  that  it  crystallizes  those 
oppositions. Somber predictions about the imminent demise of the euro came predominantly 
from  those  deeply  anti  –  European  commentators.  While  those  views,  like  all  opinions, 
should be treated with respect, there is no point in trying to refute arguments which, in great 
part, are irrational and mainly reflect wishful thinking. 
Second, skepticism. It emanates mainly, but not only, from academic circles. Prestigious and 
well respected economists have been pointing to the fact that the Euro is not an optimum 
currency area. They also underlined that, absent sufficient labor mobility, there was a need 
for  some  form  of  fiscal  federalism  that  current  arrangements  failed  to  fulfill  by  a  large 
measure.  Those  arguments  have  been  made  and  discussed  for  some  time  and  deserve 
careful  consideration.  Obviously,  recent  turbulences  and  disruptions  in  the  articulation  of 
national fiscal policies have given them a new relevance. I will come back to this debate in a 
moment.  At  this  stage,  I  will  simply  remind  you  of  some  responses  that  have  been 
consistently formulated over the last decade. The benefits of the euro cannot be assessed 
exclusively  through  the  lenses  of  the  optimum  currency  theory.  The  Euro  has  brought  to 
more  than  400  million  European  citizens  unprecedented  stability.  Price  stability,  obviously, 
with  inflation  averaging  1.97%  over  the  last  decade.  And  also,  yes,  financial  stability.  It  is 
always useful to think of counterfactual when assessing a situation. Looking beyond current 
fiscal turbulences, let us think, for instance, how Europe would have absorbed the crisis with 
fifteen different currencies, fluctuating internal exchange rates, and, as a consequence, much 
higher volatility, uncertainty, risk premia and interest rates. This experiment speaks for itself.  
In  addition,  numerous  studies  have  shown  that  economic  cycles  are  becoming  more  and 
more synchronized across the euro countries. After a spike in 2009, the standard deviation 
between  national  growth  rates  inside  the  Euro area  has  gone  down  to its  lowest  historical 
level  ever.  This  convergence  has  eliminated  one  major  asymmetry  and  is  getting  the 
eurozone closer to the canonical model of the optimum currency area. 
The  last  observable  reaction  is  support.  It  shows  up  in  comments  from  a  majority  of 
observers and investors, especially in emerging economies: they praise the euro; they want it 
to succeed; but they sometimes wonder about our collective ability, in current circumstances, 
to do what is necessary, to make the right decisions or make them at the right time and to set 
in place the proper framework for the future. These are the concerns I want to address now.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Where and how did it start?  
Most  Euro  area  and  EU  countries  entered  the  crisis  with  significantly  deteriorated  fiscal 
positions. We were very far away from the “structural balance objective” which was the basic 
pillar of our fiscal framework. So, all countries were severely hit, not so much by an increase 
in expenditures but essentially through a massive loss of revenues. The IMF has shown that, 
in  all  advanced  countries,  including  the  US  and  UK,  those  losses  account  for  around  two 
third of the deterioration in fiscal positions which have been observed during the crisis.   
Fiscal deterioration was compounded, in some countries, by the size of blanket guarantees 
given to the banking sector. Those implicit liabilities only became apparent when difficulties 
materialized.  As  in  the  US  and  UK,  fragilities  in  the  banking  sector  stemmed  from  risks 
mostly taken in – or related to – the housing sector. 
Let me note, in passing, that those problems unfortunately were not specific to the Euro area. 
Public  debt  jumped  by  around  30%  of  GDP  in  UK  and  in  US.  Structural  deficits  in  those 
countries stand at similar or higher levels than those in most parts of the Euro area. 
Overall,  the  crisis  has  put  into  light  major  deficiencies  in  the  implementation  of  fiscal 
discipline  and,  more  generally,  in  the  economic  governance  of  the  Euro  area.  It  is  indeed 
demanding to operate a single currency with multiple fiscal and structural national policies.  
Given  the  insufficient  of  market  discipline,  the founders  of the  Euro  had  seen  the problem 
and put in place the Growth and Stability Pact. The principles were sound. The framework 
was  adequate.  The  implementation  has  been  extremely  weak.  Bluntly  speaking,  peer 
pressure failed to ensure consistent and rigorous respect of the principles which had been 
agreed  upon.  It  was,  and  remains  necessary  to  make  a  “quantum  leap”  in  economic 
governance. 
What did we do ?  
The  governments  are  now  trying  to  address  those  deficiencies.  Significant  progress  has 
been made over the past year. 
At  the  national  level,  all  Member  States  have  embarked  upon  credible  public  finance 
consolidation plans that are already bearing fruit. 
At the EU level, a new framework has been agreed upon. The first pillar is a strengthening of 
the SGP with a much stronger preventive arm. Surveillance over budgetary policies has been 
reinforced with a more effective prevention/correction of excessive deficits. Government debt 
levels are being better taken into account and sanctions will become more automatic. Ideally 
those  European  disciplines  should  be  now  completed  by  the  adoption,  in  each  member 
states, of strong national fiscal rules.  
The  second  Pillar  is  a  new  process  to  monitor  competitiveness  and,  in  particular,  unit 
production costs.  
Lastly, member states have agreed on a new euro area framework for crisis management. 
Experience has shown the need to provide temporary financial support to EA Member States 
facing impaired access to market financing, 
As you know, a new facility, the EFSF, was created in May 2010 for a three year period. It 
has been used to support and finance the Greek and Irish programs. Although nominally set 
at 440bn its effective lending capacity was in fact limited to 250bn, an amount which may 
have  been  insufficient  to  instill  confidence  in  the  markets.  Last  March,  an  agreement  was 
reached to raise that capacity to an effective 440 bn.  
Member  states  also  agreed  on  a  permanent  crisis  management  framework  due  to  be 
implemented in 2013 and mainly based on a European Stability Mechanism (ESM) with an 
effective  lending  capacity  of  EUR  500  bn.  That  mechanism  will  have  the  possibility  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
exceptional  interventions  in  sovereign  debt  primary  markets.  Identical  and  standardized 
Collective Action Clauses (CACs) will be included in all new euro area government securities, 
with maturity above one year, from July 2013. Their basis will be consistent with the CACs 
that are common in New York and English laws. 
Significantly,  all  those  mechanisms  associate  the  IMF  and  the  European  Commission  “in 
consultation” with the ECB to avoid relying only on peer pressure between members states 
and ensure proper conditionality.  
As you know, the crisis has also led the Eurosytem to embark on a very limited program of 
bond purchases. It was our judgment that the transmission mechanism of monetary policy 
was severely impaired in some cases, as local bond markets were close to paralysis. That 
program has served us well. Monetary impact was instantly and fully sterilized. 
Where do we stand?  
Overall, those changes have been favorably received by the markets. Spreads and CDS on 
most  sovereigns  are  been  trending  down  since  January.  Nevertheless,  the  sense  of  crisis 
has not yet disappeared. Most recently, Portugal has asked for an IMF / EFSF program. The 
success of existing programs remains to be demonstrated. The very progressive elaboration 
of  new  framework  has  prevented  outside  analysts  to  see  the  big  picture  and  measure  the 
amplitude of the changes. 
There is also a more diffuse concern about sustainability, which I would like to discuss. 
Looking  at  aggregate  numbers,  it  is  very  difficult  to  understand  many  of  the  concerns 
expressed on the euro area. The Euro area is the only major currency zone with its external 
accounts in balance, and which therefore does not depend on external finance. This is an 
essential element of robustness and, for outside investors, provides a  strong guarantee of 
long term solvency. Its aggregate fiscal balance (with a 2010 deficit at 6,3% of GDP) is the 
most favorable of all advanced economies ( US is at 10,5%, UK at 9,6% and Japan at 7,7%). 
The same holds true for public debt which stands at 92% of GDP similar to 93% in the US 
versus 200% in Japan.  
But,  of  course,  markets,  and  analysts  do  not  look  always  at  the  euro  area  as  a  whole. 
Because fiscal policies remain national, they tend to assess separately the situation of public 
finances in each individual country. While most analysts would acknowledge the magnitude 
of the efforts undertaken, some tend to take a very pessimistic view about future outcomes. 
As I understand it, that pessimism can be articulated around two lines of argument. First, the 
amplitude of fiscal consolidation will negatively affect growth for a very long time making it 
impossible  to  service  debt  and  leading  unavoidably  to  some  kind  of  restructuring.  And 
second, this economic stagnation will trigger strong political reaction which, ultimately, would 
put the very existence of the euro area at risk. In short, the whole reasoning is based on the 
euro  area,  and  more  specifically,  its  periphery,  being  unable  to  return  to  normal  growth 
anytime  in  the  foreseeable  future.  This  is  a  very  dramatic  assumption  and  it  matters  a  lot 
because,  as  we  all know,  the  dynamics  of  debt  are  extremely  sensitive  to  forecasts  about 
future growth. Small changes in projections can have a huge impact on sustainability. Some 
of  the  implicit  assumptions  underlying  current  negative  judgments  seem  to  me  seriously 
misguided. 
Let’s look first at the short run. As you know, we have been recently surprised on the upside 
with the dynamics of growth in the Euro area. Consumer confidence is almost back to pre 
crisis  levels,  PMI  are  at  an  all  time  high  and  GDP  growth  will  almost  certainly  be  above 
potential, on average, for the year 2011. Those developments take place at a moment where 
drastic fiscal consolidation programs are implemented in all countries. Those analysts who 
predicted that fiscal tightening would stifle growth in the Euro area are currently being proven 
wrong. Positive confidence effects in the private sector are outweighing the negative impact 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of  public  expenditure  reduction.  In  our  economic  jargon,  we  seem  to  be  living  to  day  in  a 
“Ricardian” world. 
What about countries in the periphery? Spanish growth rate swung from –3.7% in 2009 to  
–0.1% in 2010, despite the fact that a major austerity plan was being implemented. Spanish 
exports are booming with an increase of 10% within the euro area in 2010 and 19% outside 
the euro area in 2010. This compares very favourably with performances of other countries 
both inside and outside the eurozone. 
Turning to the long run, it is essential, when looking at the inner workings of the euro area to 
make  a  distinction  between  real  and  nominal  evolutions.  Real  convergence  is  occurring 
between various parts of the zone and I think this process will continue and support growth in 
the future, contrary to over simplistic descriptions. 
One overlooked fact is the very fast productivity catch up in the periphery of the euro area. 
Between  2000  and  2008,  cumulative  labor  productivity  growth  in  Greece,  as  measured  by 
the  output  per  employee,  was  14,7%,  and  10,2%  in  Ireland.  Both  significantly  outpaced 
Germany  (6,1%).  This  is  exactly  what  you  would  expect  in  an  integrated  economic  and 
monetary  area  and  this  process  should  continue  in  the  future,  provided  that  appropriate 
policies are implemented. Economic convergence will therefore boost growth and support the 
return to debt sustainability.  
Now, looking at nominal evolutions, a very different picture emerges. During the same period 
nominal  wages  grew  by  a  total  of  42%  in  Ireland  and  52%  in  Greece  vs  only  7,4  %  in 
Germany. The nature of the challenge, therefore, is clear. There has to be a regime change 
in  the  way  nominal  wages  and  prices  are  set  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area.  As  Central 
Bankers, we have been making that argument for years. One benefit of the crisis has been 
that this message is now fully accepted by Governments and public opinions. Strong reforms 
are currently being pushed in labor markets legislation as well as wage determination in the 
public sector in many countries.  
I’ll end up with a few words about the banking sector. I have the privilege to be both a Central 
Banker and a supervisor. From that vantage point, I will make four remarks:  
1. 
Revenues  for  the  twelve  biggest  European  banks  have  grown,  in  aggregate,  by 
8.6% in 2010 (as compared, to 2.5% for the main US banks). As a result, European 
banks’  Core  Tier  1  ratios  stood  at  between  8.5%  and  15.3%  at  the  end  of  2010 
(corresponding  numbers  for  US  banks  are  between  8.4%  and  13.3%).  Our 
“universal banking model”, based on a diversity of activities and sources of income 
is proving its resilience.  
Obviously  there  is  a  circular  causality  between  government  debt  and  the  banking 
sector. Spreads on public debt naturally act as floors for the funding costs of banks. 
And, conversely, doubts about banks solvency create expectations of public support 
and  deterioration  in  public  finances.  This  gives  rise  to  multiple  equilibria  where 
sudden  shifts  in  confidence  can  be  self  fulfilling  and  create  difficulties  which, 
previously, did not exist. This process has been at work in a number of cases in the 
Euro area during the last year. 
The main purpose of the stress tests is to break that circularity. Our first european 
tests encompassed 81 banks vs only 19 for the US. The basic exercise was sound 
and taken as such by analysts when it was published. Somehow clumsily, however, 
a  few  banks  were  added  at  the  last  moment,  with  only  limited  investigation,  and 
these  are  precisely  the  banks  which  proved  problematic  afterwards,  which 
undermined the credibility of the whole exercise. That mistake won’t be repeated.  
A lot has been made of the fact that no sovereign stress was made on the banking 
book. And indeed, as regulators, we did not want to give any credibility to a scenario 
that  we  consider  unacceptable.  However,  there  was  full,  total,  and  transparent 
disclosure of exposures to sovereigns for each in individual bank. Everybody is free 
2. 
3. 
4. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to make their own assumptions and calculations. With knowledge of the exposure, it 
does not take a rocket scientist to figure out some scenarios. It turns out that such 
calculations would produce very reassuring numbers. But, for some reasons, they 
never  were  publically  made  by  most  analysts.  Just  as  an  illustration,  the  total 
exposure of French banks to sovereign debt in the southern part of Europe is 38% 
of total tier one (13% without Italy). I’ll let you make your own conclusions. Even in 
an apocalyptic scenario, only a small fraction of French banks tier one ratio would 
be compromised. The same results apply, with some variations, to other countries. 
Conclusion  
Let me know conclude. Like all other major advanced economies, the euro area is facing big 
challenges in adjusting to the post-crisis environment. For all, those challenges relate to long 
term fiscal sustainability. They are neither bigger nor smaller for the euro area than for the 
US,  UK  or  Japan.  They  may  be  more  complicated  to  solve  because,  by  nature,  our 
governance is more complex and we face specific collective action problems. It may take us 
longer  to  deal  with  difficulties  as  they  appear,  and  we  are  paying  a  price  for  this  relative 
inertia. But problems are being tackled, reforms are being implemented and I am convinced 
that, at the end, the Euro area will emerge as a stronger and more robust entity than before 
the  crisis.  As  for  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  I  can  assure  you  that  we  stand 
ready to act as forcefully as necessary to ensure price stability and preserve the integrity of 
the euro, which is, today, our most precious common good. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
