José Manuel González-Páramo: The challenges of the European financial 
sector 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at a conference organized by the Spanish National Council of the 
Urban Land Institute (ULI), Barcelona, 26 May 2011. 
Ladies and gentlemen: 
 Introduction  
I. 
It is a privilege for me to participate in this conference organised by the Spanish Council of 
the  Urban  Land  Institute,  dedicated  to  the  very  important  topic  of  the  challenges  currently 
faced  by  the  European  banking  sector.  Many  of  these  challenges  are  associated  with  the 
ongoing restructuring process of the banking sector and the completion and implementation 
of the new European and international regulatory and supervisory framework.  
The protracted financial crisis that we have experienced since 2007 has unveiled important 
sources of vulnerability in the financial system. These include weaknesses of the regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  of  the  banking  sector,  which  failed  to  ensure  the  safety  and 
soundness of financial institutions both individually and as a system. This has prompted the 
relevant  authorities  to  pursue  a  number  of  reforms  of  the  microprudential  supervisory  and 
regulatory framework, while also assigning central banks all over the world macroprudential 
tasks in recognition of the importance of the systemic component of financial stability.  
In  addition,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  the  relationship  between  financial  development  and 
economic  growth  is  not  really  linear  and  that,  when  financial  sectors  become  “too  large” 
relative to their home economies, risks to financial stability and macroeconomic stability may 
arise. Moreover, the crisis has undermined the sustainability of some business models that 
were  rather  widespread  among  large  international  banks,  while  also  exposing  the 
shortcomings  of  corporate  governance  and  of  the  evaluation  and  management  of  the 
different sources of risk within financial institutions.  
Given the location of this conference, I should recall that one of the factors that make the 
current crisis so challenging and costly is the interaction among its various housing-related 
components (housing prices, housing finance and the construction sector). Indeed, we know 
that  a  housing  market  bust  was  typically  a  feature  of  the  costliest  systemic  crises 
experienced over the past century, including the Nordic banking crisis of the early 1990s and 
the Japanese financial crisis started in the 1990s. In my intervention, I will try to highlight the 
aspects  of  the  current  policy  and  regulatory  debate  that  are  most  relevant  for  the  housing 
sector. 
Towards a new economic and financial paradigm: The “new normal” 
II. 
The  crisis  has  affected  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment  in  which  banks 
operate. In the aftermath of the crisis, it is very likely that many fundamental elements of our 
economies  and  financial  systems  will  work  differently  in  a  number  of  aspects,  reflecting 
processes  of  adjustment  in  the  behaviour  of  agents  and  policy-related  reforms  that  are 
currently under way. More generally, empirical evidence shows that systemic banking crises 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 in 
for 
implications 
theory  have  different 
two  decades  of  significantly 
typically  affect  the  structure  and  dynamics  of  economic  systems  over  very  protracted 
periods.1 
Before venturing into the future, let me recall the main elements of the pre-crisis economic 
and financial paradigm, i.e. the “old normal”.  
 
Reduced macroeconomic volatility. Prior to the deterioration of the crisis in October 
2008,  our  economies  experienced 
reduced 
macroeconomic  volatility.  A  number  of  empirical  studies  documented  a  significant 
decline  in  the  variability  of  both  economic  growth  and  inflation  in  almost  all  major 
industrialised economies. Most of the debate among monetary economists focused 
at the time on the predominant source of “the Great Moderation” among three main 
candidates:  (1)  better  macroeconomic  policies,  (2)  structural  changes  in  the 
economies, and (3) less disruptive distributions of shocks (“good luck”). While the 
alternative  explanations  could 
the 
sustainability of the decline in macroeconomic volatility, in general few doubts were 
expressed  about  the  steadiness  of  this  new  state  of  the  world:  the  “Great 
Moderation” was here to stay.  
Sustained  economic  growth.  The  decline  in  macroeconomic  volatility  was  also 
accompanied  by  a  significant  improvement  in  economic  performance  as  agents 
were  able  to  extract  the  dividends  of  sustained  price  stability  and  reduced 
uncertainty  about  macroeconomic  activity.  Potential  growth  in  most  developed 
economies  rose,  enabling  their  citizens  to  benefit  from  protracted  periods  of 
economic  expansion,  only 
relatively  moderate 
recessions. 
Strong  dynamics  of  house  prices.  Sustained  economic  growth,  supported  by  low 
and stable interest rates, contributed to improving expectations about asset prices, 
particularly about house prices. Optimistic expectations about housing markets at a 
time  of:  (a)  increasing  deregulation  and  liberalisation  of  the  banking  and  financial 
sectors,  (b)  fast  financial  innovation,  and  (c)  progressive  globalisation  of  financial 
markets,  led  to  rapid  appreciation  of  house  prices,  which  was  supported  by 
excessive  indebtedness  of  households  in  some  countries.  The  rise  in  household 
indebtedness and house price inflation was particularly significant in those countries 
in which the decline in nominal interest rates as a result of the shift to price stability 
had been more pronounced and in those that received large immigration flows.  
Increased profitability of the financial sector at a time of historically low risk premia. 
In  the  years  preceding  the  crisis,  the  profitability  of  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions significantly improved as a result of generally favourable economic and 
financial  conditions.  At the  same  time,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the  improvement  in 
profitability had taken place against a background of: (1) unusually subdued volatility 
in  financial  markets,  (2)  credit  risk  premia  at  historically  low  levels,  (3)  very  high 
valuations of asset prices, and (4) relatively light regulation and supervision in some 
countries. Moreover, the improvement in the financial positions of banks had taken 
place in an environment characterised by ample market liquidity across a number of 
global financial markets, which led to almost no liquidity risk premia being priced in. 
As the crisis is still unfolding, we cannot tell with certainly how our economic and financial 
systems will function in the future. However, we can safely predict that many of the elements 
of the old paradigm will no longer be valid. This will give rise to an economic and financial 
“new normal” in the post-crisis period. Some of the its main elements, that can be sketched 
out based on previous experiences of systemic banking crises, are as follows: 
interrupted  by 
infrequently 
                                                   
1  Reinhart, C.M. and K.S. Rogoff (2008), “The aftermath of financial crises”, NBER WP 14656. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Somewhat higher macroeconomic volatility and lower potential growth 
Protracted periods of adjustment in housing markets and in the construction sector 
More  rigorous  scrutiny  of  valuation  of  property  as  collateral  for  credit,  also  using 
making use of independent valuation sources 
An upward shift in the pricing of credit and liquidity risk  
Stricter regulation in order to strengthen the resilience of the financial sector, though 
probably at the cost of making financial intermediation somewhat more expensive  
Evolving  role  of  central  banks  (stronger  inclination  towards  “leaning  against  the 
wind” policies and the assignment of macroprudential objectives)  
Changes in the macroeconomic environment, regulatory and supervisory framework as well 
as  industry  structure  may  have  very  significant  implications  in  the  way  the  financial  sector 
operates in the future. Let me briefly elaborate on some of those implications. 
The banking sector after the crisis 
III. 
An  important  consequence  of  the  financial  crisis  is  the  significant  transformation  which  is 
taking  place  in  the  EU  banking  sector.  The  global  overhaul  of  banking  regulation  and 
supervision  resulting  from  the  crisis,  the  demanding  macroeconomic  environment  and  the 
ongoing deleveraging and banking restructuring in some European countries are key factors 
which are shaping the future of the banking industry both in the short- and medium-term.  
In the context of the lessons learnt from the crisis and of the regulatory reform, the rest of my 
speech  will  focus  on  the  main  aspects  of  this  reform  and  the  developments  in  the  size  of 
banking  sectors,  banking  business  models  and  corporate  governance.  I  will  conclude  by 
discussing the role of central banks in the new macro-prudential supervisory framework. 
Regulatory and supervisory micro-prudential framework 
III.1 
The  crisis  has  revealed  serious  gaps  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for 
financial institutions, both with regard to the prudential rules on capital and those on liquidity. 
Several  systemically  important  institutions  that  seemed  to  have  a  solid  financial  position 
before the crisis proved not to be sufficiently resilient to withstand the shocks that have hit 
the  financial  system  in  the  past  three  years  and  a  half.  Consequently,  governments  and 
central banks had to provide an unprecedented amount of support, and in parallel with this 
process, several initiatives have also been launched that resulted in a major overhaul of the 
regulatory and supervisory framework. 
A core element of the regulatory reform was the complete revision of the Basel II framework 
(now commonly referred to as Basel III) that has been recently agreed by the members of the 
Basel  Committee  and  endorsed  by  the  Group  of  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of 
Supervision. The key elements of the new framework include: 
(i)  
a  new  definition  of  regulatory  capital  that  will  improve  both  the  quality  and 
consistency of the capital base,  
the introduction of capital conservation buffer requirements that would constitute an 
additional  layer  of  protection  for  banks,  especially  in  periods  of  excessive  credit 
growth, 
the strengthening of the risk coverage of the capital framework that would represent 
a revision of the prudential rules on securitisation and trading book activities as well 
as the counterparty credit risk framework,  
the  planned  introduction  of  a  non-risk  based  leverage  ratio  that  would  serve  as  a 
supplementary  measure  to  the  risk-based  requirements  to  contain  the  build-up  of 
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
excessive leverage and address model risks associated with the risk-based capital 
framework, and  
the  development  of  a  liquidity  risk  framework  that  would  aim  at  improving  the 
resilience to liquidity shocks of the banks. 
(v)  
The  new  measures  will  be  introduced  over  a  transition  period  of  8  years,  and  have  been 
calibrated with the aim of avoiding severe implications for the national banking system, while 
supporting economic recovery2.  
“Too large” and non-transparent financial sectors?  
III.2 
Turning to the developments in the banking sector, let me recall that the size of the financial 
systems dramatically increased during the past few decades both in Europe and in the US.3 
To  judge  whether  the  financial  sector  has  grown  “too  large”,  it  is  crucial  to  answer  the 
question  of  whether  or  not  the  expansion  of  finance  before  the  crisis  was  driven  by 
fundamentals.  
On the one hand, it is clear that this process was fuelled by fast economic growth and a rapid 
accumulation  of  savings  in  emerging  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  developed  countries 
engaged in rapid innovation in the field of financial products, which allowed the more efficient 
channelling  of  domestic  and  global  savings  towards  productive  investments.  The  most 
striking  developments  in  this  respect  occurred  with  credit  default  swaps  (CDSs)  and 
securitised  products.  This  increase  in  financial  innovation  may,  in  turn,  have  led  to  an 
inefficient allocation of resources, excessive  risk-taking and over-leveraging of the system. 
Examples  of  such  resource  misallocation  include  the  expansion  of  the  US  subprime 
mortgage market and of the shadow banking system.  
Similarly, while we have always known that financial innovation can contribute to enhancing 
risk diversification, it is clear that innovative financial instruments also have the potential to 
undermine financial stability. For example, the complexity of new instruments might lead to a 
misallocation  of  capital  and  risk  among  market  participants.  In  this  respect,  the  crisis  has 
exposed the fragilities of the securitisation process, including the misalignment of incentives 
among agents participating in the origination and in the distribution, lack of transparency with 
regard to the risks underlying securitised products and the inadequate management of the 
risks  associated  with  the  securitisation  business.  It  is  by  now  evident  to  everybody  that 
weaknesses  in  the  business  model  based  on  “originate-to-distribute”  contributed  to  the 
worsening of loan quality.4 
The  experience  of  the  crisis  also  suggests  that  most  investors  hugely  underestimated  the 
risks of the most complex financial instruments. This is precisely why there is an increasing 
demand  for  transparency  about  both  the  degree  of  risk  of  individual  instruments  and  the 
                                                 
2  The impact assessments carried out by the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board with relation to 
the  transitory  and  long-term  effects  of  the  Basel  reform  package  revealed  that  the  costs  of  financial 
intermediation  may  temporarily  rise  during  the  implementation  phase  (e.g.  in  terms  of  increasing  spreads, 
lower credit volumes and a more moderate GDP growth). However, in the long run, the net positive benefits 
are expected to dominate as a result of lower probability of crises to occur. 
In the euro area, the expansion of banks’ balance sheets has been around 400% between 1992 and 2007 
(just before the crisis) whereas nominal GDP has increased only 130%. As a result, the ratio of banking sector 
total assets to GDP, a measure of the depth of bank intermediation, increased from 145% in 1992 to 331% in 
2007. It should be also noted that the reported assets understate the growth of bank activity in that period, as 
a lot of it took place off-balance sheet. 
3 
4  See, among others, G. Dell’Ariccia, D. Igan and L. Laevan, “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence 
from  the  Subprime  Mortgage  Market”,  IMF  Working  Paper,  No  08/106,  IMF,  2008;  and  A.  Maddaloni  and  
J.-L. Peydro, “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision, and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from Lending 
Standards”, ECB Working Paper No. 1248, October 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
exposures of institutions to different instruments, markets and counterparties. The EU-wide 
stress test exercise proved to be an important step toward a more transparent assessment of 
the  exposures  of  individual  institutions  to  different  instruments  and  countries.  The 
forthcoming EU-wide stress test will be more comprehensive and detailed than the previous 
exercise,  thereby  playing  an  even  more  important  role  in  supporting  banks’  access  to 
medium- and long-term funding.  
Going back to the ongoing regulatory reforms, while the overall impact in terms of the size of 
the  banking  sector  is  expected  to  be  moderate  on  average,  some  business  lines  or 
institutions  may  be  relatively  more  severely  affected.  Overall,  credit  institutions  that  are 
smaller  and  focused  on  the  traditional  retail  banking  business  are  not  expected  to  be 
severely  affected  by  the  new  prudential  rules.  However,  some  large  universal  banks 
(especially those with significant investments in other financial institutions and in insurance 
companies,  often  across  borders)  will  face  new  challenges,  mainly  resulting  from  the  new 
definition of capital and from the introduction of the leverage ratio.  
These large institutions are typically more leveraged than their smaller counterparts and, as 
a result of the introduction of certain adjustments in the calculation of the regulatory capital, 
their capital bases may need in some cases to be strengthened further in order to include 
only high quality resources with true loss absorbing capacity. Given that the structure of the 
financial system is rather heterogeneous across EU countries, the national banking sectors 
will have to face different challenges in the years ahead. 
It is important to emphasise in this context that several policy initiatives have been launched 
recently  to  address  the  specific  risks  associated  with  systemically  important  financial 
institutions (SIFIs). In particular, the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision agreed in 
September  2010  that  SIFIs  should  comply  with  additional  capital  requirements  over  and 
above the Basel III minimum requirements.  
Extensive work is currently being carried out under the aegis of the Financial Stability Board 
to develop a framework for the identification of the SIFIs and the calculation of the additional 
capital requirements. Its recommendations will be delivered to the G20 summit in November. 
This  is  an  important  step  forwards  towards  an  international  regulatory  framework  of  SIFIs 
that ensures consistency and a level playing field across jurisdictions. 
In addition, important initiatives are underway – both in Europe and globally – to enhance the 
banks  resolution  regimes  so  as  to  be  able  to  handle  systemic  crises  in  an  effective  and 
orderly way, while also minimising the burden for taxpayers. In particular, such regimes must 
consider the case of institutions that are active across borders. 
The FSB is identifying the key elements of effective resolution regimes. At the same time, the 
reform of national (or in the case of the EU, supra-national) resolution frameworks is already 
underway  in  the  main  economies.  In  Europe,  the  European  Commission  has  published  a 
public consultation document on the planned EU framework, for which legislative proposals 
are expected in June.  
Furthermore, work on how to strengthen the regulation and oversight of the shadow banking 
system  must  continue.  The  FSB  is  developing  recommendations  on  this  issue  in 
collaboration with other international standard-setting bodies. It is also vital to identify entities 
or activities within the shadow banking system that may be sources of systemic risk. 
At  the  same  time,  in  the  short-  to  medium-term  it  will  be  inevitable  to  improve  the  cost 
efficiency  of  banks  as  well  as  to  make  changes  in  the  ownership  structure  and  in  the 
business activities of certain institutional models, while also restructuring some segments of 
the national banking sectors. To live under the “new normal”, banks must first get there. This 
may  require  consolidation  as  well  as  changes  in  corporate  governance,  transparency  and 
business models.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Business strategies and corporate governance 
III.3. 
Business models 
The  crisis  has  shown  the  vulnerabilities  of  some  business  models.  In  particular,  it  has 
exposed the fragilities of those models based, on the one hand, on “originate-to-distribute” 
activities and securitisation techniques, and, on the other hand, on excessive dependence on 
wholesale  and  capital  markets  for  funding.  Although  no  business  model  outperformed  the 
others during the crisis, there is evidence that banking models based on higher diversification 
of activities and funding proved to be the most resilient. This explains why such models are 
becoming increasingly attractive within the European banking landscape.  
Indeed,  diversified  business  models  act  as  better  shock  absorbers  in  times  of  stress,  and 
their  ability  to  perform  well  under  stressed  conditions  represents  an  additional  incentive  to 
adopting  them.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  rating  agencies,  investors  and 
counterparties  have  significantly  reduced  their  tolerance  to  leverage  and  now  discriminate 
more between firms with different risk profiles.  
In this regard, the main priority of EU banks in terms of their business strategies in the post-
crisis  period  is  currently  to  focus  on  their  balance  sheet  structure  (e.g.  the  composition  of 
lending and of their funding sources), with a view to making it more robust and transparent.  
Furthermore,  some  banks  still  remain  too  dependent  on  central  bank  facilities  for  their 
funding,  which  is  not  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  This  requires  efforts  to  adjust  business 
strategies  towards  more  sustainable  models.  There  is  some  evidence  that  point  to  an 
increasing recourse to retail deposits among large EU banks. After experiencing a reduction 
during the years prior to the crisis, retail deposits started on an upward trend in late 2008, 
and such trend has continued into 2009 and 2010. A remaining challenge is though the fact 
that at present banks are often competing for the same deposits, which makes it difficult to 
achieve substantial increases in their deposit bases and may also erode their margins.  
At  the  same  time  banks  have  reviewed  the  geographical  location  of  their  assets.  The 
increasing internationalisation of important European groups reveals the preference among 
large EU banks for regional diversification. 
Reforms of the regulatory framework that aim to render bank business models more resilient 
are a key factor that will contribute to moving funding structures away from volatile short-term 
sources  towards  more  stable  long-term  ones,  such  as  capital  and  deposits.  As  a 
consequence of the substantial strengthening of the regulatory requirements on trading book 
exposures and on securitisation, the relative attractiveness of traditional investment banking 
activities  is  expected  to  decline.  Similarly,  with  the  envisaged  introduction  of  the  non-risk 
based  leverage  ratio,  certain  institutions  specialised  in  business  lines  that  are  traditionally 
considered  as  relatively  low-risk  (e.g.  mortgage  lending)  may  need  to  reconsider  their 
activities and look for alternative sources of revenue. 
Risk management 
Apart from the regulatory initiatives, the banks’ internal risk management represents a first 
line  of  defence  against  increasing  risks.  The  need  for  improved  risk  measurement  and 
management practices with regard to the main risks institutions are exposed to (e.g. credit, 
liquidity  and  market  risks)  has  also  been  recognised  in  a  number  of  industry  studies  that 
have identified areas in need of improvement5.  
                                                 
5  The industry has published reports highlighting the need for improved risk measurement and management, 
including the provision of information to and involvement of senior management with regard to the risk profile 
of the institution. See for example publications by the Institute of International Finance: Reform in the Financial 
Services Industry: Strengthening Practices for a More Stable System (Dec. 2009), Principles of conduct and 
best  practice  recommendations,  Financial  services  industry  response  to  the  market  turmoil  of  2007–2008 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Supervisory  authorities  have  issued  guidelines  on  required  improvements  in  corporate 
governance  and  risk  management  (in  areas  such  as  liquidity  and  stress  testing)  and  have 
also issued supplemental guidance under Pillar 2 (the supervisory review process) of Basel II 
that  addresses  the  flaws  in  risk  management  practices  revealed  by  the  crisis.  Although 
progress has been made in improving internal risk management systems, considerable work 
must yet be done.6 
Looking forward, the re-shaped banking strategies need to reflect a better balance between 
risk and returns. An important challenge for the EU banking sectors in the next few years will 
be to find the optimal level of return that preserves long-run profitability, without incurring in 
unknown risks.  
There are also several initiatives aiming to improve corporate governance in key segments of 
the financial industry. Let me recall in particular the European Commission’s proposal of a 
directive on credit agreements relating to residential property. The objective of the proposal 
is twofold: (1) to create an efficient and competitive single market for consumers, creditors 
and  credit  intermediaries,  and  (2)  to  promote  financial  stability  by  ensuring  that  mortgage 
credit  markets  operate  in  a  responsible  manner.  In  addition,  the  FSB  has  issued  a  report 
entitled  “Thematic  Review  on  Mortgage  Underwriting  and  Origination  Practices”  aiming  to 
improved oversight of the residential mortgage market and underwriting practices. 
Central banks and the new macro-prudential supervisory framework 
III.4 
I  would  like  now  to  provide  a  brief  reference  to  the  new  macro-prudential  supervisory 
framework in Europe.  
The financial crisis has provided a vivid illustration of the importance of having in place an 
effective  framework  of  macro-prudential  surveillance  that can  complement  micro-prudential 
supervision  both  at  the  national  level  and  in  a  cross-border  context.  Thus,  in  order  to 
enhance  their  abilities  to  assess  and  address  potential  systemic  risks,  over  the  past  few 
years  significant  work  has  been  undertaken  by  authorities  at  country,  regional  and  global 
levels with the aim of setting up a macro-prudential policy framework. In this respect, a major 
achievement at the European level has been the establishment of the European  Systemic 
Risk  Board  (ESRB),  entrusted  with  the  responsibility  of  macro-prudential  oversight  at  the 
EU-level. The ECB plays a key role by providing the ESRB with a Secretariat, and thereby 
logistical, administrative and analytical support.  
A  key  objective  of  the  ESRB  is  to  link  systemic  risk  analysis  with  appropriate  policy 
responses.  The  analytical  work  will  focus  on  identifying,  measuring  and  assessing  the 
potential  sources  of  systemic  risks  on  the  basis  of  broad  and  deep  information,  and  on 
applying a wide range of analytical tools to process the relevant data. The work will entail the 
assessment  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  risks  identified  and  of  the  ability  of  the  financial 
system to withstand the related shocks. On the basis of the outcome of its risk analysis and 
assessment,  the  ESRB  may  issue  concrete  and  well  targeted  risk  warnings  or  policy 
recommendations.  
There is no doubt that the establishment of the ESRB introduces a new function at the EU 
level that will enhance the ability of European and national authorities to promote the stability 
of the EU financial system as a whole. At the same time, much work needs to be done to 
advance in the design and implementation of the macroprudential frameworks. Indeed, unlike 
for monetary policy, the framework for macroprudential policy is not yet well developed. In 
                                                                                                                                                      
(Jul. 2008), report by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group entitled Containing Systemic Risk: The 
Road to Reform (Aug. 2008). 
6  Conclusion  reached  in  a  recent  report  by  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group  entitled,  Observations  on 
developments in risk appetite frameworks and IT infrastructure, December 23, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
liquidity  requirements),  monetary  policy 
particular, most of the policy tools that are considered for macro-prudential purposes at this 
stage fall under other policy area domains, such as micro-prudential supervision (e.g. capital 
and 
implementation  (e.g.  minimum  reserve 
requirements) and fiscal policy (e.g. tax incentives on mortgage interest rate payments).  
The  first  genuinely  macro-prudential  tool  to  have  been  introduced  is  the  counter-cyclical 
capital  buffer  that  will  be  gradually  implemented  as  part  of  Basel  III.  This  buffer  will  be 
activated  in  periods  of  excessive  credit  growth,  such  as  the  credit  booms  frequently 
originating from or associated with housing price bubbles.  
Further  prudential  tools  include  the  caps  on  loan-to-value  ratios,  loan-to-income  ratios  or 
debt  servicing-to-income  ratios,  which  are  typically  applied  to  mortgage  loans.  Unlike  the 
capital  or  liquidity  requirements,  these  measure  act  through  the  demand  for  loans,  as 
opposed to their supply by the banking sector. Other measures may include additional capital 
requirements  by  supervisors  for  individual  banks  that  are  considered  by  authorities  to  be 
particularly  exposed  to  certain  types  of  risks  (e.g.  concentration  risk  in  housing  markets). 
Furthermore,  intensified  supervision,  accompanied  by  specific  stress  tests  may  also 
contribute to more cautious lending policy by banks.  
In addition, enhanced transparency and more efficient communication of risks to customers 
(including increased financial literacy) may also support a better-informed decision making in 
housing  finance  and  a  more  cautious  behaviour  of  clients  in  this  field.  The  experience  of 
many East European countries over the past decade of widespread borrowing by households 
in  foreign  currencies  as  remote  as  the  yen  for  the  financing  of  housing  purchases  clearly 
points to insufficient financial literacy.  
Before  concluding  my  speech,  let  me  recall  that  macroprudential  policy  is  not  the  only 
instrument  available  to  central  banks  which  is  being  considered  in  order  to  prevent  and 
contain systemic risks. Increasing awareness that: (1) price stability, while being a necessary 
precondition, is not sufficient for financial stability, and that (2) in regimes of low and stable 
inflation  with 
liquidity  conditions  and 
unsustainable  economic  expansions  seem  to  manifest  themselves  first  in  the  build-up  of 
financial  imbalances  rather  than  in  immediate  inflationary  pressures  has  re-opened  the 
debate about the opportunity of pursing a “leaning against the wind” approach to monetary 
policy.  
Leaning against the wind can be defined as a strategy whereby a central bank would decide, 
for instance, to set a somewhat tighter monetary policy stance than would be the case under 
a  similar  macroeconomic  outlook  and  more  normal  financial  market  conditions  in  the 
absence of concerns about the emergence of an asset price bubble.  
This  subject  deserves  a  speech  on  its  own,  so  you  will  excuse  me  if  I  do  not  elaborate 
further.  I  would  like  just  to  point  out  that  at  the  ECB  we  believe  that  our  monetary  policy 
strategy – with its medium-term orientation for the definition of price stability and the explicit 
introduction of money- and credit-related considerations into the policy decisions - ensures 
that  longer-term  risks  to  price  stability,  which  emanate  from  evolving  financial  imbalances, 
are  not  overlooked  in  the  assessment  of  risks  to  medium-term  price  stability.  At  the  same 
time, the empirical link between monetary developments and evolving imbalances in asset 
and credit markets implies that the money pillar can help to detect these imbalances at an 
early stage, providing for a timely and forward-looking response to any risks to financial and 
macroeconomic stability.  
inflation  expectations,  ample 
firmly  anchored 
Conclusions 
IV. 
Let me now conclude. The future of the banking sector in the post-crisis macroeconomic and 
financial environment is an issue of crucial importance for our economic welfare, given the 
fundamental role played by banks in most European countries. This is why it is important to 
stress that there is still much work to be done before we can exit from the crisis. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  an  economic  and  financial  context  which  is  still  fragile,  the  adjustment  towards  a  “new 
normal”  continues  posing  important  challenges  and  needs.  It  is  essential  that  we  continue 
making progress in reforming both the microprudential and macroprudential regulatory and 
supervisory framework. At the same time, the banking sector must continue addressing with 
perseverance,  rapidity  and  determination  the  vulnerabilities  in  strategies  and  business 
practices  of  individual  institutions  revealed  by  the  crisis.  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  the 
banking sector will become part of the solution to the problems that still represent obstacles 
to economic growth and employment creation. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
