Jean-Paul Redouin: Liquidity and transformation 
Speech by Mr Jean-Paul Redouin, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the General 
Meeting of the French Association of Bank Treasurers (AFTB), Paris, 30 May 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this General Meeting of the AFTB. I would like to 
take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  the  successful  cooperation  that  has  been  established 
between your association and the Banque de France. It is extremely beneficial for us and I 
believe that you and your institutions also find it valuable.  
In many respects, bank and market liquidity is a fascinating area because few phenomena 
have been perceived in such different ways over such a short period of time. Indeed, market 
liquidity  became  abundant  and  cheap  in  the  1980s:  financial  markets  deepened  and 
transaction  costs  fell.  In  the  1990s,  the  growth  of  derivatives  products  facilitated  the 
management and transfer of risk. In the following decade and up to 2006, many studies had 
already focused on excess liquidity. Then, during the financial crisis of 2007–2008, sources 
of  bank  funding  suddenly  dried  up.  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  conclusions  that  can  be 
drawn from this crisis: 
– 
First, the crisis reminded us that not only does liquidity have a price and that this 
price could fluctuate greatly, but above all that liquidity cannot be taken for granted, 
irrespective of the price that some market participants are willing to pay; 
Second, central banks rapidly and efficiently adjusted their operational frameworks 
to provide liquidity to the financial system, re-establish the normal functioning of the 
money  market  and  restore  confidence.  But  such  measures  must  naturally  remain 
exceptional,  and  central  banks  must  be  vigilant  about  the  signals  and  incentives 
they give to the financial system. 
Third,  due  to  its  magnitude,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  risks  associated  with 
excessive maturity transformation when long-term assets are funded by short-term 
liabilities,  or  even  funded  overnight.  This  raises  questions  regarding  both  interest 
rate risk management and liquidity risk management. While these are distinct areas, 
they have close linkages. It is important not to have a short memory and relegate all 
this to ancient history. Indeed, at present, in an environment of ongoing extremely 
low interest rates, it is still possible to fund long-term assets at very low cost, with 
the risk of creating further asset price bubbles. In this respect, the example of the 
real  estate  sector  seems  telling.  Housing  loans  have  become  highly  important 
commercial product and could prompt certain institutions to slash their profit margins 
in order to win customer loyalty. Yet, such practices contribute to rapidly pushing up 
property prices. 
  Thus, having observed that liquidity can disappear very rapidly, that central bank intervention 
must remain exceptional and that excessive maturity transformation increases systemic risk, 
a preventive approach is called for. Such an approach should take into account two aspects:  
I will start by discussing Basel III liquidity regulation, while stressing the fundamental 
– 
goal: reducing liquidity risk and limiting maturity transformation.  
Nevertheless,  whatever  changes  are  made  to  the  regulatory  framework,  this 
necessary  but  one-size-fits-all  approach  will  still  be  inadequate  if  it  is  not 
accompanied, or even preceded, by new policies to manage maturity transformation 
by banks.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I. 
An overview of Basel III liquidity regulation 
A fundamental goal: preventing excessive maturity transformation risks 
1. 
Since  banks  are  in  the  best  position  to  reduce  information  asymmetries  in  credit  markets, 
select and monitor loans and diversify their asset portfolios, they are at the heart of maturity 
transformation activities. 
In traditional financial intermediation, banks collect savings and provide liquidity to the whole 
economy  through  transactions  on  their  balance  sheets.  To  do  this,  they  transform  liquid 
short-term  liabilities  into  medium-  to  long-term  assets  with  poor  liquidity.  This  activity 
generates  well-known  risks,  in  particular  in  terms  of  interest  rates  and  liquidity.  Maturity 
transformation is therefore subject to prudential regulation to ensure that basic security rules 
are followed.  
At the Seoul Summit in November 2010, the G20 leaders endorsed the Basel III framework 
that overhauls the current prudential regulatory regime. In particular, this is the role of the two 
new liquidity ratios:  
– 
The one-month liquidity ratio or Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) has the two-fold 
objective of preventing short-term liquidity shocks and requiring institutions to self-
insure  against  liquidity  shortages  in  order  to  limit  refinancing  exclusively  via  the 
central bank. Institutions should in no way consider that they have a guarantee of 
permanent access to such refinancing. In this respect, the use of foreign currency 
funding  is  not  always  justified  by  the  need  to  fund  assets  denominated  in  these 
currencies  in  the  absence  of  a  sufficiently  broad  customer  base  in  the  countries 
concerned. Such strategies are also used for arbitrage purposes. They contribute to 
overall market liquidity but they must remain of a magnitude that allows institutions 
to  unwind  positions  in  stressed  market  conditions.  However,  during  complete 
liquidity dry-ups some institutions became largely dependent on swap lines between 
central banks, as was the case from the end of 2007 to the start of 2010. It is also 
clear  that  the  use  of  swap  lines  between  central  banks  cannot  be  considered  a 
natural market adjustment. In this respect, it is advisable for banking supervisors to 
have indicators that enable them to measure possible foreign currency mismatches, 
without necessarily imposing a specific currency matching requirement.  
The one-year liquidity ratio or Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), for its part, aims 
to limit the risk of excessive maturity transformation such as illustrated by the failure 
of  Northern  Rock.  In  practice,  it  is  defined  as  the  “available  amount  of  stable 
funding” over one year divided by the “required amount of stable funding” for one 
year. The standard requires that the ratio be no lower than 100%.  
 A observation period necessary to calibrate these ratios 
2. 
While  the  implementation  of  quantitative  and  harmonised  rules  at  the  international  level 
represents  a  major  step  forward,  the  calibration  of  these  proposed  ratios  is  not  without 
shortcomings.  
As regards the one-month ratio, the composition of its numerator must be reviewed, that is to 
say  defining  the  high-quality  liquid  assets  that  are  largely  composed  of  government 
securities. The sovereign debt crisis has shown us that caution is required when assessing 
the degree of actual liquidity of certain debt instruments. Conversely, equities, which remain 
liquid even under stressed market conditions, are not eligible for the numerator. Furthermore, 
it is somewhat paradoxical that collateral eligible in normal times for central bank refinancing 
operations –  i.e.  excluding  non-standard  measures  –  is  not  considered  to  come  within  the 
Basel definition of liquid assets and is not fully eligible for the numerator of the ratio. 
The one-year ratio raises many questions, including in terms of principles, in that it places 
major  constraints  on  certain  maturity  transformation  activities.  Also,  can  a  one-size-fits-all 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
approach be applied to institutions worldwide even though their business models vary from 
universal banking to specialised banking models (investment banks, custodians, etc.)? The 
greatest attention will be therefore required when assessing the impact of this standard on 
the financing of the economy.  
To back up this somewhat critical observation, I would like to stress three points:  
• 
First, I wish to recall that central banks and supervisors are aware of the demands 
made on banks to implement the new regulations and we are regularly assessing 
with them the technical details of these standards.  
Second,  a  distinction  must  be  made  between  the  different  measures  set  out  in 
Basel III: 
– 
those  that  are  absolutely  necessary,  such  as  the  increase  of  capital 
charges  for  market  activities,  securitisation  and  counterparty  credit  risk 
exposures, and,  
those, such as liquidity ratios, whose impact on the real economy must be 
assessed ex ante. As regards the latter, a real observation period has been 
scheduled to allow for any necessary changes. The current arrangements 
should not be regarded as set in stone.  
 Third,  while  the  proposed  rules  may  appear  harsh,  we  will  ensure  that  a  level 
playing field is achieved for their implementation. However, French institutions are 
well-equipped  to  comply  with  them.  The  major  French  banks  have  no  difficulties 
raising funds in capital markets: to date, thanks to their size, ratings and reputation 
they have maintained their funding capacity.  
  II.  
What are the avenues for improving the management of maturity 
transformation risk? 
The  progress  made  in  the  reform  of  the  prudential  regulation  of  banks  needs  to  be 
accompanied by further reflection about the functioning of the financial system as a whole 
and  the  different  ways  of  improving  the  management  of  liquidity  risks.  That  is  why,  as  a 
complement to the regulatory responses, banks need to take immediate action straightaway 
regarding their internal risk management policies, which play a crucial role both in terms of 
liabilities and assets. I would like to say a few words about this. 
1. 
• 
 On the liabilities side 
First of all, it seems to me important to not wait for the final calibration of the new 
rules  to  gradually  increase  the  duration  of  bank  liabilities.  The  management  of 
maturity gaps, which is the primary responsibility of treasurers and ALM managers, 
cannot only be dictated by regulation; it also needs to be adapted to the risk profile 
of each institution. In the current context, we can only encourage banks to increase 
the proportion of medium- and long-term liabilities issued on the markets, so as to 
be less dependent on more volatile sources of funding. They should also reduce as 
far  as  possible  their  short-term  vulnerability  vis-à-vis  unsecured  market  funding, 
notably in foreign currencies. 
Second,  the  treatment  given  to  customer  deposits  in  the  one-month  liquidity  ratio 
could  justify  a  form  of  reintermediation  of  money  market  funds  and  increased 
competition  in  banks’  deposit-taking.  We  are  monitoring  these  developments  very 
closely.  The  asset  management  industry  is  indeed  a  sector  where  there  is  robust 
activity  that  should  not  be  destabilised.  Moreover,  the  reintermediation  of  the 
deposits  of  institutional  clients  and  companies  cannot  be  justified  on  the  basis  of 
regulatory  ratios  (in  view  of  the  strict  treatment  of  these  deposits  in  the  draft 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 regulations/reforms).  Furthermore,  the  broadening  of  the  deposit  base  of  banks 
should  not  happen  at  any  price:  we  are  monitoring  developments  in  the 
remuneration of deposits very closely. 
Lastly, securing maturity transformation activities can be achieved by encouraging 
the use of stable sources of financing. I have just talked about deposit-taking, but I 
should also mention the role played by the issuance of covered bonds. Backed by a 
dedicated  portfolio  of  underlying  assets,  these  securities  proved  to  be  resilient 
during the crisis and have since played an important role in the funding of European 
banks. 
On the assets side 
2. 
The rebalancing of banks’ liabilities structure is not sufficient on its own. In a general way, 
banks would also benefit from systematically making sure that their maturity transformation 
activities are profitable, by ensuring that the return provided by assets is proportional to the 
risks  incurred.  I  would  like  to  stress  here  that  the  greatest  vigilance  is  required  when  the 
loans  extended  do  not  generate  sufficient  margins.  This  is  the  worrying  trend  that  we  are 
seeing at the moment with respect to housing loans: margins on housing loans – veritable 
loss leaders – are being compressed in order to attract customers who become captive due 
to their borrowing. In these circumstances, the level of margins may not be sufficient to cover 
the cost of the risk, or even the cost of the funding. 
  I would like, finally, to underline the need for accurate traceability of funding flows. From this 
perspective,  improving  the  management  of  liquidity  risk  linked  to  OTC-traded  derivatives 
requires stronger supervision of markets and market participants. That is why the Banque de 
France supports all of the initiatives taken to this end: 
– 
the clearing through central counterparties (CCP) of all products deemed sufficiently 
standardised. The management of margin calls and collateral is more robust here 
than in OTC-trades; 
the recording of trades by dedicated infrastructures (trade repositories) in order to 
identify all of the systemic players; 
extending the scope of regulation to include players that are part of the unregulated 
or “shadow banking” sector. 
  Several  reforms  are  already  well  under  way  as  they  correspond  to  G20  guidelines.  The 
United  States  adopted  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  in  July  2010.  At  the  European  level,  the  draft 
EMIR regulation should be adopted in summer 2011.  
  By way of conclusion, I would like to stress the persistence of a number of warning signals 
that are still present. For instance, leverage levels in the financial sector remain very high. 
The current low interest rate environment is encouraging risky high-yield strategies; activity 
on  these  high-yield  markets  is  sustained;  innovations  on  the  ETF  market  are  raising 
questions and the commodity market is being financialised. The active management of these 
new complex instruments is thus likely to reach its limits, as happened with CDOs. 
The current challenge for central banks is two-fold: we need to improve our ability to monitor 
risks  at  a  system-wide  level;  we  also  need  to  re-establish  the  moral  hazard  that  the 
management of the crisis suspended. On their side, banks and market participants need to 
ensure  that  they  improve  their  risk  management  autonomously  in  order  to  reduce  this 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
hazard,  in  the  interests  of  their  shareholders  and  depositors,  but  also  of  economic 
development as a whole. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
