José Manuel González-Páramo: How will historians judge our handling of this crisis? 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, in the occasion of the presentation of the book titled “Un Siglo de 
Historia del Sistema Financiero Español”, Bank of Spain, Madrid, 10 June 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak today at the Bank of Spain about the 
Spanish financial sector. 
The book being presented today consists of a distinguished collection of essays providing a 
wealth  of  information  on  Spain’s  financial  sector  over  the  last  century.  Not  only  does  it 
summarise the key data and the main developments, but it also provides deep analyses. It 
will  definitely  become  the  work  of  reference  on  the  history  of  the  financial  sector  in  this 
country in the 20th century. Let me then congratulate the contributors and the editors, José 
Luis Malo de Molina and Pablo Martín Aceña for their excellent work. 
Reading the book, notably the chapter by Raimundo Poveda, we can draw some interesting 
parallels between the current crisis and the banking crisis in the late 1970s and early 1980s. 
In particular, given the current circumstances, the main message I would like to emphasise 
today  is  that  certain  changes  in  the  banking  sector  that  are  implemented  in  response  to 
crises are essential to guarantee a strong, robust banking sector in the future. In other words, 
the implementation of reforms and changes in the banking sector after a banking crisis – in 
respect of business practices, regulation and supervision – has the potential to strengthen 
the  foundations  of  the  banking  sector,  thereby  improving  its  ability  to  contribute  to 
sustainable economic growth.  
Given the limited time that I have, I will focus on some key structural developments in the 
banking sector that have taken place over the past twenty years and that are described and 
analysed  in  several  chapters  of  the  book.  In  addition,  I  will  examine  how  the  regulations 
introduced by the Bank of Spain during the boom years helped to prevent and mitigate the 
negative effects of the crisis and, especially, how some of the reforms and structural changes 
that  are  currently  being  considered  may  substantially  reduce  the  fragilities  of  the  banking 
sector. If implemented, they will strengthen the banking system and ultimately have positive 
effects on financial stability and economic growth in Spain. 
Some reflections on banking developments during the last two decades 
As  I  see  it,  Spain’s  banking  sector  has  undergone  two  fundamental  changes  since  1990: 
banking liberalisation and financial innovation. 
Banking liberalisation has produced a notable increase in competition among institutions and 
in  financial  integration.  For  example,  the  cajas  (savings  banks)  have  started  to  compete 
geographically and in different business segments. The increased competition has also led, 
at  different  times  during  these  20  years,  to  strong  competition  for  bank  deposits  (e.g.  la 
“guerra  del  pasivo”  at  the  end  of  the  80s).  In  general,  banking  competition  brings  very 
positive aspects for the real economy and to welfare, and there is no doubt that liberalisation 
of the banking sector in Spain has been very positive for the country. However, we should 
bear  in  mind,  as  some  chapters  of  the  book  point  out,  that  too  much  competition  may 
significantly increase bank risk-taking and that this may have negative implications and that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
this may undermine financial stability.1 The recent very intense competition for retail deposits 
may also be a notable example in this regard. 
Another  important  aspect  of  liberalisation  has  been  the  internationalisation  of  the  banking 
sector,  which  is  very  well  explained  in  the  book.  I  would  like  to  stress  two  aspects  of  this 
phenomenon: i) the foreign expansion by Spanish banks (particularly Santander and BBVA), 
and ii) the significant dependence on foreign liquidity (mainly through international wholesale 
markets), especially after the introduction of the euro.2 
Expansion  abroad,  when  it  is  well  executed,  definitely  brings  benefits  in  terms  of 
geographical diversification, which have become clear during the crisis, however a reliance 
on  funding  from  abroad  may  bring  some  fragility  if  that  source  of  liquidity  dries  up,  as  the 
crisis  has  shown.3  In  previous  banking  crises,  banks  typically  suffered  from  runs  on  retail 
deposits, whereas nowadays these runs are wholesale-based.4 In the light of this, the sector 
should aim to diversify its sources of funding liquidity. 
The  second  defining  element  over  the  past  decades  has  been  the  increase  in  financial 
innovation, notably in securitisation and market funding. 
Securitisation can have many positive effects, e.g. by increasing the supply of bank credit to 
the private sector thanks to greater bank liquidity. Some crucial segments of the economy, 
such as small and medium-sized firms, may also significantly benefit from the development 
of securitisation. At the same time, recent research has shown that securitisation may lead to 
a lowering of banking standards and ultimately weaken financial stability.5 Once a bank is no 
longer responsible for a loan that it has made, it has fewer incentives to monitor that loan. 
Besides, in periods of extensive securitisation, when the bank knows that new loans can be 
securitised – which in some countries can imply that the risk will be totally borne by investors 
outside the bank – the ex ante incentives for screening are notably reduced. 
All these important changes in the banking industry have taken place against an ostensibly 
benign  but potential  dangerous  macroeconomic  backdrop:  the  so-called  Great  Moderation. 
Indeed, the protracted period of high economic growth and low short and long-term interest 
rates  contributed  to  giving  the  banking  sector  some  very  good  years.  However,  that  is 
precisely when risk builds up – and it can be excessive.6 Moreover, we should not overlook 
that macro fragilities emerged during the benign macroeconomic context: for example, both 
the current account deficit and the share of the real estate sector activity were around 10% of 
GDP in 2006. 
All these elements contributed to a credit boom throughout the Spanish economy, particularly 
in  the  real  estate  sector.  In  this  context,  let  me  add  that  –  crucially  –  the  Bank  of  Spain 
reacted  very  well:  notably  by  introducing  a  strict  regulatory  system  for  special  purpose 
vehicles which significantly restricted regulatory capital arbitrage, and by introducing dynamic 
provisions, which may have reduced the very high credit supply in the good years. Without 
those  measures  the  credit  boom  could  have  been  even  bigger.7  Moreover,  the  provision 
                                                 
1  See also Stiglitz et al. (2000); Matutes and Vives (2000), and Martínez-Miera and Repullo (2010). 
2  See Kalemli-Ozcan, Pappaioannou and Peydró (2010). 
3  See Allen and Gale (2000). 
4  See Brunnermeier and Petersen (2009). 
5  See Mian and Sufi (2009); Maddaloni and Peydró (2011); Jiménez, Mian, Peydró and Sufi (2011), Altunbas, 
Marqués and Gambacorta (2010). 
6  See  Pérez-Quirós  (2000);  Adrian  and  Shin  (2009);  Allen  and  Rogoff  (2011);  Rajan  and  Diamond  (2009); 
Jiménez et al. (2011); Jiménez and Saurina (2006). 
7  See Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró and Saurina (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
buffers have been vital during the crisis as they have allowed banks to continue supporting 
credit availability. 
The crisis calls for change 
Some key features of the recent crisis have been, in my view, the fragility both on the liability 
and asset sides of banks, coupled with a densely interlinked global financial sector. Banks’ 
capital  reserves,  transparency,  funding,  risk  management,  corporate  governance  and  both 
micro and, especially, macro supervision and regulation need to be adjusted. 
Let  me  start  with  the  fragile  liabilities.  We  have  experienced  since  August  2007  a  funding 
liquidity  dry-up.  As  I  said  before,  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  Spanish  banks  were  highly 
dependent  on  foreign  wholesale  funding.  As  a  result,  the  sector  as  a  whole  ended  up 
suffering and some of the more dependent banks have been hit very badly. 
But  bank  liquidity  also  depends  crucially  on  bank  capital  and,  hence,  banks  with  stronger 
balance  sheets  suffer  much  less  from  a  lack  of  liquidity.8  The  liquidity  provided  by  the 
Eurosystem has been vital to minimise the liquidity shortages, but bank capital needs to be 
stronger so that all banks have access to private funding liquidity. 
Fragile assets were an important factor too, as very high volumes of credit (and risk) were 
granted  during  the  good  years.  Some  banks  took  more  risk  than  others  in  the  real  estate 
bubble,  and  some  banks  recorded  substantially  lower  profits  and  higher  (realized  and 
potential) loan losses during the current crisis. Hence, bank capital significantly decreased, 
especially for some groups of cajas; they, moreover, cannot easily raise capital because of 
their specific structure. 
The availability of bank capital is essential for two additional reasons: 
First,  a  bank  capital  crunch  may  lead  to  a  credit  crunch.  Thus,  in  order  to  help  the  real 
economy  recover,  some  weak  banks  need  to  be  recapitalised.  This  is  why  the  recent 
regulatory changes on capital in Spain are crucial.9 
Banking  assets  are  however  opaque,  which  –  combined  with  the  high  leverage  –  make 
recapitalisation in private markets difficult, especially in crisis periods.10 Therefore, to reduce 
these  problems,  high  transparency  is  extremely  important:  the  stress  tests  and  Bank  of 
Spain’s publications on key bank variables are thus indispensable. If, after these exercises to 
promote  transparency,  some  small  groups  of  banks  cannot  fulfill  the  capital  requirements, 
restructuring may be the only solution. 
Banks are still too highly exposed to real estate assets in their balance sheets and so the 
new  haircuts  introduced  by  the  Bank  of  Spain  go  in  the  right  direction.  Geographical 
diversification (notably the internationalisation of some banks) and better risk management 
are  also  crucial  factors,  I  believe,  in  addressing  the  current  challenges.  But  also  the 
strengthening  of  corporate  governance  is  of  utmost  importance  to  avoid  excessive 
risk-taking. In other words, transparency and risk management are important, as I said, but 
incentives as well! In this sense, the restructuring of some groups of banks may be vital.11 
Second, looking into the future, with the crisis behind us, higher bank capital requirements 
will also play a positive role by reducing incentives for excessive bank risk-taking.12 On that 
                                                 
8  See Iyer and Peydró (2011) and Rochet and Vives (2004). 
9  See Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró and Saurina (forthcoming). 
10  See Morgan (2002). 
11  See Cuñat and Garicano (2010). 
12  See Freixas and Rochet (1997) and Acharya and Richardson (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
same subject, we should welcome the changes made to EU and global banking regulations 
and  supervision,  both  micro  and  macro-based:  for  example,  the  Basel  III  package  of 
regulations (level and quality of capital, countercyclical buffers of capital, liquidity ratio. etc) 
and the developments in macroprudential supervision with the establishment of the ESRB in 
the EU. 
Concluding remarks  
Changes in the banking sector after the current crisis – at national, EU and global level – can 
make  the  Spanish  banking  sector  stronger  and  provide  a  durable  support  for  the  real 
economy,  as  happened  after  the  1970–80  crisis.  To  be  specific,  changes  in  the  business 
models and the restructuring of some banks, more and higher-quality bank capital, better risk 
management,  improved  transparency  and  corporate  governance,  as  well  as  changes  in 
banking  regulations  and  supervision  –  all  these  factors  will  contribute  towards  sustainable 
economic growth. 
However, as necessary as these changes are, they are not enough to bring about a strong 
and  robust  improvement  in  Spain’s  economy,  and  particularly  to  create  jobs  and  boost 
productivity. To achieve these objectives, further progress must be made:  
 
in  consolidating  public  finances,  also  to  reduce  the  possible  negative  spillovers  of 
the sovereign debt crisis to the banking sector; 
in  liberalising  product  and  factor  markets,  especially  now  the  labour  market  with 
respect to “negociación colectiva” (collective bargaining). 
in improving the education system at all levels – it is critical to raising productivity 
over the medium term and, therefore, to improving welfare. 
  I truly hope that when another book like this one is written in, say 50 or 100 years’ time, the 
authors will conclude that the steps taken in response to the crisis in the banking and in other 
key sectors of the Spanish economy were the right ones and, in particular, that they played a 
part  in  overcoming  the  crisis  and  increasing  in  a  sustainable  way  the  well-being  of  the 
citizens of this country.  
References 
Acharya and Richardson (eds.) (2009) Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed 
System, John Wiley & Sons. 
Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2009), Money, liquidity and monetary policy, American Economic 
Review. 
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), Financial Contagion, Journal of Political Economy.  
Allen,  F.  and  K.  Rogoff  (2011),  Asset  Prices,  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy, 
Wharton Financial Institutions Centre WP #11–39. 
Altunbas,  Y.,  Marqués,  G.  and  L.  Gambacorta  (2010),  Securitisation  and  the  bank  lending 
channel, European Economic Review. 
Brunnermeier, M. and L.H. Petersen (2009), Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of 
Financial Studies. 
Cuñat, V. and L. Garicano (2010), Did Good Cajas Extend Bad Loans? Governance, Human 
Capital and Loan Portfolios, LSE mimeo. 
Freixas, X. and J.C. Rochet (1997), Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press. 
Hellmann, T., Murdock, K. and J. Stiglitz (2000), Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking, and 
Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?, American Economic Review. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Iyer,  R.  and  J.L.  Peydró  (2011),  Interbank  Contagion  at  Work:  Evidence  from  a  Natural 
Experiment, Review of Financial Studies. 
Jiménez, G., Mian, A., Peydró, J.L. and J. Saurina (2010), Local versus Aggregate Lending 
Channels:  The  Effects  of  Securitization  on  Corporate  Credit  Supply  in  Spain,  NBER  WP 
16595. 
Jiménez,  G.,  Ongena,  S.,  Peydró,  J.L.  and  J.  Saurina  (forthcoming),  Credit  Availability: 
Identifying  Balance-Sheet  Channels  with  Loan  Applications  &  Granted  Loans,  American 
Economic Review. 
Jiménez,  G.,  Ongena,  S.,  Peydró  and  J.  Saurina  (2011),  Macroprudential  Policy, 
Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers and Credit Supply: Evidence from the Spanish Dynamic 
Provisioning Experiments, Bank of Spain mimeo.  
Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró-Alcalde, J.L. and J. Saurina (2011), Hazardous Times for 
Monetary  Policy:  What  do  23  Million  Loans  Say  About  the  Impact  of  Monetary  Policy  on 
Credit Risk-Taking?, CEPR DP 6514.  
Jiménez,  G.  and  J.  Saurina  (2006),  Credit  cycles,  credit  risk  and  prudential  regulation, 
International Journal of Central Banking.  
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Pappaioannou, E. and J.L. Peydró (2010), What Lies Beneath the Euro, 
Journal of International Economics. 
Maddaloni,  A.  and  J.L.  Peydró  (2011),  Bank  Risk-taking,  Securitization,  Supervision,  and 
Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro-area and the U.S. Lending Standards, Review of 
Financial Studies. 
Martínez-Miera,  D.  and  R.  Repullo  (2010),  Does  Competition  Reduce  the  Risk  of  Bank 
Failure? Review of Financial Studies (2010). 
Matutes,  C.  and  X.  Vives  (2000),  Imperfect  competition,  risk  taking,  and  regulation  in 
banking, European Economic Review.  
McConnell, M. and G. Perez Quiros (2000), Output Fluctuations in the United States: What 
Has Changed Since the Early 1980s?, American Economic Review. 
Mian,  A.  and  A.  Sufi  (2009),  The  Consequences  of  Mortgage  Credit  Expansion:  Evidence 
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics. 
Morgan,  D.  (2002),  Rating  Banks:  Risk  and  Uncertainty  in  an  Opaque  Industry,  American 
Economic Review. 
Rajan  and  Diamond  (2009),  The  Credit  Crisis:  Conjectures  about  Causes  and  Remedies, 
American Economic Review. 
Rochet and Vives (2004), Coordination Failures and the Lender of Last Resort: Was Bagehot 
Right After All?, Journal of the European Economic Association. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
