Jean-Claude Trichet: Taking stock on financial reform 
Opening speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Frankfurt  Finance  Summit,  “The  future  of  risk  management  and  regulation:  smarter 
regulation, safer markets”, Frankfurt am Main, 23 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  able  to  open  this  conference  here  at  the  House  of  Finance  in 
Frankfurt.  
Frankfurt  now  hosts  three  European  institutions:  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  the 
European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA)  and  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).  
This  city  is  now  the  home  not  only  of  Europe’s  monetary  authority,  but  also  of  important 
supranational  responsibility  for  supervisory  matters.  With  the  EIOPA  and  the  ESRB, 
Frankfurt  hosts  half  of  the  European  bodies  in  the  new  European  System  of  Financial 
Supervisors,  with  the  other  two  European  Supervisory  Agencies  (ESAs)  –  the  European 
Banking  Authority  (EBA)  and  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  –  based  in 
London and Paris respectively.  
I have looked with great interest at today’s programme, which is of exceptional quality.  
In my opening remarks, I would like to lay out a scheme of the building blocks of the financial 
reform that is still in progress.  
I believe that when we look back in a few years on the financial reform following the global 
crisis, we will identify three main building blocks:  
The first is banking regulation. The global community is making a big step forward here. It 
has made the right diagnosis and, in the Basel III framework, drawn the appropriate lessons. 
My  friend  Nout  Wellink  is  chairing  the  Basel  Committee;  I  myself  have  the  privilege  of 
chairing the Committee of Governors and Heads of Supervision, which provides guidance to 
the Basel Committee.  
The second building block is regulation of the financial markets. Here, reform must ensure 
much greater transparency for the various market segments and products, ensure sufficient 
competition in all markets, and attenuate as much as possible the pro-cyclicality that derives 
from  information  asymmetries,  structural  features  such  as  ratings  and  market  phenomena 
such as herding.  
The  third  building  block  is  macroprudential  oversight.  This  new  discipline  focuses  on  the 
interactions  between  the  various  parts  of  the  financial  system  and  between  the  financial 
sector and the real economy. New institutions, including the ESRB and equivalent oversight 
committees  around  the  world,  will  pursue  the  task  of  identifying  sources  of  systemic  risk, 
issuing early warnings and recommending remedial action.  
The birth date of macroprudential oversight in Europe will probably be identified as the start 
of this year but it was originally conceived in 2009 through the work of Jacques de Larosière 
and  his  high-level  group,  which  included  my  friend  Otmar  Issing.  Eighteen  months  from 
policy  design  to  institutional  establishment  is  a  remarkable  achievement.  It  was  made 
possible by thorough groundwork as well as excellent transposition by the Commission and 
very  rapid  decisions  by  the  European  Parliament  and  the  European  Council.  I  feel  very 
honoured to chair this new body, the ESRB. 
Let me focus on each of these three building blocks in turn, starting with banking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Banking regulation and Basel III  
I. 
Basel  III,  which  constitutes  the  cornerstone  of  regulatory  reform  for  the  banking  sector, 
provides for higher minimum capital requirements, better risk capture, a stricter definition of 
eligible capital elements with a particular focus on common shares and more transparency.  
The  revised  regulatory  framework  allows  appropriate  transition  periods  for  financial 
institutions to adjust to the new standards, thereby ensuring a smooth phasing-in of the new 
regulatory requirements without compromising the nascent economic recovery. By 1 January 
2015, the minimum capital requirements for common equity Tier 1 and total Tier 1 capital will 
gradually be raised up to a level of 4.5% and 6.0%, respectively. This gradual phasing-in of 
minimum  requirements  will  be  complemented  by  an  appropriate  observation  period  for  the 
non-risk-based leverage ratio and the liquidity standards. The ESRB, together with the EBA, 
will play an important role in policy setting and implementation, with the former contributing to 
ensuring consistent implementation of the policy framework throughout the EU. We are just 
beginning that process.  
In addition to the necessary transposition into national or European law of the Basel III rules, 
there  are  two  issues  that  still  need  to  be  addressed:  systemically  important  financial 
institutions;  and  capturing  the  so-called  shadow  banking  system  within  the  regulatory 
framework.  
Work  is  in  progress  on  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  in  particular  in  the 
Financial Stability Board. The main objectives are to reduce the probability of failure of such 
institutions and, in case a failure occurs, to reduce the impact on the financial system.  
In  September  2010,  the  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  agreed  that  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  should  have  additional  loss  absorbing  capacity.  Work  is 
currently underway on how to define institutions that are systemically important, and how to 
determine  the  capital  surcharges,  contingent  capital  and  other  elements  to  limit  systemic 
fallout.  
With  the  shadow  banking  system,  we  have  to  ensure  that  tighter  regulatory  rules  do  not 
provide  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  shift  their  activities  to  unregulated  areas. 
Oversight of the shadow banking sector needs to be improved. The FSB has already done 
valuable  work  –  supported  by  the  ECB  –  on  shadow  banking.  In  this  context,  the  ECB  is 
providing the Financial Stability Board (FSB) with flow of funds data on the composition of 
the  financial  sector  concerning  the  euro  area.  The  concrete  challenges  lie  in  the 
establishment  of  a  suitable  definition  of  shadow  banking  and  outlining  possible  regulatory 
options to address the risks posed by this sector.  
Given the background of the crisis, regulatory effort on financial institutions has focused on 
banking, but there is important work underway also for other financial institutions, such as the 
further specification of the capital adequacy regime for insurance companies (“solvency II”).  
Market regulation 
II. 
Let me turn to the second building block, namely regulation of financial markets. This area is 
as challenging and as complex as banking.  
The main observation we have to draw from the crisis is that the risks in market returns were 
not mainly exogenous, coming from the stochastic variation in the real economy. They came 
from  financial  risk  itself.  The  financial  structures  that  we  thought  were  in  place  to  assess, 
absorb and neutralise risk were either dysfunctional or worked to magnify volatility.  
Key factors in creating this risk were opaque financial structures, particularly vulnerability to 
contagion and domino effects, and pro-cyclicality in financial markets. 
The  lack  of  transparency  in  many  financial  instruments  meant  that  some  market  players 
could exploit – for their own, private benefit – information that was not generally available.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Pro-cyclicality acts as a formidable accelerator of financial trends. Two important factors that 
drive such amplification are distorted incentives and herd behaviour.  
The role of distortions in economic incentives is probably better known as it had traditionally 
been widely appreciated even within neo-classical modelling. By comparison, herd behaviour 
as a driver of pro-cyclical patterns in financial markets still needs a thorough explanation.  
It is difficult to rationalise herd behaviour. There are two possible explanations. One is the 
significance of a market player’s evaluation of his or her performance relative to the rest of 
the market. This is reminiscent of Keynes’ famous beauty contest analogy. To be successful 
in  this  environment,  individual  participants  do  not  form  their  own  opinions,  but  follow  the 
general  mood  prevailing  among  market  participants.  Everybody  seeks  to  ride  the  wave 
created by general sentiment, hoping to step off before the general sentiment turns.  
The  second  explanation  is  that  global  markets  are  in  fact  less  atomistic  than  we  think. 
Indeed, despite globalisation, increasing market concentration was already a long-term trend 
before the crisis. Derivatives activity in the US banking system, for example, is dominated by 
a small group of large institutions. And, of course, the market for credit ratings is famously 
dominated  by  three  signatures,  which  act  as  standard-setters  for  an  enormous  volume  of 
transactions.  
Many  regulatory  initiatives  are  underway  to  remedy  these  issues,  including  work  on  OTC 
derivatives,  ratings  agencies  and  alternative  investment  vehicles.  But  addressing  these 
challenges  could  also  be  supported  by  reorienting  significant  resources  in  research.  In 
particular, I would welcome an enrichment of thinking in economics and finance, by including 
new  approaches  that  do  not  necessarily  rely  only  on  the  notions  of  equilibrium,  universal 
rationality and efficiency.  
Inspiration from other fields, such as the natural sciences, may be particularly pertinent. I am 
thinking  for  example  of  market  movements  from  stability  to  instability,  from  tranquillity  to 
turbulence.  In  physics  such  phenomena  are  described  as  phase  transitions.  When  some 
factors  exceed  a  critical  level,  a  system  behaves  qualitatively  differently  from  a  situation 
when the factors stay below this level.  
Let me now turn to the third building block of regulatory reform, macroprudential supervision.  
Macroprudential oversight  
III. 
As  my  earlier  remarks  have  suggested,  the  financial  crisis  has  been  revealing  in  many 
respects.  It  has  revealed  the  fallout  from  the  failure  of  large  financial  institutions.  It  has 
revealed the fragility of the financial system to features and trends that cut across institutions, 
markets and infrastructures. And it has illustrated the amplitude of the consequences of the 
adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy. 
All these three elements are key features of systemic risk: first, contagion; second, the build-
up of financial imbalances and unsustainable trends within and across the financial system; 
and third, the close links with the real economy and the potential for strong feedback effects.  
The crisis has revealed the fundamental importance of systemic risk. Of the three elements I 
have mentioned, contagion and the link to the real economy are the least novel in the current 
episode.  The  most  unexpected  element  has  been  the  rigour  with  which  systemic  risk  has 
been triggered by the collective behaviour of financial institutions and the ways in which they 
interact in financial markets.  
The  main  new  avenue 
improve  our  understanding  of 
interconnectedness  in  the  financial  system,  both  via  the  direct  links  between  financial 
institutions  and  the  indirect  ones  created  in  financial  markets.  Everybody  now  sees  that 
major risks can emerge from within the financial system itself. It was not the real economy 
that threw the financial system into disarray, but the reverse.  
to  explore 
therefore 
to 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Endogenous  risks  –  risks  that  emerge  from  within  the  financial  sector  –  can  have  many 
causes. They may arise, for example, because large parts of the system rely on the same 
sources of funding, or because they have similar exposures – to rising financial imbalances, 
to currency mismatches and to widespread mis-pricing of risk.  
We  have  also  seen  that  turbulence  can  arise  from  relatively  modest  initial  shocks.  The 
system is so interconnected that what looks stable can turn out to be “meta-stable”, which 
means  potentially  highly  instable.  Snow  on  mountain  slopes  can  be  meta-stable,  looking 
pristine and tranquil yet turning into an avalanche after only a minor disturbance.  
For all these reasons, we have established a new framework of macroprudential supervision 
as have our counterparts elsewhere, including in the United States with the new  Financial 
Stability  Oversight  Council.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  there  is  still  one  more  reason  for 
macroprudential oversight, and that is the single European market.  
Cross-border and cross-sectoral financial integration within the EU is fostered by competition, 
freedom of establishment and the free flow of capital. The single financial market is a crucial 
component  of  the  overall  single  market  project,  and  macroprudential  supervision  should 
enhance the resilience of this market.  
So how exactly will the new discipline of macroprudential oversight be conducted? Financial 
stability is not an issue exclusively for central banks. Micro-prudential supervisors have a key 
role,  because  stable  institutions  are  an  essential  and  necessary  condition  for  achieving 
financial  stability.  This  is  why  the  ESAs  and  national  supervisors  together  with  the  central 
banks  are  members  of  the  ESRB  and  why  the  ESRB  and  the  ESAs  form  the  European 
System of Financial Supervisors. 
The ESRB’s main tasks are threefold: to identify and prioritise systemic risks; to issue early 
warnings when significant systemic risks emerge; and to issue policy recommendations for 
remedial action in response to the risks it identifies.  
The  ESRB  will  not  focus  on  individual  institutions,  individual  countries  or  individual 
macroeconomic  issues  –  it  will  take  a  strong  horizontal  focus,  across  countries,  across 
sectors  and  across  the  boundaries  between  the  financial  sphere  and  the  real  economy. 
Interlinkages and spillovers should be key terms in its analysis.  
To achieve these tasks, the ESRB is drawing on information from many sources, including 
strong  analytical  input  from  its  members;  intelligence  gathered  from  financial  system 
participants; and the data necessary to understand the nature of interlinkages that define the 
financial system. ESRB analysis must be broad-based covering potentially any aspect of the 
EU’s financial system – markets, institutions and infrastructure.  
The ESRB is being established at a time when the concerns of markets and policy-makers 
about short-term vulnerabilities seem to prevail over perceptions of medium- and longer-term 
risks. This confronts the ESRB, as well as other macroprudential bodies around the world, 
with specific challenges. The ESRB needs to consider what activities to initiate, well before a 
fully-fledged macroprudential policy framework is developed in the medium term. At the same 
time, it must develop this policy framework, for which no template exists and for which the 
analytical background captures only parts of the tasks. 
In the medium term, the ESRB and the macroprudential authorities of the 27 EU countries 
will  need  operational  policy  frameworks  with  specific  instruments.  The  ESRB  is  ready  to 
support – at a technical level – the work that European institutions have started to design the 
implementation of countercyclical capital buffers. Other macroprudential instruments are also 
desirable. Work on these issues has been initiated. For example, new rules on margins and 
collateral should counteract the fluctuations of the cycle. The specific capital requirements for 
risk-weighted assets might also be adjusted over the cycle. 
When these macroprudential instruments are established, possibly around the middle of this 
decade, the authorities will finally have tools to mitigate the pro-cyclical behaviour of financial 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
players. Authorities will set part of the regulatory requirements not against the solvency or 
liquidity situations of single institutions, but taking a view of the macroprudential cycle. 
Other instruments will be needed to address interconnectedness, including the most complex 
and innovative elements of market functioning. One specific focus of authorities is to ensure 
that efficient and secure central counterparties are created to reduce risks in OTC markets.  
Concentration risks produced by increasingly large financial institutions in trading and post-
trading  will  also  need  to  be  addressed.  Finally,  authorities  will  need  new  regulatory 
instruments  to  keep  pace  with  the  impact  of  new  technologies  –  including  high  frequency 
trading,  algorithmic  trading  and  the  new  universal  trading  platforms,  which  are  gaining 
ground very rapidly. 
Last week, the ESRB selected the members of its Advisory Scientific Committee to provide 
advice  on  analytical  issues.  We  have  also  established  the  Advisory  Technical  Committee, 
which assembles experts from all central banks. The institutional set-up is completed and the 
ESRB will now focus on its substantive tasks, of which we will have a substantive review in 
June  this  year.  Combining  a  focus  on  short-term  risks  with  the  medium-  and  longer-term 
perspective will be the major challenge. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I believe we are  now about halfway through the comprehensive reforms 
that  the  crisis  has  called  for.  We  have  achieved  a  blueprint  of  more  stringent  bank 
regulations that includes more loss-absorbing capital, better risk coverage and limitations for 
undue leverage. Countercyclical capital buffers are meant to lower pro-cyclicality.  
The oversight of financial institutions as well as markets and market infrastructure are being 
strengthened, and the organisational structure of financial supervision is being overhauled. 
But  much  remains  to  be  done.  The  most  important  aspect  is  the  implementation  of  these 
reforms. Moreover, the issue of systemically important financial institutions requires further 
reflection, and oversight of the proper functioning of financial markets in a way that avoids 
undue volatility, excessive influence of dominant players and oligopolistic market structures, 
while reinforcing transparency, needs to be addressed resolutely.  
Such understanding would be enhanced by greater focus in academic research on analysis 
of the intricate interactions in complex financial systems.  
The  appropriate  benchmark  for  the  financial  system  is  whether  it  is  providing  appropriate 
financing to the real economy in a stable and sustainable way. Thereby, and thereby only, 
will it make a valuable contribution to our economy.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
