Caleb M Fundanga: Developing Zambia’s Stock Exchange 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official launch of 
the BancABC Central African Stock Exchange Handbook, Lusaka, 26 July 2011. 
 The Chief Executive Officer of ABC Holdings - Mr Douglas Munatsi  
The Managing Director of BancABC Zambia Limited - Mr Dana Botha  
The Managing Director of Lusaka Stock Exchange - Mrs Beatrice Nkanza  
Management and Staff of BancABC  
Chief Executive Officers and Representatives of various Institutions present;  
Distinguished Invited Guests;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  management  of  BancABC  for  inviting  me  to  this  occasion, 
which marks the official launch of the “Central African Stock Exchange (CASE) Handbook”. I 
also  wish  to  thank  the  Managing  Director  of  BancABC,  Mr  Dana  Botha,  for  sending  me  a 
copy of the CASE handbook.  
The  handbook  provides  a  snapshot  of  various  company  financial  results,  share  price 
performance and volumes traded in 2010. The handbook also highlights basic information on 
investment and borrowing options, which will not only assist investors diversify their portfolios 
but also assist in reducing transaction costs in our stock market.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, The stock market is an important avenue for harnessing resources 
for the financing of development in our country. Stock Markets enable firms to acquire the 
much needed capital at relatively lower cost, hence facilitating capital allocation, investment 
and growth. The stock market also plays a resource mobilisation role by encouraging savings 
through the purchase of equities that meet investors risk preferences and liquidity needs.  
The  provision  of  information  on  the  stock  market  and  its  activity  such  as  contained  in  the 
CASE handbook is therefore one way of promoting investor awareness and participation on 
our local market. This will no doubt enhance the development of the stock exchange and its 
contribution to our economy.  
Chairperson, as you may be aware, the Government of the Republic of Zambia has been 
implementing  a  comprehensive  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  since  2004, 
whose main objective is to broaden and deepen the financial sector in Zambia. Under the 
FSDP, the need for a well-developed capital market as an engine for economic development 
is emphasised as it among other things would enable investors have access to a wide range 
of investment options.  
It is for this reason that the Bank of Zambia together with stakeholders introduced a number 
of initiatives aimed at further developing the capital market. This includes the introduction of 
long  term  Government  bonds,  which  among  other  purposes,  was  aimed  at  providing  an 
appropriate  platform  for  pricing  corporate  bonds.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  in 
collaboration with LuSE and Bankers Association of Zambia is in the process of extending 
the services of RTGS to settle stock exchange transaction.  
Another  welcome  development  to  the  capital  market  is  the  recent  B+  sovereign  rating 
assigned to the country, as well as, the reclassification of Zambia as a low middle income 
country. These developments reflect the country’s recent strong economic performance. As 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
you may be aware, GDP growth has averaged above 6% over the last five years, supported 
by low inflation and a positive external sector performance.  
These favorable developments put the Zambian business community and Government in a 
strong  position  to  access  finance  for  sustained  economic  growth  and  improved  living 
conditions of all citizens.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  the  medium  to  long-term  the  prospects  for  Zambia’s  economy 
are bright. The robust GDP Growth momentum is expected to be maintained premised on 
favourable  growth  performance  in  mining,  agriculture,  construction,  tourism,  manufacturing 
among  other  sectors.  This  will  be  supported  by  favourable  commodity  prices  on  the 
international  market,  Government’s  investment  in  infrastructure  and  expected  increases  in 
foreign direct investment.  
Further,  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  in  single  digits  owing  to  prudent  macroeconomic 
policies  and  the  bumper  harvest  recorded  during  the  2010/11  harvest  season  which  is 
expected to dampen any negative  effects on overall inflation through the food component. 
Accordingly,  interest  rates  are  expected  to  decline  further. In  addition, the  macroeconomic 
environment  is  expected  to  remain  favourable  due  to  a  projected  strong  external  sector 
performance. In this regard, the capital market has an important role to play.  
I wish therefore, to commend BancABC for sponsoring the CASE Handbook, which I am sure 
will  provide  valuable  information  to  active  and  potential  players  on  the  Stock  Market  in 
Zambia.  
With these remarks, I wish to declare the CASE handbook officially launched.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
