K C Chakrabarty: Challenges and opportunities in a trillion dollar 
economy 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India’s (ASSOCHAM) National Banking 
Conclave, New Delhi, 17 June 2011. 
 it 
the 
that 
trillion, 
is  expected 
Indian  economy  would  cross 
The assistance provided by Ms P B Rakhe in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  Pranab  Mukherjee,  Hon’ble  Finance  Minister,  Government  of  India,  Dr  Narendra 
Jadhav, Member, Planning Commission, Shri Dilip Modi, President , ASSOCHAM, Shri R. N. 
Dhoot, Senior Vice President, ASSOCHAM, and MP, Rajya Sabha, Shri J. M. Garg, Central 
Vigilance  Commissioner,  Dr  Thomas  Mathew,  Jt  Secretary,  Capital  Markets,  Ministry  of 
Finance,  Shri  M.  Narendra,  Chairperson,  ASSOCHAM  National  Council  for  Banking  & 
Finance and CMD, Indian Overseas Bank, Shri T. M. Bhasin, CMD, Indian Bank, Shri M. V. 
Tanksale,  ED,  PNB,  Shri  N.  Seshadri,  ED,  Bank  of  India,  Shri  D.  S.  Rawat,  Secretary 
General, ASSOCHAM, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  at  the  National  Banking  Conclave  on  the  theme 
“Challenges and Opportunities in a Trillion Dollar Economy”. As you are aware, the Indian 
economy reached the trillion US dollar GDP milestone in 2007 and joined other countries of 
the  trillion  dollar  club,  namely,  the  US,  UK,  Japan,  Germany,  China,  France,  Italy,  Spain, 
Canada, Brazil and Russia. In fact, over the period 1960 to the late 1980s, India’s GDP in 
US dollar terms doubled every nine years, on an average. Since then, the period for doubling 
has  declined  to  around  5  years,  coinciding  with  the  initiation  of  wide-ranging  structural 
reforms. With India’s GDP at current market prices during 2010–11 already placed at around 
US  dollar  1.7 
the 
US dollar 3.4 trillion mark by 2015–16, i.e., well within the span of the ensuing (Twelfth) Five 
Year Plan. Therefore, as policy makers and business leaders, we should be thinking about 
exploiting the opportunities and preparing ourselves for the challenges of managing a multi-
trillion dollar (and not a one trillion dollar) economy! 
Although some argue that India catapulted to the trillion dollar league in 2007 on account of 
GDP valuation based on sharply appreciated exchange rate that resulted from huge inflows 
of  foreign  exchange,  most  others  consider  this  as  an  emerging  sign  of  take-off  that  could 
accelerate the growth momentum going forward. Last year, economists at Morgan Stanley 
and other long-range forecasters predicted that India’s growth will start to outpace China’s 
within three to five years and continue at a faster rate than any other large country over the 
next 20 to 25 years. Hence, I believe, and others do so too, that the Indian economy is set to 
experience double digit growth during the coming two to three decades. 
While the future growth outlook of the Indian economy looks promising, the challenge is to 
make  it  more  inclusive.  At  the  grassroots  level,  India  continues  to  be  a  poor  and  less 
developed  country  in  spite  of  years  of  financial  and  other  support  provided  by  the 
Government to equity enhancing distributional programmes and the spectacular turnaround 
in investment and growth. According to a Planning Commission Report on the methodology 
of estimation of poverty issued in 2009, the all India poverty head count ratio was at 37.2 per 
cent in 2004–05 compared to 45.3 per cent in 1993–94. Prima facie, while the slow pace of 
reduction in poverty due to high population growth rate, large workforce still dependent on 
agriculture and  illiteracy  continue  to  obstruct  the  growth  potential,  the  paradigm  that  these 
disabilities  can  be  nevertheless  be  turned  around  into  a  winning  proposition  is  also  surely 
within the realm of possibility. 
In fact, many of the disadvantages which the Indian economy faced in the past has already 
been waned and turned out to be advantages. To illustrate, a disadvantage that has plagued 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
most developing economies including India has been that of scarcity of capital. This scarcity 
has  hindered  the  investment  and  growth  prospects  of  these  economies  in  the  past.  This, 
however,  is  no  longer  a  disadvantage.  With  most  countries  including  India  opening  their 
doors  to  foreign  investment,  the  question  is  no  longer  of  scarcity  of  capital  but  the  rate  of 
return that we can pay on this capital. Hence, capital is no longer a constraint in the era of 
liberalization and globalization if we are able to pay the required return and are able to attract 
the capital flows into our economies especially in the form of foreign direct investment. 
Further,  high  population  growth  was  another  disadvantage  faced  by  many  developing 
countries  while  making  efforts  to  improve  the  GDP  in  per  capita  terms.  However,  with  the 
emergence of skills and knowledge as new engines of economic growth, higher population 
growth is more of an opportunity than a constraint. According to Census 2011, 56.9 per cent 
of India’s total population belongs to the age group 15–59 years. Importantly, only 7.5 per 
cent of the population belongs to the age category “60 years and above”. This shows that 
India is yet to experience the problem of aging. Further, it is predicted that India will see a 
sharp  decline  in  the  dependency  ratio  over  the  next  thirty  years,  which  will  be  a  major 
demographic dividend for India. Moreover, it is estimated that not only India’s demographic 
trend would remain favourable for the next three decades but also remain better than other 
BRIC economies. 
We have to, however, realise that these advantages will not transform on its own to higher 
economic  growth.  In  this  regard,  appropriate  interventions  would  be  required  to  reap 
maximum benefits from this favourable demographic dividend by investing in education and 
skill  development.  In  the  Union  budget  for  2011–12,  Indian  Government  has  allocated 
Rs. 52,057  crore  for  the  education  sector,  which  is  24  per  cent  higher  than  the  2010–11 
education expenditure. However, expenditure on education as per cent of GDP is relatively 
low  in  India  when  compared  with  some  of  the  developed  nations  as  also  with  some 
developing  countries  (Table).  Among  the  G-20  countries,  India  not  only  has  lowest 
educational  indicators,  but  the  public  education  system  is  also  poor  when  compared  with 
other  BRIC  countries  and  some  of  the  emerging  market  economies.  In  2009,  World  Bank 
expressed  the  view  that  acute  shortage  of  skills  especially  in  the  area  of  civil  engineering 
shadows  the  growth  prospects  of  the  Indian  economy.  According  to  Prime  Minister 
Dr. Manmohan  Singh,  “around  10  per  cent  of  the  relevant  age  group  is  enrolled  in  any 
institute of higher education as compared to 40 to 50 per cent in most developed countries”. 
Banks play a facilitating and enabling role in this endeavour by extending education loans 
and  they  have  a  great  responsibility  to  ensure  that  no  deserving  student  is  denied  an 
education loan. However, just providing education loan is not sufficient. Industry and bankers 
would have to work together to ensure that the employability of such students is high and 
that the people with the right type of education and skills are available for the industry.  
Table:  
Expenditure on Education 
Country 
Switzerland 
United States 
France 
UK 
Malaysia 
Mexico 
Spending on 
Education as per cent 
of GDP 
5.8 
5.7 
5.6 
5.3 
8.1 
5.3 
Country 
South Africa 
Thailand 
Chile 
Brazil 
India 
Russia 
Spending on 
Education as per cent 
of GDP 
5.3 
5.2 
4.2 
4.2 
4.1 
3.8 
Note: Government education expenditure as per cent of GDP (2000–2002) 
Source: United Nations Human Development Programme 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We need to recognize that the knowledge, skills and productivity of our growing young and 
dynamic  work  force  forms  the  backbone  of  our  economy.  This  would  not  only  require 
effective implementation of developmental and poverty alleviation schemes at the bottom of 
the  pyramid,  but  also  the  recognition  that  these  new  factors  of  production,  namely, 
knowledge, skills and technology which have the ability to unleash the productive frontiers of 
the economy in the most efficient and dramatic way. Notably, these new factors of production 
which can liberate human enterprise from the binding constraints of land, labour and capital 
are  the  engines  of  growth  in  the  knowledge  economies  of  the  western  hemisphere,  along 
with countries like Japan and Israel both of which are otherwise scarcely endowed with land 
and  labor.  Technology  is  the  surest  and  the  most  appropriate  way  of  bringing  inclusion  in 
respect of any product and / or service. Technology has revolutionized every industry in the 
world  by  extending  faster  and  cost-effective  delivery  of  products  and  services,  ensuring 
affordability  to  those  who  otherwise  could  not,  and  simultaneously,  ensuring  viability  and 
profitability of producers. This has other positive spinoffs. If the cost of products and services 
is brought down leveraging technology, inflation also would come down. That would lead to a 
softer interest rate regime which would enable sustainable growth. 
Taking cue from examples of western hemisphere, India should try to become a knowledge 
economy to promote inclusive economic growth. The progress from agrarian and/or industrial 
economy  to  that  of  knowledge  economy  is  based  on  the  ability  to  acquire  ownership  of 
knowledge and to use it to create or improve goods and services. Workers in the knowledge 
economy  are  especially  distinct  in  so  far  they  know  what  they  are  doing,  how  the  work  is 
done and why they are doing the work. They also excel in their fields of knowledge and are 
often  better  at  their  jobs  than  their  superiors.  The  respect  for  knowledge  workers  leads  to 
most desired outcomes through change management as experimentation and innovation are 
encouraged and rewarded. Thus, we must strive assiduously to convert our young work force 
into potential power house of productivity and growth. 
Having  said  that,  it  would  be  impossible  to  achieve  these  objectives  in  the  absence  of 
poverty alleviation. Extreme poverty and deprivation often discourage the urge of the poor to 
participate  in  programs  that  do  not  provide  immediate  support  to  their  livelihood.  To 
encourage the poor to participate in these initiatives, therefore, requires that developmental 
programs, at the starting point, should focus on providing opportunities for people to earn a 
living and increase their incomes over time. The program can be followed up by providing 
people  the  means  for  enhancement  of  their  capabilities  to  exploit  available  opportunities. 
Finally,  effective  mechanisms  for  protection  against  a  temporary  or  permanent  loss  of 
livelihood should supplement the overall program to achieve the goal of inclusive growth. 
Presently, a number of intervention programs are conducted by the Government that focus 
on employment creation and the flagship NREGA is one such significant initiative. One could 
not,  of  course,  belittle  the  excellent  work  being  done  by  non-government  organizations 
engaged  in  supporting  livelihoods  in  several  poor  underdeveloped  hinterlands.  In  the 
financial  sector,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  crafted  well  known  programs  to  achieve  planned, 
structured and sustained financial inclusion such as adoption of Business Correspondent and 
Business  Facilitator  Model,  preparation  of  Board  Approved  Financial  Inclusion  Plans, 
requiring banks to providing a minimum of four banking products and services including no-
frills accounts with overdrafts, and is committed to furthering the scope of these initiatives. 
Collective  and  multipronged  efforts  to  promote  inclusive  growth  supplemented  by  some 
earnest  investment  in  human  capital  are  the  only  ways  by  which  we  can  move  towards 
becoming  a  knowledge  economy.  The  second  stage  assimilation  of  knowledge,  skills  and 
technology  can  be  obtained  from  education  by  means  of  brain-gain.  The  virtual  modes  of 
education  through  ICT  and  linkages  to  national  and  international  information  hubs  can 
provide  the  benefits  of  information  availability  without  the  need  to  be  present  at  in  certain 
space  or  time.  The  benefits  of  brain–gain  are  realized  from  the  wide-spread  availability  of 
domain  knowledge  from  remote  locations  which  can  transform  business  productivity  at 
minimal  cost.  The  e-Choupal  experiment  of  ITC,  for  example,  showcases  the  possibility  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
improvement in quality of produce and improved realization of returns from farming due to 
availability of better information on market prices. The helpline of the Ministry of Agriculture 
with  experts  on  board  has  been  similarly  instrumental  in  solving  day  to  day  problems  of 
farmers. Further, internet based e-education portals for students offer boundary-free learning 
experience.  These  portals  provide  virtual  classrooms  and  guidance  from  professional 
instructors on different subject areas and can have widest possible reach regardless of brick 
and mortar structures. 
While  the  initiatives  being  taken  are  laudable,  there  is  a  crying  need  for  reforms  in  our 
educational system which requires to be toned up to impart education that is focused on the 
demands of the new millennium. Effective delivery of educational inputs in a large economy 
like  India  requires  a  critical  mass  of  volume  and  quality.  In  this  regard,  the  Government 
programmes such as Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) in the elementary education sector and 
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) in the secondary education sector helped in 
achieving  the  universalisation  of  education  to  a  very  large  extent  in  terms  of  access  to 
schooling and improvement in gross enrolment ratio. Even then there is a pressing need to 
further  increase  school  enrollments,  along  with  improvements  in  the  quality  of  education. 
This  may  be  extremely  important  in  harvesting  the  fruits  of  investment.  In  this  regard,  the 
enactment  of  Right  of  Children  to  Free  and  Compulsory  Education  Act,  2009  and  the 
operationalisation  of  Article  21-A  of  the  Constitution  of  India,  are  expected  to  address  the 
issues  of  drop  out,  out  of  school  children,  quality  of  education  and  availability  of  trained 
teachers  in  the  short  to  medium  term.  Further,  a  proposal  to  set  up  a  National 
Commission/Council for Higher Education and Research to prescribe academic quality and 
advancement of knowledge in higher educational institutions is under the consideration of the 
Government. 
Yet another well known problem is the mismatch between quantity and quality of education. 
According  to  the  research  published  by  the  Observer  Research  Foundation  (2010),  India 
recorded 10.4 per cent increase in the number of graduate engineers in 2008 compared with 
9.9 per cent in China, 5.9 per cent in South Korea, 3.9 per cent in UK and –1.0 per cent in 
the  US.  However,  despite  the  increasingly  higher  numbers  of  engineering  graduates 
produced by the technical institutes in India, almost 30 per cent of fresh graduates remain 
unemployed  even  one  year  after  graduation.  In  2005,  a  McKinsey-NASSCOM  study 
indicated  that  only  a  quarter  of  India’s  technical  graduates  and  10–15  per  cent  of  general 
college graduates are of employable quality in the off-shore IT and BPO industries. Further, 
NASSCOM estimates that the educational system produces nine half-literate graduates for 
each graduate of passable quality, reflecting the low quality of education. However, despite 
discounting of the quality of education, when it comes to the number of engineers per million 
people, India has only 214 with South Korea having the highest number 1435. While Japan 
has  765  engineers  per  million  people,  China  has  340.  The  research  also  showed  that 
doctorate degrees were less than 1 per cent of graduate engineering degrees in the country. 
The percentage of doctorate degrees compared to engineering degrees was much higher in 
most of the other countries, e.g., 9 per cent in the US, 10 per cent in the UK, 8 per cent in 
Germany and 3 per cent in South Korea. Comparing Indian institutions with the well known 
international centers the study also observed that most Indian institutions had not progressed 
beyond undergraduate teaching institutions into graduate teaching and research institutions. 
Clearly, therefore, we need a lot of catching up to do both in numbers and quality in order to 
realize our goal of creating a knowledge economy with equitable and productive employment 
opportunities  for  the  youth.  Besides  forwarding  the  inclusive  growth  program  massive 
investments in education are also required by the government with participation of the private 
sector  which  should  target  at  the  development  of  occupational  skills  based  on  knowledge 
and  technology.  The  participation  of  private  sector  is  needed  to  implement  educational 
programs that have occupational relevance in contemporary enterprise. 
To sum, in the new era of growth with knowledge, skills and technology as engines, without 
knowledge  workers  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to  shift  the  production  frontier  of  any 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy. Without adequate investments in education and skill development, we will not be 
able to transform our growing young population into knowledge workers and it will result in a 
disaster.  We  thus  have  to  work  on  the  trinity  of  the  issues  of  Inclusion,  Technology  and 
Education to propel India to a 10 Trillion Dollar Economy and beyond, else we will not be 
able  to  sustain  even  the  current  growth.  I  hope  that  industry  representatives  and  bankers 
present  here  would  deliberate  on  these  issues  and  work  together  to  ensure  sustainable 
growth. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
