Spencer Dale: Productivity and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of the 
Bank of England, at the South Tyneside Manufacturing Forum, London, 21 September 2011. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak to you this morning.  
It is a pleasure to be in the North East and to have the opportunity to speak to a forum of 
business leaders from the manufacturing sector. As our economy recovers and rebalances 
towards  a  more  sustainable  pattern  of  growth  and  demand,  manufacturing  and  the  export 
sector more generally will need to play an increasing role. So I’m really pleased to have the 
opportunity to speak to a group of companies at the forefront of this process.  
The topic of my talk today is one that is close to many of your hearts. Indeed, it concerns the 
life blood of the long-term success of each and every one of your companies. 
It is also central to the setting of monetary policy.  
Productivity 
As you know far better than I, strong, sustained productivity growth is vital for ensuring that 
your companies remain competitive in the global market place.  
Productivity is equally important for the long-term health and prosperity of our economy as a 
whole.  To  paraphrase  one  economist  “productivity  isn’t  everything,  but  in  the  long-run  it  is 
almost everything”. (Krugman 1994). 
Productivity matters for monetary policy since it plays a crucial role in determining the supply 
capacity of our economy. The balance between an economy’s capacity to supply goods and 
services and what is actually demanded is a fundamental driver of inflationary pressure in the 
medium term, and so central to the MPC’s task. 
The recent behaviour of productivity has been puzzling and worrying in equal measure. 
The level of measured productivity in the UK private sector today is lower than it was at the 
time of the financial crisis.1 We have had over three years of stagnant productivity. If private 
sector  productivity  had  continued  to  grow  at  the  average  rate  seen  prior  to  the  crisis  of 
around two and half percent or so, the level of productivity today would be around 9% higher 
(Chart 1).2,3 
What might account for the UK’s productivity shortfall? And what implications might it have 
for monetary policy? 
                                                 
1  The  private  sector  has  been  approximated  by  excluding  employment  and  output  data  for  the  public 
administration  and  defence,  education  and  health  sectors,  reflecting  that  a  significant  proportion  of  these 
sectors are within the public sector. Workforce Jobs data on sectoral employment have been scaled to match 
aggregate  employment  levels  indicated  by  the  Labour  Force  Survey.  Resulting  calculations  for  the  private 
sector are estimates only. Official ONS productivity estimates are for the whole economy and so differ slightly. 
2  The productivity shortfall is measured in terms of output per head. The scale of the shortfall would be slightly 
less  if  measured  in  terms  of  output  per  hour  worked,  but  the  same  qualitative  patterns  (and  puzzles)  are 
apparent in productivity per hour measures. 
3  The  UK  is  not  alone:  OECD  data  reveal  that  several  of  the  world’s  largest  economies  (including  Germany, 
France  and  Italy)  have  also  been  experiencing  sluggish  productivity  growth  by  historical  standards.  One 
exception to this is the US, where productivity has actually grown at rates in excess of the pre-crisis average 
over much of the past three years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As I fear may often seem to be the case with economists – I’m not going to offer you a simple 
answer.  There  is  no  single  smoking  gun.  Rather  I  think  there  are  a  number  of  candidate 
explanations, each of which is likely to have played some role. In the next section of my talk, 
I’ll highlight three broad classes of explanation – which range from the relatively benign to 
more worrying diagnoses – and try to provide some guide as to their relative importance.  
I’ll  then  discuss  how  the  uncertainty  surrounding  recent  developments  in  productivity 
complicates the setting of monetary policy. The MPC needs to form an assessment of the 
strength of supply as well as demand when setting policy. I’ll conclude with some thoughts 
on  recent  developments  in  the  economy  more  generally  and  how  they  have  affected  my 
policy decisions.  
Productivity weakness: a reality or an illusion? 
So what could account for the recent poor productivity performance?  
One  possibility  is  that  the  weakness  of  measured  productivity  growth  may  exaggerate  the 
true extent of underlying weakness. Let me explain.  
An encouraging aspect of the recent recession is that although unemployment increased, it 
rose by far less than we might have feared given the depth of the recession. The recent data 
on employment and unemployment are worrying in that context, with unemployment edging 
up over the summer, after having previously fallen by over 50,000 from its peak in early 2010. 
If this weakening in the labour market continues that could materially change the relationship 
between output and employment.  
But to date, companies appeared to have held onto a greater proportion of their labour force 
than in past recessions. My own experience of speaking to businesses at the depth of the 
recession is that this was driven by a desire to retain valuable skills and experience. Many 
companies had learned from past experience how difficult it is to re-employ skilled workers 
once let go. But a consequence of this labour hoarding is that the amount of output produced 
per worker fell very sharply, in many cases partly because working hours were cut back. And 
although there has been some rebound since then, the level of labour productivity has still 
not recovered to its previous level. 
This greater retention of labour suggests that firms may be sitting on a substantial degree of 
spare  capacity.  Underlying  productivity  –  the  level  of  productivity  that  would  be  possible  if 
workers  and  capital  were  utilised  at  normal  levels  of  intensity  –  may  have  continued  to 
improve  even  though measured  productivity  has  not.  But this  will  only  become  apparent  if 
and when demand recovers and the workforce is fully utilised. 
Although  I  place  some  weight  on  this  explanation,  I  worry  that  it  is  contradicted  by  what 
business  leaders  –  just  like  you  –  typically  say  and,  more  importantly,  by  what  they  have 
been  doing.  Despite  all  this  apparent  hoarding  of  labour,  when  responding  to  business 
surveys  and  questions  from  our  network  of  Agents,  companies  often  say  that  they  have 
relatively little spare capacity. Now there are good reasons why a company’s notion of spare 
capacity may differ from that of an economist, and so there’s a danger that we over-interpret 
these  responses.4  But  it  is  not  just  what  the  managers  of  those  businesses  say,  it  is  also 
what they have been doing. Over the past year, despite only sluggish output growth, private 
sector  employment  increased  by  almost  half  a  million  people  –  the  strongest  increase  in 
                                                 
4  As noted in the August 2011 Inflation Report, one possibility is that surveys capture companies’ immediately 
available capacity rather than their long-run capacity. So companies may be reporting pressures relative to the 
capacity that can be used immediately and at little additional cost, and excluding, for example, production lines 
that were temporarily mothballed during the recession, but which could be reactivated as demand increases. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
employment since 1997. It is difficult to understand why firms should increase employment 
so significantly if their existing workforce is not fully utilised.  
Some  of  this  behaviour  may  be  explicable  if  employment  growth  were  concentrated  in 
sectors  of  the  economy  which  are  expanding  most  quickly,  especially  those  orientated 
towards the export sector. But it is striking that this pattern of rising employment and weak 
productivity is common across most sectors of the economy (Chart 2).5 It is also possible that 
firms  in  some  parts  of  our  economy  are  having  to  work  flat  out  just  to  generate  the  same 
amount of business. Estate agents, for example, trying to match buyers and sellers in a thin 
housing market. Or M&A teams pitching for new business. The extra effort that is required 
may explain why these types of companies do not report much spare capacity. But it does 
not help to explain why companies facing these types of pressures should want to expand 
greatly their workforces.  
It is hard to reconcile the number of new jobs created over the past year with the belief that 
firms are sitting on a substantial margin of spare capacity.  
The recent weakness in productivity may also have been exaggerated by the sheer difficulty 
of measuring economic activity in real time. We know that early estimates of output are often 
revised as more comprehensive data become available. Recent productivity may look less 
disappointing if subsequent estimates of output are marked up. And indeed, based in part on 
the  pattern  of  past  revisions,  the  MPC  does  think  that  the  current  and  recent  level  of 
measured output is more likely to be revised up than down (Chart 3).6 But such revisions are 
likely  to  provide  only  a  partial  explanation  of  the  productivity  puzzle.  For  example,  if  GDP 
were to be revised in line with the path the MPC judge most likely, that would account for 
only around one fifth of the 9% productivity shortfall.7 
If  labour  hoarding  and  data  revisions  provide  only  a  partial  explanation  of  the  recent 
sluggishness of productivity growth, what else might account for it?  
Difficulty of extrapolating from the past 
The  second  explanation  is  that  it  might  be  misleading  to  extrapolate  from  previous  trends 
when gauging the extent of the productivity puzzle. The past is not necessarily a good guide 
to the future. In particular, there are reasons to think that past productivity growth in both the 
energy extraction sector and the financial services sector may provide a poor guide to more 
recent trends in underlying growth in those sectors.  
In the twenty years prior to the financial crisis, productivity in the energy sector grew at an 
average annual rate of over 3%. But the pace of productivity growth slowed markedly in the 
past decade or so as North Sea oil fields aged and energy extraction became more difficult. 
Indeed, since the mid-2000s, productivity has actually been falling (Chart 4). 
In contrast, productivity growth in the financial services sector increased very sharply in the 
10 years prior to the financial crisis, underpinned by the process of financial liberalisation and 
                                                 
5  A  related  mechanism  relates  to  changes  in  employment  shares  from  high  productivity  sectors  to  lower 
productivity sectors. The scale of the changes in sectoral employment shares to date can account for some, 
but only a small proportion, of the productivity shortfall.  
6  See the box on pages 22–23 of the August 2011 Inflation Report. 
7  Employment  data  may  also  be  prone  to  revision  reflecting  possible  sampling  errors.  Headline  productivity 
figures  are  based  on  the  regular  Labour  Force  Survey  of  households.  The  Workforce  Jobs  measure  of 
employment reported by businesses has been  weaker over the recovery  to date. If the LFS measure  were 
revised towards Workforce Jobs, that could raise productivity per head by around 2 percentage points. But 
survey  evidence  broadly  supports  the  LFS  measure  of  employment  and  Workforce  Jobs  data  have  been 
revised in the past towards the LFS measure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
strong growth in financial sector balance sheets. It does not seem sensible – certainly with 
the benefit of hindsight – to think that this strong growth would continue indefinitely.  
Re-estimating the scale of the productivity puzzle using more plausible estimates for trend 
productivity growth in these two sectors reduces the size of the productivity shortfall by up to 
2  percentage  points  –  that  is  from  around  9%  to  7%  –  with  the  majority  of  that  difference 
reflecting slower underlying productivity growth within the energy extraction sector.  
Extrapolating  from  the  past  may  also  be  misleading  if  some  businesses  were  operating  at 
above normal levels of capacity utilisation prior to the recession. If that were the case, some 
of  the  subsequent  slowdown  in  productivity  growth  would  simply  reflect  the  need  for 
companies to adjust to more sustainable operating levels. And that indeed appears to be the 
case,  with  business  surveys  pointing  to  above  average  capacity  pressures  in  both  the 
manufacturing  and  services  sector  prior  to  the  recession.  The  implied  required  adjustment 
may account for around a further 1% point of the productivity shortfall.8 
Taking account of changes in productivity trends within key sectors of the economy and of 
the position of the economy prior to the start of the recession may account for around one 
third of the productivity shortfall. But even if we combine both of these factors with the impact 
of  the  likely  upward  revision  to  GDP,  this  still  leaves  a  sizeable  productivity  puzzle  –  of 
around one half of the productivity shortfall – to explain.  
The  third  explanation  is  that  underlying  productivity  growth  has  been  weakened  by  the 
impact  of  the  financial  crisis.  It  is  notable  that  this  explanation  is  consistent  with  evidence 
from business surveys of spare capacity which suggest that underlying productivity growth in 
the  manufacturing  and  services  sector  has  essentially  stagnated  since  the  start  of  the 
recession (Charts 5 and 6).9 What might account for this flat lining in potential productivity? 
Impact of financial crisis 
In an accounting sense, this stalling in productivity growth must be attributable to one of two 
factors. A slowing in the rate at which companies have added to the physical capital used by 
each member of their workforce. Or a slowing in the pace of efficiency gains associated with 
the  way  in  which  companies  combine  capital  and  labour  to  produce  output,  known  in  the 
jargon as total factor productivity.  
In  reality,  it  is  unlikely  that  a  slowing  in  the  pace  of  capital  accumulation  contributed 
significantly  to  the  weakness  of  productivity.  This  is  largely  a  matter  of  arithmetic.  Annual 
business investment flows are small relative to the size of the capital stock. So even though 
business  investment  fell  by  around  a  quarter  in  the  year  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers, and remains 20% below its pre-crisis level, it is unlikely to have had a significant 
impact on the stock of capital available per worker.10 
                                                 
8  Evidence from business surveys (eg BCC, CBI) and the Bank’s Agents suggest that capacity utilisation was 
above  normal  in  both  manufacturing  and  services  sectors.  Qualitative  survey  balances  can  be  adjusted  to 
match the mean and variance of an estimated productivity gap from which inference about productivity may be 
drawn. See Charts 3.7 and 3.8 in the August 2011 Inflation Report. 
9  Potential productivity is constructed using the BCC surveys of capacity utilisation and productivity data from 
the ONS for the manufacturing sector and private services excluding finance sector. The BCC survey  asks 
firms  whether  they  are  operating  at  or  below  full  capacity.  Since  the  survey  measures  are  qualitative,  they 
have been mean and variance adjusted over the period 1989 to 2006 to infer a measure of the gap between 
actual  and  potential  productivity.  The  trends  shown  in  charts  5  and  6  are  chosen  such  that  the  shortfall 
between actual and potential productivity maps closely to the mean-and-variance-adjusted survey measures 
of spare capacity. 
10  The annual flow of business investment prior to the recession averaged around 7% of the UK capital stock. A 
20% reduction in business investment for 5 years would result in the capital stock being only around 2% lower 
(assuming plausible assumptions for the rate of depreciation). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It is possible that this simple arithmetic underestimates the impact of the falls in investment 
spending, particularly if the falls were concentrated in highly-productive forms of investment. 
Perhaps because in the face of the deep recession companies were less willing to undertake 
riskier,  high-return  investment  projects,  and  the  constraints  on  UK  banks  made  them  less 
willing to finance them. But even so, this skewing would have to be very marked to have had 
a material impact on the quality of the capital stock.11 
The capital stock is also likely to have been eroded by increased levels of capital scrapping, 
as some companies were forced out of business and others scaled back their operations in 
order  to  survive.  Although  increased  levels  of  capital  scrapping  are  likely  to  have  played 
some  role,  they  seem  unlikely  to  provide  the  key  to  the  productivity  puzzle.  In  particular, 
although  corporate  liquidations  have  increased  in  the  recession,  that  increase  has  been 
relatively contained and significantly less than we might have feared given the depth of the 
recession. 
Rather  if  the  evidence  from  the  business  surveys  is  to  be  believed,  and  the  growth  of 
productive  potential  in  the  manufacturing  and  services  sector  has  indeed  largely  stalled  in 
recent  years,  this  is  more  likely  to  reflect  a  slowing  in  total  factor  productivity  (or  TFP  for 
short). 
I  know  what  some  of  you  might  be  thinking:  this  sounds  like  another  one  of  those 
unobservable, abstract concepts so beloved by economists, but with little connection to the 
real  world.  And  you  would  have  a  point!  But  think  of  it  as  efficiency  gains.  The  fact  that 
companies, as they hone their working practices and improve their internal processes, are 
able to increase the amount of output they produce for a given level of labour and capital 
input.  
Did the financial crisis and recession dampen the pace of efficiency gains in our economy, at 
least temporarily? 
Recessions  are  actually  often  credited  with  improving  average  levels  of  efficiency,  as  less 
productive  firms  are  forced  out  of  business  and  others  drive  through  productivity  gains  in 
order  to  stay  afloat.  Only  the  fittest  –  and  the  most  efficient  –  survive.  But  this  recession 
differed to those in our recent experience since it was triggered by a financial crisis. Banks’ 
ability  to  lend  was  reduced.  Credit  conditions  tightened.  The  implications  of  this  for  the 
efficiency with which companies operate are potentially far reaching. 
Many smaller companies and new businesses, which are a critical source of innovation in our 
economy,  have  struggled  to  secure  the  finance  they  need  to  grow  and  expand.  Company 
start-ups fell sharply during the recession,  and evidence from the  Bank’s Agents suggests 
that many smaller businesses are still struggling to access funds at affordable rates. In that 
context, it is worth recalling that small companies, employing less than 100 employees, hold 
over 40% of UK patents, even though they account for less than 20% of total investment.12 
Even for those companies that are able to borrow funds, the tightening in credit conditions is 
likely  to  have  impeded  the  efficiency  of  supply.  Some  companies  have  become  more 
cautious, preferring to hang onto liquidity or pay down debt rather than invest in increased 
levels of training and R&D. The increased cost of working capital has led many firms to cut 
back substantially on their inventory levels, disrupting the efficiency of supply chains. More 
                                                 
11  The impact on the physical capital stock would be compounded to the extent that the recession also weighed 
on the growth in human capital. In particular, employees ability to “learn by doing” on the job or through job 
related training is likely to have been reduced as a result of the decline in average hours during the recession. 
Weale  (2010)  suggests  that  the  learning  by  doing  channel  could  eventually  reduce  aggregate  labour 
productivity by around ½%. 
12  “Investigating the characteristics of patents and the businesses which hold them”, Thomas, A., Economic and 
Labour Market Review, April 2011 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
generally, the amount of management time devoted to raising finance and managing banking 
relationships  has  increased  very  substantially,  diverting  attention  from  the  search  for  new 
products and new markets.  
It is impossible to quantify with any precision the effect that strains within the banking system 
have had on the growth of productivity over the past few years. But evidence from previous 
periods of financial turmoil suggests that the effect might be material. In particular, research by 
the IMF suggests that persistent falls in TFP growth following banking crises can account on 
average for around one third of the loss of output seen following such episodes (IMF 2009). 
So where does all this leave us?  
As  I  warned  you  upfront,  I  don’t  think  there  is  a  single,  simple  explanation  for  the  recent 
surprising weakness of productivity. Some of it may well get revised away. And some of it 
may be because our sights were set too high based on past trends. But I also think there are 
good reasons to think that the recession, and particularly the impact of the financial crisis, 
may have dampened underlying productivity growth in recent years. At the risk of stating the 
bleeding obvious, we need the banks to be working for our economy to grow and prosper. 
Productivity and monetary policy 
Why does all this matter for monetary policy? 
The  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  depends  critically  on  the  balance  of  demand  and 
supply  in  the  economy.  If  demand  is  greater  than  the  goods  and  services  that  can  be 
supplied, prices will tend to rise. And vice versa. As such, when setting monetary policy, the 
MPC needs to make an assessment about current and future trends in supply, as well as 
demand. 
The discussions about economic growth we typically read about in newspapers and see on 
TV are normally posed in terms of demand. Is gloom on the high street spreading? Claims 
and  counter-claims  about  the  likely  impact  of  the  fiscal  consolidation.  But  the  MPC  also 
needs to consider the prospects for supply. How quickly is the capital stock likely to grow? 
And, importantly, will the recent weakness in productivity persist or reverse? 
Typically,  the  growth  rates  of  factors  determining  the  supply  potential  of  our  economy  
–  population,  the  capital  stock,  structural  productivity  –  are  far  less  volatile  than  those  of 
demand. As such, it is often natural for the main focus of policy to be concentrated on the 
prospects  for  demand.  But  judgements  about  supply  also  matter,  particularly  so  in  the 
aftermath of a deep recession. 
In  recessions,  demand  typically  falls  by  more  than  supply.  An  output  gap  opens  up  –  the 
economy can supply more than is currently demanded. And unless that gap is closed, it will 
push down on costs and prices. The job of monetary policymakers is to loosen policy, so that 
demand  is  brought  back  into  balance  with  supply  and  inflation  remains  close  to  target. 
Exactly how expansionary policy should be depends critically on the size of the output gap.  
But  assessing  the  size  of  the  output  gap  is  very  difficult,  for  exactly  the  reasons  we  have 
been discussing today. Early estimates of economic activity can be revised substantially, so 
it is hard to know just how weak demand and output really are. And it is equally difficult to 
know  the  extent  to  which  the  supply  potential  of  the  economy  has  been  affected  by  the 
recession.13  This  difficultly  greatly  complicates  the  setting  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  in  a 
series of influential papers, Athanasios Orphanides (eg Orphanides 2003) has argued that 
over-estimates of the size of the output gap played an important role in the policy mistakes 
that led to the period of persistently high inflation in the US in the 1970s and 80s.  
                                                 
13  Or indeed, if shocks to supply were instrumental in causing the recession. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I hope that we are learning some of the lessons from the past. Taken at face value, the depth 
of the recession might suggest there is considerable spare capacity within our economy. And 
indeed  there  is  considerable  slack  within  the  labour  market  –  unemployment  has  risen  by 
almost  900,000  since  the  start  of  the  recession  –  and  this  has  acted  to  contain  wage 
pressures. But the degree of slack within firms is probably significantly less than implied by 
the shortfall in productivity for all the reasons I’ve just explained. 
An assessment of the output gap requires an evaluation of the current level of supply. But 
the  MPC  also  needs  to  form  a  view  about  the  pace  at  which  the  supply  capacity  of  the 
economy  is  growing.  When  faced  with  a  period  of  weak  output  growth,  it  is  tempting  to 
conclude the policy should be eased in order to boost the pace of growth and so stop the 
output gap widening further. And that may well be the right policy prescription. But just how 
much demand should be boosted depends on the extent to which the weak demand growth 
is matched by sluggish growth in potential supply. 
If indeed underlying productivity growth in our economy has been weak in the recent past  
–  perhaps  due  to  the  lingering  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  –  this  may  well  continue  for  a 
while  yet.  To  be  clear,  this  is  not  the  same  as  saying  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  supply 
potential  of  our  economy  has  been  permanently  scarred  by  the  financial  crisis.  But  rather 
over the next two or three years – which is the horizon which matters for monetary policy – 
we  shouldn’t  automatically  assume  that  underlying  productivity  will  necessary  grow  at  the 
sorts of rates to which we have become accustomed to in the past.  
Policymakers need to think about supply as well as demand when responding to weak output 
growth.  
Recent policy developments 
Let me conclude with some brief comments about the current policy outlook. 
You may know that between February and August of this year, I was one of the members of 
the MPC that had been voting to raise Bank Rate. As I mentioned at the time, my vote was 
not based on the nice reasons that the economic recovery looked firmly entrenched and the 
exceptional monetary easing implemented at the height of the crisis was no longer required.  
Rather, it was driven by nasty reasons. I wasn’t confident about the strength of the recovery 
and I was worried about the downside risks to growth. But I was even more worried about the 
outlook for inflation. In particular, the risks from continuing global price pressures, and the 
risk that the prolonged period of high inflation would affect the credibility of monetary policy. 
And  as  I’ve  just  discussed,  the  growing  belief  that  the  degree  of  spare  capacity  in  our 
economy was probably less than might appear at first sight.  
But  I  also  suggested  that  policymakers  should  approach  their  task  with  considerable 
pragmatism, and that if some of the downside risks to growth materialised, I’d reverse my 
vote.  And  that  indeed  is  what  has  happened.  The  outlook  for  demand  over  the  past  few 
months  has  weakened  quite  materially.  Consequently,  at  the  August  MPC  meeting,  I 
reversed  my  position  and  voted  to  maintain  Bank  Rate  at  0.5%  and  the  stock  of  asset 
purchases at £200 billion. And as shown in the minutes published this morning, I voted the 
same way at this month’s MPC meeting. 
So what has happened to our economy over the past few months? 
The deterioration in the outlook largely reflects developments outside of our shores. Growth 
in  the  world  economy,  including  in  our  core  trading  partners  in  Europe  and  the  US,  has 
slowed.  Concerns  about  the  fiscal  positions  of  some  countries,  particularly  within  the  euro 
area, have intensified. This in turn has fuelled worries and uncertainties about the resilience 
of the international banking system. And perhaps most fundamentally of all, confidence that 
the  authorities  have  the  ability  to  respond  to  these  challenges  in  a  decisive  and  timely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
manner has diminished. These four factors have fed on each other, leading to a pronounced 
downward spiral. 
The UK has been caught in the fallout from these external developments. The strong growth 
in our exports seen through much of the past year has faltered, with knock on implications for 
the growth of manufacturing output. Renewed turmoil within financial markets has led to a 
sharp  reduction  in  asset  prices  and  to  increased  funding  pressures  on  our  banks.  And 
confidence, both within companies and households, has taken another downward step. 
The role of monetary policy in such circumstances is to support demand, so as to help bring 
inflation  back  to  target  in  the  medium  term.  And  that  is  exactly  what  the  MPC  is  doing. 
Interest  rates  remain  at  exceptionally  low  levels.  The  programme  of  quantitative  easing 
undertaken  last  year  continues  to  provide  significant  stimulus  to  demand.  It  is  also 
noteworthy  that  market  interest  rates  two  and  three  years  ahead  have  declined  markedly 
over  the  past  couple  of  months,  leading  a  material  easing  in  monetary  conditions.  If  the 
economic  situation  continues  to  deteriorate,  some  additional  loosening  in  monetary  policy 
might  be  needed.  But  that  decision  will  need  to  be  weighed  against  the  backdrop  of 
continuing high inflation, with inflation set to climb higher over the next few months. And, as 
I’ve emphasised today, it will also need to take account of the extent to which the slowing in 
output reflects weak growth in supply as well as demand.  
Chart Pack 
 Chart 1: 
Chart 2: 
Private sector output per head(a) 
Private sector output per head(a) 
Index:2008 Q1=100
Change in productivity relative to level implied by trend(b)
Continuation of pre-
recession trend (b)
1987
1991
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
 Source:  ONS  (including  the  Labour  Force  Survey)  and 
Bank calculations. 
(a)  Private 
sector  approximated  by  excluding 
employment  and  output  data  for  public  administration 
and  defence,  education  and  health  sectors.  Workforce 
Jobs  sectoral  employment  splits  scaled  to  match  total 
LFS employment levels. 
(b)  Trend  calculated  by  projecting  forward  output  per 
head from 2008 Q2 using the average quarterly growth 
rate between 1987 Q1 and 2008 Q1. 
 
  8 
 Recession (from 2008Q1 to 2009Q3)
Recovery (from 2009Q3 to 2011Q2)
e
c
n
a
n
F
i
i
 
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
s
s
e
n
i
s
u
B
i
 
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
r
e
m
u
s
n
o
C
i
s
e
c
v
r
e
s
 
r
e
h
O
t
r
o
t
c
e
s
 
e
a
v
t
i
r
P
 g
n
i
r
u
f
t
c
a
u
n
a
M
 n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
C
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
 Source:  ONS  (including  the  Labour  Force  Survey)  and 
Bank calculations 
(a)  Calculated  using  Workforce 
employment  splits  scaled 
employment levels. 
(b) Percentage deviation from trend. Trend calculated by 
projecting forward output per job from 2008 Q2 using the 
average  quarterly  growth  rate  between  1987  Q1  and 
2008 Q1. 
sectoral 
total  LFS 
to  match 
Jobs 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3: 
Bank estimates of the level of GDP(c) 
Chart 4: 
Output per head in the  
UK energy extraction industry 
Index: 2008 Q1=100
104
 102
100
98
96
94
92
90
Latest ONS data
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Data
Fitted trend
Labour productivity, index
2008=100
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
 1987
1991
1995
1999
2003
2007
2011
  Source: ONS and Bank calculations. 
(c) Chained-volume measures. The fan chart depicts an 
estimated probability distribution for GDP over the past. 
It can be interpreted in the same way as the fan charts in 
Section 5 of the August 2011 Inflation Report. 
Source: ONS (including the Labour Force Survey) 
and Bank calculations. 
(a)  Calculated  using  Workforce  Jobs  sectoral 
employment  splits  scaled  to  match  total  LFS 
employment levels. 
(b) Trends are calculated over the periods 1987 Q1 
to 2005 Q4 and 2006 Q1 to 2011 Q2 
   Chart 5: 
Chart 6:  
Measured productivity and an estimate 
of trend underlying productivity,  
based on the BCC survey of space 
capacity within firms in  
private services (ex. finance). 
Measured productivity and an estimate  
of trend underlying productivity, based 
on the BCC survey of space capacity 
within firms in manufacturing.  
Labour productivity, output 
10
per head 
Labour productivity, output 
per head
8
6
4
 1989
1997
1993
Productivity
1989
1993
1997
Productivity
2001
2005
Trend
2009
2005
2001
Trend implied by BCC survey
2009
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
 Source:  ONS  (including  the  Labour  Force  Survey), 
British Chambers of Commerce and Bank calculations. 
Source:  ONS  (including  the  Labour  Force  Survey), 
British Chambers of Commerce and Bank calculations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
References 
IMF World Economic Outlook, “Sustaining the Recovery”, October 2009. 
Krugman,  P  (1994),  “The  Age  of  Diminished  Expectations:  US  Economic  Policy  in  the 
1980s”, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Mason, G., and Bishop, K (2011). “The impact of recession on adult training: Evidence from 
the UK in 2008–09”, paper prepared for the EUROFRAME Conference on “Labour Markets 
after the crisis: policy challenges for the EU economies”. 
The Global Competitiveness Report 2011–2012, World Economic Forum 
Thomas,  A  (2011),  “Investigating  the  characteristics  of  patents  and  the  businesses  which 
hold them”, Economic and Labour Market Review, Vol. 5: No. 4, 68–86. 
Weale, M (2010), “After the recession: Thoughts on the growth potential of the UK”. Speech 
delivered  at  the  Department  for  Business,  Innovation  and  Skills  Analysts’  Conference, 
London, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech461.pdf 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
