Jean-Claude Trichet: Completing Economic and Monetary Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Gala 
Dinner of the State of the European Union conference “Revitalising the European Dream: A 
Corporate View”, Brussels, 28 June 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Thank you for inviting me to this conference. The theme to which it is dedicated is especially 
relevant  today,  when  we  have  to  draw  all  the  lessons  from  the  worst  financial  crisis  since 
World War II.  
These days, “Europe” and the benefits it brings have come to be taken for granted. Thanks 
to the success of European integration, the threat of war has become a memory of the past 
for many Europeans, in particular the younger generation.  
This makes it all the more urgent to develop a renewed vision of the kind of Europe we want 
and indeed need – a vision that is easily understood and shared amongst EU citizens.  
Each generation needs to affirm its commitment to Europe.  
As Pierre Werner once observed, “it is necessary that even those born well after the 1950s 
and  1960s  realise  that  the  European  Union  has  not  come  about  by  chance,  but  that  it  is 
based on the fundamental necessities of life amongst the peoples of Europe”1. 
Thankfully, these “fundamental necessities of life” – especially in the economic sphere – still 
seem to be felt and understood by the people in Europe. When asked, in the Eurobarometer 
surveys,  which  issues  the  European  institutions  should  focus  on  in  the  coming  years, 
Europeans believe that priority should be given to economic and monetary policy (37% in the 
EU and 41% in the euro area).  
More  than  three  out  of  four  Europeans  (78%)  agree  that  measures  to  reduce  the  public 
deficit and debt in their country cannot be delayed.  
More  than  three  quarters  of  respondents  (77%)  consider  that  stronger  coordination  of 
economic and financial policies, as well as closer supervision of financial institutions would 
be effective in combating the crisis. The idea of initiating reforms to benefit future generations 
attracts equally strong support.  
Revitalising Europe 
Revitalising  Europe  means  bringing  the  reality  of  today’s  Europe,  of  its  institutions  and 
policies, closer to these wishes and concerns of the EU citizens.  
A  Europe  of  stability  and  responsibility  where  the  burdens  of  today’s  adjustments  are  not 
shifted onto future generations.  
An  open  and  flexible  Europe  fostering  education,  entrepreneurship  and  innovation,  with 
ample employment opportunities and a high standard of living.  
A Europe that fully brings its economic and political weight to bear in an ever more globalised 
economy.  
                                                 
1  «Il est nécessaire que même ceux qui sont nés bien après les années 50 et 60 se rendent compte que l’Union 
européenne n’est pas un coup du hasard, qu’elle se fonde sur des nécessités fondamentales de la vie entre 
les peuples de l’Europe » (On 11 December 1997, on the eve of the Luxembourg European Council). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
There is a good basis for all of this – we can indeed take pride in our past achievements. 
Having served as a member of the Governing Council of the ECB since the launch of the 
euro and as its President for almost eight years now, let me say that we have accomplished 
a lot: 
For example, companies in the euro area do not have to worry about price stability – I will 
come  back  later  on  this  issue  –  and  possible  devaluations  in  the  countries  of  their  main 
trading  partners.  They  face  lower  transaction  and  hedging  costs.  There  is  more  price 
transparency and more ample access to finance, in general.  
Since  the  start  of  the  euro,  employment  in  the  euro  area  has  risen  by  over  14  million, 
compared  with  about  8  million  in  the  United  States.  Adjusted  for  population  growth 
differences, growth per capita in the euro area has been almost the same as in the United 
States over the past decade, at about 1% per year in terms of GDP per capita growth.  
Trade among euro area countries has also risen strongly. The value of exports and imports 
of goods within the euro area increased from about one quarter of GDP in 1998 to one third 
of GDP in 2007, with trade within euro area countries representing about a half of the total 
euro area trade. 
Economic and Monetary Union 
The key to understanding the current challenges in the euro area is the specific construction 
of Economic and Monetary Union.  
The coexistence of an achieved monetary union – the single currency, the single monetary 
policy  and  the  Eurosystem  with  the  ECB  at  its  helm  –  and  of  a  largely  decentralised 
economic pillar.  
Indeed, Member States are responsible for their fiscal and economic policies, but are called 
to  treat  them  as  a  matter  of  common  concern.  Those  policies  are  subject  to  a  European 
governance  framework  to  ensure  that  they  are  fully  compatible  with  the  requirements  of  a 
single currency.  
Our governance framework largely relied on the self-discipline of national governments, with 
hard constraints at the EU level only in those few cases where hard rules were supposed to 
apply.  
We had assumed that countries had sufficient incentives to “keep their house in order” and 
thereby contribute to the common good of the euro area. An overly narrow interpretation of 
the principle of subsidiarity also shielded national economic policies from what was seen as 
undue European interference.  
The experience of the first twelve years of EMU suggests that the limits of de facto soft policy 
coordination  have  largely  been  exhausted,  with  the  interdependencies  inside  a  monetary 
union calling for a stronger euro area dimension.  
Let me now take a closer look at the two EMU pillars separately. 
The “M” of the EMU 
The “M” of the EMU, or the monetary pillar, has performed well.  
The  ECB  has  a  clear  assignment:  to  deliver  price  stability,  which  is  defined  as  an  annual 
inflation rate below but close to 2% over the medium term. And over the 12 years since the 
launch of EMU, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. 
This  is  the  best  result  of  a  major  central  bank  in  the  euro  area  for  any  such  period  of 
12 years, over the last 50 years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We achieved this during challenging times. Over the years, we have had to cope with the 
bursting of the dot-com bubble, the aftermath of the events of 11September 2001, the jump 
in oil prices to $147 per barrel in 2008, rising prices of food and commodities, and then of 
course the worst financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression. 
Yet  throughout  these  very  different  economic  shocks  –  which  could  have  had  either 
inflationary or deflationary consequences – citizens and market participants in the euro area 
have  remained  confident  in  our  commitment.  Inflation  expectations  have  been  firmly 
anchored in line with our definition of price stability. 
The “E” of the EMU 
It is the “E” of the EMU, where progress is needed.  
Already  the  1989  Delors  report  stated  that  “an  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  could  only 
operate on the basis of mutually consistent and sound behaviour by governments and other 
economic  agents  in  all  member  countries.  (…)  Uncoordinated  and  divergent  national 
budgetary policies would undermine monetary stability and generate imbalances in the real 
and financial sectors of the community.” 
What does this mean in practice?  
It means improving economic governance. 
It means strengthening the rules to prevent unsound policies.  
And it means to prohibit individual countries from pursuing policies that can harm themselves 
and the euro area as a whole.  
For this reason, I have called, in the name of the Governing Council, on the Commission, the 
Council  and  the  European  Parliament  to  be  very  ambitious  in  reinforcing  economic 
governance in the euro area.  
We have called for a “quantum leap” in governance, for a substantially deepened economic 
union.  
Essential reforms 
In the short-term, we have to tackle the most urgent issues by implementing the structural 
adjustment programmes that are currently underway.  
The  new  economic  governance  framework  that  is  currently  being  negotiated  needs  to  be 
agreed and implemented in full and without delay.  
We must get the institutional framework for the medium-term right.  
The  two  EU  co-legislators  and  the  Commission  have  been  negotiating  the  new  economic 
governance package during the preceding weeks.  
The  European  Parliament  has  confirmed  its  position  at  last  Thursday’s  plenary  vote.  The 
ECB  particularly  welcomes  the  strong  message  that  is  sent  as  regards  the  fact  that  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact’s  procedures  have  to  be  made  more  automatic.  Our  past 
experience  in  applying  the  Pact,  especially  after  weakening  of  its  core  provisions  in  2005, 
have amply demonstrated that a reform of these procedures has to be a sine qua non of a 
determined response to the current crisis. 
In this context, the Governing Council of the ECB regrets that the European Council did not 
decide to espouse the European Parliament’s views on this issue at the end of last week. 
This is an issue of key importance for the ECB. We consider that an essential progress in 
decision-making procedures in the Council is to make them more automatic.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The extension of reverse qualified majority voting to the preventive arm of the Pact, which 
the European Parliament rightly insists on, is not about a perceived loss of sovereignty. It is a 
mechanism that would allow all Member States to protect themselves better from the harmful 
effects of unsound fiscal policies.  
Since the very beginning of the discussions on the reform of economic governance in May 
2010, the ECB has asked for greater automatism in the decision-making procedures to limit 
the room for discretion. This is a major component of the “quantum leap” that we have called 
for.  
Had  the  Council  had  less  room  for  manoeuvre  in  suspending  or  halting  fiscal  surveillance 
procedures in the years preceding the crisis, some of the euro area countries would not be 
facing as severe a sovereign debt crisis today.  
However, this was not the entire story – surveillance instruments were lacking altogether as 
regards  the  build-up  of  competitiveness  losses  and  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  which 
have made any solution to fiscal problems even more challenging.  
Therefore,  the  ECB  has  also  called  for  a  fully-fledged  surveillance  procedure  for 
competitiveness indicators and for macroeconomic imbalances. As a matter of fact, we have 
been pointing to the risks associated with competitiveness losses since 2005 and insisting on 
peer review and mutual oversight. The new procedure needs to be focused on the countries 
with  large  competitiveness  losses  and  high  indebtedness,  since  it  is  those  countries  that 
pose a potential threat to the functioning of EMU. 
In  the  short  term,  all  parties  have  to  take  their  responsibilities  and  agree  on  an  ambitious 
governance  package  with  two  pillars  –  surveillance  of  fiscal  policies  and  surveillance  of 
macroeconomic  policies,  sending  out  a  clear  message  to  strengthen  the  economic  policy 
framework that has been dented during the crisis. We urge a swift and ambitious completion 
of the legislative procedure to bring about certainty on this new framework. 
An  additional  element  of  stronger  economic  policy  coordination  for  competitiveness  and 
convergence  surveillance  in  the  euro  area  is  the  newly  agreed  Euro  Plus  Pact.  The  ECB 
supports the four goals of this Pact, namely to foster competitiveness and employment, to 
contribute to the sustainability of public finances and to reinforce financial stability. 
But we have also insisted that the Euro Plus Pact must be more than declarations. It must be 
followed up with concrete action. The ECB therefore welcomes the fact that the European 
Council  last  week  called  on  the  participating  Member  States  to  make  their  reform 
commitments more concrete, including specific timelines, to enable easier measurement of 
progress and benchmarking.  
Single market 
Furthermore, let us not forget that the euro area of the 17 countries is participating actively in 
the larger Single Market of the 27 member countries of the European Union. 
The  Single  Market  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  wider  Europe  2020  strategy  for  smart, 
sustainable and inclusive growth. The governance framework of this strategy underpins the 
wider surveillance efforts of the economic pillar of EMU. The first experience as part of the 
so-called  European  Semester  is  approaching  its  final  stages,  with  the  European  Council’s 
endorsement of the proposed recommendations for individual Member States last week. 
The EU Single market offers a unique businesses environment with direct access to over 500 
million potential business partners, employees and consumers with relatively high purchasing 
power. The Single Market has not been at the centre of the EU political priorities for quite 
some time and there have even been protectionist tendencies.  
I,  therefore,  strongly  support  the  initiatives  aimed  at  re-launching  the  Single  Market  to 
address the prevailing structural challenges faced by the EU economy. The Single Market is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  costs  of  cross-border  activities  and 
at the core of the Union’s growth agenda. A widening and deepening of the Single Market 
should be viewed as an opportunity to raise the “speed limit” of the economy, which is highly 
warranted in the aftermath of the impact the financial crisis had on the European economy.  
Moreover, completion of the Single Market is an essential ingredient of the required quantum 
leap towards a deeper economic union that is commensurate with the degree of economic 
integration and interdependency already achieved through monetary union. EMU has led to a 
strengthening  of  trade  integration  and  competition  within  the  Single  Market  by  enhancing 
market  access,  reducing 
increasing  price 
transparency.  
At  the  same  time,  a  well-functioning  Single  Market  is  pivotal  for  the  smooth  functioning  of 
EMU. It allows for swift and market-based adjustment in case of shocks and facilitates the 
correction of economic imbalances. 
A well functioning Single Market also requires proper design and implementation of financial 
sector  policies.  In  this  respect,  the  establishment  of  a  new  EU  supervisory  architecture  to 
introduce  genuine  macro-prudential  supervision  and  to  strengthen  the  micro-prudential 
oversight at the EU level was a prerequisite for enhanced financial stability arrangements.  
The  establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the  European  Supervisory 
Authorities  is  an  important  milestone  in  providing  the  appropriate  incentives  to  avoid 
excessive risk taking in the financial sector and to promote a level playing field in support of 
beneficial financial integration within the monetary union. Establishment of an EU framework 
for  crisis  management  is  an  important  complementary  element  of  the  new  supervisory 
framework that still needs to be put in place.  
Conclusion 
This is a large agenda already. What more would be needed for EMU in the longer term? 
I have sketched out in my speech in Aachen earlier this month some elements that in my 
view would warrant consideration in the design of a longer-term vision for Europe. 
Developing these elements in more detail would, however, be the topic of another speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
