K C Chakrabarty: Banking and beyond – new challenges before Indian 
financial system 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Mint’s 
Clarity Through Debate, Mumbai, 15 March 2011. 
 1.  
Lord  Stephen  Green,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Investment,  UK,  distinguished 
panelists, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. First of all my thanks to Mint, Mumbai, 
and  to  my  good  friends  Tamal  and  R  Sukumar  for  inviting  me  to  initiate  today’s  debate  – 
“Banking  &  Beyond:  New  Challenges  Before  Indian  Financial  System”  with  a  panel  of 
luminaries on the stage. Over the years, Mint, through its Clarity Through Debate trail-blazer 
series has been flagging topical public policy issues and challenges and acquired a niche of 
its own in the corporate mindscape as a thought leader in the financial sector. Good work. 
Kudos and my best wishes for the Mint Team. 
2.  
Winston Churchill once said that “in finance, everything that is agreeable is unsound 
and  everything  that  is  sound  is  disagreeable.”  I  suspect  many  of  my  views  may  spark  a 
strong  feeling  of  disagreement  but  will  hopefully  stimulate  passionate  public  debate.  I  am 
more  convinced  than  ever  that  financial  markets  require  a  healthy  dose  of  regulation  to 
function  efficiently.  I  am  more  convinced  than  ever  that  too-big-to-fail,  or  too-big-to-save 
banks  represent  veritable  systemic  risk  concerns,  which  are  sure  to  bring  in  more 
unpredictability  in  the  system,  need  to  be  credibly  and  effectively  tackled.  And  I  am  more 
convinced than ever that central banks operate most effectively and optimally when insulated 
from any external interference. 
3. 
Even though it is a bit customary now-a-days to have a discussion on any topic with 
the tag “next” or “beyond”, this particular issue holds enormous importance for all of us in 
India.  However,  in  today’s  integrated  world,  what  I  shall  be  talking  would  be  very  much 
relevant for other emerging markets also. Hence, I would dwell upon the issues that stare the 
global economic recovery in the face and the key elements that will shape the emerging new 
financial architecture. These issues are pretty much similar to what banks in India are / will 
be struggling with. 
4.  
Although, the recent global financial crisis and the resultant recession had its origin 
in the developed western world; but its contagion did not spare the emerging economies like 
India.  Once  in  a  life-time  crisis  warranted  a  commensurate  response  in  terms  of  a  major 
overhaul  of  the  financial  system  involving  almost  everything  from  regulation  to  risk 
management to mergers / acquisition to capitalization to executive compensation to financial 
engineering to governance. 
5.  
In this connection, interface between banks and financial markets, has undergone a 
fundamental  shift  in  the  recent  times  –  banks  have  become  intricately  linked  to  financial 
markets  and  hence  more  vulnerable  to  financial  markets  stress.  At  the  same  time, 
functioning  of  markets  has  become  intricately  linked  to  banks  which  then  emerge  as  the 
carrier for most of risks within the financial markets. We have seen these correlations at their 
most devastating during the sharp deepening of recession triggered off by the collapse of the 
apparently infallible Lehman Brothers which encompassed the whole world in its whirlwind 
spiral. However, I would restrict myself to sharing my thoughts in terms of “next” issues and, 
that too, to the banking system, which are somewhat already visible in the global financial 
firmament. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Financial inclusion 
6.  
Before I address other individual issues, I shall highlight a very basic and core issue 
for  the  Indian  banking  system  and  that  is  the  challenge  of  achieving  Financial  Inclusion. 
Without  being  inclusive,  financial  and  economic  stability  cannot  be  sustainable.  Financial 
inclusion is about credible access to appropriate financial products and services needed by 
vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups at an affordable cost in a 
fair and transparent manner from mainstream institutional players. More recently, there has 
been  a  strategic  shift  in  sustainable  financial  inclusion  to  the  adoption  of  market  oriented 
approach  viewing  financial  inclusion  as  a  viable  business  proposition.  It  has  been  made 
possible  by  the  availability  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology  required  by  the 
formal  financial  sector  for  penetrating  widespread  unbanked  areas  in  a  cost  effective  way 
and  the  realization  that  the  “Poor  is  eminently  Bankable”.  Financial  inclusion  is  related  to 
financial  stability  also  through  the  key  of  financial  education  and  literacy.  In  my  opinion, 
financial  literacy  is  an  integral  part  of  financial  inclusion  of  the  public  or  users  of  financial 
products/services.  Financial  literacy  is  instrumental  in  expanding  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  inclusion  is  itself  helpful  in  further  expanding  financial  literacy  thus  mutually 
reinforcing  each  other  in  a  positive  manner.  The  knowledge  about  the  risk  and  return 
framework  holds  the  key  to  prudent  participation  in  the  market  and  welfare  maximisation 
within the given constraints for each market player. As financial literacy involves imparting 
the required knowledge of risks and returns of financial products to the users and suppliers of 
these  products,  it  would  help  in  controlling  risks  in  the  financial  system  thus  helping  in 
maintaining systemic stability. It would be inappropriate to assume that financial literacy and 
inclusion are not global challenges. At the present juncture as the global financial system is 
dealing  with  the  aftereffects  of  financial  crisis,  it  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  access  but 
advanced  countries  are  more  in  need  of  financial  literacy/education  than  ever  before.  In 
India, it is a question both of access to financial products and services and financial literacy. 
It  implies  not  just  providing  access  but  also  to  educate all  stakeholders  about the  fairness 
and other characteristics of the financial products/services, such as their risks and returns. 
Capital 
7.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  some  other  specific  issues.  First  issue  staring  in  the  face  of 
banking  industry  is  capital.  Even  though  reasonably  well  capitalized  today,  banks  will  be 
facing  the  challenge  of  growing  their  business  due  to  capital  constraints.  India’s  financial 
system is better at capital allocation than most of the emerging market players. It has some 
high performing banks, very low stock of gross non-performing loans of about 2.5% and deep 
and  liquid  equity  markets  that  efficiently  discover  price  in  stocks  of  globally  competitive 
companies in BPO, IT, R&D, pharmaceuticals, automobiles, telecom and hospitality space. 
Still one of the challenges will be capital raising by corporate sectors but not at the expense 
of  agriculture,  small  industries  and  business.  Debate  over  channeling  larger  portion  of 
available  credit  to  the  most  potentially  productive  sector  or  to  the  sectors  where  the 
investment efficiency is lower is yet to be fully resolved. In any case, to make banks allocate 
increased credit to the productive sectors of the economy is strongly predicated on the bank 
capital  strength.  To  do  so,  more  capital  would  be  required  to  be  infused  into  banks.  With 
requirements  of  Basel  III  looming  large,  banks  would  be  facing  challenges  in  raising 
additional capital for meeting the funding needs of Indian economy potentially growing at 9% 
plus. 
8.  
Post-crisis, regulators worldwide are discussing a macro-prudential framework that 
would involve a regulatory policy focused on the system as a whole, rather than individual 
players. Capital buffers are an extremely important component of the new macro-prudential 
regulatory  framework.  The  new  framework  aims  at  improving  both  quality  and  quantity  of 
capital. Let us understand that capital is a competitive charge on the resources available for 
lending  with  a  bank  and  hence,  stepping  up  counter-cyclical  capital  requirements  and 
providing  capital  buffers  comes  with  a  cost  for  the  banking  system.  Capital  enhancement, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
however, is a prudential requirement, as financial products and transactions are becoming 
increasingly complex and prudent risk management has assumed considerable importance. 
With higher and modified nature of capital requirements proposed through the new Basel III 
accord in the aftermath of the financial turmoil, keeping banks well capitalised would be an 
added challenge. 
9.  
Banks are already suffering from inadequacy of capital as the return on such capital 
does not encourage new investors. Era of cheap capital is over and investors are also wary 
of  the  volatility  of  returns.  Newer  instruments  and  techniques  would  be  required  to  attract 
investors. While creation of enabling conditions for capital flow to the sector would continue 
to remain on the top of the reform agenda, banks would need to grow their balance sheets by 
raising capital from the markets rather than count on government. Considering the back-to-
basics common equity focus of Basel II, growing bank balance sheets will increasingly pose 
the challenge of balancing interests of shareholder and depositors/financial stability. 
Liquidity management 
10.  
Traditionally,  capital  adequacy  requirements  have  been  imposed  to  ensure 
solvency.  However,  that  is  not  the  only  issue.  The  next  issue  that  will  continue  to  engage 
substantial management attention is the management of liquidity. Is liquidity an offshoot of 
economic  crisis  or  management  crisis?  I  think  a  bit  of  both.  In  short,  banks  and  FIs  are 
destined to be facing the unpredictability they like to believe as non-existent. Liquidity crises, 
although recurrent, are yet to be effectively managed. Responses are varied and such crises 
leave  a  trail  of  devastation  clearly  visible  in  the  post  crisis  stage.  Issue  of  liquidity 
management  requires  much  defter  response  than  what  is so  far seen.  How  the  banks  will 
graduate from “lazy banking” (as response to credit market growing more unsecure) to “crazy 
banking”  (when  it  became  more  fashionable  to  jump  onto  retail  lending  bandwagon  with 
some of the banks burning their fingers) to “edgy banking” is an issue which is yet to find a 
resolution.  The  truth  is  that  the  liquidity  management  requires  more  sophisticated, 
comprehensive,  nuanced  and  razor-sharp  approach  in  order  to  prevent  it  from  being  the 
carrier of contagion. 
IFRS implementation 
11.  
The third issue that is going to cast a spell over the financial sector players is the 
compliance  with  IFRS  or  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards.  Globalization  of 
financial markets has meant an increased focus on international standards in accounting and 
has  intensified  efforts  towards  a  single  set  of  high  quality,  globally  acceptable  set  of 
accounting  standards.  Financial  statements  prepared  in  different  countries  according  to 
different  set  of  rules,  mean  numerous  national  sets  of  standards,  each  with  its  own  set  of 
interpretation about a similar transaction, making it difficult to compare, analyse and interpret 
financial statements across nations. 
12. 
In respect of banks and NBFCs, in view of the special issues involved (finalisation of 
IFRS 9 expected in the middle of 2011), a separate road map was prepared in March 2010 
for convergence with IFRS for the banking industry and NBFCs. The convergence process 
would be from period beginning April 1, 2013, with a phased approach for urban banks and 
NBFCs. This gives the banking system some time to adapt to the standards in a smooth and 
non-disruptive manner. It has to be noted, however, that banks will be significantly affected 
by the IAS 39 replacement project and a number of other accounting developments including 
those  relating  to  financial  instruments,  fair  value  measurement,  financial  statement 
presentation and consolidation. Some of the major changes pertain to certain critical areas 
such  as  classification  and  valuation  of  financial  assets,  classification  and  valuation  of 
liabilities, impairment provisions and fair value measurement. One area of concern has been 
the drawback of the incurred loss model of IAS 39 and the need to introduce more forward 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
looking  provisioning.  We  have  seen  the  how  concept  of  “marked  to  market”  turned  to  be 
useless at the time of real crisis through the potential futility of the idea of “marked to model” 
as being divorced from real market and virtually ended up with a situation that can best be 
described as “marked to madness”. The IFRS convergence process will involve significant 
challenges  for  the  banking  system  in  general.  Banks  would  need  to  upgrade  their 
infrastructure, including IT and human resources, to face the complexities and challenges of 
IFRS. Some major technical issues arising for Indian banks during the convergence process 
would  be  differences  between  the  IFRS  and  current  regulatory  guidelines  on  classification 
and measurement of financial assets, focus in the standard on the business model followed 
by  banks  and  the  challenges  for  management  in  this  area,  application  of  fair  values  for 
transactions where not much guidance is available in India in terms of market practices or 
benchmarks, and expected changes in impairment rules. 
Beyond CBS 
13.  
Today we cannot think of banking services without technology. IT has become the 
central cog in whatever banks are doing or strategizing to do in future. All of us would agree 
that  technology  has  no  longer  remained  just  a  means  for  automating  processes.  It  has 
revolutionized every industry in the world by  rendering faster and cost effective delivery of 
products and services to customers, who in the normal course could not have afforded the 
same. Technology is the surest and most appropriate way of bringing inclusion in respect of 
any product and/or service. Is technology in banks being leveraged adequately? 
14.  
Technological advancement enables a broader and inclusive banking sector and in 
the  process,  is  a  key  driver  for  the  sustained  and  inclusive  growth  of  the  economy. 
Technology by itself is not a panacea. But technology has evolved to such an extent that it 
can hold the key to achieving goals – if banks are willing to accept the changes that they will 
need to make to get there. Banks have implemented Core Banking Solutions (CBS) which 
marked  a  paradigm  shift  in  more  senses  than  one  and  branch  customers  are  now  bank 
customers as they can access their accounts from any branch for defined purposes. It was 
envisaged  that  the  CBS  would  offer  new  opportunities  for  information  management,  better 
customer  service  and  improved  risk  management.  However,  banks  have  not  been  able  to 
reap the benefits of this technology in terms of reduction in costs of small value transactions, 
speed with which the transactions are done if both successful and unsuccessful transactions 
are  considered,  improved  customer  services  and  effective  flow  of  information  within  the 
banks as also to the regulator. Banks have not gained in terms of efficiency partly because 
the  much  needed  business  process  re-engineering  was  not  done.  Further,  banks  have 
deployed  technology  for  transaction  processing  and  the  same  has  not  been  explored 
extensively  for  analytical  processing  like  customer  relationship  management  and  decision 
making. Thus, there is a need to take care of what we could not achieve in the first round of 
technology  implementation  and  think  beyond  CBS.  Supported  by  the  latest  technology, 
banks  would  need  to  identify  new  business  niches,  to  develop  customized  services,  to 
implement innovative strategies and to capture new market opportunities. 
15.  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Banks & FIs would require review of the issues relating to recruit appropriate skill, retain then 
over  a  longer  time  horizon  by  offering  them  a  clear  career  growth  opportunities  and 
supporting  enabling  process.  However,  it  is  equally  important  to  embed  inside  the 
management  structure  a  proper  IT  Governance  structure  which  will  also  enable  the 
Optimum leveraging of technology would critically hinge upon the following: 
Skilled resources 
Supportive HR policy 
Appropriate IT governance structure 
Effective business continuity plan  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
technology strength of the banks to play a supporting role with a degree of assurance and 
sustainability. 
Risk management 
16.  
Issue  of  risk  management  in  banks  and  financial  institutions  would,  however, 
continue  to  be  at  the  centre  of  an  ongoing  search  for  the  right  policy  prescription.  While 
newer skill set for managing newer areas and unfamiliar elements of risks would continue to 
pose  questions  even  to  the  most  savvy  of  banks.  Banks  will  have  to  adopt  a  converged 
approach to risk where they will reevaluate their risk management acumen in a manner that 
calls for higher levels of transparency, structural integrity and operational control. To combat 
internal fraud and protect clients and accounts, behavior and rules-based tools will have to 
be brought in. Better risk management and surveillance applications that address systemic 
and  customer-oriented  risks,  potential  conflicts  of  interest,  financial  valuation,  volatility  of 
market movements and regulations will have to be embedded into the operational structure. 
Future pricing will be dependent on risk minimization even while relationship-based pricing 
will  continue  to  hold  sway.  Today  banks  and  FIs  are  facing  with  the  risks  of  mis-pricing, 
adverse selection and mis-selling. On the one hand, banks are operating in the market where 
only about one-third of the adult population are within the banking fold leaving out the market 
potential to grow twice the current size and, on the other, banks’ propensity to take banking 
services to the silent majority is very slow. While expanding market is a matter of survival, 
further challenge for the banks would be to ring-fence its operations by establishing a sound 
risk management system that is not only protective but also inclusive and acts as a business 
enabler. But for this to happen, analytics have to be developed and data integrity has to be 
improved. 
17.  
Going forward, more focused approach would have to be given to strict adherence 
of  AML  /  KYC  norms  so  as  to  prevent  the  elements  of  fragility  to  come  into  the  system. 
Strong  tracking  system  for  verifying  the  movement  of  funds,  especially  cross  border 
transaction and skillful analytical capabilities will be the prescription of the future. Along with 
that,  the  most  important  issue  will  be  customer  protection.  When  I  talk  of  the  customer 
protection, I mean making banking services or banks economically feasible for the customers 
and protect them from the bad banking practices. Can we devise a system by which poor 
subsidizing  the  rich  can  be  reversed?  When  banks  make  huge  profit,  it  is  because  the 
customers paying through their nose. When the banks incur loss, again it is the customers 
who are made to take less for their deposits or pay more the loans. When the banks go out 
of  business,  it  is  the  millions  of  tax  payers’  hard-earned  money  that  goes  down  the  drain. 
Customer  protection  also  needs  to  be  seen  from  protecting  customer  information  and 
transaction  security.  The  writing  on  the  wall  is  clear:  “keep  your  customers  happy  and 
survive”. 
Risks and rewards 
Next  important  issue  that  warrants  a  really  careful  consideration  is  the  issue  of 
18.  
executive  compensation.  How  much  compensation  is  too  much?  Can  the  industry  have  a 
different kind of compensation structure for the same job? Can there be uniform board level 
accountability? Flawed incentive compensation practices in the financial sector were one of 
the important factors contributing to the recent global financial crisis. I am aware that booms 
are propelled by greed and busts are born out of fear. This quirk of human nature will always 
ignite the euphoria that fuels the ups and exacerbates the downs. Employees were too often 
rewarded  for  increasing  the  short-term  profit  without  adequate  recognition  of  the  risks  the 
employees’ activities posed to the organizations. 
19.  
These  perverse  incentives  amplified  the  excessive  risk  taking  that  severely 
threatened the global financial system. The compensation issue has, therefore, been at the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
centre  stage  of  the  regulatory  reforms.  Issue  of  appropriate  compensation  commensurate 
with risk or built-in checks to avoid excessive risk taking would have to be managed through 
a sound corporate governance framework based on strong corporate ethics principles and 
with reference the principles laid down by Financial Stability Board (FSB). The principles are 
intended to reduce incentives towards excessive risk taking that may arise from the structure 
of compensation schemes. The principles call for effective governance of compensation and 
its  alignment  with  prudent  risk  taking  and  effective  supervisory  oversight  and  stakeholder 
engagement.  The  principles  have  been  endorsed  by  the  G-20  countries  and  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  are  under 
implementation  across 
jurisdictions.  However,  banks  and  other  financial  system  players  need  to  appreciate  that 
good governance is more a matter of practice rather than a matter of compliance. 
20.  
Now the question is: with so much of constraints and problems, whether the system 
will survive? The answer is an emphatic yes because banking is a highly regulated business. 
But having flagged some of the challenges before the banks, it is incumbent upon me that I 
flag certain challenges for regulators. We all know that: 
– 
the  financial  system  is  growing  to  be  highly  complex  and  opaque  –  sometimes 
making  it  difficult  to  assess  the  extent  of  exposures  and  potential  spillovers.  This 
opacity magnified the shock to confidence as the recent crisis unfolded. 
the  financial  system  has  a  propensity  to  become  over-leveraged  and  heavily 
interconnected,  leading  to  massive  deleveraging  and  easily  available  propagation 
channels, both domestically and globally. 
liquidity  risks,  both  the  funding  risks  incurred  by  institutions  and  the  associated 
market liquidity risks of assets, are often much higher than recognized. 
financial  intermediation  has  increasingly  shifted  to  the  non-  or  less-regulated 
“shadow”  banking  sector,  in  large  part  to  avoid  the  more  stringent  requirements 
imposed on banks. 
there is a critical absence of effective mechanisms to deal with institutions that were 
deemed “too big to fail.”  
    How do regulators meet the above challenges? 
21.  
Central  banks  must  take  a  long-term  view  of  the  economy  and  craft  appropriate 
policy responses. We must have the latitude to raise interest rates when others want cheap 
credit  and  rein  in  risky  financial  practices  when  others  want  easy  profits.  There  has  to  be 
greater societal consensus on taking tough corrective actions. 
22.  
While progress on macro and micro-prudential regulations will be the key for moving 
forward, some work is still needed from the regulators in providing guidance to the market in 
instituting a mechanism in the area of managing not only several “known unknowns” but also 
a number of “unknown unknowns.” 
23.  
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  low  nominal  interest  rates,  abundant  liquidity  and  a 
favorable  macroeconomic  environment  encouraged  the  private  sector  to  take  on  ever-
increasing risks. Financial institutions provided loans with inadequate checks on borrowers’ 
ability  to  pay  and  developed  new  and  highly  complex  financial  products  in  an  attempt  to 
extract ever higher returns. Meanwhile, many financial regulators and supervisors were lulled 
into  complacency  and  did  not  respond  to  the  building  up  of  vulnerabilities.  We  have  to 
develop more sensitivity in our policy tools to capture and quickly correct our policy stance to 
control such covert signs of overheating. 
Conclusion 
24.  
In summing up, I would like to reiterate that though each one of the key challenges 
facing the Indian financial system begins with the banking system, it does not and should not 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
stop  at  the  banking  system.  Banks  have  to  look  beyond  the  way  banking  is  traditionally 
defined  in  a  narrow  fashion;  they  need  to  look  towards  the  vulnerable  and  other  excluded 
sections of the population as bankable. Stakeholders other than banking too need to involve 
themselves  in  the  process  of  expanding  the  outreach  of  the  financial  services,  and  thus 
partner with banks in the process of inclusive economic growth. That is the key challenge. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
