Ignazio Visco: Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, “Architect …” 
Personal remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 
Ceremony  in  memory  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  European  University  Institute,  Badia 
Fiesolana, 28 January 2011. 
 A prominent (but non-academic) economist, a leading central banker (in Italy and in Europe), 
a “non-political” politician (dedicated to the “polity” rather than to the politique politicienne), 
Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  spanned  all  of  these  professions  in  the  course  of  his  eminent 
career.  Tommaso’s  achievements  were  substantial,  as  everyone  recognizes.  He  is  rightly 
considered as one of the “architects of the euro.” A man of vision, an independent mind, an 
indefatigable civil servant – we have been fortunate indeed to have had Tommaso Padoa-
Schioppa as colleague, friend, mentor. 
Mine will not be a eulogy or a historical account of Tommaso’s many achievements. Division 
of labour and the time constraint have counselled concentrating on his contributions as an 
officer of the Bank of Italy. Perhaps the term “officer” is a bit limited, although I am sure that 
he would have appreciated it. He was the head of the Money Market Division of the Bank’s 
Research  Department  from  1975  to  1979,  when  he  left  to  become  Director  General  for 
Economic  and  Financial  Affairs  at  the  European  Commission.  He  returned  to  the  Bank  in 
1983, was named Deputy Director General in 1984 and served in that capacity for thirteen 
years. He certainly left his mark. Developments in at least three areas would most likely have 
been substantially different, and with a cost-benefit balance substantially in the red, had his 
influence  not  been  exercised  so  effectively.  The  three  areas  comprise  the  “reshaping  of 
monetary policy”, as he came to define it,1 the promotion and implementation of a ground-
breaking reform of the payment system2 and the process of European monetary unification.3 
These recollections of mine are certainly not exhaustive, and if in places they are marred by 
some  inevitable  inaccuracies,  let  me  apologize  in  advance.  More  than  two  decades  of 
observation of Tommaso’s accomplishments at the Bank, with at times lengthy discussions, 
followed by a decade and a half of exchanges after his departure to become successively 
Chairman of Consob, Member of the Board of the ECB, and Italy’s Minister of Economy and 
Finance cannot be summarized in a few minutes. And memory is sometimes incomplete and 
distorted, even if I have had the benefit of some brief conversation with some of his closest 
collaborators  during  those  years.4  In  any  case,  I  am  sure  that  my  recollection  of  his 
accomplishments errs on the side of understatement. 
Let us remember that in the 1970s the Italian economy was plagued by substantial nominal 
and real instability. High and volatile inflation rates preceded, accompanied, and followed a 
series of large and sometimes sudden depreciations of the currency, in a context of social 
unrest and substantial rigidities. For several years the economy we lived in was the “100% 
                                                 
1 
I  will  only  provide  very  limited  references  to  his  extensive  written  contributions,  but  on  the  reshaping  of 
monetary policy we are fortunate to have his views and assessment summarized in the contribution to Franco 
Modigliani’s  Festschrift  (Macroeconomics  and  Finance,  Essays  in  Honor  of  Franco  Modigliani,  edited  by 
Rudiger Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer and John Bossons, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1987, pp. 265–86). 
2  A collection of Padoa-Schioppa’s speeches and papers on the payment system has been published, in Italian, 
in the book La moneta e il sistema dei pagamenti, Il Mulino, Bologna, 1992. 
It is sufficient here to refer to the writings contained in his book on The Road to Monetary Union in Europe, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994. 
I would especially like to thank Giovanni Carosio, Francesco Papadia and Franco Passacantando for sharing 
some of their memories with me in the process of writing down these recollections. 
3 
4 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
plus”  indexed  economy  described  in  well-known  essays  written  together  with  Franco 
Modigliani in 1977–78.5 Meanwhile, Italian society was racked by violent waves of terrorism. 
The policy challenge was enormous, as Italy’s financial markets were very underdeveloped, 
public  debt  management  non-existent,  and  capital  flights  massive.  The  large  and  rising 
budget  deficits  were  being  financed  only  by  the  central  bank  and  the  banking  system. 
Financial repression was extensive, with such administrative measures as controls on capital 
movements, interest rate caps, ceilings on bank credit to the private sector, and constraints 
on banks’ portfolio investment.  
Administrative controls became a generalized system of monetary and credit management. It 
required monitoring and supervision, as well as the capacity to balance the inconsistencies 
and conflicts that necessarily flowed from the lack of market infrastructures, the co-existence 
of  qualitative  and  quantitative  credit  controls,  and  the  central  bank’s  inability  to  affect  the 
interest  rate.  Tommaso  experienced  this  in  his  daily  activity,  which  included  constant 
advising to the Bank’s governors as well as to the government. And in that same period, the 
Bank of Italy was laying the foundations of a “new system” that would shift over to indirect 
monetary  controls  and  open  market  operations.  The  compulsory  reserve  regime  was 
radically  revised,  the  method  for  issuing  Treasury  bills  was  reformed  to  admit  the  Bank’s 
participation at auctions and enhance its ability to affect the interest rate.  
In  1981,  while  Tommaso  was  serving  with  the  European  Commission,  an  epoch-making 
regime  shift  took  place,  to  which  he  had  contributed  directly  and  indirectly:  the  so-called 
“divorce” between the Bank of Italy and the Treasury. The Bank ceased to act as residual 
buyer at Treasury bill auctions, the fundamental first step towards full independence for the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  decisions.  This  was  followed  in  the  1980s  by  a  thorough 
transformation  of  the  financial  infrastructure:  direct  controls  were  suppressed,  reserve 
requirements  reformed,  competitive-bid  auctions  for  Treasury  bills  introduced,  longer-term 
Treasury bonds (with the introduction of uniform price auctions) and indexed Treasury credit 
certificates  were 
for 
government securities (the MTS, with the introduction in 1994 of market specialists) as well 
as a screen-based market for inter-bank deposits (later to become the e-MID), futures and 
options on Treasury bonds were launched on LIFFE, and more. Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa 
contributed much of his time, energy, and vision to these radical changes. 
Many  other  changes  took  place  over  those  same  years.  The  European  Monetary  System 
(EMS)  was  established,  in  the  second  half  of  the  1980s  exchange  controls  were  removed 
and capital movements were completely liberalized (by 1990), the Bank of Italy was granted 
not  only  de  facto  but  also  de  jure  independence,  the  wage  indexation  system  was 
substantially  revised  and  eventually  put  to  rest,  and  a  major  currency  and  financial  crisis 
struck the Italian economy as budget deficits and the public debt seemed to be out of control. 
Eventually, of course, the crisis was overcome, inflation was tamed, the public finances were 
brought under control. This is clearly another story, one that took a benign turn thanks also to 
the  many  infrastructural  changes  that  had  made  it  possible  for  monetary  policy  to  play  its 
proper role within a transparent and well-organised financial architecture.  
It  is  natural,  today,  to  take  it  for  granted  that  a  transparent  and  well-organised  financial 
architecture necessarily includes a smooth, well-functioning and economical payment system 
for clearing and settlement. But this is a relatively recent achievement, one that has benefited 
greatly from the information and communication technology revolution. In the mid-1980s the 
payment  system,  and  not  only  in  Italy,  was  rather  neglected  and  far  from  well-organised. 
Tommaso was convinced that central banks’ tasks should comprise not only money creation 
instituted,  a  screen-based  secondary  market  was  established 
                                                 
5  Franco  Modigliani  and  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  “La  politica  economica  in  una  economia  con  salari 
indicizzati  al  100%  o  più”,  in  Moneta  e  Credito,  No.  117,  March  1977,  and  “The  Management  of  an  Open 
Economy  with  ‘100%  Plus’  Wage  Indexation”,  in  Essays  in  International  Finance,  Princeton  University, 
No. 130, December 1979. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and inflation targeting but also improving the mechanisms of monetary circulation, instituting 
reliable  and  efficient  infrastructures,  and  what  is  now  called  “transaction  banking”.  In  a 
market economy the costs of a dysfunctional payment system could be just as great as those 
deriving from volatile inflation rates. This was particularly evident in Italy, where at the time 
the settlement of cheques or the completion of a credit transfer were long and cumbersome 
processes that involved a fragmented set of bilateral arrangements among banks. 
The  reforms  that  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  promoted  at  the  end  of  that  decade 
successfully  bridged  the  gap  between  Italy’s  system  and  that  in  place  in  the  other  major 
economies. In a first phase, from 1989 to 1993, the reform involved the system for netting in 
central  bank  money,  with  the  launch  of  dedicated  projects  for  various  payment  types 
(customer paper-based and electronic, inter-bank, foreign exchange, securities trading). He 
then  promoted  a  national,  centralised  real-time  gross  settlement  system  in  central  bank 
money that exploited the most advanced technologies and that would quickly make central 
banks the leaders in this sphere. Eventually, the system was adapted to be fully integrated 
into the network of euro-area payment systems (the TARGET structure). 
In  parallel  with  these  architectural  and  technological  developments,  Tommaso  forged  an 
intellectual environment that produced important economic research in the field of payment 
systems that now enjoys worldwide recognition. At the time he was deeply involved in the 
process  of  European  monetary  unification  and  soon  realized  that  the  creation  of  a  single 
currency  would  have  to  be  accompanied  by  the  institution  of  a  unified  mechanism  for  its 
circulation throughout the European economy. A workshop that he organized at the Bank’s 
conference  centre  in  Perugia  (SADiBa)  in  November  1991  revealed  how  fragmented  the 
procedures and mechanisms of the various European countries were and paved the way for 
the payment system agenda of the years following. From 1991 to 1995 Tommaso chaired the 
Working Group on Payment Systems of the central banks of the European Community; he 
resumed this project when he joined the Governing Council of the European Central Bank. In 
that  position  he  promoted  a  revolutionary  arrangement  by  which  each  country  would 
delegate the large-value settlement of inter-bank transactions to a centralised system run by 
three  central  banks  on  behalf  of  the  entire  Eurosystem.  This  is  how  TARGET  was 
revolutionized,  transformed  into  a  highly  efficient,  secure  single  shared  platform  for  the 
benefit  of  the  European  financial  system  (TARGET2,  created  and  jointly  managed  by  the 
Bank  of  Italy,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  Banque  de  France).  His  worldwide 
leadership in the area of payment systems received an important recognition when he was 
nominated  Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  a 
position that he held from 2000 to 2005. 
Europe’s  resolve  to  fight  inflation  and  enhance  monetary  stability  was  at  the  basis  of  the 
establishment of the EMS in 1979. With the Single European Act of 1985, it was decided to 
form  the  “single  market”  and  to  fully  liberalize  capital  movements  and  foreign  exchange 
transactions.  The  European  Council  meeting  in  Hannover  in  1988  created  the  Delors 
Committee; through a surprisingly smooth and rapid process – even if at the time it seemed 
time-consuming and rather complex – this led to the Treaty of Maastricht and, eventually, the 
EMU.  We  all  know  the crucial  role,  intellectual as  well  as practical,  that  Tommaso  Padoa-
Schioppa  played  in  this  process,  as  joint  secretary,  with  Gunter  Baer,  to  the  Delors 
Committee. I needn’t add much to this, save to recall a couple of issues. 
I am sure that if we ask even well informed people what the initials “EMU” stand for, we will 
hear, most of the time, “European Monetary Union” as an answer. Actually, of course, it is 
“Economic and Monetary Union”. From 1979 to 1983 Tommaso was, as I recalled, Director 
General for Economic and Financial Affairs at the European Commission. In that capacity he 
oversaw the initial operation of the EMS and was certainly instrumental in paving the way to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  actions that  would  lead  to  the Single  European  Act.6  But  he  was  persuaded,  from  the 
analytical  perhaps  even  more  than  from  the  political  standpoint,  that  “the  EMS  is  not 
enough”, and that the full implementation of the programme set out in the Single European 
Act  would  give  rise  to  an  “inconsistent  quartet”  in  an  area characterized  by  free  trade,  full 
capital  mobility,  fixed  (or  managed)  exchange  rates  and  national  monetary  policies.  (This 
thesis, without explicitly setting the condition of free trade, had already been set forth in the 
literature, as a dilemma or an impossible trinity, by Robert Triffin and others).7 
I said “from the analytical standpoint”, but I might have also said “architectural”. I believe that 
Tommaso’s  ambition,  and  the  founding  role  that  he  played  in  this  process,  from  the  initial 
ideas  to  the  (indirect)  negotiation  of  the  details  of  the  Treaty  articles  and  the  actual 
establishment of the Union, was exactly to create a proper institutional set-up for an idea of 
Europe designed to improve the well-being of its citizens and ensure fruitful interaction with 
the  rest  of  the  world.  At  times,  there  is  criticism  of  what  can  be  seen  as  a  “technocratic” 
approach to political union. But Tommaso was well aware of what he called the ambiguity, in 
the  development  of  Europe,  “between  a  purely  economic  project  and  a  political  project, 
between  confederation  and  federation,  between  a  free-trade  area  and  a  single  market, 
between  technocracy  and  democracy,  between  Jean  Monnet’s  functionalism  and  Altiero 
Spinelli’s constitutionalism”.8 He understood very well the risk of a “democratic deficit” and 
the limitations of “a currency without a State”.9 
So Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa has been widely identified as a (if not the) “founding father of 
the  new  currency,”  “architect  of  the  euro”.  I  believe  that  this  is  proper,  but  I  wanted  to 
emphasise  that  Tommaso  was  also  deeply  convinced  of  a  notion  clearly  expressed  by 
James Tobin, namely that as “Policy and structure become inextricably combined, their joint 
product is what matters. … One way to alter the operating properties of the system … is to 
change  the  policy  rule.  Another  way  is  to  change  the  structure”.10  And  it  was  to  changing 
structures that he devoted much of his intellectual and professional life.  
For several years, while still at the Bank of Italy, he was Chairman of the Basel Committee, 
where he initiated a process that would lead to what came to be called the “Basel II” Accord. 
The regulatory system was built around the basic notion that banks should set aside capital 
to guard against the various types of risk: credit, market, operational. The financial crisis has 
taught  us  that  both  the  assessment  of  and  the  allowance  for  these  risks  were  vastly 
inadequate. Tommaso recognized this. Still, he maintained that Basel II was definitely better 
than the previous accord precisely because it sought to specify in detail the various risks in 
banking and to provide, through its “three pillars” construction, a comprehensive framework 
to deal with them. He conceded that substantial changes at the technical level of the Accord 
were necessary, but he emphasized, in his Per Jacobsson lecture last June, that “what really 
went wrong is on the side of the government [which] was captured by the myth that finance 
can  regulate  itself  spontaneously  and  hence  retreated  too  much  from  the  regulatory  and 
                                                 
6  See, on this, his book co-authored with Michael Emerson, Mervin King, Jean-Claude Milleron, Jean Paelink, 
Lucas  Papademos,  Alfredo  Pastor  and  Fritz  Scharf,  Efficiency,  Stability  and  Equity.  A  Strategy  for  the 
Evolution of the Economic System of the European Community, Oxford University Press, London, 1987 
7  See,  “The  EMS  is  not  Enough:  The  Need  for  Monetary  Union”,  1987  (chapter  6  of  The  Road  to  Monetary 
Union,  cit.),  and  “Squaring  the  Circle,  or  the  Conundrum  of  International  Monetary  Reform”,  in  Catalyst,  a 
Journal of Policy Debate, Spring 1985. 
8   The Road to Monetary Union, cit., p. 22. 
9  See,  finally,  The  Euro  and  its  Central  Bank.  Getting  United  after  the  Union,  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass., 
2004. 
10  James Tobin, “Financial Structure and Monetary Rules, in Kredit und Kapital, 2, 1983, quoted in “Reshaping 
Monetary Policy”, cit. p. 283. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
supervisory  role  that  is  necessary  to  ensure  stability.”11  The  financial  market,  that  is,  is  a 
fundamental mechanism of our economies; but it is not an abstract concept. In the real world 
it appears as a complex infrastructure developed through a laborious process, with a set of 
well-specified  rules  of  the  game  and  the  need  for  an  attentive  and  vigilant  supervisory 
system. 
In the same lecture Tommaso returned to another recurrent theme of his, the need to move 
beyond the level of the “nation state” – in this case in order not to leave “the rapid emerging 
reality  of  global  finance”  unmanaged.  And  to  the  improvement  of  international  cooperation 
and the reform of the international monetary system he devoted his last days, through the 
group that he convened with Michael Camdessus and Alexandre Lamfalussy – what is now 
called the “Palais-Royal Initiative”.12 
To conclude, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa was a true leader, a man with whom it was always 
instructive to engage in a conversation, but at your own risk – always with the assignment, 
that is, be it explicit or implicit, of producing a concrete, real-world result. His professional life 
may well be compared to the work of a creative and passionate architect. He was not, and he 
did  not  pretend  to  be,  “always  right”.  But,  like  the  builders  of  the  medieval  cathedrals  that 
enrich Europe, he was a “man of vision,” a believer but also a very practical man. He was 
loyal  to  the  institutions  which  he  served  but  no  slavish  follower  of  received  tradition.  He 
contributed substantially, through his example, his writings, his actions, to the advancement 
of our society. He worked tirelessly and effectively for a better country, a better Europe, a 
better world than the one into which he was born. 
                                                
 
11  “Markets  and  government  before,  during  and  after  the  2007–20xx  crisis”,  Per  Jacobsson  lecture,  Basel,  27 
June 2010. 
12  Palais-Royal Initiative, “Reforming the International Monetary System. A Cooperative Approach for the Twenty 
First Century”, Paris, January 18, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
