Barry Whiteside: Regulation and supervision of non-bank microfinance 
institutions 
Opening speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Acting Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 
Regional  Off-site  &  On-site  Technical  Workshop  on  Non  Bank  Microfinance  Institutions, 
Suva, 12–14 April 2011. 
 My fellow Governors, Mr. Denton Rarawa (CBSI) and Mr. Loi Bakani (BPNG) 
Central Bank representatives from the region  
Mr. Tillman Bruett, Regional Financial Inclusion Advisor and Project Manager, Pacific Financial 
Inclusion Programme 
Mr Deva De Silva, Senior Operations Officer, International Finance Corporation 
Workshop Facilitators Mr. Mark Flaming and Dr. Mohamed Nasir  
Fellow colleagues from the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Bula vinaka to you all.  
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  all  to  Suva  for  the  first  regional  technical 
workshop on regulation and supervision of Non Bank Microfinance Institutions. It is an honor 
to  help  host  this  very  important  workshop  that  brings  together  regulators  from  around  the 
region who are interested in the microfinance and financial inclusion agenda.  
Microfinance and financial inclusion have become very topical issues on the global agenda, 
and a priority in many developing countries. It has been acknowledged that inclusive financial 
systems,  where  people  regardless  of  income  level,  have  easy  access  to  various  financial 
services, are critical for a country’s sustainable long term economic growth. In the region and 
in our individual countries we can attest that there are still significant numbers of our people 
excluded from basic financial services. 
In this regard, our active role in financial systems regulation, reform and policy development 
is  important  to  set  the  scene  and  successfully  implant  the  microfinance  and  financial 
inclusion agenda in our countries.  
An  important  element  of  inclusive  finance  is  the  institutions  directly  involved  in  extending 
financial services to the financially excluded. Most of these institutions may operate outside 
the boundaries of Central Banks’ regulatory and supervisory scope. In this workshop you will 
get to learn and devise practical approaches and methods that can be designed and adopted 
to effectively regulate such institutions.  
I wish to acknowledge the support and funding of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), 
the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP) and the International Finance Corporation 
(IFC), whose kind assistance have made this regional workshop possible.  
Regulation and supervision of Fiji’s financial system 
In  Fiji,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  responsible  for  regulating  and  supervising  the  local  financial 
system.  This  consists  of  the  banking,  insurance,  superannuation  and  foreign  exchange 
industries. In 2009, our role was extended to include the capital markets industry. 
The Reserve Bank of Fiji’s main role in this area is to maintain a stable and sound financial 
system that is fundamental to the country’s wellbeing. Our major objective in this regard is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the protection of the interests of depositors, creditors, members and policyholders, as well as 
maintaining confidence in the financial system by promoting its strength and integrity. 
Interests in microfinance 
In the last 2 years, after the global financial and economic crisis, our interest and focus on 
microfinance and financial inclusion has become more prominent and is now one of our main 
development priorities, in addition to our core central bank responsibilities.  
We have come to realize that around 40 percent of our population may be excluded from any 
sort of financial services.  
Also from a growing body of international research on policy implications and successes, it is 
widely acknowledged that the contribution of microfinance and inclusive finance is important 
for  the  sustained  economic  well  being  of  a  country  in  the  long  term.  I  believe  we  central 
bankers  have  critical  decisions  to  make  in  our  own  countries.  Our  policy  decisions  should 
facilitate a pro-growth inclusive financial system. 
In  Fiji,  a  part  of  our  wanting  to  have  an  inclusive  financial  system  was  to  ensure  that  the 
under-served low income and poor people have reasonable and affordable access to finance 
from  financial  institutions.  We  took  our  first  steps  towards  this  objective  in  2009  by 
encouraging regulated financial institutions to undertake and extend affordable microfinance 
services.  A  microfinance  policy  was  subsequently  issued  to  all  banks  to  conduct 
microfinance activities. I am pleased to say that the banks have taken on these requirements 
really well and are in compliance in one form or another.  
In  terms  of  the  affordability  of  microfinance  services  and  financial  services  in  general,  we 
view technology as one means to address this issue, away from the traditional “bricks and 
mortar” setups. Specifically, electronic methods to conduct financial and payment services, 
such  as  Point  of  Sale  (POS)  devices  using  stored  value  cards,  and  mobile  phones  using 
communication  networks,  are  innovations  that  were  well  adapted  to  microfinance.  Some 
banks in Fiji have now introduced wireless Point of Sale devices with their agents, with both 
withdrawal and deposit capabilities, to be used with stored value cards. These initiatives are 
clearly suitable for clients in rural or remote locations.  
Also, some non-regulated private sector players, such as Mobile Network Operators (MNO), 
have joined the financial inclusion effort in Fiji by introducing their mobile money services to 
facilitate payments services and cashing-in and cashing-out capabilities for clients, through 
agents.  These  activities  by  private  sector  stakeholders  blend  in  well  with  the  microfinance 
and financial inclusion drive that we have set out to do. 
Regulation and supervision of non bank MFIs 
During our work towards furthering the development of microfinance and financial inclusion in 
Fiji we realised that there were existing unregulated institutions already serving and targeting 
segments  of  the  population  for  microfinance.  These  institutions  and  their  clients  existed 
outside the boundaries of the regulated financial system and have been operating “under the 
radar” for many years. Some of these institutions include NGO MFIs, Community or village 
MFIs, semi-Government MFIs, Cooperative Savings Societies and Credit Unions.  
Most  of  these  institutions  operate  informally  or  semi-formally.  They  have  client  bases  that 
have generally stagnated over the years. Sustainability, scale and outreach are critical issues 
for some. Funding for their operations and survival is mostly dependant on Government, the 
private  sector  and  donor  grants,  or  sometimes  sadly  from  the  intermediation  of  members’ 
funds! 
To  ensure  consolidation  and  development  in  this  area  it  is  necessary  to  bring  these 
struggling,  unregulated  institutions  under  the  central  bank’s  oversight  role.  This  move, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
however,  requires  the  development  of  a  balanced  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework, 
tailored to the domestic market characteristics in which they operate.  
Having  a  balanced  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  place  should  facilitate  the 
development of these institutions and their outreach to clients, and it is in the supervisor’s 
interest  that  this  is  achieved.  I  hope  that  you  will  keep  this  in  mind  during  this  three  day 
workshop,  as  you  deliberate  and  develop  your  individual  action  plans,  to  regulate  and 
supervise these types of institutions in your own countries. 
I  also  note  the  greater  participation  of  Mobile  Network  Operators  (MNOs)  in  financial 
inclusion in our countries. I believe in some of your jurisdictions, MNOs are approaching and 
meeting  with  Central  Banks  to  discuss  their  planned  involvement  in  the  financial  and 
payment systems of your country, particularly on the mobile money front. Again we should 
facilitate such innovation and develop balanced regulatory frameworks relevant to our own 
domestic financial systems.  
Benefits and challenges of regulation and supervision of non bank MFIs 
Let  me  touch  on  some  benefits  when  central  banks  exert  some  level  of  regulation  and 
supervision on non bank micro finance institutions. 
As we all know, most of these institutions are not commercially oriented. They serve mostly 
clients  that  may  not  be  served  by  formal  financial  institutions.  Through  Central  Bank 
intervention  and  oversight,  it  is  possible  for  these  institutions  to  become  more  sustainable 
and commercially oriented, while maintaining their social goal of providing financial services 
to the low income segments of society. They would improve their governance, comply with 
minimum prudential requirements set out by the regulator to improve their operations, as well 
as have more capacity to extend financial services outreach to more under-served people in 
the country.  
Regulation  and  supervision  also  opens  up  commercial  funding  opportunities  to  institutions 
that  are  normally  always  at  the  mercy  of  limited  grants  and  member  funds.  It  attracts  the 
caliber of management and employees needed to run their operations viably and to lift the 
quality  and  standard  of  their  services.  These  have  been  the  experiences  of  informal  and 
semi-formal financial institutions in Africa and Asia that have gone through the transformation 
to become regulated entities. 
Most importantly, appropriate regulation and supervision would minimize the susceptibility of 
these  institutions  and  their  clients  to  adverse  systemic  and  prudential  risks.  It  ensures  the 
protection of the interests of depositors and creditors, and the maintenance of confidence in 
the overall financial system by promoting its strength and integrity.  
From our side, there may of course be some reluctance on the part of regulators to take on 
the role, given that extra costs are incurred in supervising these institutions. Apart from the 
costs, the regulators may lack the immediate resources, knowledge, skills and awareness in 
these often uncharted areas.  
As regulators, it is necessary that we improve our knowledge in this particular area, as it may 
be the key to unlocking a truly inclusive financial system for the sustainable development of 
our economies in the long term. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  workshop  is  timely.  It  is  certainly  a  great  opportunity  for  us  to 
effect the necessary policy changes to our regulatory and supervisory approach that would 
facilitate the development of non-bank microfinance institutions in our countries.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In these next three days you will get to learn from the facilitators, as well as from sharing 
amongst yourselves, what is involved in regulating and supervising microfinance and similar 
type institutions. I hope you will be able to come up with constructive action plans to address 
the specific issues that will be uncovered, as well as start conceptualizing the most relevant 
and effective framework for regulating microfinance activities in your own countries. 
At the end of this workshop, when you return to your own desks, you should be able to help 
formulate the necessary policies and prudential techniques that would effectively regulate our 
non-bank microfinance institutions that are serving the low income and poor people in our 
countries. 
I wish all of you a very productive workshop, and for our overseas colleagues and friends I 
trust that you will enjoy your stay in Suva.  
Vinaka vaka levu 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
