Duvvuri Subbarao: The Reserve Bank of India making a difference in 
your daily life 
Convocation address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Sambalpur University, Sambalpur, 24 February 2011. 
 First  of  all,  my  thanks  to  the  Governor  and  Chancellor,  HE  Shri  M.C.  Bhandare,  Vice 
Chancellor Professor Pujari, faculty and students of Sambalpur University for inviting me to 
be the convocation speaker this year. This is an honour to which I attach a lot of value. It 
feels wonderful to be in this beautiful state of Orissa and in the bustling Sambalpur area. 
Changes around the world 
All of you young graduates, passing out with degrees today, are a delightful sight. My mind 
goes back to my own college days. Of course, my time took place roughly half way between 
the discovery of fire and the invention of the ipad!!! The world was, maybe a little bit different 
then!  Our  phones  still  had  cords,  our  cameras  still  had  films  and  our  engineers  did 
calculations using a slide rule. The only way we knew of sending mail was by sticking stamps 
on an envelope; and the only way we knew of making copies was by using a carbon paper. 
And if we wanted to look for the web, we didn’t click on a mouse; we dusted in the corner. 
The world, and with it India, have changed in the last few decades. 
Orissa then and now 
And  changed  for  the  better  in  many  ways.  Look  at  Orissa  for  instance.  In  1970,  Orissa’s 
literacy rate was just 26 per cent, way behind the country. Today, the literacy rate is close to 
the national average of 65 per cent with an impressive jump in the female literacy rate. Child 
mortality  rate  more  than  halved  between  1970  and  2010,  but  it  is  still  behind  the  national 
average of 53 per thousand live births. There is significant progress on economic parameters 
too. Following the familiar development trend over the last 40 years, the share of agriculture 
in the gross state domestic product declined and that of industry had gone up. The average 
population for bank branch declined from 110,000 in 1970 to the national average level of 
14,000 in 2010. With only 8 per cent of its population living in towns and cities, Orissa was 
the  least  urban  state  in  India  in  1970.  Urbanization  almost  doubled  in  the  next  40  years, 
although it is still below the national average. 
Today Orissa is among the most rapidly industrializing states in the country, with a number of 
large,  medium  and  small-scale  enterprises  in  steel,  aluminium,  chrome,  power,  textile, 
handicraft and a host of other sectors. Orissa is also attracting a lot of foreign investment, 
and  if  harnessed  in  an  eco-friendly  way,  this  investment  can  contribute  to  job  creation, 
poverty reduction and inclusive growth. 
Sambalpur university 
How  Orissa  changed,  and  how  India  changed  over  the  last  four  decades,  is  impressive.  I 
know  that  many  of  the  alumni  of  Sambalpur  University  contributed  to  this  remarkable 
transformation. Some of my colleagues in the IAS studied here, and there are several staff 
members of the Reserve Bank who are products of this university. So, let me congratulate all 
of you in the graduating class of 2011 as you begin building a future for yourselves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Making a difference 
These momentous changes in our country between my time and your time, that I indicated 
above, have affected almost every facet of our lives. But even in such flux, some things have 
not changed – for example, the value system that should guide our living and thinking.  
Today  marks  a  milestone  in  your  lives.  You  will  be  leaving  the  shelter  of  your  homes  and 
your college to enter the real world as responsible adults. Whatever you choose to do for a 
career, I am sure that your education here in Sambalpur University has equipped you to take 
advantage of the opportunities, to meet the challenges that come your way. Whatever career 
you decide to pursue, remember that you can and should “make a difference” to the society. 
As I look back over the last 35 years when I have been in the civil service, I realize that our 
collective  wellbeing as a  nation  has  been  the result  of  the  efforts by  numerous  individuals 
and institutions that made a difference. And the only way you can repay your obligation to 
society is in turn to make a difference.  
“Making a difference” is indeed the focus of my speech here today. In particular, I want to tell 
you how the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), an institution I have had the privilege of leading 
over the last two and a half years, makes a difference to everyday lives of Indians.  
RBI – a mysterious institution? 
As I was preparing for this talk, it struck me that most people, even educated people, do not 
know very much about what the Reserve Bank does and why what it does is important. Many 
people  think  of  the  Reserve  Bank  as  a  mysterious  institution,  a  sort  of  monolith  –  doing 
obscure things that have no real relevance for the everyday lives of people. Others think that 
all that the Reserve Bank does is print currency, and wonder why, when short of resources, 
we don’t just print more of the stuff. Some people think that all that the Governor does every 
day in office is sign currency notes, and that if there is shortage of currency, it is because he 
is slow in signing. 
The reality is quite different. We print and distribute currency, of course, but we do a lot of 
other things besides. We are the monetary authority of the country. We are the gatekeepers 
of the external sector. We regulate and supervise banks, non-bank finance companies and 
segments of the financial markets to ensure that the money you keep in banks is safe and is 
productively deployed towards generating economic activity. Our regulation extends also to 
the  payment  and  settlement  systems  with  the  aim  of  making  financial  transactions  safe, 
robust  and  efficient.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  also  the  central  bank  –  that  is  it  is  the  bank  of 
banks and the bank of the Government of India as well as of state governments. On top of all 
this, and importantly, the Reserve Bank has a key role in the economic development of the 
country and drives an impressive social development agenda. 
That in a nutshell is the range and diversity of responsibilities of RBI. And what we do affects 
the everyday lives of people across the country from the prices they pay in the market, the 
interest they earn on their deposits in the bank, the interest that is charged when they borrow 
money and  indeed how the government pays for new roads, schools and hospitals. In my 
remarks today, I will try and demystify the world of the Reserve Bank; I will explain some of 
its main responsibilities, share with you some of the policy challenges we face, and convey to 
you above all, how we try to make a difference. 
Production and distribution of currency  
Let me start with currency management – a function that most people are familiar with. An 
exclusive prerogative to issue currency has in fact become a defining characteristic of central 
banks.  You  must  have  noticed  that  the  currency  that  you  use  has  on  it  a  promise  by  the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank that says that the note that you are carrying is worth what it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
says.  Tautological  as  it  might  sound,  this  promise  is  significant  because  it  enjoins  on  the 
Reserve Bank the responsibility of preserving the value of the rupee. 
An important issue we need to decide on is how much currency to print. We need to print 
enough currency to replace soiled and mutilated notes. On top of that we also need to print 
additional currency to meet the needs of economic growth. The currency expansion required 
to support growth depends on a number of variables including the growth rate, inflation rate, 
the growth elasticity of money and the velocity of money. This is a complex formula, but the 
important point to understand is that the amount of currency we need to print is determined 
by the replacement requirement and the economic growth requirement.  
As much as the amount of currency to be printed is formula driven in the first instance, the 
Reserve  Bank  cannot  just  “issue”  currency.  The  currency  we  issue  is  a  liability  of  the 
Reserve Bank. It has, therefore, to be backed by assets. Earlier on, the Reserve Bank too 
was part of the theology of the gold standard – the belief that issue of currency should be 
backed  by  the  gold  holdings  of  the  central  bank.  In  fact,  the  original  Reserve  Bank  Act 
prescribed a proportional reserve system whereby of the total note issue, at least 40 per cent 
was to be backed by gold bullion and sterling. Like other central banks, we too have moved 
away  from  the  gold  standard,  and  today  the  asset  backing  for  note  issue  comprises  both 
domestic and foreign securities including gold held by the Reserve Bank.  
We have four presses where currency is printed. Two presses – one at Nasik in Maharashtra 
and the other at Dewas in Madhya Pradesh are under the control of the Government; the 
remaining two presses – at Mysore in Karnataka and at Salboni in West Bengal are under 
the  control  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  currency  printed  at  these  four  presses  is  distributed 
across the country through 20 of the Reserve Bank’s regional offices and over 4200 currency 
chests located in commercial banks across the country.  
We  are  self-sufficient  in  printing capacity  but  we  still  import  the  paper required  for  printing 
currency. To remedy this, we are setting up a state of the art banknote paper mill in Mysore 
with a capacity 12000 MT per year which should cut our import demand by more than half.  
By far the most important facet of currency management is building in security features to 
prevent counterfeiting. People should be aware of these security features so that they can 
tell a forged note from a genuine one. This is the motivation for the awareness campaign that 
the Reserve Bank has launched in the print and electronic media to educate people on the 
security features.  
A  dilemma  we  face  here  is  that  when  we  launch  an  awareness  drive,  we  are  willy-nilly 
providing information also to counterfeiters. We resolve this issue by making the replication 
of  the  security  features  technically  complex  and  prohibitively  expensive,  and  also  by 
incorporating  some  additional  security  features  that  can  be  detected  only  by  sophisticated 
gadgets and equipment.  
The Reserve Bank is also committed to a “clean note” policy. We exchange soiled notes for 
clean ones, and mutilated notes for new ones subject to certain conditions. In pursuit of our 
clean note policy and to check counterfeiting, we also prescribed that, by March 31, 2011, all 
bank branches with cash receipts of over   50 lakhs per day be equipped with a note sorting 
machine  so  that  every  high  denomination  currency  note  is  checked  for  fitness  and 
genuineness before being put back in circulation. Furthermore, we have instructed banks to 
ensure  that  the  notes  that  they  issue  through  their  ATMs  are  also  pre-checked  for 
genuineness and cleanliness. 
Cost and longevity are important dimensions of currency management. We are a large cash 
economy; in fact, we are the second largest producer and consumer of currency in the world, 
next only to China. Producing such a large amount of currency is expensive. One option for 
economizing  is  replacing  paper  currency  with  plastic  currency  as  some  countries  such  as 
Singapore and Australia have already done. We are planning to try this out on a pilot basis 
starting with a plastic note in the   10 denomination, which we will distribute out of five of our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
regional offices in the country including our Bhubaneswar office. During the pilot phase, we 
need  to  study  not  only  the  relative  costs  but  also  the  carbon  footprint  associated  with  the 
recycling and disposal of plastic notes vis-à-vis paper notes. If the pilot proves successful, 
we will mainstream the use of plastic currency.  
Monetary policy 
A  quintessentially  central  banking  function  is  the  management  of  monetary  policy.  In 
formulating  the  monetary  policy,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  guided  by  three  main  objectives: 
maintain  price  stability,  support  economic  growth  by  ensuring  adequate  flow  of  credit  to 
productive  sectors  and  preserve  financial  stability.  Monetary  policy  is  typically  operated 
mainly through two variables – the price of money (policy interest rates) and the volume of 
money (liquidity). 
The Reserve Bank’s monetary stance is defined by how we determine the price and volume 
of money. We decide on the price of money by prescribing the short term policy interest rates 
which define the upper and lower bands of the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) corridor. At 
the upper end is the repo rate – the rate of interest we charge banks for overnight borrowing 
from us, and at the lower end is the reverse repo rate – the interest rate we pay banks for 
their overnight deposits with us. By calibrating the overnight repo and reverse repo rates, we 
hope  to  influence  the  long  term  interest  rates  of  the  economy  through  a  process  called 
monetary transmission. 
The  other  variable  –  the  volume  of  money  –  is  controlled  through  mainly  two  instruments. 
The  first  is  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR),  the  proportion  of  their  net  demand  and  time 
liabilities  (NDTL)  that  banks  are  required  to  keep  locked  up  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  The 
second  is  the  OMO  (open  market  operations)  whereby  the  Reserve  Bank  buys  and  sells 
government  securities  in  the  open  market  in  order  to  inject  or  withdraw  money  from  the 
system.  
Another  way  in  which  money  supply  expands  or  contracts  is  through  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  When  the  Reserve  Bank  buys  (sells)  foreign 
exchange,  it  releases  (absorbs)  an  equivalent  amount  of  liquidity  into  (from)  the  system. 
Having  said  that  I  must  add  that  we  do  not  intervene  in  the  forex  market  for  liquidity 
management purposes; we intervene only to contain volatility in the forex market, and any 
impact on liquidity is an incidental by product.  
Of course, price stability and macroeconomic stability do not necessarily guarantee financial 
stability.  This  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  big  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis.  A  post-crisis  policy 
dilemma for central banks, and one that is dominating both academic and policy debates at 
the international level, is this: should financial stability be in the domain of monetary policy or 
should  it  be  pursued  as  an  objective  of  regulatory  policy?  In  India  though,  we  have  never 
been doctrinaire about this. We have traditionally used regulatory tools such as risk weights 
and provisioning norms governing bank loans to aid monetary policy objectives. Indeed, one 
of  the  main  reasons  India  came  out  of  the  crisis  relatively  unscathed  is  that  the  Reserve 
Bank  “leaned  against  the  wind”  and  took  preemptive  action  to  restrict  the  flow  of  credit  to 
certain sectors such as real estate which showed signs of risk build-up.  
The  Reserve  Bank  reviews  its  monetary  policy  stance  every  quarter  through  a  scheduled 
policy  review.  This  involves  determining  the  relative  prioritization  between  the  three 
objectives  of  monetary  policy  –  growth,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  –  and  on  that 
basis, 
to  determine  whether  and  how  our  policy  variables  should  be  changed. 
Notwithstanding scheduled quarterly and mid-quarterly reviews, we reserve the right to alter 
our policy stance at any time to respond to the evolving macroeconomic situation.  
In the aftermath of the crisis, our biggest challenge has been to manage the tension between 
the demands of growth and of inflation. Even though we recovered from the crisis ahead of 
most other countries, inflation too caught up with us sooner than elsewhere. The tension that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
we  need  to  manage  is  that  economic  growth  requires  that we  maintain  a  low  interest  rate 
regime whereas inflation management warrants that we raise interest rates. In managing this 
tension,  we  are  deeply  conscious  that  inflation  is  a  regressive  tax  that  hurts  the  poor  the 
most as their earnings are not protected against rising prices. You will of course have noted 
that as part of managing our growth-inflation dynamics in the post-crisis period, the Reserve 
Bank has raised policy interest rates seven times since March 2010. At the same time, we 
are sensitive to the need for supporting growth as economic growth is a necessary condition 
for poverty reduction. 
Monetary  policy  making  is  always  a  challenge.  The  challenge  has  become  even  more 
complex in the globalizing world that we live in. How other countries, especially systemically 
important advanced economies, manage their monetary policies has implications for us and 
we need to take that into account in determining our own policy stance. Just to illustrate, the 
liquidity  infusion  policy  of  the  US  Fed,  popularly  known  as  quantitative  easing  (QE),  has 
triggered  larger  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs).  This  has  in  turn  put 
upward pressure on EME exchange rates eroding their export competitiveness and pushing 
up  asset  prices.  EMEs  had  to  adjust  their  macroeconomic  policies  to  manage  the 
implications of these flows.  
I  hope  you  now  have  a  better  understanding  of  the  implications  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
monetary policy for you at an individual and household level, and of the challenges that we 
address in formulating the policy.  
Regulation and supervision 
The Reserve Bank is the regulator and supervisor of banks, non-bank financial companies 
(NBFCs)  and  significant  parts  of  the  financial  markets.  In  a  market  system,  regulation  is 
important  in  order  to  protect  the  interests  of  all  stakeholders  and  to  preserve  financial 
stability. Let me explain both these objectives of regulation.  
The logic of protecting the interests of stakeholders is quite self-evident. Banks are the main 
conduits of financial intermediation in an economy – that is, banks take money from savers 
and lend it to borrowers keeping a margin for themselves to cover expenses and profits. This 
should ideally serve everyone’s interest including that of the economy at large. However, the 
apprehension  is  that  banks  will  overstep  the  limits  of  prudence  in  lending  thereby 
jeopardizing the interests of the depositors. The task of regulation in this context is to ensure 
that banks stay within prudent limits in their financial intermediation role.  
Regulation  is  necessary  also  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  is  notoriously 
difficult to define but we can easily tell when stability is disrupted, as happened during the 
recent  crisis  when  financial  markets  went  into  a  seizure.  Financial  stability  gets  disrupted 
when the fundamental macro variables such as the interest rate and the exchange rate get 
way out of alignment with economic fundamentals. We have all learnt from text books that 
the  fundamental  fulcrum  of  capitalism  is  a  competitive  market.  We  have  also  learnt  that 
markets fail because the assumptions underlying competitive markets are very exacting and 
cannot be fully met in the real world. Financial markets are even more vulnerable to failure 
than markets for goods and services because of problems of information asymmetry, moral 
hazard, adverse selection and what have you. When financial markets fail, financial stability 
is  impaired,  and  when  that  happens,  it  takes  a  devastating  toll  on  economic  growth  and 
welfare.  The  purpose  of  regulation  is  to  build  in  safeguards  against  failure  of  financial 
institutions and financial markets. 
Financial firms such as banks are different from non-financial firms, and financial markets are 
different  from  non-financial  markets.  The  important  difference  is  that  financial  firms  are  all 
interconnected, and a disruption in any one part of the system spreads rapidly through the 
entire system. Illustratively, a run on one bank could potentially trigger a run on other banks 
spreading and deepening the contagion. In contrast, the failure of a non-financial firm such 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
as a manufacturing company hurts the company’s equity holders and creditors but does not 
hurt people beyond that. 
We  conduct  bank  regulation  through  a  whole  host  of  prescriptions.  These  prescriptions 
govern  illustratively  licencing  of  banks  and  their  expansion  through  branch  network,  their 
corporate governance framework, the reserves they must maintain with the Reserve Bank, 
the  type  and  quantum  of  capital  they  must  hold  and  the  way  they  must  manage  risk. 
Although,  I  have  explained  the  concept  with  reference  to  banks,  it  applies  equally  to 
regulation of NBFCs, and other financial institutions.  
To ensure that banks comply with our regulations, we undertake periodic on-site inspections 
which are supplemented with off-site surveillance on an ongoing basis. We also hold periodic 
meetings with the top managements of banks to alert them to the bank’s vulnerabilities and 
to sensitize them to our supervisory concerns. If the banks do not comply with the regulatory 
norms, the Reserve Bank has a range of supervisory powers in its armory: issuing cautionary 
letters  and  letters  of  displeasure,  issuing  directives  to  restrict  business  and  imposition  of 
financial penalties.  
The Reserve Bank is not the only regulator in the financial sector. There are other regulators 
too – such as, for example, SEBI which regulates the capital market, IRDA which regulates 
the insurance sector and the PFRDA which regulates the pension sector.  
A frequently asked question is whether the Reserve Bank regulates the rate of interest that 
must be paid on deposits or the interest that should be charged to borrowers. We used to do 
that but have almost entirely given it up as part of the reform process. Interest rates both to 
savers and borrowers now work on the market principle of competition among banks. As of 
now,  only  interest  rates  on  NRI  deposits  and  on  savings  bank  accounts  are  administered. 
There is a view that we should deregulate the interest rate on savings bank accounts too. We 
are examining the pros and cons of doing that and will shortly put out a Discussion Paper for 
eliciting feedback. 
Regulation  has  both  costs  and  benefits.  Excessive  or  inappropriate  regulation  increases 
intermediation costs, impedes efficiency and stifles innovation. It can also result in regulatory 
arbitrage whereby financial operators evade stiff regulation by shifting operations to a lightly 
regulated regime. On the other hand, light regulation can cause financial instability and loss 
to some stakeholders at the expense of others.  
Financial regulation is an intensely analytical and intellectually challenging task. It requires 
sophisticated models and a good “sense” of the market since many of the risk indicators are 
not “real time”. Regulators need to be intellectually agile and fastfooted in their responses.  
The  challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  indeed  for  all  financial  sector  regulators,  is  to 
intelligently balance the costs and benefits of regulation and to do so in a dynamic sense as 
the market and macroeconomic circumstances are constantly evolving. 
External sector management 
The Reserve Bank shares the responsibility for the management of the external sector with 
the Government. The power for this is derived from the Foreign Exchange Management Act 
(FEMA), 1999 which is a successor to the earlier Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA), 
1973. 
Of all the different sectors of the economy, possibly the most extensive reforms have taken 
place in the external sector. Prior to 1991, India was one of the most closed economies in the 
world, and controls on foreign exchange transactions were near total. Today the situation is 
completely different. Now there are virtually no restrictions on current account transactions. 
Foreign  exchange  can  easily  be  obtained  for  business  expenses,  travel,  tourism,  studies 
abroad, medical treatment, etc. In the pre-reform era, a licence had to be obtained for almost 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
every type of import, and the import duties were prohibitive. Today, there are no quantitative 
restrictions and duties have been substantially slashed.  
Our  liberalization  has  extended  to  the  capital  sector  too.  India’s  policy  on  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) is quite liberal and transparent. We allow foreign investment in almost all 
sectors except for a small negative list. Today, every resident Indian is allowed to take out up 
to $200,000 per financial year for any permitted current or capital account transaction under 
the Liberalized Remittance Scheme. Corporates can invest abroad up to 400 per cent of their 
net worth in Joint Ventures and Wholly Owned Subsidiaries. 
India  runs  a  current  account  deficit  which  means  that  we  spend  more  foreign  money  on 
import  of  goods  and  services  than  we  earn  on  exporting  them.  The  gap  between  our 
spending  and  our  earning  has  to  be  met  by  capital  flows  –  that  is  by  foreign  savings. 
Development  Economics  says  that  it  is  alright  for  a  developing  economy  to  run  a  current 
account deficit provided the foreign savings – capital flows – that bridge the deficit are used 
productively.  Capital  flows  come  in  various  forms,  and  can  be  classified  as  debt  or  equity 
flows or short term or long term flows. In India, we have a preference for non-debt flows such 
as  foreign  equity  over  debt  flows,  and  we  have  a  preference  for  long-term  flows  such  as 
foreign direct investment over short-term flows such as foreign institutional investment. 
An important problem, indeed one that is very prominent on the current international agenda, 
is the surge of capital flows into emerging market economies (EMEs). As I said earlier, EMEs 
surely need capital flows for their investment needs. But if they get more of the flows than 
they can absorb, it hurts the economy both in financial and economic terms. I will not go into 
all the details here, but what you should know is that there are no easy ways to deal with 
excess flows. Depending on how the excess flows are handled, it can lead to appreciation of 
the currency making exports less competitive, build up asset price bubbles, fuel inflationary 
pressures or drive up interest rates. What exacerbates the problem is that these flows are 
prone to “sudden stops and reversals” which is to say that they can reverse direction and go 
out  of  an  economy  suddenly,  as  happened  during  the  crisis,  and  that  can  dent  financial 
stability. 
Another big issue in the external sector is the exchange rate. Just as inflation determines the 
purchasing power of the rupee in the domestic economy, the exchange rate determines the 
purchasing  power  of  the  rupee  in  the  external  economy.  It  is  possible  to  manage  the 
exchange rate by buying or selling foreign exchange, and countries do that either to improve 
their trade advantage or for economic management purposes such as control inflation.  
In India too, the exchange rate is an important macroeconomic variable as it determines how 
much we earn from our exports and how much we need to spend on our imports. When the 
exchange rate appreciates, exporters are hurt and they demand that RBI must intervene in 
the  market  to  bring  the  exchange  rate  down.  But  depreciating  the  exchange  rate  by 
intervention is not a completely benign option. It hurts importers who need to spend more. It 
hurts  the  government  as  it  has  to  spend  more  on  subsidizing  imports  such  as  oil  and 
fertilizers  and  also  spend  more  on  external  debt  servicing.  Intervention  can  also  fuel 
inflationary pressures in which case it hurts everyone. We believe that it is in our collective 
interest  as  global  citizens  if  exchange  rates  are  allowed  to  be  determined  by  market 
fundamentals.  
You all probably heard of “currency wars” – a situation where countries indulge in competitive 
devaluation  of  their  currencies  for  trade  advantage.  That  can  lead  to  global  imbalances  of 
several kinds. In the Reserve Bank, our policy is that we do not target a specific exchange 
rate  or  a  rate  band.  We  intervene  only  to  smooth  exchange  rate  volatility  and  prevent 
disruptions  to  macroeconomic  stability.  Indeed  one  of  the  important  issues  on  the  G-20 
agenda  is  to  reach  an  agreement  to  end  currency  wars  –  that  is  to  reach  a  shared 
understanding  on  what  types  of  interventions  may  be  appropriate  to  manage  the  external 
sector and under what circumstances.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Foreign exchange reserve management 
Managing our country’s foreign currency assets and gold reserves is another responsibility of 
the Reserve Bank. Today, our foreign exchange reserves stand at nearly US$ 300 billion, up 
from just a few billion in 1991. An adequate level of foreign exchange reserves is important 
for  several  reasons.  In  particular,  it  protects  us  against  external  shocks  and  inspires  the 
confidence of foreign investors.  
In  investing  our  foreign  exchange  reserves,  we  are  guided  by  three  principles:  safety, 
liquidity,  and  return.  In  our  investment  policy  and  practice,  we  exercise  utmost  care  and 
caution to maintain a high degree of quality of foreign currency assets.  
In  November  2009,  we  bought  200  metric  tonnes  of  gold  from  the  International  Monetary 
Fund. This triggered a lot of public and media interest on the rationale of the transaction. In 
recent years, although there has been significant accretion to our reserves, our gold holdings 
have remained stagnant. This purchase from the IMF helped in raising the proportion of gold 
in our reserves. Secondly, you will recall how, at the height of the balance of payments crisis 
in 1991, we had to pledge gold to raise resources. In view of the strategic importance of gold 
as a reserve asset, we exploited the opportunity that came our way to buy a sizeable quantity 
of gold from a reliable, multilateral financial institution at market prices in a single deal.  
Financial inclusion 
In recent years, financial inclusion has become one of the top priorities of the Reserve Bank. 
We  all  know  that  economic  opportunity  is  strongly  intertwined  with  financial  access.  Such 
access is especially powerful for the poor as it provides them opportunities to build savings, 
make investments and avail credit. Importantly, access to financial services also helps the 
poor insure themselves against income shocks and equips them to meet emergencies such 
as illness, death in the family or loss of employment.  
Financial inclusion is good for the poor. But it is also good for the economy as it channels the 
savings of the poor for productive use. Let me just say this: till financial inclusion becomes a 
reality, we have not conquered the final frontier of development. 
Despite all the progress we have made in other spheres, our performance on the financial 
inclusion front is disappointing. More than half the households in the country do not have a 
bank account, and a larger number of those that do, do not use the banks account in any 
meaningful sense. Of the 600,000 habitations in the country, only 30,000, or just 5% have 
access to a bank branch. Redressing this woeful story is the challenge of financial inclusion.  
What  is  the  Reserve  Bank’s  role  here?  On  the  commercial  side,  this  means  creating  an 
enabling  environment,  giving  macro  prudential  direction,  possibly  even  changing  our 
approaches and policies to make it easier for businesses in targeted industries to access the 
funds they need to grow and expand. On the individual consumer side, this means adopting 
new tools and technologies to bring every Indian household into the banking fold and helping 
educate them to be financially literate. 
Let me briefly list a few of the steps we have taken : 
 
We have advised banks to adopt policies in support of financial inclusion with new 
financial product offerings such as zero or minimal balance no frills accounts.  
We  are  encouraging  bank  branch  expansion  in  parts  of  the  country  which  are 
underbanked, especially in underserved geographies, through innovative modes of 
financial service delivery. 
We  are  facilitating  the  deployment  of  business  correspondents  (BCs)  –  you  can 
think  of  them  as  “barefoot  bankers”  –  as  agents  to  carry  banking  to  uncovered 
villages and areas.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  8 
      We are tailoring our regulation to encourage innovation in financial inclusion through 
hand held machines, mobile phones, ATM machines, etc.  
Banks  have  been  advised  to  ensure  universal  financial  inclusion  in  all  villages 
having a population above 2000 by March 2012 through some form; either a brick 
and mortar branch or through any of the various ICT-based models.  
We have advised banks to draw up Board approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs) 
for a period of three years up to March 2013, which should be integrated with the 
business  plan  of  the  bank.  A  uniform  model  has  not  been  imposed  so  that  each 
bank  can  build  its  strategy  in  line  with  its  business  model  and  comparative 
advantage.  
We  have  encouraged  banks  to  include  performance  on  financial  inclusion  in  the 
performance evaluation of their field staff. 
We are encouraging state governments to shift to “electronic benefit transfer” (EBT) 
– that is that all benefits and wages that the government pays to people should be 
remitted directly to the bank accounts of the beneficiaries.  
Financial literacy 
I also want to take a minute to talk about our efforts in the area of financial literacy. Financial 
literacy  has  to  be  an  integral  part  of  financial  inclusion  and  consumer  protection.  In  the 
Reserve  Bank,  we  treat  financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy  as  twin  pillars.  Financial 
literacy  stimulates  the  demand  side  –  making  people  aware  of  what  they  can  and  should 
demand.  Financial  inclusion  acts  from  the  supply  side  –  providing  in  the  financial  market 
what  people  demand.  While  we  have  traditionally  focused  more  on  addressing  financial 
exclusion  through  many  supply-side  measures  so  as  to  help  “connect  people”  with  the 
banking  system,  we  have  grown  to  recognize  the  demand  side  imperative  also  –  that 
financial literacy and education should be developed hand in hand with improving access to 
financial services. 
In  order  to  further  financial  literacy,  RBI  has  established  centres  focused  on  financial 
education in our regional offices in Chandigarh, Pune and Bangalore. We hope to replicate 
this  in  other  cities  too. We  have  encouraged  commercial  banks  to  set  up  financial  literacy 
and credit counselling centres to help people develop better financial planning skills, and to 
learn  of  the  opportunities  available  in  the  financial  sector.  Most  importantly,  we  are 
encouraging  both  central  and  state  government  to  include  financial  literacy  in  school  and 
college curriculum so that the next generation enters the adult world financially literate.  
Outreach 
In the Reserve Bank, we are deeply conscious of the fact that we can deliver on our mandate 
better if we understand people’s concerns and problems. You can gain an understanding by 
reading reports, attending seminars or participating in meetings. But nothing beats actually 
going and seeing. Last year, the Reserve Bank celebrated its Platinum Jubilee. The flagship 
of  our  celebrations,  one  which  will  possibly  have  the  most  enduring  value,  has  been  the 
outreach  programme.  The  outreach  programme  was  focussed  on  taking  forward  the  twin 
pillars of financial inclusion and financial literacy. The motivation behind this venture was for 
the RBI, as an institution, to connect with ordinary people of the country. The odyssey took 
all  of  us  –  our  Deputy  Governors,  Executive  Directors  and  myself  –  to  villages  across  the 
country – typically off-main road, away from urban influence, unbanked villages – to see and 
understand  how  grassroots 
institutions  –  self-help  women’s  groups,  micro-finance 
institutions, non-government organizations, rural cooperatives, rural branches of regional and 
mainstream commercial banks-operate, and to listen first-hand to the hopes and aspirations 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
of village India. In return, we also got an opportunity to explain to people what the Reserve 
Bank does, and how what we do touches their everyday life.  
We found the outreach programme to be a wonderful experience – intellectually rewarding, 
emotionally fulfilling and professionally mind expanding. Because of the rich dividends, we 
decided to continue this as a permanent programme. As part of my outreach commitments, 
over the last one year, I had gone to villages in Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh. Later this week, 
I am going to visit a village in Orissa, and will go to a village in Kerala in March.  
Conclusion 
I  have  tried  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  main  responsibilities  and  the 
challenges that we address. I hope this has given you a fair perspective of how the Reserve 
Bank makes a difference to your life in both direct and indirect ways – even if most of the 
time you are not perceptive to it.  
In the best traditions of convocation speeches, let me conclude by giving you some advice. 
All of us, all the time, are complaining about all the things that are wrong in our community, in 
our society and in our country. We want things to change. Just “wanting” is not good enough. 
We, each of us needs to be a change agent. And as Mahatma Gandhi said, we need to be 
the change that we desire. All I can say, as you go out as degree holders, is to go and make 
a difference in the real world and in the process make a name for Sambalpur University. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
