Paul Fisher: Central bank policy on collateral 
Paper by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director, Markets, and Member of the Monetary Policy 
Committee of the Bank of England, summarising recent discussions with a range of market 
contacts, London, 14 April 2011. 
This paper sets outs the Bank of England’s approach to collateral policy, which is driven by a combination of 
monetary and financial policy objectives and the need to protect the Bank’s balance sheet. 
 I would like to thank Simon Ainsworth, Ronnie Driver, Charles Gundy, Sarah John and Alan Sheppard for their 
help in preparing this paper. 
The Bank of England, like most central banks, has two core purposes. The first is to maintain 
price  stability,  defined  by  a  2%  CPI  inflation  target,  mandated  by  the  government  on  an 
annual basis. The second is financial stability, which entails detecting and reducing threats to 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  Bank  meets  these  objectives  through  the  use  of  its 
balance sheet. It supplies banknotes and central bank reserves (the most liquid and risk-free 
forms of payment in the economy) to the banking system, in a process which helps to anchor 
short-term market interest rates around the Bank Rate set by the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC).1 And to support financial stability, the Bank provides liquidity insurance to the banking 
system as a whole. It does so by offering to supply additional reserves (or UK government 
debt  in  some  operations)  against  a  wider  range  of  collateral  and  at  longer  maturities  than 
would be necessary just to set Bank Rate.2  
During the financial crisis, the provision of liquidity insurance to the banking system caused 
an expansion in the Bank’s balance sheet from around £80bn in 2006 to around £250bn in 
early 2010. Charts 1 and 2 below show the evolution of the Bank’s balance sheet through the 
crisis.  In  addition  the  Bank  provided  liquidity  through  a  collateral  upgrade  in  its  Special 
Liquidity Scheme (SLS) introduced in April 2008. That involved swapping £185bn of treasury 
bills  in  exchange  for  high  quality  but  temporarily  illiquid  private  sector  collateral  (as  is 
conventional for a collateral swap, this was done off-balance sheet). 
A significant expansion of the balance sheet was certainly the right thing to do in the face of 
the biggest ever global financial crisis – as Walter Bagehot wrote as early as 1873, “to avert 
panic, central banks should lend early and freely to solvent firms, against good collateral and 
at high rates.” But such a huge expansion in the balance sheet was by no means simple to 
execute, nor risk-free. 
Like any other business, especially one in the public sector, the central bank needs to protect 
its own balance sheet. The consequence of a significant loss could be to damage credibility, 
threaten  independence  and  impair  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  discharge  its  statutory 
responsibilities.  A  central  bank  will  also  be  keen  to  avoid  the  moral  hazard  involved  in 
encouraging a commercial firm to undertake particular types of risk-taking activity. There are 
certain principles that a central bank should therefore observe: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
It should not lend to any bank whose prospective solvency is seriously in question. 
It should always take sufficient, good-quality collateral against its lending. 
Central bank operations should be designed to deliver public policy objectives, not 
to support the profitability of any particular commercial firm. 
                                                 
1  See the “The Framework for the Bank of England’s operations in the Sterling Money Markets (the ‘Red Book’)” 
at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/sterlingoperations/redbook.htm  
2  See  Fisher  (2010),  “Managing  Liquidity  in  the  System:  the  Bank’s  Liquidity  Insurance  Facilities”  at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech450.pdf  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Bank of England consolidated balance sheet (a) 
 Chart 1: Liabilities 
     Chart 2: Assets 
£ billions
300
Notes in Circulation
Reserve balances
Other liabilities
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
250
200
150
100
50
0
 £ billions
300
Long-term repos
Short-term repos
Loan to APF
Other assets
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
250
200
150
100
50
0
 (a) Data to 16 March 2011 
That may sound like a simple set of rules, but there are deep policy issues to consider when 
it comes to implementation. In particular, there are policy decisions required in the following 
dimensions: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
These are important questions for the banking system as a whole, and have presented new 
and complex risk management challenges for central banks over the past few years. It is on 
these issues that we focus in this paper.3 To start with, we briefly outline some of the main 
features of the Bank’s lending operations. 
eligibility (what collateral should be accepted, and what should not);  
valuations and haircuts (how much is the collateral worth?);  
what fees should apply, if any, and  
limits (how much diversification should we seek across the collateral delivered?). 
The sterling monetary framework 
The Bank’s main activity in the sterling market prior to the financial crisis was via its short-
term repo open market operations (STR OMOs). Those regular weekly operations provided 
the banking system with the right level of reserves such that short-term market interest rates 
would remain close to Bank Rate set by the MPC.4 In addition, in order to reduce the size of 
weekly  STR  OMOs  to  a  manageable  size,  the  Bank  undertook  longer-term  repo  OMOs 
(LTR OMOs)  of  3,  6,  9  and  12  months  maturity.  The  remaining  operation  of  note  was  the 
Standing  Facilities  in  which  a  commercial  bank  could  borrow  from,  or  lend  to  the  Bank 
overnight, albeit at a less attractive rate than Bank Rate. 
The financial crisis, and the associated expansion of the balance sheet to provide liquidity 
insurance to the banking system, was a true “game changer” for the Bank of England: the 
Sterling  Monetary  Framework  has  been  almost  completely  redesigned  over  the  past  few 
years.  The  increased  demand  for  liquidity  insurance  necessitated  a  large  and  rapid 
expansion in the scale of lending and the range of collateral the Bank took in its operations. 
                                                 
3  Further details are available in the Bank’s 2010 Q2 Quarterly Bulletin 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/quarterlybulletin/qb100201.pdf  
4  These operations were suspended when large-scale asset purchases commenced in March 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  Autumn  of  2007,  the  Bank  extended  the  range  of  collateral  acceptable  in  its  LTRs 
(henceforth eLTRs) and increased their size somewhat. In April 2008, in the wake of Bear 
Stearns’ failure, the Bank introduced the SLS. Through that scheme, the Bank eventually lent 
£185bn  of  9-month  T-bills  against  a  wide  range  of  private-sector  collateral  –  mostly  UK 
RMBS  backed  by  legacy  mortgages  –  for  up  to  3  years.  Following  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008, the Bank further extended the collateral allowed in eLTRs and 
initiated  a massive  expansion in  its  lending  at  the  3  month  maturity,  eventually  peaking  at 
£180bn in early 2009. 
In  October  2008,  the  Bank  also  introduced  a  permanent  Discount  Window  Facility  (DWF), 
which  can  provide  liquidity  to  counterparties  on  a  bilateral  basis  against  a  wide  range  of 
collateral,  ranging  from  US  treasuries  and  German  bunds  to  self-originated  ABS.  The 
Standing Facilities which had played this role were re-launched as the Operational Standing 
Facilities (OSFs), more clearly intended to cope with operational disruptions and short-term 
market volatility. More recently, in June 2010, the Bank replaced the temporary eLTRs with 
permanent  Indexed  Long-Term  Repo  (ILTRs)  operations  that  regularly  offer  the  system 
3 and 6 month liquidity, against a wide pool of eligible collateral. 
In designing its permanent liquidity insurance operations, the Bank was very mindful of the 
need to balance the benefits to systemic stability, the incentives for banks to manage liquidity 
risk  prudently,  and  the  need  to  minimise  the  risk  taken  onto  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet.  In 
particular, the aim of the Bank has been to leave the credit and market risks associated with 
collateral with the counterparty, so that we only provide the intended liquidity insurance and 
not any official underwriting of the underlying risks. 
Underpinning these objectives are some additional underlying principles: 
(a) 
the Bank does not accept any collateral that it feels it cannot value and then risk-
manage effectively; 
the Bank’s prices for lending in its liquidity insurance operations can vary with the 
liquidity of the collateral delivered and the amount lent, so that use of these facilities 
only becomes attractive in stressed conditions. 
(b) 
These  principles  ensure  that  the  Bank  can  manage  its  own  risks  prudently  and  that 
counterparties are encouraged to manage their risks similarly. 
Eligibility 
The Bank’s risk preferences are very different from those in commercial financial institutions. 
Like  a  commercial  bank,  collateral  bestows  post-default  recovery  value.  But  unlike 
commercial  banks,  we  do  not  use  collateral  for  liquidity  management  purposes.  The  Bank 
does not re-pledge collateral to raise liquidity for example. The emphasis is on the protection 
that the collateral offers in a default situation. Although the eligibility of collateral depends on 
a number of factors, in all cases the collateral must be of sufficiently high credit quality so 
that it presents a low risk to the Bank in the event of a default by a counterparty. 
The Bank’s operations vary in their policy objectives, and so have different eligible collateral 
pools  which  are  tailored  to  match  the  policy  goals.  In  operations  designed  solely  to 
implement  monetary  policy,  only  a  narrow  range  of  collateral  is  allowed.  By  design,  these 
operations  will  normally  involve  lending  at  close  to  Bank  Rate.  The  Bank’s  counterparties 
have a financial incentive to optimise their use of collateral in these operations by selecting 
the cheapest to deliver. If any relatively illiquid or lower credit securities are allowed in the 
narrow  collateral  set,  then  the  commercial  banks  will  have  an  incentive  to  exploit  that 
premium. That would mean that the central bank’s monetary policy operation could become 
a regular source of funding (and profit) for the firm. This can matter if, for example, it creates 
distortions  in  demand  for  those  lower  quality  assets.  In  the  Bank  of  England’s  monetary 
policy operations – the STR OMOs and the OSFs – eligible collateral includes only securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
issued  by  those  sovereign  issuers  of  the  highest  credit  quality  and  which  are  expected  to 
remain liquid in all but the most extreme circumstances. 
In  providing  liquidity  insurance  operations,  the  policy  objective  is  to  provide  liquidity  under 
stressed  conditions  and  this  can  be  most  effectively  done  against  a  wider  collateral  set, 
although similar adverse selection concerns can apply. Where collateral is of differing market 
value, that ideally needs to be reflected in the price of lending so that there are no market 
distortions.  The  Bank  has  a  number  of  different  collateral  pools  to  reflect  this.  The  (first) 
“wider” pool is available for use in the Bank’s Indexed Long-Term Repo (ILTR) operations 
and includes both the narrow collateral set and certain private sector securities which would 
be  expected  to  remain  liquid  in  most  conditions  (including  the  debt  of  a  number  of  other 
sovereigns  and  certain  third-party  originated  ABS).  The  ILTRs  allow  firms  to  bid  to  get 
reserves against either the narrow or this wider collateral set at different prices. The Bank 
decides  how  much  is  allocated  against  wider  collateral,  depending  on  how  much  the 
commercial  banks  bid  for  it  (ie  reflecting  market  demand).5  It  also  meets  other  policy 
objectives such as providing a signal about the degree of stress in the market. 
A yet wider range of collateral is eligible in the Bank’s Discount Window Facility (DWF). DWF 
collateral is divided into four sets, depending on its underlying liquidity. Levels A and B are 
the same as the “narrow” and “wider” sets allowed in OMOs. Levels C and D go wider still 
(Table 1). The price for drawing depends on the collateral a firm has to offer: the less liquid 
the  collateral,  the  higher  the  fee.  Essentially,  the  haircuts  play  the  role  of  protecting  the 
Bank’s balance sheet while the fee plays the role of discouraging use except under stressed 
conditions and therefore avoiding market distortions in normal times. It also compensates the 
Bank for taking the liquidity risk. 
Table 1 
Collateral eligible in post-crisis Bank operations 
The Bank has been encouraging counterparties to “pre-position” collateral in the DWF, which 
allows us to conduct ex-ante due diligence and advise on the eligibility and likely advance 
rate of the collateral (ie the amount we would lend against it) were it to be called upon in a 
live  draw.  Pre-positioning  provides  counterparties  with  the  insurance  they  need  were  an 
unexpected risk to suddenly crystallise. In that scenario, having a pool of collateral that has 
                                                  
5  See  Fisher 
(2010), 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech487.pdf  
“Recent  developments 
in 
the  sterling  monetary 
4 
 framework”,  available  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
already been assessed and is ready for use might significantly reduce the delay between an 
DWF draw-down application and the release of funds.6 That could be vital in a crisis.  
Under  exceptional  circumstances,  the  Bank  can  use  its  lender  of  last  resort  function  to 
engage in Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA) outside of the publicly available operations. 
In principle, that could be against any collateral that the Bank could value and risk manage. 
The Bank comes to an independent judgment about which collateral should be eligible in all 
its operations, based on its own assessment of the credit, liquidity, transfer risk (the risk that 
collateral/liquidity  is  not  returned  by  the  counterparty  because  of  political  intervention)  and 
any legal risk of the counterparty and issuer. By making its own judgment, the Bank ensures 
that  it  is  not  reliant  on  credit  ratings  agencies  for  such  assessments.7  Rather,  it  forms  its 
opinion drawing on a range of indicators and stress tests. 
To  judge  liquidity,  the  Bank  will  typically  draw  on  data  about  the  depth  of  the  market  in  a 
range of market conditions, bid-offer dealer spreads and outstanding issuance in making its 
assessment. On legal and transfer risk, the Bank regularly reviews the jurisdictions in which 
its counterparties originate. By taking account of a range of indicators, in a non-mechanical 
way,  the  Bank  is  able  to  assess  the  suitability  of  particular  issuers’  debt  securities  for  a 
collateral set.  
Changes to the narrow collateral set 
The Bank’s collateral policy is still evolving. On 11 February the Bank announced that, with 
effect from 1 July 2011, it will accept in its narrow collateral basket sovereign debt securities 
denominated  in  Sterling,  Euro,  US  and  Canadian  Dollars  and  issued  by  the  UK,  the  US, 
Germany,  France,  the  Netherlands  and  Canada.  That  is  a  wider  range  of  currencies  than 
many of its international counterparts. For example, the ECB, Federal Reserve and Bank of 
Japan only accept securities denominated in domestic currency. The Bank of England takes 
a broader range of currencies, to make sure that the narrow collateral set is large and deep 
enough for our monetary policy operations not to cause frictions in the sovereign collateral 
markets. The risk is offset by additional haircuts for foreign currency. 
The choices of which currencies and issuers were to be allowed in the narrow collateral set 
were  decided  principally  on  grounds  of  liquidity,  not  credit.  A  number  of  AAA  issuers  are 
assigned to the wider collateral set principally because their debt stock in issue is too small 
and/or too tightly held such that bid-offer spreads are relatively wide and/or more volatile in 
the secondary market. Chart 3 shows a simple analysis of some of these factors. 
Those  changes  were  not  a  response  to  short-term  conditions  in  some  sovereign  debt 
markets.  Rather,  they  form  an  important  part  of  the  transition  to  the  Bank’s  long-term 
collateral  policy,  which  was  initiated  following  the  October  2008  consultative  paper  on  the 
Bank’s market operations. The changes have expanded the universe of collateral eligible in 
the Bank’s operations. And all the narrow collateral previously eligible will remain permissible 
under the new regime as either narrow or wider collateral. 
 
                                                 
6   Of course any drawdown is predicated on the counterparty being expected to remain solvent. 
7  This  is  in  line  with  new  FSB  principles  aimed  at  reducing  the  extent  to  which  ratings  are  “hard-wired”  into 
financial contracts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Metrics of sovereign credit risk, market liquidity and size(a)  
Chart 3 
300
5 yr CDS premia
250
200
150
100
50
0
US
France
Germany
Netherlands
Canada
UK
Italy
Spain
Belgium
Austria
Australia
Sweden
Denmark
Finland
Norway
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
-50
10yr bond bid-offer spread (bps)
 
(a)  The  size  of  the  bubbles  is  representative  of  the  total  amount  of 
sovereign  debt  outstanding  (in  sterling  terms).  Ireland  and  Portugal 
are  not  shown,  as  their  respective  bubbles  lie  significantly  to  the 
north-east  of  the  other  countries  identified  in  the  Chart.  Bubbles  for 
Cyprus, Japan, Luxemburg, New Zealand, Slovenia and Switzerland 
are  also  not  shown  for  clarity  (although  they  are  accepted  as  wider 
collateral). Data as at 11 April. 
Valuation 
The Bank’s valuation of collateral plays a key role in protecting the Bank against loss in the 
event  of  a  counterparty  default.  Where  available,  the  Bank  uses  market  prices  to  value  a 
security.  Where  no  market  price  is  available  or  those  that  are  available  are  judged  to  be 
unreliable – for example because they are out of date – the Bank calculates a model price to 
value a security, based on a standard bond pricing model of discounted expected future cash 
flows.  The  Bank  uses  its  judgment  to  assess  the  validity  of  that  model  price,  including  by 
comparing it to similar traded securities where available, and drawing on any relevant market 
intelligence it has gathered from market participants. 
Haircuts  
The Bank’s haircuts are designed to reduce the likelihood that the Bank would incur a loss if 
forced to realise and liquidate collateral in the wake of a counterparty default. So the haircuts 
not  only  have  to  protect  against  the  risk  of  counterparty  default  (credit  risk),  but  also  take 
account of the likely value of that collateral in stressed liquidity conditions (market risk). 
As a result, the Bank adopts a graded approach, with “base” haircuts varying by the type of 
collateral offered reflecting the different associated risk characteristics. It includes the likely 
correlation of risk e.g. that the value of a counterparty’s collateral will fall as the counterparty 
itself  becomes  stressed.  Over  and  above  those  base  haircuts,  and  where  appropriate,  the 
Bank  imposes  idiosyncratic  haircut  add-ons,  based  on  both  the  type  of  collateral  and  the 
counterparty. In some cases, that reflects stress tests applied to the underlying assets. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Changes in market prices can, of course, affect the value of the collateral the Bank has taken 
in its operations. As a result, the Bank calls margin on any shortfall.8 In its sterling operations, 
the Bank calls margin daily and is moving to that standard for all other transactions. 
Limits 
The Bank also manages the risk on its balance sheet using concentration limits. Those serve 
two  purposes.  First,  they  help  the  Bank  diversify  across  institutions  –  for  example, 
counterparties can only bid for a maximum of 30% of the funds on offer in the Bank’s ILTRs. 
That  helps  ensure  that  any  single  counterparty  doesn’t  corner  the  market  for  reserves 
(intentionally  or  by  accident).  Second,  they  help  diversify  across  instruments  in  the  wider 
collateral  pool  –  for  example,  the  Bank  requires  that  the  adjusted  market  value  (AMV)  of 
securities that any single issuer delivers to the Bank as wider collateral in OMOs is less than 
the greater of £250 million or 25% of its total OMO collateral delivered. 
Other recent policy initiatives 
The  Bank  has,  for  a  number  of  years,  been  refining  and  improving  its  collateral  policy.  In 
November  2010,  the  Bank  announced  that  it  would  allow  counterparties  to  use  “raw” 
(i.e. unsecuritised) loans as collateral in the DWF. By removing the need to securitise assets, 
that  initiative  expands  the  range  of  collateral  that  banks  would  be  able  to  use  in  times  of 
stress. And, by removing derivatives and certain structural features embedded in RMBS, it 
will improve the Bank’s ability to manage the risk associated with this collateral. Moreover, 
this initiative will also allow smaller counterparties, who do not have access to securitisation 
platforms,  or  for  whom  the  cost  of  securitisation  is  prohibitively  high,  to  access  liquidity 
insurance in times of need.9 The Bank started processing applications for the pre-positioning 
of loans in the DWF in January 2011. 
At  the  same  time  as  announcing  that  it  would  accept  portfolios  of  loans  as  collateral,  the 
Bank  formalised  the  next  steps  in  its  ABS  transparency  initiative.  Following  on  from  its 
consultation in March 2010, the Bank announced that it would be phasing out the eligibility of 
residential  MBS  and  covered  bonds  that  did  not  conform  to  certain  transparency  criteria. 
During a year-long implementation period, running to November 2011, those securities that 
do not confirm to the new standards will remain eligible for use in the Bank’s operations. But 
over  that  period,  counterparties  should  be  working  to  ensure  that  they  meet  the  new 
transparency  requirements.  Subsequently,  in  the  year  from  November  2011  to  November 
2012,  there  will  be  a  12  month  transition,  during  which  the  Bank  will  begin  to  apply 
increasingly large haircuts to those securities that do not conform to its requirements. By the 
end of November 2012, assets that do not comply will become ineligible. 
The  transparency  initiative  will  help  the  Bank  risk-manage  collateral  more  accurately  and 
effectively.  That  means  that  less  conservative  haircuts  would  sometimes  be  required  to 
support  a  given  level  of  borrowing.  That  will  benefit  counterparties  as  well  as  deliver  risk 
management benefits to the Bank. 
The  Bank  will  also  require  the  data  to  be  made  available  to  investors  and  other  market 
professionals,  so  that  they  will  be  able  to  undertake  their  own  risk  analysis.  That  should 
deliver longer-term benefit to the financial system as a whole – standardising, simplifying and 
publicising the data should all reduce the mechanical reliance on third party judgments and 
                                                 
8  The counterparty can meet the margin call by either providing more collateral, substituting some of the existing 
collateral with higher quality assets which receive a smaller haircut, or returning some of the lent funds. 
9  The aim would be for the Bank’s risk tolerance to be broadly the same for loans as for a securitisation of those 
same loans, so as not to provide incentives to submit one form of collateral over the other. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
models, and hence reduce “single points of failure” within the ABS market (although it will be 
up to market participants to make best use of these changes). 
Other policy issues on the agenda 
There are some big issues facing the Bank and its collateral management going forward. The 
immediate challenge is to wind down the SLS to its conclusion in January 2012. The banks 
have  made  good,  early  progress  in  reducing  their  use  of  the  Scheme,  unwinding  the 
collateral swaps ahead of their contractual maturities. As the remainder of the T-bills lent are 
returned,  the  collateral  pledged  to  the  Bank  will  be  returned  to  these  counterparties  for 
refinancing  in  the  market.  Much  of  the  collateral  posted  under  SLS  was  RMBS  and 
residential  mortgage-backed  covered  bonds,  where  conditions  in  the  secondary  and  repo 
markets have improved since the financial market seizure beginning in 2007. It is expected 
that  the  banks  will  be  able  to  generate  liquidity  using  their  mortgage  assets  in  the  private 
market or by raising funding through other markets. It is noteworthy that the private sector 
has recently engaged in SLS-like transactions; pension funds have been agreeing to swap 
highly  liquid  gilts  for  less  liquid  RMBS.  The  pension  fund,  as  a  buy  and  hold  investor,  is 
content  to  hold  a  less  liquid  asset  on  repo  for  a  higher  yield.  The  bank  in  the  meantime 
receives a highly liquid asset that can be used to raise cash in the repo market, or held as 
part of their liquid asset buffer. It will be interesting to see how that private sector collateral 
upgrade  market  grows  and  develops  and,  in  particular,  the  increased  transparency  helps 
pension funds better manage the risks in the collateral. 
Conclusion 
When people think about Bank of England policy questions, many rush to focus on interest 
rates  and,  given  our  new  responsibilities,  financial  policy  decisions.  Fewer  think  about  the 
policy issues associated with implementing those decisions. In this paper, we have tried to 
set  out  some  of  the  thinking  behind  the  Bank’s  approach  to  collateral.  It  is  driven  by  a 
combination of monetary and financial stability policy objectives and the need to protect the 
Bank’s own balance sheet. To do that, we look through current market conditions to assess 
the  value  of  collateral  and  firm  behaviour  under  stressed  conditions.  We  also  try  to 
understand the incentives that we create for our counterparties in good times and bad, so as 
to  avoid  moral  hazard  and  market  distortions.  The  changes  that  have  been  made  should 
mean  that  in  future,  the  Bank  of  England  is  more  effective  both  in  providing  liquidity 
insurance to the banking system and in mitigating its own risks. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
