Glenn Stevens: Overview of the Australian economy 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Melbourne, 26 August 2011. 
 Quite a bit has happened in both the global and local economies since we last met with the 
Committee.  In  February,  we  had  seen  the  Queensland  floods,  and  Cyclone  Yasi  had  just 
occurred. Tropical storms had disrupted iron ore shipments out of Western Australia. There 
was understandably a focus on what the economic effects of those events would be. It was 
thought likely that economic activity as measured would be materially weaker in the March 
quarter than had been earlier expected, but that there would be a recovery in the middle of 
the  year.  It  was  thought  that  the  rebuilding  efforts  in  Queensland  would  exert  a  mild 
expansionary effect on demand beginning in the second half of the year.  
GDP was indeed weak in the March quarter, with the fall in coal and iron ore production more 
than  offsetting  a  modest  increase  in  output  in  the  rest  of  the  economy.  Since  then,  the 
rebound in production of iron ore has been more or less as expected and the disruption to 
general economic activity in Queensland associated with floods has abated. But in the case 
of  coal,  largely  for  environmental  reasons,  the  process  of  dewatering  pits  is  taking  longer 
than  initially  expected.  The  recovery  of  coal  production  in  Queensland  is  probably  about 
two-thirds complete at the present time. It may be early next year before production has fully 
recovered. This has had a material effect on the forecasts for GDP.  
It was also understood in February that there would be large effects on the consumer price 
index because of the loss of key crops. These were expected to be temporary and, indeed, 
prices for the relevant items are now falling back as crops begin to recover. The Bank has 
been clear that such fluctuations have had no implications for monetary policy.  
We  didn’t  know  in  February  that  a  serious  Japanese  earthquake  would  have  a  significant 
effect  on  global  manufacturing  production  and  sales,  including  in  Australia’s  motor  vehicle 
sector. This explains part of the apparent slowing in global growth in the June quarter. Part of 
the slowing in growth in major countries is also likely to have been caused by the increase in 
energy prices in the early part of the year, which now appears gradually to be reversing.  
Another  factor  at  work,  though,  has  been  the  concerns  about  public  debt  in  major 
countries. These  were  apparent  six  months  ago,  but  have  escalated  markedly  in  the 
intervening period. Not only did yields on the obligations issued by so-called “peripheral” euro 
area  countries  reach  new  highs,  but  interest  rates  faced  by  large countries  like  Spain  and 
Italy  also  rose  to  levels  that  would  have  made  their  financial  positions  much  more 
difficult. The  euro  area’s  response  to  these  issues  has  had  some  positive  effects,  but  it 
remains  a  work  in  progress. Meanwhile,  the  United  States  is  having  a  very  difficult  time 
finding a path that avoids an immediate major fiscal contraction but still puts the US fiscal 
accounts onto a sustainable medium-term trajectory.  
As financial markets confronted all this, and also sought to digest a re-appraisal of near-term 
global growth prospects, we have seen during August a period of intense turmoil, particularly 
in equity markets. The net result of this period is that equity prices in most markets around 
the world are anything from 15 to 25 per cent below their recent highs. Yields on long-term 
securities for the United States and core European countries have fallen to historical lows as 
investors have sought safety, despite the US sovereign rating downgrade by S&P. Measures 
of  volatility  have  increased  sharply. There  has  been  a  degree  of  renewed  pressure  on 
US dollar funding for European banks. The currencies of certain countries regarded as safe 
havens, like Switzerland, have soared and the price of gold has reached new highs.  
So markets remain on edge. All that said, the dislocation has not, on most common metrics, 
approached the extent of that seen three years ago. The main effect on Australia’s financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in 
travelled 
to  date, 
fairly  well 
markets  has  been  lower  equity  prices,  which  have  fallen  along  with  those  in  major 
markets. Other  Australian  markets  have, 
the 
circumstances. Funding  costs  have,  if  anything,  declined,  which  is  being  reflected  in  lower 
costs  of  fixed  rate  mortgages. Major  Australian  banks  report  being  offered  substantial 
US dollar  funding  offshore  on  account  of  their  relatively  high  credit  standing. In  any  event, 
their  reliance  on  such  wholesale  funding  is  much  reduced  from  three  years  ago,  with  the 
large increase in deposit funding at home and slower balance sheet growth. There has been 
no  abnormal  demand  for  liquidity  by  financial  institutions  from  the  Reserve  Bank  in  this 
period and the quantity of settlement funds in the system has been completely normal over 
the past month. The exchange rate has come off its peaks of a couple of months ago, but it 
remains quite high compared with most of the post-float experience. Some commodity prices 
have declined, but they have not slumped the way they did in late 2008 and early 2009, and 
spot prices for major Australian commodities remain quite high.  
People will understandably want to draw comparisons with the financial crisis of 2008. We 
cannot  know,  of  course,  what  will  transpire  in  the  months  ahead,  but  I  think  that  what  we 
have witnessed is best seen not so much as a new crisis, as part of the long aftermath of the 
2008 crisis. Among the countries at the heart of that crisis it was to be expected that, after 
serious problems in private-sector balance sheets, economic recovery would be a drawn out 
affair. That is usually the way. This is having a predictable effect on fiscal positions: revenues 
are weak and budget deficits have remained large. It is not surprising that coping with this is 
politically  difficult  and  it  remains  a  point  of  considerable  uncertainty  what  the  ultimate 
resolutions in the various major countries will look like. This may be leading to precautionary 
behaviour and, as a result, the global growth outlook does not look as strong as it did six 
months ago, even though it is not necessarily as weak as some of the pessimists fear.  
In our own region, indicators suggest some moderation in growth in the Chinese economy, 
but it appears to be still pretty solid. Around Asia, inflation rates have generally tended to rise 
over the past six months. A key question for the countries in the region is whether enough 
has  been  done  to  contain  the  inflation  pressure,  which  does  look  to  have  spread  beyond 
initial rises in food and energy prices. Asia’s management of these challenges will ultimately 
matter a good deal for Australia, and for the world.  
In the meantime, Australia’s terms of trade are very high and the investment expansion in the 
resources sector is proceeding. On the indications available it has quite some distance to run 
yet. This is having positive spillovers to some parts of the  Australian economy. Our liaison 
suggests  that,  beyond  the  benefits  being  experienced  by  equipment  hire,  engineering, 
surveying and consulting firms, businesses as diverse as those supplying modular housing, 
laboratory  services  and  the  training  of  semi-skilled,  trade  and  other  workers  are  seeing 
effects of the expansion.  
Meanwhile,  other  sectors  are  being  squeezed  by  the  high  exchange  rate  or  by  the 
much-touted  household  caution. Now  it  is  important  not  to  overstate  the  degree  of 
caution. Some  areas  of  household  spending –  like  overseas  travel –  are  growing  very 
strongly. But overall it is, in my judgement, increasingly clear that we have seen a significant 
change  in  household  behaviour. There  was  a  lengthy  period  in  which  households  saved 
progressively  less  from  current  income,  increased  their  leverage  and  enjoyed  a  sense  of 
rising prosperity from the increase in asset values. That was most likely a one-time, if rather 
drawn  out,  adjustment  to  a  number  of  important  factors. It  is  quite  understandable  that  it 
occurred – and it should be equally understandable that it wasn’t going to continue like that 
indefinitely. The “new normal” – which is actually the old normal – is where households save 
a  non-trivial  fraction  of  income  and  keep  their  debt  levels  more  in  line  with  income. One 
positive  is  that  the  adjustment  to  this  “new/old”  normal  has  been  pretty  fast,  which  means 
that  a  lot  of  it  may  already  have  been  accomplished. Nonetheless,  in  view  of  the  financial 
turmoil of recent weeks, it would not be surprising if a degree of caution remained for a while 
yet.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Three months ago, the Bank voiced concerns over the outlook for inflation in Australia, on 
the basis that measures of underlying inflation looked like they had ended a decline that had 
lasted for more than two years, were starting to turn up and were forecast to rise over the 
three-year forecast horizon. That outlook suggested that policy would need to be tightened 
“at  some  point”. The  Bank  did  not  have  a  pre-committed  notion  of  when  that  point  might 
be. Such indications are, in any event, always conditional on the ongoing assessment of the 
outlook. The  policy  decision  must  consider  not  only  the  central  forecast  but  also  the 
possibility that things turn out differently from that forecast.  
In the intervening period, the international situation has become more clouded and evidence 
of caution at home has, if anything, intensified. Asset prices have declined, credit growth has 
moderated further and the exchange rate remains very high. While each of these is affected 
by factors other than monetary policy, together they suggest a fair degree of restraint is being 
exerted by financial conditions. Under the circumstances, the Board judged the most prudent 
course was to sit still through this period, in spite of inflation data that, on their face, continue 
to be concerning.  
Looking ahead, the year-ended CPI inflation rate will probably remain well above 3 per cent 
in the September quarter. It is then likely to come down as the impact of last summer’s floods 
on food prices continues to unwind; we will see those effects around the end of the year and 
the  early  part  of  next  year. After  that,  the  assumed  impact  of  the  carbon  pricing  scheme, 
which we have now put into the forecasts, starts to affect the headline inflation figures.  
We have been very clear that the Bank will abstract from those carbon price effects in setting 
monetary policy, just as we did with the implementation of the GST a decade ago. It is the 
more persistent path of inflation on which the Bank must focus.  
In that regard, the question is whether recent events will have a bearing on the medium-term 
inflation outlook. It would be reasonable to anticipate that a decline in confidence arising from 
the  recent  events  internationally  may  well  dampen  demand  somewhat  compared  with  the 
outlook set out in the Statement on Monetary Policy published in early August. That, together 
with  the  increased  visibility  of  structural  change  in  the  economy,  may  also  condition  wage 
bargaining and price setting. If these forces persist, they may act to lessen the upward trend 
in inflation pressures that appeared to be in prospect. At the same time, significant rises in a 
range of administered prices are still set to occur over this period and unit costs have been 
rising quite quickly given the fairly poor performance of multi-factor productivity growth over 
recent years. So as usual, there are varying factors about which the Board will need to make 
careful judgements over the months ahead.  
In  summary,  there  is  a  heightened  degree  of  uncertainty  at  present. There  are  major 
challenges  in  the  global  economy  and  significant  forces  at  work  in  the  Australian 
economy. But  at  this  point  in  time,  our  terms  of  trade  are  at  a  record  high,  while  our 
unemployment rate remains low. Inflation bears careful watching, but we can keep it under 
control. Our banks are strong, our currency is sound and our sovereign credit position is in 
the international top tier. Consumer “caution”, while making life hard for the retail sector, is 
also  building  resilience  in  household  balance  sheets. If  we  are  entering  another  period  of 
weaker international conditions, this is a pretty good starting point from which to do so.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
