William C Dudley: Regulatory reform of the global financial system 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at a meeting hosted by the Institute of Regulation & Risk, North 
Asia, Tokyo, 11 April 2011. 
 I am pleased to be here today to speak about the issue of regulatory reform and the global 
financial system.  
But  before  I  begin,  I  would  like  to  express  my  deepest  sympathies  and  those  of  my 
colleagues at the Federal Reserve to the people of Japan following the tragic events of the 
past month. We mourn your loss even as we admire the heroism of those who risked their 
lives to help others and the quiet fortitude with which so many of your citizens have borne 
their suffering and grief. We know that the character of the Japanese people will enable you 
to  overcome  the  challenges  before  you,  working  together  in  common  national  purpose  to 
rebuild and restore. 
On the subject of my talk today, a stable and resilient financial system that allocates credit in 
an efficient manner underpins and supports economic growth and rising standards of living 
around the world. As we saw recently, however, a financial system that is prone to booms 
and crashes can not only lead to an inefficient allocation of real resources during the booms 
but can also have devastating consequences for global economic activity and employment 
during the crashes. In an integrated global economy, severe negative consequences can be 
felt far away from the center of the financial crisis – as they were in Asia in late 2008 and 
early 2009. This underscores our common interest in promoting financial stability on a global 
basis. 
Truly effective reform would generate sizable and widespread benefits. However, there are 
significant challenges to achieving this. One challenge arises from the fact that we have a 
global economy with many large, globally active financial firms, but our regulatory regimes 
are  implemented  at  the  national  level.  Another  is  that  any  attempt  to  improve  regulatory 
standards will inevitably meet with resistance from parties that have a vested interest in the 
status quo. 
Today  I  will  comment  on  the  actions  underway  in  the  United  States  and  internationally  to 
make  the  financial  system  more  resilient  and  robust.  I  will  focus  on  the  logic  behind  the 
reform efforts, progress to date, and areas where there still is considerable work to do. As 
always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee,  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  or  my  international  supervisory 
colleagues with whom I work closely with on a regular basis. 
The  financial  crisis  exposed  significant  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system.  Without 
revisiting all the causes and consequences of the credit boom and bust that led to a boom 
and bust in the U.S. housing market, the bottom line is that our regulatory system failed in 
two important dimensions. First, a significant number of large, internationally active financial 
firms reached the brink of failure. Second, the financial system was not very resilient when 
these  firms  got  into  difficulty.  Instead,  the  threat  of  failure  propagated  further  shocks  that 
reverberated throughout the global financial system. 
These  two  shortcomings  reflect  many  factors  including  inadequate  capital  and  liquidity 
buffers, poor incentives to correctly measure, price and manage risks ex ante, the opacity of 
firm balance sheet and counterparty exposures, and the manner in which large financial firms 
were interconnected within the financial system. In the end, there was too much leverage in 
which large amounts of highly illiquid, long-term assets were financed by short-term liabilities. 
The  fact  that  a  large  amount  of  the  wholesale  funding  used  to  finance  these  assets  was 
provided by leveraged financial intermediaries to other financial intermediaries increased the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
system’s vulnerability to adverse shocks. As it turned out, the amount and quality of capital 
was grossly inadequate relative to the quality of the assets and off-balance-sheet exposures 
of many of the major global banking institutions. Moreover, many institutions had inadequate 
liquidity buffers. The lack of liquidity forced the fire sale of assets, which depressed prices 
and increased the pressure on capital. 
When  troubled  institutions  did  fail,  this  exacerbated  the  pressure  on  the  remaining 
institutions. Aggravated by the lack of transparency about their counterparty exposures and 
the contingent liabilities they faced, the problems of a single institution quickly became the 
problems of many. This was fueled in part by concern that the counterparty claims on failed 
institutions would be frozen and unable to be realized quickly. 
Not only did some core firms have inadequate capital and liquidity, they also faced conflicting 
incentives as to how to manage their capital resources. For example, many firms that came 
under stress were slow to cut their dividends or to raise new capital because of fears that 
such  actions  would  signal  their  underlying  weakness.  Obviously,  the  failure  to  conserve 
capital made these institutions weaker rather than stronger. 
The  crisis  also  underscored  severe  deficiencies  in  the  international  dimension  of  the 
regulatory  environment.  Financial  institutions,  flows  and  activities  are  global,  but  the  vast 
majority of regulation and information sharing is contained within national boundaries. Where 
resolution regimes existed, they generally existed only for banking entities and were not set 
up to handle the orderly resolution of a large internationally active bank holding company or 
non-bank financial firm. This cross-border problem persists to this day. 
The interconnectedness of the financial system also caused shocks to spread quickly. For 
example,  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  led  to  losses  at  the  Reserve  Fund,  which 
precipitated  a  widespread  money  market  mutual  fund  panic.  It  also  led  to  actions  by  U.K. 
bankruptcy authorities that had the effect of freezing the assets owned by hedge fund and 
other  clients  of  the  firm  and  this  encouraged  such  investors  to  pull  assets  from  other 
institutions perceived to be weak. These and other propagation channels in turn, led to virtual 
stoppage  of  lending  and  borrowing  activity  in  the  money  markets  and,  ultimately,  a  credit 
crunch that reverberated throughout the global financial system. For example, the crisis led 
to  a  sharp  constraint  on  the  availability  of  trade  credit  in  the  fall  of  2008  that  had  a 
devastating impact on economic activity in emerging markets in Asia and Latin America, as 
well  as  Japan.  This  region  felt  the  full  economic  consequences  of  the  crisis  even  though 
banks in the region were generally healthy and far from the U.S. housing boom and bust and 
the  subprime  mortgage  debacle  that  could  be  viewed  as  the  initial  spark  that  ignited  the 
crisis. 
The  crisis  also  underscored  another  area  for  further  cross-border  work:  Our  international 
approach to liquidity provision and lender-of-last-resort services to globally active institutions. 
Cooperation among liquidity providers, for example, through some central bank dollar swap 
arrangements,  played  an  important  role  in  stabilizing  global  money  markets.  However,  the 
division  of lender-of-last-resort  responsibilities  between  home  and  host countries  remained 
ambiguous through the crisis. This needs further attention.  
So what steps have been taken to address some of these sources of vulnerability? There are 
literally dozens of initiatives underway nationally and globally, not only in traditional bodies 
for  such  cooperation  such  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Bank  Supervision,  but  also  among 
newer international groups such as the Financial Stability Board. Most of these initiatives can 
be grouped into three major categories: 
 
Actions  to  significantly  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  of  large  systemically 
important financial institutions.  
Measures to broaden the oversight of the financial system to include activities that 
occur  outside  of  the  core  banking  system.  The  shadow  banking  system,  which  is 
composed of the wide range of financial intermediation activities that occur outside 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 of the traditional purview of bank regulators, needs greater attention. In particular, 
shadow  banking  activities  that  involve  maturity  transformation  are  vulnerable  to 
shocks because such activities do not have the support of bank deposit guarantees 
or access to central bank liquidity and, thus, are vulnerable to funding runs.  
Steps 
financial  market 
infrastructure  to  ensure  that  when  a  large  complex  financial  firm  fails,  the  failure 
doesn’t threaten to bring down the entire financial system. 
the  resolution  regime  and 
to  strengthen 
the  core 
 Turning  to  the  first  set  of  initiatives  designed  to  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  of  large, 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), the tougher capital and liquidity regimes 
that  the  Basel  Committee  has  devised  are  probably  the  most  important  elements.  On  the 
capital side, Basel III significantly increases requirements with respect to both the quantity 
and quality of capital. On the quantity side, there have been two important changes. First, the 
capital  requirements  have  been  raised  so  that  internationally  active  banks  must  have 
common equity ratios of at least 7 percent of risk-weighted assets when the standards are 
fully phased in by 2019. This 7 percent standard consists of a 4.5 percent minimum plus a 
2.5 percent capital conservation buffer. Banks whose capital ratios fall into the buffer range 
will  face  increasingly  stringent  restrictions  on  capital  distributions  such  as  dividends  and 
share repurchases and discretionary bonus payments to staff. This should act as a form of 
“automatic stabilizer” to their capital resources and change the incentives banks face during 
periods of stress. Second, for many globally active banks, the amount of capital required will 
also  rise  because  the  amount  of  risk-weighted  assets  against  which  the  capital  ratios  are 
calculated  will  increase.  Explicit  capital  requirements  for  operational  risk  and  counterparty 
credit  risk,  as  well  as  increased  requirements  for  certain  trading  activity  and  transactions 
between financial institutions should result in a significant rise in risk-weighted assets. 
On the quality side, capital requirements have been toughened by narrowing the definition of 
what  can  be  counted  toward  common  equity  capital  for  regulatory  capital  purposes.  The 
emphasis has been put on common equity because of the superior loss-absorbing capacity 
of this type of capital on a going concern basis. Tighter limits have been put on certain types 
of assets – such as mortgage servicing rights and tax-deferred assets – in which the values 
depend on a firm remaining viable, and that might not be easy to realize in the midst of a 
financial crisis. 
On  the  liquidity  regime  side,  several  major  initiatives  are  underway.  The  Basel  Committee 
has  proposed  a  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  requirement  for  globally  active  banks.  In 
essence,  this  standard  would  require  that  large,  internationally  active  banks  hold  sufficient 
short-term, liquid assets so that a bank could fund its operations for at least 30 days, without 
needing to borrow funds from the central bank. By creating a pool of liquid assets that the 
bank could sell or allow to mature, the liquidity buffer would buy time for the bank to explore 
options to restore market confidence. Such steps might include selling businesses and other 
asset dispositions, raising additional capital, or by making changes in senior management. 
The LCR requirement is being carefully evaluated to ensure that there will be no deleterious, 
unintended consequences when it becomes effective. 
Also,  apart  from  the  Basel  initiative,  supervisors  are  placing  greater  emphasis  on  liquidity. 
For example, in the United States, supervisors have emphasized the importance of adequate 
liquidity  buffers  and  many  banks  have  been  pushed  to  bolster  their  liquidity  resources 
through the supervisory process. 
Together, this emphasis on a greater quantity and higher quality of capital and larger liquidity 
buffers should make banks individually, and the banking system as a whole, more resilient to 
adverse shocks. The goal is to enable banks to retain market access to capital and funding 
even when large losses occur or the banks are subject to other adverse shocks. The ability 
to retain access should enable banks to manage through their problems, avoiding the types 
of liquidity runs that led to the forced unwinding of positions and that pushed what might have 
been solvent institutions over the edge into insolvency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  addition  to  the  Basel  III  standards  for  capital  and  liquidity,  an  international  effort  is 
underway  to  further  reduce  the  probability  of  failure  for  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  or  SIFIs.  The  basic  logic  behind  this  effort  is  that  the  failure  of  a  larger,  more 
complex firm can have disproportionately large negative systemic consequences. As a result, 
such firms should be forced to hold additional capital in order to reduce their probability of 
failure below that of smaller firms. An additional capital requirement on such SIFIs would also 
help  to  level  the  playing  field  between  larger  and  smaller  firms  by  offsetting  the  funding 
advantage that accrues to the largest firms that stems from the perception that they are “too 
big to fail.” Although there are potentially other options, I believe that a SIFI surcharge could 
best be satisfied by requiring SIFIs to hold additional common equity above and beyond the 
Basel 7 percent Tier I common standard. 
The  move  toward  a  tougher  capital  and  liquidity  regime  undoubtedly  receives  the  greatest 
attention in terms of the measures being implemented to make large banks safer. However, 
there also are a number of other important changes being made to supervisory practices in 
the United States and elsewhere. One noteworthy example is the more widespread use of 
horizontal stress tests to ensure that banks have adequate capital. This is a very important 
development, because it makes the evaluation of capital more forward-looking. The issue is 
not just how much regulatory capital a bank has currently but how that bank’s capital level is 
likely to evolve over time in adverse economic circumstances. 
In  the  United  States,  another  important  change  is  that  we  are  refocusing  our  supervisory 
practices to identify structural weaknesses and to push firm managements to remedy their 
shortcomings relative to “best practice” standards. Horizontal reviews across the large banks 
are  being  undertaken  to  identify  firm-specific  deficiencies.  At  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  are 
placing  greater  emphasis  on  understanding  banking  organizations’  business  models  and 
strategies  –  in  other  words,  better  understanding  the  specific  markets  and  activities  from 
which the banking organizations make money over time and the nature of the risks they take 
in  this  process.  Strong  risk  management  practices  within  organizations  are  particularly 
important, as risk managers must be empowered to stand up to those in the front office and 
prevent activities and practices that create risks or incentives that are incompatible with bank 
safety  and  soundness.  Compensation  practices  are  being  reviewed  to  ensure  that  the 
incentives created by the compensation regime are consistent with a banking organization 
remaining in sound financial condition. 
Another key supervisory innovation has been the more extensive supervisory engagement 
on the processes that banking organizations use to assess and plan for their capital needs. 
Recently,  the  Federal  Reserve  completed  a  Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review 
(CCAR) program for the 19 largest U.S. bank holding companies. The purpose of the CCAR 
process was to assess the way these institutions allocate capital over time against the risks 
they  run,  including  how  robust  that  allocation  is  to  changes  in  the  economic  and  financial 
environment. As part of this exercise, banking organizations had to show how their capital 
would hold up under a stress environment specified by the Federal Reserve, as well as how 
they  expected  their  activities  and  capital  positions  to  be  affected  by  changes  such  as 
Basel III. The CCAR built on lessons learned during the crisis about the importance of taking 
a forward-looking and comprehensive approach to assessing capital adequacy, including an 
assessment  of  the  level  and  composition  of  a  bank  holding  company’s  capital  resources 
under stressed economic and financial market conditions. 
This  exercise  received  considerable  attention  because  an  assessment  of  bank  holding 
companies’ plans for increasing dividend payments and implementing stock buyback plans 
were an important part of the review. However, the CCAR’s focus was much broader than 
simply assessing proposed capital distributions. Instead, the goal of the CCAR was to help 
ensure  that  large  bank  holding  companies  have  strong,  firmwide  risk  measurement  and 
management processes to support their internal assessments of capital adequacy and that 
their  capital  resources  are  sufficient  given  their  business  activities  and  the  resulting  risk 
exposures. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  second  important  strand  of  reform  is  to  ensure  that  regulatory  oversight  is  sufficiently 
broad to include the activities of the so-called shadow banking system. This aspect of reform 
and  oversight  is  still  in  its  early  days.  But  work  is  underway.  For  example,  the  Financial 
Stability Board is undertaking work to identify potential sources of vulnerability caused by the 
activities  in the  shadow  banking  system  and  how  such  vulnerabilities  could  be  addressed. 
Also,  in  the  United  States,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  (FSOC)  views  its 
mandate  broadly  with  respect  to  identifying  systemic  risks  and  proposing  remedies.  For 
example, on an ongoing basis, the FSOC will monitor and assess which non-bank financial 
intermediaries  in  the  United  States  are  systemically  important  and,  thus,  require  greater 
regulatory oversight. 
But  the  focus  will  not  just  be  on  large  financial  firms.  Activities  and  practices  that  occur 
outside  of  the  core  institutions  are  also  important.  For  example,  the  activities  of  money 
market mutual funds is one area receiving close scrutiny. As you know, a run on the money 
market  funds  developed  in  the  fall  of  2008  when  the  Reserve  Fund  broke  the  buck  when 
Lehman  Brothers  failed.  This  underscored  a  critical  structural  weakness  of  money  market 
mutual funds created by the convention that the net stable asset value could be fixed at par. 
When  a  money  market  mutual  fund  incurs  losses  that  cause  it  to  “break  the  buck,”  this 
encourages investors to rush to withdraw their funds from other funds before they break the 
buck. The result can be a run on money market mutual fund assets. In the United States, the 
Securities  Exchange  Commission  has  already  tightened  the  rules  with  respect  to  liquidity, 
quality and the average maturity of so-called 2a-7 fund assets, but there is still more to be 
done to address the remaining vulnerabilities. 
As mentioned earlier, the final major strand of regulatory reform is to strengthen the core of 
the financial system and make the system as a whole robust to the failure of a large bank or 
non-bank financial institution. In this realm, there are several notable initiatives. 
First, an effort is underway to create robust resolution regimes that allow large systemically 
important financial institutions to be wound down smoothly in a way that minimizes contagion 
and the risk of a broader panic or that causes damage to other parts of the financial system. 
For example, the Dodd-Frank Act gives enhanced resolution powers to the Federal Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  to  use  to  wind  down  large,  complex  non-bank  financial 
institutions. If such a firm becomes troubled, the regulators, with concurrence from the U.S. 
Treasury, can avert a bankruptcy filing and instead put the non-bank financial company into 
resolution.  As  part  of  such  a  resolution  process,  regulators  are  working  to  ensure  that 
systemically important firms have viable recovery plans and that such firms have “living wills” 
that can help guide how such firms can be managed through a resolution situation. 
Second, to reduce the likelihood of disruptive and highly costly failures, regulators around the 
world are evaluating whether bail-in forms of capital might be used to help recapitalize firms 
when they would otherwise lose their viability, or, alternatively, to help facilitate the orderly 
wind-down  of  a  firm.  Bail-in  capital  might  consist  of  a  well-identified  tranche  of  debt  that 
would convert to equity only if and when a particular set of trigger conditions were met. Such 
triggers  might  include  breaching  a  certain  level  of  regulatory  capital  and/or  a  regulatory 
determination that without conversion the firm would no longer be viable. One considerable 
challenge  is  how  to  define  a  set  of  triggers  in  a  way  that  is  sufficiently  transparent  and 
objective so that the bail-in process does not act as a catalyst and precipitate a run on other 
firms that might appear to have similar characteristics. In principle, however, by helping to 
recapitalize  the  firm,  bail-in  capital  could  help  to  forestall  the  need  for  a  forced,  rapid 
liquidation of assets and this might help to facilitate the orderly wind-down of a large, global 
firm that otherwise could not otherwise be easily resolved. 
Third, efforts are underway to reduce counterparty risk exposures by requiring that over-the-
counter  (OTC)  interest  rate  swaps,  credit  default  swaps,  and  equity  and  commodity 
derivative  trades  be  standardized  where  feasible  –  and  that  all  standardized  trades  be 
cleared through central counterparties (CCPs). Standardized clearing through CCPs reduces 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(IOSCO)  are 
the  complex  web  of  counterparty  exposures  that  exist  in  the  bilateral  world  of  OTC 
derivatives.  Everyone  that  centrally  clears  becomes  the  counterparty  to  the  CCP.  This 
enables  a  high  level  of  gross  bilateral  exposures  to  be  netted  down  to  a  much  more 
manageable set of net exposures to the CCP. 
Fourth,  recognizing  that  mandated  central  clearing  will  only  reduce  risk  if  the  CCPs 
themselves are robust, efforts are underway to strengthen financial market infrastructures. In 
the United States, for example, the Dodd-Frank Act instructs the Financial Stability Oversight 
Council to designate certain financial market utilities (FMUs) as systemically important. Such 
FMUs would be subject to a tougher regulatory oversight regime. On a parallel track, at the 
international  level,  the  Committee  for  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the 
International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions 
revising  and 
strengthening a set of regulatory oversight principles and minimum business standards for 
financial  market  infrastructures  (FMIs).  These  principles  include  numerous  standards  with 
respect  to  governance,  access,  risk  management  practices,  and  capital  and  liquidity 
standards. As Chair of the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems and someone 
deeply involved in the CPSS-IOSCO work, I believe that adoption of an agreed-upon global 
set  of  minimum  standards  for  FMIs  is  essential  if  we  are  to  have  a  safe  global  financial 
system. 
Recently, CPSS-IOSCO issued a revised set of such principles for consultation. Responses 
to the proposed principles are due back by late July. The CPSS-IOSCO plans to publish a 
final set of standards early next year. I hope and anticipate that countries will adopt these 
principles  as  the  minimum  regulatory  standards  for  the  systemically  important  FMIs  that 
operate in their jurisdictions. 
In summary, considerable effort is underway to enhance financial stability. 
That said, I think it is important to recognize some of the important challenges in designing 
and implementing effective reform. Four broad challenges immediately come to mind. First, 
the resolution of large financial firms that operate in multiple jurisdictions remains largely out 
of reach – at least in the near- to medium-term. This is due to the fact that legal rules are not 
harmonized  across  the  different  regulatory  regimes  with  respect  to  bankruptcy  and 
liquidation. For example, although the Dodd-Frank Act establishes a resolution regime for the 
U.S. operations of a large global financial firm domiciled in the United States, this resolution 
framework  stops  at  the  nation’s  borders.  Supervisors  from  different  nations  are  working 
together  in  an  effort  to  create  more  effective  cross-border  crisis  management  tools  and 
resolution  regimes,  but  this  work  is  still  in  its  very  early  stages  and  there  are  formidable 
obstacles to overcome. 
A second challenge is the uneven progress that has been made in reforming bank regulation 
and  supervision  across  the  different  jurisdictions.  For  example,  in  some  cases,  the 
supervisory authorities have been quite forceful in making banks domiciled in their countries 
raise capital. In other cases, the response has been less aggressive. The uneven progress of 
reform makes comprehensive reform more difficult. It shifts the tenor of the discussion away 
from  what  is  the  proper  macroprudential  framework  and  set  of  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements to one that focuses too much on issues of relative competitiveness. Too often 
the questions asked are: What is most beneficial to the banks of my particular country? Do 
the regulations bolster or harm my “national champion”? The focus shifts away from the goal 
of bolstering global financial stability to finding ways of tilting or adjusting the new standards 
to achieve a national competitive advantage. 
This  is  in  not  in  anyone’s  interest.  As  discussed  earlier,  every  nation  has  an  interest  in 
promoting  financial  stability  globally,  since  the  effects  of  systemic  financial  stress  in  one 
place  can  swiftly  spread  throughout  the  global  economy.  Moreover,  although  a  relatively 
loose  regulatory  regime  may  attract  business from  other  financial centers,  there  is  no  free 
lunch here. A more lax regulatory regime is likely to expose that country’s taxpayers to huge 
tail risks. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A third challenge is the sequencing of reforms. For example, many jurisdictions are focusing 
on banking reforms, but have not yet applied the same intensity to shadow banking activities. 
If  regulatory  requirements  for  banks  are  increased  significantly,  the  risk  of  stimulating  the 
growth of the non-regulated shadow banking sector also increases. This suggests that the 
regulatory oversight effort has to be broadly applied so we just don’t trade one problem – for 
example, undercapitalized large banks – for another – a shrunken regulated banking sector 
and an enlarged, unregulated non-banking sector. 
So  what  needs  to  be  done?  In  short,  plenty.  Although  we  have  made  some  progress  in 
making the global financial system safer and more secure, there is much more to do. Several 
examples illustrate the range of issues that are still outstanding. 
First,  we  do  need  to  adopt  an  additional  capital  requirement  on  large  global  systemically 
important financial institutions. We need this to reduce the risk of failure of such institutions to 
very low levels because we do not yet have the tools in place to resolve these institutions on 
a  cross-border  basis  in  a  non-disruptive  manner.  We  also  need  to  do  this  because  such 
institutions  –  by  being  perceived  to  be  too  big  to  fail  –  obtain  a  funding  advantage,  which 
higher capital charges can help offset. Without such a requirement, large banks can gain a 
competitive advantage just through their size. 
Second, as discussed earlier, we have much more to do to ensure that we have a relatively 
level playing field. We need that to discourage regulatory arbitrage and beggar-thy-neighbor 
policies that might benefit narrow national constituencies at the expense of global financial 
stability. 
Third,  we  need  closer  cooperation  among  regulators.  While  regulators  have  successfully 
worked toward a much tougher regulatory regime for capital and liquidity, there are still huge 
opportunities for further progress. For example, regulators need to adopt more far-reaching 
protocols that allow for greater sharing of supervisory information on a cross-border basis to 
facilitate more effective supervision. But, this needs to be done carefully, so that proprietary 
business information is protected. Currently, regulators generally do not have access to the 
necessary information to fully assess the condition of foreign banks that operate within their 
borders. They have supervisory information about the activities and state of condition of the 
foreign  bank  branches  and  subsidiaries  within  their  borders,  but  do  not  always  have  good 
access to information about the parent company or what the banking entity looks like on a 
consolidated basis. This has long been a difficult issue, though efforts are underway to find 
ways to enhance information-sharing. 
Similarly, protocols need to be developed to share regulatory information about systemically 
important financial market infrastructures that operate on a cross-border basis. Access to the 
trade records of OTC derivatives activity that will be recorded in trade repositories also needs 
to be made available to be shared among regulators. 
Fourth, we need greater clarity concerning the responsibilities of the home versus the host 
country, especially when a bank encounters problems. 
Fifth,  we  need  to  work  out  how  emergency  liquidity  should  be  provided  on  a  cross-border 
basis. If a major financial market utility in London, for example, needs dollar liquidity to stay 
in operation, who will provide in it? Who will bear the risk and on what terms and conditions? 
The political unrest in the Middle East and North Africa underscores once again the fact that 
we operate in a shared world economy in which events in one country and region can have 
large impacts globally. And to support this globalized economy, global financial firms and a 
global  payments  and  settlement  infrastructure  are  needed  to  support  this  activity.  Yet,  we 
currently  operate  with  a  financial  system  that  is  largely  regulated  on  a  country-by-country 
basis. 
This  is  not  tenable.  What’s  required  is  not  some  global  authority  dictating  what  national 
authorities can do but instead greater cooperation and trust in exchanging information and 
agreement  on  harmonized  standards  such  as  those  laid  out  in  the  Basel  III  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
requirements  and  the  CPSS-IOSCO  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures.  There 
needs to be a good faith commitment to try to achieve a level playing field. The regulations 
and supervisory practices that are put in place should be determined by what is good for the 
public  good  writ  large,  rather  than  what  benefits  some  narrow  set  of  private  financial 
institutions or markets. 
Finally,  we  need  to  be  persistent.  There  is  much  work  that  still  lies  ahead.  As  the  crisis 
recedes in memory, the natural reflex will be to relax and grow complacent. Already, some 
bankers  are  arguing  that  it  is  time  to  get  back  to  “business  as  usual.”  We  have  seen  that 
“business  as  usual”  results  in  unacceptable  outcomes.  So  we  need  to  keep  working  on  a 
continual basis to make the global financial system more resilient and robust. We will not be 
able  to  avert  all  future  failures  or crises,  but  I  know  we  can  do  much  better  in  limiting  the 
frequency,  severity  and  the  breadth  of  their  impact  when  they  occur  if  we  keep  pushing 
forward. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
