Zeti Akhtar Aziz: New platform to serve the Islamic financial industry 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
launch of Bloomberg’s Enhanced Islamic Finance Platform, Kuala Lumpur, 21 February 2011. 
 It is my pleasure to join you this morning at this Launch of the Bloomberg Enhanced Islamic 
finance platform. This development is timely as Islamic finance is envisioned to continue to 
make great strides in this new decade. Such an information platform is an important element 
for the more efficient functioning of the Islamic financial markets in the international financial 
system. In this recent ten years we have seen significant developments in Islamic finance in 
both  our  domestic  and  the  international  financial  system.  In  this  more  challenging  and 
uncertain environment, Islamic finance has demonstrated its resilience and viability and has 
sustained its growth momentum. 
Today,  with  the  increasing  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance,  its  continued  growth  and 
expansion will very much depend on extensive information which can be efficiently accessed. 
Bloomberg  has  for  two  decades  been  serving  the  Islamic  financial  community  providing 
access to news offerings and timely data and information. The initiative today to enhance its 
Islamic  finance  platform  is  thus  a  highly  welcomed  development.  The  seamless  flow  of 
information in the Islamic financial markets is integral to facilitate the efficient price discovery 
process  and  maintain  the  vibrancy  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  Data  and  news  that 
transcends  boundaries  in  real  time  are  important  for  not  only  investors  and  financial 
institutions but also for researchers and scholars in Islamic finance. It will contribute towards 
enhancing  competitiveness,  product  innovation  and  strengthen  the  international  financial 
inter-linkages. 
As  we  enter  this  new  decade,  the  challenge  for  the  world  is  to  sustain  the  economic 
recovery. While there continues to be many problems still to be addressed in the developed 
world,  most  emerging  economies  have  continued  to  do  well.  In  Malaysia,  our  economy 
recorded  a  strong  growth  of  7.2%  in  2010  driven  by  strong  domestic  demand  and  our 
stronger economic and financial linkages with other emerging economies. An important part 
of this recovery is the strong recovery in private investment as capacity utilisation increases 
and  as  the dynamic  nature  of  our  economy  presents  new  investment  opportunities  in  new 
growth areas. 
For  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  the  year  2011  is  set  to  be  an  exciting  period.  The  global 
sukuk issuance in the year 2010 surpassed that of the previous year by more than 20 per 
cent. Against this positive growth, renewed confidence of investors and issuers is evident. In 
2011,  the  sukuk  issuance  is  projected  to  surpass  the  level  recorded  in  2007  when  it 
sustained the highest level of issuances. The year 2010 also saw Malaysia’s evolution as a 
multi-currency  sukuk  origination  platform  with  four  foreign  currency  sukuk  issuances 
amounting  to  about  USD3  billlion. This  trend will  benefit  from  the  Bloomberg  AIBIM  Bursa 
Malaysia Sovereign Shariah Index (BMSSI) developed by the Association of Islamic Banking 
Institutions  Malaysia  (AIBIM),  Bursa  Malaysia  and  Bloomberg  that  is  also  being  launched 
today as part of the enhancement in the Islamic finance platform. 
The launch of this ringgit sukuk index marks another significant milestone in the Malaysian 
Islamic financial environment as it measures the performance of ringgit denominated Shariah 
compliant  government  securities 
the  benchmarking  purposes.  This 
development  has  been  part  of  the  continuous  support  by  AIBIM  and  Bursa  Malaysia  to 
further  strengthen  Malaysia’s  position  as  a  leading  sukuk  market  in  the  world.  The 
collaboration  between  AIBIM,  Bursa  Malaysia  and  Bloomberg  is  also  expected  to  see  a 
ringgit  corporate  sukuk  index  in  the  offing.  Moving  forward,  efforts  are  underway  between 
Bank Negara Malaysia and Bloomberg to broaden this initiative to develop a foreign currency 
in  addition 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
issuance  by  sovereign  entities,  multilateral 
sukuk  index.  The  liberalization  of  our  financial  markets  is  expected  to  attract  more  such 
foreign  currency  sukuk 
institutions  and 
multinational corporations. 
In  further  strengthening  the  infrastructure  for  the  sukuk  market,  the  Malaysian  Electronic 
Clearing Corporation or MyClear, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Bank Negara Malaysia that 
operates the country’s real time gross settlement system and securities depository system, is 
also  undertaking  an  initiative  to  promote  cross-border  financial  transaction  that  is  efficient, 
reliable and secured. This initiative reflects our commitment towards financial integration in 
the ASEAN region and the global financial system through closer linkage with other central 
securities depositories, namely Euroclear and the Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) of the 
Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority.  It  is  expected  that  other  central  securities  depository  will 
participate  in  this  initiative  to  heighten  this  cross-border  linkage.  MyClear  is thus set  to  be 
one of the key multilateral settlement platforms that will facilitate sukuk trading transactions. 
The implementation of this initiative which is scheduled to be completed in the second half of 
2011  offers  cost-effective  access  for  foreign  investors  to  invest  in  Malaysian  securities 
deposited  with  MyClear.  At  the  same  time,  it  will  enable  Malaysian  investors  to  invest  in 
foreign  securities  deposited  with  international  and  regional  central  securities  depositories 
institutions.  Moving  forward,  MyClear  will  continue  to  expand  its  horizon  to  other  regions 
across the world. 
Another infrastructure development that is taking shape in the international Islamic financial 
system  is  the  establishment  of  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation 
(IILM). Launched in October 2010, the IILM has begun its operations in Kuala Lumpur on the 
1st  of  February.  Its  main  task  is  to  issue  short-term  multi-currency  liquidity  instruments  to 
facilitate the cross-border liquidity management between financial centres and at the same 
time enhance the financial inter-linkages. The IILM is scheduled to roll out the issuance of 
liquidity instruments later this year. This will allow for more efficient management of financial 
flows across borders and thus contribute towards the efficient internationalisation of Islamic 
finance. 
As  the  Islamic  financial  community  significantly  grows  in  size,  it  is  congruent  that  this 
enhanced  Islamic  finance  platform  being  launched  today  has  widened  its  outreach  to  the 
subscribers  globally  and  from  contributors  of  data  and  information  from  institutions  around 
the  world.  To  support  this  new  enhanced  Islamic  finance  platform,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
and  the  other  community  members  under  the  MIFC  initiative  is  pleased  to  be  one  of  the 
contributors. The MIFC page in the enhanced platform provides insights on Shariah, MIFC 
business opportunities and key developments. It also hosts the extensive network of Islamic 
financial community in Malaysia. 
On this note, I wish to congratulate Bloomberg, AIBIM, Bursa Malaysia and the many teams 
that worked on this initiative to serve the Islamic financial industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
