Patrick Honohan: Additional capital requirements for four Irish banks  
Remarks by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the publication 
of capital and liquidity results for the banking sector, Dublin, 31 March 2011. 
 Today the Central Bank announces additional capital requirements for four banks covered by 
Government guarantee, namely Bank of Ireland, Allied Irish Banks, Irish Life and Permanent 
and EBS Building Society.  
This is part of what has been envisaged, since last year’s initial effort, as an annual capital 
adequacy exercise for the banks to get to grips with the scale of losses and the challenge of 
rebuilding the Irish banking system. 
But  the  present  exercise  is  on  an  exceptionally  intensive  and  elaborate  basis,  and  is 
designed to respond to market scepticism about the banks. This scepticism means that the 
banks  have  to  hold  more  capital  than  would  otherwise  be  needed,  in  order  to  convince 
international lenders of their solidity under all circumstances. 
This is being done as part of the EU-IMF Programme designed to restore market confidence 
to Ireland, and in particular to its Government finances and to its banks.  
The  capital  requirements  being  announced  form  part  of  what  we  are  calling  the  Financial 
Measures Programme,  which represents the banking part of this two-pronged strategy. As 
you will hear, it involves not just a capital increase, but also a schedule of deleveraging and 
asset sales and some structural reorganization (on which the Central Bank has been closely 
involved in advising, and which will be announced by the Minister for Finance). All of these 
elements are interrelated. 
The  overall  increase  in  capital  required  is  sizable.  The  main  underlying  reason  for  such  a 
large  increase  is  the  need  to  restore  market  confidence.  It  is  a  prerequisite  to  the  banks 
returning  to  normal  functioning  that  they  should  have  ample  capital  to  meet  even  the 
market’s gloomy prognostications. The European Commission, ECB and IMF have endorsed 
the rigorous approach used. 
This year’s exercise has involved a detailed drilling down to the loan-by-loan level, including 
an  intensive  data  integrity  exercise  and  asset  quality  review.  The  Central  Bank  engaged 
BlackRock  Solutions,  an  international  firm  with  a  strong  reputation  in  the  market  for  its 
capabilities in assessing losses in credit portfolios to conduct as comprehensive a review of 
the  loan  portfolios  as  was  possible  in  3  months,  with  an  emphasis  on  determining  the 
potential scale of loan losses in an adverse and unlikely macroeconomic scenario. Reality is 
therefore not likely to be as bad as the projections they have arrived at; nevertheless, they 
are what is needed to arrive at a sufficient capital requirement. 
Three factors contribute in approximately equal amounts to the additional capital.  
 
First, there are the loan-loss calculations by BlackRock for the coming three years. 
BlackRock’s  method  and  approach  build-in  considerable  conservatism  and  are 
based on an even more adverse macroeconomic scenario than used last year. 
Second, there is the cost of asset sales and deleveraging that are mandated as part 
of  the  EU-IMF  programme  and  which  reflect  the  impossibility  of  the  banks’ 
continuing to operate on the over-sized scale which they had reached by 2007.  
Third,  a  higher  minimum  capital  percentage  has  been  set  and  additional  buffers 
have  been  included  to  take  care  of  any  concerns  regarding  any  other  factors  not 
taken into account in the explicit calculations, for example, post-2013 events. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Therefore,  while  it  would  indeed  be  appropriate  to  make  some  upward  adjustment  in  the 
central estimate of future bank losses from what was envisaged in previous announcements 
last  year,  I  would  emphasize  that  that  is  not  the  focus  of  today’s  announcement.  The 
scenarios  and  modelling  being  used  are  not  intended  to  provide  forecasts  of  what  will 
happen. Indeed, the thrust of the banking policy – including the other announcements of the 
Financial Measures Programme which will be made by the Government today – is to seek to 
ensure that the banks, their customers, and the nation in general get out of this situation with 
much less cost, distress and dislocation. The Central Bank’s forecasts for the economy are 
much more optimistic than the stressed scenario used. 
Now I will hand you over to Matthew Elderfield for more of the details. 
 The Financial Measures Programme will create a sustainable Irish banking system through a 
process  of  recapitalization,  deleveraging  and  reorganization.  The  additional  capital 
requirements announced today provide for future loan losses over the coming three years on 
a scale that is unlikely to occur and provide for an additional buffer for subsequent events. 
Enough  capital  is  also being  provided  to  cover  the  unavoidable  losses  involved  in  needed 
asset disposals, even though there will not be fire-sales. 
The  assumptions  that  have  been  used,  the  methodology  BlackRock  has  followed  and  the 
capital  percentage  targets  the  Central  Bank  has  set  together  provide  an  exceptionally 
conservative basis for recapitalizing the Irish banks. The data assembled in this exercise has 
been  published  to  enable  independent  analysts  to  see  the  basis  on  which  we  have 
determined  loan  loss  projections,  and  as  part  of  a  continuing  effort  to  create  more 
transparency around these matters. 
I’d  also  like  to  mention  that  the  data  verification  exercise  has  provided  some  reassurance 
about data quality, while not all of the relevant data or paperwork was readily accessible, the 
consultants did not find data and paperwork matters of material impact on likely losses. 
Smaller, but more soundly constituted, Irish banks should be in a better position to provide 
loan and other financial services to households and businesses and to support the economic 
recovery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
