Daniel Mminele: Thoughts on South Africa’s monetary policy 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
JP Morgan Investor Conference, Washington DC, 16 April 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank  you  to  JP  Morgan  Emerging  Markets  Research  Group  for  inviting  me  to  share  with 
you some thoughts on South Africa’s Monetary Policy.  
In the years prior to the most recent global financial crisis, central banks in general appeared 
to  have  almost  perfected  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.1  Inflation  targeting  central  banks 
were given operational independence to vary the short-term interest rate in order to achieve 
an  inflation  target.  While  this  worked  very  well  for  some  time,  the  global  financial  crisis 
showed us that achieving price stability by no means equated to achieving financial stability. 
This  has  resulted  in  somewhat  of  a  paradigm  shift  for  traditional  monetary  policy,  and  it 
seems we may be on the cusp of a new era in central banking. 
I would like to briefly discuss global economic developments and the changing role of central 
banks,  highlighting  the  challenges  and  lessons  learnt  from  the  global  financial  crisis.  I  will 
then talk about South African monetary policy, as that is the reason for which I was invited to 
speak to you today.  
Global economic developments and monetary policy  
2. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund’s  (IMF)  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  reflects  a 
similar picture to that of a few months ago. The global economic recovery proceeds at an 
uneven  pace  and  although  it  is  broadening,  the  divergence  in  economic  activity  remains 
wide. The growth momentum in advanced economies is gaining traction, but is insufficient to 
meaningfully impact on unemployment.  
Emerging  markets,  on  the  other  hand,  are  characterised  by  robust  growth  with  signs  of 
overheating in certain economies. The IMF projects that global growth will moderate in 2011 
to  4,5  per  cent  from  5  per  cent  in  2010.  Advanced  economies  are  forecast  to  expand  by 
2,5 per cent and emerging economies by 6,5 per cent.  
The IMF has also identified a number of old and new risks, including the threat of spill overs 
from the euro area periphery to core Europe, exacerbated by continuing weakness among 
many  European  financial  institutions,  a  lack  of  clarity  on  exposures  and  weak  sovereign 
balance sheets. This last point is not confined to Europe, but a risk to advanced economies 
in general and the US and Japan more particularly. It is plausible that this state of affairs, if 
not addressed, could result in an abrupt increase in interest rates, which could destabilise 
global bond markets and emerging markets more particularly. In emerging economies, the 
IMF highlights the risk of overheating and the threat of a hard landing. The IMF is of the view 
that policy responses so far have been inadequate to address these pressures. Finally, oil 
and food price risks are also on the upside.  
The  combination  of  these  factors  makes  central  banking  a  somewhat  more  complex 
environment to operate in. The global economy has emerged from recession, but has not yet 
                                                 
1   BIS Working Paper 326, November 2010, The changing role of central banks, CAE Goodhart. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
returned to pre-crisis levels of output and employment. The very actions taken to mend the 
global  economy  have  contributed  to  a  new  set  of  challenges,  in  particular,  ballooning 
sovereign debt ratios. At the same time, inflation is picking up speed, owing to the spike in 
food and oil prices, and the very tools central banks use to combat inflation run the risk of 
attracting  even  more  capital  inflows  into  emerging  economies.  Monetary  policy  in  the 
developed world remains accommodative, policy rates are still close to zero and quantitative 
easing remains a feature of some of the advanced economies.  
As with any crisis, there are always lessons to be learned. One of these as I mentioned in the 
introduction, is the limitations of monetary policy and the fact that the achievement of price 
stability by itself does not lead to financial stability. We are already seeing greater emphasis 
on  financial  stability  compared  to  prior  the  crisis.  Not  only  will  central  banks  need  to  pay 
greater  attention  to  financial  considerations  in  framing  monetary  policy,  but  will  also  most 
likely  play  a  greater  role  in  macro  prudential  policy.  In  this  respect,  central  banks are  well 
placed  to  deal  with  these  challenges,  having  the  relevant  expertise  in  macro-economic 
analysis,  knowledge  of 
financial  markets,  overseeing  payments  and  settlements 
infrastructure and (in many cases) explicit responsibility for the regulation and supervision of 
financial institutions.2 
Nonetheless,  the  financial  stability  objective  of  central  banks  remains  clouded  with 
uncertainty. It is unclear to what extent it can be an additional objective of monetary policy, 
and even if it is, how do central banks adjust the policy response, are there sufficient and 
appropriate  instruments  available  to  central  banks  to  fulfil  this  dual  mandate  and  would 
macro  prudential  policy  at  times  not  run  the  risk  of  undermining  the  effectiveness  of  the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism.  In  addition,  there  are  implications  for  legislative  and 
governance  arrangements.  There  is  much  work  underway  in  trying  to  understand  exactly 
what all this means. 
So while central banks may have perfected the art of monetary policy in the last decade, they 
have also undergone a tectonic shift in the last few years, which still has some way to go. 
Emerging markets and capital flows 
3. 
One of the consequences of the easy monetary policy employed over the past few years has 
been the surge in capital flows to emerging market economies. The Institute of International 
Finance (IIF) records that net private capital inflows to emerging markets increased from just 
below US$200 billion in 2002 (1,5 per cent of GDP) to US$908 billion in 2010 (7 per cent of 
GDP).  The  IIF  estimates  that  inflows  will  rise  to  US$960  billion  in  2011  and  to  over 
US$1 trillion  in  2012.  These  inflows  reflect  a  combination  of  greater  macroeconomic 
fundamentals in emerging markets, significant fiscal deterioration and loose monetary policy 
in  advanced  economies,  and  the  increased  integration  of  emerging  economies  into 
international capital markets.  
Many  emerging  market  economies  have  taken  various  actions  towards  curbing  capital 
inflows in an attempt to limit currency appreciation. Measures considered and implemented 
range  from  taxes  on  inflows,  limits  being  placed  on  government  bond  investment  by 
foreigners, to pre-announced currency market intervention programmes, just to name a few. 
South Africa too has experienced large capital inflows, with the resultant upward pressure on 
the exchange rate of the rand. A favourable fiscal position, deep and liquid capital markets 
and  sound  macroeconomic  policy  have  made  the  country  an  attractive  destination  for 
portfolio inflows. South Africa has studied the measures imposed by other emerging market 
economies, but questions the efficacy of most of these measures. Furthermore, it is doubtful 
that  such  measures  would  be  appropriate  for  South  Africa  given  our  savings/investment 
                                                 
2   The role of central banks after the crisis, Mr Jaime Caruana, General Manager of the BIS, January 2011.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
imbalance and dependence on portfolio flows to finance our current-account deficit. Like the 
Philippines, where measures to encourage greater capital outflows were implemented, so too 
has  South  Africa  lifted  some  of  the  limits  on  outward  investments  for  local  pension  funds, 
insurers and individuals.  
South  Africa  has  also  taken  advantage  of  strong  capital  inflows  to  increase  the  level  of 
foreign-exchange reserves. Gross reserves have increased by approximately US$9,6 billion 
since January 2010 to US$49,3 billion in March 2011. Of this amount, an increase of about 
US$5,5 billion was recorded in the first quarter of 2011. During the 2010 calendar year, the 
South  African  Reserve  Bank  purchased  US$7,4  billion  for  foreign-exchange  reserves 
accumulation, while approximately US$3,8 billion was purchased during the first quarter of 
2011. The Bank’s policy continues to be that the exchange rate remains market-determined, 
and therefore the policy is to accumulate reserves and not to defend or achieve a particular 
level for the exchange rate.  
Recent domestic economic developments 
4. 
The  improvement  in  global  economic  activity  and  in  international  commodity  prices,  along 
with domestic monetary and fiscal stimulus, resulted in a cyclical improvement in the South 
African economy. After emerging from recession in third quarter of 2009, growth accelerated 
to 4,8 per cent in the first quarter of 2010, but moderated to 4,4 per cent in the fourth quarter 
of  2010.  On  an  annual  basis,  real  GDP  growth  contracted  by  1,7  per  cent  in  2009  but 
improved  by  2,8  per  cent  in  2010.  There  was  a  marked  turnaround  in  manufacturing 
production in 2010. After contracting by 10,4 per cent in 2009, the manufacturing sector grew 
by 5,0 per cent in 2010. Despite the increase in activity, manufacturing production remains 
well  below  the  peak  reached  in  2008  and  has  been  primarily  driven  by  the  motor  vehicle 
sector. In general, a lack of new private sector investment projects, relative strength of the 
rand and unfavourable economic developments in some of the country’s key export markets, 
led to a subdued performance. High commodity prices and strong export demand also lifted 
mining output in the fourth quarter. The economy, however, continues to be characterised by 
a significant degree of underutilisation of productive capacity, measuring 80,7 per cent in the 
fourth quarter of 2010, well below the pre-crisis average of around 85 per cent.  
Among  the  expenditure  components,  real  final  consumption  expenditure  by  the  household 
sector contracted for five successive quarters before resuming an upward trend from the final 
quarter  of  2009.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2010,  real  final  consumption  expenditure  by 
households increased by just over 5,0 per cent, reflecting positive consumer sentiment and 
disposable  income  growth.  Credit  extension  figures  show  a  better  take-up  of  credit  by 
businesses, implying that the recovery in investment spending will pick up and that subdued 
growth in gross fixed capital formation will improve. However, while the Bank is of the opinion 
that  consumption  expenditure  may  remain  relatively  robust,  it  is  unlikely  to  accelerate  to 
excessive levels in the short-term, owing to continued high levels of household indebtedness 
(77,6  per  cent  of  disposable  income).  The  ratio  of  impaired  advances  to  gross  loans  and 
advances  has  remained  at  elevated  levels  of  around  5,8  per  cent  for  some  time,  but  has 
stabilised.  Bank  credit  extension  to  the  private  sector  is  also  relatively  subdued,  with  total 
loans and advances growing by 4 per cent since September 2010, house prices are either 
declining  or  growing  at  low  nominal  rates,  while  equity  prices  will  most  likely  also  have  a 
moderating impact on wealth effects and consumption.  
The Bank forecasts that growth will average 3,7 per cent in 2011 and 3,9 per cent in 2012. 
Various high frequency indicators suggest a positive growth momentum going forward. The 
composite leading business cycle indicator has remained in positive territory, both business 
and consumer confidence levels are relatively high, and the Purchasing Managers Index for 
the  manufacturing  sector  maintained  a  level  above  the  key  50  threshold.  Notwithstanding 
these developments, unemployment remains very high. Even the improved growth rates are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
insufficient and well below what is required to significantly impact on the unemployment rate, 
which measured 24,0 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010.  
As  with  any  forecast,  there  are  many  risks.  Notably,  global  developments  present  some 
challenges.  Peripheral  Europe  and  the  unfolding  sovereign  debt  crisis  remains  a  wildcard, 
the  US  economy  is  still  fragile  despite  substantial  stimuli,  events  in  North  Africa  and  the 
Middle East and their impact on oil prices, and the recent disasters in Japan could all derail 
the nascent global recovery and hence, South Africa’s economic outlook.  
Recent monetary policy developments 
5. 
The global inflation outlook has deteriorated somewhat over the past few months, driven by 
higher prices for food and oil. Inflationary pressures in emerging market economies are more 
pronounced,  resulting  in  a  few  emerging  economies  already  embarking  on  monetary 
tightening.  For  South  Africa,  cost-push  pressures  have  increased  the  upside  risks  to  the 
inflation outlook, while demand driven pressures remain subdued. The year-on-year inflation 
rate for consumer prices increased by 3,7 per cent in February. Despite rising global food 
prices,  food  price  inflation  in  South  Africa  is  still  relatively  low,  helped  by  recent  bumper 
maize  crops  and  exchange  rate  developments.  But  recent  data  releases  clearly  show  an 
accelerating trend at both producer and consumer levels.  
The  Bank’s  CPI  forecast  has  been  adjusted  higher,  but  still  reflects  that  inflation  should 
remain within the target range over the forecast period to the end of 2012. CPI inflation is 
forecast to average 4,7 per cent in 2011 and 5,7 per cent in 2012, peaking at 5,8 per cent in 
the first quarter of 2012. Much of the increase in inflation is based on higher assumptions for 
international oil prices. The most recent survey shows that inflation expectations of financial 
analysts  have  deteriorated  slightly,  but  expectations  of  business  and  trade  unions  have 
shown  some  improvements.  The  Bureau  for  Economic  Research  Inflation  Expectations 
Survey shows that inflation is expected to average 5,3 per cent in 2011 and 5,7 per cent in 
2012, compared to 5,5 per cent and 6,2 per cent in the previous survey.  
One  of  the  key  upside  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  has  been  high  real  wage  settlements. 
There  are,  nonetheless,  indications  of  a  moderation  in  wage  settlements,  with  the  overall 
wage settlement rate amounting to 8,2 per cent in 2010, compared to 9,3 per cent in 2009. 
Nominal  unit  labour  cost  growth  has  similarly  moderated,  from  9,3  per  cent  in  the  third 
quarter of 2010 to 7,7 per cent in the fourth quarter. Food and administered prices remain 
significant upside risks to the inflation outlook, most particularly, oil prices. It seems likely that 
oil  prices  will  remain  at  elevated  levels,  even  if  current  geo-political  challenges  can  be 
resolved.  
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  kept  the  repo  rate  steady  at  5,5  per  cent  since 
November  2010.  While  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  are  tilted  to  the  upside,  they  are 
predominantly of a cost-push nature, but need to be monitored very closely for any second 
round effects.  
Conclusion 
6. 
In summary, the past year has brought some recovery in global economic activity, although 
the momentum has slowed somewhat. There are still many risks on the horizon, and South 
Africa is subject to the same risks facing the global economy.  
The  economic  recovery  in  South  Africa  is  on  track  and  short  term  economic  indicators 
suggest that we will continue to see further improvements. However, growth continues to be 
at levels that are insufficient to meaningfully address unemployment. 
Inflation has picked up, but is expected to remain within the target range over the forecast 
period.  At  the  conclusion  of  its  last  meeting,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  deemed  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
policy rate to be at an appropriate level. However, inflationary pressures will be monitored, 
especially insofar as second round inflationary pressures may negatively impact the inflation 
outlook, so as determine when policy adjustments may be required.  
Thank you. Enjoy the rest of the conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
