Jean-Claude Trichet: Monetary policy in uncertain times 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Bank of 
Finland 200th Anniversary Conference, Helsinki, 5 May 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at your conference on monetary policy.  
It is remarkable to think that the Bank of Finland will celebrate its two hundredth anniversary 
this  year.  The  ECB,  as  the  youngest  central  bank  in  the  world,  but  with  such  an 
extraordinarily solid historical legacy in the Eurosystem, looks at such a storied history in the 
European monetary team with pride.  
This  conference  occurs  at  a  point  in  time  when  central  banks  and  governments  of  the 
advanced  economies  continue  to  face  a  wide  range  of  challenges.  I  would  like  to  start  by 
reflecting in front of you on a challenge that, at first sight, may seem not directly related to 
monetary  policy:  strengthening  economic  governance  in  the  euro  area.  Strong  economic 
governance – and therefore closer economic union – is however the fundamental counterpart 
to the single monetary policy. With a centralised monetary policy but decentralised fiscal and 
economic policies – in the absence of a federal institutional framework – those policies have 
to be placed in a solid framework and appropriately coordinated.  
The  duty  of  public  institutions  is  to  fulfil  their  mandate  and,  by  doing  so,  to  meet  the 
expectations of the citizens. The ECB’s Governing Council has done so and fulfilled public 
expectations in line with its mandate. Citizens in Europe expect overall stable prices and their 
purchasing  power  to  be  maintained.  Over  the  first  12  years,  the  ECB  has  delivered  an 
average annual rate of inflation of 1.97%.  
Citizens  expect  a  stable  economy  and  public  authorities  that  are  alert  and  effective  in 
combating  crises.  The  ECB  has  taken  unprecedented  steps  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the 
recent crisis on the real economy by ensuring the flow of credit to the households and firms 
and preserving financial stability – of which I will talk more later. 
In  the  field  of  economic  governance,  however,  public  institutions  still  need  to  make  a 
“quantum leap” to meet public expectations. European citizens recognise the value of closer 
economic cooperation, particularly those in the euro area. Surveys indicate that, on average 
in euro area countries, more than four out of five euro area citizens are in favour of greater 
policy  coordination  between  countries  to  overcome  the  crisis.  This  is  something,  which  I 
consider  very  important:  citizens  want  a  stronger  and  better  coordination  of  economic  and 
financial policies in the euro area.  
The challenge facing policymakers today is how to deliver the deeper economic union that is 
so  fundamental  to  EMU  and  to  the  expectations  of  its  citizens.  All  agree  that  the  existing 
economic governance framework needs to be reformed. Fiscal and broader macroeconomic 
policies have to be consistent with rates of sustainable growth and price stability in a stability-
orientated  economic  and  monetary  union.  To  achieve  this,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
needs  to  be  reinforced  and  a  strong  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and 
competitiveness needs to be installed. 
Important negotiations are ongoing between the Commission, the Council and the European 
Parliament to reach agreement on the legislative package to reform economic governance. 
For these reforms to reach the “quantum leap” that is required, the following elements are 
essential:  
First,  greater  automaticity  is  needed  in  all  surveillance  procedures,  including  the  new 
macroeconomic  surveillance  framework.  The  Council  should  have  less  room  for  halting  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
suspending procedures against Member States. Strict deadlines to avoid lengthy procedures 
and the deletion of escape clauses would further automaticity. This is critical to ensure the 
credibility of the new framework and address spillovers in a timely manner. 
Second,  enforcement  tools  need  to  be  more  effective.  In  addition  to  financial  sanctions, 
political  and  reputational  measures  would  help  foster  early  compliance,  as  would  the 
application  of  earlier  and  more  gradual  financial  sanctions  within  the  macroeconomic 
surveillance framework. Discretion to reduce or suspend financial sanctions is undesirable as 
it strongly reduces effectiveness and sets the wrong incentives.  
Third, more ambitious policy requirements would better match the current reality of the euro 
area. It makes sense for macroeconomic surveillance to have a clear focus on the euro area 
countries with large current account deficits, significant losses of competitiveness and high 
levels of public and private debt. As regards fiscal surveillance, ambitious benchmarks are 
needed when establishing an excessive deficit and in setting the adjustment path towards a 
country’s medium-term budgetary objective. 
Finally, the gap between the EU and national level must be closed. New procedures will not 
be  sufficient  if  they  are  not  solidly  anchored  at  national  level.  Binding  commitments  by 
Member States to swiftly implement strong national budgetary frameworks are essential. 
In my view, the proposals agreed by the Council do not represent the significant leap towards 
closer economic union that is required. The European Parliament has been more ambitious 
in its approach, particularly as regards greater automaticity and the broader and more timely 
use of sanctions. I hope that the ongoing negotiations over the legislative package will permit 
the texts to be significantly improved along these lines. I believe that the citizens of Europe 
count on the European Parliament to take a broader perspective and drive these changes 
forward.  
There are also some important areas in which care should be taken not to weaken the texts. 
In  particular,  softening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  by  introducing  further  exceptions  or 
treating in a special way specific expenditure items, such as public investment, would create 
further room for unwarranted discretionary decisions. It is also of crucial importance that the 
economic  governance  reform  is  fully  implemented  as  soon  as  possible  and  without  any 
transition period.  
Beyond  fiscal  and  broader  macroeconomic  governance,  it  is  important  to  remember  that 
economic union comprises a third governance pillar which is equally important: the structural 
reforms embedded in the “Europe 2020” strategy and the Euro Plus Pact. Structural reforms 
are  essential  to  elevate  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  in  the  face  of  ongoing  debt 
sustainability  challenges  and  future  age-related  expenditures.  A  specific  example  where 
urgent progress is needed is the incomplete single market in services. It makes full economic 
sense  and  it  is  urgent  to  complete  the  single  market  in  the  sector  in  which  a  very  large 
majority of people in Europe work. 
When  EMU  was  first  established,  many  people  asked  how  monetary  union  could  function 
effectively in a Europe of sovereign states. The answer is simple: it can function effectively 
with an appropriate economic union. 
It is fully recognised that this economic union must be one where countries that wisely follow 
a virtuous economic path are rewarded, and those that pursue unsustainable policies have to 
internalise the costs of their actions. 
At  the  same  time,  economic  union  implies  interconnectedness,  and  it  is  in  all  countries’ 
interest not to exacerbate difficulties by creating uncertainty in financial markets. 
We look to an economic union where all countries face up to their individuals responsibilities, 
but also an economic union which remains guided by a common cause and destiny. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Turning now to monetary policy, the challenges central banks are facing in fulfilling their role 
of a stable anchor are large. 
First,  decisions  have  to  be  made  in  an  environment  marked  by  a  very  high  degree  of 
uncertainty. Although operating in an uncertain environment is common business for central 
banks,  I  would  argue  that  structural  transformations  of  our  economies,  the  ever-growing 
complexity  of  global  finance  and  the  overall  process  of  globalisation  are  itself  creating  a 
multidimensional acceleration of change leading to increased uncertainty on the transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy. 
In addition, in crisis times there is an elevated degree of Knightian uncertainty. The character 
of this uncertainty can not be calculated or modelled. Acting pre-emptively to avoid possible 
grave consequences of events for which a priori probabilities do not exist implies that crisis 
prevention is a crucial part of policy.  
This leads to another challenge, which is the need to communicate clearly the actions taken 
in  the  realm  of  crisis  prevention.  The  immediate  decisions  that  appear  necessary  to  avoid 
crisis might not be fully understood by external observers, including the general public for the 
simple reason that they do not see the counterfactual. When measures are wisely taken ex 
ante,  precisely  to  avoid  the  unfolding  of  an  acute  crisis,  then  decision-makers’  face  the 
problem of explaining their actions in the light of something that did not happen. 
This is yet one more reason for why the independence of central banks is absolutely key. It is 
essential to permit them to take the appropriate preventive decisions. As the world around us 
is rapidly changing, swift action is often called for. I have previously proposed a posture of 
“credible alertness”, suggesting that it was the best approach for a central bank to anchor 
inflation  expectations  firmly,  while  being  ready  to  take  action  at  any  point  in  time  without 
being the prisoner of previous commitments on policy actions. The threat to act will be more 
effective the more credible the central bank has been over time in actually delivering price 
stability.  
In  addition,  the  knowledge  that  the  central  bank  will  normally  make  use  of  all  available 
options  –  as  circumstances  dictate  –  to  counteract  situations  that  have  the  potential  for 
undermining  confidence  and  perturbing  market  conditions  enhance  control  of  private 
expectations.  Our  readiness  to  act  prior  to  the  crisis,  during  the  crisis  and  as  far  as  the 
existing  use  of  standard  interest  rate  measures  is  concerned  also  currently  is  clearly 
demonstrated throughout time.  
Allow me to elaborate a little bit on some of the actions taken. In the exceptional times of the 
past three years, the response to the crisis by central banks around the world has led to the 
adoption  of  non-standard  measures.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the  non-standard  measures 
adopted during the crisis are precisely designed to help restore a more normal functioning of 
the  transmission  mechanism  and  contribute  to  recreating  an  environment  where  the 
“standard  measures”  can  operate  effectively.  It  should  be  clear  what  the  non-standard 
measures  of  the  ECB  are  not.  They  can  not  be  seen  as  liquidity  measures  to  stimulate 
activity at a lower bound for interest rate, where they would act where standard interest rate 
policy fails. Rather “non-standard” measures can co-exist with different levels of the policy 
rate.  
The  monetary  policy  stance  is  always  chosen  by  the  Governing  Council  to  deliver  price 
stability in a medium term. The non-standard measures have a clear purpose: ensuring that 
the  standard  measures  themselves  are  transmitted  as  effectively  as  possible  despite  the 
otherwise abnormal functioning of some markets. The types of non-conventional operation 
implemented  by  the  ECB  fully  allow  us  to  amend  the  monetary  policy  stance,  in  particular 
through a change in the interest rates. In other words, decisions about interest rates can be 
separated from the non-conventional measures. 
I refer to this duality as the “separation principle”. The non-standard measures have to be 
commensurate with what we are observing on the market, namely to help the transmission of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
our  monetary  policy  to  function  better  again.  The  standard  measures  are  there  to  deliver 
price stability in the medium term. 
Seen through the lens of the separation principle, I stress that we have been and will take in 
the future decisions on standard measures independently of our decisions on non-standard 
measures.  For  example,  the  ECB  has  indicated  clearly  that  interest  rate  increases  could 
perfectly well take place independently of the timing of the phasing out of the non-standard 
measures – if those non-standard measures continue to be fully justified by the situation. 
The separation principle can be seen operating recently. On April 7 the Governing Council 
decided to increase the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by 
25  basis  points.  I  was  particularly  pleased  that  this  decision  was  taken  unanimously.  That 
was  of  course  a  very  important  decision  that  the  Governing  Council  was  implementing  as 
regards  the  “standard  measures”.  At  the  same  time  “non-standard  measures”  were 
maintained for the second quarter of this year, particularly the policy of full allotment and a 
fixed rate for the supply of liquidity with a duration of three months.  
 Let  me  conclude.  I  am  convinced  that  when  central  banks  and  governments  take  up  the 
tasks  that  are  before  them  then  we  will  surmount  the  difficulties  our  economies  are 
experiencing. But this is no time for complacency in any respect. The ECB, for its part, will do 
all that is necessary to continue to be a solid and reliable anchor of stability and confidence 
in  these  challenging  times.  And  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  future  will  continue  to  present 
new and unexpected challenges.  
The citizens of Europe can rely on our strong determination to ensure a very solid anchoring 
of inflation expectations – something that is more important than ever in turbulent times.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
