Nout Wellink: Basel III and the impact on financial markets 
Speech by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the ING Basel III Financing Conference, Amsterdam, 
14 April 2011. 
 It  is  has  been  three  and  a  half  years  since  the  global  financial  crisis  began.  The  banking 
sector and financial system now seem to have stabilised. But this required unprecedented 
public sector interventions, and significant risks remain. Despite the severity of the crisis, we 
are already seeing signs that its lessons are beginning to fade. At the same time, there are 
still significant risks on the horizons, while key reforms still need to be carried through if we 
are to achieve a truly stable banking and financial system. 
The  Basel  III  framework  is  the  cornerstone  of  the  G20  regulatory  reform  agenda  and  the 
Basel Committee rules were issued at the end of last year. This development is the result of 
an unprecedented process of coordination across 27 countries. Compared to Basel II, it was 
also achieved in record time, less than two years. The next step, which is just as critical as 
the  policy  development,  is  implementation.  Consistent  and  timely  global  implementation  of 
the  minimum  standards  of  Basel  III  is  critical  to  ensure  longer-term  banking  sector  and 
economic  stability.  Some  countries may  choose  to  implement  higher  standards  to address 
risks  particular  to  their  national  contexts,  examples  of  which  so  far  are  Switzerland  and 
Sweden. This has always been an option under Basel I and II, and it will remain the case 
under Basel III. To minimise the transition costs, the Basel III requirements will be phased in 
gradually from 1 January 2013. 
This morning I would like to discuss with you the impact of Basel III on financial markets. In 
addition, I would like to focus on a key remaining area of policy development work, which is 
dealing with the risks of systemically important banks. 
The liquidity framework 
I am aware that the impact of Basel III on financial markets is especially interlinked with the 
new funding and liquidity ratios. Let me therefore first say a few words about new the liquidity 
standards. Weak liquidity profiles of banks were one of the core elements of the crisis, and 
they  therefore  represent  a  critical  part  of  the  regulatory  framework  going  forward.  Overall 
there is broad support for the liquidity framework introduced by the Basel Committee. Banks 
and other  market participants already use  methods similar to the Liquidity Coverage Ratio 
(LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). Many of the issues that have been raised 
pertaining to these requirements revolve around the calibration of the ratios, rather than the 
conceptual basis of the framework. 
It is important to emphasise the goal in establishing the liquidity framework: to require banks 
to withstand more severe shocks than they had been able to in the past, thus reducing the 
need  for  such  massive  public  sector  liquidity  support  in  future  episodes  of  stress.  The 
success of the framework should not be measured in terms of whether it will have zero cost. 
Instead,  the  better  measure  of  success  is  whether  the  framework  corrects  pre-crisis 
extremes at acceptable costs. Banks that take on excessive liquidity risk should be penalised 
under  the  new  framework,  while  sound  business  models  should  continue  to  thrive.  With 
these  objectives  in  mind,  the  Committee  will  use  the  observation  period  to  review  the 
implications of the standards – all the more as they are brand new – for individual banks, the 
banking  sector,  and  financial  markets,  addressing  any  unintended  consequences  as 
necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  this  regard,  the  Basel  Committee’s  focus  is  now  on  ensuring  that  the  calibration  of  the 
framework  is  appropriate.  Certain  aspects  of  the  calibration  will  be  examined  and  this  will 
involve regular data collection from banks. Any adjustments should be based on additional 
information and rigorous analyses. However, banks’ data on the crisis are distorted because 
of  the  government  support  schemes.  Hence,  the  analysis  will  need  to  include  both 
quantitative bank experience and additional qualitative judgement. 
It is worth emphasising that a number of effects of the framework are indeed intended. For 
example, with regard to the pool of liquid assets, the rules are meant to promote changes in 
behaviour  and  to  create  incentives  to  reduce  risky  liquidity  profiles.  This  can  be  done,  for 
example, by pushing out the average term of funding or increasing the share of stable funds. 
In other cases, banks did not price liquidity appropriately throughout the firm, and correcting 
risk management deficiencies will in turn improve liquidity profiles. In fact, the initial response 
we  have  observed  in  some  countries  that  have  already  implemented  comparable  liquidity 
ratios suggest that these are the types of strategies that are being pursued. 
Effects of Basel III on financial markets 
Since the new regulation will change the behaviour of banks, it will also have wider effects on 
financial markets. The effects in the transitional phase will be different from the effects in the 
new steady state. In the transitional phase, adjustments of banks’ balance sheets to meet the 
new  capital  and  liquidity  standards  will  affect  supply  and  demand  in  capital  markets  and 
could lead to relative price changes. 
Equity markets: impact of the new buffer regime  
On equity markets, additional demand from banks is expected. The quantitative impact study 
by the BCBS shows that banks worldwide need additional capital of EUR 175 billion to reach 
a  core  capital  ratio  of  4.5%  and  around  EUR  600  billion  for  the  7%  requirement.  For 
comparison, euro area bank equity issuance has been USD 20 to 50 billion annually since 
2005. Mind that this includes the crisis period. The worldwide figure ranged from USD 50 to 
USD 150 billion. This suggests that, given enough time, markets should be able to absorb 
the  new  capital  that  needs  to  be  raised.  Especially  if  banks  are  able  to  use  this  time  to 
accumulate capital through retained earnings and lower costs. This would reduce their need 
to go to the equity market. 
Bonds markets: impact of Liquidity coverage Ratio (LCR)  
The new liquidity requirements could influence fixed-income markets. The quantitative impact 
study  by  the  BCBS  shows  that  the  shortfall  of  liquid  assets  to  meet  the  LCR  is  around 
EUR 1.7 trillion for the worldwide banking sector [this figure does not include the surplus of 
banks that meet the LCR]. This seems high, but is less than 10% of the total market size of 
domestic liquid assets. Nevertheless, there may be some currency areas where the supply of 
liquid  assets  is  smaller  than  in  other  areas.  The  new  liquidity  regulation  provides  for  tailor 
made solutions in those cases. For instance, the Reserve Bank of Australia has established 
a liquidity facility to help local banks meet the LCR requirement, while Denmark intends to 
give special treatment to covered bonds; the possibilities to do so will be fleshed out over the 
observation period. 
The LCR will change the relative preferences for banks to hold certain asset classes. It will 
make  assets  that  are  considered  as  liquid  under  the  new  regulation  more  popular,  and 
assets that are not considered as liquid assets less so. This can shift demand to sovereign 
bonds, covered bonds and high quality corporate bonds and away from less liquid assets, 
such as other bank bonds, securitised assets and lower quality corporate bonds. All this can 
have implications for credit spreads and investors’ returns on particular market segments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  asset  purchasing  programmes  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  give  an  indication  of  the 
effects of large-scale bond purchases on interest rates. The effects on the 10-year Treasury 
yield per USD 100 billion of asset purchases have been estimated to range between 2 and 
7 basis points, which suggests a high degree of uncertainty. Moreover, these effects can not 
be  translated  one  by  one  to  the  impact  of  the  new  liquidity  regulation.  The  expected 
investments by banks will stretch over a much longer horizon than the asset purchases by 
the Fed. In any event, banks’ reactions to the introduction of the new liquidity standards are 
uncertain.  In  addition  to  accumulating  liquid  assets,  banks  could  also scale  back  business 
activities that are vulnerable to liquidity risk, or lengthen the maturity of their funding. 
Bonds markets: impact of Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR)  
The requirement to reduce the maturity mismatch via the NSFR will urge banks to look for 
more stable sources of funding. Since they will have to compete with other borrowers in the 
term  funding  markets,  the  additional  demand  by  banks  could  drive  up  the  yields  on  bank 
bonds.  To  limit  funding  costs,  banks  will  pursue  different  strategies  in  their  liquidity 
management. They will try to raise more retail deposits. However, the supply of retail savings 
is  limited,  in  particular  in  the  Netherlands  where  banks  have  to  compete  with  insurance 
companies  and  pension  funds.  Alternatively,  banks  could  issue  more  secured  funding,  for 
instance  covered  bonds,  or  issue  more  long-term  unsecured  bonds.  To  raise  more 
unsecured  long-term  bonds,  banks  may  have  to  rebuild  their  investor  base,  for  instance 
through increased transparency. Stress-tests could contribute to that; they are a useful tool 
to disclose exposures to particular risks. 
Reducing maturity mismatches to meet the NSFR is a big challenge for banks in the coming 
years. The study of the BCBS shows that the shortfall of liquid assets to meet the NSFR is 
around  EUR  2.9  trillion  for  the  worldwide  banking  sector  [this  figure  does  not  include  the 
surplus of banks that meet the NSFR]. This headline figure can not be simply totalled with 
the shortfall of the LCR that I mentioned before. A bank that meets the NSFR probably also 
meets  the  LCR.  Another  issue  is  that  the  shortfall  in  terms  of  the  size  of  the  long-term 
funding market differs widely across countries. In currency areas where banks have a large 
shortfall relative to the available supply, the long term debt markets might need to expand 
significantly to meet the additional demand by banks. 
Outlook for bond markets and regulatory issues  
Term  funding  markets  may  expand  in  response  to  increased  supply  by  investors  and  the 
presumably  higher  yields.  It  could  make  short-term  investors  willing  to  make  longer  term 
investments,  particularly  if  the  market  liquidity  of  long-term  paper  improves  relative  to 
shorter-term  paper.  This  could  be  stimulated  by 
transparent,  collateralised  and 
straightforward  asset  structures.  For  these  reasons  covered  bonds  have  become  popular 
recently, although we are not sure on the precise impact on unsecured investors. In the first 
quarter EUR 100 billion of covered bonds was issued in Europe and observers expect this 
asset  class  to  grow  further.  The  recognition  as  liquid  assets  in  the  LCR  supports  the 
issuance of covered bonds. As you probably know, MBS securities are not recognised in the 
LCR  buffer.  Increased  transparency  and  market  liquidity,  for  instance  through  market 
quotation, would increase the likelihood that MBS securities would be recognised as liquid 
assets. 
Bonds yield might also be influenced by new resolution regulation that gives authorities more 
options  to  deal  with  ailing  institutions.  Market  participants  fear  that  this  might  raise  the 
probability  of  burden  sharing  by  bond  holders. I  guess  this  primarily  concerns  Tier  2  debt. 
Since that is a limited portion of total funding – at least for Dutch banks – there is little reason 
to worry. More in general, a rise in the yield on such bonds could be welcome if it implies a 
more adequate pricing of the risks that holders of bank bonds face. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Steady state  
Assessing the long term market impact of Basel III is difficult, since banks may change their 
business models. It is likely that banks will look for more capital and liquidity efficient models, 
for instance by offering products with a more stable or fee-based income stream. This will 
change their capital and liquidity needs and thereby their reliance on financial markets. 
It is clear that in the new steady state we will end up with a stronger banking system. The 
Basel Committee has estimated that if bank capital increases from 6 percent to 8 percent of 
the  risk-weighted  assets,  the  risk  of  a  crisis  is  more  than  halved.  If  liquidity  risk  is  also 
reduced, the probability of a crisis declines even more. The reduced default risk of banks will 
lower credit risk premia they have to pay in capital markets. Moreover, a stronger banking 
system  is  expected  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  market  confidence,  reducing  thus  the 
volatility in financial markets. 
Addressing the SIFI problem 
I would also like to mention some developments that are not included in Basel III but that are 
high  on  the  international  agenda  of  financial  policy  makers.  The  crisis  has  taught  that  a 
targeted  approach  to  systemically  important  institutions,  so-called  SIFIs,  is  crucial  to 
safeguard financial stability and mitigate moral hazard. For a country like the Netherlands – a 
small open economy with a number of very large and interconnected financial institutions – 
addressing  this  problem  is  even  more  important.  These  institutions  play  a  vital  role  in  the 
Dutch financial system and real economy. 
In order to tackle the SIFI problem the Basel Committee together with the Financial Stability 
Board are working on additional measures for systemic banks. These measures first involve 
more  intensive  supervision  and  a  higher  loss  absorbing  capacity,  primarily  to  reduce  the 
probability of a default of a systemic bank. This will mean that possibly systemic banks will 
be required to hold larger capital buffers. 
Secondly, the measures involve improving the resolution capacity of national authorities and 
the  requirement  for  systemic  banks  to  develop  recovery  and  resolution  plans.  This  should 
help to make it easier to wind down any type of institution in an orderly fashion which will 
reduce the impact of a failure of a systemic bank. Moreover, the Basel Committee is working 
on  a  proposal  for  a  methodology  to  identify  systemic  banks.  A  distinction  will  be  made 
between  domestic  and  global  SIFIs,  and  stricter  rules  will  apply  to  the  latter  group  of 
institutions. Let me be clear, we are not talking about hundreds of banks, but rather a few 
dozens,  which  because  of  their  size,  interconnectedness,  or  limited  substitutability  could 
pose  a  risk  to  the  international  financial  sector.  This  will  help  secure  that  at  least  the 
externalities associated with those institutions that are most interconnected on a global scale 
will be addressed. 
The temporary changed role of central banks 
Besides Basel III, the financial markets have been influenced significantly by the activities of 
central banks. Their role has dramatically changed in the crisis, owing to the unconventional 
policy measures, which are meant to be temporary. In autumn 2008, enhanced credit support 
to the interbank market was introduced in the euro area, by way of unlimited liquidity supply 
to  banks  against  adequate  collateral.  This  has  supported  monetary  transmission  and 
prevented  a  credit  rationing  of  the  private  sector.  For  the  same  purpose,  the  Eurosystem 
purchased  covered  bonds  issued  by  banks  on  a  limited  scale.  This  program  has  already 
been completed last year. 
In  May  2010,  when  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  erupted,  the  phasing  out  of  the  extended 
refinancing  operations  was  temporary  delayed  and  the  Securities  Markets  Programme 
started.  This  bond  purchasing  program  aims  at  non-functioning  Eurozone  bonds  markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Eurosystem  buys  bonds  from  monetary  counterparties,  while  the  liquidity  creation  is 
sterilised by the issuance of term deposits. The program has prevented that bond markets 
collapsed  due  to  a  drying  up  of  market  liquidity.  It  has  supported  the  transmission  of  the 
policy rate to longer term interest rates in bond markets. 
The Eurosystem has purchased EUR 77 billion government bonds of EMU countries so far, 
which is a substantial share of the government bond markets in the most affected countries. 
This is an unhealthy situation, since it creates an undesired dependence of governments on 
the central bank. Moreover, an extended government bond portfolio of the Eurosystem is not 
desirable from a risk management perspective. 
The European debt crisis 
Given the fact that monetary policy has been fully stretched, it is crucial that governments 
take their responsibilities to tackle the root causes of the sovereign debt crisis. To this end, 
Europe and the IMF established the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), an ultimate 
safety net that could be resorted to if needed, as Ireland did in November. It is important that 
governments  keep  improving  the  EFSF  in  terms  of  both  quantity  and  quality,  meaning 
maximum  flexibility  in  the  intervention  of  the  EFSF.  To  be  effective  in  supporting  market 
confidence and prevent a further escalation of the crisis, a convincing increase of the level of 
available capital in the EFSF is desired. 
The  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  will  replace  the  EFSF  in  2013.  Last  month  the 
European  Council  agreed  that  the  ESM  will  have  an  effective  lending  capacity  of 
EUR 500 billion. By exception, the fund will be able to buy sovereign bonds in the primary 
market. Debt purchases in the secondary market remain impossible, which I regret, since it 
complicates a transition of responsibilities from central banks to governments. 
Any financial assistance to be granted under the ESM will be subject to strict conditionality 
and provides for involvement of private creditors in the unexpected event of insolvency, in 
line  with  IMF  policies.  To  facilitate  this  process,  from  June  2013  onward,  standardised 
collective action clauses (CACs) will be included in newly issued bonds with a maturity longer 
than one year. Moreover, the ESM gets a preferred creditor status, junior only to the IMF. 
These elements have made investors nervous, but probably markets will get used to them. 
They  could  enhance  the  disciplining  market  influence  on  sovereign  debtors,  although 
conditions to involve the private sector should be flexible, to prevent a disruption of market 
access by sovereigns and to prevent that credit spreads correct too abruptly. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  European  authorities,  including  the  Eurosystem,  do 
everything  to  stem  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Countries  conduct  rigorous  economic  reform 
programs:  to  regain  the  trust  of  financial  markets,  improve  economic  growth,  restructure 
banking  sectors  and  strengthen  public  finances.  These  measures  contribute  to  a  more 
sustainable debt situation, although the challenges are huge in certain countries. The ESM 
will only reinforce the need for fiscal and macro economic discipline and stronger governance 
with  more  automatic  mechanisms.  The  alternative  of  default  would  have  much  graver 
consequences, with unforeseen, but probably serious first and second round effects on the 
financial  system  across  the  euro  area.  This  is  precisely  what  policymakers  are  preventing 
with unprecedented measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
