Abdulrahman  A  Al-Hamidy:  Brief  overview  of  the  Saudi  Arabian 
insurance industry 
Speech by His Excellency Dr Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy, Vice Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  (SAMA),  at  the  First  Symposium  on  Insurance,  held  at  the  Institute  of 
Banking, Riyadh, 22–23 March 2011. 
 It  gives  me  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  first  symposium  that  the  Saudi  insurance 
industry has organized in collaboration with the Institute of Banking. I hope more such events 
will  be  organized  to  discuss  future  plans  to  expand  insurance  activities,  and  to  set  up 
mechanisms  to  improve  the  working  environment  of  the  insurance  industry  to  enable  it  to 
serve better. 
Dear Audience, 
Thanks to Allah, that the Saudi economy has witnessed considerable economic and social 
development since the turn of the century. This has largely resulted from the restructuring of 
the  economy  and  improvement  in  the  regulatory  apparatus  that  has  greatly  facilitated 
domestic  and  foreign  investment  and  thereby  has  helped  enhance  the  efficiency  and 
competitiveness of the economy. The non-oil real GDP has grown by an annual average of 
4.4 percent in the past five years. The private sector production went up by 4.5 percent and 
its  contribution  to  real  GDP  increased  to  48.8  percent  in  2010  from  45.5  percent  in  2006. 
Other  key  developments  that  took  place  during  the  last  five  years  included:  yearly  state 
expenditure rising up to Rls 2.6 trillion; decline in public debt to Rls 167 billion (10.2 percent 
of  GDP);  annual  current  account  surplus  averaging  $75  billion  and  increase  of  more  than 
Rls 550 billion in bank assets. 
According  to  the  World  Bank  Group  report,  the  Kingdom  has  been  ranked  eleventh  in  the 
world  and  first  in  the  East  region  in  terms  of  doing  business  and  provision  of  competitive 
environment in 2010. The development witnessed by the Kingdom during previous years has 
been comprehensive and broad-based. Vast number of development projects to modernize 
infrastructure,  and  improve  facilities  to  provide  water,  electricity,  health  and  educational 
services  have  been  approved.  Therefore,  it  is  expected  that  strong  growth  of  the  Saudi 
economy will continue unabated and this will expand the financial sector in general and the 
insurance sector in particular. 
Dear Audience, 
Insurance companies play a key role for the development and stability of public and private 
sectors by providing opportunities to individuals and firms to improve their risk profiles and 
obtain compensation for losses incurred. It is for this reason that SAMA has been keen in 
regulating the insurance sector in accordance with the national and international standards 
and practices. SAMA ensures that all companies operating in the insurance industry comply 
with such standards and practices and work according to prescribed rules and regulations. 
Dear Audience, 
SAMA undertakes annual supervisory visits to insurance companies to make sure that they 
operate  efficiently  and  professionally  and 
technical  and  regulatory 
requirements to ensure better profitability and customers’ satisfaction. SAMA also regularly 
monitors soundness of insurance companies’ financial positions to ensure that they are able 
to  meet  their  contractual  obligations.  SAMA  will  continue  to  exert  supervisory  and  control 
efforts using all means to ensure the optimality of insurance operations. 
fulfill 
they 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Dear Audience, 
Insurance  industry  has  progressed  well  in  recent  years  as  its  contribution  has  grown 
equivalent to one percent of GDP in 2010. Total estimated written premiums have increased 
by 12.4 percent to Rls 16.41 in 2010 from Rls 14.6 percent in 2009. This clearly indicates 
growing  awareness  about  various  insurance  products  including  public  insurance  products, 
health  insurance  and  protection  and  savings  insurance  by  individuals  and  various 
organizations operating in the Kingdom. 
Insurance  claims  are  projected  to  have  reached  Rls  4.7  billion  in  2010  compared  to  Rls 
5.8 billion  in  2009.  Insurance  claims  that  are  made  against  damages  are  integral  part  of 
insurance activities. They contribute to reassuring, stabilizing, and securing individuals and 
organizations. Recent rainfalls that had caused substantial losses in the city of Jeddah have 
proved the importance of insurance and its benefits and compensations for property losses. 
SAMA  has  directed  all  insurance  entities  to  promptly  compensate  customers  according  to 
their insurance policies, and facilitate procedures for receiving claims and processing them. I 
also emphasize that SAMA will follow up this matter and take legal actions against insurers 
that  are  proven  to  be  negligent.  I  am  sure  that  you  all  are  aware  of  the  significance  of 
handling such claims promptly and efficiently since this will enhance insurance companies’ 
reputation and attractiveness to those averse to taking risks. 
Dear Audience, 
During the past few years, the insurance sector has not only achieved good results in terms 
of services provided, diversity of products, and establishing trust with beneficiaries, but also 
in terms of compliance with laws, regulations, and instructions issued. However, there is a lot 
more that remains to be done to modernize the insurance industry to enhance its soundness, 
capabilities  and  performance  to  make  it  comparable  to  regional  and  global  insurance 
industries. Such a situation calls for considerable attention to professionalism in application 
of  technical  aspects  of  pricing  policies,  management  of  claims,  provision  of  technological 
infrastructure consistent with the size and nature of the work, investment policy, compliance 
with the financial solvency standards, and allocations of  necessary technical provisions to 
ensure health and soundness of the companies’ financial positions. It is imperative that the 
insurance industry remains competitive by developing and providing insurance products and 
services to the satisfaction of customers at all times. 
Dear Audience, 
We  expect  the  insurance  industry  to  continue  to  improve  its  performance  and  achieve 
balanced growth in accordance with corporate objectives and available resources. We also 
anticipate  the  industry  to  meet  the needs  of the  market  and  beneficiaries  to increase  their 
confidence  in  the  insurance  activities.  It  is  important  that  insurance  companies  strike  a 
balance between the size of business and geographic expansion, and human and financial 
resources and operating infrastructure. 
I would like to conclude the speech by emphasizing the importance of the insurance sector 
with respect to employment and training of male and female citizens through paying more 
attention  to  the  development  of  human  resources  and  training  policies  and  increasing 
Saudization. SAMA has designed a compulsory exam on the basics of insurance activities to 
measure  employees’  competence  and  insurance  providers’  awareness  of  insurance 
fundamentals including laws, regulations and standards. Companies are required to organize 
vocational  and  technical  development  programs  to  raise  insurance  awareness  and  help 
provide qualified manpower to serve the insurance sector and the country well. 
Thank you for your attention. 
I wish you all a successful symposium. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
