Ardian Fullani: Recent developments in the Albanian banking system 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at a meeting organised by 
Raiffeisen Bank with business representatives and its major clients, Tirana, 14 June 2011. 
 Dear Minister of Finances, 
Dear Mr. Lennkh and Mr. Hodell, 
Dear Mr. Canacaris, 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Today’s  meeting  organised  by  the  Raiffeisen  Bank  with  the  business  community  is  very 
significant.  Firstly,  it  shows  a  well-defined  strategy  of  the  Raiffeisen  group  to  increase  its 
market  share  in  Albania  through  dialogue  with  business  partners.  Secondly,  such  forums 
serve also as a platform to generate development ideas and projects of national, and why 
not, regional importance. Thirdly, I think that today’s meeting is indicative of the maturity and 
rising  awareness  of  the  banking  system  and  the  business  community.  Personally,  I  would 
wish  that  such  meetings  be  intensified  in  the  future:  they  should  also  be  more  structured, 
oriented towards a constructive debate, and involve the entire system and all sectors of the 
economy. In short, banks and businesses need to sit together for the best.  
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  are  in  mid-2011  now,  which  is  a  complex  year  in  terms  of  its  challenges  for  objective 
reasons  owing  to  the  international  financial  dynamics  of  the  past  3–4  years.  Whilst  our 
economy has posted positive growth, it continues to operate below its potential. 
The international setting is filled with uncertainty for a group of advanced economies, while 
agricultural  products  and  raw  materials  prices  remain  high.  Despite  last  year’s  narrowing 
current deficit, Albania’s external position remains a constant structural weakness. 
The Albanian banking system is considered to have adapted commendably to this complex 
situation.  I would  like  to  underline that  we  have  done  an immense  amount  of  work  so  far. 
Therefore,  I  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  all  central  and  local  managing  units  of 
banks operating in Albania. During this period, the Albanian banking system has continued to 
expand  its  activity  and  lending  to  the  economy.  Financial  soundness  and  profitability 
indicators  have  improved  and  system’s  activity  capitalization  is  in  a  good  position.  The 
banking sector remains the main actor of financial intermediation in Albania, whose financing 
continues to rely mainly on public deposits. 
The main problem of the banking system has been the growing non-performing loans share, 
which has also reflected the active policy of the Bank of Albania to enhance the transparency 
of  banks’  balance  sheets.  Credit  risk  remains  the  primary  risk  to  our  banking  sector.  In 
response, the banking sector has established adequate reserve funds to buffer major shocks 
on  the  borrowers  repayment  capacity  and  market  equilibrium.  Stress  tests  support  our 
conclusion on banking system resilience. 
The presence in this room of both the business community and the banking system suggests 
me  to  refer  once  again  to  the  need  for  sincere  cooperation  of  mutual  benefit.  With  a  few 
exceptions,  I  think  this  cooperation  has  been  present  and  operational  and  has  certainly 
supported  in  particular  the  country’s  economic  activity  over  the  past  years.  The  global 
financial crisis that erupted in late 2008 had its influence on our economy by stiffening this 
cooperation. On the one hand, the system found itself in a difficult liquidity situation, while on 
the  other  hand  businesses  found  it  difficult  to  access  markets.  With  some  additional 
subjective reasons, the outcome of this was a deterioration of the system’s loan portfolio and 
companies’  liquidating  capacity.  Consequently,  2009–2010  marked  a  slowdown  of  lending 
growth to the economy, reflecting the increased prudence, fully justified by the system, and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
business  inability  to  earn  a  meritable  new  loan.  The  period  coincided  with  a  review  of 
balances  and  portfolio  restructuring,  when  possible  with  provisions,  directly  affecting  the 
system’s financial performance. 
The Bank of Albania has played a major role as a guardian of the country’s macroeconomic 
and  financial  stability.  Macroprudence  has  been  the  prevalent  word  in  our  communication 
with the market, authorities and the public. We have translated macroprudence as a need for 
more capital and liquidity, and increased banking system payment capacity. Consequently, 
the  Albanian  banking  sector  did  not  experience  contracting.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has 
provided and continues to provide the necessary liquidity to the banking system, to stimulate 
not  only  to  the  market  but  also  to  the  entire  economy.  Prudent  policies  and  timely  legal 
regulations  guaranteed  effective  banking  supervision  and  enabled  satisfactory  businesses’ 
access to bank loans. Actually, I would like to point out that the Albanian banking system left 
the crisis in healthy condition and that it guarantees growing stability.  
Our  banking  system,  during  this  period,  has  carried  out  a  considerable  amount  of  work, 
which  has  served  to  consolidate  each  bank’s  position  prior,  during  and  after  the  crisis. 
Hence, the banks are now able to use again their full lending potential. For the truth’s sake, it 
must  be  underlined  that  the  latest  figures  speak  of  growth  in  the  order  of  10  per  cent  in 
annual  terms,  a  figure  which  should  not  go  unnoticed  or  be  considered  as  inadequate.  I 
would suggest the same philosophy to the business community. For objective reasons, the 
concept  of  free  money  belongs  to  the  past.  By  that  I  mean  that  a  bank  loan  should  be 
earned, which means unconditional and honest cooperation within the legal and regulatory 
framework approved by the country’s authorities. Of course, banks are established to lend 
money, but first and foremost we need to bear in mind that the public deposits’ stability is 
more  important  than  an  individual  business  loan  or  bank  portfolio.  Moreover,  the  business 
community  needs  to  recalibrate  its  position  in  relation  to  recent  developments  both  in  the 
national  and  global  economy  context.  It  must  aim  a  higher  productivity,  primarily  through 
identifying comparative advantages in the framework of global changes.  
In that regard, it is necessary to adopt new business administration philosophies on capacity 
building  and  investment  in  human  resources,  governance,  internal  control,  financial 
and  legal  expertise,  and  risk  management.  Besides  a  legal  relation,  the  bank-client 
relation is a human relation, one of trust. When a business delays the payment  of a bank 
loan  instalment,  it  should  consider  its  judgement  on  the  bank  if  the  bank  delayed  the 
payment of the matured interest to that business. 
Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Bank of Albania, I would like to invite the communities present in this event 
to strengthen their communication bridges, which is of benefit not only to them but also to the 
economy in general.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
