Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference with 
the Albanian Minister of Finance and the IMF Mission Chief for Albania, Tirana, 22 June 2011. 
 Dear media representatives,  
In the last two weeks, a team of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) led by Mr Gerwin Bell, 
Mission Chief, visited Albania. During this visit, we had intensive discussions on the current 
economic developments, the economy’s expected performance and appropriate orientation 
of macroeconomic policies. This visit in the framework of Article 4 Consultation focused also 
on structural issues of the Albanian economy, highlighting the steps to be made for ensuring 
sustainable long-term growth.  
Brief overview of key issues discussed 
First, the 2010 and early 2011 economic and financial developments showed that, overall, 
the  Albanian  economy  overcame  the  global  crisis  effects  with  success  and  has  the  pre-
requisites to generate economic growth in the period ahead. Foreign demand was the main 
contributor  to  the  2010  economic  growth,  while  the  current  year  is  expected  to  be 
characterised  by  a  resurgence  of  domestic  demand  and  slower  growth  rates  of  Albanian 
exports.  Overall,  the  macroeconomic  situation  is  balanced,  characterised  by  low  and 
controlled  inflation;  safe,  liquid  and  well-capitalised  financial  system;  improving  financial 
markets; and improved current account position. These developments reflect, inter alia, the 
relevant policies, which have proven effective in buffering large shocks from the global crisis. 
I take this opportunity to point out that the Bank of Albania’s efforts to keep inflation in check 
and anchor inflationary expectations, as well as its regulatory and supervisory measures to 
guarantee financial system stability managed to reduce shock-buffering costs and prevented 
undesirable consequences.  
Second, as regards the economy’s expected performance in the medium and long run, the 
conclusion reached after the two-week long consultations was that the Albanian economy is 
expected  to  remain  in  positive  territory  of  economic  growth.  However,  growth  rates  will 
clearly depend on the resurgence of the domestic demand, which is suffering from insecurity 
related to national and international developments. Consumption and investments continue 
to suffer from added prudence by economic agents, while financial conditions and banking 
system  capacity  to  credit  the  economy  are  improved.  Furthermore,  higher  inflation  rates, 
noted  during  the  first  months  of  2011,  are  expected  to  drop  in  the  upcoming  period.  This 
reveals  the  foreign  origin  of  shocks  that  have  led  to  increased  prices  and  reflects  internal 
economic and financial conditions as well as our monetary policy.  
The joint examination of the Albanian economy found that the fiscal and external sectors are 
the two main ones that would require our attention and our work in the future.  
The Bank of Albania has long held that public finances’ long-term stability is a precondition 
for  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  daily  world  press  illustrates  channels  through  which 
indicators such as budget deficit and public debt affect financial markets and in turn the real 
economy. Convinced that the Albanian economy would benefit in the medium and long run 
from  lower  public  debt,  we  have  encouraged  and  supported  all  measures  taken  in  this 
regard. We deem that this philosophy should lay at the foundation of the expected 2011 mid-
year budget review, as well as other medium and long-term public finances projects.  
The external sector is another structural weakness of the Albanian economy. Partially also in 
response  to  this  concern,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  underlined  constantly  the  need  for 
deepened structural reforms to support a new economic growth and development model for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
through 
increased  efficiency  and 
Albania.  This  model  should  inevitably  materialise 
competitiveness of our products and services in domestic and international markets.  
On  the  other  hand,  it  requires  a  more  rational  attitude  of  the  private  sector  towards  the 
current  economic  context  as  well  as  a  more  careful  financial-risks  management.  What  is 
more,  the  Albanian  economy  needs  to  become  more  attractive  to  foreign  investors  by 
continuously improving the business climate, the legal framework and its implementation, as 
well as by providing educated and cost-attractive labour force.  
Thirdly,  seen  in  the  above-mentioned  setting,  our  policies  should  remain  prudent  to 
guarantee  the  country’s  macroeconomic  equilibriums.  As  the  crisis  showed,  prevention  is 
better than cure. In this regard, political and structural measures that contribute to stability 
have a positive impact in the long term horizon.  
*** 
During the consultations, I found that we share with the IMF and the Ministry of Finance the 
same  views  on  the  need  to  maintain  and  further  strengthen  macroeconomic  stability. 
Moreover,  there  is  a  modern  consensus  on  division  of  duties  between  the  two  central 
institutions of macroeconomic administration (central bank and Ministry of Finance) as well 
as a concrete commitment to continue this co-ordination in the future. In conclusion, I would 
like  to  reiterate  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  remains  fully  committed  to  observe  the  inflation 
target of 3%, and continue to orientate its monetary policy exclusively to this function. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
