Rundheersing Bheenick: Fostering Africa’s growth in the new reality – 
from vision to action 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the opening 
plenary of the SWIFT Africa Regional Conference, Balaclava, 30 May 2011. 
 It is a pleasure to be here this morning and to address you at the Opening Plenary of the 
SWIFT  Africa  Regional  Conference.  Let  me  add  my  own  words  of  welcome  to  the  foreign 
delegates, especially those visiting our country for the first time. I have no doubt that you will 
be joining the ranks of satisfied repeat visitors as you discover for yourself how right one of 
our earliest publicists was when he claimed boldly that Heaven was copied after Mauritius. 
The name of the publicist? A certain Mark Twain. He may have been exaggerating – but just 
a wee bit! I thank SWIFT for giving me the opportunity to share with you some thoughts on 
the theme of “Fostering Africa’s growth in the new reality – from vision to action”.  
I shall focus on the need to strengthen Financial Market Infrastructure (FMI) in our region. 
FMIs  play  a  key  role  in  promoting  financial  stability  and  economic  growth.  When  financial 
markets get the jitters, the world economy grinds to a halt, as we have just painfully re-learnt. 
It is difficult to think of a more appropriate topic for a gathering such as this at a time when 
we  have  all  become  acutely  aware  of  the  importance  of  strong  financial  markets  for 
economic prosperity. It is true that much progress has been made in strengthening FMI in 
Africa; it is equally true that much remains to be done as African financial systems are still 
lagging behind and are weakly integrated with the global financial system. As policymakers in 
advanced  economies  direct  their  efforts  towards  global  reforms  for  a  more  robust  global 
financial system, it may be a suitable time for some FMI initiatives in the African region. 
First, let me briefly recapitulate the scope of SWIFT’s activities and operations in the global 
FMI,  just  to  give  the  uninitiated  some  idea  of  its  systemic  importance  and  explain  why 
regulators  take  such  a  close  interest  in  SWIFT.  A  few  metrics  will  suffice  to  give  you  an 
indication  of  the  criticality  of  SWIFT  to  the  operation,  safety  and  soundness  of  the  global 
financial  system.  Since  it  was  set  up  in  the  mid-1970’s,  SWIFT  has  rapidly  become  an 
indispensable element of the global FMI. It connects over 9,000 financial institutions in more 
than  200  countries  and  territories.  We  learn  from  SWIFT’s  2009  Annual  Review  that 
3.76 billion FIN messages – FIN is SWIFT core store-and-forward messaging service – were 
exchanged in that year. That means 15 million messages everyday. SWIFT has experienced 
exponential growth since it sent its first message in 1977. And it is extremely reliable. With 
99.99 per cent availability of FIN and SWIFTNet, SWIFT truly lives up to its motto: “Failure is 
not an option”.  
The  use  of  SWIFT  allows  FMIs  to  support  near  real-time  payment  services  using  a  single 
standard messaging platform within a private, secure and reliable environment. This leads to 
lower  costs,  lower  operational  risks  and  less  operational  inefficiencies.  Because  FMIs 
facilitate the clearing and settlement of monetary and financial transactions, safe and efficient 
FMIs are particularly important for maintaining financial stability. Their critical role comes to 
the fore in times of crisis when, given the interconnectedness and interlinkages of the global 
financial  system,  systemic  risk  is  at  its  peak.  If  FMIs  are  not  properly  managed,  they  can 
pose significant risks to the financial system and be a potential source of contagion. 
An  efficient  cross-border  clearing  and  settlement  process  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  global 
markets  to  operate  seamlessly  and  efficiently.  Cross-border  credit  transfer  services  are  a 
legitimate concern of regulators. They must be rapid, efficient, reliable, cheap, and able to 
cope with a rapidly-changing financial landscape. By transporting financial messages, SWIFT 
is at the heart of the global clearing and settlement system. If SWIFT didn’t exist, something 
looking like it would have had to be invented. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
SWIFT  is  part  of  the plumbing  of  the  international  financial  system.  Plumbing  plays  a  vital 
role  in  our  homes;  but  it  is  normally  hidden  away,  tiled  over,  and  taken  for  granted.  It  is 
certainly  not  the  subject  of  polite  dinner  table  talk.  Until,  that  is,  when  it  springs  a  leak, 
malfunctions, or clogs up – when fixing it becomes the utmost priority, on pain of having no 
dinner,  never  mind  the  talk.  So  it  is  with  SWIFT.  And  it  is  because  of  this  systemic 
importance that the central banks of the G-10 countries agreed in 1998 that SWIFT should 
be  under  cooperative  oversight  by  central  banks.  As  SWIFT  is  established  under  Belgian 
Law, the National Bank of Belgium functions as the lead overseer.  
The crisis has been a stressful time for all financial sector players and their regulators. FMIs 
performed quite well during the financial crisis. The severity of the crisis has brought to light 
important lessons regarding effective risk management. This has led international standard-
setters  to  review  and  upgrade  existing  standards.  In  March  this  year,  the  Committee  for 
Payments  and  Settlement  System  (CPSS)  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in 
collaboration  with  the  Technical  Committee  of  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities 
Commission (IOSCO), reviewed the principles for FMIs, again highlighting their critical role in 
fostering  financial  stability.  This  review  supported  the  Financial  Stability  Board  initiative  to 
strengthen core financial infrastructures and markets. I will not bore you with the detailed list 
of standards for FMIs. Let me mention a few salient points. First, they are mainly expressed 
as  broad  principles  that  CPSS/IOSCO  strongly  recommend  that  their  members  should 
implement to the fullest extent possible. Second, they aim principally at harmonization across 
FMIs  and  countries.  Third,  the  report  also  outlines  the  general  responsibilities  of  central 
banks,  market  regulators,  and  relevant  authorities  responsible  for  FMIs,  in  implementing 
these standards. You might think that this renewed interest in beefing up standards would 
have  got  the  regulatees  and  their  lobbyists  up  in  arms.  Quite  the  contrary.  Gottfried 
Leibbrandt, Head of Marketing at SWIFT, supports these moves:  
  “Standards  underpin  all  hope  of  progress  to  a  more  efficient  global  financial 
services industry”.  
And  I  fully  agree  with  the  Chairman  of  SWIFT  when  he  says  that,  as  the  world  slowly 
emerges from the worst crisis of our generation, regulation and supervision will continue to 
be crucial elements for maintaining financial stability. The contrast with the reaction of global 
banking  leaders  to  the  proposals  of  the  other  Basel  Committee,  BCBS  –  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision – to tighten supervisory standards and increase capital 
requirements for banks, especially those deemed to be systemically important, couldn’t be 
more striking. 
There  are  currently  many  market  initiatives  in  various  parts  of  the  world.  These  seek  to 
address  the  gaps  identified  during  the  global  financial  crisis  in  the  FMIs  in  the  leading 
financial centres of Europe and North America. But, interesting as it may be, it will take us 
too far afield to wander off in that direction. Let me turn to FMIs in the African region. 
Financial market infrastructure in Africa 
Modern  attempts  to  build  Pan-African  payment  systems  actually  started  in  the  eighties. 
These sought to strengthen regional cooperation and facilitate trade between neighbouring 
countries. But well before that, in 1946, several decades before the Euro, the 14 countries of 
the  West  African  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (WAEMU)  had  already  adopted  a  single 
currency and had actually set up their central bank in 1962, the Banque Centrale de États de 
l’Afrique de l’Ouest (BCEAO). 1981 saw the establishment of the Preferential Trade Area, a 
free trade agreement between east and southern Africa, of which Mauritius was a founder-
member.  This  was  succeeded  in  1994  by  the  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern 
Africa,  which  has  emerged  as  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  proposed  African  Economic 
Community. The Southern African Development community (SADC) was launched in 1992, 
building on the Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC), itself set 
up since 1980. Mauritius joined SADC in 1994. SADC has worked on the harmonisation of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
payments systems among its member states with the result that today all members of the 
SADC  either  have,  or  are  in  the  process  of  implementing,  a  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS) system. There have been initiatives to integrate African capital markets and one of 
these is the Regional exchange, the Bourse Régionale des Valeurs Mobilières (BVRM). In 
SADC,  a  number  of  initiatives  have  been  launched  to  create  a  FMI  by  2018  on  the 
assumption that there will be monetary convergence and a SADC Central Bank by that date. 
There are parallel, if not overlapping, programs and projects at the level of COMESA, AACB 
– the Association of African Central Banks –, and the African Union. All of these draw their 
inspiration  from  the  desire  for  greater  integration  in  Africa,  culminating  ultimately  in  the 
distant  future  in  the  realisation  of  the  vision  of  a  United  States  of  Africa,  with  a  common 
currency and a common central bank.  
However, despite this grand, overarching, vision – and a flurry of loosely-coordinated actions 
and initiatives to realize it –, the reality on the ground is that, African financial markets remain 
fragmented and costly. The integration of African payments systems into an FMI has a long 
way to go. The financial infrastructure of continental Africa can best be described in terms of 
adjectives  of  extremes.  Payment  systems  range  from  the  highly  advanced  to  the 
underdeveloped;  banking  systems  range  from  highly  regulated  to  purely  market-driven 
systems;  and  banking  penetration  ranges  from  several  bank  accounts  per  head  to  the 
highest proportion of unbanked people. Over the years, Africa has become the testbed for a 
number  of  a  number  of  innovations  in  payments.  Technology  has  made  a  remarkable 
breakthrough allowing banking services to reach the unbanked – the M-Pesa Mobile Banking 
in Kenya is a case in point. 
Paradoxically, Africa is the third-fastest economic growing region in the world, behind Asia 
and the Middle East, with an annual average growth of around 5 per cent, driven by the rising 
global  demand  for  commodities  from  the  BRIC  countries.  Investments  in  Africa  are  now 
based  on  a  new  trade-related  model.  For  example,  as  India  and  China  become  the  major 
trading partners of Africa, and increase their dependence on the continent, they are investing 
more  than  the  colonial  powers  did  in  the  development  of  natural  resources,  building 
infrastructure such as roads and airports, and providing services such as banking. So there 
are now tremendous business opportunities for the African continent, as it hitches its wagon 
to the rising stars of the global economy. Its economic outlook can only strengthen further, 
driven by high commodity prices and strong external demand.  
The question that arises is whether African countries will be able to put in place rapidly the 
FMI  to  support  and  stimulate  these  trade  and  investment  flows?  It  is  recognized  that  the 
development of a healthy financial sector is critical for countries that experience rapid growth. 
A recent World Bank publication, released about a week ago, “Global Development Horizons 
2011”, comments on how Mauritius witnessed a further acceleration of economic growth in 
2009 as private consumption rose. This new phase of growth was accompanied by the rapid 
expansion of domestic credit and the development of financial markets more broadly. Failure 
to  develop  the  appropriate  FMI  can  dampen  growth  prospects  and  thwart  development 
efforts in Africa.  
Regional financial integration 
However, solo and unco-ordinated efforts by countries acting individually and independently 
may  not  bring  the  African  continent  to  a  new  level  of  development.  For  me,  part  of  the 
solution clearly lies in hastening the process of regional financial integration. As I mentioned 
earlier,  there  have  been  significant  strides  in  the  direction  of  regional  trade  integration  in 
Africa.  But,  drawing  from  the  lessons  learned  from  the  problems  encountered  by  the 
European Union, I firmly believe that regional trade integration should go hand in hand with 
regional financial and monetary integration. And we  must reckon with our African realities. 
We all know the PIIGS story, where some believed that pigs could actually fly! As countries 
in  the  Eurozone  periphery  face  a  severe  sovereign  debt  crisis  which  threatens  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
foundations of the Euro, they are being bailed out by other, much-stronger, partners. It is not 
clear whether any African countries are either prepared, or indeed able, to bail out their peers 
in  case  they  confront  similar  difficulties.  A  fiscal  union  and  a  transfer  union  cannot  be  far 
behind  monetary  union.  We  must  therefore  proceed  cautiously.  We  should  not  rush  into  a 
monetary union. Financial integration can very well take place without monetary union in the 
first instance.  
Limiting  our  sights  to  regional  financial  integration,  does  not  imply  any  lack  of  ambition.  It 
does bring many benefits for Africa. First, it would provide incentives for domestic financial 
reforms. Second, it would increase the scale of operations. Third, it would spur competition. 
Fourth,  it  would  increase  FDI  inflows.  And  it  would  enable  African  systems  to  become 
regional, and ultimately global, players in financial markets. But, to achieve regional financial 
integration,  there  are  certain  conditions  that  must  be  met  and  a  key  requirement  is 
macroeconomic stability. And this is a pretty tall order, if you take into account the fact that 
African economies are so vastly different on so many counts.  
There  are  problematic  asymmetries  ranging  from  production  structures  to  institutional 
effectiveness  –  such  as  democratic  accountability,  the  incidence  of  corruption,  and 
government  efficiency.  All  these  contribute  to  major  disparities  in  economic  performance, 
including  public  finance,  and  dependence,  public  debt,  balance  of  payments  performance, 
inflation,  and  growth.  Between  2000  and  2007,  annual  growth  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  was 
around 6.5 percent – the highest rate in more than 30 years. This was accompanied by low 
or moderate inflation and growing macroeconomic stability. Then the region was hit by two 
global  economic  shocks,  the  sharp  increases  in  food  and  energy  prices  of  late  2007  and 
early 2008, and the onset of the recession later in 2008. The crisis came at a time when sub-
Saharan Africa was in a much better shape than it had ever been before, and was resolutely 
heading  for  higher  growth  and  faster  poverty  reduction.  Although,  at  the  beginning,  the 
effects of the crisis were not felt, given the limited integration of the African financial system 
with the global financial system, their second round impacted negatively on macroeconomic 
convergence and regional financial integration efforts.  
This led many to argue that the process of regional financial integration should be delayed or 
put  on  hold  while  awaiting  better  times.  This  view  has  been  reinforced  by  the  recent 
geopolitical  tensions  in  the  North  African  region,  which  has  added  grist  to  the  mill  of  the 
confirmed Africa-skeptics who point out that Africa heads the hit-parade of failed states.    
For the optimists, the crisis brings new opportunity as Ms Antoinette Sayeh, – coming herself 
from a failed state, and now Director, of the African Department of the International Monetary 
Fund – said in a speech entitled “Sub-Saharan Africa: Challenges for 2010” at The Brooklyn 
Institution (November 2009) : “…new engines to drive strong growth will be needed in the 
post-crisis  period.  Measures  to  improve  the  business  environment,  develop  well-regulated 
capital markets, increase labor productivity, and enhance efficiency in the public sector will 
be crucial”. 
Policymakers therefore face the daunting challenge of coming up with key policies aimed at 
reducing gaps, inequality and income differences across the region in order to transform it 
into regional single markets and regional production bases that are fully integrated and more 
competitive in the global economy. Melding the different countries into a regional bloc, with 
free movement of goods, services, skilled labor and free flow of capital, implies that there will 
be an increasing flow of funds, or payments, between economic agents in different countries 
and  greater  cross-border  trading  of  securities.  FMIs,  that  are  harmonized,  standardized, 
inter-operable,  and  inter-linkable,  are  fundamental  requirements  to  achieve  truly  integrated 
markets  in  the  region.  While  I  am  convinced  that  this  is  the  way  forward  for  Africa,  I  am 
perfectly  aware  of  the  many  hurdles  that  that  need  to  be  overcome  before  this  kind  of 
ambition  can  become  a  reality.  For  example,  the  efficient  functioning  of  a  payments  and 
settlement system, a vital component of FMIs, relies on the appropriate infrastructure being 
put in place i.e. telecommunications, acceptance networks, internet access etc. While many 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
countries  in  the  African  region  have  made  significant  efforts  towards  implementing  RTGS 
systems, in setting up ATMs, or effecting payments through mobiles, many still lack reliable 
telecommunications,  good  road  networks,  or  even  electricity.  Another  area  that  requires 
attention  would  be  region-wide  regulatory  frameworks,  and  adequate  supervision  to  keep 
pace with the expansion of cross-border banking and other financial services areas. 
Financial market infrastructure in Mauritius 
That’s enough about the continent for this morning. Let me tell you a few words on our own 
efforts to enhance our FMI. In spite of the smallness of our economy, the FMI in Mauritius is 
quite developed. It has gone through a series of transformations over the years. These were 
made  possible  because  we  could  piggy-back  on  state-of-the-art  telecommunications 
infrastructure, providing global connectivity. As we welcomed global players in our jurisdiction 
and  as  our  economy  developed,  the  Mauritian  financial  system  became  increasingly 
integrated  with  international  financial  markets.  On  the  downside,  we  also  became 
increasingly exposed to the risk of instability, and more vulnerable to external shocks. The 
Bank of Mauritius has the responsibility to ensure the stability and soundness of the financial 
system of the country. While this financial stability role of the Bank is not a new one, it was 
brought  into  sharper  focus  by  the legislative  changes  to  the  responsibilities  of  the Bank  in 
2004. In practice, the Bank would look at the robustness of the core financial infrastructure, 
which includes the payments and settlement system, and identify potential triggers, in times 
of stress, that could lead to a crisis. The safety of the payments and settlement system is a 
major  concern  for  us  not  only  because  of  the  risks  embedded  in  the  system,  but  also 
because we are a fully-monetised economy where a small hiccup in the system can rapidly 
lead  to  a  major  economic  disruption.  Also,  the  payments  and  settlement  system  is  the 
channel  through  which  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  –  failure  of  the  payments  and 
settlement  system  would  translate  into  a  failure  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism 
and monetary policy would be ineffective. 
The  Bank  is  concerned  with  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  the  payment  system.  As 
operator of the system, we have influenced its design and evolution. We directed our efforts 
to modernize the system, to make it more efficient, and more resilient to the risk of potential 
financial market instability. What distinguishes our payments and settlement system is that it 
is  an  integrated  system.  Our  system  has  become  a  model  for  the  region  –  we  have  been 
receiving a steady stream of delegations from other central banks in the region interested to 
look at its intricacies. 
Modernisation of our payments and settlement system 
The first phase of the modernization of our payments and settlement system started with the 
implementation  of  MACSS  –  the  Mauritius  Automated  Clearing  and  Settlement  System.  It 
links electronically all banks operating in Mauritius as well as the Ministry of Finance to the 
Bank  of  Mauritius.  MACSS  was  designed  to  use  the  SWIFT  infrastructure  as  message 
carrier, instead of a private proprietary network, and was a première in the region at the time 
of its launch. MACSS processes over 2,000 transactions per day to a value of nearly Rs10 
billion  –  or  nearly  3%  of  our  GDP.  Then  PLACH  –  the  Port-Louis  Clearing  House  –  was 
automated,  with  the  standardization  of  cheques  using  Magnetic  Ink  Character  Recognition 
(MICR)  technology  and,  in  turn,  PLACH  piggy-backed  on  the  MACSS  communication 
network. Well before the global financial crisis had begun to unfold, I had zeroed in on the 
Payment Systems as a key contributor to financial stability and economic growth. I therefore 
decided – against quite some opposition – to create a division within the Bank, dedicated to 
payment system issues, as is the practice in most central banks.  
The establishment of the MCIB – Mauritius Credit Information Bureau – under the aegis of 
the Bank of Mauritius, was a key element of our FMI. MCIB is a public registry of borrower 
information  and  provides  factual  information  on  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers.  It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
improved the provision of credit information. It was also instrumental in lowering the ratio of 
non-performing loans in banks. In other words, it improved the quality of banks’ loan portfolio. 
While we have been busy warding off pressing unsolicited offers to acquire it from us, we 
have  also  been  constantly  expanding  the  coverage  of  MCIB.  In  2009,  we  replaced  the 
MACSS software with a new application based on international best practice. It is built on a 
more resilient architecture and supports multi-currency transactions including payment of tax 
bills  in  foreign  currency.  Our  RTGS  is  certified  “SWIFT  Gold  Label”  and  we  are  the  only 
country in the region to have a multi-currency RTGS. 
There was still a missing component in our payments landscape – we did not have a proper 
automated clearing system for low-value payments. These make up the bulk of the payment 
transactions in our economy. Last December, for example, we cleared a record number of 
cheques: 562,000 of them in an amount of Rs29.4 billion – or a daily average of 26,800 for a 
daily average amount of Rs1.4 billion. We have invested in a Bulk Clearing System as the 
first  phase  in  the  implementation  of  a  Cheque  Truncation  System.  At  the  time  that  the 
Cheque Truncation project was envisaged in Mauritius, we wanted to be the pioneers in the 
region with this system which would do away  with the need for physical processing of the 
large number of cheques which I just mentioned. Unfortunately we got entangled in board-
room squabbles and procurement delays. We have been overtaken by other central banks 
which probably had more lee-way with respect to decisions to invest in new technology. We 
are making up for lost time and expect to roll out our cheque imaging system by the end of 
June. 
Regional Payments and Settlement System (REPSS) 
Let me round off this brief overview of our FMI, the part that is under the Bank’s purview, with 
an  FMI  initiative  for  the  region  where  the  Bank  is  acting  as  the  Payment  and  Settlement 
Agent,  REPSS  –  the  Regional  Payments  and  Settlement  System  of  COMESA.  I  am 
reminded that the last time that a SWIFT Africa Regional Conference was held in Mauritius in 
2004, Arthur Cousins, Director Strategic Financial Markets Projects, Standard Bank of South 
Africa and Member of the SWIFT Board, had shared with delegates his vision of “TARGET 
Africa” where he saw, as he put it: 
almost  the  entire  continent  running  interoperable  SWIFTNet-based  RTGS 
systems by the end of 2008.  
Today, we are not quite there, but the doors of African regionalisation are slowly opening up 
with  this  FMI  initiative  for  the  COMESA  region.  Today,  the  project  has  made  notable 
progress. REPSS is fully in key with the “Target Africa Vision” and connects the 19 COMESA 
member-states,  through  the  SWIFT  network  for  cross-border  payments.  Low-cost  linkages 
between the national payment systems of countries through SWIFT will no doubt reduce the 
cost  of  doing  business  within  Africa,  but  requires,  beyond  technological  capability,  a  real 
political will. And instead of duplicating similar systems in the other sub-regions, wouldn’t it 
be far more efficient to extend the reach of REPSS beyond COMESA countries, to take on 
the entire continent? 
Concluding remarks 
We are looking at a different new world where no country is an island and none can envisage 
their own economic prosperity in isolation. We need to unite forces to reap the benefits of an 
integrated market, reduce costs and achieve greater efficiency. Regional financial integration 
can help to develop domestic financial markets in Africa. Recently, a fellow Central Banker, 
Mr  Budi  Mulya,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Indonesia,  remarked  that  harmonized, 
standardized  and  interoperable  market  infrastructures  are  fundamental  requirements  to 
facilitate increased volumes of cross-border transactions within the ASEAN region. I believe 
his observation is very pertinent and could apply equally well to the African region. But I have 
one  lingering  concern  –  I  am  worried  by  the  sheer  multiplicity  of  regional  initiatives  in  our 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
region.  The  experience  on  the  continent  shows  that  while  regional  organisations  may  be 
easily  formed,  they  can  be  quite  difficult  to  take  forward.  Governments  face  difficult  policy 
choices  emanating  from  national,  regional  and  international  programs.  Multi-regional 
agendas  arising  from  multiple  memberships  in  different  regional  groups  can  become  an 
obstacle to broader regional integration. Is it not high time to bring all the various building 
blocs,  like  COMESA,  SADC,  WAEMU  and  others,  together  as  part  of  one  integrated 
programme  to  deliver  on  the  vision  of  a  United  Africa  that  we  have  been  pursuing  for  so 
long? 
As for financial integration, I am an inveterate optimist. I firmly believe that we can build an 
integrated financial market in our part of the world. It makes economic sense – we have the 
know-how; we have the technology; and above all, we have the people. REPSS is a first step 
in the direction of financial market integration. We need to continue to concentrate our efforts 
and resources instead of duplicating them. The time has come for us to re-define our vision 
of “Target Africa”. Sometimes Vision has to be re-defined before it can be transformed into 
Action. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
