Hidetoshi Kamezaki: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Japan 
Summary of a speech by Mr Hidetoshi Kamezaki, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of 
Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Saga, 2 February 2011. 
I.  
The economy and prices 
 The global economy 
A.  
Let  me  start  by  describing  the  situation  in  which  the  global  economy  currently  finds  itself. 
From  2000  onward,  the  global  economy  –  after  a  period  of  stagnation  in  the  wake  of  the 
bursting  of  the  IT  bubble  –  enjoyed  sustained  high  growth  led  by  improved  productivity  in 
many  economies,  owing  to  the  advance  of  globalization  and  increased  participation  of 
emerging economies in the global market. In the United States, household consumption was 
buoyant, based on borrowing using increased home values as collateral. The hike in housing 
prices  was  due  in  part  to  increased  demand  from  a  growing  population  and  the  baby 
boomers, with funds made available by financial institutions. Through financial engineering, 
these  institutions  in  turn  raised  low-cost  funds  from  around  the  world  in  exchange  for 
securitized products with a high credit rating backed by such housing loans. Furthermore, in 
the southern European and Baltic economies, growth accelerated because they were able to 
attract  considerable  foreign  investment  on  the  basis  of  a  stable  exchange  rate  and  low 
interest rates due to the adoption of, or a peg to, the euro. China registered robust growth as 
its  entry  into  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO)  helped  it  to  attract  direct  foreign 
investment. It was around this time that the emerging economies of Brazil, Russia, India, and 
China,  which  saw  continued  high  growth  driven  by  domestic  demand,  were  collectively 
dubbed the BRICs. 
However, housing prices in the United States peaked around 2006 and started to decline, 
leading to an increase in defaults by households that had taken out mortgages based on the 
belief that housing prices would continue to rise. This resulted in an increase in defaults on 
mortgage-backed  securities,  and  investors  around  the  world  that  had  purchased  these 
products  suffered  losses.  Investors  increasingly  withdrew  funds  from  risk  assets,  causing 
turbulence in financial markets in Europe and the United States from around summer 2007, 
culminating in a full-blown financial crisis with the failure of Lehman Brothers in autumn 2008. 
Credit  concerns  gave  rise  to  turmoil  in  financial  markets  and  led  to  a  deterioration  in 
economic  activity,  which  in  turn  affected  financial  institutions  and  markets,  giving  rise  to  a 
vicious circle that resulted in a severe global downturn. In addition, the fall in asset prices 
created a heavy debt burden for some financial institutions and households, forcing them to 
adjust their balance sheets and curtail spending, putting further downward pressure on the 
economy. 
Against  this  background,  countries  around  the  world  introduced  large-scale  monetary  and 
fiscal measures with the aim of bringing the deterioration in the economy to a halt. As a result 
of these measures, the global economy started to pick up around spring 2009, helped by the 
completion of inventory adjustments. Thereafter, emerging economies swiftly returned to a 
high  growth  path,  while  advanced  economies  recovered  due  to  the  strength  of  increased 
demand  from  emerging  economies,  monetary  and  fiscal  measures,  and  the  rebuilding  of 
inventories. The United States, for example, is continuing to recover at a moderate pace, as 
is  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  although  the  pace  of  recovery  there  differs  by  country. 
Meanwhile, a number of developments have caused concerns, such as the Dubai debt crisis 
in  autumn  2009,  the  Greek  financial  crisis  in  spring  2010,  and  the  economic  deceleration 
from summer to autumn 2010 after the completion of fiscal stimulus measures and inventory 
restocking,  but  these  concerns  have  been  overcome.  It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
pace of recovery in the advanced economies, particularly in Europe and the United States, is 
showing  little  sign  of  accelerating,  since  many  economic  entities  are  burdened  with  heavy 
debt repayments, and as a result, refrain from forward-looking spending and investment. In 
the United States, for instance, the sharp fall in housing prices means that many households 
have  negative  equity,  making  it  also  difficult  for  financial  institutions  to  collect  mortgage 
repayments.  Furthermore,  in  some  peripheral  European  countries,  governments  and 
financial  institutions  that  borrowed  a  large  amount  of  funds  from  overseas  when  their 
economies were strong are finding it difficult to repay loans due to the economic downturn. 
The global economy is expected to continue recovering, although the stark difference in the 
pace  of  growth  –  with  high  growth  in  the  emerging  economies  and  weak  growth  in  the 
advanced economies, particularly in Europe and the United States – is set to persist. Yet, I 
think there are substantial downside risks with regard to the U.S. and European economies, 
since domestic demand remains vulnerable to shocks given the heavy debt burden in these 
countries.  It  is  also  necessary  to  be  aware  of  the  risk  that  problems  in  some  peripheral 
European countries may trigger turmoil in international financial markets, exerting a negative 
shock on the global economy again. On the other hand, although emerging and commodity 
exporting economies – which are enjoying a virtuous cycle of growth in production, income, 
and spending – are in the process of tightening monetary policy, there is a risk that growth 
will accelerate further due to inflows of surplus funds from advanced economies, which are 
continuing to pursue loose monetary policies. From a longer-term perspective, however, this 
represents a downside risk, since it could lead to inflation or an overheating of asset markets, 
which would necessitate strong tightening measures. 
The Japanese economy 
B.  
The Japanese economy also got off to a weak start at the beginning of the 2000s, but then 
from 2002 to 2007 experienced the longest period of economic expansion since the end of 
World  War  II,  owing  mainly  to  robust  external  demand.  Thereafter,  the  economy  declined, 
falling steeply in response to the crisis triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers in autumn 
2008, but started to recover after leveling off around spring 2009. The driving force of the 
recovery  in  Japan  was  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  and  government  measures  to 
stimulate  sales  of  environmentally  friendly  goods,  boosting  exports  and  durable  consumer 
goods  sales.  The  increase  in  production  then  positively  affected  corporate  profits, 
employment, and business fixed investment. 
The  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately,  but  the  recovery  appears  to  have  paused 
since autumn 2010 due to the deceleration in overseas economies, the phasing out of the 
various stimulus measures to increase demand for environmentally friendly goods, and the 
appreciation of the yen. At present, the economy is at a critical juncture and could either start 
to grow again or, if it fails to gain momentum, start shrinking. Fortunately, the deceleration of 
overseas  economies  appears  to  have  ended  and  exports  are  thus  expected  to  start 
recovering soon. Furthermore, it seems that the economy will not be weighed down long by 
the end of measures to stimulate demand for environmentally friendly goods, given that car 
production and sales have recovered somewhat due to efforts by automakers to launch new 
models after the expiration of subsidies. Moreover, the appreciation of the yen has also come 
to a halt for the time being. Therefore, the Japanese economy is highly likely to soon emerge 
from  the  present  pause  and  resume  its  moderate  recovery.  Consequently,  the  general 
improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  and  in  business  fixed  investment  is 
likely to continue. A strong recovery, however, is unlikely, as households and firms will be 
wary  of  undertaking  forward-looking  spending  and  investment  due  to  persistent  concerns 
about the future. 
Naturally,  this  outlook  is  subject  to  uncertainty.  As  mentioned,  there  are  both  upside  and 
downside risks to overseas economic developments that are likely to influence exports and 
overall corporate activity in Japan. On the domestic front, a downside risk is that spending 
and  investment  by  households  and  firms  will  be  dampened  further  by  weak  growth 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
expectations  due  to  population  decline  as  well  as  concerns  regarding  the  pension  system 
and the fiscal deficit. On the other hand, if, such concerns were to ease, this could lead to an 
increase in spending and investment. 
Recent price developments 
C.  
Next, I will move on to price developments. Prices in international commodity markets have 
recently  been  increasing,  reflecting  particularly  the  growth  in  emerging  economies  and 
inflows of surplus funds due to monetary easing in advanced economies. As a result, import 
prices  in  Japan  have  been  rising,  despite  the  considerable  downward  pressure  from  the 
ongoing appreciation of the yen. The domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI), which 
measures fluctuations in prices of goods traded between firms in Japan, has also been rising 
moderately. 
In  contrast,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  excluding 
fresh  food  (the  core  CPI),  which  measures  the  price  of  goods  and  services  purchased  by 
households,  has  been  in  negative  territory  since  March  2009,  indicating  that  deflation  is 
continuing. However, since reaching a year-on-year rate of decline of 2.4 percent in August 
2009,  the  pace  of  decline  in  the  core  CPI  has  been  moderating.  Meanwhile,  the  pace  of 
decline in the CPI excluding food and energy, or the core-core CPI, which is less susceptible 
to  international  commodity  price  fluctuations,  has  also  been  moderating  after  the  year-on-
year  rate  of  decline  reaching  1.6  percent  in  April  and  May  2010.  Likely  reasons  are  the 
increase in international commodity prices and the narrowing of the negative output gap as a 
result of the recovery of the Japanese economy. 
In  terms  of  the  outlook,  the  year-on-year  pace  of  decline  in  the  core  CPI  is  expected  to 
continue slowing, reflecting the rise in international commodity prices and the narrowing of 
the  negative  output  gap,  and  I  think  that  the  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  may  even  enter 
positive territory in fiscal 2011. However, needless to say, there are risks to the outlook for 
prices, just as there are risks to economic activity. First, there is the possibility of an upswing 
in international commodity prices caused by strong growth in emerging economies. On the 
other hand, if pessimism among the public spreads due to a slower-than-expected recovery 
of the economy, there could be a decline in the medium- to long-term inflation expectations – 
which are stable at the moment – possibly leading to a fall in the actual inflation rate. Lastly, 
a  technical  factor  is  the  possible  effects  of  the  base  year  revision  for  the  CPI,  which  is 
scheduled to take place in summer 2011. Taking into account the experience of past such 
revisions, it is highly likely that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI on the basis of the 
new base year will be lower than that on the basis of the current base year. Of course, such 
statistical  changes  leave  economic  activity  unaffected,  and  with  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  stable  and  prospects  for  a  moderate  improvement  in  the  aggregate 
supply and demand balance, it seems certain that the Japanese economy is headed in the 
direction of overcoming deflation. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
D.  
The outlook I just presented is my own personal assessment. Let me now turn to the Outlook 
for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  known  as  the  Outlook  Report,  which  the  Bank  of  Japan 
releases semiannually, in April and October. The Outlook Report presents the Policy Board 
members’ assessments for economic activity and prices based on the forecasts in the form 
of numerical values. In addition to the semiannual Outlook Report, the Bank releases interim 
assessments in July and January, which present the Bank’s revised projections. 
In the most recent projection released in January 2011, Policy Board members considered it 
most  likely  that  real  GDP  in  fiscal  2010  would  grow  3.3  percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis 
reflecting  the  rebound  from  the  contraction  in  the  preceding  year.  Following  the  relatively 
high  rate  of  growth  in  fiscal  2010,  real  GDP  is  then  projected  to  continue  increasing 
moderately in the following years, at a rate of 1.6 percent in fiscal 2011, and 2.0 percent in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
fiscal 2012. The year-on-year change in the core CPI is projected to remain negative in fiscal 
2010  at  minus  0.3  percent  –  this  excludes  the  effects  of  subsidies  for  high  school  tuition, 
which  would  cause  a  further  decline  of  0.5  percentage  point  –  but  is  expected  to  turn 
moderately positive thereafter, to plus 0.3 percent in fiscal 2011 and plus 0.6 percent in fiscal 
2012. It should be noted, however, that these figures do not incorporate possible effects of 
the base year revision for the CPI this summer. 
Policy Board members make their forecasts in terms of a range of values rather than a point 
estimate, and they then attach a probability of realization to each of the values. The collective 
view of the Policy Board has been that risks are balanced on the whole.1 
Measures taken by the Bank 
II.  
Next, I will outline the policy measures taken by the Bank following the Lehman shock. 
Measures to address the financial crisis 
A.  
After the failure of Lehman Brothers in autumn 2008, financial market participants around the 
world became overly cautious about a possible chain reaction of bankruptcies and started to 
retain  funds  as  on-hand  liquidity  rather  than  lend  them  to  other  participants,  resulting  in  a 
sharp  financial  contraction.  In  order  to  address  this  situation,  the  Bank,  as  emergency 
measures to provide liquidity for financial markets, successively conducted same-day funds-
supplying operations, introduced U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations, and accepted bonds 
issued by the governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and France 
as  eligible  collateral.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  outright  purchases  of 
commercial  paper  (CP)  and  corporate  bonds,  based  on  the  recognition  that  a  significant 
decline in the functioning of markets, such as the serious shortage of liquidity in the CP and 
corporate bond markets, was causing a tightening of overall corporate financing conditions. 
In  addition,  the  Bank  introduced  a  series  of  temporary  emergency  measures  to  facilitate 
corporate financing, including the easing of the rating requirement for corporate debt to be 
accepted  as  eligible  collateral  and  the  special  funds-supplying  operation  to  facilitate 
corporate financing, through which the Bank provided 3-month funds for an unlimited amount 
against  the  value  of  corporate  debt  pledged  as  collateral  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  of 
0.1 percent. 
Furthermore, in order to ensure an accommodative financial environment, the Bank reduced 
the  target  level  of  the  policy  interest  rate  (the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate)  from 
0.5 percent to 0.1 percent, which is the lowest level in the world. In order to provide ample 
liquidity by maintaining the policy interest rate at this low level, the Bank also introduced the 
complementary  deposit  facility,  whereby  interest  is  made  payable  on  excess  reserve 
balances held at the Bank by financial institutions. 
Moreover,  the  Bank  introduced  temporary  measures  to  secure  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system,  given  that  the  strains  in  global  financial  markets  and  the  subsequent  fall  in  stock 
prices and rise in credit costs had greatly affected financial institutions’ intermediary function 
and  financial  soundness.  Such  measures  include  the  purchase  of  stocks  held  by  financial 
institutions  to  help  them  reduce  the  market  risk  associated  with  stock  holdings  and  the 
provision of subordinated loans to banks to help them maintain sufficient capital bases. 
The  Bank  gradually  brought  some  of  these  temporary  measures  to  an  end  as  financial 
markets regained stability. 
                                                 
1   For  details,  see  Appendix  2  (Risk  Balance  Charts)  of  the  “Statement  on  Monetary  Policy”  released  on 
January 25, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
B.  
Recent conduct of monetary policy toward a sustainable growth path with 
price stability 
Financial markets have recently been stable and the economy has been showing signs of a 
moderate recovery, but the Bank recognizes that the Japanese economy is still experiencing 
deflation.  With  a  view  to  overcoming  deflation  and  returning  the  Japanese  economy  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability,  the  Bank  continues  to  consistently  make 
contributions  as  the  central  bank  and  is  currently  utilizing  a  three-pronged  approach  of 
pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  through  comprehensive  monetary  easing,  ensuring 
financial market stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic 
growth. 
Pursuing powerful monetary easing 
1.  
The  Bank  aims  to  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing  through  the  implementation  of  the 
comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy  decided  in  October  2010.  This  policy  consists  of 
three measures: a change in the guideline for money market operations; a clarification of the 
policy time horizon; and the establishment of an Asset Purchase Program. 
Regarding the first measure, the change in the guideline for money market operations, the 
Bank  lowered  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  target  from  previously  “around 
0.1 percent” to “around 0 to 0.1 percent.” Although the target rate of 0.1 percent was already 
extremely low, by allowing the target rate to fall below 0.1 percent, the Bank clarified that it is 
pursuing a virtually zero interest rate policy. 
As for the second measure, the clarification of the policy time horizon, the Bank made it clear 
that it will maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judges that price stability is in 
sight, on condition that an examination of risk factors, including the accumulation of financial 
imbalances,  reveals  no  problems.  Price  stability  here  is  defined  on  the  basis  of  the 
“understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”  (hereinafter,  the  “understanding”) 
announced by the Bank and refers to the level of inflation that each Policy Board member 
understands, when conducting monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over 
the medium to long term, with the midpoints of most Policy Board members’ “understanding” 
being around 1 percent. The Bank has made it clear that the Policy Board does not tolerate a 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI equal to or below 0 percent. Usually, in an economic 
recovery phase, there are various forecasts as to when the policy rate will be changed and 
projections  for  longer-term  interest  rates  consequently  vary.  The  clarification  of  the  policy 
time horizon – that is, the clarification of the conditions necessary for a change in the policy 
rate  –  should  lead  to  a  convergence  in  market  expectations  regarding  future  changes  in 
policy  and  therefore  help  to  stabilize  longer-term  interest  rates.  As  the  economic  recovery 
progresses and corporate profits improve, this “policy duration effect” should exert significant 
further easing effects, since firms’ funding costs decline relative to their profits. 
As the third measure of the comprehensive monetary easing policy, the Bank established the 
Asset  Purchase  Program  worth  about  35  trillion  yen  to  purchase  various  financial  assets, 
such  as  government  securities,  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and 
Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  as  well  as  to  conduct  fixed-rate  funds-
supplying operations against pooled collateral whereby funds with a maturity of three or six 
months are provided at an interest rate of 0.1 percent. In the money market, where the Bank 
conducts  daily  operations  as  the  central  bank  of  Japan,  most  short-term  interest  rates  are 
already close to zero, and there remains little room for further declines. Therefore, to achieve 
additional monetary easing, it is necessary to influence longer-term interest rates and prices 
of risk assets. It is for this reason that the Bank established the Asset Purchase Program, 
which  aims  at  purchasing  financial  assets,  including  risk  assets,  thereby  encouraging  a 
decline in longer-term market interest rates and a reduction in various risk premiums. While 
the  purchase  of  risk  assets  such  as  ETFs  and  J-REITs  is  an  extraordinary  measure  for  a 
central bank, the aim is that this will act as a catalyst for market participants to take a more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
active  investment  stance,  thereby  helping  to  smooth  the  intermediation  of  risk  money  and 
further improve firms’ funding conditions. 
Ensuring financial market stability 
2. 
In order to fully ensure financial market stability, the Bank has been implementing a variety of 
measures including the utilization of various funds-supplying operations, even in the current 
situation  where  Japanese  financial  markets  have  been  relatively  stable.  Specifically,  the 
Bank has provided ample funds to financial markets, with the year-end outstanding balance 
of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank  last  year  exceeding  22  trillion  yen,  which  was  above  the 
20 trillion  yen  in  2009,  and  the  15  trillion  yen  in  2008,  the  year  of  the  Lehman  shock. 
However, measures include not only the amount of funds supplied but also steps to provide 
financial  institutions  with  the  confidence  that  they  can  obtain  sufficient  funds  whenever 
necessary. For example, temporary measures introduced in response to the financial crisis 
that  continue  today  include  the  complementary  deposit  facility,  the  acceptance  of  foreign 
government bonds as eligible collateral, and U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations. These 
measures aim to forestall a return of instability in financial markets. 
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth 
3. 
Moreover, in order to strengthen the foundations for economic growth, the Bank has been 
implementing a measure through which it provides long-term funds at a low interest rate to 
private  financial  institutions  in  accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and 
investment. Currently, financial markets and financial institutions have abundant funds, firms 
have  strong  cash  flows,  and  households  hold  an  enormous  amount  of  financial  assets. 
Nevertheless,  the  Japanese  economy  has  yet  to  show  robust  growth,  indicating  that  the 
issue  at  stake  is  not  a  shortage  of  funds,  but  the  unwillingness  of  economic  entities  to 
undertake forward-looking spending and investment. Underlying this situation is the fact that 
the decline in the growth trend of the economy has led to a decline in firms’ and households’ 
growth  expectations,  which  in  turn  gives  rise  to  insufficient  domestic  demand  –  the 
fundamental cause of the current deflation. In this situation, the Bank aimed to address the 
fundamental cause of the current deflation by making use of its function as the central bank 
and making more funds available to new areas of growth to raise growth expectations. While 
this  fund-provisioning  measure  alone  is  unlikely  to  be  enough  to  raise  Japan’s  growth 
potential, the Bank hopes that by acting as a catalyst it will prompt discussions on this issue 
as well as efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
Looking  at  the  outcome  so  far,  I  would  say  that  most  of  the  objectives  of  the  fund-
provisioning  measure  implemented  in  June  2010  have  been  achieved.  Many  financial 
institutions nationwide have shown an interest in the measure, and among the 140 financial 
institutions  that  applied,  more  than  100  financial  institutions  have  been  selected  as 
counterparties.  The  total  amount  of  loans  provided  through  the  two  rounds  of  loan 
disbursements carried out by the Bank so far is about 1.5 trillion yen, which is already about 
half of the maximum amount of loans – 3 trillion yen – to be disbursed under the measure, 
with a year and a half still remaining until June 30, 2012, when the last disbursement of new 
loans  is  to  take  place.  Areas  eligible  for  loans  or  investment  range,  for  example,  from 
environment and energy business, development of social infrastructure, medical and nursing 
care  business,  and  regional  revitalization  business  to  business  deployment  in  Asian 
countries, and include efforts to support local industries. The measure is gradually producing 
positive effects as a catalyst – its intended purpose – since, although the maximum duration 
of loans provided under the measure is four years, more than 70 percent of actual individual 
loans or investments exceed this period. Moreover, following the introduction of the measure, 
financial institutions have been establishing new dedicated funds and lending schemes, and 
some of them in certain cases have set a higher ceiling on the total  amount of lending or 
investment than the 150 billion yen ceiling for the total amount of loans that they could obtain 
from the Bank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Toward a sustainable growth path with price stability 
III.  
I  will  talk  next  about  the  structural  problems  facing  the  Japanese  economy.  As  I  have 
explained,  the  economy  has  been  showing  signs  of  a  moderate  recovery  but  is  still 
experiencing  deflation  because  the  growth  momentum  remains  weak.  The  “lost  decade” 
following  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  economy  has  unfortunately  turned  into  “two  lost 
decades.” It is necessary to consider what can be done to avoid a third lost decade. 
Japan’s process of economic development 
A.  
Let us look back on Japan’s process of economic development in the past. Right after the 
end of World War II, Japan looked to the affluent advanced economies of Europe and the 
United States. At this point, Japan enjoyed a latecomer advantage and, with hard work, was 
in a position to aim at catching up and even overtaking these economies relatively quickly. 
Moreover, benefiting from a rise in the working-age population and the so-called population 
bonus – the increase in the share of the working-age population in the total population – it 
was  easy  to  accelerate  growth.  Furthermore,  with  industrialization  having  already  gotten 
underway before the war, Japan at the time was among the few countries that could produce 
high-quality manufactured goods at a low price and had few competitors in the international 
market.  This  favorable  environment  and  Japan’s  economic  model  –  based  on  detailed 
government industrial policy, strong support for firms from the main bank system, and strong 
employee  loyalty  based  on  the  seniority  system  and  lifetime  employment  –  helped  form  a 
positive cycle facilitating a high rate of growth. 
As a result, in 1968, Japan became the world’s second largest economy, and in the 1970s 
entered the ranks of the advanced economies, almost equal in terms of per capita GDP with 
the advanced economies of Europe and the United States. However, by joining the world’s 
leading economies, it lost its latecomer advantage. Moreover, around this time the population 
bonus  also  started  to  fade.  Thus,  the  conditions  that  had  propelled  high-speed  growth 
changed drastically, and with the outbreak of the oil crises and the appreciation of the yen, 
high-speed growth came to an end. Stable growth, however, was maintained thanks to the 
continued upward trend in the working-age population and the absence of competitors in the 
production of manufactured goods. In the 1980s, a large proportion of the population was able 
to enjoy a satisfactory standard of living. At the same time, however, the increased presence 
of the Japanese economy in international markets intensified trade friction, leading to a rising 
yen after the Plaza Accord. Foreign pressure rose for a wider opening of Japanese markets 
and for financial deregulation. It is against this background that the bubble economy emerged. 
The 1990s started with the tumbling of the Nikkei Stock Average, which had set a record high 
at the end  of 1989. The bubble had burst, and Japan had to contend with the disposal of 
nonperforming loans (NPLs), slow growth, and the onset of deflation, marking the first lost 
decade. During this period, critical changes took place that affected Japan’s growth potential. 
The first is that the working-age population peaked in 1995 and then started to decline. The 
decade also saw the globalization of world markets following the end of the Cold War, the 
liberalization of international capital flows, and advances in information and communications 
technology,  paving  the  way  for  the  rise  of  emerging  economies.  Taken  together,  these 
developments  clearly  signaled  the  end  of  the  favorable  environment  that  had  supported 
Japan’s economic growth. Consequently, growth in domestic demand remained weak in the 
2000s,  even  after  the  disposal  of  NPLs  had  almost  been  completed.  As  a  result,  the  lost 
decade turned into the two lost decades. 
Restrengthening Japan’s economic growth potential 
B.  
As illustrated by what I just described, the cause of the two lost decades appears to have 
been the vanishing of the favorable conditions that had propelled economic growth. In order 
to  restrengthen  Japan’s  economic  growth  potential,  efforts  need  to  be  made  to  create  a 
favorable  environment.  For  example,  to  reduce  the  negative  effects  of  the  fall  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
working-age  population  on  economic  growth,  measures  should  be  taken  to  raise  the  labor 
force participation rate of women and the elderly. There is no question that the government, 
firms,  and  society  as  a  whole  need  to  work  together,  for  example,  to  improve  the 
environment for child rearing and actively promote employment policies that encourage the 
acquisition  of  new  skills.  Furthermore,  to  cope  successfully  with  competition  in  global 
markets,  Japan  should  improve  its  competitive  environment  by,  for  example,  concluding 
more  free  trade  agreements  (FTAs)  and  economic  partnership  agreements  (EPAs).  Japan 
also  needs  to  maintain  and  improve  its  model  of  growth  based  on  benefiting  from  rapid 
growth in overseas economies, which has served it well so far. To this end, it is necessary to 
boost productivity in agriculture to strengthen the sector’s international competitiveness and 
ensure that it is not left behind in overall economic growth. 
In  addition,  we  need  to  build  a  new  growth  model  that  reflects  the  changing  economic 
environment.  To  stay  in  the  forefront  of  global  competition,  it  is  necessary  to  devise  and 
develop new areas of growth – simply following the example or copying the products of others 
will allow latecomers to catch up in no time. Firms need to take risks and pioneer new areas of 
business. It is also necessary to shift factors of production among industries to improve the 
efficiency  of  resource  allocation.  Areas  where  efforts  should  be  strengthened  without  delay 
include environment-related sectors, where Japan has a technological edge, and areas linked 
with population aging, such as the nursing care and medical industry, since Japan has the 
fastest-aging  society  in  the  world.  Successful  implementation  of  efforts  to  this  end  should 
result in highly competitive new business models capable of capturing global demand. 
In order to strengthen economic growth potential, existing business structures must also be 
modified  to  suit  the  new  environment.  For  example,  it  is  important  to  proceed  with  further 
deregulation  to  encourage  creativity  and  entrepreneurship  by  firms  and  individuals. 
Furthermore, some of the institutions that were devised on the assumption of high growth are 
becoming too costly to maintain in the current period of low growth; for the sake of efficiency, 
it is necessary to take measures to promote structural reform. In the past, deregulation has 
led  to  the  birth  of  new  areas  of  business  such  as  mobile  phones  and  door-to-door  parcel 
delivery  services  and  increased  diversity  in  employment  patterns,  which  has  expanded 
employment opportunities. Moreover, increased efforts to correct high-cost structures have 
narrowed the differences between prices in domestic and foreign markets. Endeavors such 
as these will in due course inject vitality into the Japanese economy. 
At the same time, it is extremely important to reform the social security systems and to work 
on  fiscal  consolidation,  since  public  concerns  over  the  future  of  the  pension  system  and 
public finances hamper economic growth by putting a brake on forward-looking spending and 
investment.  Weak  economic  growth  has  made  firms,  individuals,  and  the  government 
reluctant to take on new challenges and push ahead with painful reforms, and has made the 
economy  heavily  dependent  on  fiscal  spending  for  a  prolonged  period.  As  a  result, 
government debt has ballooned, and the combined long-term debt outstanding of the central 
and regional governments in Japan is forecast to reach 869 trillion yen at the end of March 
2011, which is about 1.8 times Japan’s nominal GDP. Japan is thus in no position to merely 
sit back and observe the sovereign debt problems in Europe, which I touched upon earlier, 
and which were triggered by concerns about fiscal sustainability. A solution must be found 
before Japan suffers a serious loss of credibility in the markets. 
Measures taken by the Bank 
C.  
As I said earlier, the Bank continues to consistently make contributions as the central bank in 
order to overcome deflation and return the Japanese economy to a sustainable growth path 
with  price  stability.  The  Bank’s  efforts  through  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  also  aim  to 
help  strengthen  Japan’s  economic  growth  potential.  The  Bank  must  always  be  ready  to 
proactively  implement  the  necessary  policies  to  achieve  its  objectives.  Going  forward,  the 
Bank should continue to be proactive and do its utmost to bring the Japanese economy back 
to a sustainable growth path with price stability. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
