Duvvuri Subbarao: Dilemmas in central bank communication – some 
reflections based on recent experience 
Speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  second 
Business Standard Annual Lecture, New Delhi, 7 January 2011. 
 1. 
First of all my thanks to Business Standard, and to my good friends T.N. Ninan and 
Sanjaya Baru, for inviting me to deliver this second Business Standard Annual lecture. This 
is an honour to which I attach a lot of value. 
Central bank communication 
2. 
As a part of my job, I accept several speaking commitments, and often I struggle to 
determine the topic for my speech and the key message I should be delivering. From that 
perspective, deciding on a topic for this lecture has been relatively easy. I have chosen to 
speak on “Dilemmas in Central Bank Communication”, and that choice has been motivated 
by three reasons. 
3. 
First,  over  two  years  into  the  job  as  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  I  am  still 
traversing  a  steep  learning  curve.  I  have  learnt  many  things,  and  one  of  them  is  that 
communication  of  policy  is  as  important  as  the  content  of  policy,  and  is  oftentimes  more 
challenging. 
4. 
The second motivation for my choice of the lecture topic comes from the experience 
of the recent crisis when central bankers around the world realized how communication is 
critical to the effectiveness of crisis management policy. This bias towards openness actually 
reflects a remarkable shift in stance on the part of central bankers. As Liaquat Ahamad says 
in his best selling book, “Lords of Finance”, central bankers had previously believed that in 
times  of  crisis,  it  is  prudent  to  obey  the  admonition  of  mothers,  across  cultures,  to  their 
children:  “If  you  can’t  say  anything  nice,  don’t  say  anything  at  all.”  This  follows  from  the 
recurring dilemma that central bankers face in times of panic. If you make an honest public 
statement, you end up feeding the frenzy. On the other hand, if you try to be reassuring, you 
have to twist the truth. In recent decades, however, central bankers have been increasingly 
persuaded  that  even  in  times  of  stress,  they  are  better  off  communicating  rather  than  not 
communicating. The recent crisis reinforced this growing faith in communication as central 
bankers realized, much to their relief, that keeping the public informed and updated actually 
reduced rather than exacerbated anxiety and panic. 
The final reason for my choosing this topic is quite straight forward. This lecture is 
5. 
sponsored  by  a  media  house,  and  what  better  platform  than  this  to  share  with  the  public 
some of the dilemmas and challenges we face in our communication strategy. 
Domain of communication 
6. 
Central  bank  communication  has  been  the  subject  matter  of  much  intellectual 
discourse,  but  this  has  almost  always  been  in  the  context  of  communication  of  monetary 
policy. That is understandable because monetary policy is at the heart of central banking and 
also possibly because communication of monetary policy is arguably more challenging than 
communicating other policies. In my lecture today though, I will speak about communication 
in a broader context – not just with reference to monetary policy but also encompassing other 
dimensions  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  mandate  such  as,  for  example,  regulation  and 
supervision, currency management and external sector management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It would be blasphemous to speak about central bank communication without first 
Alan Greenspan – the doyen of communication! 
7. 
paying homage to that doyen of central bankers – Alan Greenspan. So let me get on with it. 
Greenspan is notoriously famous for several things including for transforming central 
8. 
bank communication to an art form. “Since I’ve become a central banker”, he said in 1987, 
“I’ve learned to mumble with great incoherence. If I seem unduly clear to you, you must have 
misunderstood what I said.” 
9. 
After nearly 15 years on the job, in October 2001, Greenspan took a U turn saying 
that, “Openness is more than just useful in shaping better economic performance. Openness 
is  an  obligation  of  a  central  bank  in  a  free  and  democratic  society.  Transparency  of  our 
activities is the means by which we make ourselves accountable to our fellow citizens to aid 
them in judging whether we are worthy of that task”. Indeed, we owe it to Greenspan, and 
perhaps  his  Delphic  utterances,  for  generating  much  learned  commentary  on  why  central 
bank communication is important. 
the 
last 
Over 
towards  clearer 
two  decades,  central  banks  have  moved 
Why is central bank communication important? 
10. 
communication and greater transparency. This has been driven by several motivations. 
11. 
First  and  foremost,  central  banks  have  realized  that  open  and  transparent 
communication enhances policy effectiveness by way of achieving expected outcomes. This 
shift  in  central  bank  theology  from  deliberate  obscurity  to  greater  transparency  actually 
reflects a shift in the theory of monetary policy. Up until the early 1990s, monetary policy was 
strongly influenced by Nobel Laureate Robert Lucas’ argument that monetary policy affected 
real variables, like growth, only if the policy changes were unanticipated. This encouraged 
obscurity over openness and clarity. However, lost in the message was that monetary policy 
always  affected  nominal  variables  like  inflation  even  if  fully  anticipated.  In  the  1980s,  two 
economists, also Nobel winners, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott, argued that fully transparent 
rules rather than discretionary policy changes were more efficient and credible. This was the 
beginning of the push towards rules over discretion and greater central bank transparency. 
12. 
The most eloquent illustration of this shift towards transparency is the change in the 
communication  strategy  of  the  US  Fed.  Hard  as  it  might  be  to  imagine  from  today’s 
perspective, prior to 1994, the US Fed was not even announcing the target Fed Funds Rate; 
the market was expected to infer the rate from the timing, sequencing and magnitude of its 
open market operations. In sharp contrast, today the Fed not only announces the rate but 
also  gives  a  clear  indication  of  future  policy  trajectory.  Indeed,  it  is  standard  practice  for 
central banks these days to indicate the policy rates, the rationale behind the policy action, 
the expected outcomes, and oftentimes to give forward guidance on future policy actions. 
13. 
While communicating policy after it is made is the standard mode of communication, 
central banks are also increasingly taking to communication before policy action. This again 
is  a  lesson  of  experience  –  that  the  market  does  not  like  unexpected  news,  and  that 
surprises  should  be  avoided  unless  surprise  is,  in  rare  circumstances,  part  of  the  strategy 
itself. When the Fed announced last August that it would reinvest the proceeds of maturing 
securities  purchased  under  the  first  phase  of  quantitative  easing  (QE1),  markets  were 
unnerved. In contrast, the elaborate communication exercise that preceded the recent QE2 
brought  much  clarity  to  the  Fed  action  and  delivered  the  expected  “announcement  effect”. 
QE2  has  of  course  come  in  for  extensive  criticism,  but  that  is  certainly  not  owing  to  any 
shortfall in communication. 
14. 
We have had a similar experience at the Reserve Bank. Both on the way up to the 
crisis and on the way down, we had to make several “off-cycle” policy adjustments. There 
was  wide  agreement  that  these  measures  were  expedient;  nevertheless  they  did  not  go 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
down well with the market because of the surprise element. This has prompted us to revise 
our  communication  strategy  by  introducing,  with  effect  from  September  2010,  more 
structured  scheduled  mid-quarter  reviews.  While  we  have  not  surrendered  our  flexibility  to 
take  policy  action  as  and  when  warranted,  more  frequent  scheduling  of  policy  reviews 
reduces the need for off-cycle action and thereby minimizes the surprise element. 
15. 
Sometimes, communication, instead of being a vehicle for policy, can be the policy 
itself. Drawing yet again from the US experience during the crisis, the Fed realized that its 
repeated announcement of keeping rates low “for an extended period” led markets to reach a 
certain  inference  on  what  “extended  period”  could  mean.  In  this  context,  some  policy 
analysts argued that a step that the Fed could consider was to modify the language of the 
statement to communicate to investors that it anticipates keeping the target Federal Funds 
rate low for a longer period than was currently priced in the markets. This, it was believed, 
would have eased financial conditions as was desired. 
16. 
Communication  can  be  a  potentially  powerful  tool  for  getting  feedback  when  the 
implications and the impact of proposed policy are uncertain. For example, the Reserve Bank 
has  thrown  open  the  issue  of  whether  we  should  deregulate  the  interest  rate  on  savings 
accounts, which incidentally is one of the very few interest rates that remains administered. 
There are persuasive arguments both for and against deregulating this. In the Reserve Bank, 
we  realized  that  this  is,  like  all  big  decisions,  a  judgement  call  and  that  we  needed  the 
“wisdom  of  the  crowds”  in  reaching  a  judgement.  Discerning  people  would  no  doubt  have 
realized that eliciting views and feedback is now standard practice for most policy decisions 
of the Reserve Bank. 
Yet another factor that has motivated central banks into placing larger emphasis on 
17. 
communication is their hard earned autonomy in the years before the crisis. Central banks 
have  increasingly  embraced  more  open  communication  to  counter  the  criticism  that  an 
autonomous  central  bank  comprising  unelected  decision  makers  was  inconsistent  with  a 
democratic structure.  
18. 
Finally,  central  bank  communication  is  important  for  the  institution  to  learn,  listen 
and  understand.  This  is  a  lesson  that  we  have  taken  to  heart  in  the  Reserve  Bank.  I  am 
referring  here  not  to  the  standard  one  way  oral  or  written  communication  but  to  two  way 
communication  between  the  central  bank  and  its  stakeholders,  with  the  central  bank 
remaining largely in a listening mode. During our platinum jubilee last year, we launched the 
“outreach”  programme  whereby  all  of  us  in  the  senior  management  together  with  our  field 
office  staff  and  accompanied  by  senior  functionaries  of  commercial  banks  visited  remote 
villages across the country. This was an immensely rewarding learning experience in several 
ways.  Most,  of  all,  we  found  that  listening  to  people  and  understanding  their  concerns 
enriches our policy making in a very powerful way. Because of its enormous value add, we 
are continuing the outreach programme as a regular activity. 
Communication – illustration of dilemmas 
I  have  so  far  told  you,  with  the  help  of  some  recent  examples,  why  central  bank 
19. 
communication is growing in importance. I have debated about how to go on from here. One 
option is to list all that we have done in the Reserve Bank to improve communication, but that 
may  be  a  boring  litany.  Another  is  to  give  a  scholarly  discourse  on  central  bank 
communication but there are people around with greater expertise than I to do that. I have 
therefore  decided  that  I  will  give  you  ten  illustrations  of  the  communication  dilemmas  and 
challenges that we have faced in the Reserve Bank in the recent period. 
Monetary policy – to pause or not to pause 
(i) 
20. 
As all of you know, in calibrating the exit from the expansionary monetary stance of 
the crisis period, the Reserve Bank has been struggling with the growth-inflation dynamics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
over the last one year. By the time of the second quarter review in early November 2010, we 
had already raised policy interest rates five times. The central issue before this policy review 
was whether we should continue on the tightening spree or pause before resuming tightening 
later on. We consulted experts and economists and found that opinion was divided among 
them. One view was that we must pause for a bit in order for the rate hikes already affected 
to  play  out,  and  then  resume  tightening.  The  opposing  view  was  that  we  should  continue 
tightening  to  a  point  that  would  deliver  RBI’s  inflation  projection  and  pause  only  after  that. 
Inside the Reserve Bank, the view was that within the policy trajectory, it did not matter if we 
paused  briefly  as  long  as  we  remained  committed  to  the  eventual  outcome.  The  dilemma 
then boiled down to communicating to the market that our action should be interpreted only 
as a comma and not a full stop. Whether or not we managed the dilemma effectively is, of 
course, for you to judge. 
Monetary policy stance – forward guidance 
(ii) 
21. 
Central banks have learnt that giving forward guidance on the policy trajectory is an 
effective way of managing market expectations. But they have also learnt that this is not a 
totally  benign  option.  The  forward  guidance  is  typically  conditional  on  certain  expected 
macroeconomic developments. The dilemma then is how precisely is the conditionality to be 
communicated,  and  how  to  ensure  that  the  market  does  not  ignore  the  conditionality  and 
interpret the guidance as an irrevocable commitment. In keeping with the best practice, we in 
the Reserve Bank too have started giving some forward guidance. And as expected, we too 
have confronted the classic communication dilemma. Let me illustrate. In the Second Quarter 
Review of early November 2010, we had said: 
“Based purely on current growth and inflation trends, the Reserve Bank believes 
that the likelihood of further rate actions in the immediate future is relatively low. 
However, in an uncertain world, we need to be prepared to respond appropriately 
to shocks that may emanate from either the global or domestic environment.” 
22.  
Many analysts commended us for the forward guidance, but a few thought that we 
were  imprecise  on  the  conditionality  as  well  as  on  the  time  horizon  implied  by  “immediate 
future”.  I  can  only  say  that  the  element  of  ambiguity  was  deliberate  because  it  was 
unavoidable. 
(iii) 
Monetary policy stance – close to normal or closer to normal? 
23.  
Let me give you another illustration of how we agonize over how every word might 
be interpreted. In the mid-quarter review of September 2010, as part of the forward guidance, 
we had said: “the Reserve Bank believes that the tightening that has been carried out over 
this period has taken the monetary situation close to normal”. 
24.  
There  were  two  communication  dilemmas  here.  The  first  was  whether  we  should 
say “close to” or “closer to”. In the end, we determined that the forward guidance would be 
meaningful only if we had said “close to”, thereby giving ourselves room for further action. 
The  second  dilemma  was  about  whether  “normal”  would  be  interpreted  as  “neutral”.  This 
dilemma  arises  in  the  context  of  the  frequently  asked  question,  “Have  the  policy  rates 
become neutral?” The neutral policy rate, as the economists here would know, is the policy 
interest rate consistent with potential growth and low and stable inflation. It is, however, not 
possible to precisely define the neutral rate for a rapidly growing and structurally transforming 
economy like that of India. On the other hand, “normal” rates can be broadly inferred from the 
crest  and  trough  of  the  policy  rates  over  the  growth-inflation  cycle.  In  the  post  policy 
dissemination, we made an extra effort to communicate this distinction between “normal” and 
“neutral” rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy stance – communicating uncertainty 
(iv) 
25.  
A  frequent  dilemma  we  face  is  about  how  much  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  a 
policy  decision  we  should  communicate.  Our  policy  decisions  are  based,  among  other 
criteria, on macroeconomic data, all of which is in the public domain. The media has more 
than enough expertise to interpret and analyze this data. Nonetheless, the market is eager to 
know the Reserve Bank’s interpretation of the data because, in the ultimate analysis, it is our 
interpretation that informs the policy decision. 
To  give  you  an  example,  the  IIP  (index  of  industrial  production)  data  has  been 
26. 
fluctuating in recent months bewildering analysts about the underlying trend and even raising 
doubts  about  the  quality  of  the  data  itself.  The  market  was  understandably  anxious  about 
how  the  RBI  might  read  the  data.  In  order  to  let  the  market  know  that  we  do  not  know 
anything  more  than  it does  and  to  convey  the  extent  of  our  uncertainty,  in  our  September 
2010 mid-quarter review we said “....the high volatility [of the IIP] over the past two months 
raises some doubts about how effectively the index reflects the underlying momentum in the 
industrial sector.” 
Disclosing inflation expectations survey 
(v) 
27. 
The  Reserve  Bank  conducts  a  quarterly  inflation  expectations  survey  based  on  a 
sample of 4000 respondents spread over 12 cities including the four metros. We have been 
doing this since September 2005 and have gradually refined the survey methodology over 
time. Although the survey was originally intended to be an internal exercise to improve our 
appreciation of the inflation situation, by 2009 there was a growing view within the Reserve 
Bank that we should “communicate” the survey results to the public on the principle that, as 
far as possible, there should be no information asymmetry between the public and us. We 
resolved that issue fairly quickly. We got the data quality and data analysis peer reviewed by 
a high level technical committee, and based on the committee’s endorsement, decided on 
disclosure. 
28. 
The real communication dilemma was the one that followed, whether we will be able 
to convey the arms length relationship between the “Reserve Bank” and the “Reserve Bank 
Survey”, and make the broader public appreciate that the survey results are the opinion of 
the  respondents  and  not  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  We  made  a  serious  effort  to  maintain  that 
distinction. Initial reports showed that some segments of the public remain confused but we 
are hoping that that confusion will resolve in due course. 
Communication dilemmas outside monetary policy arena 
29. 
As I said earlier, communication dilemmas arise not just in the domain of monetary 
policy but also with respect to other dimensions of the Reserve Bank’s work. Let me give you 
some illustrations from those. 
Guidelines for new bank licences 
(vi) 
30. 
As  you  know,  there  is  a  proposal  to  licence  some  new  banks.  The  last  time  the 
Reserve Bank had formulated guidelines for bank licencing was way back in 2001; the world 
has changed a lot since then. We realized that the guidelines for bank licensing need to be 
revisited in the changed context. The broad issues in new bank licensing are by now quite 
familiar: the initial size of capital, the period to be allowed for capital dilution, conversion of 
NBFCs to banks or promotion of banks by NBFCs and the advisability of allowing corporates 
to start banks. On several of these issues, the world view has changed; many heresies of the 
past have become orthodoxies today. 
31. 
We  were  eager  to  evaluate  our  bank  licencing  guidelines  in  the  light  of  later 
experience and to get broadbased feedback from all stakeholders. Accordingly we decided to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
put out a discussion paper listing the pros and cons of each of the decision criteria. We were 
genuinely open minded and made deliberate effort to communicate our “open mindedness”. 
Most media and a majority of the analysts had thought we came across quite well on that 
count.  But  a  small  segment  said  that  we  had  betrayed  our  “biases”  causing  some 
consternation  within  the  Reserve  Bank.  It  is  not  clear  whether  we  had  fallen  short  in  our 
communication effort or whether our interlocutors were superimposing their own prejudices in 
evaluating us. Regardless, there is a lesson here for us to improve our communication. 
Basel III – getting the message across 
(vii) 
32. 
As many of you know, the G-20, at its Seoul meeting in November 2010, endorsed 
the Basel III package for bank regulation and supervision. At the heart of Basel III are efforts 
to  fortify  the  banking  system,  correct  the  incentive  framework  and  ensure  its  long  term 
stability. We, in India, are in the process of evaluating the impact of Basel III on Indian banks 
and  I  have  spoken  about  that  at  length  elsewhere1.  Basel  III  poses  several  challenges 
including communication challenges. Let me illustrate two of the important ones. 
33. 
First,  central  to  Basel  III  is  the  idea  that  banks  should  build  up  capital  and 
provisioning buffers during good times and draw these down during downturns so as to be 
able  to  continue  lending  while  absorbing  losses.  The  underlying  rationale  is  sound,  but 
somewhat  counter-intuitive.  Experience  shows  that  markets  demand  that  banks  maintain 
higher  capital  and  provisioning  during  a  downturn  to  withstand  higher  risks.  If  markets 
continue with such expectation, banks would likely “hoard” capital and stop lending which will 
exacerbate the downturn. The communication challenge, therefore, is to educate the market 
on the Basel III notion of buffers and their manner of use so that these safeguards function 
the way they are intended to. 
34. 
The second communication challenge under the proposed Basel III package comes 
from  the  “comply  or  explain”  framework  under  which  countries  have  the  option  to  deviate 
from certain components of the package and explain why they have deviated. The concern 
really is that the market, known for its unfailing ruthlessness, will penalize any deviation, and 
the  communication  challenge  for  regulators  is  to  persuade  the  markets  to  evaluate  the 
country’s compliance based on the explanation. 
Systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) 
(viii) 
35.  
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  the  Financial  Stability 
Board (FSB) are currently engaged in devising a framework for regulating and supervising 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  SIFIs,  as  is  well  known,  were  at  the 
centre of the recent crisis. Since they are “too big to fail” and “too interconnected to fail”, they 
had to be rescued at a huge cost to the tax payers. The international level work, currently in 
progress, is engaged in identifying ways to reduce the moral hazard of SIFIs, defining the 
criteria  for  their  identification  and  designing  differential  capital  and  liquidity  surcharge  for 
them. 
Under  the  arrangement  presently  under  discussion,  SIFIs  will  be  pre-identified  on 
36.  
the basis of some defined criteria and subjected to graded prudential surcharges and other 
safeguards.  These  are  intended  to  eliminate  the  moral  hazard,  reduce  their  systemic  risk 
potential, and should it become inevitable, allow them to fail in an orderly manner. The intent 
                                                 
1  
“Post Crisis Reforms to Banking Regulation and Supervision – Think Global, Act Local”, Inaugural address by 
Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the FICCI-IBA Conference on “Global Banking: 
Paradigm Shift” at Mumbai on September 7, 2010.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is to pre-identify SIFIs for the purpose of greater supervision but not to disclose the list as 
that would accentuate the moral hazard. 
37.  
The  dilemma  is  how  the  market  might  actually  respond  to  this  deliberate  non-
transparency. Will the market guess the list of SIFIs, as indeed it will, and interpret the intent 
behind  the  enhanced  regulation  as  a  way  of  preserving  the  “too  big  to  fail”  syndrome, 
continue  to  give  SIFIs  competitive  advantage  in  funding  markets  on  such  a  flawed 
understanding and thereby encourage risky behaviour? Or will the market appreciate that the 
true  intent  behind  the  pre-identification  and  more  stringent  regulation  and  supervision  of 
SIFIs  is  to  reduce  the  probability  of  their  failure,  and  in  the  event  of  failure,  to  make  their 
resolution feasible and apportion the burden across all stakeholders without burdening the 
tax payers? 
Limits to transparency – some practical challenges 
38.  
As many of you will appreciate, there is a difference between appropriate openness 
and inappropriate openness. Greater transparency is not always better communication and 
white noise often complicates understanding. Also, central banks may  sometimes  withhold 
information for strategic reasons. Many of you will recall the intense debate that preceded the 
release  of  the  results  of  bank  stress  testing  in  the  US.  There  was  an  apprehension  that 
banks that come out as “stressed” will be pushed into a vicious circle of further stress as a 
result of the disclosure thereby losing the wriggle room to turn around. Let me give you two 
examples from our own experience to illustrate the communication challenges of this type. 
Security features of currency notes 
(ix)  
39. 
We face a classic communication dilemma in disclosing the security features of our 
currency notes. We are deeply conscious that to check counterfeiting, we need to constantly 
enhance  the  security  features  of  the  currency.  That  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient.  The 
sufficiency condition will be met when people become aware of the security features so that 
they  can  tell  a  forged  note  from  a  genuine  one.  The  dilemma  is  that  when  we  launch  an 
awareness drive, we are providing information also to counterfeiters. We resolve this issue 
by  making  the  replication  of  security  features  technically  complex  and  prohibitively 
expensive, and also by incorporating some additional security features that can be detected 
only by sophisticated gadgets and equipment. An added challenge in this regard is that our 
awareness  campaign  has  to  educate  the  public  without  unduly  alarming  them.  This  has 
prompted us to opt for a soft campaign rather than a hard-hitting one; it might take longer to 
create the necessary impact, but it will be more lasting. 
Disclosing the composition of foreign exchange reserves 
(x) 
40. 
Let me give you another illustration of the limits to transparency. The Reserve Bank 
puts out the data on foreign exchange reserves every week with a lag of one week. We also 
publish  a  half  yearly  report  on  the  management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  indicating 
several details including the objectives of the reserve management strategy, the adequacy of 
the  reserves,  risk  management  practices  etc.  However,  we  do  not  disclose  the  currency 
composition of our reserves and we have been criticized for our lack of communication in this 
regard.  The  reason  we  do  not  disclose  the  currency  composition  is  because,  as  the  forex 
reserves manager, we are like any other commercial entity in the market. The information is 
market sensitive and disclosure could potentially impact our commercial interests adversely. 
Disclosure  also  has  wider  implications  for  our  international  relations.  Furthermore,  market 
efficiency  is  in  no  way  affected  by  our  non-disclosure.  Indeed  non-disclosure  is  the  norm 
around the world; a majority of the countries, particularly the large reserve holders, do not 
disclose the composition of their foreign exchange reserves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
We  have,  however,  progressively  moved  towards  greater  disclosure  in  line  with 
41. 
international best practices. The Reserve Bank is among 68 central banks from around the 
world  to  have  adopted  the  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standards  (SDDS)  template  for 
publication  of  detailed  data  on  foreign  exchange  reserves,  including  some  information  on 
currency composition, investment pattern and forward positions. These data are put out on a 
monthly basis on RBI’s website. The Reserve Bank is also one of the very few central banks 
which publish market intervention numbers in its monthly Bulletin with a lag of two months. 
Role and responsibility of the media 
42. 
A lecture on communication dilemmas of central banks would be incomplete without 
a comment on the role and responsibilities of the media. So, let me address that issue briefly. 
43. 
First of all, I want to compliment the Indian media – both print and electronic – for 
the useful intermediation role they play between policy makers and stakeholders. The media 
disseminates,  interprets  and  explains  the  news  to  the  public,  and  in  the  reverse  direction, 
conveys  stakeholder  concerns,  perceptions  and  opinions  to  the  policy  makers.  In  the 
Reserve Bank, we enjoy a professional and mutually beneficial relationship with the media. 
They add value by informing and educating the stakeholders on RBI policies and actions and 
keep us on our toes through their feedback and critique. I am often impressed by the depth 
of media analysis and their insightful opinion pieces and leaders. I will also let you in on a 
secret. My staff tutor me painstakingly before scheduled media interactions, but the depth of 
my understanding is oftentimes put to test by the media interlocutors who spring questions 
that we had not thought of. 
44. 
Even as the media has been an effective intermediary between the Reserve Bank 
and  its  stakeholders,  there  are  ways  in  which  it  can  become  even  more  effective.  Let  me 
make a few suggestions in this regard. 
45. 
Sometimes, I find that the competition among the media militates against the quality 
of analysis. The media disseminates economic and financial news, indeed any news, at three 
levels. The first level is “news” as “news” and I can appreciate the race to be the first at this 
level. The second level is analysis and interpretation and the third level is “opinion”. It is at 
these latter two levels that competition to be “the first with it” compromises quality. The media 
will probably be more effective and value adding if it allows time for digesting the news and 
thinks through before “analysis and interpretation”, and does some research before coming 
out with “opinion”. I am no expert in journalism, but as a consumer of journalism, I think my 
interests will be better served by more in-depth analysis and critique rather than of the “get 
up and go” variety of opinion dissemination. 
46. 
Second, media reporting is sometimes inaccurate, and the risk of misinformation in 
such cases is high. If Dr. Reddy Labs in Hyderabad projects 9 per cent earnings growth and 
if that is reported under a large headline of “Dr. Reddy projects 9 per cent growth”, even the 
intelligent  reader  can  be  forgiven  for  believing  it  to  be  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  the  then  RBI 
Governor, projecting 9 per cent GDP growth. Surely, more stringent quality control will make 
the media a more useful and effective “news intermediator”. 
47. 
Third, as much as I can appreciate the unwavering focus of the media on news that 
sells, the media has a responsibility also for broadbasing its reporting. You often report what 
policy makers say on the sidelines of an event in broad headlines and completely ignore the 
event  itself.  This  tendency,  I  believe,  is  unfair  to  the  event  organizers  as  well  as  to  your 
broader audience who should know of the event. 
48. 
I  am  also  intrigued  by  how  the  media  picks  up  a  tiny  segment  of  a  speech  and 
reports only that, and that too often out of context. For example, a few months ago, I spoke 
at a bankers’ conference on the implications of Basel III for the Indian banking system, and in 
passing I had made a comment about how the salary structure of public sector banks needs 
to be revisited to attract and retain talent. I was puzzled by how this bit alone got extensively 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reported and commented upon. Admittedly the reporting was constructive but I still feel that 
the larger issues of Basel III too should have made it to news and comment.  
49. 
Finally,  a  brief  but  important  comment  on  the  role  of  the  media  during  the  recent 
crisis. It has played an effective and largely useful role in disseminating news and views, but 
also  on  occasion  fuelled  the  frenzy.  Some  of  the  panic  during  the  crisis  could  have  been 
avoided, and at any rate contained, if the media opted for restraint instead of sensationalism. 
50. 
I have critiqued the media not so much to find fault but to share my perceptions. I do 
want to reiterate that the media plays a constructive and value adding role and they are a 
critical instrumentality for the RBI as an institution and for me as the Governor in delivering 
on our mandate. 
Conclusion 
51. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  In  matters  of  communication,  central  banks  have  certainly 
come a long long way from their haughty indifference of the past to cautious eagerness of 
the  present.  Consider  this.  In  the  1930s,  in  response  to  some  criticism  of  the  Bank  of 
England  by  Lord  Keynes,  Sir  Ernst  Harvey,  the  Deputy  Governor,  deposed  before  the 
Macmillan Committee: “As regards criticism, we (at the Bank of England) do not admit there 
is a need for defence; to defend ourselves is somewhat akin to a lady starting to defend her 
virtue.” Fast forward to today. Lady of virtue or no virtue, mystique and secrecy are no longer 
the bywords of central banks. On the other hand, central banks are now wise to the fact that 
in  this  age  of  globalization,  they  can  leverage  on  communication  to  enhance  their 
effectiveness. 
52. 
Increasingly,  central  bank  communication  is  not  just  a  matter  of  openness  and 
transparency, but also of education, guidance, persuasion and dialogue; and of listening and 
learning.  My  interest  in  sharing  with  you  the  dilemmas  and  challenges  we  face  in  our 
communication has been to convey to you how we carefully weigh the various policy options 
and how, once we have made a policy choice, deliberate on what to say and how to say it. 
The Reserve Bank takes its communication role seriously. It is our continuing endeavour to 
communicate in a clear manner so as to minimize scope for misinterpretation; in an effective 
manner so that the diverse target groups get the relevant information and message; in an 
honest manner such that we explain the known knowns and indicate the known unknowns; 
and in a consistent manner such that people can link our policies and action to past trends 
and future projections. 
53. 
in communication. All I can say is we will make every effort to get there. 
No doubt, in the Reserve Bank, we still have a way to go to reach the best practice 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Some recent initiatives towards enhancing communication 
Substantive 
• 
• 
• 
Procedure 
• 
Increased the frequency of monetary policy reviews 
Pre-policy consultations with academics and media in addition to other stakeholders  
Rationale  behind  the  policy  decisions  and  context  to  the  decisions  clearly 
communicated in the monetary policy 
Forward guidance provided as and when expedient 
Expected outcomes from the policy actions are spelt out  
Rationalised macro and monetary developments and monetary policy documents to 
avoid overlaps and duplication – shorter, crisper 
Publication of Financial Stability Report twice a year 
Draft policies on website for feedback 
Explicit efforts to keep the consultation documents on major policy decisions clear of 
RBI biases  
Real-time handbook of statistics on the website 
Placing  more  and  more  research  and  data  in  public  domain,  including  various 
surveys that provide inputs for the policy  
Publication of  Governor’s  and  Deputy  Governors’  public  engagement  schedule  on 
RBI website to demystify these offices 
Live webcast/telecast of Governor’s press conference and archiving it on website  
Publishing transcript of Governor’s press conference on website  
Teleconferencing with media  
Editors Conference once every year  
Post-policy interaction with researchers/analysts  
Streamlined  major  RBI  publications,  including  monetary  policy,  to  make  them 
concise and reader-friendly 
Seminars  and  briefings  with  media  and  academics  on  important  publications  and 
research 
Informal  briefings  and  training  programmes  for  media  persons  to  explain  role  and 
functions of RBI and to explain specific immediate issues 
Publication of comic books on banking and central banking to reach out to children 
Outreach  programmes 
literacy/inclusion  
Participation in local exhibitions and melas  
Town hall events, outside of metros, to bring central bank closer to the layperson  
Special exhibitions (in Mumbai and Kolkata) to depict history of RBI and money 
remote  areas  across 
the  country 
financial 
for 
to 
        10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Opening of financial literacy centres in regional offices 
Focussed awareness advertising campaigns on matters of public interest 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
