Janet L Yellen: Unconventional monetary policy and central bank 
communications 
Speech by Ms Janet L Yellen, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business US Monetary Policy Forum, 
New York, 25 February 2011. 
 The  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Forum  has  become  an  important  venue  for  promoting  an 
exchange  of  views  among  policymakers,  academics,  and  financial  market  participants.  I’m 
pleased to participate in this panel on lessons learned about unconventional monetary policy. 
In my remarks today, I’ll highlight the role of central bank communications in bolstering the 
effectiveness  of  unconventional  monetary  policy.1  It  is  not  my  intention  to  provide  new 
information about the outlook for the U.S. economy or monetary policy.  
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has deployed unconventional monetary policy 
tools to promote economic recovery and price stability since late 2008. In particular, after the 
intensification of the financial crisis, conventional monetary policy became constrained by the 
zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.  At  that  point,  the  FOMC  began  to  provide 
forward  guidance  about  the  likely  path  of  the  federal  funds  rate,  and  the  Federal  Reserve 
also announced a program to buy agency debt and mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Over 
time,  the  purchase  program  was  augmented  substantially  and  was  expanded  to  include 
longer-term  Treasury  securities.  Furthermore,  on  several  occasions,  the  FOMC  has 
communicated  to  the  markets  about  the  likely  longer-term  trajectory  of  its  holdings  of 
Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS.  
In the remainder of my remarks, I will present some evidence regarding the effectiveness of 
these  policy  tools  and  discuss  important  similarities  and  differences  in  the  transmission 
mechanisms through which they influence the economy. I will also present some simulations 
of  a  macroeconometric  model 
importance  of  clear  and  effective 
communication in conjunction with the use of these unconventional policy tools.  
illustrate 
the 
to 
Some general observations 
It  is  important  to  recognize  at  the  outset  that  conventional  and  unconventional  monetary 
policy actions bear many similarities. Forward guidance concerning the path of the federal 
funds rate, for example, is explicitly intended to influence market expectations concerning the 
future trajectory of shorter-term interest rates and thereby affect longer-term interest rates. 
That  said,  standard  monetary  policy  actions  also  typically  alter  not  just  current  short-term 
rates,  but  the  anticipated  path  of  short-term  rates  as  well,  influencing  longer-term  rates 
through  the  identical  channel.  In  fact,  central  bankers  have  long  recognized  that  this 
“expectations  channel”  operates  most  effectively  when  the  public  understands  how 
policymakers expect economic conditions and monetary policy to evolve over time, and how 
the central bank would respond to any changes in the outlook.  
The transmission channels through which longer-term securities purchases and conventional 
monetary  policy  affect  economic  conditions  are  also  quite  similar,  though  not  identical.  In 
particular, central bank purchases of longer-term securities work through a portfolio balance 
                                                 
1   These remarks solely reflect  my  own views and  not  necessarily those of any  other member  of the Federal 
Open  Market  Committee.  I  appreciate  assistance  from  the  members  of  the  Board  staff  –  including  William 
English,  Yuriy  Kitsul,  Jean-Philippe  Laforte,  Andrew  Levin,  David  Reifschneider,  and  David  Wilcox  –  who 
contributed to the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
channel to depress term premiums and longer-term interest rates. The theoretical rationale 
for  the  view  that  longer-term  yields  should  be directly  linked  to  the outstanding quantity  of 
longer-term assets in the hands of the public dates back at least to the 1950s.2 
Each  of  these  policy  tools  tends  to  generate  spillovers  to  other  financial  markets,  such  as 
boosting  stock  prices  and  putting  moderate  downward  pressure  on  the  foreign  exchange 
value  of  the  dollar.  My  reading  of  the  evidence,  which  I  will  briefly  review,  is  that  both 
unconventional policy tools – the use of forward guidance and the purchases of longer-term 
securities  –  have  proven  effective  in  easing  financial  conditions  and  hence  have  helped 
mitigate the constraint associated with the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate.  
The effectiveness of forward guidance 
I  will  begin  with  an  assessment  of  the  FOMC’s  forward  guidance  concerning  the  federal 
funds  rate,  which  began  when  the  FOMC  reduced  its  funds  rate  target  to  a  range  of  0  to 
¼ percentage  point.  In  particular,  the  December  2008  FOMC  meeting  statement  indicated 
that “economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds 
rate for some time.” Identical guidance was reiterated in January 2009, and in March 2009 
the phrase “for some time” was changed to “for an extended period.”  
Figure  1  suggests  that  the  provision  of  guidance  concerning  the  future  path  of  the  federal 
funds  rate  likely  contributed  to  more  accommodative  financial  market  conditions.  In 
particular, the consensus outlook of professional forecasters regarding the path of the funds 
rate shifted down markedly in the Blue Chip survey published at the beginning of February 
2009  (the  solid  line)  compared  with  the  survey  published  two  months  earlier  (the  dashed 
line).3 
A  crucial  feature  of  the  FOMC’s  policy  communications  is  that  the  Committee’s  forward 
guidance has been framed not as an unconditional commitment to a specific federal funds 
rate path, but rather as an expectation that is explicitly contingent on economic conditions. 
Since November 2009, the Committee has specifically indicated that the relevant economic 
conditions  include  “low  rates  of  resource  utilization,  subdued  inflation  trends,  and  stable 
inflation expectations.” An important consequence of such conditionality, serving to enhance 
the effectiveness of the guidance, is that incoming information about economic and financial 
developments  has  led  forecasters  and  investors  to  revise  their  outlook  for  the  path  of  the 
funds rate even in the absence of a change in the forward guidance language.  
The evolution of financial market expectations concerning the funds rate path over the past 
year illustrates that the conditional nature of the FOMC’s forward guidance allows incoming 
economic data to shift market views. For example, as shown in the left panel of figure 2, the 
expected path of the funds rate shifted down markedly during the spring and early summer of 
last  year  in  the  wake  of  weaker  readings  on  economic  activity  and  prices  and  of  some 
concerns about potential spillovers from developments in Europe. Those expectations shifted 
down somewhat further during late summer and early autumn. Conversely, as shown in the 
right  panel,  funds  rate  expectations  have  shifted  upward  over  the  past  several  months  in 
response  to  more-positive  economic  news  and  greater  confidence  that  a  self-sustaining 
economic recovery may be taking hold.  
Down the road, once the recovery is well established and the appropriate time for beginning 
to  firm  the  stance  of  policy  appears  to  be  drawing  near,  the  FOMC  will  naturally  need  to 
                                                 
2   Early  examples  include  Culbertson  (1957),  Tobin  (1958),  and  Modigliani  and  Sutch  (1966).  More  recently, 
Vayanos and Vila (2009) study a preferred-habitat model in which short- and long-term assets are imperfect 
substitutes in investors’ portfolios and the effect of arbitrageurs is limited by their risk aversion or other market 
frictions such as capital constraints. 
3   See Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (2008, 2009). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
adjust its “extended period” guidance and develop an alternative communications strategy to 
shape market expectations about the policy outlook. However, if there were an unexpected 
faltering of the recovery or a substantial widening of downside risks to economic activity and 
inflation, the forward guidance now in place might well be sufficient to facilitate an outward 
shift in the expected path of the funds rate, just as we saw over the course of last year.  
If  financial market  participants  appeared  to  be  expecting  policy  firming  to  begin  somewhat 
sooner  than  policymakers  considered  desirable  or  appropriate  under  such  circumstances, 
the  language  of  the  forward  guidance  could  be  adjusted  to  shift  expectations  toward  the 
somewhat  longer  horizon  over  which  the  Committee  expected  the  federal  funds  rate  to 
remain  extraordinarily  low.  Figure  3  illustrates  the  potential  for  such  a  change  in  forward 
guidance to support economic activity. In the left panel, the dashed line denotes the baseline 
path for the federal funds rate as embedded in current financial market data, while the solid 
line corresponds to an alternative path in which the initiation of policy firming is postponed by 
one year. If policymakers viewed that alternative path as appropriate and market participants 
came  to  share  that  view,  then  financial  conditions  would  become  significantly  more 
accommodative, even in the absence of any change in the current level of the funds rate. As 
shown  in  the  right  panel,  a  simulation  of  the  FRB/US  model  –  a  macroeconometric  model 
developed  and  maintained  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  –  indicates  that  such  a  shift  in 
policy expectations would be associated with a lower trajectory for the unemployment rate 
(solid line) and a somewhat higher path of core inflation (dashed line) over coming years.  
The effectiveness of asset purchases 
I will now turn to an assessment of the FOMC’s program of longer-term securities purchases. 
Both theory and empirical evidence suggest that asset prices and yields are affected not only 
by  current  securities  purchases  but  also,  importantly,  by  market  expectations  concerning 
future FOMC securities holdings. This observation implies that central bank communications 
pertaining to any important feature of the path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet should 
influence financial conditions.  
Event  studies  can  therefore  be  helpful  in  gauging  the  financial  market  effects  of  such 
communications.4 For example, table 1 reports the response of selected financial variables 
on several key dates associated with the FOMC’s purchases of longer-term securities. In late 
November 2008, the Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $600 billion in 
agency MBS and agency debt, and Chairman Bernanke provided further details in a speech 
one  week  later.  On  March  18,  2009,  the  FOMC  announced  that  the  program  would  be 
expanded by an additional $850 billion in purchases of agency securities and by $300 billion 
in  purchases  of  longer-term  Treasury  securities.  Evidently,  each  of  those  communications 
was associated with substantial declines in longer-term nominal and real Treasury yields and 
in rates on agency MBS and corporate debt.  
Last  August,  the  FOMC  announced  that  it  would  begin  reinvesting  principal  payments  on 
agency MBS and agency debt into longer-term Treasury securities, and over the subsequent 
couple  of  months  or  so,  the  public  remarks  of  Federal  Reserve  officials  made  note  of  the 
possibility  of  a  further  expansion  of  the  portfolio.  Consequently,  when  the  Committee 
announced  in  early  November  that  it  intended  to  purchase  an  additional  $600  billion  in 
longer-term  Treasury  securities,  that  decision  was  largely  anticipated  by  financial  market 
participants, and it occasioned only minimal market response. However, taken together the 
movements  in  longer-term  interest  rates  that  occurred  between  the  August  and  November 
FOMC meetings are strikingly similar to those on the prior announcement dates shown in the 
                                                 
4   A burgeoning literature focuses on the experience with asset purchase programs of the Federal Reserve and 
other central banks; for example, see D’Amico and King (2010); Gagnon and others (2010); Hamilton and Wu 
(2010); and Joyce and others (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the 
that 
to  more 
judgment 
these  securities  purchases  contribute 
table,  bolstering 
accommodative financial conditions.  
One complication that arises in evaluating the contribution of portfolio balance effects to the 
observed  movements  in  longer-term  rates  is  that  news  about  large-scale  asset  purchases 
may  also  influence  investors’  perceptions  regarding  the  likely  path  of  short-term  interest 
rates. Such effects may not have been very important, however, when the FOMC announced 
the  expansion  of  its  securities  purchases  in  March  2009.  As  shown  in  Figure  4,  that 
announcement  appeared  to  have  only  modest  effects  on  the  outlook  of  professional 
forecasters (left panel) and investors (right panel) regarding the likely trajectory of the federal 
funds rate. Thus, the substantial decline in longer-term yields following this announcement 
appears to have mainly reflected the effect of the purchases in pushing down term premiums 
rather than a shift in the expected path of the funds rate.5 This evidence suggests that the 
portfolio balance channel of influence is not only operative but also fairly large.  
That said, as we saw in figure 2, the expected path of the federal funds rate does appear to 
have flattened for a time during the late summer and early autumn of last year. Even allowing 
for that change in near-term policy expectations, however, it seems reasonable to conclude 
that the announcement of additional securities purchases mainly affected financial conditions 
through the portfolio balance channel.  
To  assess  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  the  Fed’s  large-scale  asset  purchase  program,  I 
would like to highlight some findings from a recent study by four Federal Reserve System 
economists.6 As shown in figure 5, the authors constructed an illustrative baseline trajectory 
for the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings over the course of this decade (solid line) as 
well  as  an  alternative  trajectory  corresponding  to  a  counterfactual  scenario  in  which  the 
FOMC never decided to initiate any securities purchases (dashed line).  
The  baseline  incorporates  the  first  round  of  asset  purchases  –  which  brought  the  Federal 
Reserve’s securities holdings to a little more than $2 trillion. It embeds an assumption that 
the FOMC will complete the purchases announced last November so that the balance sheet 
expands to about $2.6 trillion by the middle of this year. From that point forward, the authors 
assume that the overall size of the portfolio will remain unchanged until mid-2012 and then 
shrink  gradually  at  a  rate  sufficient  to  return  it  to  its  pre-crisis  trend  line  by  mid-2016, 
whereupon  the  Federal  Reserve  resumes  expanding  its  holdings  at  the  trend  rate.  Full 
convergence of the composition of the portfolio is not complete until 2017, however, as the 
average maturity of the portfolio is still somewhat elevated in 2016. It should also be noted 
that  the  trend  line  itself  rises  gradually  over  time  as  a  consequence  of  steady  growth  in 
demand for U.S. currency.  
Of  course,  the  baseline  trajectory  is  purely  illustrative:  The  actual  evolution  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet will depend on the decisions that the FOMC  will make in light of 
economic  and  financial  developments.  Nonetheless,  the  overall  characteristics  of  this 
assumed trajectory seem broadly consistent with the sense of the Committee’s discussions 
last spring. In particular, as reported in the minutes of the April 2010 FOMC meeting, most 
Committee participants expressed a preference for renormalizing the size and composition of 
                                                 
5   As  noted  earlier,  in  the  March  2009  FOMC  statement,  the  Committee  did  modify  its  forward  guidance  by 
indicating that  exceptionally  low levels  of the federal funds rate  would likely be  warranted “for an extended 
period” (rather than “for some time”, as in the December 2008 and January 2009 FOMC statements), but that 
modification does not appear to have substantially influenced professional forecasters’ expectations about the 
near-term path of the federal funds rate. To the extent that the expanded asset purchases were expected to 
strengthen  the  economic  recovery,  the  change  in  the  forward  guidance  may  have  helped  clarify  that  the 
FOMC  did  not  intend  to  offset  that  effect  by  accelerating  the  initiation  of  policy  firming;  consequently, 
expectations for the trajectory of the federal funds rate were little changed on balance. 
6   See Chung and others (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over a period of about five years that would commence 
following the initiation of policy firming.  
Figure 6 shows the results of simulations of the FRB/US model to gauge the effect of these 
asset  purchases  on  the  unemployment  rate  and  core  personal  consumption  expenditures 
(PCE)  inflation.  For  this  purpose,  the  baseline  path  (denoted  by  the  dashed  line  in  each 
panel)  is  constructed  using  historical  data  in  conjunction  with  the  latest  set  of  consensus 
projections from the Survey of Professional Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia. Then the staff model is used to simulate the counterfactual scenario in 
which  the  FOMC  never  conducts  any  asset  purchases  (denoted  by  the  solid  line  in  each 
panel).7 The pace of recovery under the baseline scenario is expected to be painfully slow. 
But the counterfactual scenario suggests that conditions would have been even worse in the 
absence of the Federal Reserve’s securities purchases: The unemployment rate would have 
remained persistently above 10 percent, and core inflation would have fallen below zero this 
year. Of course, considerable uncertainty surrounds those estimates, but they nonetheless 
suggest that the benefits of the asset purchase programs probably have been sizeable.  
My  final  observation  concerning  the  FOMC’s  asset  purchase  program  pertains  to  the 
importance of clear and effective communications in the years ahead. As I noted earlier, both 
theory and empirical evidence suggest that market prices and yields at any particular time 
reflect both the Federal Reserve’s current securities holdings and also markets participants’ 
expectations  for  its  future  holdings.  Consequently,  a  shift  in  expectations  concerning  the 
trajectory of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could have an important effect on financial 
conditions going forward.  
In  particular,  financial  conditions  depend  on  market  expectations  not  only  concerning  the 
amount of the FOMC’s purchases but also concerning the anticipated timing and pace of the 
eventual unwinding of those holdings. For example, financial conditions would likely tighten 
immediately  if  market  participants  came  to  expect  a  more  rapid  renormalization  of  the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. In contrast, if market participants were to anticipate a more 
gradual renormalization, financial conditions would likely become more stimulative.  
To  illustrate  the  potential  importance  of  such  changes  in  expectations,  figure  7  depicts  a 
scenario in which markets come to anticipate that the Federal Reserve will shrink its balance 
sheet more rapidly than in the baseline scenario. The left panel shows the assumed contour 
of  an  expected  acceleration  of  asset  sales  that  would  renormalize  the  overall  size  of  the 
portfolio  within  about  two  years  (solid  line),  roughly  twice  as  fast  as  under  the  baseline 
scenario (dashed line). The announcement of such a strategy would cause a substantial rise 
in term premiums relative to the baseline scenario, and, assuming no offsetting change in the 
path  of  the  federal  funds  rate,  the  resulting  higher  level  of  long-term  interest  rates  would 
damp aggregate spending. The right panel depicts the macroeconomic effects of the more 
rapid  runoff  of  the  balance  sheet  in  terms  of  deviations  from  the  baseline  scenario:  The 
unemployment rate (solid line) is significantly higher, and core PCE inflation (dashed line) is 
somewhat lower.  
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  believe  that  both  forward  guidance  and  large-scale  asset  purchases  have 
been effective tools for providing additional monetary accommodation under circumstances 
in which conventional monetary policy has been constrained by the zero lower bound on the 
federal  funds  rate.  My  colleagues  on  the  FOMC  and  I  are  regularly  reviewing  the  asset 
                                                 
7   Because the latest release of the Survey of Professional Forecasters provided forecasts of the unemployment 
rate only through 2014, the authors extrapolated the forecasts through 2018 using the extended consensus 
forecasts reported in the October 2010 Blue Chip survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
purchase program in light of incoming information, and we will adjust the program as needed 
to promote our statutory mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. Recognizing 
the  importance  of  market  expectations  to  the  effectiveness  of  unconventional  policies,  the 
Committee  will  continue  to  seek  ways  to  enhance  the  clarity  and  effectiveness  of  our 
monetary policy communications.  
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
References 
Blue Chip Financial Forecasts: Top Analysts’ Forecasts of U.S. and Foreign Interest Rates, 
Currency Values, and the Factors That Influence Them (2008 and 2009). New York: Aspen 
Publishers, monthly, http://www.aspenpublishers.com/blue-chip-publications.htm. 
Chung,  Hess,  Jean-Philippe  Laforte,  David  Reifschneider,  and  John  C.  Williams  (2011). 
“Have  We  Underestimated  the  Likelihood  and  Severity  of  Zero  Lower  Bound  Events?” 
Working  Paper  series  2011-01.  San  Francisco:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco, 
January.  
Culbertson,  John  M.  (1957).  “The  Term  Structure  of  Interest  Rates,”  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, vol. 71 (November), pp. 485–517.  
D’Amico,  Stefania,  and  Thomas  B.  King  (2010).  “Flow  and  Stock  Effects  of  Large-Scale 
Treasury  Purchases,”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2010-52.  Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.  
Gagnon,  Joseph,  Matthew  Raskin,  Julie  Remache,  and  Brian  Sack  (2010).  “Large-Scale 
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Reports 441. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March.  
Hamilton,  James  D.,  and  Jing  (Cynthia)  Wu  (2011).  “The  Effectiveness  of  Alternative 
Monetary  Policy  Tools  in  a  Zero  Lower  Bound  Environment,”  working  paper.  San  Diego: 
University of California, San Diego, February.  
Joyce,  Michael,  Ana  Lasaosa,  Ibrahim  Stevens,  and  Matthew  Tong  (2010).  “The  Financial 
Market Impact of Quantitative Easing,” Working Paper 393. London: Bank of England, July 
(revised August).  
Modigliani,  Franco,  and  Richard  Sutch  (1966).  “Innovations  in  Interest  Rate  Policy,” 
American Economic Review, vol. 56 (March), pp. 178–97.  
Tobin, James (1958). “Liquidity Preference as Behavior towards Risk,” Review of Economic 
Studies, vol. 25 (February), pp. 65–86.  
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila (2009). “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure 
of Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper Series 15487. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau 
of Economic Research, November. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
