Njuguna Ndung’u: Compilation and harmonization of monetary and 
financial statistics in the East African Community 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the opening 
of the workshop on the harmonization of monetary and financial statistics in the East African 
Community, Nairobi, 29 March 2011. 
 Mr. B. Rajcoomar, Chief of Financial Institutions Division, IMF;  
Mr. Jaroslav Kucera, Senior Economist, IMF;  
Mr. Thomas Morrison, EDDI Project Manager, IMF;  
Mr. Robert Maate, Senior Statistician EAC Secretariat;  
Distinguished Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
I  welcome  you  all  to  Kenya  and  to  this  very  important  workshop  on  the  compilation  and 
harmonization  of  monetary  and  financial  statistics  in  the  East  African  Community  (EAC).  I 
thank you all for attending this workshop.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
This workshop is taking place at a critical stage in the integration process of the EAC and 
monetary  and  financial  statistics  play  a  critical  role.  This  will  support  the  institutions  to  be 
formed under the regional integration process. Previous milestones achieved comprise of the 
establishment of an EAC Customs Union and the launch of the Common Market Protocol. 
These  developments,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  underscore  the  need  for  a  statistical 
harmonization framework and related capacity building strategies for the region.  
The success of the regional integration initiative is anchored on a number of convergence 
criteria  that  require  information  and  analysis:  In  this  regard,  the  computation,  concepts, 
definitions  and  methods  used  in  compiling  the  indicators  that  determine  the  convergence 
criteria  must  be  understood,  harmonized  and  consistent  across  all  Partner  States. 
Furthermore, since the EAC regional integration initiative envisages a centralized approach 
to the policy making process, it has to be anchored on appropriate and adequate indicators 
and  centralized  statistical  information.  Thus  the  harmonization  of  monetary  and  financial 
statistics,  among  other  statistics,  will  be  critical  for  policy  formulation  and  implementation 
within the EAC region.  
In fast-tracking the process of statistical harmonization among the Partner States, the EAC 
Central Bank Governors recently approved the hiring of short-term consultants from among 
Partner  States.  I  am  aware  that  the  consultants  have  begun  work  and  we  believe  this 
workshop has come at the most appropriate time so as to complement their efforts.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Towards this end, I want to thank the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for the Technical 
Assistance they continue to provide in the development and harmonization of statistics, in the 
EAC region. About two years ago, most of our countries concluded the second phase of the 
General  Data  Dissemination  System  (GDDS)  project  which  was  aimed  at  improving  the 
availability  and  quality  of  data,  in  developing  countries.  This  was  important  in  order  to 
conform to international standards. Some of the major achievements of the monetary module 
of  this  project  include  the  correct  classification  of  key  financial  assets  and  liabilities  and 
sectorization of transactions for the main deposit taking institutions in our financial sectors. 
The  end  result  was  the  compilation  and  filing  of  standard  reports  by  most  of  the  EAC 
countries with the IMF Statistics Department.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Again I recall that towards the end of last year, the IMF approached most of our countries to 
consider joining the Enhanced Data Dissemination Initiative (EDDI). The focus of the EDDI is 
to consolidate the gains realized under the GDDS while expanding the institutional coverage 
in  statistical  compilation  to  include  other  deposit  taking  institutions  such  as  SACCOs  and 
microfinance; and other key financial sector institutions such as pension funds and insurance 
companies. I am aware that the work plans were prepared during the first EDDI workshop in 
Kampala  and  the  IMF  has  identified  technical  experts  for  each  of  our  countries.  This 
workshop is therefore part of the greater plan towards the improvement of statistics in the 
region by the IMF. I wish to sincerely thank the IMF for these initiatives.  
It is only appropriate at this juncture to recognize, Ladies and Gentlemen, the critical role 
that  the  EAC  Secretariat  has  played  in  providing  an  elaborate  roadmap  on  how  statistical 
harmonization  can  be  achieved  within  the  EAC  region.  However,  for  this  to  succeed,  an 
appropriate mechanism, in terms of institutional arrangements and legal frameworks, has to 
be put in place to guard and guide the production of harmonized and quality statistics in the 
EAC Partner States and more importantly, at the regional level. These statistics will inform 
policy formulation and implementation in the integration process.  
All countries have their own data collection, storage and processing centres. It is a question 
of how we can pick the important aspects from our own areas for use, standardization and 
centralization.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In concluding my remarks, I welcome you once again to Kenya and to this workshop. Though 
the duration of the workshop is short, please find time to visit some of our beautiful sceneries 
around town and sample what the City of Nairobi has to offer.  
It is now my pleasure and humble duty to declare this workshop officially open.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
