Ric Battellino: Will Australia catch a US cold? 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Euromoney Forum, New York, 21 September 2011. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  taking  part  in  this  conference,  and  in  particular  to  be  here  in 
New York again.  
I have been visiting New York regularly for a large part of my career at the Reserve Bank. I 
have always very much enjoyed these visits, but that, of course, was not their purpose. The 
point of my visits was to find out what was going on in the US economy because, for a long 
time, this had a major bearing on the Australian economy.  
Through the 1980s and into the 1990s, developments in the Australian economy showed a 
close correlation with those in the US economy. It was particularly striking that the recessions 
of the early 1970s, early 1980s and early 1990s were highly synchronised between the two 
countries and had many similarities in their nature and origins. As a result, it was common in 
the 1980s and 1990s to hear the phrase “when the US sneezes, Australia catches a cold”.  
Australian economists, including those in the Reserve Bank, spent a lot of time researching 
the question of why growth in the Australian economy was so highly correlated with that in 
the  US.  We  were  intrigued  by  the  closeness  of  the  relationship  because  the  trade  flows 
between the two economies were not particularly large. The United States has always been 
only a moderately important export destination for Australia.  
The  research  unearthed  various  channels  that  contributed  to  the  close  relationship,  but 
two factors seemed particularly important:  
 
First,  the  economic  shocks  faced  by  the  two  countries  in  the  lead  up  to  the 
recessions of the 1980s and 1990s were similar, as were the policy responses. It 
was understandable, therefore, that the economies would follow similar paths.  
Second, the financial and cultural links between the two countries have always been 
very strong. The United States is a large investor in Australia and many Australian 
companies  have  operations  in  the  US.  US  economic  news  receives  very  wide 
coverage  in  the  Australian  media.  This,  in  turn,  has  often  promoted  very  similar 
movements in financial prices, business sentiment, and even household behaviour.  
Scrutiny of this close relation between the two economies reached its peak around the mid 
1990s. Ironically, this was around the time when the relationship began to change.  
Certainly,  by  the  first  decade  of  this  century,  the  paths  of  the  economies  had  clearly 
diverged.  Whereas  the  United  States  experienced  recessions  in  2001  and  2008/9,  the 
economic  downturns  in  Australia  around  those  times  were  relatively  mild.  It  has  been 
20 years  since  the  Australian  economy  experienced  a  year  of  negative  growth.  This 
represents  the  longest  period  of  uninterrupted  growth  in  Australia’s  economic  history,  and 
one for which there are few precedents among the developed economies.  
Why have the paths of the two economies diverged? I don’t think I can provide an exhaustive 
or  conclusive  answer  to  this  question,  but  there  are  a  couple  of  factors  that  have  clearly 
played significant roles.  
First, both the 2001 and 2008/9 recessions in the United States were to a large degree the 
consequence of financial misadventure. The former was heavily influenced by the collapse of 
the “tech” bubble, and the latter by the collapse of the sub-prime housing bubble.  
Australia  was  not  affected  nearly  as  seriously  by  either  of  these  events.  The  tech  bubble 
largely missed Australia. In fact, in the late 1990s Australia was constantly being berated for 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
being  an  old-world  economy  in  that  it  did  not  have  a  home-grown  information  technology 
industry. As it turns out, being a heavy user of technology, but not a manufacturer of it, was 
an advantage. The Australian economy was not distorted by the tech bubble that built in the 
late 1990s, and it did not weaken as much as the US economy when the price of tech stocks 
collapsed in 2001.  
The mildness of the 2001 economic slowdown in Australia meant that the Reserve Bank was 
able to normalise interest rates relatively quickly thereafter. In the event, this helped Australia 
avoid the worst of the excesses in housing markets that subsequently built up in many other 
countries. The housing market was most “frothy” for Australia as a whole around 2002–2003, 
and it cooled noticeably in 2004 as interest rates rose. While there were subsequent price 
increases  in  particular  cities,  the  speculative  element  in  the  market  had  subsided 
considerably in most states by the time the global financial crisis hit in 2008.  
Aside from increasing interest rates, the Reserve Bank also warned repeatedly around that 
time  about  the  danger  of  excessive  increases  in  house  prices  and  borrowing,  which  may 
have, at the margin, curtailed some speculative activity. It was also helpful that the Australian 
Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (APRA),  the  prudential  supervisor,  pressed  the  banks  to 
maintain relatively high lending standards. While there was some sub-prime lending activity 
in Australia, it was on a small scale, and mainly by non-bank lenders. As such, arrears rates 
on  housing  loans  have  remained  at  low  levels,  and  Australian  banks  have  remained 
profitable. Australia, therefore, did not have a home-grown financial crisis in 2008/09, and its 
financial  institutions  also  had  little  direct  exposure  to  the  US  housing  market.  As  a 
consequence,  just  as  had  been  the  case  in  2001,  Australia  experienced  only  a  mild 
economic slowdown in 2008/09.  
The fact that Australia avoided the direct impact of both the tech crash and the sub-prime 
crisis obviously helps to explain why the Australian economy has done better than the US in 
the past decade. But another factor that has contributed to its outperformance has been the 
growing  role  of  China  in  the  global  economy.  The  expansion  of  China  has  had  an 
overwhelmingly  positive  impact  on  the  Australian  economy  over  the  past  10  to  15  years, 
whereas  the  implications  of  the  Chinese  expansion  for  the  United  States  have  been  more 
mixed.  The  integration  of  China  into  the  global  economy  has  been  an  important  factor 
shaping  the  performance  of  many  economies  over  the  past  10  to  15  years.  Generally, 
economies  that  complement  the  Chinese  economy  have  done  relatively  well.  Obvious 
examples  are  commodity  exporters  such  as  Australia  and  some  Latin  American  countries, 
exporters of capital equipment and luxury cars, such as Germany, and countries that are part 
of the China supply chain, such as many in Asia.  
Arguably, Australia is one of the economies that most complements the Chinese economy. It 
is  a  large  producer  of  food,  energy,  basic  materials  and  education  and  tourism  services  
– products and services for which China has a very strong demand – while the limited size 
and  specialised  nature  of  Australia’s  manufacturing  sector  mean  that  the  economy  as  a 
whole is not facing wide-scale competitive pressures from China. As evidence of this, over 
the past decade Australia has experienced a much larger rise in its terms of trade than all 
other major commodity exporters, apart from Chile.  
While it is clear that China now has a large influence on the Australian economy, that is not 
to say that US developments no longer matter.  Clearly, they do. They continue to play an 
important role in shaping financial market behaviour, and household and business sentiment. 
The  point,  however,  is  that  over  the  past  10  to  15  years  these  channels  have  not  been 
powerful  enough  to  dominate  overall  economic  outcomes,  being  outweighed  by  the  other 
influences I have mentioned.  
At this juncture, the US and Australian economies find themselves in very different cyclical 
positions. The United States is still struggling to recover from the deep recession caused by 
the sub-prime crisis, while Australia, having grown for 20 years, is operating with relatively 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
little spare capacity and is investing heavily to meet rapidly growing demand for resources 
from China, and elsewhere in Asia.  
A topical question at present is whether the recent turmoil in global markets will eventually 
overwhelm the positive effects on the Australian economy from China.  
That  could  occur  either  because  the  financial  uncertainty  undermines  household  and 
business  confidence,  and  therefore  consumer  and  investment  spending,  or  because  the 
turmoil also weakens the Chinese economy, leading to reduced demand for resources.  
It is simply  too early to be able to  answer this question. For one thing, nobody  yet knows 
when,  or  how,  the  issues  that  are  causing  the  financial  turmoil  will  be  resolved.  In  some 
cases they go to the heart of institutional arrangements in Europe, and cannot be resolved 
quickly.  It  is  impossible  to  know,  therefore,  how  long  the  turmoil  will  last,  or  even  if  it  will 
escalate further.  
As yet there is little in the way of hard economic data available for the period since financial 
market volatility escalated, but let me briefly run through what we do know.  
I will begin with some observations about China. A few years ago, a common question was 
whether  the  Chinese  economy  could  continue  to  grow  if  the  US  economy  slowed.  The 
experience  of  the  past  three  or  four  years  has,  I  think,  answered  that  question,  and  the 
answer  is  in  the  affirmative.  China  has  maintained  strong  growth  in  the  face  of  the 
US recession and the sluggish recovery. The latest batch of Chinese data, which relates to 
August,  suggests  that  any  slowing  in  the  economy  has,  to  date,  been  modest.  This  is 
confirmed by recent data on Australia’s shipments of coal and iron ore to China, which have 
also held firm. So too have the prices of iron ore and coal.  
In  relation  to  Australia,  the  most  comprehensive  data  on  the  economy  –  the  national 
accounts  – are  only  available  up  to  the  June quarter,  and  so  pre-date  the  recent  financial 
volatility.  They  confirmed,  at  that  point,  a  picture  of  very  strong  business  investment; 
declining government investment, as earlier fiscal stimulus is unwound; relatively flat dwelling 
investment; and weak commercial construction. All this was broadly in line with expectations. 
The  one  area  of  the  national  accounts  that  surprised  was  the  strength  of  household 
consumption.  Retail  sales  had  been  subdued  through  much  of  this  year,  and  this  had 
generally  been  taken  as  a  sign  of  weak  consumption  overall.  But  the  national  accounts 
showed  that  household  spending  on  services  has  been  strong.  Households  are  spending 
more on entertainment, eating out and travel, particularly overseas travel.  
At one level, this was surprising given the clear signs of caution among households, but it is 
less  surprising  when  account  is  taken  of  the  on-going  fast  pace  of  increase  in  household 
income. For a time, this increased income was used to rebuild saving, but with the household 
saving  ratio  having  stabilised  in  recent  quarters,  income  growth  is  now  providing  the 
wherewithal to fund consumption.  
The  national  accounts  also  showed  that  Australia’s  GDP  continues  to  be  affected  by  the 
severe effects on mining activity of the floods over the Australian summer. Taken literally, the 
weakest  sector  of  the Australian  economy  over  the  past  year  has  been  the  mining  sector, 
where output has fallen by 9 per cent over the past year.  
We know this is in the process of being reversed, so we need to look through it to judge the 
underlying strength of the economy. Our estimate of the underlying trend in mining-related 
activity over the next couple of years is for increases in the order of 10 to 15 per cent. The 
rest of the economy on the other hand, is growing at an annual rate of only about 2 per cent. 
This is below what would have been regarded as normal in the past.  
This  slow  pace  of  growth  in  the  non-mining  sector  is  not  simply  a  matter  of  a  shortfall  in 
demand. There are signs that the capacity of this part of the economy to supply goods and 
services has also slowed. For one thing, growth in the working-age population has slowed 
markedly  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  due  largely  to  a  slowdown  in  immigration.  Also, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
productivity growth continues to be low. For growth in the non-mining economy to pick up, it 
is likely that these trends will need to reverse.  
Labour market data are available up to August. They continue to point to soft outcomes for 
employment, after the surprisingly fast increase last year. The unemployment rate has also 
risen by 0.4 percentage points over the past few months, after having been steady at around 
5 per cent for much of the year. These trends could be an indication of the economy having 
slowed recently to a pace that is below its potential.  
On the other hand, there are some aspects of labour market numbers that have a stronger 
feel. Contrary to the slowing in the number of people employed, there has been solid growth 
in  total  hours  worked  recently.  Also,  the  very  recent  rise  in  unemployment  has  been  most 
pronounced  in  the  resource-rich  states,  while  an  independent  indicator  –  the  number  of 
people  on  unemployment  benefits  –  does  not  point  to  any  rise  in  unemployment.  All  this 
suggests  more  information  is  needed  before  we  can  draw  any  firm  conclusions  about 
whether or not the labour market is weakening.  
Measures  of  consumer  and  business  confidence  declined  sharply  in  August,  following  the 
increase  in  financial  market  volatility.  This  is  not  surprising.  Consumer  confidence  has 
subsequently  recovered  somewhat  in  September.  We  will  need  to  wait  to  see  how  these 
swings in confidence affect spending. So far, recent liaison information from retailers does 
not point to any further significant weakening.  
Let me end with a few words on how the Reserve Bank has been seeing monetary policy.  
The context for monetary policy over the past year or so has been that the overall economy 
is operating with relatively little spare capacity, and is facing a very large boom in investment 
and  a  large  rise  in  national  income.  The  Bank’s  view  has  been  that,  if  this  is  to  be 
accommodated  without  generating  undue  inflationary  pressures,  other  components  of 
spending would need to grow less than might otherwise be the case. The implication of this 
is that monetary policy would need to provide an element of restraint. Accordingly, the Bank 
late  last  year  lifted  the  cash  rate  to  the  point  that  resulted  in  most  lending  rates  in  the 
economy being a little above average.  
From time to time over the past year, the Bank has considered whether further restraint was 
required,  but  on  balance  concluded  that  existing  policy  settings  remained  appropriate, 
particularly  given  the  restraint  also  being  applied  by  the  high  exchange  rate.  At  its  most 
recent  monetary  policy  meeting,  the  Board  judged  that  the  recent  financial  volatility  could 
weaken the outlook for demand, and hence may, in due course, act to dampen pressure on 
inflation. On this basis, the Board judged that it was prudent to maintain the current stance of 
monetary policy.  
In  the  meantime,  financial  markets  seem  to  have  concluded  that  the  risks  are  weighted 
towards the Australian economy weakening sharply and, taken literally, seem to be pricing in 
a reduction in official interest rates towards the unusually low levels reached after the global 
financial crisis. There are technical reasons why current market pricing may not be giving an 
accurate  picture  of  interest  rate  expectations.  Nonetheless,  markets  do  seem  to  have 
reached a pessimistic assessment and this appears to be based mainly on the assumption 
that weakness in the US and Europe will flow through to Australia.  
The  present  situation  has  some  similarities  to  that  in  2003.  From  late  2002  to  the  third 
quarter of 2003, financial markets were pricing in cuts in interest rates in Australia, largely on 
the back of concerns about the sluggishness of the US recovery at that time. In the event, 
however,  that  sluggishness  in  the  United  States  did  not  flow  through  to  the  Australian 
economy and Australian interest rates did not fall.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
It is too early at this stage to judge with any degree of certainty whether Australia will catch 
cold from the US. However, given that over the past 10 to 15 years the Australian economy 
has  been  less  vulnerable  to  severe  US  symptoms,  there  are  reasonable  grounds  for 
optimism.  
Until a clearer picture emerges, the Bank’s approach will be to keep an open mind, and base 
its  assessments  about  appropriate  policy  on  a  careful  analysis  of  the  data  that  become 
available.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
