Duvvuri Subbarao: Tribute to two distinguished academics and 
economists 
Welcome remarks by Mr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
third  P  R  Brahmananda  Memorial  Lecture  by  Prof  Stanley  Fischer  “Central  Bank  Lessons 
from the Global Crisis”, Mumbai, 11 February 2011. 
 I have great pleasure in welcoming Governor Stanley Fischer who will shortly be delivering 
the  P.R.  Brahmananda  Memorial  Lecture.  A  hearty  welcome  also  to  the  members  of  the 
family  of 
late  Prof.  Brahmananda  –  Shri  P.R.  Ramaswamy,  and  Smt.  and 
Shri P.R. Vishwanath. Of course, a warm welcome to all the invitees, who have made time to 
come for this lecture. 
Prof. Brahmananda 
Professor Brahmananda was a distinguished academic, a noted researcher and a respected 
teacher. His contribution to teaching and research in economics in India is legendary. 
Even as Prof. Brahmananda’s research interests spanned a wide spectrum and he will be 
remembered for a number of significant contributions, his most enduring legacy is the “wage-
goods model” he developed in the 1950s which provided the inspiration for what came to be 
known as the “Bombay School of Thought”. Prof. Brahmananda had the intellectual courage 
and  conviction  to  go  against  the  mainstream  wisdom  of  the  time  embodied  in  the 
Mahalanobis  strategy.  He  argued  that  the  quickest  route  to  poverty  reduction  lay  in 
emphasizing employment and consumption in the short-term which will automatically lead to 
capital goods production in the medium to long term. Whether India would have been better 
off had it followed the Bombay School will, for ever, remain an interesting counterfactual. 
Even as though Prof. Brahmananda’s contributions enriched almost all areas of economics, 
monetary  economics  remained  his forte.  The  Reserve  Bank  benefitted  in  many  ways  from 
Prof. Brahmananda’s prolific mind. Most notably, he undertook to write for us the monetary 
history of India for the 19th century. What he produced was a sterling contribution that not 
only chronicled the development of classical monetary and international trade theories, but 
also threw new insights on the debates in monetary policy of that period. 
The Reserve Bank of India instituted a lecture series in memory of Professor Brahmananda 
in 2004 as a tribute to his abiding commitment to teaching and research in economics and to 
pay homage to his long association with the Reserve Bank of India.  
Prof. Stanley Fischer 
We  are  privileged  that  another  distinguished  academic  and  internationally  renowned 
economist,  Prof.  Stanley  Fischer,  will  be  delivering  the  third  Brahamananda  Memorial 
Lecture  today.  Prof.  Fischer  is  so  well  known  that  it  will  be  presumptuous  on  my  part  to 
introduce him. But I will do so nevertheless if only to pay homage to a tradition.  
Prof. Fischer, who is presently Governor of the Bank of Israel, has a formidable reputation 
as an academic, as a teacher, as an economic policy adviser and administrator, and in his 
current  position,  as  an  economic  policy  practitioner.  His  academic  credentials  are 
impeccable  –  PhD  from  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT),  Assistant 
Professor  of  Economics  at  the  University  of  Chicago  and  Professor  of  Economics  at  MIT. 
You would no doubt have noted that with this blend, Prof. Fischer will make an ideal referee 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for  the  perennial  feud  between  the salt-water  and  fresh-water  economists  of  the  American 
School. 
Prof.  Fischer  served  in  several  top  level  institutions  in  senior  positions.  He  was  Vice 
President, Development Economics and Chief Economist at the World Bank. After two years 
of that, he made a momentous career change by walking across the 19th Street in downtown 
Washington  to  become  the  First  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary 
Fund (IMF), in which position he served for seven years from 1994 to 2001. At the end of 
2001,  Prof.  Fischer  joined  the  influential  Washington-based  financial  advisory  body,  the 
Group of Thirty. 
At least two generations of students of economics, not just in the US, but around the world, 
have learnt their macroeconomics from the seminal text book “Macroeconomics” that Stan 
co-authored  with  late  Rudi  Dornbusch.  He  wrote  several  other  books,  all  noted  for  their 
original thinking, intellectual insights and clarity of argumentation.  
Stan  Fischer  assumed  office  as  the  Governor  of  the Bank  of  Israel in  May  2005.  He  was 
associated with the Bank of Israel in the past, having served as an American Government 
adviser to Israel’s economic stabilization program in 1985. On May 2, 2010, he was sworn in 
for a second term at which time the Prime Minister of Israel said of Stan Fischer, “This is a 
man on whom there is no disagreement in the whole world that he does excellent work”. 
Prof.  Fischer  has  made  a  distinct  mark  in  academic  research  and  analysis.  His  principal 
contribution has been on the role of activist policy in stabilizing an economy, and the effects 
of lags and uncertainty on the effectiveness of policy. Subsequently, Prof. Fischer extended 
his research to the role of policy in the context of rational expectations, stickiness in prices 
and indexation of wages. 
Israel 
A brief comment on the Bank of Israel under Governor Fischer’s leaderships. Israel came out 
of the crisis relatively unscathed, and the credit for that goes largely to Stan. Replying to a 
question on how that happened, he answered, and I quote, “When the crisis came, we saw it 
approaching  from  afar  in  the  form  of  currency  appreciation,  and  we  balanced  this 
phenomenon with foreign exchange deals. When Lehman Brother collapsed, we decided it 
was  the  moment  to  cut  interest  rates.”  Whoever  said  “academics  do  not  make  good 
practitioners”? 
In 2010, the Bank of Israel was ranked first among central banks for its efficient functioning, 
according to IMD’s World Competitiveness Yearbook, yet another tribute to Stan’s leadership 
and  sagacity.  In  September  2009,  the  Bank  of  Israel  was  the  first  bank  in  the  developed 
world to raise its interest rates demonstrating Stan’s intellectual courage to be an outlier. In 
October  of  2010,  Stan  Fischer  was  declared  Central  Bank  Governor  of  the  Year  by  the 
Euromoney magazine.  
Central bank lessons 
Professor Fischer will be speaking today on “Central Bank Lessons from the Global Crisis”. 
That  topic  needs  no  explanation,  but  maybe  it  needs  some  context.  When  asked  what  he 
thought of the French Revolution, Mao Zedong had famously replied – “It is too early to tell”. 
People who take a long view of history, like Mao, take the position that it is just too soon to 
draw the lessons of the crisis. Policy practitioners do not have the luxury of historians; they 
have  to  respond  to  unfolding  developments  in  real  time,  and  incorporate  the  lessons  of 
experience. 
There is another reason why it is not too soon to be talking about the lessons of the crisis; 
indeed  why  we  should  be  more  activist  in  learning  the  lessons  of  the  crisis.  In  their 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
painstakingly  researched  book,  “This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”, 
Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Carmen  Reinhart  show  how  over  eight  hundred  years,  all  financial 
crises can be traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis 
to the next. Each time, experts have chimed that “this time is different” claiming that the old 
rules do not apply and the new situation is dissimilar to the previous one. 
Is this time really different for central banks? Remember, central bankers were a triumphant 
lot in the years before the crisis. They thought they had discovered the holy grail of stable 
growth, low inflation and low unemployment and declared victory. The crisis then came as a 
serious  blow  to  the  credibility  of  central  banks  and  the  reputation  of  central  bankers.  The 
challenge  for  central  banks,  as  indeed  for  all  policy  makers,  is  to  learn  the  lessons  of  the 
crisis and reflect them in their policies.  
There cannot be a more learned person than Stan Fischer to draw the lessons of the crisis 
for central banks and set them off on meeting their most urgent challenge of regaining lost 
credibility.  I  have  great  pleasure  in  inviting  Governor  Stanley  Fischer  to  deliver  the  third 
Brahamananda Memorial Lecture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
