Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Policy discipline and spillovers in an 
interconnected global economy 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  SNB-IMF  High-Level  Conference  on  The  International  Monetary 
System, Zurich, 10 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, it is a great pleasure to be here today at this conference. 
In May 1351 – so from today almost exactly 660 years ago – Zurich became the fifth member 
of  the  Swiss  Confederacy,  which  at  the  time  was  a  loose  confederation  of  de  facto 
independent  states  to  better  coordinate  policies  and  lawmaking  among  these  states  within 
the confederacy.  
This example links nicely to the current need of better policy coordination and collaboration in 
today’s  world  of  growing  global  integration  and  interconnectedness  through  trade  and 
financial links than ever.  
The  topic  of  today’s  session  “policy  discipline  and  spillovers  in  an  interconnected  global 
economy” is therefore extremely timely both from a global and European perspective.  
In my intervention, let me, therefore, briefly touch upon four questions:  
1.  
Under  what  circumstances  can  a  lack  of  policy  discipline  lead  to  macroeconomic 
imbalances with destabilizing effects for the economy?  
How can such imbalances spill over to other countries and the global economy?  
What are recipes to prevent imbalances and their spillovers? 
What can we learn from all this for the current situation in Europe? 
2.  
3.  
4.  
So let me turn to the first question: 
1.  
Under what circumstances can a lack of policy discipline lead to 
macroeconomic imbalances with destabilizing effects for the economy?  
Prior  to  the  crisis,  the  deficiencies  of  macroeconomic  policies  and  the  lack  of  sufficient 
international cooperation led to the build-up of unsustainable external imbalances among key 
deficit and surplus economies. Such global imbalances paved the way and contributed to the 
financial  crisis  to  unfold.  This  has  not  only  revealed  insufficient  policy  discipline  and 
cooperation,  but  also  the  lack  of  an  effective  mechanism  to  influence macroeconomic  and 
structural policies in key countries where those appeared unsustainable from the standpoint 
of global economic and financial stability. 
The global economy has become increasingly interconnected and its degree of integration 
will most likely continue to increase in the future. [Foreign trade is projected to exceed the 
pre-crisis levels next year, reaching a new historical high of about 64% of the world’s GDP. 
Financial openness, defined as the amount of foreign assets and liabilities, is estimated to be 
more than 300% of the world’s GDP in 2009 ]. This interconnectedness brings externalities 
and policy challenges. And the recent global financial crisis has been a reminder that this can 
have  dramatic  consequences  on  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system  and  that 
national policies do not suffice in preventing such imbalances from occurring.  
The growing integration of the world economy has contributed to create another dimension of 
loose policies: the failure to recognise the impact of domestic policies on other countries or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the global economy, where the policies’ externalities can be detrimental to global growth and 
the stability of the global economic system. This lack of policy discipline is often an outcome 
of an excessive focus on short-term objectives as opposed to long-run sustainability.  
The exit from monetary policy easing and fiscal accommodation after a recession is a case in 
point. A delayed exit from accommodative monetary policy after a recessionary period may 
contribute to excessive risk taking and large international capital flows. As you know the ECB 
Governing Council decided to raise by 25bp its official rates in April. Similarly, exiting too late 
from stimulative fiscal policy may run the risk of triggering an adverse adjustment in global 
asset prices and global exchange rate configurations. In this respect, the commitment taken 
by the G20 countries to reduce their deficit by half by 2013 is of utmost importance.  
2.  
How can such imbalances or policy failures can spill over to other countries 
and the global economy?  
There  are  a  number  of  historical  examples,  in  which  loose  policies  and  the  neglect  of 
negative spillovers – led to imbalances and disorderly adjustments in international markets. 
In the late 1970s, the US was criticised by some observers for conducting an overly loose 
monetary policy, which allegedly led to a decline of the US dollar to historical lows. External 
imbalances widened (to about 2 per cent of GDP in aggregate terms at that time only!), and 
many countries, especially Japan and Germany, accused the US to seek gaining competitive 
advantages.  It  was  the  Fed’s  decisive  policy  action  under  Paul  Volcker,  raising  the  Fed’s 
policy  rate  to  a  peak  of  around  20  per  cent  in  1981,  which  ended  this  “Great  Inflation” 
experience. 
Another – more recent – example for a lack of policy discipline comes from the euro area. 
Fiscal indiscipline in some – but not all! – euro area Member States had widespread financial 
markets  implications.  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  need  to  strengthen  fiscal  discipline 
significantly.  
The ECB has called repeatedly for a “quantum leap” in this respect that would go beyond 
current  proposals  made  by  EU  Heads  of  States  and  Governments,  though  the  package 
proposed  by  the  European  Parliament  is  already  an  improvement  in  some  respect.  This 
“quantum  leap”  would  include  quasi-automatic  applications  of  sanctions  on  the  basis  of 
clearly pre-defined criteria and without scope of discretion or waivers. I will come back to that 
later. 
These  examples  show  that  many  policy  makers  –  even  today  –  believe  that  the  “put  your 
own house in order” approach is a sufficient recipe for international cooperation. International 
cooperation  is  solely  an  exercise  in  which  the  national  authorities  have  the  main 
responsibility for identifying and solving problems, albeit in a process which is monitored by 
other  parties.  Advocates  of  such  a  form  of  cooperation  tend  say  that  national  authorities 
“know best”, or that full sovereignty and the absence of finger-pointing increase the chances 
of achieving cooperative outcomes. Moreover, if each party managed to keep its own house 
in  order  –  the  theory  goes  –  policy  failures  would  not  occur,  negative  spillovers  would  be 
contained, and crises would not happen.  
I  strongly  believe  that  the  “putting-your-house-in-order”  concept  is  not  sufficient  in  today’s 
globalised  economy.  Raghuram  Rajan  wrote  in  his  book  “fault  lines”:  “in  an  integrated 
economy and in an integrated world, what is best for the individual actor or institution is not 
always  best  for  the  system.”  Therefore,  just  as  micro-prudential  regulation  has  failed  to 
identify  key  systemic  risks  in  international  financial  markets,  a  narrow  focus  on  national 
policies alone is unlikely to deliver the global public good of a stable global monetary system 
and  sustainable  growth.  Failing  to  properly  recognise  the  impact  of  domestic  policies  on 
others,  and  the  second  round  feedbacks  on  the  domestic  economy  can  be  detrimental  to 
growth and stability.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
An excessive focus on the domestic economy may exacerbate global economic and financial 
imbalances, ultimately making future global crises more likely and more severe. This is all 
the  more  true  for  systemically  relevant  countries,  which  have  a  special  obligation  for 
international cooperation.  
in 
that 
important  milestone 
What are recipes to prevent imbalances and their spillovers? 
3.  
Sound  macroeconomic  policies  at  the  national  level  can  –  of  course  –  help  to  address 
external shocks and spillovers. But – as mentioned – there are clear limits of national policies 
with regard to fully prevent spillovers from systemic shocks or economic imbalances in an 
increasingly integrated world economy.  
Moreover, a global economy requires global policies.  
The  G20  Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and  Balanced  Growth,  which  is  the  first 
systematic  multilateral  assessment  of  global  imbalances,  is  therefore  welcome.  It  is  a 
constructive approach to ensure that macroeconomic and structural policies of key countries 
take into consideration their external spillovers, and in particular the risks they entail for the 
global financial system. The recently agreed set of indicative guidelines for global imbalances 
is  an 
the 
G20 Framework  will  help  us  in  benchmarking  acceptable  levels  of  global  imbalances,  and 
provide guidance on how to deal with unsustainable imbalances in an orderly manner. It is 
now of foremost importance to implement the Framework effectively, and to fully live up to 
the expectations that the G20 process raised internationally.  
Multilateral surveillance on domestic policies of systemic countries to ensure their orientation 
towards medium term stability and sustainability should be strengthened on other fronts as 
well. The ECB has always been supportive of the IMF’s Multilateral Surveillance Decision in 
this respect, and the recently conducted first round of IMF spillover reports can be seen as a 
step towards a broader and more comprehensive framework. Moreover, today’s multilateral 
surveillance framework is probably insufficient with respect to disciplining mechanisms, and 
what is needed is a mechanism that ensures that IMF members look beyond their short-term 
policy  goals  and  internalize  their  impact  on  the  global  system.  What  is  needed  more  than 
ever, is a mechanism to ensure that the concept of external stability becomes a cornerstone 
of  multilateral  surveillance.  This  means  that  it  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  whether  a 
country’s  exchange  rate,  monetary,  fiscal  and  financial  sector  policies  are  destabilising  for 
other  countries  or  regions.  This  would  be  a  considerable  strengthening  of  international 
cooperation to achieve our common goal of economic and financial stability.  
respect.  By  using  structural  approaches, 
What can we learn from all this for the current situation in Europe? 
4.  
Also Europe had to learn the hard way that loose policies and large imbalances also in the 
private  sector,  rather  than  only  the  public  sector,  may  have  severe  implications  for  public 
sector  budgets  and  risk  systemic  crises.  Especially  in  the  banking  sector,  our  regulatory 
framework  and  surveillance  turned  out  to  be  insufficient.  While  finance  was  getting 
increasingly  regional  or  global,  regulation  remained  mainly  in  the  national  realm,  and 
discipline was delegated too much to the markets itself.  
But  in  less  than  two  years,  the  institutional  structure  of  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  has 
changed  significantly  to  take  some  of  these  lessons  into  account.  These  changes  were 
driven by the insight that both mutual solidarity and policy discipline are needed to restore 
confidence,  and  to  prevent  further  divergences.  With  this  in  mind,  the  EU  Heads  of  State 
have  created  a  new 
increased  macroprudential 
supervision, and introduced new measures for macroeconomic surveillance. All the more, it 
was recognized that even with the highest degree of regulation and surveillance, crises may 
occur,  and  a  speedy,  transparent  and  predictable  emergency  response  mechanism  is 
financial  supervisory  architecture, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
needed  to  secure  financial  stability.  The  creation  of  the  EFSF  and  the  ESM  are  important 
milestones towards this end.  
Can  similar  results  be  achieved  at  the  global  economic  governance  level?  What  are  the 
“common  goals”  that  we  are  sharing  at  the  international  level?  Our  previous  quid-pro-quo 
multilateralism has left us with high risks for economic and financial stability, and ultimately 
growth  and  prosperity.  It  is  therefore  in  a  country’s  own  interest  to  better  internalize 
externalities of domestic policy making for the greater public good of global economic and 
financial  stability.  International  policy  coordination  like  this  may  provide  us  with  Pareto-
superior solutions, and the recent commitments made at the IMF and the G20 level – which 
are  means  towards  this  end  –  are  good  starting  points  to  deliver  such  progress  if 
implemented effectively.  
Let me say in conclusion: 
The  economy  is  global.  So  policies  cannot  remain  local.  Having  experienced  the  worst 
financial and economic crisis since WWII, we know that policies and policy coordination at a 
global  level  are  needed.  The  most  important  areas  on  the  global  policy  agenda  are  the 
reform of financial regulation and policies to address macroeconomic imbalances. On both 
fronts  we  have  already  made  a  lot  of  progress.  But  continued  efforts  are  needed.  Equal 
regulatory  treatment  of  financial  institutions,  regulating  the  shadow  banking  sector  and 
structural  reforms  to  improve  competitiveness  will  be  needed  for  a  sustainable  and  stable 
economic and financial system for the future.  
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
