Barry Whiteside: Development of micro-insurance in Fiji 
Opening speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Acting Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 
Launch of LICI’s Micro Life Product, Suva, 20 April 2011. 
 His Excellency the High Commissioner of India, Mr Vinod Kumar,  
General Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India Fiji Operations, Mr Krishnan Narasimhan, 
Mr. Tillman Bruett, Project Manager, Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme 
Fiji Management & Staff of LICI,  
Distinguished guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Good evening and bula vinaka to you all.  
It  is  an  honour  and  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  help  launch  Life  Insurance 
Corporation of India’s (LICI) first individual micro-insurance product. 
I  wish  to  thank  Mr.  Narasimhan  for  the  invitation  and  I  congratulate  LICI  for  this  exciting 
initiative. 
I  would  like  to  mention,  right  up  front,  that  Mr.  Narasimhan  is  a  pioneer  member  of  our 
National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce  and  the  current  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Literacy 
Working  Group  of  that  Taskforce.  During  his  time  in  Fiji  he  has  clearly  demonstrated  his 
passion  as  an  advocate  of  financial  inclusion  and  has  been  at  the  forefront  driving  and 
promoting this cause which we hold dear to our hearts. Last year he was influential in the 
Green Ribbon Campaign that raised awareness on the importance of financial literacy.  
I understand Mr. Narasimhan will be leaving our shores in the not too distant future. We are 
of  course  saddened  by  this,  given  his  tremendous  contribution  to  our  financial  inclusion 
cause. We of course recognize that this is a necessary career path move and we wish him 
only the very best in his future endeavours. 
Introduction – Micro-insurance 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  micro-insurance  exists  in  Fiji  on  a  very  small  scale.  However,  as 
some of you know, micro-insurance is now the fastest growing microfinance product in the 
world, providing benefits to millions of mothers, farmers and small business owners.  
By  definition,  micro-insurance  is  simply  …affordable  insurance  provided  for  low  income 
people to protect themselves from financial shocks imposed on them through unpredictable 
events.  
While  the  risks  faced  by  the  poor  are  no  different  from  those  encountered  by  others,  this 
group of people are more vulnerable to such risks due to their very limited resource base. 
Therefore, they face a greater financial burden when hit by an unexpected event, such as the 
untimely  death  of  a  family  member,  deadly  illness  or  injury,  or  loss  of  assets  from  natural 
disasters.  
The  reality  is  that  when  low  income  households  are  faced  with  such  difficulties,  harsh 
choices are made to endure such ordeals and just to get by. Their subsequent actions may 
deplete their quality of life, thus their standard of living declines and more people fall deeper 
into the poverty trap.  
In  Fiji,  the  poor  are  the  most  exposed  to  such  risks  and  at  the  same  time,  are  the  least 
protected against the consequences. Micro-insurance can play an integral role in diminishing 
the risks associated with catastrophic events. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Micro-insurance is new to Fiji, with just two products, a funeral and a life policy introduced to 
the market in 2010. I would like to be able to tell you how successful these products have 
been in terms of their take-up, but I do not have the figures yet. A new product for protection 
against crop damage is also currently being explored.  
Clearly  there  is  scope  for  micro-insurance  to  develop  in  Fiji  given  the  existing  demand  for 
protection  against  health,  life,  education,  financial  and  disaster  risks.  Tonight’s  product 
launch by LICI is testament to that.  
As an institution whose vision is to lead Fiji to economic success, the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
believes  that  promoting  micro-insurance  is  an  investment  for  the  future,  but  this  needs  a 
collaborative approach by all. LICI has risen to that challenge and I applaud them for that.  
Developments in financial inclusion and microfinance 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  may  be  aware,  in  2009  a  National  Microfinance  Workshop 
was  organized  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  supported  by  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme (PFIP). A key outcome at this workshop was the commitment by participants to a 
common vision of “…reaching at least 150,000 unbanked citizens through a coordinated 
national effort by the year 2014”.  
To promote this vision, the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce was established and given 
the job to monitor and drive strategies in achieving financial inclusion goals. To support the 
work  of  the  Taskforce,  three  working  groups  were  also  established  to  focus  on  financial 
literacy, statistics and microfinance.  
A follow up workshop was held in March this year where stakeholders took stock of what had 
been achieved to date. More importantly, forward plans were reviewed with the 2014 target 
in mind.  
In  addition  to  this,  the  RBF  has  continued  its  outreach  and  awareness  by  way  of 
microfinance expositions. In 2010, together with our many stakeholders, we held three expos 
in  Ba,  Labasa  and  Suva.  This  year  we  plan  to  hold  another  three  in different  locations.  In 
fact, the first one was just concluded at the end of March. It was the first ever microfinance 
exposition held in the maritime zone, covering Savusavu, Taveuni, Koro, Gau and Levuka.  
The primary focus of such expositions is to raise awareness and promote greater financial 
inclusion in Fiji. The expos feature different organizations from the private and public sectors 
(including the banks and mobile phone companies), donors, civil society groups and relevant 
government ministries. We are indeed really thankful for the tremendous on-going support of 
all these organisations. 
Micro-insurance to support these developments 
In  May  2010,  the  Asian  Development  Bank  released  a  comprehensive  report  titled 
“Microfinance  in  Fiji  –  Challenges  and  Opportunities”.  The  report  highlighted  that  when 
certain key risks are pooled or transferred in a cost efficient manner, the likelihood of falling 
further  into  poverty  due  to  external  shocks  is  reduced.  It  also  identified  a  huge  market  for 
micro-insurance,  with  at  least  250,000–300,000  citizens  still  untapped  by  insurance  in  our 
country.  
On  the  15th  July  2010,  the  Reserve  Bank  together  with  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Program  organized  an  “Information  Exchange  on  Micro-insurance  in  Fiji”  with  relevant 
stakeholders. The event saw stakeholders deliberate and discuss the extension of insurance 
to low income households in Fiji and enabled them to learn more about its potential for both 
low income households and insurance companies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The development of the micro-insurance industry will ensure that low income households can 
live life with dignity especially in times of adversity. Improved access to financial services for 
low income residents is definitely needed.  
The Reserve Bank is working on developing a sound regulatory framework, with low barriers 
and more awareness and consumer protection, to ensure the viability of the micro-insurance 
industry in Fiji. 
There  are  a  number  of  obstacles  that  hinder  the  growth  of  micro-insurance.  Perhaps  the 
greatest  obstacle,  apart  from  affordability,  would  be  the  limited  public  awareness  on  the 
benefits  of  insurance  among  those  who  have  never  had  access  to  financial  services. 
Financial literacy is seen as the answer to overcome this hurdle. 
Micro-insurance  has  become  a  global  phenomenon  and  the  number  of  successful  stories 
and case studies in other developing countries has pointed the way for the introduction of 
such products in Fiji.  
I  have  already  mentioned  the  very  few  micro-insurance  products  currently  available  in  our 
market. This is therefore a call for insurance companies to do what LICI is doing here today 
and come up with more innovative products in this field.  
The initial undertaking towards expanding access to insurance for the poor is diversifying the 
products.  In  their  current  form,  insurance  policies  are  too  technical  and  complicated  to  be 
understood by the ordinary man on the street. Given the structure of Fiji’s economy, it is not 
just about extending any product to the poor, but providing products that are of value to them 
and which produce a reasonable return.  
Micro Life by LICI 
Ladies and gentlemen, today, I am extremely pleased to help launch a new micro-insurance 
product  into  our  economy,  called  Micro  Life,  courtesy  of  the  Life  Insurance  Corporation  of 
India.  
Micro Life is an endowment-type micro-insurance product providing death, disability, accident 
and  funeral  expense  benefits,  besides  substantial  savings  and  returns  on  maturity.  This  is 
the first ever individual and comprehensive micro-insurance product for Fiji.  
The initiative is welcomed by the RBF as we believe in innovative financial products in the 
economy and such introduction is the stepping stone for financial inclusion at large. Perhaps 
the first of its kind in Pacific, the product aims to provide low cost life insurance solutions to 
the segments of society who have up to this point in time, been under served. The product 
clearly fits our picture of promoting greater financial inclusion.  
Ladies and gentlemen it would be remiss of me not to say anything about the provider.  
Life Insurance Corporation of India (LICI) is no small operation. It is a global Life Insurance 
company with headquarters in Mumbai, India and is fully owned by the Government of India. 
LICI,  Fiji  is  a  branch  of  the  parent  company  and  has  been  operating  in  Fiji  for  more  than 
54 years. The Fiji operations of LICI are guided by the Insurance Laws in Fiji (Insurance Act, 
1998) and are governed by the Reserve Bank of Fiji.  
Today,  LICI  in  Fiji  is  a  prominent  player  in  the  financial  sector  of  the  country,  operating 
through a network of branch offices in Suva, Lautoka and Labasa, besides agency offices in 
nine other centers. The Vision of LICI Fiji is to become the preferred insurer of choice for the 
people of Fiji. We thank the Company for moving further on its vision in the case of its new 
Micro Life product.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Conclusion 
In concluding, I would just wish to say that micro-insurance is a vital tool for the country’s low 
income  people  to  protect  themselves  from  adversity.  If  low  income  individuals  decide  to 
purchase  the  micro-insurance  product,  it  will  certainly  moderate  the  risks  and  provide  the 
comfort or backing to be more optimistic in whatever they may be doing to pull themselves 
out  of  poverty.  Micro-insurance  is  designed  to  help  the  low  income  individual  cope  with 
financial emergencies.  
The  onus,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  to  try  to  make  everyone  aware  of  this  excellent 
opportunity and utilize it to better their livelihoods. 
Launch 
Once again, I thank Mr. Narasimhan for his kind invitation. I wish him and his team at LICI 
every success with the Micro Life product. I also thank LICI for continuing to contribute to the 
development of our financial sector and economy. 
I now have much pleasure in launching the LICI Micro-insurance product – Micro Life. 
Vinaka vakalevu and Dhanyavaard. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
