Peter Pang: Managing the next phase of growth in Asia 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Peter  Pang,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the IMF’s Asia and Pacific Regional Economic Outlook, Hong Kong, 28 April 2011. 
 1. 
Good morning. It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to the launch of the latest 
issue of the IMF’s Asia and Pacific Regional Economic Outlook (REO). We are honoured to 
have  Mr.  Anoop  Singh,  Director  of  the  Asia  and  Pacific  Department  of  the  IMF,  and  his 
colleagues  to  share  with  us  today  their  views  on  the  region’s  economic  and  financial 
developments, the outlook and the challenges, and what can be done to manage the risks 
and promote sustainable growth in the years ahead. 
2. 
I like the theme of this issue of the REO – “Managing the Next Phase of Growth” – 
as this is what concerns us most in Asia at this juncture. We are now some two-and-a-half 
years after the outbreak of the global financial crisis, and Asia has been leading the global 
recovery  –  a  recovery  that  is  maturing  as  rightly  pointed  out  by  the  IMF.  The  question  is 
where and how we should move on from here. And looking ahead, managing the next phase 
of  growth  is  very  challenging  as  we  are  facing  complications  of  unprecedented  scale  and 
dimensions.  
3. 
Specifically, the US and Europe, the two largest markets for Asia’s exports, are still 
facing steep challenges in the adjustment process and the situation is still rather fluid. For the 
US,  the  rather  sticky  structural  constraints  such  as  high  unemployment  and  depressed 
housing  markets  suggest  that  self-sustainable  growth  momentum  remains  uncertain  when 
policy supports are withdrawn. In the case of Europe, while some progress has been made in 
resolving  the  sovereign  debt  issue,  risks  remain  on  whether  certain  economies  can 
overcome  the  challenge  without  substantial  debt  restructuring.  Looking  ahead,  external 
demand from these two markets is likely to remain subdued in the near future. Meanwhile, 
closer to home, the disastrous earthquake and the ensuing nuclear crisis hitting Japan, a key 
importer and exporter for many economies in the region, is adding further downside risk to 
export and production growth in the region. Last but not least, political instability in the Middle 
East and North Africa (MENA) region will likely keep oil prices elevated for some time. This in 
turn would drag on global economic growth, add upward pressures on inflation and heighten 
volatilities in the global financial markets. 
4. 
All these complications are making life difficult for policy makers in the region. While 
Asia,  having  learned  well  the  lessons  from  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  has  managed  to  get 
through the recent global crisis relatively unscathed, we are now entering uncharted waters, 
and there are both imminent and longer-term policy challenges.  
5. 
First  and  foremost,  it  is  challenging  to  manage  the  large  capital  flows.  The 
divergence in the growth rates of advanced and emerging economies have been driving fund 
flows  to  Asia,  resulting  in  signs  of  overheating  in  certain  pockets  of  the  region.  The 
increasingly  negative  real  interest  rates  as  a  result  of  rising  inflation  in  many  regional 
economies  will  add  fuel  to  the  already  high  credit  growth  and  heated  asset  markets.  That 
said,  we  must  also  be  wary  of  the  risk  of  reversal  of  the  fund  flow.  The  recent  surge  in 
headline  inflation  and  the  more  favourable  near-term  cyclical  conditions  in  advanced 
economies  have  already  brought  forward  expectations  of  the  start  of  rising  interest  rate 
cycles.  With  the  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  stances  in  the  advanced  economies 
becoming  more  imminent,  the  risk  of  an  abrupt  reversal  of  international  capital  flows  is 
increasing.  This  calls  for  pre-emptive  policy  actions  to  contain  the  build-up  of  overheating 
pressure and another boom-bust cycle in the region before such abrupt reversals of capital 
flows occur.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Secondly, some of the conventional wisdoms in monetary policy may be challenged 
6. 
by paradigm shifts in the next phase of growth. Conventionally it has been suggested that 
central bank normally may not need to react proactively to commodity price inflation because 
of  their  transitory  nature  and  limited  pass-through  to  core  inflation.  However,  the  recent 
increase of commodities prices such as food and oil could be more sustainable because of 
structural change in demand and supply. For instance, structural factors such as slowing of 
crop yield growth, fast population growth and higher income elasticity for food in developing 
countries would continue to support higher food prices. Policy markers would therefore need 
to  pay  attention  to  these  developments  in  calibrating  the  appropriate  degree  of  monetary 
tightening.  
7. 
Thirdly, there is also a need to diversify the sources of growth for the region, in order 
to  generate  sustainable  growth  and  redress  global  imbalance.  In  this  regard,  it  is  worth-
noting some encouraging developments that are underway in the region. The first one is the 
deepening intraregional trade and increasing orientation towards domestic consumption. The 
robust  economic  growth  of  the  regional  economies  over  the  past  year  has  mainly  been 
propelled  by  strong  domestic  demand,  while  the  contribution  from  net  exports  was  either 
small  or  negative.  In  fact,  the  aggregate  trade  balance  of  the  region  has  been  gradually 
declining  since  2007,  and  if  intra-regional  trade  is  excluded,  it  has  declined  notably  from 
about 4% of the regional GDP in mid-2007 to less than 2% at end-2010, the lowest in more 
than a decade. This gradual change in trade pattern, with regional economies shifting their 
export markets from deficit countries like the US to surplus countries in the region, has also 
been contributing to global rebalancing.  
8. 
We  also  should  not  overlook  the  positive  attributes  of  capital  flows.  While 
challenging to manage, capital inflows present important opportunities for boosting broader-
based  growth.  The  key  is  to  channel  the  capital  flows  into  good  uses,  and  particularly 
towards  productive  investments.  In  this  regard,  promoting  capital  market  development  is 
important  to  open  up  additional  channels  of  funding  for  long-term  investments  such  as 
infrastructure. The good news is that the region is already taking steps in the right direction 
by improving the financial infrastructure of bond markets and expanding the investor base. 
Meanwhile, many economies are also making greater use of public-private partnerships to 
promote critical infrastructure investment projects. 
9. 
In  the  face  of  these  significant  uncertainties  and  challenges  ahead  of  us,  IMF’s 
assessment of the prospects and risks, as well as advice on policy response for the region is 
particularly  important  at  this juncture.  We  look forward  to  the  presentation  by  IMF  and  the 
dialogue during the panel discussions.  
10. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
