Spencer Dale: MPC in the dock 
Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director, Monetary Policy, and Chief Economist of 
the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  National  Asset-Liability  Management  Global  Conference, 
London, 24 March 2011. 
 I would like to thank Alina Barnett, Rohan Churm and Michael Hume for their considerable help in preparing this 
speech. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. 
The  remit  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  clear:  to  hit  the  2%  inflation  target.  But 
inflation in February was 4.4% – well above the target. It has been above target for much of 
the past 5 years. And it is likely to remain so for the next year or so. 
At the same time, monetary policy remains at extraordinary loose levels. This month marks 
the second anniversary of Bank Rate being reduced to 0.5%; it’s lowest ever level. And the 
stock of asset purchases financed by central bank reserves – QE – remains at £200 billion. 
There is an onus on the Committee to explain how its actions are consistent with its remit. 
There is a good case for the defence. But we need to continue to make it. 
It needs to be made if international investors, such as many of you here this morning, are 
going to continue to have the confidence to invest in the UK. 
More  generally,  it  needs  to  be  made  to  preserve  the  accountability  and  credibility  of  the 
Committee. 
The MPC is accountable for hitting the inflation target. Developments in the rest of the world 
certainly affect us. And inflation will not always be close to target. But ultimately UK inflation 
is our responsibility: it is made and controlled in Threadneedle Street.  
The  credibility  of  monetary  policy  relies  on  companies  and  households  having  confidence 
that  the  Committee  will  keep  inflation  close  to  target.  After  a  series  of  failed  monetary 
frameworks in the 1970s and 80s, the gains in credibility associated with the introduction of 
inflation targeting and the creation of an independent policy committee greatly improved the 
functioning  of  our  economy.  The  task  of  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation  was  made 
substantially easier, and we enjoyed a sustained period of economic stability. We lose those 
hard-fought gains at our peril. 
The MPC stands charged on four counts. Why is inflation so high? Why has inflation been so 
much higher than we expected? Could inflation remain high? And how is the current stance 
of policy consistent with the inflation outlook? 
My task today is to make the case for the defence. 
Why is inflation so high? 
On the first count – why is inflation so high – the case for the defence has been advanced by 
a  number  of  my  colleagues  in  recent  months  and  so  hopefully  will  be  familiar  to  many  of 
you.1  Over  the  past  few  years,  our  economy  has  been  hit  by  a  series  of  large  price  level 
shocks  –  to  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  to  VAT,  and  to  the  sterling  exchange  rate  – 
which  have  raised  companies’  costs  and  put  upward  pressure  on  prices.  Together  these 
factors can more than account for the strength of inflation. 
                                                 
1  See for example the speeches by Bean (2011), King (2011), Miles (2011), and Posen (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Indeed,  recent  analysis  in  the  Bank’s  Inflation  Report  suggests  that  these  factors  can 
account for a rise in the level of consumer prices since the beginning of 2007 of between  
8–12%.2 This dwarfs the extent to which inflation has exceeded the 2% inflation target over 
the same period. 
Now, if we really were in a Court of Law, I fear the Judge may be looking down on me at this 
point with a degree of disdain, suggesting that this sounds like a series of excuses. “Inflation 
is inflation”, he or she  may say, “whatever its cause. Your job is to keep inflation close to 
target”. 
I’ve considerable sympathy for this argument: the high and variable rates of inflation seen in 
recent  years  have  affected  the  ability  of  both  households  and  companies  to  plan  their 
spending and investment decisions with any degree of certainty.  
But the remit of the MPC recognises that trying to keep inflation at target in the face of large 
shocks and disturbances “may cause undesirable volatility in output.”3 I fear that to some this 
might sound like I’m resorting to technical loop-holes to bolster my defence. But that is not 
the case. This element of the remit has been central to the operation of monetary policy in 
recent years. 
The foremost task of monetary policy over the past few years has been to ensure that the 
financial  crisis  did  not  lead  to  a  prolonged  depression.  To  have  offset  these  price  level 
shocks would have meant presiding over an even deeper recession. I’m not saying that if I 
had had perfect foresight, I wouldn’t have changed my policy stance at all. But the hurdle for 
wanting to have had materially tighter policy in the face of the most severe downturn in the 
post-war period is pretty high. 
But this argument is hypothetical. As many of you may know, the MPC did not have perfect 
foresight. Indeed, far from it! Which leads to the second charge against the MPC: why has 
inflation been so much higher than we expected?  
Why has inflation been so much higher than we expected? 
On the Committee, we always stress that the uncertainty associated with forecasting inflation 
means  that  the  forecasts  –  and  outturns  relative  to  those  forecasts  –  should  be  judged  in 
terms of the entire forecast distribution rather than a single point forecast. But even viewed in 
this way, inflation in recent years has turned out significantly higher than we thought at all 
likely. Consider, for example, the forecast the Committee made two years ago in February 
2009.  At  that  time,  the  probability  the  Committee  attached  to  inflation  being  above  3%  in 
2010 was less than 5% in each quarter. In the event, CPI inflation was above 3% in every 
quarter of 2010 and averaged 3.3% (Chart 1). However viewed, there is a prolonged period 
of unexpectedly high inflation that needs to be explained.  
That  explanation  comes  in  two  halves,  with  the  source  of  the  inflation  surprise  in  2009 
different from that in 2010. 
In 2009, our surprise largely stemmed from the extent to which the increase in import prices 
associated with sterling’s depreciation was passed through into higher consumer prices. The 
                                                 
2  See  the  box  on  page  34–35  of  the  February  Inflation  Report.  The  box  explains  how  a  range  of  estimates 
suggest that these factors might have added between 6% – 10.5% to the level of prices between 2007 and the 
end  of  2010.  My  numbers  update  this  analysis  for  the  recent  impact  of  the  January  2011  VAT  rise  and 
additional increases in energy and import prices. 
3  The relevant clause of the remit states “The framework is based on the recognition that the actual inflation rate 
will on occasions depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances. Attempts to keep inflation at 
the  inflation  target  in  these  circumstances  may  cause  undesirable  volatility  in  output.”  See  http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/d/open_letter_from_chx_to_boe_22032011.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
MPC’s initial judgement was that over the next few years less than half of the increase in 
import prices would feed into higher UK consumer prices, with the remainder being absorbed 
in  margins  or  lower  nominal  wages.  This  judgement  was  based  in  part  on  a  number  of 
influential studies made in the years prior to sterling’s depreciation which suggested that the 
degree  of  exchange  rate  pass-through  in  many  countries,  including  the  UK,  had  fallen 
significantly  during  the  period  of  Great  Moderation.  Indeed,  a  general  view  had  emerged 
amongst many academics and commentators that pass-through in many  major economies 
had fallen close to zero.4  
The MPC’s initial judgement that around 40% or so of the increase in import prices would 
pass through into consumer prices was at the top end of this emerging view. However, that 
judgement now looks woefully optimistic compared to the degree of pass-through we think 
has occurred, which is closer to 100%.5 This error of judgement can more than account for 
the surprising strength of inflation through 2009 (Chart 2).  
However,  it  accounts  for  much  less  of  the  surprise  in  2010,  since  the  extent  of  additional 
pass-through has lessened as time has gone on.6 Instead, the 2010 surprise largely stems 
from the sharp pickup in import price inflation seen through much of last year, driven by the 
surge in commodity prices. At the time we made the February 2009 forecast, we expected 
import prices to increase only slightly in 2010. In the event, the prices of oil, food and metals 
increased  by  between  20  and  40%  during  2010,  leading  to  a  further  bout  of  import  price 
inflation.  
These higher commodity prices directly affect the prices of the food and energy we consume. 
But  the  effects  go  wider  than  that.  Higher  metal  prices  raise  the  cost  of  imported  cars. 
Likewise,  cotton  prices  and  the  cost  of  clothes.  All  told,  the  unexpected  increase  in 
commodity and world trade prices can account for the lion’s share of the surprising strength 
in inflation in 2010 (Chart 3). 
So there are two significant factors accounting for the recent extended period of higher than 
expected  inflation.7  In  2009,  the  surprising  strength  largely  reflects  greater  than  expected 
pass-through from sterling’s depreciation into consumer prices. There were good reasons for 
                                                 
4  Taylor (2008) argued that the global economy had experienced a reduction in the degree of exchange rate 
pass-through in recent years. Microeconomic studies attributed this decline to increased globalisation, which 
increased  competition  between  domestic  and  foreign  firms  (Campa  and  Goldberg  (2006)).  Macroeconomic 
studies argued that this was due to monetary policy’s focus on price stability which caused prices to adjust 
more  slowly  (Devereux  and  Engel  (2001),  Taylor  (2000,  2007),  Devereux,  Engel  and  Storgaard  (2004)). 
Empirical studies such as Ihrig et al (2006), found that the exchange rate pass-through to consumer prices in 
the U.K. had fallen from 0.20 before the 1990s to almost zero thereafter; similar effects were found in other 
G7 countries with the exception of Germany. 
5  The  February  2011  Inflation  Report  (Section  4  and  the  box  on  pages  34–35)  describe  estimates  which 
suggest that import price increases since 2007 have added 4% to 6% to the overall price level. This equates 
to pass-through of between 66% and 100%. I discussed some reasons for why the degree of pass-through 
may have been larger or at least faster than predicted by earlier studies in a speech last year (Dale 2010). 
6  The  analysis  presented  here  is  based  on  the  forecast  made  in  February  2009.  The  extent  of  the  surprise 
stemming from the degree of exchange rate pass-through in subsequent forecasts reduced more quickly than 
suggested  by  this  analysis  since  the  MPC  learnt  from  this  high  pass-through  and  adjusted  subsequent 
projections accordingly. 
7  There  are  of  course  many  other  elements  of  the  MPC’s  forecasts  which  have  differed  from  what  was 
projected.  For  example,  previous  Bank  analysis  (see  the  box  on  pages  48–49  of  the  August  2010  Inflation 
Report)  has  highlighted  the  smaller  than  expected  impact  from  the  weakness  of  demand.  Acting  in  the 
opposite  direction,  it  appears  that  consumer-facing  companies  may  have  squeezed  their  margins  by  more 
than  had  been  anticipated  during  2009/10.  The  various  changes  to  VAT  during  this  period  have  also 
complicated the task of forecasting inflation. However, relative to the February 2009 forecast considered here, 
changes  in  VAT  did  not  contribute  significantly  to  the  surprising  strength  of  inflation  in  2009/10,  since  the 
effects  of  the  temporary  reduction  in  VAT  in  December  2008  were  included  in  that  forecast,  and  the  main 
impact of the more recent increase in VAT did not come through until the first quarter of this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
thinking that the degree of pass through may be relatively limited, but by the start of 2010 
that judgement was shown to have been wrong and we have incorporated close to full-pass 
through  in  forecasts  since  then.  By  contrast,  the  unexpected  strength  of  inflation  through 
much of 2010 largely stems from the surge in commodity prices.  
Could inflation remain high? 
To summarise: there’s no great puzzle as to why inflation has been above target for much of 
the past few years. Our economy has been subject to a series of large shocks – to oil and 
other  commodity  prices,  to  VAT,  and  to  the  sterling  exchange  rate  –  which  have  raised 
inflation.  The  scale  of  these  shocks  can  more  than  account  for  the  overshoot  of  inflation 
relative to target. Moreover, it is possible, albeit with the benefit of hindsight, to explain why 
inflation in recent years has been higher than we expected.  
But  that  is  all  in  the  past.  What  matters  for  monetary  policy  are  the  prospects  for  inflation 
over the next 2 to 3 years. 
My  broad  view  of  the  inflation  outlook  is  similar  to  that  described  in  the  February  Inflation 
Report.  Inflation  will  probably  rise  further  in  the  near-term  as  recent  commodity  price 
increases pass through the supply chain. But further out, inflation is likely to fall back as the 
temporary impacts of the price level shocks wane and the slack in the economy associated 
with the deep recession from which we are only gradually recovering continues to pull down 
on inflation. But the risks and uncertainties associated with the inflation outlook means it is 
impossible  to  know  with  any  certainty  by  how  much  and  over  what  period  inflation  will 
moderate. 
Indeed, it is quite possible that inflation may be considerably higher or lower than the central 
view taken in the February Report. This leads to the third item on our charge sheet: could 
inflation  remain  high?  The  simple  answer  to  this  question  is  –  I’m  afraid  –  yes.  I  would 
highlight two risks in particular. 
The  first  is  that  global  price  pressures  continue  to  add  to  domestic  inflation.  There  are  a 
number of potential channels through which this could operate. 
At first blush, the most natural suspect might appear to be a continuation of the recent rapid 
increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities.  As  I  said,  commodity  prices  have 
increased  sharply  over  the  past  year  and  the  strong  demand  from  emerging  economies, 
especially China, which has underpinned much of that rise, looks set to continue.8 But this 
ignores the fact that one of the reasons why commodity prices increased so much through 
2010 was exactly because demand was expected to remain strong.  
Indeed,  looking  ahead,  futures  prices  are  broadly  flat.  Now  there  are  many  reasons  why 
commodity prices may not be expected to follow exactly the path implied by futures prices. 
For example, if investors require a positive risk premium for holding commodities, or because 
some  commodities  cannot  be  easily  stored.  And  further  sharp  movements  in  commodity 
prices  are  certainly  possible.  But  I  wouldn’t  expect  to  see  rapid  increases  in  commodities 
prices of the like seen over the past year unless global demand turned out to be significantly 
stronger – or supply weaker – than currently anticipated. 
But  inflation  at  home  could  also  be  affected  by  more  general  inflationary  trends.  Average 
inflation in the largest emerging economies increased from 2.8% to 5.3% last year.9 This in 
large  part  reflects  rising  local  and  global  food  prices.  But  overheating  in  many  emerging 
                                                 
8  Events in Japan and the Middle East and North Africa have also had an important influence on commodity 
prices  in  recent  weeks.  Oil  prices  have  increased  reflecting  fears  of  supply  disruption  and  heightened  risk 
premium, but some non-oil commodity prices have fallen in response to concerns about weakening demand. 
9  This group covers the BRIC economies plus 22 other emerging and newly industrialised economies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economies is playing an increasing role. These economies account for a little under 20% of 
the  UK’s  imports.  So  if  inflation  remains  elevated  in  these  countries  this  could  have  a 
material impact on domestic inflation.  
Under  some  circumstances,  we  may  expect  the  impact  of  high  inflation  in  overseas’ 
economies to be offset by a corresponding depreciation in their exchange rates. But where 
economies operate pegged exchange rate regimes it is far from clear that this can be relied 
upon, at least in the near term. 
A third external factor which could add to domestic inflation is if there is further pass-through 
from the past depreciation of sterling. Our central view is that there has been close to 100% 
pass through in terms of the direct impact of higher import prices on to consumer prices. But 
it is hard to be precise about the exact degree of pass-through, and the range of estimates 
included in the February Inflation Report suggest that pass through to date may be as low as 
two-thirds. Moreover, it is quite possible that pass-through may exceed 100% if companies 
making  domestically  produced  goods  and  services  are  able  to  use  the  increased 
competitiveness associated with sterling’s depreciation to widen their margins.10 
So there are a number of potential channels through which developments abroad may affect 
domestic inflation.  
But to repeat a point I made up front: inflation is home made. If we think that global price 
pressures are likely to push up on CPI inflation for an extended period, UK monetary policy 
will need to be set in such a way as to reduce domestically-generated inflation, and so leave 
room for these external price pressures. And to respond to an argument I have seen made 
by  a  number  of  commentators  in  recent  months.  No:  raising  Bank  Rate  will  not  directly 
dampen  global  inflation.  But  it  can  ensure  that  it  does  not  lead  to  high  and  persistent 
domestic inflation.  
The second upside risk to inflation that I would highlight is if the prolonged period of above 
target inflation erodes the public’s confidence that the MPC will keep inflation close to target. 
Inflation has been above target for 49 out of the past 60 months. Over that 5 year period, 
inflation has averaged 2.8%. Inflation is likely to remain above target for the next year or so. 
This suggests that by mid 2012, inflation is likely to have been above target for the best part 
of six and a half years. 
Yes, it is perfectly possible to explain why inflation has been so high for so long. And yes, 
there  are  good  reasons  why  monetary  policy  did  not  try  to  keep  inflation  closer  to  target 
during  this period.  But  just  like  the  Judge  looking  down  on  me  earlier,  to  some  people,  at 
some point, this may just start to sound like a series of excuses. This risk is heightened by 
the fact that the MPC has consistently under-predicted inflation during this period. It is much 
easier to be wise after the event. For many people, the one thing about inflation they know 
with certainty is by how much their cost of living has increased in recent years. And if they 
take  any  signal  from  that  about  the  path  of  future  inflation,  this  could  have  significant 
implications. 
Discussions of MPC credibility are often framed in terms of a set of binary arguments. Has 
the MPC lost its credibility or not? Are inflation expectations anchored or de-anchored? 
This approach encourages a focus on measures of medium-term inflation expectations. The 
rate of inflation expected over the next year or so may consistently move around since the 
MPC does not attempt to bring inflation back to target over very short time horizons. But this 
                                                 
10  In  the  extreme,  the  law  of  one  price  (LOOP)  suggests  that,  in  the  absence  of  transport  costs  and  trade 
barriers, the price of a given commodity will be the same all over the world.  Even though the LOOP is unlikely 
to  hold  perfectly,  the  mechanisms  underpinning  LOOP  might  cause  a  sterling  depreciation  to  lead  to  an 
increase in the prices of some domestically produced goods and services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
line of argument suggests that the stability of inflation expected 5 or 10 years ahead provides 
a good metric for judging the credibility of monetary policy.  
The  evidence  on  medium  and  long-term  measures  of  inflation  expectations  is  somewhat 
mixed. The most recent survey conducted for the Bank by NOP suggests that 5-year ahead 
inflation expectations increased by 0.4% points over the past year. The corresponding survey 
measures  collected  by Citigroup/YouGov  and  Barclays  have  risen  by  similar  amounts.  But 
both the Citigroup/YouGov and Barclays measures remain below the levels they reached in 
2008.  And  measures  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations  derived  from  financial  markets 
are little changed compared to a year ago. 
But  I’m  cautious  about  how  much  comfort  we  can  take  from  the  relative  stability  in  these 
measures for two reasons. 
First,  although  some  economists  may  like  to  think  otherwise,  most  companies  and 
households have far better things to do than spend time formulating detailed expectations of 
the  rate  of  inflation  likely  to  prevail  in  5  or  10  years  time.  Many  may  use  simple  rules  of 
thumb to form views about future inflation, such as “inflation will be equal to the target”.11 Or 
they may base their expectations on the views they hear expressed by others or they read 
about  in  newspapers.12  Importantly,  expectations  formed  in  this  way  may  be  relatively 
sticky.13 Rules of thumb are only changed when they perform poorly over a period of time. 
Expectations  based  on  the  views  of  others  may  be  updated  only  occasionally.  As  such,  it 
may  be  some  time  before  we  see  the  full  effects  of  the  extended  period  of  above  target 
inflation fully reflected in inflation expectations. 
Second,  and  more  fundamentally,  I  worry  that  this  binary  approach  to  monetary  policy 
credibility  –  credible  or  not  credible,  anchored  or  de-anchored  –  misses  the  key  risk  to 
inflation expectations. Despite some of the more lurid newspaper headlines, I don’t believe 
that  many  people  think  that  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  adopted  a  secret  aim  to 
keep inflation above the 2% target indefinitely. Given that, I don’t find it surprising that when 
asked, many survey respondents have not significantly raised their expectations of inflation 
in the medium term.  
More likely, however, is that some companies and some households may look back at the 
prolonged period of above target inflation and infer that the Committee has perhaps become 
more  tolerant  of  deviations  of  inflation  from  target.  As  such,  inflation  may  be  expected  to 
return to target more gradually. Rates of inflation expected to prevail in 5 or 10 years may not 
increase, but inflation expectations 2, 3 and 4-years ahead may well do. This risk is almost 
impossible  to  monitor  since  information  on  the  term  structure  of  inflation  expectations, 
especially  for  households  and  companies,  is  very  sparse.  But  it  could  have  profound 
implications for the inflation outlook and the performance of our economy. 
If  companies  and  households  expect  inflation  to  return  to  target  quickly  they  will  set  their 
prices and pay demands accordingly. And in so doing, monetary policy has less to do – in 
terms  of  varying  the  level  of  demand  in  the  economy  –  to  ensure  that  it  does.  Inflation 
credibility  is  self  reinforcing.  The  credibility  gains  associated  with  the  move  to  inflation 
targeting and an independent policymaking committee in our country led to a reduction in the 
persistence of inflation. Inflation came back to target more quickly and the cost of it doing so 
in terms of output volatility was reduced.14 If companies and households begin to expect that 
                                                 
11  Brazier, Harrison, King and Yates (2008). 
12  Carroll (2003). 
13  Mankiw and Reis (2002). 
14  There was a reduction in the persistence of UK inflation without an increase in the volatility of output.  Benati 
(2006) found that the inflation targeting period has been the most stable macroeconomic period in UK history. 
Some have argued that this was due to lower and less volatile shocks hitting the UK economy (Benati and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation will be returned to target more slowly that would harm the efficient functioning of our 
economy.  Wage  and  price  setting  behaviour  could  change.  The  task  of  keeping  inflation 
close to target would become more costly. Inflation persistence would increase. We need to 
guard the gains in credibility built up over the past 15 years or so. 
How is the current stance of policy consistent with the inflation outlook? 
The existence of these upside risks leads to the fourth and final charge levelled against the 
MPC. Is the current stance of policy consistent with the inflation outlook?  
As I’ve explained, the central view of the Committee – which I share – is that much of the 
current strength of inflation is driven by a series of price level shocks. Inflation is likely to fall 
back next year, as the temporary impacts from these factors wane and the persistent slack in 
our economy continues to pull down on inflation.  
That  outlook  drives  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Policy  needs  to  remain  highly 
accommodative in order to support spending and income and so reduce the risk of inflation 
significantly undershooting the target in the medium term.  
But there is considerable uncertainty about the extent to which inflation is likely to fall and 
over  what  time  period.  That  uncertainty  maps  into  differing  views  as  to  exactly  how 
accommodative monetary policy needs to be.  
On  the  one  hand,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  strength  and  durability  of  the  recovery  may 
disappoint. Our economy still faces considerable headwinds, especially within the household 
sector,  where  real  incomes  have  been  squeezed  and  many  families  may  not  yet  have 
adjusted fully to the implications of the substantial fiscal consolidation now in train. 
On the other hand – as I’ve discussed – there is a risk that inflation may remain higher for 
longer  than  currently  expected.  Either  because  global  price  pressures  continue  to  add  to 
domestic inflation or because the persistent period of above target inflation starts to become 
ingrained in wage and price setting behaviour. 
It is still too early to reach any firm conclusions, but it seems likely that the terrible events in 
Japan and the political upheaval in the Middle East and North Africa will add to both of these 
risks. The huge disruption in Japan and the uncertainty associated with events in Libya are 
likely to dampen global demand, at least in the short run. But the accompanying increases in 
energy prices are likely to add to domestic inflation. 
At  the  MPC  meeting  two  weeks  ago  I  voted  to  raise  Bank  Rate  to  0.75%.  Even  with  this 
increase in rates, the stance of monetary policy would remain highly stimulatory. Bank Rate 
would still be close to an historic low and the stimulus from our programme of quantitative 
easing would be unaffected. But I judged that removing some of the monetary stimulus was 
warranted. 
I would like to tell you that this judgement was driven by “nice” reasons. That I was confident 
that the recovery would continue apace. That the very low level of Bank rate reached at the 
depth of the recession was no longer needed. That we were in a position in which monetary 
policy could begin a gradual process of normalisation. 
But I’m afraid these nice reasons were not the factors driving my decision. In particular, I’m 
not at all confident about the strength of the recovery. My central view – similar to that in the 
February Inflation Report – is that growth is likely to be close to its average historical rate 
over  the  next  few  years.  But  that  is  a  pretty  disappointing  outlook  given  the  depth  of  the 
                                                                                                                                                      
Mumtaz (2007)) while others have argued this was due to better monetary policy (Batini and Nelson (2005), 
Nelson and Nikolov (2004)). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
recession  from  which  we  are  recovering.  And  there  is  considerable  scope  for  growth  to 
surprise to the downside, particularly if households retrench further. 
Rather,  my  vote  to  raise  rates  was  driven  by  a  concern  that  –  despite  a  relatively  weak 
outlook for growth – the risks to the inflation target in the medium-term were to the upside. In 
particular, the risks from continuing global price pressures and the effects of the prolonged 
period of above target inflation meant that the level of demand consistent with achieving the 
inflation target had probably fallen. 
Nasty reasons rather than nice ones.15  
I should stress that I’m not at all certain that this will turn out to have been the right policy 
decision.  A  key  lesson  I  learnt  from  the  financial  crisis  is  that  economists  know  a  lot  less 
about  the  economy  and  how  the  economy  works  than  many  would  like  to  believe. 
Policymakers need to approach their task with humility and pragmatism. If growth turns out to 
be  materially  weaker  than  I  anticipate  or  other  medium-term  pressures  on  inflation  ease 
unexpectedly, I will reverse my decision. But with growth expected to be around its average 
historical rate, inflation likely to remain above 4% for the rest of this year and Bank Rate at 
record low levels, some withdrawal of policy stimulus seems sensible. 
The juxtaposition of high inflation and loose monetary policy means that there is an onus on 
the MPC to explain its actions. The case for the defence needs to be made. And we have a 
good story to tell. We can explain why inflation has been above target for much of the past 
few years. We think we understand – albeit with the benefit of hindsight – why we have been 
surprised by the strength of inflation. And we have learnt from those episodes. I can’t say 
that  monetary  policy  will  perfectly  anticipate  every  twist  and  turn  of  the  economy.  We  will 
continue to be surprised by events and need to adjust policy accordingly. But I can assure 
you that the MPC remains as committed and as focused as ever in our determination to hit 
the inflation target.  
                                                 
15  This distinction between nice and not nice reasons for raising Bank Rate was made in an interview by Charlie 
Bean with the Western Mail on 1 February 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 (2003), 
“Macroeconomic  expectations  of  households  and  professional 
References 
Batini,  N,  and  E.  Nelson  (2005),  “The  U.K.’s  Rocky  Road  to  Stability”,  Working  Paper 
No. 2005–020A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Bean, C (2011), “The MPC’s policy dilemma”. Speech at ABI’s Economics and Research 
Conference, London, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech479.pdf 
Benati,  L  (2006),  “UK  monetary  regimes  and  macroeconomic  stylised  facts”,  Bank  of 
England Working Paper, No. 290. 
Benati,  L  and  Mumtaz,  H  (2007),  “U.S.  Evolving  Macroeconomic  Dynamics:  A  Structural 
Investigation,” European Central Bank Working Paper N. 746, April 2007. 
Brazier, A, Harrison, R, King, M and Yates, T (2008), “The Danger of Inflating Expectations 
of  Macroeconomic  Stability:  Heuristic  Switching  in  an  Overlapping-Generations  Monetary 
Model”, International Journal of Central Banking, June 2008. 
Campa, J and Goldberg, L (2006), “Distribution margins, imported inputs, and the sensitivity 
of the CPI to exchange rates”, NBER Working Paper No. 12121. 
Carroll,  C 
forecasters”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 269–98. 
Dale, S (2010), “Inflation, Inflation, Inflation”. Speech at Cardiff Business School, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech448.pdf 
Devereux, M B and Engel, C (2001), “Endogenous currency of price setting in a dynamic 
open economy model”, NBER Working Paper No. 8559. 
Devereux, M B, Engel, C and Storgaard, P (2004), “Endogenous Exchange Rate Pass-through 
When Nominal Prices are Set in Advance,” Journal of International Economics, 63, 263–291. 
Ihrig,  J,  Marazzi,  M  and  Rothenberg,  A  (2006),  “Exchange  rate  pass-through  in  the 
G7 countries”,  International Finance Discussion Paper No. 851, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Juvenal, J and Taylor, M (2008), “Threshold Adjustment of Deviations from the Law of One 
Price”, Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Econometrics: Vol. 12: No. 3, Article 8. 
King,  M 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech471.pdf 
Mankiw,  N  G  and  Reis,  R  (2002),  “Sticky  information  versus  sticky  prices:  A  proposal  to 
replace the new Keynesian Phillips curve”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1295–1328. 
Miles, D (2011), “Monetary policy in extraordinary times”. Speech to the Centre for Economic 
Policy Research and London Business School, London, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech475.pdf 
Nelson, E and Nikolov, K (2004), “Monetary Policy and Stagflation in the UK”, Journal of 
Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(3), 293–318. 
Posen,  A  (2011),  “The  soft  tyranny  of  inflation  expectations”.  Speech  at  the  Oxonia 
Distinguished Lecture, Oxford, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech474.pdf 
Taylor,  J  (2000)  “Low  inflation,  pass-through,  and  the  pricing  power  of  firms”,  European 
Economic Review, Vol. 44, pp. 1389–1408. 
Taylor,  J  (2007)  “Globalisation  and  monetary  policy:  missions 
Conference on the International dimensions of monetary policy, Girona, Spain, June. 
Taylor,  J  (2008),  “The  impacts  of  globalisation  on  monetary  policy”,  Banque  de  France, 
International Symposium: Globalisation, inflation and monetary policy, March 2008.  
the  Civic  Centre,  Newcastle,  available  at: 
(2010),  Speech  given  at 
impossible”,  NBER 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
