Agustín Carstens: DALÍ – Mexico’s award-winning securities settlement 
system 
Remarks by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the Franz Edelman 
Prize Award, granted to the Mexican central securities depositor, S.D. Indeval, for developing 
with the Bank of Mexico and the Instituto Tecnológico Autónomo de México (ITAM) the DALÍ 
securities settlement system, Mexico City, 12 January 2011. 
    Susan  Albin,  President  of  Informs  (Institute  for  Operation  Research  and  the 
Management Sciences). 
Luis Téllez Kuenzler, Chairman of BMV Group, stakeholder of S.D. Indeval. 
Arturo  Fernández,  Chancellor  of  the  Instituto  Tecnológico  Autónomo  de  México 
(ITAM). 
Highly  respected  DALÍ  developing  team  from  S.D.  Indeval,  ITAM  and  Banco  de 
México, to whom this renowned award has been granted. 
Dear guests, ladies and gentlemen: 
Good afternoon. 
I am very pleased that the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences 
granted the Franz Edelman Award to Indeval for the excellent job done in developing DALÍ. 
This recognition is very good news for the Mexican financial system. 
The securities settlement system is key for Banco de México: 
 
We are responsible for promoting the sound development of the financial system, of 
which the securities settlement system is crucial. 
One  of  our  objectives  as  a  central  bank  is  to  foster  the  smooth  operation  of  the 
payment systems. The securities settlement system is not only the largest payment 
system  in  Mexico,  but  also  an  essential  component  of  our  liquidity  provision 
mechanism for other payment systems. 
Finally,  the  securities  settlement  system  is  used  to  compensate  and  liquidate  the 
monetary policy operations that help us achieve our price stability goal. 
  Given the relevance of all payment systems, Banco de México is constantly striving to adapt 
the  best  practices  available.  In  this  spirit,  we  worked  together  with  Indeval  in  the  design, 
construction, and implementation of DALÍ.  
When  we  were  defining  the  operating  rules  for  the  system,  financial  intermediaries  and 
Indeval wanted a multilateral netting scheme since this would allow them to use the available 
liquidity,  in  terms  of  cash  and  securities,  efficiently.  The  central  bank  knew  well  the 
advantages of this scheme for a developing market, but also its downsides: if any depositor 
lacked enough money or securities, it could take hours and complex procedures to redo the 
multilateral netting process. From Banco de México’s perspective, this was not acceptable. 
Apart  from  the  benefits  of  a  multilateral  netting  scheme,  we  also  needed  a  real  time 
settlement system, for its superior characteristics in terms of risk control and simplicity, and 
because it would be very useful for our liquidity provision mechanisms. 
In  order  to  perform  simultaneously  multilateral  netting  and  settlement  in  near  real  time, 
Banco de México developed and proposed a methodology based on mathematical models 
and operations research techniques.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Specifically, we created a linear programming model that linked a network flow problem for 
money with many network flow problems for securities. In other words, we proposed a model 
were money and securities constitute a flow through a network of participants. The solution 
we were looking for could be obtained by maximizing these flows quickly and applying the 
results immediately to the participants’ balances. 
Since there are specialized algorithms that solve linear programming problems very fast, we 
had, in principle, a method to choose a set of transactions with maximum value that could be 
settled with the available resources.  
This  methodology,  however,  would,  in  some  cases,  settle  transactions  only  partially  –  for 
example, instead of settling the 1,000 CETES that were intended in a transaction, only 990 
would be settled – a practice unheard at the time. We broke the mold when we realized that 
it was feasible to offer participants a simple choice: to operate on the basis of an efficient 
multilateral  netting  scheme  that  would  partially  settle  some  operations,  or  to  operate  on  a 
gross basis. The intermediaries went for the most efficient solution.  
And so, thanks to the use of operations research techniques, a new methodology to settle 
securities in the Mexican market was born.  
With  this  solution  in  hand,  Banco  de  México  felt  Indeval  had  the  capability  to  develop  a 
system that would: 
1. 
Settle under a delivery versus payment scheme. That is, having an unbreakable 
link between the settlement of a securities transfer and the corresponding payment. 
Settle  operations  frequently.  Participants  would  be  able  to  know,  almost  in  real 
time, which transactions were settled. 
Make  efficient  use  of  the  liquidity  available  for  settlement,  both  in  terms  of 
securities and money. 
2. 
3. 
We knew from the models developed by Banco de México that it was possible to implement 
a system with such characteristics and, more importantly, that this would yield a first class 
securities settlement system. 
After  intensive  analysis,  testing  and  calibration,  and  with  the  valuable  assistance  of  the 
Instituto  Tecnológico  Autónomo  de  México  (ITAM),  Indeval  decided  to  use  the  model 
proposed  by  Banco  de  México  for  its  new,  ground  breaking  system,  DALÍ.  Today,  we  are 
very fortunate to have the first securities settlement system that offers multilateral netting and 
near real time settlement, with significant advantages for our financial market. 
We now have an outstanding securities settlement system that offers excellent services to 
investors, issuers and intermediaries, and generates trust in our financial system. We believe 
that the effort we all put into the design, development, and testing of DALÍ was well spent. 
I congratulate Indeval, and the staff from ITAM and Banco de México who participated in this 
project. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
