Mario Draghi: The culture of monetary stability from unification to the 
present day  
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the inauguration of the exhibition “The currency of united Italy: from lira to 
euro”, Palazzo delle Esposizioni, Rome, 4 April 2011. 
 The Bank of Italy is making a twofold contribution to the 150th anniversary of the Unification 
of Italy. With the collaboration of numerous experts from Italy and abroad, it is sponsoring a 
vast  research  project  –  entitled  Italy  and  the  World  Economy,  1861–2011  –  on  the  Italian 
economy’s response to the major changes in the international scenario that have taken place 
from  the  birth  of  the  unified  State  to  the  present  day.  The  results  of  this  research  will  be 
presented at a conference in Rome on 13, 14 and 15 October. 
For  the  wider  public,  and  particularly  for  young  people,  we  are  inaugurating  today  the 
exhibition on The currency of united Italy: from lira to euro. 
The thread that runs through the 150 years of Italian monetary history since unification draws 
together two fundamental events: the country’s monetary unification, which the newly formed 
Italy undertook in order to strengthen the foundations of its political unity; and, closer to our 
time,  Italy’s  participation  in  European  monetary  unification,  achieved  despite  the  lack  of 
political unity. 
This  story,  from  the  lira  to  the  euro,  illustrates  a  central  point  for  all  of  us  today  –  the 
importance of monetary stability and of a political and economic culture that recognizes its 
value. 
Guido Carli suggested a logical path to take. “If international competition”, he wrote in 1961, 
“is indeed the most powerful incentive towards our country’s economic development, there 
can be no doubt that, in turn, its strongest pillar is monetary stability. This, too, is a lesson 
handed  down  to  us  through  a  century  of  Italy’s  –  sometimes  painful  –  experiences  as  a 
nation state.”1 
The  concept  of  monetary  stability  changes  with  time,  alongside  the  technological  and 
institutional  conditions  that  determine  it.  Between  the  19th  and  20th  centuries,  Italy,  too, 
switched from a system in which money was made of, or could be converted into, precious 
metal to one based on purely fiat money. In the first system, monetary stability is ensured by 
maintaining  the  gold  convertibility  of  the  currency  at  a  fixed  parity.  By  and  large,  Italy 
managed  to  do  this:  on  the  eve  of  the  First  World  War,  despite  some  periods  of 
inconvertibility, the price index was at the same level as in 1861. This stability was regarded 
as the natural state of things. 
With  the  ascendancy  of  paper  money,  a  radical  institutional  overhaul  took  place  in  the 
monetary  field.  The  modern  central  bank  came  into  being,  and  standards,  rules  and 
organizations were established to manage a currency whose value was no longer anchored 
to that of a metal, but instead based entirely on trust. 
As early as 1839 Carlo Cattaneo warned, in his review Il Politecnico, that “paper money must 
not be issued except on behalf of the State, and that, with all the rigorousness and all the 
                                                 
1   Banca d’Italia (1961), Abridged version of the Report for the year 1960, “Concluding Remarks”, 111. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
solemnity of laws and fundamental orders, its quantity must be made proportionate to needs, 
that is, to the volume of transactions.”2 
It was not until 1893 that the Bank of Italy was founded, with the main task of centralizing the 
function  of  note  issuance,  which  until  then  had  been  distributed  among  six  local  banks.  It 
immediately  took  on  the  broad  role  of  guarantor  of  monetary  stability  and  centre  of  the 
financial  system.  In  the  words  of  Marco  Fanno,  it  becomes  “the  central  institution  around 
which the banking structure gravitates and on which it is hinged, …the body regulating the 
market, … the last line of defence to activate at times of grave difficulty.”3 
The suspension of the gold convertibility of banknotes during the First World War drew the 
attention of economists and economic policy makers directly to inflation, not in the old sense 
of increase in the stock of banknotes but in the modern sense of rise in the general price 
level.  The  value  of  money  lies  in  its  purchasing  power  and  therefore  inflation  means 
devaluation  of  the  currency.  Keeping  prices  down  –  although  still  instrumental  to  the  lira’s 
external convertibility – became the objective of economic policy under the new system of 
the gold exchange standard that prevailed after the War. 
Right after the Second World War the lira fell to a thirtieth of its pre-war value as a result of a 
flare-up  of  inflation,  extinguished  by  the  monetary  stabilization  engineered  by  Einaudi  and 
Menichella. Einaudi called for a concerted effort to avert “monetary unity’s destruction”.4 The 
laborious  task  of  rebuilding  confidence  in  the  currency,  and  thus  of  reconstituting  savings, 
was pursued with courageous determination, in the belief that the defence of the currency 
would create a solid basis for the country’s economic recovery. 
The  path  of  international  integration  was  followed  by  joining  the  Bretton  Woods  monetary 
system.  In  the  1950s  Italy  enjoyed  a  period  of  unprecedented  monetary  stability  and 
economic growth. The exchange rate with the dollar was stable, and remained so until 1971; 
for the first time the rate of inflation in Italy was in line with, if not lower than, that of the other 
leading European countries. 
The end of the Bretton Woods system at the beginning of the 1970s concluded the transition 
from  commodity  money  to  fiat  money.  Troubled  times  ensued:  international  economic 
relations were affected by deep shocks, such as the oil crises. During this passage Italy paid 
a high price in terms of loss of value of the lira: double-figure inflation eroded households’ 
purchasing  power  and  periodical  devaluations  gave  only  temporary  relief  to  a  productive 
system labouring to restore its efficiency and competitiveness. 
In the following decade the decision was taken to advance the construction of the European 
Community through the completion of the single market and, eventually, the Economic and 
Monetary  Union  and  the  euro.  Italy  took  a  leading  role,  responding  to  the  widespread 
aspiration of the nation. These prophetic words were pronounced by Carli at the beginning of 
the 1970s: “During Italy’s Risorgimento the European ideal was deeply engrained in the effort 
to achieve national unity, so that the two ideals were not seen as contradictory but as phases 
of a single process moving towards the expression of a culturally homogeneous community. 
Events  in  the  last  decades  have  given  a  sense  of  urgency  to  what  might  have  seemed  a 
utopian vision during the last century, so that the accomplishment of European unification is 
considered  an  indispensable  development  for  the  very  survival  of  the  values  embodied  in 
national ideals.”5 
                                                 
2   Carlo Cattaneo (1839), “Delle crisi finanziarie e della riforma del sistema monetario”, Il Politecnico, 1, June, 
548. 
3   Marco Fanno (1912), Le Banche e il Mercato Monetario, Athenaeum, Roma, 131 and 147. 
4   Banca  d’Italia  (1947),  Annual  Report  of  the  Governor  to  the  General  Meeting  of  Shareholders,  “Final 
Considerations”, 51. 
5   Bank of Italy (1973), Abridged version of the Report for the year 1972, “Concluding Remarks”, 222. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Today, there is reason to believe that the stability of the currency and of prices depends on 
the expectations of economic agents. These expectations are formed on the basis of such 
elements  as  the  clarity  and  certainty  of  the  rules  of  money  creation  and  the  reliability  and 
credibility of the institutions managing it. The establishment of a culture of monetary stability 
is crucial for this to become a virtuous circle. 
Luigi  Einaudi  believed  that  money  was  a  contract  between  economic  agents  and  that  its 
stability had to be built by educating them. As a young economist, in 1905 he undertook the 
translation into Italian of Walter Bagehot’s Lombard Street,6 the classic Anglo-Saxon text on 
monetary  stability,  certain  that  it  would  be  effective  also  in  forming  public  opinion.  As 
Governor he invented the medium of the Concluding Remarks to speak to the Italians, not 
just to the experts. Faced with the pernicious inflation route, in 1947 he claimed it was the 
right and the duty of the senior management of the Bank of Italy to issue “a cry of warning”, 
while at the same time loudly avowing that “it is a road we shall not take.”7  
In the last half century the Bank of Italy has indeed maintained this commitment to educate 
and inform with the publication of research papers by the Economic Research Department, 
public talks by senior management, and not infrequent contacts with universities and with the 
new  generations.  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  explained,  sixteen  years  ago,  that  a  central 
bank  contributes  to  monetary  stability  also  through  “a  constant  effort  of  information, 
education, and clarification that is part and parcel of defending the value of the currency.”8 
Nowadays, 
that  effective  communication  and  widespread 
understanding  of  monetary  matters  are  essential  for  the  success  of  their  monetary  policy 
strategy. The Eurosystem is committed to informing the markets and the public about how it 
thinks,  decides  and  acts.  This  is  also  a  way  of  keeping  price  expectations  stable over  the 
medium-to-long term. 
Now that monetary stability no longer hinges on the amount of precious metal available in the 
system, it relies on the credibility and technical expertise of the central banks. But the latter 
are powerless if the value of stability is not firmly ingrained in the collective consciousness. 
The objective of the exhibition we inaugurate today, and of the permanent museum that will 
later  take  its  place,  is  to  help  entrench  this  value,  which  is  a  common,  founding  legacy  of 
European citizenship. 
the  central  banks  know 
                                                 
6   Walter Bagehot (1905), Lombard Street – Il mercato monetario inglese (translation by Prof. L. Einaudi), Utet, 
Turin. 
7   Bank of Italy (1947), Relazione Annuale, “Considerazioni Finali”, 255. 
8   Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (1995), “La sicurezza monetaria e le banche centrali”, talk given at the Centro Alti 
Studi Difesa in Rome on 9 June 1995, published in the series Banca d’Italia – Documenti, 489, 9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
