Charles Bean: Central banking then and now 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the Sir Leslie Melville Lecture, Australian National University, Canberra, 12 July 2011. 
 Good  evening!  It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  invited  here  to  give  the  tenth  annual  lecture 
dedicated to the memory of Sir Leslie Melville. As you will all know, Sir Leslie had a most 
distinguished career, both in academia and as a public servant. Much of his working life was 
spent as Chief Economic Adviser to the Commonwealth Bank, the ancestor of the Reserve 
Bank of Australia, where he provided advice to the Board on monetary and exchange rate 
policy, and also to Prime Ministers and Treasurers on economic matters more generally. In 
passing,  I  should  record  that  Sir  Leslie’s  appointment  was  in  part  the  result  of  one  of  the 
Directors of the Bank of England, Otto Niemeyer, pressurising the Commonwealth Bank to 
break with tradition by recruiting a professional economist! Sir Leslie also played a key role in 
the founding of the post-war economic order, leading the Australian delegation to the Bretton 
Woods conference, where he earned the fulsome praise of Maynard Keynes, followed by a 
stint as Australia’s Executive Director at the new international institutions. And, of course, he 
spent almost a decade as the second Vice-Chancellor of this University. I think you can say 
that was a professional life lived to the full. 
Sir  Leslie’s  early  years  at  the  Commonwealth  Bank  were  spent  dealing  with  the  Great 
Depression, one of the great pathologies of economic history. I joined the Bank of England 
from academia a little  over a decade ago. While my first seven years turned out  to be an 
unusually tranquil period for the economy, the past four years have been anything but. So 
tonight, I thought I would discuss some of the lessons that I think central banks should draw 
from the Global Financial Crisis of 2007–8 and the subsequent Great Recession.  
The  distinctive  feature  of  a  central  bank  derives  from  its  role  as  the  monopoly  supplier  of 
outside money, comprising notes and coin and commercial banks’ reserve deposits. These 
constitute the ultimate settlement asset for an economy and mean that a central bank has a 
unique ability to create or destroy liquidity through the use of its balance sheet. The primary 
objective is to ensure that the supply of that liquidity is consistent with the smooth functioning 
of the real economy. From this follows the two core tasks of a central bank: the maintenance 
of broad stability in the price level, nowadays often enshrined in a formal numerical target for 
inflation;  and  supporting  the  process  of  financial  intermediation  during  times  of  stress, 
including  acting  as  Lender  of  Last  Resort  to  solvent,  though  temporarily  illiquid,  financial 
institutions. 
Of  course,  central  banks  sometimes  carry  out  other  tasks  too.  The  Bank  of  England,  for 
instance,  manages  the  government’s  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  used  to  manage  our 
national debt. And in some countries, central banks are responsible for banking supervision. 
But such tasks do not by their nature have to be carried out by the central bank. 
Charts  1  and  2  show  the  balance  sheets  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  US  Federal 
Reserve1 during the crisis. The near-tripling in size is striking, reflecting operations in pursuit 
of both the financial and monetary (price) stability objectives. Before the crisis, central banks 
provided predominantly short-term loans to banks against generally only the safest collateral, 
mainly highly-rated government debt. But when financial intermediaries found their sources 
of finance drying up, particularly after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, we began providing 
                                                 
1  The US Federal Reserve’s outright securities holdings before the initiation of large-scale asset purchases on 
18 March 2009 are included in the “Other” assets category and held constant at the level on this date for the 
remainder of the period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
larger loans, of longer tenors, against a wider range of collateral; the Federal Reserve also 
dealt with a broader range of counterparties. The same is true of the central banks of other 
countries caught up in the maelstrom, including here in Australia. 
This leads me to my first general lesson: in a crisis, central banks need to show flexibility. 
The  demand  for  many  of  these  support  programmes  wanes  naturally  as  conditions 
normalise, but the crisis has also prompted permanent changes in monetary frameworks. For 
instance, the Bank of England has introduced regular auctions of liquidity in which loans can 
be secured against either the safest collateral or, at a cost, a wider collateral set, including 
high-quality  private  securities.  An  increase  in  bids  offering  the  wider  collateral  as  security 
then provides an early warning of financial stress. And here, the Reserve Bank of Australia 
has also permanently widened the range of collateral it accepts.  
More recently, the movements in the size and composition of our respective balance sheets 
reflect  transactions  carried  out  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  especially  our  large-scale 
purchases of government debt (and, in the US case, also government-backed GSE debt and 
mortgage-backed  securities)  financed  by  the  issuance  of  reserves.  Commonly  called 
“quantitative easing”, I shall say more about the efficacy of these operations later. 
Before the crisis, central banks saw these two objectives of monetary and financial stability 
as largely complementary in nature. According to the conventional wisdom, the maintenance 
of  price  stability  would  help  foster  stable  macroeconomic  conditions  more  generally  by 
anchoring  expectations.  And  the  consequent  reduction  in  macroeconomic  volatility  should 
help  reduce  the  likelihood  of  episodes  of  financial  instability.  All  that  was  necessary,  then, 
was  to  ensure  that  banking  regulators  and  supervisors  ensured  individual  financial 
institutions followed appropriately responsible policies with regard to their lending decisions 
and were sufficiently well capitalised and all would be well. 
We  know  now  that  this  confidence  was  misplaced.  For  many  advanced  economies,  the 
decade  and  a  half  leading  up  to  the  financial  crisis  was  indeed  a  period  of  unusual 
macroeconomic stability, with low and stable inflation accompanied by steady growth – the 
Great  Moderation.  Inflation  targeting  and  similar  price-stability  oriented  monetary  policies 
appeared to have delivered the goods. But in a number of countries – most obviously the 
United  States,  but  also  including  Australia,  Ireland,  Spain  and  the  United  Kingdom  –  this 
period was also characterised by rapid credit growth and property price inflation, sowing the 
seeds of future problems (Chart 3).  
Now  many  factors  contributed  to  the  severity  of  the  subsequent  financial  crisis.  A 
non-exhaustive list includes: the development of complex securities which were impossible to 
value in stressed conditions and which connected financial institutions in unexpected ways; 
disguised leverage through the use of securitisation vehicles, whose real aim was regulatory 
arbitrage; remuneration packages encouraging positions that generated decent returns most 
of the time but high losses in some states of the world; excessive reliance on credit-rating 
agencies;  defective  risk  management;  and  insufficient  high-quality  capital  to  absorb  losses 
when they materialised. 
But  macroeconomic  conditions  possibly  also  played  a  part2.  Far  from  fostering  financial 
stability, the Great Moderation may itself have contributed to the build-up of credit and the 
adoption  of  risky  positions  by  leading  investors  to  underestimate  potential  macroeconomic 
risks.  And  commentators,  such  as  John  Taylor  (2009)  and  Bill  White  (2009)  have  blamed 
excessively loose monetary policy during the years leading up to the crisis. Low policy rates 
boost credit growth and asset prices in conventional accounts of the monetary transmission 
mechanism, but other work has also highlighted the potential for low safe interest rates to 
                                                 
2  The potential role of high global savings and the consequent downward pressure on long-term interest rates is 
another factor often mentioned (Bernanke, 2005). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
encourage  a  shift  into  riskier  assets  (for  example  Claudio  Borio  and  Haibin  Zhu,  2008)3. 
While the contribution of monetary policy to the crisis is controversial – I shall say a bit more 
on this later – I find plausible the idea that the long period of relative macroeconomic stability 
lulled investors into a false state of security. 
This leads to my second lesson from the crisis: the achievement of price stability does not 
guarantee the maintenance of financial stability and, without further measures, may possibly 
even compromise it. 
My next lesson follows on from this and relates to deficiencies in our analytical framework. 
The canonical macroeconomic model for thinking about the design of monetary policy is that 
of  the  New  Keynesian  synthesis  (see  Richard  Clarida,  Jordi  Gali,  and  Mark  Gertler,  1999; 
Michael Woodford, 2003). This focuses on the consequences of real and nominal rigidities in 
goods  and  labour  markets,  which  give  rise  to  a  short-run  trade-off  between  inflation  and 
activity.  The  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium  models  in  use  in  many  central  banks 
typically embody this synthesis, though usually with quite a few knobs and whistles added 
on. Moreover, the optimal monetary policy in these models looks rather like flexible inflation 
targeting:  the  central  bank  aims  to  offset  completely  shocks  to  aggregate  demand,  but 
accepts temporary movements in inflation in the face of shocks to supply so as to limit the 
volatility in output. 
Financial intermediaries are conspicuous by their absence in these models. That is not to say 
that  mainstream  macroeconomists  and  monetary  policy  makers 
financial 
considerations  altogether.  It  had  been  long  understood  that  financial  frictions  could  affect 
both  the  evolution  of  the  economy  and  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  But  these 
frictions typically served merely as modest amplification and propagation mechanisms, rather 
than  a  potential  source  of  fundamental  disturbance  to  the  economy.  One  example  is  the 
“financial accelerator” arising from monitoring costs which give rise to a relationship between 
the  external  finance  premium  paid  by  a  borrower  and  their  financial  health  (see  Ben 
Bernanke,  1983).  The  behaviour  of  intermediaries  was  thus  seen  as  being  of  marginal 
relevance to the understanding of macroeconomic fluctuations. And many analyses ignored 
financial  imperfections  altogether,  assuming  that  that  the  transfer  of  funds  from  savers  to 
borrowers was both frictionless and efficient. 
To  see  why  the  behaviour  of  financial  intermediaries  is  potentially  so  important,  note  that 
most  financial  crises  have  been  characterised  by  two  features.  The  first  is  an  excessive 
expansion of credit during the prelude to a crisis, perhaps prompted in the first instance by 
some  innovation4  or  other  beneficial  economic  development.  The  second  is  a  mismatch 
between  the  maturities  and/or  currencies  of  the  assets  and  liabilities  on  either  side  of  the 
balance sheet. 
Consider  a  simplified  bank  balance  sheet,  shown  in  Chart  4,  with  the  bank’s  holdings  of 
loans,  securities  and  reserves  financed  by  a  mixture  of:  (insured)  deposits;  other  debt  of 
various forms, including borrowing from other financial institutions collateralised against the 
bank’s assets, repurchase agreements, unsecured bank debt; and finally equity capital. This 
last  category  is  the  initial  absorber  of  unexpected  losses  and  is  a  key  determinant  of 
sustainable balance sheet size and thus of the supply of credit to the economy. That is, by 
the  way,  rather  different  from  the  standard  textbook  model,  in  which  banks’  holdings  of 
reserves and loans are financed solely by deposits and the size of the bank’s balance sheet 
ignored 
                                                 
3  This  could  come  about  through:  conventional  asset  substitution;  an  attempt  by  investors,  such  as  pension 
funds, to maintain returns in order to match their commitments (Raghuram Rajan, 2005); or a movement down 
the risk spectrum as banks expand loans in order to maintain leverage as the value of their existing assets, 
and therefore also of bank equity, rises (Tobias Adrian and Hyun Shin, 2009). 
4  Though Adam Posen (2010) notes that equity booms precipitated by technological innovations are typically 
less costly than real estate booms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
is 
than 
finance 
long-term 
it  wishes 
to  restore 
that  degree  of 
typically  cheaper 
leverage  (in  practice,  a  deterioration 
is  determined  by  the  product  of  its  holdings  of  reserves  and  the  money  multiplier.  Since 
short-term 
finance,  profit-maximising 
intermediaries  have  an  incentive  to  finance  their  illiquid  long-term  loans  by  potentially 
footloose short-term debt, relying on their ability to roll that debt over when it matures, or to 
find similar alternative funding sources. Moreover, the recent episode was also marked by 
increased reliance on short-term wholesale funding, which proved more prone to flight than 
traditional retail deposits.  
Now suppose that the returns on the bank’s loans turn out less than expected or the value of 
its  securities  falls.  That  could  be  the  result  of  a  macroeconomic  shock  or  just  reflect  a 
correction  to  initially  over-optimistic  expectations.  Then  the  bank’s  net  worth  also  falls, 
reducing the buffer available to cover any further unexpected losses, potentially raising the 
costs  of  unsecured  debt.  Moreover,  the  collateral  available  to  back  secured  debt  also 
shrinks.  
Suppose the bank initially held assets worth fifteen times the value of its equity and assume 
that 
in 
macroeconomic  conditions  might  also  lead  to  lower  desired  leverage).  Then  the  bank  is 
faced with either reducing its assets or increasing its equity. If it pursues the former strategy, 
then it would need to reduce its assets by fifteen times the amount by which its capital has 
fallen. Moreover, by depressing the prices of those assets, such a fire sale also impairs the 
balance sheets of other banks, amplifying the effect of the shock. The same is true if banks 
seek  to  repair  their  balance  sheets  by  cutting  back  on  the  extension  of  credit:  less  credit 
implies lower activity and greater loan losses. Fire sales and credit crunches can thus greatly 
amplify a financially-driven downturn. Both played a role in the latest crisis.  
Assuming  that  policymakers  are  not  actively  seeking  a  reduction  in  the  supply  of  credit, 
shrinking  the  balance  sheet  leads  to  an  unsatisfactory  outcome  from  a  macroeconomic 
perspective. Injecting additional equity capital would be preferable. But while banks may be 
prepared  to  do  this  over  time,  by  cutting  dividends  to  shareholders  or  reducing  staff 
compensation, they are typically reluctant to raise new capital directly in such circumstances. 
In part, that is because the benefits of extra capital accrue initially to existing debt holders 
who will consequently be less likely to suffer losses. Moreover, investors may see additional 
injections  of  capital  as a  signal  that  the  bank  is  in  difficulties.  In  sum,  there  is  a  collective 
action problem, to which mandatory stress tests coupled with forced re-capitalisation is one 
possible solution. 
So  my  third  lesson  is:  financial  intermediation  needs  to  be  brought  into  mainstream 
macroeconomic analysis.  
That  such  a  lesson  should  even  be  necessary  may  be  somewhat  surprising  giving  the 
frequency of financial crises around the globe in recent years; see Chart 5 taken from the 
work  of  Rong  Qian,  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Ken  Rogoff  (2010).  Introducing  –  or  rather 
re-introducing – financial considerations to the analysis of macroeconomic fluctuations would 
also be returning the study of the business cycle to its historical roots. 
This task is already well under way in academia and I suspect the field of macroeconomics 
will look very different in a decade or so. We are, though, still in the foothills. But to give a 
broad-brush  flavour  of  how  financial  intermediaries  might  affect  things,  we  can  look  to  the 
graphical extension of the New Keynesian model offered by Woodford (2010). 
The  left-hand  panel  of  Chart  6  shows  the  demand  for  funds  from  ultimate  borrowers,  LB, 
together with the total supply of loanable funds from savers, LS. The former is a decreasing 
function of the cost of borrowing, RB, while the latter is an increasing function of the return on 
savings, R. For simplicity, I shall take this to be the return on deposits and the same as the 
central bank’s policy rate. The marginal source of funds to intermediaries, however, is likely 
to be in the wholesale markets and, if unsecured, these will need to offer a higher return to 
compensate for the associated default risk. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the standard model with costless financial intermediation, the loanable funds market clears 
at  A  and  the  borrowing  and  saving  rates  are  equal.  If  intermediation  is  costly,  however,  a 
spread, S, opens up between the two and the volume of loans will be lower, at L. Relating L 
to this spread then generates a demand for intermediated funds as a decreasing function of 
the spread: the XD schedule in the right-hand panel of Chart 6. 
To determine the value of this spread, we then need a model of the supply of intermediation 
services,  XS.  Given  our  earlier  discussion,  this  is  just  the  net  worth  of  the  intermediaries 
multiplied  by  their  desired  leverage.  Desired  leverage  is,  in  turn,  likely  to  be  higher  the 
greater is the spread between the return on investments and the cost of funds. It is also likely 
to be lower the greater the degree of uncertainty about the environment. So the schedule will 
be  upward  sloping,  and  lie  further  to  the  right,  the  higher  is  bank  capital.  Moreover,  the 
schedule should be flat for low levels of leverage, as the prospect of bank creditors losing 
money  is  then  negligible  and  the  spread  just  needs  to  cover  the  actual  costs  of 
intermediation,  such  as  running  a  branch  network.  But  as  leverage  rises,  so  there  is  an 
increasing risk of loss to creditors and the interest rate paid to the suppliers of unsecured 
bank  debt  needs  to  reflect  that.  If  the  state  is  believed  to  guarantee  all  bank  debts,  then 
XS will be flat. Finally the schedule will become vertical when the capital ratio, which in this 
simple set-up is just the inverse of the leverage ratio, reaches its regulatory minimum. The 
equilibrium spread is given by the point of intersection, B. 
During the upswing phase of a credit/asset-price boom, perceptions of macroeconomic risk 
tend to be low. Moreover, rises in asset prices also boost bank net worth. In sum, the health 
of the banking system is not in doubt and the upward sloping part of the XS schedule will 
tend  to  be  a  long  way  out  to  the  right.  But  when  the  boom  turns  to  bust,  the  associated 
unexpected  losses  lead  to  falls  in  bank  equity,  reducing  the  supply  of  credit.  Moreover, 
people’s  subjective  perception  of  the  macroeconomic  risk  blows  out,  reducing  desired 
leverage. The XS schedule moves inwards, to XS’, while the equilibrium spread rises to S’. 
That in turn pushes the rates of return on savings down to R’ and the cost of borrowing up to 
RB’ and the volume of loans down to L’. The fire sale externalities referred to earlier can then 
greatly amplify this contraction in credit supply by generating further losses in the net worth 
of intermediaries. 
The consequences of all this for output are shown in Chart 7. On the usual assumption that 
savers  save  a  fraction  of  any  increase  in  income,  the  supply  of  funds  from  savers  will  be 
increasing in output, generating the usual downward-sloping relationship between output and 
the  policy  rate,  IS.  Its  location,  however,  also  depends  on  the  spread,  S,  with  the  boom 
phase of the credit cycle leading IS to shift outwards and the bust phase shifting IS inwards. 
To  complete  the  story,  we  just  need  to  add  a  description  of  monetary  policy.  Assuming 
inflation starts off at target, an inflation targeting central bank will seek to hold the level of 
demand at potential, so monetary policy is described by MP. In the face of a credit boom, the 
central bank would then raise the interest rate to negate the expansionary effect on demand, 
and  cut  it  in  the  face  of  a  credit  bust.  The  corresponding  aggregate  demand  schedule, 
incorporating  the  endogenous  policy  response,  is  given  by  AD  in  the  right-hand  panel, 
together with a conventional upward-sloping aggregate supply schedule, AS; for simplicity, I 
ignore the possible impact on the supply of goods of changes in the price and availability of 
credit. 
A  central  implication  of  this  analysis  is  that  while  it  suffices  to  think  in  terms  of  a  single 
representative interest rate in normal conditions, in times of stress the whole set of market 
rates need to be considered. Consequently, movements in  the policy rate alone no longer 
provide  an  accurate  summary  measure  of  monetary  conditions.  The  importance  of  this  is 
illustrated in Chart 8, which shows the recent paths of the policy rate in the United States and 
the United Kingdom, together with representative measures of the cost of bank debt and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
corporate loan rate5. Before the crisis, the policy rate and marginal cost of funds were close 
together,  with  the  spread  of  the  loan  rate  above  funding  cost  reflecting  the  cost  of 
intermediation and the default risk. The onset of the crisis then pushed both market rates up 
relative  to  the  policy  rate  as  concerns  about  the  solvency  of  financial  intermediaries  rose. 
Focusing  on  the  policy  rate  alone  overstates  the  degree  to  which  the  effective  monetary 
stance loosened in the wake of the collapse of Lehman’s. 
A corollary of this, together with the severity and the duration of the downturn, is that policy is 
more likely to be constrained by the zero lower bound than previously thought. Ahead of the 
crisis,  simulations  with  macroeconomic  models  suggested  that,  with  an  inflation  target  of 
2 per cent, the zero lower bound would bind around 10 per cent of the time. The costs of this 
were pretty modest, however, because such episodes were likely to be short in duration (see 
e.g. David Reifschneider and John Williams, 2000). That analysis looks less persuasive now. 
Indeed a study by Williams (2009) suggests the ideal level of the US Federal Funds rate after 
the collapse of Lehman’s would have been around minus 4 per cent6 and puts the cost of this 
constraint – ignoring the scope for other policies – at around $1.8 trillion over 2009–2012. 
Other  policies  are,  of  course,  available.  In  the  monetary  sphere,  that  takes  the  form  of 
purchases from the private sector of longer-term public and private securities, financed by 
issuing claims on the central bank. As we saw in Charts 1 and 2, both the Bank of England 
and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  have  made  substantial  large-scale  asset  purchases,  worth 
about 15% of GDP in each case. The aim of such purchases is to drive down the yields on 
these  and  similar  assets  by  increasing  their  scarcity,  so  boosting  demand.  Commonly 
referred  to  as  “quantitative  easing”,  the  moniker  is  somewhat  misleading  as  it  focuses 
attention  on  the  associated  reserve  expansion,  rather  than  the  change  in  the  portfolio 
composition of the central bank and private sector. 
But do they work? Under Ricardian equivalence the answer would be No, as the associated 
transfer  of  risks  from  private  sector  balance  sheets  onto the  public  sector’s  is  matched  by 
offsetting  movements  in  future  taxes  (Gauti  Eggertson  and  Woodford,  2003).  Be  that  as  it 
may, event studies by Joe Gagnon and others (2010) for the United States, and Mike Joyce 
and  others  (2010)  for  the  United  Kingdom  suggest  that  long-term  bond  rates  in  each 
jurisdiction fell by around 100 basis points as a result of the purchase programmes, though 
the ultimate impact on aggregate demand is harder to judge. 
From this I draw my fourth lesson: central banks do not run out of ammunition when policy 
rates reach their zero lower bound. 
Despite that, as we have seen only too clearly, it is next to impossible to stabilise activity in 
the face of a financial crisis, as indebted households, businesses and intermediaries all seek 
to  de-leverage  simultaneously.  Moreover,  the  upswing  of  the  credit  cycle  is  frequently 
associated  with  an  increase  in  lending  to  purchase  assets,  especially  property;  that  was 
certainly 
investment  or 
construction boom – as was the case in the United States, Ireland and Spain – the result is a 
capital overhang that needs to be worked off. There are welfare gains from avoiding such 
capital misallocation. 
That leads naturally to my fifth lesson: prevention is better than cure. 
the  consequence 
this  occasion. 
true  on 
is  an 
If 
                                                 
5  The marginal funding cost is the three-month Libor plus the average of the five-year CDS premia of the major 
banks.  The  corporate  loan  rate  is  the  three-month  Libor  plus  the  average  of  the  spread  on  sub-investment 
grade syndicated loans. 
If no other policies were available, then one might be tempted to conclude that the inflation target should just 
be higher in normal times, as advocated by Olivier Blanchard, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia and Paolo Mauro (2010). 
By ignoring the other policies that are available to deal with, and prevent, financial crises, to my mind this is 
giving up too easily. 
6 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But how best to do that? Could a different choice of monetary policies have led to a better 
outcome? Ahead of the crisis, there was a robust debate on whether monetary policy should 
seek  to  moderate  credit/asset-price  booms  as  well  as  maintain  low  inflation.  On  the  one 
hand,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  others  (e.g.  Bill  White,  2006;  Stephen 
Cecchetti et al., 2002) argued that policy should be set tighter than justified by the inflation 
outlook so as to “lean against the wind”. On the other hand, Chairman Greenspan and others 
at  the  Federal  Reserve  (Alan  Greenspan,  2002;  Bernanke  et  al.,  1999)  advocated  only 
responding to such events in so far as they affected the immediate macroeconomic outlook, 
but acting aggressively to stabilise markets in the event of a correction, sometimes referred 
to as “cleaning”. The Fed broadly followed such a policy during the dot-com boom-bust. 
Before the crisis, I stood some way between these two positions (Bean, 2003). On the one 
hand, a policy of leaning against the wind is perfectly consistent with the practice of flexible 
inflation  targeting  once  it  is  recognised  that  financial  instability  usually  results  in  a  sharp 
contraction  in  demand  and  potential  disinflationary  pressure.  Undershooting  the  inflation 
target in the near term could then enhance the chances of success further out. On the other 
hand, there are practical obstacles to the implementation of a “leaning” policy. In particular, 
such a policy involves accepting lower output in the short term in return for uncertain future 
gains and also runs the risk of precipitating the very collapse one is seeking to avoid. 
The severity of the recession might appear to tilt the argument in favour of “leaning”, but the 
question  still  arises  as  to  how  effective  such  a  policy  would  have  been  in  restraining  the 
boom in credit and property prices and at what cost to activity. Together with colleagues from 
the Bank (Bean et al, 2010), I recently attempted to investigate this question using simple 
vector autoregressive models of the US and UK economies. I will refer you to the paper for 
the details, but Table 1 shows the results of counterfactual simulations of a pretty aggressive 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  policy,  in  which  the  policy  rate  is  held  around  200  basis  points 
higher over the 2003–2006 period. 
The  simulations  suggest  that  the  peak  in  real  house  prices  would  have  been  about 
7½% lower in the United States and some 20% lower in the United Kingdom. The impact on 
the stock of credit is, though, more modest: just 3–4% lower by the end of 2006. Moreover, 
the cumulative impact on activity is considerable, with output around 3% lower by the time 
the crisis begins. Clearly, then, the terms of trade for controlling the risks to financial stability 
through monetary policy alone do not look very favourable: even substantially higher interest 
rates  over  a  sustained  period  would  not  have  prevented  the  crisis.  A  similar  conclusion  is 
reached by Bernanke (2010) and Carmen Reinhart and Vince Reinhart (2011). 
Moreover, restricting domestic credit expansion will not serve if the cross-border activities of 
banks result in their most vulnerable exposures originating overseas. That, of course, was 
the case in the present crisis, where the main losses to UK and European banks arose from 
holdings  of  securities  linked  to  the  behaviour  of  the  US  housing  market.  On  top  of  that,  a 
unilateral  increase  in  interest  rates  may  well  end  up  having  a  perverse  effect  on  credit 
growth,  because  it  sucks  in  capital  flows  from  abroad  to  take  advantage  of  the  interest 
differential,  so  boosting  the  real  exchange  rate  and  adding  to  the  supply  of  funding  to  the 
banking sector. 
The  obvious  conclusion  is  that  one  needs  to  look  to  other  instruments  –  so-called 
macroprudential  regulation  –  which  act  directly  against  the  expansion  in  credit  during  the 
upswing  and  limit  the  contraction  in  any  bust;  in  other  words  they  stabilise  the  supply  of 
intermediation schedule, XS. Given our earlier discussion, an obvious way to do this is by 
raising capital requirements on banks, thus improving their resilience, during the upswing of 
the  credit  cycle  and  reducing  them  during  the  subsequent  downswing,  allowing  banks  to 
maintain the supply of financial services. The new Basel III agreement on capital and liquidity 
regulation makes specific provision for such a countercyclical capital buffer of up to 2.5% of 
risk-weighted  assets  on  top  of  the  increased  base  Core  Tier  1  capital  ratio  of  7%,  i.e.  a 
potential increase in capital requirements of more than a third. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Capital requirements and leverage constraints both affect the overall size of banks’ balance 
sheets. But credit booms and busts are often associated with excessive lending to particular 
risky segments of the market. So instruments to affect the composition of balance sheets are 
also potentially useful, for instance through selective variation in the risk weights applied to 
the  calculation  of  capital  ratios.  Quantitative  controls  applying  to  particular  sorts  of  loans, 
such  as  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  on  mortgages  are  another  option,  as  are  minimum 
haircuts  on  repo  and  similar  financial  transactions  between  intermediaries.  Finally,  since 
excessive  maturity  mismatch  is  an  aggravating  feature  of  financial  crises,  banks  could  be 
asked to increase their holdings of reliably liquid assets as the risk of instability builds, in an 
analogous fashion to the capital buffer. 
Macroprudential policies are sometimes described as the missing instrument, but in reality 
many of these tools are familiar to regulators and there is already international experience in 
their application, often from emerging economies (though in some cases their application has 
been  aimed  at  restraining  aggregate  demand  rather  than  reducing  the  risk  of  financial 
instability). Indeed, the Australian experience nearly a decade ago is a prime example. Over 
2002 and 2003, house prices here rose nearly 40 per cent, stimulated in part by changes in 
the tax treatment of housing, increased competition in credit markets and the attainment of a 
low inflation macroeconomic environment; alongside this, there was a similarly rapid rate of 
expansion in mortgage lending (see Chart 3). APRA started signalling its concerns to bank 
executives  during  2002  and  in  2004  went  on  to  increase  the  capital  requirements  on 
uninsured  “Low  Doc”  loans.  More  generally,  APRA  seems  to  have  been  quite  strict  in 
ensuring  that  loan  origination  standards  were  maintained  and  banks  made  prudent 
provisions for losses. This robust regulatory response was complemented by a slightly tighter 
monetary  stance  and  numerous  “open-mouth  operations”  by  the  RBA  highlighting  the 
growing risks in the housing and credit markets. The effect of these actions was to take some 
of the steam out of the housing market and ensure that banks were in a better position to 
withstand  the  global  financial  crisis  when  it  finally  broke.  (For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the 
Australian experience, see Paul Bloxham, Christopher Kent and Michael Robson, 2011.) 
Other examples of macroprudential regulation in action include: successive increases in risk 
weights on commercial and residential property loans by the Reserve Bank of India during 
2005–8; dynamic provisioning after 2000 in Spain; and quantitative constraints on mortgage 
lending in Hong Kong in 1994. There are several other instances. Like Molière’s M. Jourdain, 
some have been speaking prose all along; the rest of us just need to catch up. 
The evidence suggests the effectiveness of these tools is, though, variable and we should 
therefore not expect too much from them (see Committee on the Global Financial System, 
2010). Bankers have every incentive to figure out ways to circumvent regulatory constraints 
and, if the restraints on behaviour are deemed onerous, activity is likely to shift outside the 
regulatory perimeter. It may be possible to design policies which embed incentives to comply 
rather  than  evade,  and  smart  supervision  can  help.  But  there  could  be  occasions  when 
tighter monetary policy is the only way to reach those parts of the financial system beyond 
the  reach  of  regulation.  In  such  cases,  if  other  policies  are  not  available,  then  “leaning 
against the wind” may be the only option left. 
As the simple analytical framework used earlier makes clear, tighter monetary policy reduces 
both aggregate demand and credit supply, while tighter regulatory policies do the same. But 
the empirical evidence suggests the impact of interest rates on credit is generally relatively 
weak,  while  capital  and  liquidity  regulation  have  a  very  direct  impact  on  leverage  and 
maturity transformation and thus on the resilience of the financial system. 
 So my sixth lesson is: both monetary and regulatory policies are required to maintain price 
and  financial  stability;  moreover,  monetary  policy  should  remain  focused  on  the  control  of 
inflation, while regulatory policies should be assigned to maintaining financial stability. 
Much  is  sometimes  made  of  the  risk  of  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  pulling  in 
opposite directions if they are assigned to different agencies. Most of the time this should not 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
happen,  as  both  aggregate  demand  and  credit  market  shocks  will  tend  to  push  the  two 
policies in the same direction. Differential movements are more likely to arise in the face of 
supply disturbances. For instance, a beneficial supply shock will tend to push inflation below 
target,  warranting  a  looser  monetary  policy,  while  it  may  also  encourage  a  credit  boom, 
warranting  tighter  macroprudential  policies.  But  in  any  case,  it  is  not  clear  that  is  such  a 
problem. The instruments address different distortions, so one should expect them to move 
in different directions from time to time. Moreover, it is likely that the regulatory dials will be 
adjusted  much  less  frequently  than  policy  rates,  so  co-ordination  should  not  be  that 
significant an issue7.  
My  concluding  observations  relate  to  the  broader  context  within  which  macroprudential 
policies are conducted. Credit booms are times when everyone feels good and risks seem 
slight.  Taking  the  credit  punch  bowl  away  before  the  party  gets  out  of  hand  will  be 
controversial, and banks and borrowers will be quick to claim “this time is different”. That is a 
good  reason  for  delegation  to  a  separate  committee  or  agency  with  a  longer  perspective, 
much  as  we  do  with  monetary  policy.  Even  so,  the  pressures  not  to  take  action  may  be 
intense. 
Making macroprudential policies rule-based would be one response. But whereas measures 
of credit and leverage may together serve as useful portmanteau guides to latent risks in the 
financial  system,  a  considerable  degree  of  discretion  is  likely  to  be  called  for.  So  a  rigid 
linkage  of  macroprudential  instruments  to  such  indicator  variables  seems  inappropriate.  In 
the  monetary  policy  sphere,  we  have  the  luxury  of  precisely  defined  measure  of  inflation 
against which the rationale for policy choices can be made. Unfortunately, we presently lack 
a  similarly  precise  characterisation  of 
financial  stability  objective,  so  effective 
communication will be even more important than in the monetary sphere. 
Tonight  I  have  offered  you  six  lessons  that  I  have  taken  from  the  crisis,  though  they  are 
certainly  not  intended  to  comprise  an  exhaustive  list.  Moreover,  some  of  us  had  more  to 
learn than others. Here in Australia you have had a relatively “good” crisis – if that is not an 
oxymoron  –  in  part  because  robust  prudential  supervision,  coupled  with  enlightened 
monetary  policy,  helped  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  was  in  a  better  position  to 
withstand the crisis than back in my own country. There the government has initiated reforms 
that  seek  to  embed  some  of  the  lessons  into  the  institutional  framework.  These  include 
returning  prudential  supervision  to  the  central  bank  and  the  creation  of  a  Financial  Policy 
Committee charged with protecting and enhancing the resilience of the UK financial system. 
We had our first meeting last month, issuing half a dozen recommendations to our banking 
supervisor and to our banks. We are, though, conscious that we still have much to learn in 
operating this new framework, including from the experience of others. 
I do not know what Sir Leslie would have made of the Global Financial Crisis and the Great 
Recession. But I think we can take it for granted that he would have risen to the challenge of 
preventing a repetition. That is a challenge future central bankers must also aspire to meet. 
Apparently there is an old Chinese curse that wishes “interesting times” on the recipient. The 
past  four  years  have,  I  am  afraid,  been  rather  more  “interesting”  than  I  would  have  liked. 
Times will no doubt continue to be interesting, but let us hope in the English, rather than the 
Chinese sense. Thank you! 
the 
                                                 
7  This is analogous to the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy, where the fiscal authority is in effect 
a Stackelberg leader. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
References 
 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun S. Shin (2009). “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy”, 
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99, 600–605. 
 
Bean, Charles R. (2003). “Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are 
Inflation Targets Enough?” in Anthony Richards and Timothy Robinson (eds.) Asset Prices 
and Monetary Policy, 48–76. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney. 
 
Bean, Charles R., Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Timothy Taylor (2010). 
“Monetary Policy after the Fall” in Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
 
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of 
the Great Depression”, American Economic Review, 73, 257–276. 
 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). “The Global Saving Glut and the US Current Account Deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, 10 March. 
 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010). “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, speech to the 
American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, 3 January. 
 
Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999). “The Financial Accelerator in 
a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework“, in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.) 
Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume 1, 1341–1393. Elsevier: Amsterdam. 
 
Blanchard,  Olivier,  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Paolo  Mauro  (2010).  “Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy”, mimeo, International Monetary Fund, January. 
 
Bloxham,  Paul  Christopher  Kent  and  Michael  Robson  (2011).  “Asset  Prices,  Credit 
Growth,  Monetary  and  Other  Policies:  An  Australian  Case  Study”,  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research Working Paper 16845. 
 
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2008). “Capital regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary 
Policy: A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism”, Bank for International Settlements 
Working Paper No.268. 
 
Cecchetti, Stephen, Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002). “Asset Prices in a 
Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework”, in William Hunter, George Kaufman and Michael 
Pomerleano, eds., Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory and 
International Policies, 427–444. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA. 
 
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999). “The Science of Monetary Policy: A 
New Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37,1661–1707. 
 
Committee on the Global Financial System (2010). “Macroprudential Instruments and 
Frameworks: A Stocktaking of the Issues and Experiences”, 
http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs38.pdf. 
 
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates 
and Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 139–211. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010). “Large-scale 
Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, Staff Report No.441. 
 
Greenspan, Alan (2002) “Opening Remarks” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, 1–10. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas: Kansas City. 
 
Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens and Matthew Tong (2010). “The Financial 
Market Impact of Quantitative Easing,” Bank of England Working Paper No.393. 
 
Posen, Adam S. (2010). “Do We Know What We Need to Know in order to Lean against the 
Wind?”, speech to the Cato Institute, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech462.pdf. 
 
Qian, Rong, Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2010). “On Graduation From 
Default, Inflation And Banking Crisis: Elusive Or Illusion?”, National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper 16168. 
 
Rajan, Raghuram G. (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?”, in The 
Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, 313–370. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: 
Kansas City. 
 
Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy 
in a Low Inflation Era”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32(4), 936–966. 
 
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Vince Reinhart (2011). “Pride Goes before a Fall: Federal 
Reserve Policy and Asset Markets”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 
16815. 
 
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2011). 
Taylor, John B. (2009). “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical 
Analysis of What Went Wrong”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 
14631. 
 
White, William R. (2006). “Is Price Stability Enough?”, Bank for International Settlements 
Working Paper 205. 
 
White, William R. (2009). “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean’?”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Dallas Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 34. 
 
Williams, John C. (2009). “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1–50. 
 
Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. 
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ. 
 
Woodford, Michael (2010). “Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis”, Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, 24(4), 21–44. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Central Banking Then And Now
Sir Leslie Melville Lecture
Australian National University, Canberra 
Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy
12 July 2011
 Chart 1: Bank of England balance sheet
Liabilities
Assets 
Reserves
Draining operations
Other
Currency
£ billions
300
QE
£ billions
300
Long-term repos
Short-term repos
Other
250
200
150
100
50
0
250
200
150
100
50
0
Mar-07
Mar-08
Mar-09
Mar-10
Mar-11
Mar-07
Mar-08
Mar-09
Mar-10
Mar-11
 Chart 2: Federal Reserve balance sheet
Liabilities
Assets 
Reserves
Draining operations
Other
Currency
$ billions
3000
QE
Currency swaps 
Other loans
Repo
Other
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
$ billions
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Mar-07
Mar-08
Mar-09
Mar-10
Mar-11
Mar-07
Mar-08
Mar-09
Mar-10
Mar-11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3: Credit and asset prices
Total credit
Real house prices
Index; 2002 = 100
Australia
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Index;  1997 = 100
Australia
Spain
United Kingdom
United States
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
  Chart 4: Simplified bank balance sheet
Liabilities
Deposits
Debt – secured
unsecured
repo
Assets
Loans
Securities
Equity
Reserves
 Chart 5: 200 years of financial crises
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
  Chart 6: Loanable funds market
Interest rate
RB'
RB
            S'         S
R
R'
     L'     L
Spread
           LS
A
S'
S
  LB
Loans
XS'
B
XS
XD
B'
L'
L 
Loans
Chart 7: Output and inflation
Policy rate
    MP
Inflation
R
R'
             C
           C'
      AS
     AD
  IS
              IS'
     Y*
Output
      Y*
Output
 Chart 8: Interest rates and monetary conditions 
UK
Estimate of banks' 
marginal funding cost
Per cent
Estimate of 
corporate loan
rate
Policy rate
US
Estimate of  banks' 
marginal funding cost
Per cent
10
Estimate of 
corporate loan
rate
8
6
4
2
0
Policy rate
10
8
6
4
2
0
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Table 1: A Leaning Against the Wind (LATW) Policy
Real Stock of Credit
(% change from 
Real House Prices
(% change from 
2003Q1) 
2003Q1)
Output
(% change from 
2003Q1)
Base
LATW Base
LATW Base
LATW
United States
12.2
2005Q1
2007Q1
28.1
United Kingdom
21.1
2005Q1
2007Q1
45.3
10.5
23.9
19.7
39.7
10.0
12.1
18.3
15.0
7.6
12.5
5.5
11.6
6.3
9.0
4.7
9.0
 13.8
22.2
26.7
43.0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
