Narayana Kocherlakota: Communication, credibility and implementation 
– some thoughts on current, past and future monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  National  Association  of  State  Treasurers,  Bismarck,  North  Dakota, 
30 August 2011. 
 I  thank  Doug  Clement,  David  Fettig,  Terry  Fitzgerald,  Bernabe  Lopez-Martin  and  Kei-Mu  Yi  for  many  helpful 
thoughts and comments. 
As  you  just  heard,  I’m  the  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis.  The 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of the 12 regional Reserve banks that, along 
with the Board of Governors, make up the Federal Reserve System. The Minneapolis bank is 
the headquarters of the System’s operations in the ninth of the 12 districts. This district is a 
far-flung  one  that  includes  Montana,  the  Dakotas,  Minnesota,  northwestern  Wisconsin  and 
the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.  
One of the aspects of my job that I enjoy most is the opportunity to visit communities across 
the Ninth District. I have had the pleasure of traveling to each state in the district in my nearly 
two years as president, but this is my first trip to Bismarck in that time. I want to express my 
thanks to the National Association of State Treasurers for this invitation. I also want to extend 
my  thanks  to  the  area  business  and  civic  leaders  who  have  taken  time  from  their  busy 
schedules to meet with me today to discuss the area’s economic conditions, as well as those 
who will join me later this afternoon to tour areas hit by this year’s Missouri River flooding.  
The flooding experienced by North Dakota communities – most notably along the Missouri 
and Souris rivers, but also along other state waterways – has dealt an unfortunate economic 
setback  to  many  cities  in  a  state  that  has  otherwise  experienced  very  good  economic 
outcomes in recent years. We have been monitoring the economic impact of the 2011 floods 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and will continue to do so, in North Dakota as 
well  as  Montana  and  South  Dakota.  It  will  be  some  time  before  we  have  a  complete 
reckoning of all associated costs. 
However,  one  thing  seems  certain:  The  same  cooperative  attitude  and  resilience  that  has 
characterized communities’ responses to the flooding suggests that their recovery will be a 
strong  one.  In  his  History  of  North  Dakota,  Elwyn  B.  Robinson  cites  a  late-19th  century 
British statesman, who described the prevailing spirit of optimism of the people who settled 
west of the Mississippi River: “Men seem to live in the future rather than in the present: not 
that they fail to work while it is called for to-day, but they see the country not merely as it is, 
but as it will be, twenty, fifty, a hundred years hence.”1 
I’m reasonably confident that Mr. Robinson would view this as an awkward segue, but his 
quote  is  also  instructive  to  the  operations  of  monetary  policy.  The  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee – the FOMC – meets eight times per year to set the path of monetary policy over 
the next six to seven weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve banks 
– including me – and the seven governors of the Federal Reserve Board, including Chairman 
Bernanke,  contribute  to  these  deliberations.  (Actually,  right  now,  there  are  only  five 
governors – two positions are unfilled.) However, the Committee itself consists only of the 
governors, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a rotating group of 
four other presidents (currently Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Dallas and Chicago). 
                                                 
1   See Robinson (1966). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
indeed 
in  mind 
its  medium-term  and 
long-term  goals  when  making 
As  I  said,  the  Committee  meets  eight  times  per  year.  Its  deliberations  concern  the 
appropriate readjustment of monetary policy to the new information received since the last 
meeting. But, as was true of the early settlers of our great continent, the Committee has to 
keep 
those 
readjustments. And it must also keep in mind the public’s understanding of those goals.  
This  perspective  –  that  good  policy  responds  to  the  current  conditions  so  as  to  achieve 
certain  well-communicated  future  goals  –  will  be  a  key  theme  for  the  remainder  of  my 
remarks. They will be divided into three parts. The first part is about the FOMC’s objectives 
and  my  thoughts  regarding  them.  In  the  second  part,  I  discuss  the  FOMC’s  performance 
relative to those goals in the past three and a half years since the beginning of the Great 
Recession.  Finally,  I  close  with  an  analysis  of  recent  FOMC  decision-making.  Here,  my 
discussion is perhaps a little more disengaged than usual, since I dissented from – that is, 
formally disagreed with – the last FOMC decision. And here it seems especially à propos to 
remind you that my remarks here today reflect my thoughts alone, and not necessarily those 
of  others  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  including  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee.  
FOMC objectives  
Let  me  turn  first  to  a  discussion  of  FOMC  objectives.  Congress  has  mandated  that  the 
Federal  Reserve  set  monetary  policy  so  as  to  promote  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment. In my view, the heart of implementing the price stability mandate is to formulate 
and  communicate  an  objective  for  inflation.  The  central  bank  then  fulfills  its  price  stability 
mandate  by  making  choices  over  time  so  as  to  keep  inflation  close  to  that  objective.  Of 
course,  the  central  bank’s  job  is  complicated  by  economic  shocks  that  may  lower  or  raise 
inflationary pressures. The central bank provides additional monetary accommodation – like 
lower  interest  rates  –  in  response  to  the  shocks  that  push  down  on  inflation.  It  reduces 
accommodation in response to the shocks that push up on inflation. By doing so, it works to 
ensure that inflation stays close to its objective.  
As  I  said,  though,  it  is  not  enough  to  have  an  objective  –  the  Federal  Reserve  must  also 
communicate that objective clearly. That communication serves to anchor medium- and long-
term inflationary expectations. Put another way, without clear communication of objectives, 
the  public  can  only  guess  at  the  intentions  of  the  FOMC.  Inflationary  expectations  and 
inflation itself will inevitably end up fluctuating – and possibly by a lot. As I’ll discuss later, it is 
possible to undo these shifts in expectations, but only at significant economic cost. 
The  Federal  Reserve  communicates  its  objective  for  inflation  in  a  number  of  ways.  For 
example, at quarterly intervals, FOMC meeting participants publicly reveal their forecasts for 
inflation five years hence, assuming that monetary policy is optimal. Those forecasts usually 
range between 1.5 percent and 2 percent per year. They are often collectively referred to by 
saying that the Federal Reserve views inflation as being “mandate-consistent” if it is running 
at “2 percent or a bit under.” But the Fed has also communicated its intentions more directly 
and  more  broadly.  Last  December,  for  example,  on  the  television  program  “60  Minutes,” 
Chairman  Bernanke  explained  the  dangers  of  letting  inflation  fall  too  low  relative  to  this 
2-percent-or-a-bit-under range. In the same interview, he also emphasized that the FOMC is 
unwilling to allow inflation to rise above this range.2 3 
As I’ll describe in more detail later in my speech, the economy was hit in the past three and a 
half years by shocks that had the potential to drive inflation significantly downward. I believe 
                                                 
2  
In  particular,  when  asked  if  keeping  inflation  in  check  was  any  less  of  a  priority  for  the  Federal  Reserve, 
Chairman Bernanke responded: “We’ve been very, very clear that we will not allow inflation to rise above two 
percent or less.” See “60 Minutes” transcript. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that the FOMC’s clear communication of its inflation objective has helped the FOMC keep 
inflation  from  falling  too  low  in  the  face  of  those  shocks.  At  the  same  time,  clear 
communication of its objective has also allowed the FOMC to follow highly accommodative 
monetary  policies  –  like  keeping  interest  rates  near  zero  for  nearly  three  years  –  without 
triggering large upward movements in inflationary expectations.  
I’ve  been  emphasizing  the  importance  of  communication  –  and  communication  matters 
greatly.  But,  ultimately,  the  public’s  beliefs  about  the  FOMC’s  inflation  objective  will  also 
depend on inflationary outcomes. If annual inflation averages less than 1.5 percent for more 
than three or four years, onlookers will begin to suspect that the FOMC’s true objective for 
inflation is lower than its declared “two percent or a bit under.” Correspondingly, if inflation is 
persistently higher than 2 percent, then the public will begin to believe that the FOMC’s true 
objective  for  inflation  is  higher  than  2  percent.  In  either  case,  inflation  expectations  could 
become unmoored, and the FOMC could lose control of inflation itself. Communication can 
only be effective if the FOMC also retains credibility.  
As I mentioned, Congress has also mandated that the FOMC set monetary policy so as to 
promote  maximum employment. In the past, some have seen an intrinsic conflict between 
the FOMC’s price stability mandate and its maximum employment mandate. In contrast, my 
thinking accords with the more modern viewpoint that there is relatively little tension between 
these  two  goals.  The  modern  paradigm  recognizes  that  monetary  policy  should  allow  the 
natural  supply-and-demand  forces  in  the  economy  to  operate  without  impediment.  For 
example, if energy costs spike, the basic forces of supply and demand dictate that firms will 
cut back on production and demand less labor, creating higher unemployment. It is inefficient 
for  any  policy  –  including  monetary  policy  –  to  attempt  to  interfere  with  this  natural 
adjustment process. It follows that the Federal Reserve’s operational definition of “maximum 
employment” has to vary over time. 
Nonetheless,  the  modern  paradigm  does  view  price  stability  as  playing  a  crucial  role  in 
ensuring maximum employment. It is well-documented that different firms adjust their prices 
at  different  times  and  in  different  ways  in  response  to  the  ebb  and  flow  of  inflationary 
pressures in the economy. This asynchronous adjustment of prices across firms generates 
economic  inefficiencies,  including  losses  of  employment.  By  ensuring  that  prices  follow  a 
steady,  well-understood  path,  the  Federal  Reserve  eliminates  the  variation  in  inflationary 
pressures  and  the  need  for  firms  to  respond  to  that  variation.  In  this  way,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  mission  of  achieving  price  stability  is  entirely  consistent  with  its  mission  of 
achieving maximum employment.3 
But  there  is  another,  deeper  sense  in  which  the  price  stability  and  maximum  employment 
mandates are intertwined. Imagine that inflation runs at 3 or 4 percent per year for three or 
four years. The public will then start to doubt the credibility of the Fed’s stated commitment to 
a 2-percent-or-a-bit-under objective. The public’s medium-term inflationary expectations will 
consequently  begin  to  rise.  As  we  saw  in  the  latter  part  of  the  1970s,  these  changes  in 
expectations can serve to reinforce and augment the upward drift in inflation. At that point, 
the Federal Reserve will have to tighten policy considerably if it wishes to regain control of 
inflation. But we learned in the early 1980s that the resultant tightening – while necessary – 
generates  large  losses  in  employment.  In  other  words,  failing  to  meet  its  price  stability 
                                                 
3   The preceding two paragraphs are my attempt to describe the so-called divine coincidence that optimal policy 
in New Keynesian models involves the simultaneous elimination of output gaps and inflation variability. (See 
Blanchard  and  Galí  2007.)  This  characterization  is  only  literally  true  under  relatively  strong  assumptions. 
However, Justiniano, Primiceri and Tambalotti (2011) document that it also provides a good approximation to 
optimal policy in a New Keynesian model that is estimated to fit U.S. data from 1954 to 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
mandate can also lead the FOMC, over the medium and long term, to substantial failure on 
its employment mandate.4 
An important communications challenge for the FOMC is that it is much harder to quantify 
the  maximum  employment  mandate  than  the  price  stability  mandate.  I’ve  already  talked 
about how a change in energy costs can push down on maximum employment. But changes 
in minimum wage policy, demography, taxes and regulations, technological productivity, job 
market efficiency, unemployment insurance benefits, entrepreneurial credit access and social 
norms all influence what we might consider “maximum employment.” Trying to offset these 
changes  in the  economy  with  monetary  policy  can  lead  to  a  dangerous  drift  in  inflationary 
expectations and ultimately in inflation itself.  
Monetary policy since the great recession  
As I discussed earlier, the Federal Reserve is mandated to set policies that promote price 
stability. With that in mind, how has the Federal Reserve done in terms of its price stability 
mandate since the Great Recession began in December 2007? The answer is: remarkably 
well. The personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation rate has averaged 1.8 percent 
per year from the fourth quarter of 2007 through the second quarter of 2011. I would say that 
this outcome is essentially consistent with price stability.  
This admirable performance is not due to luck. Since mid-2006, residential land prices have 
fallen by over 50 percent.5 Falling land prices were at the heart of the financial crisis from 
2007  to  2009  and  have  generated  a  persistent  fall  in  wealth  and  borrowing  capacity  for 
households.  The  associated  declines  in  demand  for  consumption  goods  and  investment 
goods pushed downward on prices and inflation.  
Confronted with this enormous shock to the economy, the Federal Reserve has followed an 
unprecedentedly  and  imaginatively  accommodative  policy.  It  has  kept  interest  rates  near 
zero. It has provided “forward guidance” by explicitly expressing its expectation that interest 
rates  would  stay  extraordinarily  low  for  an  extended  period.  It  has  bought  over  2  trillion 
dollars of longer-term government securities. Through these actions, the Fed has provided 
an  extraordinary  amount  of  monetary  stimulus  –  and  so  has  been  able  to  meet  its  price 
stability mandate.  
But what about the future? There are a number of ways to measure inflationary expectations, 
which  all  –  unfortunately  –  come  with  caveats.  Last  December,  a  Cleveland  Fed  study 
analyzed several such measures.6 It concluded that the Survey of Professional Forecasters’ 
(SPF’s) projections7 tend to forecast relatively well. The most recent SPF survey (conducted 
before the August FOMC meeting) predicted that PCE inflation would average 2.1 percent 
per year for the next five years.  
Thus,  in  the  face  of  challenging  circumstances,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  met  its  price 
stability  mandate  and  is  expected  to  continue  to  do  so.  Unemployment  does  remain 
disturbingly  high.  Yet,  I  am  sure  it  would  be  even  higher  without  the  enormous  amount  of 
                                                 
4   The  discussion  in  this  paragraph  is  largely  consistent  with  the  following  quote  from  Chairman  Bernanke’s 
response  to  a  reporter’s  question  in  April  about  the  Fed’s  ability  to  lower  the  rate  of  unemployment  more 
rapidly: “even purely from an employment perspective – that if inflation were to become unmoored, inflation 
expectations were to rise significantly, that the cost of that in terms of employment loss in the future, as we 
had  to  respond  to  that,  would  be  quite  significant.”  (See  transcript  of  Chairman  Bernanke’s  April  27,  2011 
press conference, p. 14). 
5   See Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, LAND-PI (CSW) series. 
6   See Meyer and Pasaogullari (2010). 
7   Survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary stimulus that the FOMC has provided. Moreover,  I believe that the FOMC could 
only have systematically lowered the unemployment rate further by generating inflation rates 
higher than 2 percent over a multiyear period. Such an outcome could well lead the public to 
lose  faith  in  the  credibility  of  the  FOMC’s  inflation  objective  and  thereby  increase  the 
probability that the FOMC would lose control of inflation. As I stressed earlier, this scenario 
would require a policy response that would generate substantial losses of employment. 
Recent FOMC decisions 
Much of my discussion so far has been a look back over the past three and a half years, 
since the start of the Great Recession in December 2007. My assessment is that, despite 
some profound economic shocks, the FOMC – led by Chairman Bernanke – has successfully 
met its price stability mandate by engaging in imaginative forms of monetary accommodation 
and thereby helped lower the unemployment rate. Now I’d like to turn to my assessment of 
the most recent round of FOMC decision-making. To put this part of my talk in the proper 
context, I want to ask another key question: How did the FOMC achieve its success over the 
past three and a half years with regard to price stability?  
The answer, I believe, is that the FOMC consistently made choices in response to changes 
in short-term economic conditions that were designed to support its medium-term objectives. 
Getting  these  choices  right  is  certainly  more  of  an  art  than  a  science.  With  that  said, 
economists  have  suggested  a  number  of  rules  that  tell  central  banks  how  to  respond  to 
changes in economic conditions so as to keep inflation near some target level. I generally 
find  these  rules  useful  in  guiding  policymaking,  and  especially  so  when  they  arrive  at  the 
same recommendation. (Unfortunately, that’s not always the case.)  
But here’s one instance in which most of the rules do deliver the same recommended course 
of  action.  Suppose  the  FOMC  observes  an  increase  in  available  measures  of  inflationary 
pressures  and  a  decrease  in  labor  market  slack  –  that  is,  the  gap  between  maximum 
employment  and  observed  employment.  Then  many  monetary  policy  rules  would 
recommend that the FOMC not ease policy further and in fact consider reducing the level of 
monetary policy accommodation. That recommendation – don’t ease further if you’re doing 
better on your mandates – makes sense to me.  
With that recommendation in mind, let’s go back to November 2010. At that date, the FOMC 
took a significant policy step by announcing its intention to buy $600 billion of longer-term 
Treasury securities. Until the most recent meeting in August, this was the last major policy 
step  undertaken  by  the  Committee.  What  did  available  measures  of  inflationary  pressures 
and labor market slack – the “mandate dashboard” – look like back in November?  
In  terms  of  inflation,  I  generally  think  that  core  inflation  does  a  better  job  of  tracking 
underlying  inflationary  pressures,  because  it  does  not  include  the  highly  volatile  and 
transitory fluctuations in food and energy prices. In November, PCE core inflation over the 
preceding 12 months had been less than 1 percent and had decelerated throughout the year. 
Of  course,  a  good  mandate  dashboard  should  also  include  some  measure  of  the  future 
course of inflationary pressures. Here, it is worth noting that, even with the large-scale asset 
purchase in place, FOMC participants expected core inflation to remain very low: less than 
1.3 percent over the upcoming calendar year of 2011. 
In terms of labor market slack, I’ve argued elsewhere that it’s hard to find reliable measures 
of this key variable.8 But the FOMC statement makes specific reference to the unemployment 
rate as a gauge of labor market slack, and so I’ll use that measure on my notional mandate 
dashboard. The unemployment rate was 9.8 percent in November 2010. With the help of the 
                                                 
8   See Kocherlakota (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
large-scale asset purchase, FOMC participants expected it to fall to about 9 percent a year 
hence.  
How had the mandate dashboard changed in August 2011? PCE core inflation rose sharply: 
From December 2010 through July 2011, the annualized core PCE inflation rate was over 
2 percent.  FOMC  participants  did  not  submit  forecasts  of  core  PCE  inflation  in  August. 
However,  the  most  recent  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters,  done  before  the  August 
FOMC  meeting,  predicted  that  core  PCE  inflation  will  average  1.7  percent  in  2011  and 
1.6 percent in 2012. It seems clear that inflationary pressures were higher in August than in 
November. My own current forecast for core PCE inflation is even higher than the SPF’s – I 
expect that it will average around 2 percent per year over 2011 and 2012. 
What about labor market slack? The unemployment rate was 9.1 percent in July 2011, as 
opposed  to  9.8  percent  in  November  2010.  Again,  we  don’t  have  FOMC  participant 
projections  available  from  the  August  meeting.  However,  the  Survey  of  Professional 
Forecasters predicts that unemployment will be 8.6 percent in just over a year’s time. Going 
into  the  August  FOMC  meeting,  my  own  forecast  for  unemployment  was  a  little  more 
optimistic, in the sense that I do expect unemployment to be under 8.5 percent by the end of 
next year. But, even with the more pessimistic SPF forecast, labor market slack is smaller 
than  in  November  2010,  when  the  FOMC  expected  unemployment  to  remain  around 
9 percent in a year’s time. 
So,  measures  of  past  and  forecasts  of  future  inflationary  pressures  were  higher  in  August 
than  at  the  time  of  the  FOMC’s  last  major  policy  move  in  November.  Measures  of  current 
labor market slack and expectations of future labor market slack were smaller in August. The 
monetary  policy  rules  that  I  described  earlier  would  suggest,  again,  “Don’t  ease  further  if 
you’re  doing  better  on  your  mandates.”  Indeed,  they’d  recommend  that  the  level  of  policy 
accommodation be reduced.  
Instead, at its August meeting, the FOMC decided to adopt a more accommodative policy 
stance. From March 2009 through June 2011, the FOMC statement said that the Committee 
expected  to  keep  interest  rates  extraordinarily  low  for  an  “extended  period,”  which  was 
generally  interpreted  as  meaning  “at  least  for  two  or  three  meetings.”  In  August  2011,  the 
FOMC  changed  its  statement  to  say  that  it  now  expected  to  keep  interest  rates 
extraordinarily  low  for  at  least  16  meetings.  Given  what  I’ve  said, it  is not  surprising  that  I 
dissented from this decision.  
I  would  be  remiss  if  I  did  not  mention  one  subtlety  in  my  discussion  of  changes  in  the 
mandate dashboard since November 2010. I’ve treated the decline in the unemployment rate 
as  representing  a  decline  in  labor market  slack.  This  view  is  not  uncontroversial. From  an 
accounting  perspective,  the  unemployment  rate  can  fall  for  two  reasons:  People  can  find 
jobs,  or  people  can  stop  searching  for  jobs.  Much  of  the  decline  since  November  is 
attributable to people who were formerly unemployed choosing to no longer look for work.  
Nonetheless, it still seems appropriate to me to view this change in labor market conditions 
as representing a decline in labor  market slack. Intuitively, people who are non-employed, 
but not actively looking for work, are less likely to apply for any given job opening. Hence, the 
recent departures from the labor force imply that there is less downward pressure on wages. 
Almost by definition, from an economic perspective, this means that there is less slack in the 
labor market.  
The  rise  in  core  inflation  in  the  first  part  of  the  year  is  consistent  with  the  view  that  labor 
market slack has fallen. But some observers argue that core PCE inflation is only temporarily 
high because of the tragic events in Japan or transitory spikes in commodity prices. If so, the 
disinflationary  pressures  of  2010  should  soon  reappear  in  the  form  of  a  sharp  decline  in 
current  and  expected  core  PCE  inflation  rates.  In  that  eventuality,  increasing  policy 
accommodation might well be appropriate.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I’ve argued here that the Committee increased the level of accommodation when standard 
rules seem to call for standing pat or even reducing accommodation. What are the costs of 
such a move? The standard rules are meant to guide the economy toward the Committee’s 
medium-term objectives. If monetary policy is consistently overly accommodative relative to 
these rules, the Committee risks generating inflation higher than 2 percent for several years. 
As  I’ve  discussed,  such  an  outcome  could  have  significant  consequences  for  inflation  and 
inflation expectations. Future Committees might have to endure large losses in employment 
in order to fix these consequences.  
Conclusion 
I  mentioned  that  I  dissented  from  the  Committee’s  last  decision  in  August.  Two  other 
presidents dissented – and there have not been as many dissents at one meeting in nearly 
20 years. In my view, this level of disagreement reflects two aspects of the current setting. 
The  first  is  related  to  the  leadership  of  the  Committee.  Chairman  Bernanke  strongly 
welcomes the airing of disparate views within the meeting. He clearly believes – as I do – 
that the United States has a decentralized central bank because we will get better monetary 
policy  if  decision-making  is  grounded  in  a  wide  range  of  views.  I  think  that  the  chairman 
should be applauded for this approach to policymaking.  
The second is related to the nature of the economic data that we’ve seen in the first part of 
this year. I’ve described how inflation rose and unemployment fell. It’s also true that real GDP 
grew at less than 1 percent at an annualized rate in the first half of the year. And the outlook 
for  real  GDP  growth  has  slipped  too.  Last  November,  my  forecast  for  annual  real  GDP 
growth  was  similar  to  that  of  other  FOMC  participants:  I  expected  that  real  GDP  growth 
would average above 3 percent per year, and probably closer to 3.5 percent per year, over 
the following two years (that is, from the fourth quarter of 2010 through the fourth quarter of 
2012). Now, I expect that real GDP growth will average around 2.5 percent per year over that 
same period of time.  
It’s  unusual  to  see  an  increase  in  inflation  and  a  fall  in  unemployment  occur  when  GDP 
growth is so sluggish and when the outlook for real GDP growth has slipped so much. It is 
hardly  surprising  that  there  might  well  be  some  disagreement  about  the  appropriate 
monetary policy response to this conflicting mix of information.  
As  we  go  forward  together  on  the  Committee,  I  see  no  reason  to  revisit  the  decisions  of 
August  2011.  The  Committee  has  included  what  I  regard  as  a  two-year  conditional 
commitment in its statement. I believe that undoing this commitment in the near term would 
undercut the ability of the Committee to offer similar conditional commitments in the future – 
and this ability has certainly proved very useful in the past three years. So, I plan to abide by 
the August 2011 commitment in thinking about my own future decisions. Of course, the case 
for any additional easing would have to be made on its own merits. And, like the 19th century 
settlers of the American West, the Committee will have to keep its eye on the future when 
deciding about the present.  
Thanks for your attention. I’m happy to take your questions.  
References 
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Galí. 2007. “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian 
Model.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking Supplement 39, pp. 35–65. 
Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2011. “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy.” 2010 Annual Report. 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.  
Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio E. Primiceri and Andrea Tambalotti. 2011. “Is There a Trade-
Off Between Inflation and Output Stabilization?”  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Meyer, Brent H., and Mehmet Pasaogullari. 2010. “Simple Ways to Forecast Inflation: What 
Works Best?”  
Robinson, Elwyn B. 1966. History of North Dakota. University of Nebraska Press, p. 552. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
