Philipp Hildebrand: The independence of the Swiss National Bank 
Speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at Avenir Suisse, Zurich, 21 June 2011. 
 The speaker would like to thank Peter Kuster for his support in preparing this paper. In addition, his thanks go to 
Rita Kobel Rohr for her helpful comments when drawing up the speech. 
Is the independence of the Swiss National Bank so extensive that it stands outside the reach 
of our democratic system based on the separation of state powers, on checks and balances? 
The  topic  of  central  bank  independence  is  a  matter  of  discussion  beyond  the  borders  of 
Switzerland. Around the world, a debate has started on the limits to power, in general, and 
the independence of central banks, in particular, and in some cases radical demands have 
been made.1 Because many central banks found themselves obliged to resort to large-scale 
unconventional  measures  during  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  debate  is 
raging now. 
Central banks are indeed very special institutions. They hold the banknote-issuing monopoly 
and provide the domestic money market with liquidity. Consequently, they can never really 
be short of money. In Switzerland, the state has conferred the banknote-issuing monopoly on 
the  SNB.  This  means  that  it  always  has  the  requisite  means  for  meeting  its  obligations  in 
Swiss francs. However, that does not stop it from making losses. As you know, the SNB had 
to report a large annual loss in 2010. This was due to exchange rate losses on the foreign 
currency holdings. These had increased substantially in the course of our foreign exchange 
market  interventions,  which  we  carried  out  in  order  to  counter  the  deflationary  threat 
identified by us. 
The loss and the increased risk in our central bank balance sheet is a matter which we take 
very  seriously.  The  annual  loss  has  provoked  critical  remarks,  in  particular  as  regards  our 
independence and our ostensibly far-reaching powers. It is understandable that people will 
question the extensive measures we had to take to manage the financial crisis. That is all 
part of life in a democratic society. I am therefore grateful for this opportunity to present to 
you, in the next few minutes, my thoughts on the essence, the boundaries and the pitfalls of 
our  independence.  I  hope  I  will  be  able  to  clarify  one  or  two  misunderstandings  in  the 
process. 
The reason why the SNB is independent is not because it happens to suit the members of 
the Governing Board, which is the body responsible for monetary policy. I can assure you 
that  it  would  sometimes  be  easier  if  we  could  just  accept  instructions  from  a  higher  body. 
What  actually  happens  is  that  we  have  to  bear  responsibility  ourselves  for  the  monetary 
policy decisions we take, and we take them – typically – under a veil of uncertainty. 
The  reason  why  we  are  independent  is  so  that  we  can  better  fulfil  our  mandate.  In  other 
words, our independence is purely a means to a higher end. That end is defined in article 5 
of the National Bank Act as pursuing a monetary policy serving the interests of the country as 
a  whole  and  ensuring  price  stability,  while  taking  due  account  of  the  development  of  the 
economy.  Article  6  is  the  basis  of  our  independence.  Under  this  clause,  we  are  explicitly 
prohibited from seeking or accepting instructions from Federal authorities. In other words, we 
are obliged to make our own decisions. 
                                                 
1  For instance, a very well-known US congressman – possibly a future presidential candidate – has gone as far 
as calling for the Fed to be abolished. Cf. Paul, Ron (2009), End the Fed, New York: Hachette Book Group. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
There  are  good  reasons  why  Swiss  legislators  have  established  our  independence  so 
strongly. Theory and practical experience throughout the world are clear on this point. The 
more independent a central bank, the better it fulfils its mandate. It has much better chances 
of  ensuring  price  stability  and  thereby  making  a  contribution  to  sustained  economic 
developments than a central bank that is not independent.2 I am not planning to overwhelm 
you  now  by  citing  all  the  relevant  literature.3  However,  the  most  important  reasons  put 
forward  by  academic  writers  on  the  subject  include  differences  in  the  legitimation,  time 
horizon  and  incentives  of  politicians  and  central  bankers.  While  politicians  are  legitimated 
through  popular  election,  central  bankers  legitimate  themselves  by  carrying  out  their  legal 
mandate  to  the  best  of  their  ability.  Political  processes  are  often  protracted,  but  once  a 
decision  has  been  taken,  results  should  be  rapidly  visible.  to  be  available  as  soon  as 
possible. By contrast, central bankers are able to take decisions very quickly, but the results 
of these decisions – whether good or bad – may not be evident until years later. 
It  is  precisely  because  this  lag  is  often  so  long  that  the  credibility  of  central  bankers  is 
essential.  If  central  bankers  are  credible,  economic  entities  will  trust  them.  As  a  result, 
monetary policy is more effective. For instance, if inflation rises due to increasing commodity 
prices, employees will not immediately ask for higher wages because they are confident that 
the increase in inflation is only temporary. Thus independence is a necessary prerequisite for 
a central bank, in order to develop the credibility it requires for carrying out monetary policy. 
Mind you, independence is a necessary – but not a sufficient – prerequisite for successful 
monetary policy. 
Central  bank  independence  in  monetary  policy  is  not  a  specifically  Swiss  achievement.  In 
many  countries  it  has  helped  to  firmly  establish  inflation  expectations  in  the  long  term. 
Consequently,  monetary  policy  can  react  to  shocks  in  the  short-term,  when  necessary. 
However, with a view to certain characteristics of the Swiss economy, the independence of 
the SNB appears particularly valuable. Allow me to explain this briefly, using our experiences 
during  the  financial  crisis  as  my  example.  When  the  extreme  shock  of  the  great  financial 
crisis  occurred  in  2008–09,  monetary  policy  was  in  a  position  to  act  rapidly.  Our  well-
developed  social  security  system  also  fulfilled  its  role  as  an  automatic  stabiliser. 
Discretionary fiscal policy, by contrast, played a relatively minor role. One reason for this is 
that  we  have  a  federal system  with  extensive  decision-making  powers  in  the  hands  of  the 
people. Another is the extensive global integration and openness of the Swiss economy. This 
means that much of the impact of any fiscal programmes designed to stimulate the economy 
would have been felt abroad rather than in Switzerland. There are certainly positive sides to 
the fact that fiscal policy in Switzerland was not used actively, or to a large extent, for crisis 
management – as is evident if we think of the problems of sovereign debt currently afflicting 
other countries. Yet we should not forget that monetary policy had to bear the lion’s share of 
the adjustment burden in its place. 
As I mentioned before, article 6 of the National Bank Act constitutes the foundation stone of 
our  independence.  However,  the  principle  that  the  SNB  should  be  an  independent  central 
bank is actually established at the highest level of all, in article 99 of the Swiss Constitution. 
This shows the importance attached to the independence of the SNB by the constitutional 
                                                 
2  These  findings  were  taken  into  account  when  the  European  Monetary  Union  was  founded.  Under  the 
Maastricht Treaty, a country planning to join the union must have an independent national central bank. 
3  Cf., for instance, Ricardo, David (1824), Plan for the Establishment of a National Bank; Hayek, Friedrich A. 
von (1971), Verfassung der Freiheit, pp 440–41, Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck (4th edition 2005); Barro, Robert J. 
and  Gordon,  David  B.  (1983),  A  Positive  Theory  of  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Natural  Rate  Model,  Journal  of 
Political  Economy,  91  (August),  pp  589–610;  Cukierman,  Alex, Webb,  Steven  B.  and  Neyapti,  Bilin  (1992), 
Measuring  the  Independence  of  Central  Banks  and  Its  Effect  on  Policy  Outcomes,  World  Bank  Economic 
Review, 6 pp 353–398; Alesina, Alberto und Summers, Lawrence H. (1993), Central Bank Independence and 
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 25 (May), 
pp 151–162. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
authorities, in other words, the Swiss sovereign power. Our independence comprises several 
dimensions – function, institution, finances and staff.4 
I  make  a  point  of  repeating  the  fact  that  we  must  fulfil  our  mandate  without  seeking  or 
accepting instructions either from the Federal Council or from the Federal Assembly or any 
other body. The SNB is institutionally independent because it is a legal entity in its own right. 
It  has  the  legal  status  of  a  special-statute  joint-stock  company.  The  financial  dimension  of 
independence comprises, on the one hand, the prohibition on state financing. Under article 
11  of  the  National  Bank  Act,  we  are  not  permitted  to  grant  the  Confederation  any  loans. 
Neither are we allowed to acquire government bonds from new issues. These provisions are 
a  strong  defence  against  fiscal  policy  being  bankrolled  by  the  central  bank.  On  the  other 
hand, we can take risk onto our balance sheet should we regard this as absolutely necessary 
in  order  to  fulfil  our  mandate.  In  this  respect,  the  lesson  learned  from  the  crisis  is  that,  in 
good times, we need to ensure that our balance sheet is as robust as possible, so that we 
can burden it in bad times. Finally, in terms of staff, our independence is expressed by the 
fact  that  the  members  of  the  SNB  executive  bodies  –  the  Governing  Board  members  and 
their deputies – are appointed by the Federal Council for a fixed and comparatively long term 
of six years.5  
Ladies and Gentlemen, our independence is not unlimited, however. First, it is not absolute 
but related only to our mandate. It is not we ourselves but the Swiss legislators who charge 
us with maintaining price stability. Incidentally, that also applies to mandates other than the 
monetary policy core mandate, which I will not be talking about today. 
The SNB has specified its monetary policy mandate and rendered it measurable. A situation 
of price stability prevails when the consumer price index (which is calculated by the Swiss 
Federal  Office  of  Statistics,  and  not  by  us)  shows  an  average  annual  rate  of  below  2%. 
Deflation is also regarded as a failure to attain the objective of price stability. Where we are 
independent is in our choice of the means by which we fulfil this mandate. Under article 9 of 
the  National  Bank  Act,  we  may  use  a  great  many  instruments,  as  needed.  This  broad 
flexibility within our statutory legislation (which came into force in 2004) proved to be a huge 
advantage during the crisis, also by comparison with other central banks. For instance, we 
were quickly in a position to issue our own debt certificates and develop a large market for 
them. We do not use these SNB Bills because we need money. They are used to absorb 
excess liquidity in the money market. 
Second, our independence is not unconditional. With the privilege and duty of independent 
action comes a particular responsibility. And whoever bears responsibility in our democratic 
constitutional state must be accountable for his or her actions, for the means chosen and the 
results  achieved.6  Consequently,  under  article  7  of  the  National  Bank  Act,  we  maintain  a 
regular  exchange  of  information  with  the  Federal  Council,  and  the  SNB  and  the  Federal 
Council  inform  one  another  of  decisions  that  will  have  a  significant  economic  or  monetary 
impact. This is important for us, because it ensures that we are familiar with the fiscal political 
framework within which we conduct our monetary policy. Nevertheless, each body retains full 
                                                 
4  Cf. also Message on the revision of the National Bank Act of 26 June 2002, FF 2002 6107 to 6109. 
5  Together with the possibility of re-election, this helps to set the incentives for members of the Governing Board 
in a way that ensures that long-term fulfilment of the statutory mandate is also in their individual interest. 
6  Other societies espouse comparable principles, “It cannot be acceptable in a democratic society that a group 
of  unelected  individuals  are  vested  with  important  responsibilities  without  being  open  to  full  scrutiny  and 
accountability.”  Cf.  speech  given  by  Alan  Greenspan  on  5  December  1996  on  “'The  Challenge  of  Central 
Banking in a Democratic Society,” Washington D.C. Also, “Democratic principles demand that, as an agent of 
the government, a central bank must be accountable in the pursuit of its mandated goals, responsive to the 
public and its elected representatives and transparent in its policies.” Cf. speech given by Ben Bernanke on 
26 May 2010, on “Central Bank Independence, Transparency and Accountability,” Tokyo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
responsibility for its own area.7 Each year we submit an Accountability Report to the Federal 
Assembly,  in  which  we  outline  how  we  have  fulfilled  our  mandate.  Also,  on  frequent 
occasions  we  are  called  upon  to  provide  a  full  account  of  our  actions  to  the  relevant 
parliamentary commissions. 
In addition, we provide the general public with regular information about our assessment of 
the  economic  situation  and  monetary  policy  –  in  press  releases  or  half-yearly  media 
conferences immediately after our quarterly monetary policy assessments, in speeches and 
in interviews. In this way we ensure transparency. 
Through  our  legal  status  as  a  joint-stock  company,  we  also  have  duties  towards  our 
shareholders which we fulfil each year, at the General Meeting, within the framework set out 
by the National Bank Act. The cantons – our majority shareholders – are well represented in 
our supervisory body for operating matters, the Bank Council.  
As  you  see,  the  special  characteristics  of  the  Swiss  system  are  taken  into  account. 
Federalism is mirrored in the composition of the Bank Council and in the distribution of our 
shareholdings and – not least – in the distribution of profit. 
The Swiss constitution and the National Bank Act provide for the SNB’s profit to be paid to 
the  Confederation  and  the  cantons.  Two-thirds  accrue  to  the  cantons  and  one-third  to  the 
Confederation. However, a distribution can only be carried out if the balance sheet and the 
SNB’s result allow for this to be done. The robustness of our balance sheet, in other words, 
setting aside provisions for currency reserves, takes first priority over a distribution. This can 
be  derived  directly  from  the  legislation.  The  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  most 
other currencies weakened our balance sheet last year. In addition, very volatile results may 
be expected in the next few years because of the current size of the balance sheet and the 
uncertain  situation  in  the  capital  markets.  Consequently,  the  possibility  that  distributions  to 
the  Confederation  and  the  cantons  will  have  to  be  suspended  in  certain  years  cannot  be 
excluded.  Fiscal interests  must  take  a  back  seat  when  it comes  to  ensuring  our  long-term 
monetary policy freedom of action and independence. 
The  Governing  Board  is  also  genuinely  Swiss.  The  executive  body  consists  of  three 
members with equal rights who jointly carry out the tasks defined in article 46 of the National 
Bank Act and bear joint responsibility for them. First and foremost, the law describes these 
tasks  as  conceptional  and  operational  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  Chairman  does  not 
have any special powers. Consequently, responsibility is shared. 
Transparency  and  accountability  are  crucial,  particularly  in  times  of  crisis,  when  the 
information needs of the general public and financial markets, as well as other authorities, 
are increasing exponentially. We have responded to this need. For instance, information on 
central  bank  balance  sheet  items  and  SNB  Bills  has  been  stepped  up,  and  our  news 
conferences  can  now  be  watched  on  our  website.  During  the  course  of  the  crisis,  in 
particular, at the time of the measures to strengthen the Swiss financial system in October 
2008,  the  number  of  appearances  of  Governing  Board  members  before  parliamentary 
commissions increased significantly.8 I would like to hazard a guess that the SNB has never 
been  as  transparent  as  it  is  today.  In  this  respect,  it  also  stands  up  well  to  international 
comparison. 
                                                 
7  This is also laid down in the Message on the revision of the National Bank Act with regard to art. 7 para. 1 
NBA  (6191),  “The  SNB’s  decision-making  autonomy  must  be  retained  because  its  accountability  would 
otherwise  inevitably  come  into  conflict  with  its  authority  to  act  independently  of  instructions  (under  art.  6).” 
Consequently,  the  SNB  bears  “sole  responsibility  for  the  mandates  described  in  art.  5”  while  the  Federal 
Council, in turn, “is solely responsible for the economic decisions that fall within its area of responsibility.” 
In 2010, members of the Governing Board appeared 13 times before parliamentary commissions. 
8 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However, central bank independence has its pitfalls. A latent threat to such independence 
can, in principle, always be said to exist. This threat is particularly great in times of crisis. 
Consequently it was right and important, during the recent crisis, for central banks around the 
world  to  work  closely  with  governments.  However,  the  risk  now  is  that  false  expectations 
have been raised amongst politicians. Central banks need to remain firm and concentrate on 
their  monetary  policy  mandate.  While  it  was  necessary  to  be  close  to  other  government 
authorities  at  a  time  of  emergency,  now  that  the  crisis  has  been  confined,  a  little  more 
distance is in order. 
As I outlined at the beginning, the SNB has also taken exceptional measures in order to fulfil 
its mandate. In doing so, it has shown that it is prepared to make use of the independence it 
has been granted. What is essential here is that we are always guided solely by our mandate 
when making our decisions. At the same time, we are continually analysing developments 
and constantly drawing conclusions with a view to our future actions. Based on this, the SNB 
will  continue  to  use  the  instruments  we  judge  best  suited  and  necessary  for  fulfilling  our 
mandate in the interests of the country as a whole, to the best of our ability. The SNB must 
be able to continue exercising its independence without this being fundamentally questioned. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have shown you that the SNB’s independence is limited to fulfilling 
the mandate with which it has been entrusted by the politicians, and that it is accountable for 
this  mandate.  The  SNB  is  not  powerful.  With  the  precision  of  a  Swiss  watchmaker,  it  has 
been embedded in our democratic institutions, our constitutional state and the society of our 
nation.9 We are aware that a high level of responsibility is attached to our mandate-related 
independence. That is why we use the independence we have been granted with prudence. 
                                                 
9  One of my predecessors described the SNB as, “to some extent”, “the fourth power in the land”, while adding 
the  comforting  comment  that  “this  additional  element  within  the  –  generally  speaking  –  highly  developed 
balance of powers in Switzerland, has functioned well” (Lusser, Geldpolitik 1996). Cf. Lusser, Markus (1996), 
Geldpolitik, p. 100, Zurich: Verlag Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
