Njuguna Ndung’u: Developments in the banking sector in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
opening of Standard Chartered Bank Kenya Limited’s Head Office, Nairobi, 20 June 2011. 
 Your  Excellency  Honourable  Mwai  Kibaki,  President  and  Commander-In-Chief  of  the 
Defence Forces of the Republic of Kenya; 
Honourable Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance; 
Mr. John Peace, Group Chairman of the Board of Directors, Standard Chartered Bank; 
Mr. Peter Sands, Group Chief Executive Officer, Standard Chartered Bank; 
Mr. Wilfred Kiboro the Chair of the Board of the Standard Chartered Bank Kenya; 
Mr. Richard Etemesi, Chief Executive Officer, Standard Chartered Bank Kenya; 
Board Members present; 
Staff of Standard Chartered Bank Kenya; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  join  you  on  this  auspicious  occasion  in  celebrating  Standard  Chartered 
Bank  Kenya’s  100th  Anniversary.  It  is  indeed  a  momentous  achievement  for  the  bank  and 
perhaps to plan for the next 100 years will even be more exciting. May I take this opportunity 
to appreciate the presence of His Excellency the President which gives this function great 
significance  and  importance.  Let  me  also  commend  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of 
Standard  Chartered  Bank  for  steering  the  institution  from  its  formation  in  1911,  and  for 
successfully providing financial services to Kenyans for the last 100 years. 
Over  the  years,  the  Bank  has  achieved  several  milestones  with  a  number  of  strategic 
alliances and acquisitions. These milestones have extended the customer base, geographic 
reach  and  broadened  the  product  range  that  Standard  Chartered  offers.  The  bank  has 
strongly  focused  on  developing  its  franchises  in  Asia,  Africa  and  the  Middle  East  through 
concentration on consumer, corporate and institutional banking. In Kenya, the bank focuses 
on two core business divisions, Wholesale banking and Consumer banking. With regard to 
its financial operations in Kenya, the bank as at March 2011, was among the top 6 banks 
with an asset portfolio of Ksh.149 billion, thereby commanding a market share of 7.9 percent. 
Customer  deposits  stood  at  Ksh.105  billion  being  supported  by  a  capital  base  of  Ksh.21 
billion, while loans and advances amounted to Ksh.72 billion. 
Your  Excellency:  Despite  various  shocks  that  have  hit  the  economy  in  recent  years,  the 
banking  sector  continues  to  exhibit  resilience.  The  sector  grew  by  8.8%  in  2010.  Some 
indicators of the financial sector performance witnessed in the last twelve months to March 
2011 are as follows: 
 
The sector’s asset base expanded by 20 percent from Ksh.1.5 trillion in March 2010 
to  Ksh.1.8  trillion  in  March  2011  as  banks  continued  to  expand  their  lending 
portfolio; 
The  deposit  base  increased  by  16.7  percent  from  Ksh.1.2  trillion  to  stand  at 
Ksh.1.4 trillion  in  March  2011  on  account  of  branch  expansion,  financial  inclusion 
and domestic economic activity expansion; 
The Total and Core Capital Adequacy to Total Risk Weighted Assets Ratios stood at 
21.1 percent and 18.9 percent, well above the statutory minimum of 12 percent and 
8 percent respectively, signifying the stability of the sector; 
The sector’s pre-tax profits increased by 16.5 percent from Ksh.17.0 billion in March 
2010 to Ksh.19.8 billion in March 2011 while the average liquidity at end of March 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2011  was  43.5  percent,  well  above  the  statutory  minimum  requirement  of 
20 percent. 
This  impressive  growth  has  been  supported  by  the  expansion  of  banks  into  new  market 
frontiers,  improved  risk  management  and  continuous  legal  and  regulatory  reforms  by  the 
Government and Central Bank in a bid to enhance financial inclusion by reaching out to the 
unbanked population. 
Your  Excellency,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  would  like  to  assure  the  banking  sector  and 
stakeholders  that  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  develop  cardinal  policies  aimed  at 
financial  inclusion,  development  and  deepening  in  consultation  with  the  market.  So  far  we 
have  seen  the  supply-side;  the  deposit  accounts  solved.  We  need  to  make  it  easier  and 
cheaper to borrow and loan accounts will grow from the current 2 million accounts compared 
to 14 million deposit accounts. On the demand side, demand for loans is lagging because of 
costs. 
The  CBK  will  is  to  create  a  conducive  business  environment  for  the  sector  to  operate 
efficiently, effectively and soundly. We continue to support and build strong institutions both 
the commercial banks and the regulator must be strong. Strong institutions will always define 
the appropriate incentives (and penalties) to encourage prudent behavior in the market. We 
hope such measures and the ensuing environment will of necessity benefit clients of banks 
who have taken financial inclusion seriously. 
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen; Finally, allow me once again to applaud Standard 
Chartered Bank Kenya Limited on your Centenary celebrations and wish the bank continued 
prosperity in the future here in Kenya and in the East African region as a whole. 
It is now my honour and singular pleasure to invite the Honorable Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister for Finance Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta to make his remarks and welcome His Excellency, 
The President. 
Welcome, Honorable Deputy Prime Minister. 
Thank You and God bless you all 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
