John Murray: Commodity prices - the long and the short of it 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Institute  of 
Public  Administration  of  Canada  (IPAC)  -  Saskatchewan/Johnson/Shoyama  Graduate 
School of Public Policy, Regina, Saskatchewan, 10 February 2011. 
 Commodity prices are once again making headlines. Some commodity prices, such as those 
for copper and cattle, have reached record highs; others are rising quickly and approaching 
previous  peaks.  Consumer  prices  world-wide  are  under  mounting  upward  pressure,  and 
escalating food costs have triggered riots in some developing countries. The price of OPEC 
crude  oil,  which  had  spiked  at  an  all-time  high of  US$145  in  the  summer  of  2008,  only  to 
collapse to US$34 within six months, is now hovering around US$96, leading to increased 
talk of a new super-cycle in crude. 
Not surprisingly, governments are under growing pressure both to contain the rising prices of 
these  primary  products  and  to  dampen  their  volatile  movements.  Leaders  of  the  G20 
countries, meeting in Seoul, Korea, late last year, promised – “further work on the regulation 
and  supervision  of  commodity  derivatives  markets,”  and  said  that  they  would  strengthen 
efforts  to  “mitigate  excessive  fossil  fuel  price  volatility.”  Nicolas  Sarkozy  has  specifically 
identified commodity price volatility as a priority issue for France’s presidency of the G20 this 
year, while regulators in the United States have proposed new curbs on speculative trading 
in several commodities. 
The behaviour of commodity prices and the actions that might be taken in response to their 
suspected misbehaviour are of special interest to Canada. We are not only a major producer 
and  exporter  of  many  primary  products,  we  are  also  a  significant  consumer  of  them, 
especially of energy. 
My speech today describes the distinguishing features of commodity price movements over 
different time horizons, running from the very long run to the very short run. It then explores 
the various factors – both fundamental and speculative – that might account for their unusual 
behaviour.  It  concludes  with  some  comments  on  various  policy  responses  that  have  been 
proposed  to  manage  these  movements  and  to  improve  the  performance  of  commodity 
markets more generally. 
Why commodity prices are of special interest to Canadians 
Canada  is  unusual  among  advanced  economies.  It  is  the  only  G7  country  that  is  a  major 
commodity exporter. The production of primary products accounts for roughly 11 per cent of 
our gross domestic product. While this is much smaller than it was 50 years ago, it is nearly 
three times the relative size of commodity production in the United States and far higher than 
that of most other industrialized countries (see Appendix, Chart 1). In addition, commodities 
account for roughly one third of our exports. 
Within  Canada,  Saskatchewan  is  like  a  microcosm  of  the  national  economy,  but  with 
commodities playing an even more important role. All ten provinces and three territories have 
significant  resource  sectors,  but  among  the  provinces,  Saskatchewan,  Alberta  and 
Newfoundland/Labrador stand out (Chart 2). 
The resource sector is a major source of income and investment, and movements in world 
commodity prices have an outsized effect on Canada’s terms of trade and national wealth. 
The  relative  importance  of  different  commodities  has  shifted  over  time,  with  energy  now 
representing a much larger share of total commodity production and food accounting for a 
much smaller, but still important, share (Chart 3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Commodity prices in the very long run 
I will have a great deal to say about the exceptional short-run volatility of commodity prices in 
a few minutes, but for now I would like to focus on the very long run. Commodity prices over 
long stretches of time, say 50 or 100 years, are actually quite stable.1 Yet if you follow the 
news you would think new price records are being reached every few days. How can one 
explain  this  apparent  inconsistency?  One  of  the  answers  lies  in  the  important  distinction 
between what economists call real and nominal prices. Nominal prices are the ones you and 
I  see  reported  every  day.  For  example,  the  current  price  of  oil,  as  I  noted  earlier,  is 
approximately US$96.2 However, this can give a misleading impression of how high or low 
commodity prices really are. Since inflation generally pushes all prices higher over time, it is 
important to adjust commodity prices for these changes in the purchasing power of money in 
order to get a better sense of their true relative cost. Chart 4 plots a broad-based index of 
commodity prices over the period 1970 to the present in both real and nominal terms. The 
commodities that comprise the index are weighted according to their relative importance in 
Canadian  production.  As  you  can  see,  the  real  price  line  is  much  flatter  than  the  nominal 
price line and shows more stability through time. The results are essentially unchanged if we 
begin the analysis as far back as the mid-1800s or 1900. 
Charts 5 and 6 provide a similar decomposition, but for two subcomponents of the aggregate 
index that are of particular interest to Saskatchewan – oil prices and food. If you look closely, 
you will notice that both of the real-price series are relatively stable, unlike the nominal-price 
series, which have risen sharply over the past 40 years, reflecting the effects of generalized 
price inflation. 
The  long-run  price  stability  of  most  commodities,  subject  to  subtle  differences  in  trend, 
should  not  come  as  a  surprise.  Given  sufficient  time,  consumers  and  producers  adjust  to 
changing market conditions. Persistent price increases encourage consumers to economize 
on the use of more expensive commodities and move to alternative goods. At the same time, 
producers find it profitable to tap new and often more expensive sources of supply, and to 
develop new technologies to assist them. Investment and innovation also allow producers to 
bring new products to market, facilitating the process of economization and substitution. All 
of  this  takes  considerable  time,  however.  While  the  supply  responses  might  be  shorter  in 
some sectors such as agriculture, for major energy projects the gestation period can be as 
long  as  10  or  15  years.  Eventually,  though,  demand  and  supply  adjust  –  in  many  cases 
taking  prices  back  to  where  they  started.  This  is  what  economists  often  refer  to  as  “mean 
reversion.” 
What about the significant price increases we’ve seen since 2002? 
Although mean reversion is frequently observed in the very long run, commodity prices can 
also  experience  large  and  persistent  swings  over  5-,  10-  and  even  20-year  periods.  Price 
increases  are  usually  followed  by  price  declines,  and  vice  versa,  but  the  timing  of  these 
reversals is highly uncertain.3 
                                                 
1   See D. Coletti, “The Long-Run Behaviour of Key Canadian Non-Energy Commodity Prices: 1900–91,” Bank of 
Canada Review (Winter 1992–1993: 47–56). 
2   For convenience and by convention, world commodity prices are usually quoted in U.S. dollars. This means 
that whenever the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar changes, commodity prices usually change too. 
3   Estimates  from  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (P.  Cashin,  C.  J.  McDermott  and  A.  Scott,  “The  Myth  of 
Comoving Commodity Prices,” IMF Working Paper, WP/99/169, 1999) suggest that the average length of a 
slump in oil prices is about 50 months, while oil-price booms typically last just over 20 weeks. However, there 
is obviously a great deal of variance around these averages. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The magnitude and timing of commodity price movements are notoriously difficult to predict. 
Indeed,  some  have  suggested  that  they  are  only  slightly  easier  to  explain  after  the  fact! 
Debates  about  the  “true”  causes  of  the  dramatic  super-cycle  that  we  have  observed  in 
commodity  prices  over  the  past  eight  years  continue.  While  there  is  little  doubt  that 
remarkable shifts in global demand and supply have played a major role, the extent to which 
other  forces,  driven  perhaps  by  large  financial  flows,  might  have  served  as  an  accelerant 
remains an open question. 
What  is  evident,  looking  at  the  data,  is  the  significant  role  played  by  the  emerging-market 
economies  (EMEs).  Over  the  past  ten  years,  they  have  accounted  for  the  majority  of  the 
growth in the global economy (Chart 7). More importantly for our purposes, EMEs have also 
accounted  for  most  of  the  surge  in  global  demand  for  raw  materials  (Chart  8).4  Their 
accelerating  resource  needs  are  being  driven  by  three  developments.  First  is  the 
phenomenal  GDP  growth  that  many  EMEs  have  experienced.  Second,  current  production 
processes in the EMEs are very resource intensive, particularly with regard to their energy 
requirements. Third, rising disposable incomes and a growing middle class in the EMEs have 
added an important consumption element to the mix, through increased demand for food and 
a broader range of energy-using household products. Bringing things a little closer to home, 
high demand for food in EMEs has contributed importantly to the demand for potash. 
Growing demand in both the EMEs and advanced economies, as well as occasional supply 
bottlenecks,  can  explain  most,  though  perhaps  not  all,  of  the  upward  movement  in 
commodity prices that we observed from 2000 to mid-2008. The same is true of the sharp 
correction that followed in late-2008, as well as the recent rebound.5 These three episodes 
mirrored the phenomenal rise, sudden collapse, and equally sharp recovery in global growth 
over the period. The fact that the latest jump in commodity prices has occurred so soon in 
the business cycle, while growth in many advanced countries continues to lag, is testament 
to  the  growing  importance  of  the  EMEs  and  their  considerable  influence  in  commodity 
markets. 
Extreme short-run volatility 
Aside from the remarkable long-run stability of commodity prices, and their significant price 
swings  over  the  business  cycle,  commodity  markets  are  also  notable  for  their  extreme 
volatility  in  the  short  run.  While  the  high-frequency  movements  of  commodity  prices  are 
typically  several  times  the  size  of  those  in  the  CPI  or  the  GDP  deflator,  they  occasionally 
become even larger (Chart 9). The recent spike in commodity price volatility is an obvious 
example, but it is by no means unprecedented. Similar, if not larger, spikes were witnessed 
during the Great Depression and the tumultuous 1970s and 1980s.6 
All  of  these  high  volatility  episodes  can  be  linked  to  exceptional  macroeconomic 
circumstances  or  political  unrest,  but  many  analysts  believe  that  destabilizing  financial 
market dynamics have also been a contributing factor. As I noted earlier, there is an ongoing 
debate  about  the  significance  of  speculation,  however  defined,  and  whether  economic 
fundamentals alone can explain what we have observed. 
Those who favour a fundamentals interpretation of events point to the highly inelastic nature 
of  commodity  demand  and  supply  in  the  short  run  –  that  is  to  say,  their  insensitivity  to 
                                                 
4   See  D.  Coletti,  R.  Lalonde,  P.  Masson,  D.  Muir  and  S.  Snudden,  “Commodities  and  Monetary  Policy: 
Implications for Infation and Price-Level Targeting,” (Bank of Canada, forthcoming). 
5   See O. Gervais and I. Kolet, “The Outlook for the Global Supply of Oil: Running on Faith?” Discussion Paper 
No. 2009-09, Bank of Canada, 2009). 
6   See O. Calvo-Gonzalez, R. Shankar and R. Trezzi, “Are Commodity Prices More Volatile Now? A Long-Run 
Perspective” (World Bank Policy Working Paper No. 5460, 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
unexpected price changes.7 Even large price movements seldom elicit a significant drop in 
demand or increase in supply in the short run, owing to fixed consumer tastes, set production 
processes, the long lags associated with bringing new commodity supplies to market and the 
absence of close substitutes. Relatively modest shocks to the macro economy can therefore 
have an exaggerated effect on commodity prices. 
Low  interest  rates  may  also  occasionally  exacerbate  upward  pressure  on  prices  since 
commodity  users  are  inclined  to  hold  larger  inventories  when  carrying  costs  are  low.  In 
addition, commodity producers may be inclined to delay production and “leave the oil in the 
ground”  until  interest  rates  rise  and  the  opportunity  cost  of  postponing  the  sale  of  their 
commodities is higher.8 As a result, demand increases while supply is squeezed. 
Alternative interpretations and the role of the speculator 
Few economists would dispute the importance of supply and demand and the special nature 
of commodity markets in explaining price movements. Some maintain, however, that there is 
more to the story and argue that zealous investors and the destabilizing dynamics of financial 
markets  frequently  cause  commodity  prices  to  overshoot  their  appropriate  levels.  Before 
demonizing  speculators,  however,  it  is  important  to  define  what  we  mean  by  “speculators” 
and remember that most financial market activity is welfare improving. In other words, there 
are both good and bad forms of speculation. 
For the purpose of our discussion, I am going to define a speculator as someone who has no 
direct  commercial  interest  in  holding  physical  commodities  but  is  willing  to  take  an  open 
position  (i.e.  make  an  investment)  in  the  form  of  a  futures  contract,  derivative  or  other 
financial instrument in the expectation of earning a positive return for bearing this risk. 
Commodity  producers,  and  those  who  use  commodities  to  manufacture  other  products, 
typically want to hedge their positions. They use these same financial instruments to manage 
the extreme volatility of commodity prices by locking in future prices, thereby shifting the risk 
onto those more willing to bear it. Speculators can therefore fulfill an important function. Their 
actions  permit  the  maintenance  of  active,  liquid  markets  for  hedging  and  assist  the  price-
discovery  process,  making  the  system  more  efficient  and  stable.  After  all,  the  guiding 
principle of buying low and selling high should actually help to reduce price volatility. 
Those  who  see  speculators  as  risk  creators,  rather  than  risk  absorbers,  argue  that  the 
increased  volatility  observed  in  recent  years  was  linked  to  a  surge  in  outstanding  futures 
contracts, derivatives, exchange-traded funds and other financial products held by individuals 
with no commercial interest in commodities. Commodity assets under management rose by 
more than US$100 billion in the past year alone, a roughly 40 per cent increase (Chart 10). 
Low  interest  rates  and  a  search  for  yield,  combined  with  the  introduction  of  innovative 
financial  products  and  what  some  have  termed  the  “financialization”  of  the  commodities 
market, have produced an unhealthy brew, they argue. 
Correlation, however, does not prove causation, and those on the other side of the debate 
cite a number of curious and seemingly contradictory aspects of the financial destabilization 
story. They argue that it is too early to race to judgement regarding the supposed “dark side” 
of the market. 
                                                 
7   See D. Gately, “OPEC Incentives for Faster Output Growth,” (Energy Journal, 25, no.2 (2004): 75–96. Also 
N. Krichene, “World Crude Oil and Natural Gas: A Demand and Supply Model,” Energy Economics 24, no. 6 
(2002): 557–76. 
8   See J. A. Frankel, and A. K. Rose, “Determinants of Agricultural and Mineral Commodity Prices,” in Inflation in 
an Era of Relative Price Shocks, R. Fry, C. Jones and C. Kent (eds.) (Reserve Bank of Australia, 2009). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First, the ratio of outstanding commercial to non-commercial contracts has remained roughly 
unchanged,  although  both  have  grown  significantly  in  the  past  four  years.  So  there  is  no 
sense  of  undue  pressure  coming  from  the  unhedged,  non-commercial  side  of  the  market. 
Second, investment in commodities is concentrated in the futures market, and its impact on 
spot prices is mainly indirect (i.e. through arbitrage).9 While futures prices might therefore be 
expected to rise as investor interest grows, the reverse has been observed – with spot prices 
staying  higher  than  futures  prices.  Third,  if  speculators  were  pushing  prices  above  their 
fundamental  levels,  one  would  expect  to  see  inventory  levels  rising,  reflecting  unwanted 
output. This has not been the case, however. In most instances inventory levels have been 
falling as prices have been rising, suggesting excess real demand.10 Finally, it is interesting 
to  note  that  the  prices  of  many  commodities  that  are  not  actively  traded  on  exchanges  or 
included in commodity indexes have risen by as much as those that are. The introduction of 
new  investment  instruments  and  new  means  of  speculating,  then,  do  not  appear  to  have 
made a significant difference in observed price pressures. This conclusion is reinforced by 
comparisons across time, which indicate volatility is no higher now than it was before these 
instruments were developed. 
Unfortunately, data limitations and the somewhat arbitrary classification of investors as either 
commercial  or  non-commercial  preclude  a  more  definitive  assessment.  Although  both  the 
fundamentalist  and  speculative  camps  can  point  to  supporting  evidence,  the  extent  of 
destabilizing speculation and its impact on commodity prices remain open questions. It would 
be surprising, however, if investment flows did not have some influence on prices. How large 
an influence and whether it is stabilizing or destabilizing probably varies over time, as do the 
costs it imposes on the economy. 
What should policy-makers do? 
What, if anything, should policy-makers do about high and volatile commodity prices? The 
answer  depends  critically  on  the  diagnosis.  Is  there  a  market  failure  that  needs  to  be 
corrected? Do the fluctuations last long enough to do serious harm? If these movements are 
predominantly  fundamental  in  nature,  attempts  to  resist  them  would  be  largely  futile  and 
counterproductive. Efforts to dampen speculation through limits on the number of allowable 
contracts or tighter margin requirements would penalize both good and bad speculation, and 
potentially  handicap  the  operation  of  markets.  Efforts  to  put  ceilings  on  commodity  prices 
would  prevent  market  clearing  and  reduce  supply.  Clearly,  if  anything  of  this  sort  is 
contemplated,  it  should  be  done  cautiously.  President  Sarkozy,  who  will  chair  the 
G20 leaders’  summits  for  the  coming  year,  has  put  reform  of  the  commodity  derivative 
market near the top of his agenda. However, he has also underscored the need for a more 
thoroughgoing  review  before  any  action  is  undertaken.  Various  supervisory  and  regulatory 
agencies  have  also  called  for  greater  oversight  of  commodity  exchanges,  and  recently 
enacted  legislation  for  financial  sector  reform  in  the  United  States  has  proposed  that  new 
limits be put on speculative trading in a number of commodities. This work, however, is still at 
a very early stage. 
Less-controversial  measures  have  also  been  proposed,  which  both  fundamentalists  and 
market  skeptics  can  support.  The  first  is  a  call  for  greater  transparency  and  information 
sharing  with  regard  to  commodity  supply  and  demand.  Lack  of  timely  and  comprehensive 
                                                 
9   The impact on spot prices of investment in commodities is more direct in the case of commodity index funds 
that are physically backed by the underlying commodities. These investment products are, however, limited to 
commodities that can be stored (metals, for example). 
10   Care  must  be  exercised  in  interpreting  these  results,  however,  since  the  relationship  between  spot  and 
forward prices, and between prices and inventories, also depends importantly on how price expectations are 
formed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
data hampers the functioning of both the physical and financial commodities markets. Recent 
work in the oil market, under the auspices of the Joint Oil Data Initiative (JODI), is serving as 
a useful template for these efforts. Improved information should help stabilize markets and 
work to everyone’s benefit, except perhaps those who profit from asymmetric information and 
possible manipulation of the present system. The second set of reforms focuses specifically 
on  transparency  in  the  over-thecounter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets  and  is  part  of  a  much 
larger  initiative  launched  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  to  enhance  financial  market 
infrastructure. The third set of reforms targets the things that several governments do, either 
intentionally or unwittingly, to inhibit the smooth operation of commodity markets. Some of 
these take the form of price ceilings or subsidies to households, which elevate demand for 
certain commodities and often reduce supply. Others involve subsidies to producers, which 
may divert needed resources to different uses. A prime example is the support for biofuels, 
which reduces the amount of arable land available for food production. The fourth and final 
set of suggested reforms involves a number of initiatives that governments ought to take, as 
opposed  to  the  various  things  that  they  should  stop  doing.  The  former  include  structural 
reforms to make their economies more flexible and resilient to shocks and, more generally, 
encouraging rather than resisting necessary adjustments to changing market conditions. 
Conclusion 
As we have seen, commodity prices are notable for three things: their remarkable stability in 
the  long  run;  their  sizable  and  persistent  swings  in  the  medium  run;  and  their  exceptional 
volatility  in  the  short  run.  These  tendencies  pose  an  enduring  challenge  for  consumers, 
producers and policy-makers. Over the long run, economists such as Prebisch and Singer11 
once worried that commodity producers would suffer ever-declining terms of trade relative to 
manufacturers.  More  recently,  this  view  seems  to  have  been  overturned,  with  some 
economists now worrying about the costs that ever-increasing commodity prices will impose 
on consumers. Over the medium run, economists are concerned about the negative effects 
that  large  and  persistent  swings  in  commodity  prices  can  have  on  the  macroeconomy  by 
destabilizing output and spurring inflation. In the short run, highly volatile prices, despite their 
temporary nature, can impose tremendous costs on some of the most vulnerable members 
of the global community. 
Before racing to solution, however, it is important to understand what forces are driving these 
prices.  Available  evidence  suggests  that  most  of  the  major  swings,  as  well  as  a  large 
proportion  of  the  short-run  volatility  that  we  observe,  can  be  explained  by  market 
fundamentals. Although speculation and what might be termed “excessive investor interest” 
might play a role in exaggerating these price movements, the supporting evidence is at best 
mixed.  Policy-makers  determined  to  take  corrective  action  should  therefore  proceed  with 
caution. Without a clear diagnosis it is difficult to talk about remedies and policy fixes with 
any confidence. 
There are, nevertheless, a number of measures that almost all economists can agree on, no 
matter  where  they  lie  on  the  fundamentals-to-destabilizing  speculation  continuum.  They 
include improved transparency and structural reforms that will remove harmful barriers, make 
markets more efficient and economies more resilient. 
Thank you. 
 
                                                 
11   See R. Prebisch, The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems. (New York, United 
Nations,  1950).  And  H.  W.  Singer,  “The  Distribution  of  Gains  between  Investing  and  Borrowing  Countries,” 
The American Economic Review 40, no. 4 (1950): 473–85. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1 
Natural resources as a percentage of GDP 
Natural resources as a percentage of provincial GDP 
Chart 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
The changing composition of Canadian commodity production 
Chart 3 
  8 
 Chart 4 
Commodity prices: composite index 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5 
Nominal and real oil-price index 
Chart 6 
Nominal and real food prices 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
Emerging-market economies continue to drive global economic growth 
Chart 7 
Growth in world GDP and contribution to global growth of oil demand 
Chart 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  10 
 Chart 9 
Year-over-year change in commodity prices 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
