Fatos Ibrahimi: Business development opportunities in Albania 
Speech by Mr Fatos Ibrahimi, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Forum on 
Business  Activity,  with  Governors  and  Managing  Board  of  the  Black  Sea  Trade  and 
Development Bank, Tirana, 20 June 2011. 
 Distinguished participants, 
It is a great pleasure for me to take the floor at this forum organized by the Black Sea Trade 
and  Development  Bank,  which  this  time  has  on  focus  the  promotion  of  development 
opportunities in Albania. Allow me say that the time of holding this forum coincides with the 
need  to  ensure  the  economy’s  revival  at  home,  after  weathering  the  direct  impacts  of  the 
global  economic  and  financial  crisis.  The  economy’s  revival  needs  to  become  more 
sustainable, promoting the development of sectors that provide a competitive advantage by 
developing specific public policies and taking the public-private investment partnership to a 
new level. 
Allow  me  to  dwell  in  more  details  on  the  contribution  that  the  financial  system  and  the 
banking sector can provide to support valuable business projects. 
The  development  and  good  financial  position  of  the  financial  system  in  general  and  the 
banking  sector  in  particular  is  a  prerequisite  for  carrying  out  a  successful  financial 
intermediation activity. In fact, over the last decade, the banking sector has experienced a 
rapid development. Well-known European banking groups have entered the market, bringing 
about knowledge and best technologies, as well as enhancing competition in the interbank 
market.  Also,  the  banks  with  Albanian  capital  have  expanded  their  network  and  have 
properly utilized the advantages of better recognition of the domestic market. As a result of 
active business development policies, the banking sector has experienced a steady growth 
of deposits and credit expansion. It suffices to say that at end-2004, total loan accounted for 
only 7% of GDP, while today it accounts for approximately 40%. About two-thirds of loans 
are extended to the private sector, while the rest to households and individuals. In business 
sector,  loans  are  extended  to  the most  important  and  fast-growing  sectors,  such as  trade, 
other services, transport and construction. Almost all business loans are extended to private 
sector,  though  recently  an  increase  in  loans  for  public  sector’s  projects  /  investments  is 
registered.  
On the other hand, the expanded banking network and better use of new technologies have 
enabled the pursuit of more competitive policies, attracting a high number of depositors and 
providing  valuable  services  to  citizens.  Deposits  continue  to  represent  the  main  source  of 
banking sector financing, an element that highlights its stability. Interest rates on loans and 
deposits  have  reflected  the  banks’  targets  on  financial  indicators,  the  monetary  policy  at 
home and in the countries of the major currencies, as well as the country risk margin. We 
deem  that  over  this  period,  these  interest  rates  have  been  appropriate  for  a  sustainable 
development of the banking financial intermediation. 
During the last 2–3 years, the country’s economy was affected by the global economic and 
financial  crisis.  The  public  authorities  at  home  were  committed  to  supporting  the  domestic 
economic  development  by  pursuing  stimulus  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  In  the  banking 
sector, the global financial crisis appeared mainly with the contracted paces of lending to the 
economy.  Throughout  this  period,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  aimed  at  preventing  the 
deepening of the impact of this crisis by conducting an ease monetary policy and supplying 
the  interbank  market  with  necessary  liquidity.  During  2009  and  2010,  the  Bank  of  Albania 
lowered the key interest rate by 1.25 percentage points, to 5%. Also, during the major part of 
2009, the banks benefited unlimited liquidity, at an interest rate equal to the key policy rate. 
In  the  meantime,  before  the  impact  of  the  crisis,  through  special  regulatory  acts  initiated 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
since  2006,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  aimed  at  limiting  some  risks  arising  from  banking 
activity, such as rapid and foreign-currency lending, by setting higher capital requirements for 
more  exposed  banks.  Throughout  this  period,  we  have  communicated  regularly  with  the 
public  at  large,  businesses  and  banking  industry,  to  explain  our  actions  and  discuss  the 
challenges posed to economic actors. We believe that as a result of these actions taken by 
public  authorities  and  the  cooperation  with  the  financial  industry,  the  banking  sector  has 
successfully  withstood  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crises,  remaining  sustainable  and 
maintaining  positive  indicators  of  financial  intermediation.  Thus,  during  2010,  the  banking 
sector  credit  growth,  albeit  lower  than  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  was  considerable,  around  
9%,  while  in  some  Central  and  South-Eastern  European  countries,  it  was  negative.  The 
deceleration  of  credit  growth,  which  was  initially  driven  by  supply-side  factors,  is  mostly  a 
phenomenon attributed to the decline in the demand for loans. As a consequence of weaker 
expectations  for  activity  development,  businesses  decreased  their  production  capacity 
utilization, lowering investment objectives and the demand for loan. 
In spite of weathering the direct impact of the crisis, important challenges lay ahead of the 
banking sector  and  the Bank  of  Albania.  First,  the  performance  of credit  quality  should  be 
monitored prudentially, aiming to timely identify non-performing loans, assess them correctly 
according to possibilities of their repayment and pursue proper policies, in order to recover 
the  loan  value  within  an  appropriate  time.  Second,  during  this  phase,  it  is  necessary  to 
strengthen the banks’ internal audit systems, not only related to credit risk but also to provide 
a higher standard of management. Third, banks should assess their expectations about the 
performance  of  their  activity  and  take  measures  to  strengthen  their  capital  position  in 
advance, in case of need.  
The Bank of Albania deems that in the periods ahead the Albanian banking sector and the 
economy need to determine and pursue more suitable development policies, which should 
include: setting realistic development objectives; setting more competitive prices for banking 
products  and  services;  and  increasing  lending  in  the  national  currency.  About  overall 
economy,  a  more  sustainable  development  should  be  ensured,  relating  mainly  to  better 
control on trade deficit, supporting the sectors that actually contribute or may contribute to 
increasing exports in the country. Public authorities should strengthen their commitment to 
developing  the  non-bank  financial  market,  which  gradually  leads  to  reduction  of  economic 
dependence on the banking sector condition and improves access to financing of a higher 
number  of  private  entities.  In  this  way,  a  greater  opportunity  would  be  provided  to  the 
financial system to finance projects in the agricultural sector, which has a high potential for 
ensuring competitive advantages in the Albanian economy. 
Allow me to conclude by emphasizing the Bank of Albania’s willingness to contribute, through 
its  policies  on  monetary  and  financial  stability,  to  maintaining  a  better  climate  of  sound 
development  of  the  financial  and  banking  activity,  as  a  condition  for  a  greater  financial 
support to business development in the country. I think that this forum will make a valuable 
contribution  to  setting  some  concrete  development  policies  and  projects,  about  which,  I 
believe  that  the  Black  Sea  Trade  and  Development  Bank  will  offer  its  own  support  and 
expertise. 
Wishing success to the proceedings of this forum, I thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
