Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Protocol to bring the National Bank of Serbia 
into line with EU central banking standards 
Introductory statement by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, at the press conference on the occasion of the signing of the 
protocol  between  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  and  the 
Delegation of the European Union to the Republic of Serbia, Belgrade, 18 March 2011. 
 that  we  completed 
Mr Šoškić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, 
Mr Degert, Ambassador and Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the Republic 
of Serbia, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very happy to be back here in Belgrade. Like last time, I am here to announce the start 
of a close cooperation programme between the ECB, the national central banks of the EU 
and the National Bank of Serbia. This programme, which has in fact already been under way 
since 1 February 2011, is again funded by the EU. 
Much has happened since I was last in Belgrade on 1 September 2008. At the end of the 
previous cooperation programme, we delivered a needs analysis report to the then Governor, 
Radovan Jelašić. Since then we have experienced a major financial crisis that has affected 
both  the  EU  and  the  Republic  of  Serbia.  I  would  like  to  reflect  on  these  two  points  in  my 
introductory remarks.  
The  needs  analysis  report 
in  May  2009  made  a  number  of 
recommendations  for  further  advancement  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  in  technical 
domains and for amendments that would be required to Serbian legislation. Such changes 
are  necessary  for  Serbia  to  receive  acknowledgement  as  being  prepared  for  joining  the 
European  Union  and  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  to  have  reached  a  level  that  would  be 
commensurate with being ready to join the European System of Central Banks. 
The ECB cooperated with 17 national central banks in preparing that needs analysis report 
for the National Bank of Serbia. Today we are proud to announce that we have 21 national 
central banks on board. We have elaborated a detailed plan of what we intend to do when, 
and  how,  over  the  next  two  years,  on  the  different  components  of  the  programme.  We 
believe that having such a large group of partners working with the ECB will benefit both the 
programme and the National Bank of Serbia. 
In the needs analysis report two years ago we looked at six areas of central banking of the 
National Bank of Serbia. As part of the current programme, as you can see from our joint 
press release, we will cover a diverse range of topics that spans 11 areas of the National 
Bank of Serbia’s competencies. 
In 2008 and 2009 much of the work involved in preparing the needs analysis report was in 
the  hands  of  EU  central  bank  experts.  They  proposed  a  benchmark  against  which  the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  should  measure  itself  in  assessing  its  readiness  for  joining  the 
ESCB. They were responsible for delivering an assessment and recommendations on areas 
that could be further improved. The new project that has just started offers training sessions 
for staff of the Bank and support in the preparation of new draft legislation as well as internal 
the rules of procedure and policies that will bring the Bank into line with EU central banking 
standards and working methods. Governor Šoškić and his team are committed to preparing a 
large number of programme outcomes or deliverables, and for our part, we from the EU will 
do  all  we  can  to  support  our  Serbian  colleagues  in  reaching  the  targets  they  have  set  for 
themselves. Today I will formally confirm this support and commitment on behalf of the EU 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
central banks by signing the relevant protocol alongside Governor Šoškić and Ambassador 
Degert. 
Let  me  now  briefly  turn  to  the  second  element  of  change  over  the  last  three  years  that  I 
highlighted a moment ago. The financial crisis that has gripped the world since October 2008 
has been challenging for the EU as well as for Serbia. There are many lessons to be learned 
from this crisis. In view of the time available, I would like to focus on two of them. One is the 
importance of good public finances and the other is the role of central banks in helping to 
safeguard financial stability. 
In the EU, the Stability and Growth Pact has always been seen as a key component in the 
process of ensuring sound public finances while fiscal policy remains a national competence 
and  we  have  not  advanced  further  towards  a  federation  and/or  harmonised  fiscal  policies. 
Very  much  to  the  ECB’s  regret,  the  reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  2005 
weakened the fiscal framework substantially. The greater flexibility that was created has led 
to a lack of enforcement of fiscal discipline at the EU level and insufficient national incentives 
to comply with the EU rules. 
Drawing  the  lessons  from  the  current  crisis  for  the  euro  area  in  particular,  the  ECB  has 
advocated  a  quantum  leap  in  terms  of  economic  governance:  better  coordination  between 
countries, clear rules for economic policy conduct, quasi-automaticity in their implementation 
and sanctions for non-compliance. I would like to underline how important it is for a country 
like Serbia, as for any other advanced or emerging economy, to pursue sound fiscal policies. 
As an open economy facing balance of payment challenges, it is crucial that Serbia pursues 
stability-oriented macroeconomic policies that will bring international recognition and put the 
country  in  a  position  to  finance  domestic  and  external  deficits  temporarily,  which  in  turn 
would smooth its development process. 
Another lesson drawn from the crisis by the EU was that there was a need to review and 
reinforce the structures for micro and macro-prudential supervision. The result has been the 
establishment of three pan-European supervisory authorities that have been given powers to 
promote  EU  interests  in  securing  financial  stability  while  day-to-day  supervisory  powers 
remain at the Member State level. On the macro-prudential side, the ECB has been asked to 
take on challenging new obligations arising from the establishment of the European Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB). The ECB provides the Chair of the ESRB and its Secretariat. While the 
ECB has for many years raised its voice on financial stability concerns and risks in the euro 
area, the new ESRB must work from an EU-wide perspective and assume the additional role 
of issuing warnings and recommendations. The authorities responsible for financial stability 
will either need to comply with those recommendations or explain why they do not wish to do 
so.  We  consider  this  a  useful  way  forward  in  the  absence  of  the  more  radical  step  of  a 
transfer of competencies from the national to the European level. From the point of view of 
the  individual  country,  including  Serbia,  I  would  also  stress  how  important  it  is  that  the 
financial stability mandate is clearly allocated and that the central bank plays an important 
contributory role in this context. 
We have drawn a number of other conclusions from the financial crisis in Europe – including 
at central bank level. We draw our inspiration from a firm intention to perform our tasks in a 
better way so as to avoid a repetition of what we have been through over the last couple of 
years. The implication of this is that, to some extent, the best practices of central banking in 
the EU are a moving target, since we consider it our duty to remain always at the forefront of 
developments that will help us to achieve our objectives in the best way possible. From this 
perspective, today’s event should not only be seen as marking the continuation of an already 
strong  partnership  between  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  and  a  large  number  of  national 
central banks in the European Union. It should hopefully also highlight a partnership that will 
continue for many years, even after we have successfully concluded this current programme 
at the end of January 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  ECB  will  coordinate  the  programme  from  Frankfurt  am  Main  and  has  dispatched  a 
Resident  Programme  Coordinator  who  will  remain  in  Belgrade  until  it  is  completed.  The 
national  central  banks  have  identified  their  respective  experts  on  supervision,  foreign 
exchange  reserve  management  and  payment  systems,  to  give  just  a  few  examples.  The 
National  Bank  of  Serbia  has  also  made  very  strong  commitments,  assigning  substantive 
resources  to  the  programme  and  its  coordination.  I  wish  all  the  experts  and  managers 
involved success in achieving the ambitious targets of this two-year central bank cooperation 
programme. 
Many thanks and good luck to you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
