Rundheersing Bheenick: Latest decisions by Mauritius’s Monetary Policy 
Committee 
Remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the post-MPC 
Press Conference, held at the Bank, Port Louis, 14 June 2011. 
(English version of the creole transcript) 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen  from  the  Press,  I  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  you  all.  I  have 
invited  you  here  this  morning  to  comment  on  the  decision  taken  by  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee (MPC) yesterday. I will also answer your questions. As usual, I have by my side 
my two fellow deputy Governors, who are also members of the MPC, and you may set your 
questions directly to them if you wish. 
It  would  be  good  to  place  the  final decision  of the  MPC  in  its  proper context.  The  context 
brings us to the end of  last year, when, at the  meeting of  September  2010, the MPC had 
decided unanimously to lower the Key Repo Rate by 100 basis points because the Mauritian 
economy was showing signs of slowing down and business sentiment was gloomy. 
It  would  be  good  also  to  take  stock  of  what  other  central  banks  were  doing  at  the  time. 
Indeed, there were no central banks lowering their policy rate, much less by 100 basis points. 
We were going against the tide, because we believed that the Mauritian economy was then 
in need of a lifeline. So we went for a very drastic cut of 100 basis points. It was a calculated 
risk. It was clear that after taking such a risk, the MPC would soon have to take things back 
in hand. And that is precisely what the MPC did after a period of six months – remember we 
had said we would leave the conditions unchanged in the market during that period. 
As from the month of March 2011, we began a process called normalisation of interest rates. 
Normalisation  means  that  the  interest  rate  must  be  positive  in  real  terms,  beyond  the 
expected inflation rate – this is what we call, in technical terms, to stay ahead of the curve. 
When we raised the rate by 50 basis points in March, we emphasized that the interest rate 
had to be normalised. The message was clear: firstly, this increase of 50 basis points, and 
secondly, the normalisation process would continue. 
At  the  last  meeting,  the  MPC  considered  the  state  of  the  Mauritian  economy  and,  at  the 
same time, reviewed global economic conditions. There are some encouraging trends at the 
local level, but also some potential source of concern that could increase downside risks in 
future  –  we  will  be  coming  back  to  these  later.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  signs  of 
overheating on the domestic front, so that there is a school of thought that says we should 
leave the rate unchanged, keeping the monetary policy stance on hold, until the clouds, that 
threaten some economies at the global level, dissipate. 
Unfortunately, inflationary pressures have persisted. For the month of April, for example, the 
year-on-year  inflation  showed  a  small  decline,  barely  measurable,  from  7.2  percent 
to7.0 percent. It was too early to say that it was a reversal of trend. Eventually, when the May 
figures  were  released,  the  year-on-year  inflation  rose  to  7.1  percent,  no  longer  showing  a 
downward trend. In other words, inflationary pressures still persist, despite the hike in interest 
rate of 50 basis points at the MPC meeting in March 2011. At the same time, if we look at 
other measures of inflation, that is to say, the Core 1 and Core 2 inflation, also based on the 
year-on-year methodology, they confirm that the underlying inflationary pressures still persist. 
This is an indication that we must continue to tighten our approach to monetary policy and 
this is what we have done on the domestic front. If inflationary pressures do not abate, we 
intend to continue on the same track in order to get ahead of the curve. In other words, the 
normalisation process will continue.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
There are some who believe that the economy is rapidly slowing down and the balance of 
payments is a major source of concern. They also point out that FDI flows fell significantly in 
the first quarter of 2011, and unemployment rose slightly from 7.3 to 7.8 percent last year. 
According to them, these are factors that should be considered to maintain the status quo, 
that is, no increase in the Key Repo Rate. But our reading is a little different – we believe that 
the performance of the Mauritian economy is fairly good. Earlier this year, we thought that 
growth would be around 4.4 percent. Presently, the growth forecast of the Central Statistics 
Office is 4.5 percent, and since March, we at the Central Bank, had forecasted that growth 
would  be  4.6  percent.  Now  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  could  be  above 
4.6 percent. 
Let me explain: growth of exports in our main sectors, whether textiles, seafood and tourism, 
is buoyant. The order books are full for the textile sector. Since our competitors have higher 
levels  of  inflation,  for  example  in  China,  we  believe  that  prospects  are  improving  for  our 
exporters.  Our  export  revenues  reached  a  record  level  of  15.2  billion  rupees  in  the  first 
quarter of 2011 (quarter on quarter) compared to the last five years. Tourist arrivals for the 
first quarter are also a record. We believe that the current estimate of tourist arrivals for the 
year,  which  is  around  980,000,  may  in  fact  surpass  the  onemillion  mark.  There  are 
unprecedented levels of growth to date, 25 percent in one case and 40 percent in others. Of 
course, these growth rates are for smaller markets, not for major ones, but they show that 
the diversification efforts and promotional campaigns, conducted by the MTPA and others, 
are beginning to bear fruit. There are constraints such as air access, and if these constraints 
are reviewed and corrected, there is no reason why we  may not exceed the figure of one 
million  tourist  arrivals.  So,  the  tourism  sector  is  doing  very  well.  But  we  need  to  focus  on 
target markets; there are traditional markets, two or three markets that are in bad shape. The 
English Market and the Italian market are on the decline, so is the Belgian market. Europe is 
losing ground in some areas. 
Let  me  come  back  for  a  moment  on  what  is  happening  locally  before  proceeding  to  the 
international  front.  I  was  saying  that  FDI  flows  had  fallen  very  drastically.  If  we  take  the 
figures for the first quarter of 2011, they represent about 25 percent of the FDI flows we had 
received during the first quarter of 2010. As you are all aware, we depend mainly on these 
flows for our balance of payments equilibrium. Our balance of payments, in terms of visible 
trade, is in deficit. We make up for this deficit by the revenues from services and FDI flows 
and by draw downs from foreign currency loans by Government. If the trends we observed in 
the FDI flows do not reverse, we may have problems further down the line. These problems 
may  affect  our  economic  fundamentals  drastically  and  could  even  affect  the  value  of  the 
rupee. We believe this is a concern not only for the Central Bank, but also for the country, 
and a signal to authorities concerned to redouble their efforts to continue to attract more FDI 
flows, which would enable us to continue on our path to development, in the same way as we 
have done so far. We hope that this decline is one-off and will be corrected rapidly. Anyway, 
a single quarter is not enough to make forecasts. And we have reasons to believe that the 
figure  of  16  billion  rupees,  which  the  Board  of  Investment  has  estimated  as  FDI  flows  for 
2011, could be achieved; otherwise we could face difficulties later. 
The third point is the issue of employment. If we make a very brief reading of the situation in 
terms  of  employment,  we  find  that  the  unemployment  rate  has  increased  during  the  first 
quarter. Normally during the first two quarters of the year, the unemployment rate increases 
on account of seasonal factors. But in general, the rate of unemployment is not a concern, 
since the climate at the global level itself is not conducive to job creation. So, if in Mauritius, 
we  have  an  unemployment  rate  which  is  just  under  8  percent,  there  are  countries  where 
unemployment  exceeds  15  percent  and  could  even  reach  20  percent.  Given  a  crisis 
situation, we do not believe that we would encounter major problems with unemployment in 
macroeconomic  terms.  However,  in  microeconomic  terms,  we  have  a  problem.  There  is  a 
mismatch between the demand for jobs and job creation. Nevertheless, in 2010, there have 
been  11,300  jobs  created,  notwithstanding  the  employment  of  foreigners.  We  believe  that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this year, about 9,500 jobs will be created, including 500 jobs for foreigners. Job creation will 
therefore  continue  in  Mauritius.  But  we  must  renew  our  efforts  in  re-skilling,  in  view  of 
creating  jobs  in  sectors  that  are  growing,  rather  than  in  areas  where  people  usually  seek 
employment,  like  the  civil  service.  The  outlook  is  more  interesting  in  the  ICT  and  BPO 
sectors, for instance. So unemployment is not an immediate issue, but it is not the case for 
inflation. After a review of the situation on the domestic front, the MPC chose to rather focus 
on control of inflation than on fears over growth. 
Let us now move to the international scene. As you know, the crisis is still here. There are 
some major economies, very important to us, which are in very bad shape, especially the US 
market. The end of the QE2 could create more volatility for the dollar and we still do not know 
what will happen after that. So we must exercise great vigilance in relation to the value of our 
rupee which could appreciate on the back of a weakening dollar. The problems confronting 
the euro area still persist. China is having problems with inflation, and it is currently having 
recourse  to  outsourcing  to  Vietnam  and  Cambodia.  So,  internationally,  there  are  major 
concerns. Despite this, the general view is that during the second quarter, the situation will 
improve and there will be recovery at the global level. 
There  are  concerns  over  food  and  commodity  prices,  as  well  as  energy  prices.  You  are 
probably  aware  that  at  the  last  OPEC  meeting,  no  consensus  was  reached  to  increase 
production.  And  if  demand  in  the  global  economy  is  too  high  and  oil  production  does  not 
increase,  it  may  result  in  a  hike  in  oil  prices.  The  good  thing  is  that  Saudi  Arabia  has 
indicated its intention to continue to increase production unilaterally. If the global recovery for 
the  second  quarter  is  much  stronger  than  the  first  quarter,  there  is  a  risk  that  food  and 
commodity prices start going up again – we must be prepared for a further increase in food 
and  commodity  prices.  A  positive  note  was  that,  when  the  FAO  index  rose,  there  was  no 
corresponding  increase  in  the  prices  of  the  foodstuffs  that  Mauritians  tend  to  consume, 
namely, dairy products, cereals and rice. But if there is recovery, there is a risk that food and 
commodity prices and oil prices might go up again – which will represent a new source of 
inflation for us. 
This brings us to the need of exercising control over rising prices in Mauritius – we welcome 
Government’s  initiative  to  set  up  L’Observatoire  des  Prix.  This  is  an  excellent  initiative 
indeed. But L’Observatoire des Prix alone will not solve the problem of rising prices. It is a 
tool among many others, just like monetary policy is a tool among many others. In the case 
of L’Observatoire des Prix, it must be supported by greater efforts geared towards making 
changes  in  the  consumption  pattern  of  people  and  those  that  determine  prices,  in  other 
words,  changes  in  consumer  behaviour  and  price-setting  behaviour.  The  two  must  go 
together, otherwise L’Observatoire des Prix would not contribute towards keeping inflation at 
reasonable rates. We hope that L’Association des Consommateurs and other efforts in the 
field  of  financial  education  would  lead  to  changes  in  consumption  patterns  through  better 
informed consumers. 
Some  people  have  expressed  concern  that  there  might  be  in  Mauritius  what  is  called 
stagflation.  Stagflation  had  made  the  headlines  in  the  late  60s,  early  70s,  to  describe  the 
problem  which  the  British  economy  was  facing  at  that  time.  We  are  very  far  from  this 
situation – we have a high growth rate, not far from our trend growth rate. Firstly, a feature of 
stagflation is that the economy should be stagnating. Growth of 4.6 percent is not at all what 
we could call a stagnant economy. Secondly, there must be a high rate of inflation, perhaps 
double-digit inflation, if not an inflationary trend that points to double digits. Our inflation rate, 
depending on which measure you are using, is 4.8 percent (CPI measure), or 7.1 percent 
(measured  year-on-year)  for  the  last  month.  It  is  true  that  the  trend  is  upward,  but 
unfortunately  for  the  proponents  of  stagflation and  fortunately  for  us, inflation is  far  from  a 
double-digit inflation. Inflation expectations are well-anchored. Our last Inflation Expectations 
Survey brought it out very well – there is a majority of people who believe that inflation will 
remain  within  the  range  of  5  to  8  percent.  5  to  8  percent  inflation  is  not  what  one  would 
expect in an environment of stagflation. The last element of stagflation is that there is no job 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
creation, and rising unemployment. In Mauritius, there is job creation – more than 9,500 jobs 
including 500 jobs for foreigners will be created in 2011. Therefore forget about the notion of 
stagflation  in  Mauritius!  Our  economy  is  quite  buoyant;  we  are  optimistic  that  we  will  go 
beyond the 4.6 percent growth. That is why we opted to continue the normalisation process 
so that inflation does not come to play the spoilsport. 
Some  additional  points:  The  Monetary  Policy  Challenge  (MP  Challenge).  We  will  be 
launching our fifth edition of MP Challenge at the end of the month, and we hope there will 
be more participation this year. As you know, the  MP Challenge  is an invitation to college 
students and young academics to form a team to simulate the process of “monetary policy 
making” in Mauritius. And we set up a separate panel to evaluate entries. In this context, we 
have recourse to the University of Mauritius or the University of Technology. We are part of 
the  panel,  of  course,  but  we  trust  the  representatives  of  the  universities  to  evaluate  the 
entries. We hope there will be a good response – last year there were 23 participants, we 
hope that this year there will be still more. 
My Second Deputy Governor mentioned earlier about business sentiment. It is good to point 
out  that  there  have  been  very  positive  feedbacks  from  the  Business  Sentiment  Surveys 
conducted by the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry. We hope that by the end of 
the year, the Bank of Mauritius will be able to launch a Business Sentiment Survey, targeting 
a  sample  of  respondents  slightly  different  from  that  targeted  by  the  Mauritius  Chamber  of 
Commerce and Industry, which primarily targets its own members. 
We hope to launch this survey before the end of the year since we have had good results 
from  the  Inflation  Expectations  Surveys.  These  surveys  have  been  successful  and  we 
believe we can expand the range of surveys that we have in Mauritius. 
Another very positive point I want to make is on productivity in general and specifically, on 
capital  productivity,  which  has  consistently  increased  last  year  compared  to  the  previous 
year.  This  partly  reflects  the  investments  made  by  our  enterprises  in  previous  years  to 
enhance their level of technology. We have concerns about the decline in public investment, 
the GDFCF. We are still more concerned about the even more substantial decline in private 
sector investment. We hope that measures will be taken to reverse this downward trend. We 
hope firstly that there will be an increase in the GDFCF and that secondly its composition will 
favour private sector investment. The prospects are not good in private sector investment, 
most  of  which,  excluding  purchases  of  aircraft  and  ship,  consists  of  construction  projects, 
IRS projects and hotel projects that are now completed. Several other projects in the IRS are 
still pending and are unlikely to find financing. So investment is a source of concern. 
What about the savings side? The reduction in the gap between inflation and savings rates 
charged by banks has resulted in an increase in the level of savings in Mauritius. It was a 
source of great concern to us when two years ago, we had raised this issue. At that time, the 
level  of  savings  had  reached  around  12  percent,  now  it  exceeds  16  percent.  It’s  a  good 
trend;  we  hope  that,  with  this  increase  in  interest  rate,  which  should  be  reflected  in  the 
savings deposit rate charged by banks, investors will be even more encouraged. 
And to help you compare Mauritius with other countries, we will circulate two tables – one to 
highlight  the  rate  of  inflation  in  countries  that  are  relevant  to  Mauritius  or  in  comparable 
countries. From the table, you will see that there are only three countries that have a higher 
inflation rate than Mauritius, namely India, Indonesia and Romania. All other countries have 
an inflation rate lower than that of Mauritius. A big effort is required to bring back our inflation 
rate in the ranks. A continuous effort should be considered by everyone to control all sources 
of inflation. The second table that we will circulate will show that the monetary policy stance 
of the Bank of Mauritius is not different from that of other central banks. The table will show 
you what other central banks have been doing in recent months in terms of monetary policy 
and  interest  rates.  These  two  tables  will  allow  you  to  situate  Mauritius  vis-à-vis  other 
countries, as it is important to gauge the differential between us and other countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
