Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro area and its role in the global economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  upon 
reception of the 2011 Global Economy Prize, Kiel, 19 June 2011. 
 It  is  a  privilege  to  receive  this  Global  Prize  today.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  jury  for  this 
distinction, which honours the ECB and its staff. 
Kiel has a long tradition of openness. It has forged close ties with the rest of the world, ever 
since it joined the Hanseatic League in 1283. Seven centuries later, Kiel is today part of the 
euro area, a vast economic continent, which is itself globally open and linked in many ways 
to the rest of the world. It is about the euro area and of its role in the global economy that I 
would like to share with you some thoughts in receiving this Prize today. 
How can we characterize the salient features of the euro area and of its role in the global 
economy? And what are the challenges that need to be addressed in this context? 
Three key aspects deserve attention in my view. 
First, the euro area is amongst the most open of large economies in the world. 
The euro area’s trade relations with the rest of the world have grown appreciably since 1999, 
which underscores that the euro area is not a closed shop. The euro area’s trade openness 
has  increased  by  about  9  percentage  points  over  the  first  years  of  the  euro,  from  roughly 
one-quarter to  one-third  of  output, notably  as a  result  of  rapidly  growing  trade  with  vibrant 
economies, such as the new EU Member States or China. 
The  euro  area  is  the  world’s  largest  trading  partner,  after  the  European  Union  itself, 
accounting  for  about  14%  of  global  exports  and  imports  in  2010.  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union  has  fostered  trade.  Not  only  inside  the  euro  area  (+50%  increase  in  trade  volumes 
over the first years of the euro), but even more so with the European Union as a whole and 
the rest of the world (+80% over the same period). 
The euro area is also very open financially, and increasingly so. Its international assets and 
liabilities averaged each around 170% of GDP in 2009, compared with roughly 140% of GDP 
for the US and 90% of GDP for Japan. As financial globalisation unfolded in the last decade, 
the  euro  area’s  external  assets  and  liabilities  have  grown  in  tandem,  by  roughly 
80 percentage points of GDP between 1999 and 2009. 
The euro area is a vast continent of more than 331 million citizens. By population size, it is 
comparable with the other large economy of the developed world, namely the United States, 
with a population of 310 million. 
In terms of economic output, the euro area is second only to the United States. It accounted 
for about 20% of world output in 2010, twice the share of Japan (about 10% of world output), 
and somewhat less than the United States (about one-quarter of world output).  
Second, the euro is a stable and credible currency. 
For over 12 years now, the European Central Bank –together with all national central banks– 
has been delivering what it is expected to deliver: price stability in the euro area as a whole 
over  the  medium-term,  with  an  average  annual  inflation  of less  than  2%,  but  close  to  2%. 
Since we are in Kiel, let me add that in Germany the average yearly inflation has been 1.5%, 
which is a better result than for any such 12 year period over the last 50 years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We have thereby been safeguarding the euro’s purchasing power. This has been achieved 
despite several headwinds to the European economy: oil prices went up; the internet bubble 
burst; violence and wars have raged in some parts of the world; and starting in mid-2007 we 
had to cope with the most severe global financial crisis in over 60 years. 
Taken  as  a  whole,  the  euro  area  performed  soundly  also  when  looking  at  other 
macroeconomic indicators, or comparing with other large developed economies. 
 
Adjusted  for  differences  in  population  growth,  per  capita  GDP  growth  in  the  euro 
area  over  the  last  decade  has  been  almost  the  same  as  in  the  United  States,  at 
about 1% per year. 
The dispersion of real GDP growth rates across euro area countries is comparable 
with  the  equivalent  dispersion  across  U.S.  states.  For  instance,  the  difference 
between the fastest and slowest-growing U.S. states is not of a markedly different 
order of magnitude as that between euro area countries.  
Overall employment in the euro area increased by 14 million during the first twelve 
years, compared with a rise of about 8 million in the United States. 
And the overall yearly public finance deficit in the euro area is presently about half 
that in the United States or in Japan. The IMF projects indeed the euro area’s fiscal 
deficit to reach 4.4% of GDP this year, against 10.8% of GDP in the U.S. and 10.0% 
in Japan. 
   The  euro’s  international  status  is  the  outcome  of  market  forces.  But  one  of  the  particular 
characteristics  of  the  euro’s  international  role  is  to  be  markedly  regional  and  strongest  in 
economies with close geographical and institutional links to the euro area. 
The euro’s international role also displays a high degree of stability. And the available factual 
evidence suggests that it has remained broadly unchanged since the outbreak of the global 
financial crisis, in particular. 
For  instance,  the  euro  accounted  in  2010  for  about  one-quarter  of  disclosed  foreign 
exchange reserves globally (against around 60% for the  US dollar and 4% for the yen). It 
also  accounted  for  about  one-quarter  of  the  stock  of  international  debt  securities  and  for 
roughly 20% of foreign exchange turnover. 
Third, the euro area has a balanced current account.  
As such, the euro area does not contribute to global imbalances, one of the main challenges 
facing the global economy and the world community. 
It is worth stressing that the euro area is the relevant dimension to consider for a vast single 
currency and economic area with a common exchange rate and monetary policy. And there, 
the numbers are clear: the euro area current account balance averaged less than 0.1% of 
GDP over 2005–2007 before the global crisis broke out, according to IMF figures. Moreover, 
the euro area current account is still projected by the Fund to be broadly balanced this year 
and the next up to 2015. The picture is very different in other parts of the world.  
A  concern  is  that  after  some  partial  reduction  induced  by  the  crisis,  global  imbalances  are 
starting  to  widen  again.  This  raises  challenges  for  international  monetary  and  financial 
cooperation.  The  euro  area  has  a  significant  stake  in  effective  global  re-balancing,  notably 
through sounder domestic policies worldwide which, in turn, would contribute to global external 
stability. The global economy has a lot of homework to do if it is to address these challenges. 
People of goodwill, inspired by the desire to keep the global economy “open, market-based, 
just  and  protective”  will  surely  be  needed  to  that  end.  Credit  should  therefore  be  given  to 
initiatives  such  as  the  Global  Economy  Prize  to  encourage  them  to  press  ahead  in  that 
direction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
