Ewart S Williams: Stimulating domestic capital in the energy sector 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Trinidad and Tobago energy conference, Port-of-Spain, 8 February 2011. 
 It’s a bit of a paradox but the facts are that the energy sector makes a major contribution to 
GDP,  to  the  public  finances  and  to  exports,  (but  scarcely  any  direct  contribution  to 
employment) and depends very little on domestic financing. 
Table I illustrates the contribution of the energy sector to the various economic aggregates. 
You should note too, that since the beginning of the last decade, the energy sector was the 
main  engine  of  growth  and  has  grown  at  an  average  rate  of  10.3  per  cent  per  annum, 
outpacing the average growth of 3.8 per cent for the non-energy sector. 
In terms of financing, Table II shows that the energy sector accounts for a mere 3 per cent of 
total  banking  system  loans  and  virtually  the  entire  bank  exposure  is  to  the  “service” 
companies.  
The picture is even worse if we look at the capital market. With the exception of one small 
company listed on the second-tier market, none of the 32 listed companies on the first-
tier  of  the  stock  exchange  are  in  the  energy  sector.  In  addition,  of  the  $17  billion  of 
(private) securities floated on the domestic capital market in the last decade, none were for 
local energy sector companies.  
And here I am defining the energy sector in the broad sense, comprising: 
(i)  
upstream – largely multi-national firms specializing in exploration and the production 
(mining) of oil and gas;  
the downstream petro-chemical sector (also largely foreign owned); and 
the energy services sector (the smaller firms that provide support services) – these 
are largely locally-owned, though there are three multi-nationals that also operate in 
this sector.  
(ii)  
(iii)  
The  foreign-owned  enterprises  are  financed  almost  exclusively  from  abroad  through  direct 
equity injections and intra-company loans. The Table III presents estimates of total foreign 
direct  investment  in  the  energy  sector  in  the  period  (2001–2009).  The  significant  inflows 
during the first half of the decade were on account of the considerable capital investments 
associated with the development of the LNG industry.  
Of  course,  Petrotrin  and  NGC,  the  large  local  companies  in  the  energy  sector  are  state 
corporations who also finance their investment projects largely from international sources (of 
course,  in  addition  to  retained  earnings).  According  to  their  published  annual  reports, 
external indebtedness by Petrotrin and NGC has grown tremendously. NGC’s external debt 
more  than  tripled  between  2004  and  2006.  Of  the  approximately  $9  billion  increase  in 
Petrotrin’s debt over the period 2006–2009, almost all was financed on the external market.  
The  often  repeated  rationale  for  the  limited  involvement  of  the  domestic  financial  sector 
includes: 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
the large capital outlays and long lead times to production;  
high risk and uncertainty associated with exploration investment; 
potential for inherently variable resource revenue; and 
the high interest rates and inefficiency of domestic capital markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It is true that the domestic capital market is limited in terms of the financing requirements of 
the  larger  companies.  For  example,  Petrotrin  went  to  the  overseas  market  to  raise 
US$750 million  in  2007  and  US$850  million  in  2009  to  finance  the  Gasoline  Optimization 
Project and the ultra-low sulphur diesel plant. The domestic financial system certainly could 
not supply those resources. (But one is tempted to ask why a small portion could not have 
been raised here).  
In  terms  of  the  capital  market,  the  largest  local  currency,  private  sector  issue  in  the 
domestic  capital  market  was  TT$1  billion  in  2005  for  TSTT.  In  terms  of  foreign  currency 
issues,  the  largest  issue  was  US$130  million  for  the  Trans  Jamaica  Highway  in  2004, 
followed by US$120 million for the Government of Barbados in 2009.  
The  Petrotrin  transaction  in  2009  clearly  shows  that  the  required  capital  could  have  been 
raised on the local market at a lower interest cost (Table IV). However, the issue size was 
considerably larger than the customary values raised on the domestic market.  
Apart from issue size, the multinational energy companies will not borrow on the domestic 
market  because  they  can  access  financing  at  cheaper  rates.  According  to  the  BP’s 
consolidated financial statements for 2009, the company’s interest cost for fixed rate debt for 
US dollar, Euro and “other currencies” issues were 4 per cent, 4 per cent and 6 per cent, 
respectively.  The  rates  were  considerably  lower  for  floating  rate  debt  (1  per  cent,  2  per 
cent and 3 per cent). In this year, the prime rate in Trinidad and Tobago was 11.9 per cent. 
Capital issues were at rates ranging from 5.25 to 8.95 per cent.  
The pre-conditions for increasing domestic financing in the energy sector are better now than 
they have ever been.  
First,  excess  reserves  have  averaged  $2.3  billion  throughout  2010,  and  the  foreign 
exchange situation is strong enough to afford such loans.  
Second, interest rate differentials between domestic and foreign interest rates have virtually 
disappeared and investors are looking for investment opportunities. In principle, there is the 
potential for both bank and capital market financing. 
Over  the  years,  there  have  been  two  proposals  pertaining  to  the  multi-national  upstream 
sector.  The  first  is  for  these  corporations  to  ring-fence  their  domestic  operations  and 
open these up to wider public participation – listed on the domestic stock exchange. The 
practical implications of this have not really been explored. There is, however, a view among 
some  multi-nationals  that  adhering  to  differing  capital  market  regulations  in  developing 
countries will be an unnecessary hassle. 
It should be noted, however, that listings of multi-national operations have been successfully 
undertaken in countries such as Nigeria where ChevronTexaco and Mobil are listed on the 
Nigeria  Stock  Exchange.  In  the  local  context,  it  is  not  clear,  for  example,  whether  tax 
incentives  could  be  used  under  these  circumstances.  Could  some  level  of  local  equity 
participation be made a condition for new entrants? I raised this with an industry insider 
and the retort was... “could the process start with bringing Petrotrin and NGC (or part thereof) 
to market?” An interesting question indeed. 
Second, the issue of depository receipts has also been raised.  
Domestic capital in the energy sector could be enhanced with the introduction of depository 
receipts by the multinational corporations that operate locally. A depository receipt (DR) is a 
security issued by a depository bank to domestic buyers as a substitute for direct ownership 
of stock in foreign companies. A DR is a convenient way for companies whose stock is listed 
on a foreign exchange to cross-list their stock on the Trinidad and Tobago Stock Exchange 
(TTSE)  and  make  stocks  available  for  purchase  by  local  investors  without  the  concern  of 
currency differences. 
DRs have increasingly become a facet of the capital markets of countries where there is a 
strong  multinational  presence.  DRs  are  issued  in  countries  such  as  India,  Taiwan,  Hong 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Kong and South Korea. There is already a depository bank with local operations (Citibank) 
that can facilitate the process. 
However,  the  challenge  would  lie  in  the  negotiations  with  the  multinationals  –  convincing 
them  of  the  advantages  of  issuing  DRs.  Perhaps  the  government  can  consider 
enshrining provisions in future bid rounds or other long-term contracts with foreign 
companies which promote the issuance of TTDRs. 
Even  if  we  put  aside  the  larger  multi-nationals,  the  active  involvement  of  private  domestic 
capital  will  greatly  help  the  development  of  the  energy  services  sector.  These  small  local 
companies (drillers and other service operators) take on active role in reviving old wells as 
they  assume  control  of  small  acreages  on  which  they  do  their  own  exploration  and 
production. 
Output  from  these  sources  has  declined  in  recent  years.  The  Government  has  proposed 
changes  for  small  land  and  marine  operators  to  stimulate  activity.  The  incentives  are 
designed to increase the tax deductible costs to reduce the liability for the SPT.  
I am suggesting that a Junior Stock Exchange could be an effective mechanism for raising 
capital for this sector, while broadening public participation. 
A junior stock market is a mechanism whereby enterprises that find difficulty raising capital 
through commercial loans can source the required funding. Successful junior markets have 
been  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  (London  Stock  Exchange  Junior  Market)  and 
Canada (Toronto Stock Exchange Junior Market). In 2009, a junior market was launched 
in Jamaica. From all reports, it has been very successful. 
The  main  feature  of  a  junior  market  is  that  it  allows  investors  to  place  capital  into  listed 
SMEs.  Market  development  is  supported  by  appropriate  tax  incentives  by  the 
government as such exemption from taxes on dividends and share transfers. Some of 
the criteria for the establishment of a junior market are as follows (the process puts some 
obligations on the SMEs): 
– 
– 
Companies desirous of listing must do so via an IPO.  
The preferred method of issue is via a Prospectus Issue where an offer is made to 
the public by or on behalf of a company, at a fixed offer price. 
For  the  purpose  of  transparency,  annual  statutory  audits,  quarterly  and  annual 
reports  are  required  in  keeping  with  the  submission  requirements  of  the  main 
exchange.  
A  company  which  is  wholly  or  partly  a  subsidiary  of  a  registered  entity  on  a 
recognized stock exchange shall not be eligible to be listed. (This disqualifies local 
operations of international oil companies) 
  I  am  told  that  there  are  some  obstacles  to  be  cleared  before  a  junior  market  for  energy 
service firms could be established. One is the assignment of acreages by Petrotrin and the 
second is the need to address trade union opposition. 
It is said that our stock market has not flourished because shareholders are reluctant to dilute 
ownership  and  firms  are  reluctant  to  open  themselves  up  to  public  scrutiny.  However,  the 
economic environment has changed and if we are to meet our investment requirements, a 
greater shareholding democracy is necessary. This is another area where private and public 
sector collaboration could yield dividends. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
