Ignazio Visco: The new EU economic governance and market discipline  
Remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General and Member of the Governing Board 
of the Bank of Italy, at the Brussels Economic Forum 2011, “Rethinking economic policy in 
Europe  –  a  new  era  of  EU  economic  governance”,  Session  II:  “EU  economic  governance 
framework in practice – ensuring its robustness”, Brussels, 18 May 2011. 
 The Economic and Monetary Union has been a success in many respects. It has enhanced 
internal  trade  and  delivered  a  credible  monetary  policy  that  has  anchored  inflation 
expectations and fostered a culture of price stability. The euro rapidly attained the status of a 
strong international currency. However, the functioning of EMU has been hampered by some 
very serious pitfalls in its institutional design. We now clearly see an asymmetry between the 
strength  of  the  “monetary”  pillar  and  the  weakness  of  the  institutional  framework.  The 
architects  of  EMU  understood  that  fiscal  discipline  was  necessary  for  the  functioning  of  a 
monetary  union  in  which  the  single  monetary  authority  would  be  confronted  by  multiple 
national  fiscal  policy-makers.  To  achieve  fiscal  discipline  they  relied  on  a  multilateral 
surveillance mechanism based on fiscal rules.  
The  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  shown  that  the  surveillance  mechanism  has  not 
been effective. European rules were not sufficient to induce countries to adopt prudent fiscal 
policies  in  good  times.  The  result was  that  many  euro  area  countries  faced  the crisis  with 
relatively  high  deficit  ratios,  still  far  from  their  medium  term  objectives;  those  objectives, 
equal  to  a  balanced  budget  for  most  member  states,  would  have  allowed  countries  to  let 
automatic stabilizers operate in unfavourable circumstances without exceeding the 3 per cent 
threshold. In several countries the debt-to-GDP ratio was above the 60 per cent ceiling, in 
some  cases  still  by  a  large  margin.  Fiscal  rules  and  procedures  failed  on  more  than  one 
occasion. In 2003 a trade-off of short-term interests within the European Council stopped the 
rules from being applied to Germany and France. This reflected the lack of an independent 
enforcer. The sustained fiscal profligacy in Greece was not timely reflected in official fiscal 
data (the estimate for 2009 deficit, which in April of the same  year  was 5.1 per cent, was 
progressively  revised  upwards  to  15  per  cent).  This  case  exemplifies  problems  of  the 
statistical  monitoring  framework.  There  is  a  wide  consensus  that  fiscal  rules  should  be 
broader (encompassing debt dynamics) and more effective (via new voting procedures). 
The  crisis  has  also  highlighted  that  low  public  debts  and  deficits  do  not  guarantee  fiscal 
sustainability. In a crisis, private liabilities can quickly turn into public debt. Before the crisis, 
the fiscal performance of Ireland was considered extremely successful. From the launch of 
EMU, it almost halved its debt-to-GDP ratio, reducing it to 25 per cent in 2007. The recession 
more than doubled it. Furthermore, households and non-financial firms were highly indebted 
(their debt burden was about two and a half times GDP); the major Irish banks had balance 
sheet assets equal to five times GDP. The fall in real estate prices and the recession caused 
them big credit losses; the political decision to use public funds to bail out reckless financial 
institutions has pushed up the public debt by more than 20 percentage points of GDP so far, 
to a level of about 95 per cent of GDP in 2010, with further disbursements anticipated for this 
year following the results of the stress tests conducted on banks. Perhaps, the crisis would 
have been less severe if a framework to detect and tackle macroeconomic imbalances and 
systemic risks had been in place. This has prompted the introduction of a second pillar in EU 
economic governance: macroeconomic surveillance. 
But  there  is  a  need  for  a  third  pillar:  market  discipline.  I  will  not  focus  on  the  temporary 
arrangements devised to cope with the significant short-run challenges posed by the crisis. 
Rather,  I  would  like  to  offer  some  remarks  on  the  long-term  institutional  set-up  that  is 
currently taking shape in the European Union. During the early stages of the debate on the 
new European architecture, there was relatively little emphasis on the role that markets can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
play to induce fiscal discipline. The issue gained prominence in November 2010, when the 
main characteristics of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the permanent mechanism 
slated to replace the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) in June 2013, were spelled 
out. 
Scepticism on the effectiveness of market-based fiscal discipline was already present in the 
early stages of the EMU project. The final report of the Delors Committee remarked in 1989 
that:  “the  constraints  imposed  by  market  forces  might  either  be  too  slow  and  weak  or  too 
sudden and disruptive”. The European Commission expressed similar concerns a year later. 
And many years earlier, Luigi Einaudi, the great Italian economist and statesman, summed 
up  the  common  view  by  saying  “i  risparmiatori  hanno  cuore  di  coniglio,  gambe  di  lepre…” 
(“investors have the heart of a rabbit, the legs of a hare …”). I think it is fair to say that the 
mistrust in market discipline finds support in the EMU experience. In the period from 1999 to 
mid-2007  (just  prior  to  the  sub-prime  crisis)  markets  almost  did  not  differentiate  among 
European  sovereigns.  Sovereign  yield  spreads  relative  to  the  German  10-year  benchmark 
ranged  from  5  basis  points  for  Ireland  to  50  basis  points  for  Greece.  The  interest  rate 
differentials for Greece, Ireland and Portugal were still below 50 basis points in the spring of 
2008. After a period of increased financial market tension, during which, however, the spread 
on Greek and Irish bonds rarely exceeded 300 basis points, at the beginning of December 
2009  10-year  spreads  were  back  below  200  basis  points  for  all  three  countries.  After  that 
they spiralled upwards, reaching 660, 380 and 330 basis points, respectively, between the 
end of April and the beginning of May 2010. There were several more acute bouts of tension 
on the euro area sovereign debt market in the second half of 2010 and the first few months 
of  2011.  The  pressure  eased  temporarily  after  the  decision,  last  March,  to  increase  the 
lending  capacity  of  EFSF  and  to  establish  a  permanent  crisis  resolution  mechanism.  But, 
also reflecting the perception that in the transition from the EFSF to the ESM the burden on 
private creditors may become extremely heavy, spreads have risen again to very high levels 
and now stand above 650 basis points for Portugal, 750 for Ireland and 1250 for Greece. 
Formal statistical exercises also find a relatively weak correlation between spreads and fiscal 
fundamentals  (i.e.  the  debt  level,  present  and  projected  primary  deficits)  in  the  pre-crisis 
period. The correlation became stronger later, when it was already too late to avoid a major 
area-wide  turmoil.  The  issue,  then,  is  how  markets  can  exercise  a  more  prominent  role, 
working properly – which means gradually – to complement rule-based fiscal surveillance. A 
deterioration  of  the  cost  and  availability  of  funds  to  both  private  and  sovereign  issuers 
provides  a  strong  incentive  to  correct  irresponsible  behaviour,  tracking  closely  both  the 
country’s  fiscal  fundamentals  and  private  sector’s  weaknesses  (that  may  prompt  the 
government  to  step  in).  Thus,  the  key  question  is  when  and  under  what  conditions  credit 
markets provide sufficient incentives to restrain irresponsible borrowing.  
The recent experience suggests that investors will be more effective in disciplining euro area 
governments if certain institutional prerequisites are met.  First, borrowers must  adequately 
and  promptly  respond  to  market  signals.  Second,  transparent  and  timely  information 
concerning the actions and the budgetary position of sovereign lenders should be available 
to all agents (and a reform designed to improve the quality and reliability of fiscal statistics by 
strengthening Eurostat’s powers has been recently adopted). Third, full bail-out of troubled 
governments should be credibly ruled out. A no-bail-out clause is already enshrined in the 
European treaties, but many investors were inclined to believe that the clause would not be 
applied  in  an  emergency.  This  implied  that,  ex  ante,  investors  did  not  demand  sufficiently 
higher premia for holding government bonds with higher default risk. By contrast, if the threat 
of  a  default  is  credible,  this  will  foster  stricter  market  oversight  and  induce  less  fiscal 
profligacy ex ante. In equilibrium, default will be less, not more, likely.  
But how can a no-bail-out clause be made credible? The answer, of course, is by making, ex 
post, the bail-out more costly than a bail-in for official lenders; that is, by reducing the spill-
over of a sovereign default so that the economic and political costs of a default fall mainly on 
the defaulting country. It is paramount to weaken the link between sovereign risk and bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
risk.  This  will  require  a  careful  analysis  of  the  many  different  channels  through  which  a 
deterioration  in  fiscal  conditions  affects  the  cost  and  availability  of  bank  funding.  For 
example, regulators might want to carefully assess the (regulatory) incentives banks have to 
hold excessive amounts of risky sovereign bonds, and the collateral rules that are used by 
central banks and in wholesale markets could be reconsidered. The link between sovereign 
and bank credit ratings should also be carefully examined. 
Rules  and  markets  should  not  be  seen  as  mutually  exclusive,  but  as  mechanisms  that 
complement  and  reinforce  each  other.  The  challenge  would  be  not  only  to  limit  the 
intermediary’s  exposure  to  a  given  sovereign  borrower  considered  in  isolation,  but  also  to 
guarantee that intermediaries can survive even if debt restructuring in one country triggers 
restructuring  in  others.  It  should  also  be  taken  into  account  that  a  default  can  threaten 
financial stability through its impact on derivative markets (e.g. the market for credit default 
swaps).  All  this  clearly  requires  regular  stress  testing  of  financial  intermediaries  and  the 
availability of timely and objective assessments of sovereign risk. Such assessments should 
evaluate  fiscal  conditions  and  prospects,  consider  the  level  and  trend  of  private  sector 
indebtedness,  and  take  a  country’s  prospects  of  growth  into  account.  Clearly,  this  is  a 
formidable challenge, and we know too well that it has not been satisfactorily addressed by 
credit  rating  agencies.  But  we  have  to  find  ways  for  such  institutions  to  develop  proper 
standards  and  operate  in  a  transparent  relationship  with  national  agencies  such  as 
independent national fiscal councils, supranational (in Europe, Community) institutions and 
international financial organisations.   
Ex-ante  procedures  that  facilitate  an  orderly  default  should  be  considered.  The  European 
Council’s  proposal  to  introduce  collective-action  clauses  (CACs)  would  help  to  make  debt 
restructuring more likely and quicker, credibly reinforcing the threat of a default. If approved, 
however, the innovation will apply only to new debt issues, potentially raising a problem of 
market  segmentation  and  indirectly  providing  a  senior  status  to  current  bonds.  As  Axel 
Weber and his Bundesbank colleagues have recently suggested, a clause that automatically 
extends debt maturity when a country gets the ESM assistance could also be included. This 
would put some of the burden of restructuring on short-term borrowers, who otherwise would 
benefit disproportionately from ESM intervention. It would make private sector involvement 
possible as soon as the crisis manifests itself, whereas CACs can only play a role in the later 
phases of a crisis, when ESM help has already proven ineffective.  
The  introduction  of  the  ESM  rightly  envisages  the  involvement  of  the  private  sector  in  all 
cases where the sovereign borrower is deemed insolvent (short-term illiquidity problems are 
instead properly addressed with ad hoc and conditional financial help). Of course, the devil is 
in the details. There is no foolproof way to distinguish short-term illiquidity from fundamental 
insolvency (the quest for a clear-cut answer probably started with Bagehot around 1870). So 
the ESM (like any other lender of last resort) is exposed to two kinds of risk: bailing out an 
insolvent borrower and allowing the bankruptcy of an illiquid one. Furthermore, unlike private 
borrowers, sovereigns usually can choose whether or not to honour their debts, so that the 
issue  is  not  really  insolvency  in  the  strict  sense  (i.e.  inability  to  repay)  as  unwillingness  to 
repay owing to exceedingly high social or political costs, which are even less straightforward 
to judge and to measure. Still, this issue cannot be avoided. We need to think about what 
institution  should  be  in  charge  of  such  evaluations,  and  acknowledge  that  it  should 
comprehensively consider the evidence and assessments provided by credit rating agencies, 
national  fiscal  councils,  international  financial  institutions  and  organizations.  A  tough 
assignment, indeed. 
To conclude, I have to confess that, in a sense, I have cheated you. My Einaudi’s quotation 
was actually incomplete. He not only said that “investors have the heart of a rabbit, the legs 
of  a  hare…”;  he  continued  and  said  that  they  have  “…la  memoria  di  un  elefante”  (“the 
memory  of  an  elephant”).  This  should  be  a  reminder  of  the  disruptive  consequences  of  a 
default, which often permanently stains a government’s reputation. Governments that default 
are excluded for potentially long periods from international capital markets, especially when 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
markets  consider  the  default  opportunistic.  They  also  face  an  increased  cost  of  borrowing 
thereafter.  Finally,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  default  also  signals  an  overall  lack  of 
reliability  of  the  country.  A  proper  design  of  the  conditions  for  the  ex-ante  involvement  of 
creditors in an orderly restructuring of the debt of a sovereign borrower and the definition of 
appropriate incentives for a more gradual, timely and responsible market assessment would 
significantly  reduce  the  probability  of  sovereign  default  and  the  risk  of  extremely  harmful 
financial stress associated with such an event. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
