Yoshihisa Morimoto: Economic activity and prices in Japan and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Yoshihisa Morimoto, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a 
meeting with Business Leaders, Saitama, 9 December 2010. 
 The global economy  
I. 
Economic  activity  in  Japan  is  closely  linked  to  global  economic  developments.  Therefore, 
before  discussing  the  Japanese  economy,  I  will  first  take  a  look  at  trends  in  the  world 
economy. From around 2005, the world economy grew at a rapid pace of around 5 percent 
annually,  with  China  and  other  emerging  economies  gaining  in  prominence.  The  failure  of 
Lehman Brothers in September 2008, however, brought this growth to a sudden halt, and the 
world economy marked negative growth in 2009 due to the severe contraction in the first half 
of  the  year.  Causes  of  the  sharp  decline  include  the  rapid  deceleration  in  economic  and 
financial  activity  due  to  the  financial  crisis  triggered  by  the  Lehman  shock,  and  the 
corrections to the various excesses that had built up in the world economy since the mid-
2000s.  By  “excesses,”  I  am  referring  to  overborrowing  by  households,  excess  production 
capacity  in  the  corporate  sector,  and  the  large  amount  of  nonperforming  loans  held  by 
financial institutions.  
Measures  to  address  the  financial  crisis  implemented  by  governments  and  central  banks 
around the world started to show effects from the second half of 2009. With the contraction in 
economic and financial activity having come to a halt, policy measures to stimulate demand 
provided a further boost. It should be noted, however, that the pace of economic growth has 
been  slowing  somewhat  since  summer  2010,  as  restocking  of  inventories  that  took  place 
during the recovery phase came to an end and the effects of demand-boosting measures in 
the  United  States  and  other  countries  waned.  The  slowdown  is  also  due  in  part  to  the 
unwinding of accommodative policies in emerging countries in order to keep economies from 
overheating.  
Advanced economies  
A. 
Let  us  look  at  advanced  economies  in  more  detail.  The  U.S.  economy  remains  on  a 
moderate  uptrend.  Although  the  effects  of  fiscal  stimulus  measures  have  been  waning, 
exports  to  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  continued  to  increase  and 
private  consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  have  been  rising  moderately.  Housing 
starts  have  remained  at  a  depressed  level  after  dropping  sharply  due  to  the  expiry  of  tax 
credits for homebuyers, but are unlikely to fall further. 
As  for  the  outlook,  the  U.S.  economy  is  likely  to  continue  recovering  on  the  back  of 
increasing exports and accommodative monetary policy. It must be added, however, that in 
the labor market employment conditions have not improved greatly, with unemployment, for 
example,  remaining  at  a  high  level.  Consequently,  balance-sheet  adjustments  in  the 
household  sector  –  that  is,  the  restoration  of  financial  health,  including  the  repayment  of 
household debt – are unlikely to gather pace, so that the pace of recovery is likely to remain 
moderate.  
Economic activity in the euro area as a whole has been recovering moderately, with some 
differences in growth by country: Germany has performed strongly while other countries have 
lagged behind. Although the pace has been slowing, exports and production have continued 
to increase, while domestic demand components, such as private consumption, have been 
rising  from  the  previous  quarter.  For  the  present,  the  euro  area  is  likely  to  continue 
recovering  moderately.  However,  attention  needs  to  be  paid  to  the  effects  of  fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
consolidation, which from next year will start in earnest also in the major economies, and to 
volatility in financial markets due to concerns over the public and private debt problems in 
some of the peripheral countries.  
Emerging and commodity-exporting economies  
B. 
Although  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  are  often  grouped  together,  they 
are a diverse group. Here, I will focus on the major East Asian economies, since they are 
most relevant to Japan. First, the Chinese economy has continued to show high growth of 
around  10  percent.  Although  the  pace  of  increase  in  exports  has  been  slowing  due  to  a 
deceleration  in  overseas  economies  such  as  the  United  States,  domestic  demand,  as 
indicated by retail sales and investment in fixed assets, has continued to show high growth. 
Like  China,  South  Korea,  Taiwan,  Thailand,  and  other  NIEs  and  ASEAN  countries  also 
experienced  continued  economic  growth  driven  by  domestic  demand,  although  inventory 
adjustments in IT-related goods are casting a shadow on the outlook for exports.  
Overall, it is very likely that emerging and commodity-exporting economies will continue to 
show  relatively  high  growth  due  to  robust  domestic  demand  and  capital  inflows  from 
overseas. The pace of growth of the Chinese economy is likely to decelerate somewhat due, 
among  other  things,  to  government  measures  to  restrain  the  increase  in  real  estate 
transactions.  However,  given  the  continuing  increase  in  private  consumption,  growth  is 
nevertheless  likely  to  remain  relatively  high.  Economic  conditions  in  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN 
countries are expected to follow a recovery trend due to the inflow of overseas capital and 
increases in private consumption and business fixed investment.  
The Japanese economy  
II. 
Based  on  the  above  assessment  of  the  world  economy,  I  will  now  talk  about  economic 
activity and prices in Japan. Semiannually, in April and October, the Bank of Japan releases 
the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  known  as  the  Outlook  Report,  in  which  it 
makes public its forecasts for economic activity and prices for the next two to three years, the 
background for its forecasts, and the associated risk factors. My speech today will from time 
to time refer to this report, in particular the October 2010 Outlook Report.  
Economic activity  
A. 
Real  GDP  growth  for  the  July-September  quarter  of  2010  was  relatively  strong.  Recent 
developments  in  production,  however,  indicate  that  the  economic  recovery  seems  to  be 
pausing. The pause in the recovery can be attributed to various factors, including a decrease 
in demand following the last-minute rise in demand ahead of the expiration of subsidies for 
purchasers of environmentally friendly cars  and the boost from the extremely hot weather, 
the deceleration in overseas economies, and inventory adjustments in IT-related goods.  
Looking at the situation for each demand component, real exports as a whole have recently 
been more or less flat, reflecting the following factors: (1) the effects of inventory adjustments 
in IT-related goods such as semiconductors in South Korea and Taiwan; (2) the deceleration 
in  the  U.S.  economy;  (3)  the  unwinding  of  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  emerging 
economies;  and  (4)  the  effects  of  the  strong  yen  on  exports  of  cars  and  other  goods. 
However,  given  the  strong  domestic  demand  in  emerging  economies,  Japan’s  exports  are 
unlikely to fall precipitously and are likely to recover in the longer term, providing support to 
the economy overall. Furthermore, production, which is likely to remain lackluster for a while 
due to the reasons mentioned above, is expected to gradually return to a moderate upward 
trend along with the recovery in exports.  
The  Bank  maintained  its  assessment  of  business  fixed  investment  as  “showing  signs  of 
picking up.” This rather cautious assessment, despite the fact that business fixed investment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this  fiscal  year  is  likely  to  turn  out  to  be  higher  than  in  the  previous  year,  reflects  the 
following:  (1)  the  fact  that  firms  continue  to  feel  that  their  capital  stock  is  still  excessive; 
(2) the shift of production to overseas locations; (3) the deceleration in overseas economies; 
and (4) the appreciation of the yen. Yet, I frequently hear that there is considerable pent-up 
need  for  replacement  investment  and  investment  in  environmentally  friendly  equipment, 
given that firms have held back on such investment since the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
Barring any extreme external shocks, the pick-up in business fixed investment is therefore 
expected to gradually become more pronounced as a result of the improvement in corporate 
profits.  
Turning to the household sector, private consumption in the July-September quarter of 2010 
was  supported  by  the  last-minute  rise  in  demand  ahead  of  the  expiration  of  subsidies  for 
purchases of environmentally friendly cars and the increase in the tobacco tax, in addition to 
the boost from the extremely hot weather. There was a clear decrease in sales of cars, with 
the  exception  of  small  cars  with  engine  sizes  of  660  cc  or  less,  which  in  October  and 
November  were  sharply  down,  by  approximately  30  percent,  from  the  same  period  a  year 
earlier.  I  earlier  mentioned  some  factors  behind  the  current  “pause”  in  the  economic 
recovery. Among them, I have been most concerned about the drop in car sales because of 
the wide range of firms and industries encompassed by the automotive sector. With the drop 
in car sales having become a reality, the question now is the depth and length of the decline. 
Demand  for  cars  has  been  brought  forward  for  a  year  and  half  since  the  introduction  of 
subsidies  in  April  2009,  so  the  decline  in  car  sales  is  likely  to  continue.  That  being  said, 
though, one would expect the negative impact on the economy to be greatest immediately 
after  the  expiration  of  subsidies  and  to  subsequently  ease  gradually.  Therefore,  private 
consumption is expected to gradually recover. Obviously, the timing of a full-fledged recovery 
of private consumption is not clear, since the employment and income situation is expected 
to remain severe. Developments in this area, together with housing investment, which has 
been recovering gradually, warrant a close watch. 
Against this background, if overseas economies, led by emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies,  were  to  register  higher  growth,  this  would  increase  the  likelihood  of  Japan’s 
economy returning to a recovery path fueled by an increase in exports. The October 2010 
Outlook Report paints such a scenario for fiscal 2011 onward. The report also said that in 
“fiscal 2012, Japan’s economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential, 
as  the  transmission  mechanism  by  which  the  strength  in  exports  and  production  feeds 
through  into  income  and  spending  will  likely  operate  more  effectively  amid  the  continued 
relatively high growth in overseas economies, especially emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies.” Although this is subject to a considerable margin of error, the Bank estimates 
that Japan’s potential growth rate during the projection period is around 0.5 percent.  
Prices  
B. 
Domestic corporate goods prices are expected to remain on a moderate uptrend for the time 
being,  mainly  due  to  the  uptick  in  international  commodity  prices.  The  decline  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI; excluding fresh food) on a year-on-year basis is decelerating and 
is  expected  to  continue  decelerating  as  a  trend  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand 
balance gradually improves.  
As stated in the projection in the Outlook Report for the period ending in fiscal 2012, it will 
take considerable time for the supply and demand balance to improve because the drop in 
demand after the financial crisis was considerable and the pace of economic recovery has 
been moderate. Therefore, the deceleration in the decline in the CPI on a year-on-year basis 
is likely to remain moderate and it will likely take until sometime in fiscal 2011 for the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI to enter positive territory. Thereafter, the rate of increase is 
expected to start rising through fiscal 2012.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Risks to the outlook  
III. 
The above outlook for economic activity and prices suggests that the Japanese economy will 
be  able  to  overcome  deflation  and  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability, 
although it will take time. However, there are various upside and downside risks to economic 
activity and prices.  
(1)  developments 
for  economic  activity: 
Risks to economic activity  
A. 
In the October 2010 Outlook Report, the Bank listed the following as risk factors concerning 
the  outlook 
in  advanced  economies; 
(2) developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  countries;  (3)  developments  in 
business and household sentiment; and (4) firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations.  
Regarding the first risk, economies burdened with balance-sheet adjustments, such as the 
United States, are unlikely to achieve strong growth and will remain prone to weakness until 
the  adjustments  are  completed.  U.S.  household  debt  relative  to  income  remains  high.  In 
Europe, financial markets remain volatile, as indicated by the recent surge in yields on Irish 
government  bonds.  Furthermore,  the  amount  outstanding  of  public  debt  has  increased 
considerably  due  to  the  implementation  of  vigorous  fiscal  policies.  The  implementation  of 
fiscal consolidation measures, which will proceed further, might exert greater-than-expected 
downward pressure on individual economies and the global economy.  
Emerging and commodity-exporting economies are likely to maintain relatively high growth 
led by domestic demand, and in this situation the continued large-scale monetary easing in 
advanced economies might accelerate capital inflows to emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies.  Stock  and  housing  prices  in  these  economies  have  been  rising  already.  If 
economic conditions in these economies are boosted further, Japan’s economy could realize 
stronger-than-expected growth through the increase in exports to these economies. On the 
other hand, if economic and financial activity in these economies becomes excessive, there 
is  a  risk  that  this  could,  in  the  longer  term,  lead  to  a  sharp  reversal.  Therefore,  whether 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  will  be  able  to  achieve  a  soft  landing  and 
return to a sustainable growth path is an issue that warrants careful attention.  
A domestic issue that warrants attention is the possibility that fluctuations in business and 
household sentiment might affect economic activity. For example, the appreciation of the yen 
may  on 
the  one  hand  encourage  mergers  and  acquisitions  abroad  –  a  positive  
development – but on the other it is also likely to exert downward pressure on the profits of 
exporters and might damage economic activity if this were to hurt business confidence and 
lead firms to change their behavior.  
A final point concerns firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations. If firms are able to 
capture  infrastructure  and  consumption  demand  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies,  this  would  increase  the  possibility  that  economic  activity  will  be  stronger  than 
projected. On the other hand, if firms’ growth expectations continue to shift downward, there 
is a risk that business fixed investment and private consumption could decrease more than 
expected.  
I believe that the risks to either side are equally important and that at present the upside and 
downside  risks  are  broadly  balanced.  However,  I  will  continue  to  carefully  monitor 
developments concerning these risks.  
Risks to prices  
B. 
Risks to prices, in addition to the above four risk factors affecting economic activity, include a 
possible decline in firms’ and households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations. If the 
pace of recovery in resource utilization of labor and production capacity remains moderate, 
firms  and  households  might  expect  prices  to  fall,  which  in  turn  could  affect  actual  prices. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Other risks to prices that require careful observation include the high uncertainty in gauging 
the aggregate supply and demand balance and its impact on prices, as well as price changes 
due to fluctuations in international commodity prices and foreign exchange rates.  
Monetary policy  
IV. 
Let me now turn to the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. The Bank recognizes that Japan’s 
economy  is  faced  with  the  extremely  important  challenge  of  emerging  from  deflation  and 
returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Based on this recognition, the Bank 
has been doing its utmost as the central bank, using a three-pronged approach consisting of 
(1)  strong  monetary  easing,  (2)  ensuring  stability  in  financial  markets,  and  (3)  providing 
support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. Today, I would like to explain the 
Bank’s pursuit of strong easing through comprehensive monetary easing and the support for 
strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  to  address  the  medium-  to  long-term 
issues faced by the Japanese economy.  
A. 
Pursuing strong monetary easing: the comprehensive monetary easing policy  
With regard to its pursuit of strong monetary easing, the Bank has reduced its policy interest 
rate twice since the Lehman shock and, by increasing longer-term funds provision to financial 
institutions through new funds-supplying operations, the Bank has been influencing directly 
longer-term interest rates such as 3-month and 6-month rates. As a result, market interest 
rates have been stable at extremely low levels and firms’ funding costs have been declining. 
However, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 4 and 5, 2010, it was judged that 
the economic growth rate was likely to be somewhat lower than the projection presented in 
the  July  2010  interim  assessment,  reflecting  the  slowdown  in  the  U.S.  economy  since 
summer 2010 and the effect of the appreciation of the yen on business sentiment. It was also 
agreed  at  the  meeting  that,  in  view  of  the  downside  risks  to  the  economic  outlook,  it  had 
become more likely that the return of Japan’s economy to a sustainable growth path would 
be delayed compared to what had been projected earlier. In this context, what particularly 
caught my attention was the results of the September 2010 Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released by the Bank. Although I had anticipated that firms’ 
view of future business conditions had deteriorated to some extent due partly to the decrease 
in  demand  following  the  expiry  of  government  measures  to  boost  demand,  the  extent  to 
which it had deteriorated was larger than I had expected.  
The Bank has repeatedly stated that it will continue to consistently make contributions as the 
central  bank  so  that  Japan’s  economy  will  overcome  deflation  and  return  to  a  sustainable 
growth path with price stability. Therefore, the members of the Policy Board, myself included, 
thought that the time had come for the Bank to express this stance more clearly, examine 
concrete  measures,  and  take  drastic  measures.  Moreover,  it  was  important  to  announce 
these measures as a package rather than piecemeal policies. The purpose of this package is 
to further enhance monetary easing, and I personally felt that first of all it was important for 
the Bank to announce a change in the guideline for money market operations and clarify the 
Bank’s commitment regarding the time horizon based on the “understanding of medium- to 
long-term price stability” (hereafter the “understanding”).  
Regarding the change in the guideline for money market operations, the Bank lowered the 
target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  –  the  shortest  interbank  rate  –  from  “at 
around  0.1  percent”  to  “at  around  0  to  0.1  percent,”  thereby  clearly  indicating  that  it  was 
pursuing  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy.  As  for  the  clarification  of  its  commitment 
regarding the time horizon based on the “understanding,” Policy Board members agreed that 
(1)  the  Bank  would  maintain  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  until  it  judged  that  price 
stability was in sight, and (2) the “understanding” would be appropriate as the basis for that 
judgment.  The  “understanding”  is  the  level  of  inflation  that  each  of  the  nine  Policy  Board 
members understands as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  “understanding”  at  present  falls  in  a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  and  the 
midpoints of most Policy Board members’ understanding are around 1 percent.  
In considering policy options the Bank could take, the Bank’s options within the conventional 
monetary policy framework were limited, given that short-term interest rates – ranging from 
overnight  to  longer-term  rates  –  were  already  at  levels  that  left  little  room  for  a  further 
decline.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  decided  on  the  establishment  of  the  Asset 
Purchase  Program  (hereafter  the  Program)  as  the  third  measure  in  the  comprehensive 
monetary  easing  package.  Like  other  Policy  Board  members,  I  felt  that  the  Bank  should 
consider  a  variety  of  policy  options  without  precluding  measures  that  are  temporary  or 
extraordinary for a central bank, such as directly influencing longer-term rates and expanding 
the type of financial assets eligible for the Bank’s purchases.  
The details of the Program are as follows. The Bank established a program on its balance 
sheet  to  conduct  outright  purchases  of  various  financial  assets,  such  as  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs), CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan 
real estate investment trusts (J-REITs), and the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against 
pooled collateral. The total amount of the Program will be about 35 trillion yen, consisting of 
about 5 trillion yen for purchases of financial assets and about 30 trillion yen for the fixed-rate 
funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral. The Bank has already begun purchasing 
JGBs  and  corporate  bonds,  and  the  first  auction  for  the  purchase  of  CP  is  scheduled  for 
tomorrow,  December  10,  2010.  The  Bank  also  decided  to  start  purchasing  ETFs  and  
J-REITs  in  the  near  future.  As  the  Bank  has  been  explaining,  this  is  a  temporary  and 
extraordinary  measure  for  a  central  bank.  Moreover,  the  Bank  did  not  adopt  this  measure 
lightly,  since  it  entails  the  critical  issue  of  making  sure  that  the  risks  involved  in  holding 
various risk assets are properly managed in order to ensure the financial health of the central 
bank of Japan.  
B. 
The bank’s measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth  
Lastly, I will move on to talk about the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening 
the foundations for economic growth, which the Bank decided to introduce at the Monetary 
Policy Meeting held on June 14 and 15, 2010. The measure supplies long-term funds at a 
low  interest  rate  against  eligible  collateral  to  financial  institutions  in  accordance  with  their 
efforts in terms of lending and investment toward strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth.  
Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  and  returning  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  To  achieve  this,  the  key,  in  my  view,  is  to  tap 
potential demand, and both economic entities in the private sector and the authorities need 
to continue to make steady efforts to this end. The main cause of the current deflation is the 
negative  output  gap,  which  largely  reflects  a  long-term  downtrend  in  the  economic  growth 
rate  since  the  1990s.  However,  looking  again  at  major  trends  such  as  demographic 
developments and globalization, can we really say that Japan has nothing to gain from these 
trends?  I  do  not  think  so.  It  all  depends  on  one’s  perspective.  For  example,  demographic 
trends can be seen as a shrinking of the total and the working-age population, or they can be 
seen as an increase in the importance of the elderly. Similarly, global warming is an issue 
that  requires  an  immediate  response,  but  even  more  important  is  a  medium-  to  long-term 
strategy covering the next 10 or 20 years.  
Regarding  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic  growth,  Bank  of  Japan  Governor  Masaaki  Shirakawa  has  commented  that,  in 
addition to providing practical support through the provision of funds, he felt that it was more 
important  to  raise  awareness  of  the  challenges  the  economy  faces.  Having  worked  in  the 
business world, I feel exactly the same. I believe what is needed is to identify the root cause 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of the challenges Japan’s economy faces and take the most appropriate action to address 
them, no matter how long this may take.  
On December 7, 2010, the Bank carried out the second new loan disbursement under the 
fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth, so 
that the amount of loans disbursed now totals about 1.5 trillion yen. Individual investments 
and loans under the measure cover a broad range of fields, with financial institutions making 
a  variety  of  efforts  reflecting  the  particular  customer  base  and/or  region  they  serve.  I  feel 
these  are  extremely  encouraging  signs  and  that  such  efforts  are  a  vital  step  toward 
overcoming the challenges the economy faces. The Bank, as the central bank, is determined 
to  offer  support  as  broadly  as  possible  for  the  efforts  that  private  financial  institutions  are 
making on their own initiative toward strengthening the foundations for economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
