Lars E O Svensson: Where do central banks go from here? 
Speech by Mr Lars E O Svensson, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a panel 
discussion, Norges Bank Symposium, Oslo, 18 November 2010.  
 The opinions expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Riksbank’s 
Executive Board or staff. Gabriela Guibourg has contributed to this speech. 
It is a great privilege to participate in this symposium and to celebrate the achievements of 
Governor Svein Gjedrem. I have had the benefit of having very good contacts with Norges 
Bank since the mid 1990s. Under the leadership of Svein and his colleagues and co-workers, 
I have seen Norges Bank set up its monetary policy in a way that has made it a model for the 
rest  of  the  world.  Norges  Bank  truly  deserves  the  admiration  that  it  receives  from  central 
bankers and academics all over the world. In particular, Svein deserves credit for the novel 
interpretation  –  immediately  upon  his  appointment  in  1999  –  of  the  instruction  from  the 
Ministry of Finance to stabilize the exchange rate, namely that the best way to do this in the 
longer run was to orient the Bank’s monetary policy towards an inflation target. This would 
enable  the  Bank  to  make  the  best  contribution  to  economic  stability  and  a  stable  krone 
exchange rate. 
As  a  background  to  my  comments  on  the  topic  of  this  panel,  “Where do  central banks  go 
from here?”, let me note that, as the world economy recovers from the recent financial crisis 
and the Great Recession that followed, a debate is underway regarding the causes of the 
crisis and how to reduce the risk of future crises. The role of monetary policy and its relation 
to financial stability are also under debate. Some blame the Federal Reserve, saying that its 
monetary policy was too expansionary after 2001 and that this laid the foundations for the 
crisis. The lesson to be drawn, they argue is that there is a need to modify the framework of 
flexible inflation targeting and give a greater role to financial-stability considerations.  
In my view, the crisis was largely caused by factors that had very little to do with monetary 
policy. Instead, it was mainly caused by regulatory and supervisory failures in combination 
with  some  special  circumstances,  such  as  low  real  interest  rates  around  the  world  and 
housing  policy  in  the  United  States.  Neither  do  I  share  the  view  that  there  is  a  need  to 
fundamentally  modify  the  framework  of  flexible  inflation  targeting.  Ultimately,  my  main 
conclusion for monetary policy is that flexible inflation targeting – applied in the right way and 
in  particular  using  all  the  information  about  financial  conditions  that  is  relevant  for  the 
forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  at  any  horizon  –  remains  the  best-practice 
monetary policy before, during, and after the financial crisis. 
A conclusion that should be drawn from the crisis is that neither price stability nor interest-
rate  policy  is  sufficient  to  achieve  financial  stability.  Instead,  a  separate  financial-stability 
policy  is  needed.  In  particular,  monetary  policy  and  financial-stability  policy  need  to  be 
conceptually  distinguished,  since  they  have  different  objectives  and  different  appropriate 
instruments,  even  in  cases  where  the  central  bank  has  responsibility  for  both.1  Financial 
stability as an objective of monetary policy makes little sense, but it does makes sense as an 
objective  of  the  central  bank,  if  the  central  bank  has  the  instruments  required  to  fulfil  this 
responsibility. 
Let me elaborate on these issues. 
                                                 
1  For a more detailed discussion of these issues, see Svensson (2010, section 5.2).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Monetary policy after the crisis 
Is there any reason to fundamentally modify the framework of flexible inflation targeting given 
the experience of the financial crisis? I think not. Flexible inflation targeting has worked and 
continues to work well – before, during and after the crisis. Flexible inflation targeting implies 
that the central bank aims at stabilizing both inflation around an inflation target and resource 
utilization  around  a  normal  level.  This  implies  choosing  a  policy-rate  path  such  that  the 
corresponding  forecasts  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  best  stabilise  inflation  and 
resource  utilisation.  If  the  central  bank  uses  all  relevant  information  in  constructing  these 
forecasts , including the impact of changes in financial conditions on inflation and resource 
utilisation at any horizon, monetary policy will automatically respond in the best possible way 
to changing financial conditions (Woodford 2007, 2010a). 
One lesson from the financial crisis is that financial conditions may in times of crisis have a 
strong and deteriorating effect on the transmission mechanism, making standard interest-rate 
policy less effective. This motivates more research on how to incorporate financial conditions 
and financial intermediation into the standard models of the transmission mechanism used 
by  central  banks.  Much  progress  has  already  been  made  in  understanding  these  effects  
(see Adrian and Shin 2010a, Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010 and Woodford 2010a). 
The relation between monetary policy and financial-stability policy 
As mentioned, an important conclusion from the financial crisis is that neither price stability 
nor interest-rate policy are enough to achieve financial stability (Carney 2009, White 2006). 
Good flexible inflation targeting by itself does not achieve financial stability. Furthermore, the 
policy rate is an ineffective instrument for influencing financial stability, and policy rates high 
enough  to  have  a  noticeable  effect  on  credit  growth  and  house  prices  will  have  a  strong 
negative effect on inflation and resource utilisation, even in sectors that are not experiencing 
any  speculative  activity.  Specific  policies  and  instruments  are  needed  to  ensure  financial 
stability. A good financial-stability policy framework is necessary to ensure financial stability. 
Monetary policy cannot serve as a substitute. 
In  general,  it  is  helpful  to  conceptually  distinguish  financial-stability  policy  from  monetary 
policy. Different economic policies, such as fiscal policy, monetary policy and labour market 
policy  can  be  distinguished  according  to  their  objectives,  the  policy  instruments  that  are 
suitable for achieving the relevant objectives, and the authority or authorities who control the 
instruments  and  are  responsible  for  achieving  the  objectives.  From  this  point  of  view,  it  is 
clear that monetary policy and financial-stability policy are very different, and understanding 
this distinction is important.  
Monetary  policy,  in  the  form  of  flexible  inflation  targeting,  has  the  objective  of  stabilising 
inflation  around  the  inflation  target  as  well  as  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level. 
Under  normal  circumstances, 
rate  and 
communication.  In  times  of  crisis,  as  we  have  seen  during  the  current  crisis,  other  more 
unconventional  methods  can  be  used,  such  as  lending  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  at  longer 
maturities, quantitative easing, and so on.  
Financial-stability  policy  has  the  objective  of  maintaining  and  promoting  financial  stability. 
Financial  stability  can  be  defined  as  a  situation  in  which  the  financial  system  can  fulfil  its 
main functions of submitting payments, channelling saving into investment, and providing risk 
sharing without disruptions that have significant social costs. The available instruments are, 
under  normal  circumstances,  supervision,  regulation,  and  financial-stability  reports  with 
analyses and leading indicators that may provide early warnings of stability threats. In times 
of crisis, authorities may use instruments such as lending of last resort, variable-rate lending 
at longer maturities (credit policy, credit easing), special resolution regimes for financial firms 
in trouble, government lending guarantees, government capital injections, and so forth. 
instruments  are 
the  suitable 
the  policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
My point here is that this has to be taken into account when considering the lessons of the 
financial crisis for monetary policy. The interest rate is a blunt and unsuitable instrument for 
achieving financial stability and it thus makes little sense to assign the objective of financial 
stability to monetary policy. However, it may make sense to assign the objective of financial 
stability to the central bank, if the central bank is given control of the appropriate supervisory 
and regulatory instruments.  
The fact that financial-stability policy and monetary policy are different does not mean that 
there is no interaction between them. This interaction need to be considered. Monetary policy 
affects asset prices and balance sheets and can thereby affect financial stability. Financial-
stability policy directly affects financial conditions, which affect the transmission mechanism 
of  monetary  policy.  This  means  that  monetary  policy  should  normally  be  conducted  taking 
financial-stability policy into account, and financial-stability policy should be conducted taking 
monetary policy into account. This is similar to how fiscal policy is conducted taking monetary 
policy  into  account,  and  monetary  policy  is  conducted  taking  fiscal  policy  into  account. 
Importantly, under normal conditions, financial stability is handled by financial-stability policy, 
not by monetary policy. 
However, let us suppose that the appropriate and effective instruments for ensuring financial 
stability are not available, for instance because of serious problems with the regulatory and 
supervisory  framework  that  cannot  be  remedied  in  the  short  run.  In  such  a  second-best 
situation, if there is a threat to financial stability, one may argue that, to the extent that policy 
rates do have an impact on financial stability, this impact should be taken into consideration 
when choosing the policy-rate path to best stabilise inflation and resource utilisation. Such 
considerations could result in a lower or higher policy-rate path than otherwise, in order to 
trade  off  less  effective  stabilisation  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  for  more  financial 
stability.2 To the best of my knowledge, the evidence so far indicates that in normal times 
such a trade-off is very unfavourable, in the sense that the impact of policy rates on financial 
stability  is  quite  small  and  the  impact  on  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  is  significantly 
greater. Then, in normal times an optimal trade-off would still result in policy rates directed 
towards stabilizing inflation and resource utilization with little impact on financial stability.  
In particular, it seems clear that monetary policy should not be used to target housing prices. 
A considerable amount of research has concluded that policy rates have a modest impact on 
housing  prices  but  a  substantial  impact  on  output,  implying  high  real  costs  for  using  the 
policy rate for this purpose (Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach 2010). If housing prices are 
considered  a  problem, 
loan-to-value  restrictions,  amortization 
requirements,  a  property  tax,  or  restrictions  on  the  tax  deductibility  of  mortgage  rates  are 
examples  of  instruments  that  have  much  lower  real  costs  and  hence  a  considerable 
comparative  advantage  compared  to  the  policy  rate  in  affecting  housing  prices  (Svensson 
2010b).  
instruments  such  as 
Flexible inflation targeting with mean square gaps (MSGs) – another step towards 
increased transparency 
The adoption of numerical inflation targets has entailed great progress for practical monetary 
policy and made it possible to measure and evaluate the target fulfilment of monetary policy 
                                                 
2  Such considerations could include evidence of the “risk-taking channel” as in Borio and Zhu (2008). Adrian 
and Shin (2010a, b) argue, in a model with such a risk-taking channel, that short interest-rate movements may 
have  considerable  effects  on  the  leverage  of  securities  broker-dealers  in  the  market-based  financial  sector 
outside  the  commercial-banking  sector.  If  we  assume  that  the  risk  of  a  financial  crisis  increases  as  this 
leverage increases, and that policy rates affect leverage, then policy rates would affect the risk of a financial 
crisis (Woodford 2010b). However, new regulation is likely to limit excess leverage and limit the magnitude of 
these  affects.  The  size  of  the  market-based  financial  sector  may  end  up  being  smaller  after  the  crisis.  In 
Europe, Canada and the Nordic countries, commercial banks dominate the financial sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in a much more efficient manner than before. However, the fact that monetary policy is not 
just directed towards stabilising inflation, but also towards stabilising resource utilisation has, 
in  the  absence  of  quantitative  measures  of  stability  in  these  variables,  made  it  difficult  to 
measure  and  evaluate  target  fulfilment  in  this  stability  dimension.  This  makes  it  difficult  to 
decide which policy-rate path best stabilizes both inflation and resource utilization.  
My suggestion is to use mean squared gaps for the inflation forecast and for the resource- 
utilization forecast as measures of the stability of inflation and resource utilization.3 Figure 1 
provides an example, using graphs from Norges Bank’s Inflation Report of June 2005. 
Monetary policy with mean squared gaps (Norges Bank, June 2005) 
Figure 1 
In figure 1, the top left panel shows three alternative policy-rate paths, the main path chosen 
by Norges Bank at the time and two alternative paths, a lower and a higher path. The top 
right panel shows the corresponding forecast of inflation according to the index CPI-ATE, the 
consumer price index adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products. The bottom 
right panel shows the corresponding forecasts of the output gap, the gap between output and 
potential output. These three panels are shown in the June 2005 Inflation Report. We see 
that there is a tradeoff between stabilizing inflation and resource utilization, measured as the 
output gap. The lower (higher) policy-rate path stabilizes inflation better (worse) around the 
  T
 for  details.  The  mean  squared  gap 
                                                 
3  See  Svensson 

t
t
0[ (
, )
   

*  denotes 
the 

t
y
t
*(
, )



, where y(t+τ,t) denotes the forecast in quarter t of output in quarter t + τ 
and y*(t+τ,t) denotes the forecast in quarter t of potential output in quarter t + τ, and T is the forecast horizon 
(normally 12 quarters).  
(2010a,  c) 
T
*] / (
1)
target.  The  mean 
inflation 
t
T
, )] / (
2



, where π(t+τ,t) denotes the forecast in quarter t of inflation in quarter t +  and 
calculated  as 
is  calculated  as 
squared  gap 
for  output 
inflation 
y t
0[ (
for 
T


is 
1)
 2
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation  target  of  2.5 percent  but  resource  utilization  worse  (better).  The  Qvigstad  (2005) 
necessary (but not sufficient) condition for optimal policy is satisfied, namely that the inflation 
gap and the output gap should be of opposite signs.  
The bottom left panel, with the mean squared gap for inflation plotted along the horizontal 
axis and the mean squared gap for output plotted along the vertical axis, has been added by 
me. The closer the mean squared gap for inflation and output is to zero, the better inflation or 
the output gap is stabilized. The less sloped straight line is an iso-loss line that corresponds 
to equal weight on inflation and output-gap stabilization, that is to a “lambda” equal to one.4 
With  such  equal  weight,  the  high  policy-rate  path  is  preferred.  The  steeper  straight  line 
corresponds to lambda equal to 0.3, that is, with a weight on output-gap stabilization equal to 
0.3 relative to the weight on inflation stabilization. With such a weight, the main policy-rate 
path is about as good as the higher and clearly better than the lower policy-rate path. At the 
time, Norges Bank had announced that its decisions were consistent with a relative weight 
on output-gap stabilization equal to 0.3 and a relative weight on interest-rate smoothing of 
0.2  (Bergo  2007  and  Holmsen,  Qvigstad,  and  Røisland  2007).  With  some  weight  also  on 
interest-rate smoothing, the main policy rate is best.  
The  use  of  the  mean  squared  gaps  is  one  more  step  towards  more  systematic  and 
transparent inflation targeting, in which central banks can be evaluated and held responsible 
for  their  decisions  with  even  greater  accuracy  than  before,  following  the  introduction  of 
numerical inflation targets, published forecasts of inflation and the real economy, published 
policy-rate  paths  and  other  important  steps  taken  in  the  development  of  a  systematic  and 
transparent monetary policy.  
References 
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2010a),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary 
Economics,”  in  Friedman,  Benjamin  M.,  and  Michael  Woodford  (eds.),  Handbook  of 
Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier, forthcoming. 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin (2010b), “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial 
Intermediation 19, 418–437. 
Assenmacher-Wesche,  Karin,  and  Stefan  Gerlach  (2010),  “Monetary  policy  and  Financial 
Imbalances: Facts and Fiction”, Economic Policy July 2010, 437–482. 
Bergo, Jarle (2007), “Interest Rate Projections in Theory and Practice,” Speech on January 
26, 2007, www.Norges-Bank.no. 
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” BIS Working Paper 268, www.bis.org. 
Carney, Mark (2009), “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilise Economic 
Activity”, in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Jackson Hole Symposium. 
Gertler,  Mark,  and  Nobuhiro  Kiyotaki  (2010),  “Financial Intermediation  and  Credit Policy  in 
Business  Cycle  Analysis,”  in  Friedman,  Benjamin  M.,  and  Michael.  Woodford,  eds., 
Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier, forthcoming. 
Holmsen,  Amund,  Jan  F.  Qvigstad,  and  Øistein  Røisland  (2007),  “Implementing  and 
Communicating Optimal Monetary Policy,” Norges Bank Staff Memo 2007/3.  
                                                 
4  An  iso-loss  line  shows  combinations  of  mean  squared  gaps  for  inflation  and  output  that  are  equally  good. 
Combinations on an iso-loss line closer to the origin are better in terms of stabilizing inflation and the output 
gap. See Svensson (2010a) for details.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Qvigstad,  Jan  F.  (2005),  “When  Does  and  Interest  Rate  Path  ‘Look  Good’:  Criteria  for  an 
Appropriate Future Interest Rate Path – A Practician’s Approach”, Norges Bank Staff Memo 
No. 2005/6. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010a), “Inflation Targeting,” in Friedman, Benjamin M., and Michael 
Woodford,  eds.,  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics,  Volume  3,  Elsevier,  forthcoming, 
www.larseosvensson.net. 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010b), “Some Problems with Swedish Monetary Policy and Possible 
Solutions,” speech on November 24, 2010, www.larseosvensson.net.  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010c), “Why a Lower Repo Rate Path?”, speech on February 24, 2010, 
www.larseosvensson.net.  
White,  William  R.  (2006),  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?”  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  205, 
www.bis.org.  
Woodford, Michael (2007), “The Case for Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007. 
Woodford, Michael (2010a), “Financial Intermediation and Macroeconomic Analysis”, working 
paper, Columbia University, www.columbia.edu/~mw2230.  
Woodford, Michael (2010b), “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability,” in progress.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
