Daniel K Tarullo: Derivatives regulation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 12 April 2011. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate  this  opportunity  to  provide  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  views  on  the 
implementation of title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act  (Dodd-Frank  Act).  The  Board’s  responsibilities  with  respect  to  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives  fall  into three  broad  areas:  consultation  and  coordination  with  other  authorities, 
both  domestic  and  international;  efforts  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  of  derivatives 
markets; and supervision of many derivatives dealers and market participants.  
Consultation and coordination 
The Dodd-Frank Act requires that the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) consult with the Board on the rules they are 
crafting to implement several provisions of title VII. Immediately after passage of the act, the 
staff from the commissions and the Board met to fashion a process for this consultation; at 
the Board, we identified members of the staff with relevant expertise, both here and across 
the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Our  staff  have  commented  on  proposed  rules  of  the 
commissions at each stage of the development process to date. In providing feedback, we 
have tried to bring to bear our experience from supervising dealers and market infrastructure 
as well as our familiarity with markets and data sources to assist the commissions.  
Important  coordination  activities  related  to  derivatives  regulation  also  are  occurring  within 
international  groups.  Most  prominently,  the  Group  of  Twenty  (G-20)  leaders  have  set  out 
commitments related to reform of the OTC derivatives markets that, when implemented by 
national authorities, will form a broadly consistent international regulatory approach. Work on 
the G-20 commitments is being done by numerous groups of technical and policy experts, 
and staff members from the Federal Reserve are actively participating in these groups.  
More generally, the Board participates in many international groups that serve as vehicles for 
coordinating policies related to the participants and the infrastructure of derivatives markets. 
These  groups  include  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (Basel  Committee), 
which  has  recently  enhanced  international  capital,  leverage,  and  liquidity  standards  for 
derivatives, and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, which is working with 
the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  to  update  international  standards 
for  systemically  important  clearing  systems,  including  central  counterparties  that  clear 
derivatives  instruments,  and  trade  repositories.  Public  consultation  on  these  revised 
international standards is currently under way.  
The  goal  of  all  of  these  efforts  is  to  develop  a  consistent  international  approach  to  the 
regulation and supervision of derivatives products and market infrastructures as well as to 
the  sound  implementation  of  the  agreed-upon  approaches.  Our  aim  is  to  promote  both 
financial stability and fair competitive conditions to the fullest extent possible.  
Infrastructure issues 
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  addressed  both  the  infrastructure  of  the  derivatives  markets  and  the 
regulation and supervision of its dealers and major participants. Central counterparties are 
given  an  expanded  role  in  the  clearing  and  settling  of  swap  and  security-based  swap 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(hereafter referred to as “swap”) transactions, and the Board believes benefits can flow from 
this  reform.  Since  2005,  Federal  Reserve  staff  members  have  worked  with  market 
participants  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  for  OTC  derivatives,  including  developing  and 
broadening  the  use  of  central  clearing  mechanisms  and  trade  repositories.  Market 
participants have already established central counterparties that provide clearing services for 
some  OTC  interest  rate,  energy,  and  credit  derivatives  contracts.  If  properly  designed, 
managed,  and  overseen,  central  counterparties  offer  an  important  tool  for  managing 
counterparty  credit  risk,  and  thus  they  can  reduce  risk  to  market  participants  and  to  the 
financial system. Both central counterparties and trade repositories also support regulatory 
oversight  and  policymaking  by  providing  more-comprehensive  data  on  the  derivatives 
markets.  The  Board  is  committed  to  continuing  to  work  with  other  authorities,  both  in  the 
United States and abroad, to ensure that a largely consistent international approach is taken 
to  central  counterparties  and  trade  repositories  and  that  their  risk-reducing  benefits  are 
realized.  
Title VIII of the act complements the role of central clearing in title VII through heightened 
supervisory  oversight  of  systemically 
including 
systemically  important  facilities  that  clear  swaps.  This  heightened  oversight  is  important 
because  financial  market  utilities  such  as  central  counterparties  concentrate  risk  and  thus 
have the potential to transmit shocks throughout the financial markets. The Financial Stability 
Oversight Council is responsible for designating utilities as systemically important. Through 
its role on the council, the Board helped develop the designation process that was released 
for  comment  in  March.  Separately,  the  Board  is  also  seeking  comment  on  proposed  risk-
management  standards  that  would  apply  to  those  designated  utilities  supervised  by  the 
Board  under  title  VIII.1  As  part  of  title  VIII,  the  Board  was  given  new  authority  to  provide 
designated  utilities  with  access  to  Reserve  Bank  accounts,  payment  services,  and 
emergency  collateralized  liquidity  in  unusual  and  exigent  circumstances.  We  are  carefully 
considering ways to implement this authority in a manner that protects taxpayers and limits 
any rise in moral hazard.  
financial  market  utilities, 
important 
Supervisory issues 
Although  central  counterparties  will  provide  an  additional  tool  for  managing  counterparty 
credit  risk,  enhancements  to  the  risk-management  policies  and  procedures  for  individual 
market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. As the reforms outlined 
in the act are implemented, the most active firms in bilateral OTC markets likely will become 
active clearing members of central counterparties. As such, the quality of risk management 
at these firms importantly affects the ability of the central counterparty to manage its risks 
effectively and to deliver risk-reducing benefits to the markets.  
Capital  and  margin  requirements  are  central  to  the  prudential  regulation  of  financial 
institutions  active  in  derivatives  markets  as  well  as  to  the  internal  risk-management 
processes of such firms. Title VII requires that the CFTC, the SEC, and prudential regulators 
adopt capital and margin requirements for the noncleared swap activity of swap dealers and 
major  swap  participants.  The  Board,  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Farm 
Credit Administration are responsible for adopting capital and margin requirements for swap 
dealers and major swap participants that are banks or other prudentially regulated entities. 
The  commissions  are  responsible  for  adopting  capital  and  margin  requirements  for  swap 
dealers and major swap participants that are not supervised by a prudential regulator. The 
                                                 
1   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), “Federal Reserve Seeks Comment on Proposed 
Rule Related to Supervision of Designated Financial Market Utilities,” press release, March 30. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prudential  regulators  and  the  commissions  are  consulting  in  developing  the  rules,  and  all 
agencies must, to the maximum extent practicable, adopt comparable standards.  
Earlier today, the Board and the other prudential regulators released for public comment a 
proposed  rule  on  capital  and  margin  requirements.  Our  proposal  will  be  open  for  public 
comment for 60 days, and we look forward to receiving the public’s comments.  
For capital, our proposal relies on the existing regulatory capital requirements, which already 
specifically  address  the  unique  risks  of  derivatives  transactions.  Beyond  the  current 
requirements,  the  Board  and  the  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  played  an  active  role  in 
developing the recent Basel III enhancements to capital requirements agreed to by the Basel 
Committee in December 2010. Basel III will, among other things, strengthen the prudential 
framework  for  OTC  derivatives  by  increasing  OTC  derivatives’  risk-based  capital  and 
leverage  requirements  and  by  requiring  banking  firms  to  hold  an  additional  buffer  of  high-
quality,  liquid  assets  to  address  potential  liquidity  needs  resulting  from  their  derivatives 
portfolios.  
Our proposal for margin imposes initial and variation margin requirements on the noncleared 
swaps held by swap dealers or major swap participants that have a prudential regulator. For 
swaps  with  a  nonfinancial  end-user  counterparty,  the  proposed  rule  would  not  specify  a 
minimum margin requirement. Rather, it would allow a banking organization that is a dealer 
or major participant to establish a threshold, based on a credit exposure limit that is approved 
and monitored as part of the credit approval process, below which the end user would not 
have  to  post  margin.  For  swaps  with  other  counterparties,  the  proposal  would  cap  the 
allowable  threshold  for  unsecured  credit  exposure  on  noncleared  swaps.  In  addition,  the 
proposal  would  only  apply  a  margin  requirement  to  contracts  entered  into  after  the  new 
requirement becomes effective.  
A much discussed part of the act is the requirement that banks push portions of their swap 
activity into affiliates or face restrictions on their access to the discount window or deposit 
insurance. Under  the  push-out  provisions,  banking  organizations  with  deposit  insurance  or 
access  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  discount  window  will  have  to  reorganize  some  of  their 
derivatives activity, pushing certain types of swaps out of subsidiary banks and into distinct 
legal entities that will require their own capitalization and separate documentation of trades 
with existing customers. The act permits domestic banks to continue to engage in derivatives 
activities that have been a traditional focus of banks, including hedging activities and dealing 
in interest rate swaps, currency swaps, certain cleared credit default swaps, and other swaps 
that  reference  assets  that  banks  are  eligible  to  hold.  However,  because  of  the  specific 
language contained in the act, this exemption for traditional bank derivatives activities does 
not apply to U.S. branches of foreign banking firms that by law have access to the Federal 
Reserve’s discount window. A possibly unintended effect of the act’s push-out provision may 
be to require some foreign firms to reorganize their existing U.S. derivatives activities to a 
greater  extent  than  U.S.  firms.  Proposed  rules  to  implement  this  section  are  still  under 
development by the banking agencies.  
Conclusion 
As  the  implementation  process  for  the  act  continues,  the  challenge  facing  the  Board  is  to 
enhance  supervision,  oversight,  and  prudential  standards  of  major  derivatives  market 
participants  in  a  manner  that  promotes  more-effective  risk  management  and  reduces 
systemic risk, yet retain the significant benefits of derivatives to the businesses and investors 
who use them to manage financial market risks. The Board is working diligently to achieve 
these goals.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
