Már Guðmundsson: Iceland’s economy and monetary regime – a series 
of crossroads 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
50th Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 7 April 2011. 
 Honourable President; Prime Minister; other Ministers; Speaker of Parliament; Chairman of 
the  Board;  Party  Chairmen,  Bank  Directors;  Directors  of  Public  Institutions;  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen:  
This  year’s  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  is  held  on  the  Bank’s 
50th anniversary. But it would hardly be accurate to say that the Bank is facing halcyon days 
at  this  milestone.  Quite  the  contrary:  times  are  turbulent.  Furthermore,  Iceland’s  economy 
and  monetary  regime  are  standing  at  a  complex  series  of  crossroads,  and  the  paths  we 
choose  could  have  a  profound  impact  on  future  developments.  This  is  reminiscent  of  the 
situation that reigned when the Bank was founded, but I will come to that later.  
What exactly are these crossroads, then?  
The first fork in the road lies in the changing economic situation. Instability and recession are 
giving  way  to  better  equilibrium  and  recovery.  The  current  account  deficit  from  Iceland’s 
overheating period has been turned around to an underlying surplus that has supported the 
króna, which is now over 7½% stronger than it was at the beginning of last year. At the same 
time, the Central Bank has bought foreign currency in the market for about 33 b.kr., as part of 
its plan to accumulate non-borrowed reserves. Inflation reached the Central Bank’s inflation 
target  towards  the  end  of  last  year,  due  to  a  stronger  currency,  spare  capacity  in  the 
economy,  and  inflation  expectations  approaching  the  target.  This  development  is  not 
independent of the monetary policy stance, however, as spare capacity can be associated 
with a vicious cycle of falling exchange rate and rising inflation expectations if confidence is 
lacking.  
Indicators suggest that a weak economic recovery began in the third quarter of 2010, and 
forecasts assume that it will continue this year. The recovery is still weak, not least given the 
substantial slack in the economy. Two points of concern in this connection are that business 
investment is very low in historical context and export growth is rather weak in view of the 
low real exchange rate and robust recovery of global trade. An important factor here is that 
Iceland’s  major  export  sectors  face  capacity  constraints;  therefore,  exports  cannot  be 
increased  to  any  significant  degree  without  further  investment.  Growth  is  strong  in  export 
sectors without such limits, but their share in total exports is still small.  
The next crossroads stems from the vast improvement in Iceland’s foreign liquidity and the 
build-up of the foreign exchange reserves. As of the end of February, the reserves totalled 
719 b.kr., or 46% of GDP. Iceland’s foreign reserves have never been larger as a share of 
GDP, not even at the end of World War II. Increased reserves, enhanced stability, progress 
in the implementation of the plan to achieve a fiscal surplus in coming years, and buybacks 
of  Treasury  foreign  debt  in  the  secondary  market  have  silenced  the  voices  that 
prognosticated sovereign default. These factors contribute to the assessment that it is now 
considered safe to start removing capital controls on outflows and that the conditions have 
improved  markedly  for  Treasury  foreign  borrowing,  which  could  pave  the  way  for  other 
domestic entities.  
The  Icesave  referendum  taking  place  this  coming  weekend  could,  of  course,  affect  these 
prospects.  If  the  “yes”  vote  carries  the  day,  plans  for  capital  account  liberalisation  and 
Treasury borrowing will proceed as currently planned. If the Icesave agreement is rejected, 
however, there are indications that two major credit rating agencies will decide to downgrade 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Iceland’s sovereign debt to sub-investment grade. This would impede foreign borrowing and 
delay  capital  account  liberalisation,  although  it  is  not  clear  how  strong  or  persistent  these 
effects would be.  
The  financial  system  is  at  a  crossroads  as  well.  The  first  phase  of  financial  system 
reconstruction  is  largely  complete.  Iceland’s  banks  have  defined  balance  sheets,  private 
sector debt restructuring is underway, and changes have been made in order to address the 
most obvious flaws in the regulatory framework governing domestic financial institutions. A 
number  of  tasks  remain  unfinished,  however,  as  regards  establishing  a  stable,  effective 
financial system. It is not yet possible to state with certainty that financial institutions could 
fund  themselves  without  the  support  of  capital  controls  and  the  declaration  of  a  blanket 
deposit  guarantee.  In  this  context,  it  is  critical  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets,  which  are  important  for  trading,  funding,  and  risk  diversification  –  particularly  the 
foreign exchange and equity markets. It is also essential that financial institutions and other 
entities re-establish their access to foreign credit markets. A further task is to formulate policy 
regarding the nature, size, and international relations of the Icelandic financial system. It is 
no  less  important  to  formulate  policy  concerning  the  tools  and  institutional  structure  for 
financial stability: the financial crisis has taught us that assessing systemic risk is key, as are 
sound arrangements for the application of tools to mitigate it.  
The  final  crossroads  is  faced  by  economic  policy,  as  a  result  of  the  changes  I  have 
described. In short, it can be said that the tasks at hand are shifting from the achievement of 
stability to promoting growth, and from crisis management to longer-term development.  
In terms of monetary policy, this can be seen in the Monetary Policy Committee’s shift of its 
bias  from  monetary  easing  to  neutral.  This  does  not  mean  that  interest  rates  cannot  be 
lowered  further,  but  it  does  mean  that  because  inflation  appears  to  have  hit  bottom, 
economic  recovery  has  begun,  and  the  effective  policy  rate  is  closer  to  equilibrium  than 
before, it is not as clear what direction upcoming interest rate decisions will take. The next 
steps  will  be  determined  more  by  the  newest  indicators  of  economic  developments  and 
prospects than they have been in the recent past.  
At its next meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee will probably assess whether and how 
the  Icesave  referendum  results  and  the  newly  published  capital  account  liberalisation 
strategy will affect monetary policy in the near future. The strategy divides liberalisation into 
two main phases, with Phase I dedicated to unwinding offshore króna positions by allowing 
owners to exit through auctions or by investing in the Icelandic economy. Only when these 
measures have generated acceptable results can controls on residents’ capital outflows be 
lifted. If conditions are right, the latter phase could proceed relatively quickly, but if not, it will 
be executed more gradually.  
It is difficult to say how long Phase I will take, as its duration will depend on a number of 
uncertainties,  such  as  access  to  foreign  credit  markets.  But  it  is  important  for  near-term 
monetary  policy  that  Phase  I  be  designed  to  minimise  potential  negative  effects  on  the 
exchange rate and the foreign exchange reserves, at least at first. It is only in Phase II that 
the interest rate differential with other countries begins to assume much greater importance 
as regards exchange rate developments. 
In  the  recent  past,  monetary  policy  has  been  an  element  in  the  larger  economic  policy 
formulated by the Icelandic authorities in co-operation with the International Monetary Fund. 
The key features of that policy have been exchange rate stability, fiscal sustainability, and 
financial system reconstruction. In spite of delays in execution, the programme has, on the 
whole,  been  very  successful.  Our  collaboration  with  the  IMF  according  to  the  current 
economic programme will conclude in August, but of course, our long-standing co-operative 
relationship with the Fund will not end then. On behalf of the Central Bank, I would like to use 
this  opportunity  to  thank  the  IMF  and  its  staff  for  their  efforts  over  the  past  two-and-a-half 
years.  The  conclusion  of  the  IMF-supported  programme  and  the  implementation  of  the 
capital  account  liberalisation  strategy  bring  the  determination  of  Iceland’s  future  monetary 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  economic  policy  framework  to  the  fore.  That  work  has  already  begun,  partly  with  the 
Central  Bank’s  December  2010  report  entitled  Monetary  Policy  in  Iceland  after  Capital 
Controls.  
Let us think back for a moment to 1961, when the Central Bank of Iceland first opened its 
doors. As will be described in subsequent speeches, the Icelandic economy was changing 
rapidly at that time. A number of structural changes were well underway, and some of them 
are still in effect today. The policy of the time aimed at establishing market-based economic 
equilibrium in Iceland. Trade in goods and services was liberalised, and multiple exchange 
rates were supplanted by an exchange rate based on underlying economic conditions. Then, 
as now, Iceland was pursuing an economic programme in collaboration with the IMF. Then, 
as now, Iceland’s economic ties to the rest of the world were under review.  
The establishment of the Central Bank was an element in these changes, and its activities 
were  part  of  broader-based  measures.  From  the  outset,  the  Central  Bank’s  position  was 
strong.  It  is  remarkable  that  among  us  here  today  are  a  number  of  people  who  were 
important thinkers and agents of change at that time.  
Honoured guests: As I mentioned earlier, we are faced at present with the need to formulate 
future monetary and financial stability policies. The review of the Act on the Central Bank of 
Iceland will presumably be a part of that process. The Central Bank will participate actively in 
this work, but many others will be involved, and the Bank looks forward to collaborating with 
them. Ultimately, however, it is Parliament, and in some instances the people themselves, 
who have the last word.  
In closing, I would like to thank the Central Bank’s many collaborators for a successful co-
operative  relationship  over  the  past  year.  I  want  no  less  to  thank  the  employees  of  the 
Central  Bank  for  their  tireless  efforts,  for  without  their  contribution,  the  Bank’s  work  would 
bear very little fruit. And in closing, I want to express my gratitude to the many individuals 
who have put their shoulders to the wheel at the Central Bank of Iceland over the past 50 
years. It is a pleasure to see so many of you here today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
