Stefan Ingves: Introduction on monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag Committee 
on Finance, Stockholm, 3 March 2011. 
 I was here as recently as two days ago to discuss the development of housing prices and 
household indebtedness. Today, I am here to discuss monetary policy.1
 After several years 
of crisis management, it feels positive to return to discussing more “usual” monetary policy 
issues. When I was here a year ago, I showed a picture of a skater on the ice. Having been 
out on thin ice, I considered we had returned to thicker ice. Today, I would instead say that 
we’re back on dry land. To use a different metaphor, Sweden, with its small, open economy, 
could  be  described  as  being  a  small  boat  on  a  wide  ocean.  The  financial  crisis  required 
“Sailboat  Sweden”  to  navigate  some  dramatically  stormy  waters.  After  such  a  traumatic 
experience, it is natural to try to lift your gaze and ask certain all-embracing questions:  
 
 
 
Personally, I would be just a little worried if I found myself aboard a boat without knowing 
where I boarded it, its current position or final destination. Let me therefore attempt to give 
you my answers to these questions as they concern Sweden’s economy.  
Where have we come from?  
Where are we now?  
Where are we going?  
Where have we come from?  
The years before the financial crisis – the calm before the storm  
From  about  the  middle  of  the  1990s  until  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis,  economic 
development  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad  was  characterised  by  positive  growth  and  low 
inflation. Fluctuations in production and inflation decreased, at the same time as productivity 
growth  in  Sweden  and  elsewhere  increased.  There  are  many  ways  of  illustrating  this 
development, but one way would be to examine government bond rates in Sweden, the euro 
area  and  the  United  States  (see  Slide  1).  Certain  clear  patterns  can  be  detected.  These 
include  decreased  interest  rate  levels  and  a  reduction  of  fluctuation  in  these  over  time.  In 
addition,  from  the  mid-1990s,  interest  rates  in  various  countries  developed  in  a  strikingly 
similar  manner.  This  strong  development  can  be  further  illustrated  by  growth  in  the  world 
economy, which fluctuated between 2 and 5 per cent and averaged almost 4 per cent (see 
Slide 2). All in all, developments from the mid-1990s until the start of the financial crisis can 
be compared to a voyage through relatively calm waters, to return to our nautical analogy. 
But then the storm broke.  
Sweden’s economy during the financial crisis – what happened?  
Happily, we can now start talking about the financial crisis as something we have left behind 
us. It is also much easier now to see the implications of the crisis for Sweden than it was 
                                                 
1  
I refer to my speech of 1 March, “The housing market, the banks and household debts” as regards details of 
the housing market and indebtedness among households. The speech is available at the Riksbank’s website, 
www.riksbank.se. However, at the end of today’s speech, I will touch on household debts and housing prices 
when I discuss our forecast for the repo rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
while the crisis was in progress. One way of emphasising the drama of the financial crisis is 
to look at GDP in the world as a whole, which decreased for the first time since the 1940s 
(see Slide 2). With an economy in free fall in many parts of the world, policy rates dropped 
with full force (see Slide 3). At the same time, very extensive fiscal easing was implemented 
in  many  countries.  Furthermore,  both  governments  and  central  banks  launched  various 
support measures to avoid a collapse of the financial system.  
Today, we know that, in the end, the financial crisis mainly manifested itself in Sweden in the 
form  of  decreased  demand  from  abroad.  World  trade  declined  sharply,  as  did  Sweden’s 
exports  (see  Slide  4).  The  uncertain  situation  meant  that  the  currencies  of  many  smaller 
economies were weakened in relation to the US dollar and euro. To a great extent, this also 
applied to the Swedish krona, which reached its lowest point ever (see Slide 5). Despite the 
weakened krona, the decrease in exports was extremely severe. It is natural to ask why. One 
explanation is that a large part of the decline in world trade affected investment goods and 
durable  consumer  goods  such  as  cars.  The  purchase  of  these  goods  could  easily  be 
postponed  when  the  crisis  broke  out.  Such  product  groups  represent  an  important  part  of 
Sweden’s exports. In could thus be said that Sweden was impacted particularly severely due 
to the composition of its exports. As I mentioned in my introduction, Sweden is a small, open 
economy that is highly dependent on exports. During 2009, GDP fell by over 5 per cent, the 
sharpest decline since the Second World War.  
Even  if  the  krona  was  heavily  weakened,  this  was  not  enough  to  prevent  a  major  fall  in 
exports.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  indications  that  the  weakening  of  the  krona 
contributed  strongly  towards  preventing  inflation  from  becoming  excessively  low.  Unlike 
abroad,  where  inflation  became  negative,  inflation  in  Sweden  remained  around  the  target 
even during the most acute phase of the crisis (see Slide 6). Note that inflation in Sweden 
here disregards changes in mortgage interest expenditure – it is measured using the CPIF. 
This approach corresponds better with the way that inflation is measured abroad.2 
Developments in Sweden during the financial crisis differ in several regards from the crisis 
we  experienced  during  the  1990s,  when  major  problems  were  present  in  the  Swedish 
economy before the crisis erupted. Inflation was very high and the credit market had recently 
been deregulated. This led to overheating tendencies and the fixed exchange rate eventually 
needed to be abandoned. In somewhat simplified terms, I usually describe the crisis of the 
1990s like this: “things were quite OK abroad, but Sweden was not OK”.  
This time, the crisis had its origins in problems on the US housing market, which then had 
unanticipated consequences. With the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, 
these  events  turned  into  a  global  financial  crisis.  And  in  several  other  countries,  such  as 
Spain  and  Ireland,  problems  arose  on  the  housing  market.  At  the  same  time,  the  public 
finances of several countries were not in sufficiently good shape to handle a crisis like this. 
This  was  not  true  of  the  Swedish  economy.  Thanks  to  regulations  on  surplus  targets  and 
expenditure ceilings, Sweden’s public finances were in good shape before the crisis broke 
out. Unlike during the crisis of the 1990s, the situation could now be described as follows: 
“things were not OK abroad, but Sweden was OK”.  
There  are  also  other  differences  if  the  current  situation  is  compared  with  the  crisis  of  the 
1990s. Back then, there were no elements of lending to the banks by the Riksbank. On the 
other hand, loan losses among the Swedish banks were enormous, as I clearly remember 
from  my  position  as  head  of  the  Swedish  Bank  Support  Authority  at  the  time.  Now,  the 
situation has rather been the opposite: comprehensive lending from the Riksbank, but very 
limited loan losses on the home market for the banks. How can this be explained? Well – as 
a reflection of the nature of the crisis. Back then, in the early 1990s, the banks had suffered 
                                                 
2   For  example,  in  the  euro  area,  the  price  index  HICP  measures  inflation  without  the  effects  of  changes  in 
mortgage interest expenditure. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
loan losses in the commercial property sector, which impacted on profitability in the banking 
sector and led to a degree of restructuring aimed at maintaining capital adequacy; it was a 
solvency crisis, rather than a liquidity crisis. This time, in conjunction with the financial crisis, 
an acute shortage of liquidity instead arose in the banks when the functioning of the capital 
markets  became  impaired.  A  further  sign  that  the  financial  crisis  is  behind  us  is  that  the 
Riksbank has now wound up all of the extraordinary measures adopted during the crisis.  
It  was  not  entirely  easy  to  understand  the  development  of  the  financial  crisis  while  it  was 
unfolding. Today, however, the view is much clearer. This brings us to the question of where 
we are today.  
Where are we now?  
Strong recovery after the crisis  
The Swedish economy has recovered very strongly from the financial crisis. The growth of 
GDP  in  Sweden  is  very  high  from  both  a  historical  and  an  international  perspective. 
According to new figures, GDP growth amounted to 5.5 per cent in 2010 (see Slide 2).3 This 
is the strongest growth seen since 1970. There have thus been very wide fluctuations in the 
economy  in  recent  years.  After  developments  in  2009,  which  entailed  the  sharpest  fall  in 
GDP  since  the  Second  World  War,  we  have  instead  experienced,  in  2010,  the  greatest 
increase of GDP in 40 years. Sweden is now among those economies with the highest GDP 
growth  rates  in  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  the  indicators  are  very  strong,  suggesting 
continued high levels of growth throughout early 2011.  
Exports,  which  decreased  so  drastically  during  the  crisis,  are  showing  very  high  growth 
figures (see Slide 4). One natural explanation is that world trade is now growing and Sweden 
has a high percentage of exports. This is the case even though the recovery in the United 
States and euro area is proceeding relatively sluggishly.  
From what I have just said, it is easy to conclude that the “emerging economies” have a high 
demand  for  Swedish  exports  and  have  heavily  increased  their  proportion  of  these.  This 
explanation is only partially correct. If we look at which countries Swedish exports go to, the 
United  States  and  Europe  remain  completely  dominant  (see  Slide  7).4  However,  over  a 
longer  period,  the  United  States  has  decreased  its  share  in  favour  of  the  BRIC  countries 
(Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China).  There  are  many  indications  that  the  significance  of  the 
emerging economies for Swedish exports will continue to increase in the period ahead. This 
is  an  example  of  an  important  gradual  change  that  has  taken  place  independently  of  the 
financial crisis and which will affect developments in the future. It could perhaps be said that 
the  crisis  has  contributed  towards  shedding  light  upon  the  increased  significance  of  the 
emerging economies, as these are now driving the recovery of the global economy.  
Interestingly  enough,  the  composition  of  products  in  Sweden’s  exports,  which  was  a 
disadvantage for Sweden when the crisis erupted, has now been turned into an advantage. 
There is a natural explanation for this: just as purchases of goods of this type (large amounts 
of which are exported by Sweden) were easy to postpone, so are they also easy to resume. 
However,  over  the  last  year  or  so,  the  krona  has  appreciated  considerably,  reducing  the 
impetus previously provided by the weakened exchange rate (see Slide 5).  
At the same time, exports are far from being the only part of the Swedish economy that has 
grown. Domestic demand in the form of consumption and investments has developed very 
                                                 
3   This  was  entirely  in  line  with  the  Riksbank’s  forecast  from  February,  which  also  predicted  GDP  growth  of 
5.5 per cent for 2010. 
4   The slide shows percentages of goods exports, which constitute about two-thirds of Sweden’s total exports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
strongly. So why is the growth of domestic demand also so high in Sweden, compared, for 
example, with the United States and the euro area? There are several explanations for this.  
To  start  with,  Sweden’s  public  finances  are  in  good  shape  in  an  international  comparison, 
which  means  that  there  will  be  no  need  for  fiscal  policy  tightening  in  the  period  ahead.  In 
addition, household saving in Sweden was high before the crisis broke out. Saving increased 
further in conjunction with the crisis, presumably due to the general uncertainty prevailing. 
Moreover,  household  confidence  has  recovered  strongly,  as  various  types  of  survey  have 
shown. Together with relatively sizable incomes, this has made it possible for consumption to 
recover.  A  further  favourable  factor  is  that,  in  the  end,  the  Swedish  financial  system  was 
never fully drawn into the financial crisis.  
Towards a normalisation of GDP and inflation – even for the repo rate  
Let me refer back to Slide 3, which shows the policy rates of Sweden, the euro area and the 
United  States.  The  policy  rates  of  both  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  remain  on 
extremely low levels. This emphasises that the situation in these countries is far from being 
“business as usual”. Part of this can be explained by the development of public finances. In 
the  euro  area,  unease  remains  high  over  how  countries  such  as  Greece,  Portugal  and 
Ireland will cope with their long-term commitments. One of the forms taken by this unease is 
that  of  rising  government  bond  rates  in  these  countries,  which  is  further  increasing  the 
burden of debt (see Slide 8). The high levels of public debt are partially a consequence of the 
fiscal policy stimulation packages introduced during the crisis. In many cases, the situation 
has been exacerbated by the excessively weak development of public finances in the years 
leading up to the crisis.  
Several  countries  are  now  facing  a  difficult  balancing  act.  On  one  hand,  significant  fiscal 
policy tightening will be necessary for a long time to come in order to reduce public debt to a 
more reasonable level. On the other hand, this tightening must not be so comprehensive as 
to  threaten  the  economic  recovery.  Hopefully  the  planned  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility  will  have  a  beneficial  effect,  but  the  public  finance  problems  will  characterise 
developments for a long time to come, one way or another.  
The United States also has a large and growing central government debt, and it will require 
comprehensive fiscal policy tightening to gain control over this development. One advantage 
is that US government bond rates are still low (see Slide 1). Moreover, asset purchases by 
the US central bank have contributed towards keeping interest rates down. These expansive 
financial  conditions,  together  with  high  profits within  the  corporate  sector,  suggest  that  the 
recovery will pick up further speed, despite the need for fiscal policy tightening.  
On the other hand, problems remain on the housing market, which are dampening household 
demand and restraining the recovery. Many households have seen the value of their homes 
decrease sharply, with homes now being worth less than mortgages in many cases. In such 
a situation, many households are choosing to strengthen their balance sheets by restraining 
consumption in favour of saving. Furthermore, house sales entail a serious risk of incurring 
losses.  In  turn,  this  may  mean  that  the  unemployed  are  less  willing  to  move  to  regions  in 
which there exist job opportunities. The labour market may thus have become less flexible, 
and long-term unemployment in the United States may have risen as a consequence of the 
crisis.  
Happily, in Sweden, the level of GDP seems to have returned to about the same level as 
prevailed before the crisis erupted. Our overall assessment is that resource utilisation is on 
the way to becoming normalised. However, I would like to point out that it is very difficult to 
measure  resource  utilisation,  as  this  cannot  be  directly  observed.  Different  measures  also 
provide  somewhat  different  pictures.  While  a  number  of  measures  indicate  that  resource 
utilisation  has  already  returned  to  normal,  other  measures  continue  to  point  to  a  certain 
degree of spare capacity. There are many indications that unemployment has the potential to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
decrease  a  bit  more  before  any  “bottleneck  problems”  arise  in  the  labour  market  (see 
Slide 9).  
CPIF inflation has shown significantly more stable development than CPI, which includes the 
effects on mortgage interest expenditure of the drastic interest rate cuts implemented during 
the crisis, as well as the recent interest rate increases. Inflationary pressures are starting to 
increase in tandem with the economic recovery. This means that the repo rate has also been 
increased from the very low level of 0.25 per cent that prevailed one year ago to 1.5 per cent 
today.  This  allows  us  to  safeguard  the  balance  of  Sweden’s  economy  and  simultaneously 
attain the inflation target of 2 per cent.  
Where are we going?  
Having come this far, it may be appropriate to stop and spend a moment reflecting over the 
financial crisis and long-term economic development. As I mentioned in my introduction, the 
period  from  the  mid-1990s  until  the  financial  crisis  was characterised by  good  growth,  low 
inflation  and  decreasing  variation  in  output  and  prices.  In  addition,  the  financial  crisis  was 
preceded by a period of about 60 years of unbroken growth in the world economy. So we 
could  ask  ourselves:  are  crises  of  the  type  we  have  just  experienced  “improbable  events” 
that take place perhaps once in fifty years and something we just have to accept? My answer 
is both yes and no. We have learned that financial crises are extremely costly. Governments 
and central banks are now busy discussing different measures both to reduce the likelihood 
of  crises  arising  and  to  mitigate  the  consequences  of  any  such  crises.  This  work  is  very 
important,  but  unfortunately  will  not  mean  that,  as  of  now,  there  will  never  be  any  more 
crises.  
So what should we do to ensure that it takes as long as possible until the next crisis breaks 
out?  To  start  with,  it  is  important  to  develop  the  financial  regulatory  framework  both  in 
Sweden and abroad, so as to boost the resilience of the financial system. Work on this is 
currently in full swing, but it will take several years before we will be able to gain a clearer 
view of how such a new regulatory framework may look. However, regardless of how it may 
look, it will affect the conditions for monetary policy, one way or another. It is thus important 
for  central  banks  to  continually  monitor  and  analyse  changes  in  the  financial  regulatory 
system. The financial crisis has also emphasised the need to better incorporate the financial 
markets’ significance into the macroeconomic assessment that guides monetary policy.  
Future developments – the stable development of Sweden’s economy requires the 
repo rate to be raised  
The recovery of Sweden’s economy after the financial crisis has now made a lot of progress. 
Output  has  largely  returned  to  the  pre-crisis  level,  and  unemployment  is  in  retreat.  Our 
assessment  of  developments  is  that  the  high  growth  rate  in  the  economy  will  gradually 
decrease  in  the  period  ahead  and  will  approach  normal  levels.  Underlying  inflation  is 
increasing and will be close to target by the end of the forecast period (see Slide 10). It could 
be  said  that  the  Swedish  economy,  including  monetary  policy,  is  in  a  process  of 
normalisation.  This  also  means  that  issues  that  were  being  analysed  before  the  crisis 
erupted,  such  as  commodity  prices  and  the  development  of  the  krona,  are  again  on  the 
agenda, now that the need for acute crisis management has decreased. One example of this 
is formed by the alternative scenarios in the last monetary policy report, which dealt with both 
the stronger krona and commodity prices, which are now rising rapidly on the world market 
(see Slide 11). I will return to these scenarios later.  
Another  sign  of  normalisation  can  be  seen  in  the  occasional  differences  between  the 
Riksbank’s repo rate forecast and different measures of market expectations of the repo rate. 
During  the  financial  crisis,  there  was  unusually  great  uncertainty  regarding  where  the 
economy was going and how various monetary policy measures would affect developments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Consequently,  it  was  not  surprising  that  different  analysts  arrived  at  different  conclusions 
regarding the future development of the repo rate. During 2009, most measures of market 
expectations  indicated  that  participants  expected  earlier  repo  rate  increases  than  were 
indicated by the Riksbank’s repo rate path. The situation in 2010 was the opposite: that is, 
the market expected slower increases of the repo rate than were suggested by the repo rate 
path. The direction of Sweden’s economy is now clearer and this may explain why different 
measures  of  market  expectations  have  moved  closer  to  the  Riksbank’s  forecast  (see 
Slide 12).  
All in all, the monetary policy stance suggests a gradual increase of the repo rate towards 
more normal levels (see Slide 12). This is a precondition for the balanced development of the 
Swedish  economy.  As  I  mentioned  two  days  ago,  housing  prices  and  debts  among 
households  have  increased  heavily  for  a  longer  time.  The  rate  of  increase  of  household 
debts  has  far  exceeded  the  rate  of  increase  of  incomes.  If  this  development  continues, 
imbalances  may  arise  in  the  Swedish  economy  over  the  long  term.  Consequently,  in  this 
regards, the normalisation of the repo rate level may also contribute to promoting a stable 
economic development in the future.  
Even  if  the  development  of  Sweden’s  economy  is  favourable,  it  is  naturally  not  risk-free. 
What risks can we see at present?  
Firstly,  the  krona  may  appreciate  more  than  we  had  expected.  The  assessment  we  have 
made is that the krona, to a significant extent, already reflects the high growth rate of GDP 
and the strong state of public finances, for example. However, I would like to point out that 
forecasts of exchange rates are always associated with significant uncertainty. It cannot be 
ruled out that the favourable development of the Swedish economy has led many investors 
to  reappraise  their  view  of  investing  money  in  Sweden.  So  could  an  excessively  strong 
exchange  rate  form  a  problem?  Yes,  it  may  form  a  “problem”  in  so  far  as  demand  for 
Swedish  exports  will  decrease  and  inflation  may  not  increase  in  line  with  expectations,  as 
imported  goods  become  cheaper.  Should  this  be  the  case,  it  may  not  be  necessary  to 
increase  the  repo  rate  as  rapidly.  An  alternative  scenario  in  February’s  Monetary  Policy 
Report  examines  this  possibility.  But  let  me  clearly  emphasise  that  the  Riksbank  has  no 
target for the level of the exchange rate. Monetary policy is governed by the inflation target, 
even if the exchange rate is an important determining factor for inflation.  
Secondly, as I mentioned, commodity prices have increased very steeply over the last year 
(see  Slide  11).  To  a  certain  extent,  although  far  from  completely,  this  price  rise  has  been 
counteracted  by  the  appreciation  of  the  krona.  If  commodity  prices  increase  as  a  result  of 
rising demand, this price increase will probably be more permanent than one resulting from 
supply shocks – that is factors obstructing output.5 It seems likely that the strong economic 
development of the emerging economies – with increased demand for intermediate goods as 
a result – can largely explain the increase of commodity prices over the last year. The very 
recent  unease  in  North  Africa  has  contributed  to  rising  oil  prices  and  has  more  of  the 
character of a supply shock. All in all, the increase of commodity prices may have greater 
contagion effects on prices in the rest of the economy than we have estimated.  
Thirdly:  even  if  unemployment  has  decreased  over  the  last  year,  it  is  still  relatively  high. 
Despite  this,  a  certain  degree  of  labour  shortages  can  already  be  discerned  in  several 
sectors. Shortages have even risen rapidly in the manufacturing sector, where employment 
fell  the  most  during  the  crisis.  Only  one-fifth  of  the  jobs  lost  in  the  manufacturing  industry 
have  again  been  filled.  This  may  have  effects  on  wage  formation  and  inflation.  In  our 
forecast,  wages  will  increase  by  3–3.5  per  cent  over  the  coming  three  years.  Labour 
shortages  in  combination  with  a  strong  economic  climate  may  lead  to  a  situation  in  which 
                                                 
5   Examples of such factors include natural disasters or political unease in countries of production. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
wages increase at a faster rate. In that case, inflation will be higher and it may be necessary 
to raise the repo rate more rapidly.  
Having discussed these risks, it may be worthwhile to point out that they are only risks. Our 
main scenario for future developments suggests the stable recovery of the Swedish economy 
and gradual increases of the repo rate.  
Conclusion  
Let me now summarise the basis for the future direction of monetary policy. Following the 
financial crisis, Sweden’s economy has shown a strong recovery. Growth is currently high, 
but is expected to decline successively. The labour market is on the road to recovery, and 
unemployment  is  falling.  Prices  are  increasing  on  the  world’s  commodity  markets, 
contributing to rising inflation. Resource utilisation is on the way up, also contributing to the 
increase of inflationary pressures in Sweden in the period ahead.  
All in all, it can be said that the financial crisis is now behind us and that the situation is in the 
process of normalisation. This also requires a normalisation of monetary policy in the form of 
rising repo rates in the years ahead.  
In this context, allow me to clarify an important issue linked with the forecast for Sweden’s 
economy.  As  I  have  mentioned,  our  assessment  is  that  growth  in  the  Swedish  economy  
– following its very bumpy journey during the financial crisis – will gradually decrease (see 
Slide 2). Whether the forecast for Sweden’s GDP growth “levels off” at 2, 2.5 or 3 per cent 
will be determined by the workings of the economy, by the development of output and more. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  influence  long-term  growth  rates  or  the  long-term  level  of 
unemployment.  
The  inflation  target  and  monetary  policy  are  thus,  in  themselves,  no  guarantee  of  high 
growth, but they create the right conditions for consumption and investment decisions and 
reduce uncertainty over future price changes. And this is a strong foundation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
