Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Risk management in central banking 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  International  Risk  Management  Conference  2011,  Free  University  of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 15 June 2011. 
 Introduction1 
It is a pleasure for me to speak at this International Risk Management Conference 2011, and 
particularly to contribute to this workshop on financial stability. In my remarks today, I would 
like  to  elaborate  on  two  interrelated  issues,  namely  financial  stability  and  the  risk 
management function in central banking.  
I plan to structure my talk in two parts. First, I will discuss the role of central banks as liquidity 
providers and lenders of last resort, seeking to preserve financial stability as a necessary, 
albeit insufficient, condition for achieving their primary objective of price stability. This role will 
in  turn  explain  why  central  banks,  including  of course  the  Eurosystem  and  the  ECB,  have 
expanded their balance sheets during the crisis. Second, I will elaborate on risk management 
in  central  banks,  explaining  how  this  differs  from  risk  management  practices  in  private 
financial firms. In doing so, I will also talk about the risk management framework of the ECB 
and the Eurosystem and how this contributes to the ECB’s policy goals, among other things, 
by ensuring the institution’s financial protection. 
My  objective  is  to  provide  a  better  understanding  of  the  specificities  of  central  banking 
activities  in  the  supply  of  liquidity  to  the  financial  sector.  I  will  also  clarify  why  certain 
comments 
in  particular  
the ECB – becoming “bad banks”, as a result of their actions during the financial crisis, are 
fundamentally flawed. 
recently  about  central  banks  – 
that  have  been  made 
Central bank as lender of last resort 
1. 
The financial crisis has reminded us how, after a negative liquidity shock, financial firms may 
be forced to liquidate assets that they hold in stock in order to preserve a cash buffer. This 
naturally  puts  downward  pressure  on  the  market  value  of  those  assets.  And  when  asset 
values decrease, other financial firms which hold that type of asset in their portfolios may be 
forced to sell as well to protect their balance sheet and in particular their desired capital ratio. 
Downward spirals can therefore ensue, which may seriously imperil the financial stability of 
the entire system.  
If  risks  become  systemic,  investors  collectively  try  to  escape  them  by  scrambling  for  an 
“outside asset”. When situations arise in which all counterparties appear to be at great risk, 
the  only  safe  store  of  value  are  assets  that  do  not  represent  a  claim  on  anybody  in  the 
market. Liquidity – which is a claim on a central bank – becomes the only asset – outside 
asset  –  in  demand  in  these  circumstances.  Investors  hoard  liquidity  and  shed  all  other 
financial claims that are vulnerable to credit risk. Such heightened preference for liquidity in a 
context of diminished confidence in other market participants has consequences not only for 
the  value  and  liquidity  profile  of  the  assets  held  by  private  institutions,  but  also  for  their 
funding  policies.  The  liquidity  and  credit  crunch  disallow  the  rollover  of  liabilities,  and 
                                                 
1 
I wish to thank Marco Catenaro, Fernando Monar and Massimo Rostagno for their contributions to the speech. 
I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
therefore investors are pushed to liquidate assets in the market, further contributing to the 
downward spiral.  
It is crucial to realise that even a partial collapse of the financial system would jeopardise the 
ultimate goal of central banks, i.e. price stability, as prices adjust to a falling real economy. 
Furthermore, financial instability can negatively impact on monetary policy transmission. 
For those reasons, under such circumstances central banks have to provide liquidity to the 
markets, intermediating in the money market with the aim of stabilising the financial sector 
and avoiding a meltdown. In other words, they have to play the role of “lenders of last resort”.  
Playing such a role of course has implications for the size and risk profile of central banks’ 
balance sheets. At times of severe financial stress, central banks have to assume more risk 
in order to fulfil their mandate of price stability. These are risks that no private player is willing 
or able to take on. By doing so, a central bank achieves three things: it ensures the adequate 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses;  it  helps  to  preserve  the  liquidity  of  financial 
markets; and it ultimately helps to restore a private market for those assets and thus creates 
the conditions which are necessary for it to unwind those positions.  
In other words, the central bank is the only financial institution which – by temporarily taking 
on more risk than it would do in normal conditions – can manage and keep systemic risk in 
check.  
As far as the Eurosystem is concerned, most liquidity-providing operations are conducted in 
the form of repo transactions, which are completely collateralised. When a counterparty fails, 
the central bank does not lose all the funds it has lent. A substantial fraction of value can be 
recovered  from  the  repo-ed  assets.  What  matters  most,  repo  operations  are  short-term 
lending,  from  one  week  up  to,  currently,  three  months.  The  short-term  nature  of  these 
interventions  means  that  they  can  be  –  and  are  being  –  elastically  unwound  as  market 
conditions improve. In this respect, the ECB framework allows for an “automatic” contraction 
in its balance sheet: when favourable conditions are restored, banks can once again lend to 
each other in the money market. It goes of course without saying that not every action to deal 
with systemic or banking crises needs to be taken by the central bank. Liquidity support by 
central banks is meant to provide counterparties with bridge funding to cover the transition to 
calmer  market  conditions.  It  is  predicated  on  the  assumption  that  counterparties  are  and 
remain solvent institutions. If the latter condition is not met, then fiscal authorities should step 
in  and,  if  necessary,  inject  fresh  capital.  The  measures  announced  for  the  Irish  banking 
system are a case in point. 
In the following I will elaborate in greater detail on the key aspects that enable central banks 
to  take  risks  in  crises.  In  particular,  I  will  describe  some  features  of  risk  management  in 
central  banks,  explaining  the  main  differences  with  risk  management  practices  in  private 
banks. I will also briefly describe the risk control framework of the ECB, and the Eurosystem 
in general, which ensures its financial protection while helping to achieve its policy goal. 
2. 
Risk management in a central bank 
General remarks 
Central banks have preferences and constraints that differ from those of private banks. The 
objectives  of  central  banks  are  defined  in  their  statutes,  which  typically  specify  the 
maintenance of price stability as their primary mandate.  
For central banking policies to be successful, they need to remain credible by making sure 
that at least two conditions are met. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
First, a central bank should be sufficiently capitalised and run in such a way that it remains 
financially independent. Financial independence helps to keep external parties from unduly 
interfering in the conduct of monetary policy.  
Second, the long-term profitability of a central bank needs to be ensured, so that the bank’s 
reaction  to  specific  economic  circumstances  is  not  influenced  by  considerations  of  the 
short-term financial impact of such policies on its profit and loss accounts.  
Consequently,  the  capital  position  of  a  central  bank,  its  profitability  and  the  degree  of 
financial risk protection provided by its risk control framework seem to be crucial elements 
that contribute to its credibility, hence facilitating monetary policy. This consideration, along 
with the principles of prudence and transparency that are required for all public institutions 
entrusted with the management of public funds, calls for the establishment of state-of-the-art 
risk management frameworks and the highest governance standards. 
Risks  taken  in  central  banking  activities  need  to  be  analysed  in  a  holistic  manner, 
considering  the  interaction  of  different  portfolios  and  operations.  For  that  purpose,  a  
state-of-the-art comprehensive risk monitoring and reporting framework is required, capable 
of  providing  decision-making  bodies  with  appropriate  risk  management  input.  As  a  key 
element  of  the  risk  management  function  at  a  central  bank,  the  highest  governance 
standards need to be observed, both in terms of the reporting lines and organisation of the 
risk management function.  
Making a comparison of central banking practices with the risk management and governance 
standards required for private financial institutions seems obvious. However, it is not always 
easy to take best practice in private financial institutions as a measure for comparing the risk 
management  frameworks  of  central  banks,  since  there  are  a  number  of  very  relevant 
differences  that  make  such  comparisons  inappropriate.  Those  differences  relate  to  the 
structure and components of the financial statements and their corresponding risks, as well 
as  to  the  objectives  and  constraints  faced  in  the  strategic  asset  allocation  and  other  risk 
management  decisions. 
these 
dissimilarities. 
the  most  significant  aspects  of 
I  will  elaborate  on 
Liabilities and capital position of central banks 
To begin with, I will focus on the capital and liability side of the balance sheet, since the most 
striking  idiosyncratic  feature  of  a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  is  the  existence  of 
non-maturing liabilities that are not remunerated. I am referring, of course, to banknotes. A 
central bank is endowed with the monopoly to issue central bank money, which constitutes a 
sizeable  liability.  Furthermore,  central  banks  have  also  a  privileged  access  to  other  stable 
funding sources such as the current accounts covering the minimum reserve requirements. 
Therefore,  in  times  of  financial  distress  central  banks  do  not  face  the  same  liquidity 
challenges as private institutions.  
The  solvency  profile  of  central  banks  also  differs  significantly  from  that  of  private  financial 
institutions. The latter need to weight their risks against the financial buffers provided by their 
explicit  capital  position.  In  the  case  of  the  Eurosystem,  its  explicit  capital  position  is 
determined by consolidated capital and reserves amounting to more than €80 billion, but also 
by revaluation accounts amounting to more than €300 billion. Although such explicit financial 
buffers remain a valid and necessary benchmark to assess the leverage and the risk-taking 
capacity  of  central  banks,  their  financial  strength  cannot  be  fully  captured  by  using  capital 
adequacy  metrics  such  as  those  applicable  to  private  banks  for  regulatory  purposes,  as  it 
has been done in a rather simplistic way by some commentators. 
Particularly,  the  privilege  to  issue  legal  tender  gives  central  banks  an  additional  financial 
buffer  in  the  form  of  seigniorage  income.  The  concept  of  seigniorage  income  refers  to  the 
return generated by the assets that are funded with non-remunerated liabilities, that is, with 
banknotes. The seigniorage income expected for the future constitutes an implicit financial 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3
buffer that needs to be considered when assessing the economic capital of a central bank. In 
this regard, the net present value of such future income can be seen as a sort of “franchise 
capital”, as it reflects the value of the “franchise” to issue legal tender.  
Having  discussed  the  different  components  of  the  liability  side  of  a  central  bank,  and 
particularly  its  capital  position,  I’d  like  to  consider  the  use  made  by  central  banks  of  such 
capital and look at the asset side of the balance sheet. 
Assets and risk management framework of central banks 
Capital  allocation  in  central  banking,  understood  as  the  risk  budgeting  and  strategic  asset 
allocation decisions that arise from the capital position and objectives of the bank, also differs 
substantially in methods and scope from that conducted at private financial institutions. On 
the one hand, regulatory capital requirements are not a constraint for central banks. On the 
other hand, the risk-return trade-off is not the only relevant function to evaluate the capital 
allocation  decisions  of  a  central  bank,  since  its  objective  should  be  to  maximise  social 
welfare by achieving its policy goals. 
Against  this  background,  the  risk  profile  of  a  central  bank  displays  characteristics  that  are 
significantly different from those of private banks. From a dynamic perspective, central banks 
tend  to  take  more  risks  in  crisis  situations,  whereas  private  firms  reduce  their  exposures. 
From a static perspective, central banks tend to take far less equity risk, duration risk and 
credit risk than private firms, while taking a much higher currency risk exposure. In addition, 
strategic  decisions  in  central  banks  typically  are  shaped  to  reduce  operational,  legal  and 
reputational risks to a minimum, not only to avoid the possible financial impact of those risks, 
but more importantly, to maintain credibility. 
I  will  now  turn  to  the  main  determinants  of  the  risk  profile,  on  the  asset  side,  of  a  central 
bank’s balance sheet, by describing the Eurosystem case, and, in particular, that of the ECB. 
I’ll consider the applicable risk mitigation measures as well. 
I will start by describing a central bank’s exposure to exchange rate (or FX) risk. The extent 
to  which  central  banks  hold  FX  risk  in  their  balance  sheets  differs  substantially  from  the 
typically  much  lower  FX  exposures  of  private  firms.  FX  risk  is,  in  normal  times,  the  core 
determinant  of  the  risk  profile  of  a  central  bank  such  as  the  ECB.  Hence,  from  a  risk 
management perspective, the size of the foreign reserves held, the currency distribution and 
the degree to which such positions may be hedged are some of the more important choices 
a central bank has to make. But in fact, these choices are not risk management choices. In 
the  case  of  the  ECB,  foreign  reserves  are  mainly  held  for  intervention  purposes,  and 
therefore the corresponding FX risk is not hedged. The reason for taking on that apparent 
risk is simple: a central bank may need to intervene in the markets by selling foreign currency 
if a sudden appreciation of those currencies impairs price stability or financial stability directly 
or indirectly. In a sense, the need to intervene represents a contingent policy liability, and by 
taking such an FX risk we are effectively hedging or matching such contingent liability.  
The exposure to gold price movements is also significantly higher in central banks than in 
private  banks.  For  example,  holdings  of  gold  in  the  Eurosystem  amount  to  approximately 
€350 billion, accounting for almost 20% of the total assets. The holdings are on this scale not 
only for historical reasons, but also for risk management reasons, as gold is considered to be 
a  safe  haven.  In  times  of  financial distress,  gold  indeed  helps  central banks  to  maintain  a 
solid financial position. 
Another  striking  difference  of  central  bank  exposures  compared  with  those  of  private 
institutions is to be found in their investment portfolios. Those of central banks are typically 
managed  with  a  very  high  degree  of  prudence.  Risks  are  kept  to  levels  that  ensure  the 
financial buffers of the institution remain free to meet policy needs, while at the same time 
attempting to achieve sufficient income to cover operating expenses and to ensure long-term 
profitability.  The  regular  fixed-income  portfolios  of  the  ECB,  as  an  example,  are  managed 
4 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
against internally derived benchmark portfolios which serve as a yardstick for performance 
and risk measurement. Our benchmarks reflect our quite conservative stance with regard to 
the  interest  rate,  credit  and  liquidity  risks,  and  are  derived  on  the  basis  of  the  specific 
objectives  for  each  portfolio.  The  management  of  the  actual  portfolios  against  those 
benchmarks  is  constrained  by  a  number  of  typical  risk  control  measures,  such  as  relative 
value-at-risk  limits  and  caps  imposed  on  credit  and  liquidity  risk  exposures.  All  in  all,  we 
could  describe  the  investment  framework  of  our  regular  fixed-income  portfolios  as 
conservative. This of course does not come as a surprise. 
In normal times, we try to retain in our balance sheet ample leeway in terms of risk-taking 
capacity. This allows us to expand our balance sheet and take more risks in situations where 
other market participants are deleveraging and reducing their risks. Our additional risk-taking 
sometimes  arises  from  our  regular  operations,  but  in  other  cases  it  occurs  through 
non-conventional measures such as outright purchase programmes. I will discuss some risk 
management aspects of our outright purchase programmes before briefly covering some of 
the measures associated with our ordinary monetary policy operations. 
The security purchase programmes initiated by the Eurosystem as a reaction to the financial 
crisis,  that  is  the  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP)  and  the  Securities Markets 
Programme  (the  SMP),  have  had  the  clear  objective  of  smoothing  out  the  transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  The  most  powerful  risk  management  arguments  for 
accepting the risks entailed by the programmes were that the markets were overpricing the 
risks associated with the related assets, and that the Eurosystem’s action could contribute to 
mitigating  market  concerns.  Not  being  a  liquidity-constrained  institution,  we  can  act  as  a 
buy-side  counterparty  in  markets  where  sell-offs  are  taking  place,  and  our  investment  in 
those markets can be held to maturity, so that only default risk could impact our profit and 
loss accounts.  
I  will  now  turn  to  our  ordinary  market  operations,  that  is,  our  lending  operations.  The  risk 
control  framework  applied  to  the  Eurosystem’s  credit  operations  is  designed  according  to 
four basic principles: protection, consistency, simplicity and transparency. Protection can be 
seen as the main objective of the risk control framework, while consistency, simplicity and 
transparency  are  needed  for  the  framework  to  work  in  an  efficient,  accountable  and 
predictable manner. 
In  the  context  of  the  implementation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  credit  operations,  financial 
protection  is  ensured  by  relying  on  three  lines  of  defence  that  can  be  complemented  by 
discretionary action.  
The  first  line  of  defence  relates  to  the  fact  that,  in  repo  operations,  as  long  as  our 
counterparty  meets  its  obligations,  we  don’t  incur  any  kind  of  risk  related  to  the  collateral. 
Assets  held  as  collateral  only  constitute  a  guarantee,  not  a  direct  exposure.  Accordingly, 
related price decreases could only induce Eurosystem losses if those decreases took place 
after  the  default  of  the  counterparty.  Therefore,  by  only  accepting  financially  sound 
counterparties  in  our  credit  operations  we  greatly  limit  the  risks.  Financial  soundness  is  a 
precondition  imposed  by  the  Eurosystem  on  its  counterparties  to  participate  in  monetary 
policy operations. 
The second line of defence in our credit operations is the eligibility requirements we impose 
for  the  collateral.  Eurosystem  credit  operations  need  to  be  guaranteed  by  adequate 
collateral,  complying  with  minimum  credit  quality  thresholds  and  other  legal  criteria  and 
operational requirements. The minimum credit quality requirement in general corresponds to 
a  BBB–  rating,  although  in  some  cases  the  rules  applied  may  differ.  Regarding  ABSs,  an 
asset class that many analysts have blamed for being at the core of the financial crisis, the 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 5
Eurosystem  actually  requires  a  minimum  AAA  rating  at  issuance.2  All  in  all,  the  eligibility 
criteria  help  to  protect  the  Eurosystem,  while  ensuring  that  sufficient  collateral  remains 
available to our counterparties under any kind of economic scenario, so that monetary policy 
can be implemented.  
The third line of defence relates to other elements of the collateral risk control framework. 
Margin  call  policies  and  risk  control  measures  such  as  valuation  haircuts  are  applied  to 
mitigate credit, market and liquidation risks related to the collateral assets that need to be 
sold to cover the exposure of defaulted counterparties.  
Another key component of the financial protection of the Eurosystem when performing credit 
operations  is  the  valuation  of  collateral  assets.  In  this  regard,  the  Eurosystem  is  making 
considerable  efforts  to  maintain  state-of-the-art  valuation  techniques  for  those  assets  for 
which a reliable market price may not be available.  
I would like to emphasise that our collateral eligibility and risk control framework is continually 
reviewed,  and  the  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis  are  obviously  being  incorporated  into  it. 
That being said, it is also relevant to point out that our framework is designed to be applied 
consistently  in  both  good  and  bad  times.  Our  creditworthiness  allows  us  to  maintain 
conservative  risk  control  measures,  such  as  haircuts,  above  market  standards  in  normal 
times.  Counterparties  are  willing  to  accept  such  haircuts  because  they  know  we  are  not 
going to default on our obligations. In fact, in times of extreme uncertainty and heightened 
risk aversion, the conditions in private repo markets deteriorate quickly and our operations 
become more attractive. By not adjusting our risk control framework in a pro-cyclical manner, 
and therefore by maintaining or even enlarging the collateral available to our counterparties 
facing greater financial distress, we achieve two policy goals. On the one hand, we facilitate 
the implementation of a monetary policy stance  consistent with the crisis environment. On 
the other hand, we contribute to restoring the value of certain assets by attributing them a 
liquidity status that the market would not have permitted.  
The Eurosystem risk position: common misunderstandings 
Let  me  address  en  passant  two  issues  that  have  received  attention  from  some  analysts 
recently. 
First, some commentators have stated that, since the ECB’s balance sheet is expanding and 
is allegedly taking on large risks, the ECB may be turning into a “bad bank”.3 This argument 
is based on a clear misunderstanding of the type of operations conducted by the Eurosystem 
and  of  the  risk  control  measures  applied  to  those  operations.  The  description  of  the  risk 
control measures and of the specificities of the capital position of the ECB that I just provided 
should  help  dispel  such  misunderstanding.  The  data  have  actually  confirmed  that  the 
Eurosystem’s financial results have proved resilient to the global financial crisis, and its total 
capital position has even increased.4 The numbers I have provided in terms of overall capital 
and reserves of the Eurosystem should help a better understanding of the situation. 
Second, some analysts have tried to show that the Eurosystem had taken on too much risk, 
at the detriment of the ECB major shareholder, by looking at the net balances of individual 
                                                 
2  A minimum AAA rating at issuance by two rating agencies is required. Over the life of the instrument, it should 
retain a second-best rating of at least A–. 
3  See, for instance, the interview to T. Mayer in FAZ, 14 June 2011, “Die EZB droht zur Bad Bank zu werden”; 
M. Persson, 8 June 2011, “Europe’s bad bank,” The Wall Street Journal. 
4  From  5  September  2008  to  3  June  2011,  Capital  and  reserves  have  increased  by  13.2%  (from  €71.7  to 
€81.2 billion)  and  revaluation  accounts  have  increased  by  100%  (from  €152.3  to  €305.9  billion).  Total 
Eurosystem assets have increased by 31.8% (from €1441 billion to €1899 billion) over the same period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
national central banks in the Eurosystem – the so-called TARGET2 balances.5 Not only is the 
analysis  wrong,  as  it  has  been  shown  by  others,6  but  the  conclusions  in  terms  of  burden 
sharing are exactly the opposite. In fact, the risk sharing system inherent in the Eurosystem 
monetary policy operations, which is generally based on the share of GDP and population, is 
particularly favourable for those countries whose banking system has a comparatively large 
net creditor position with respect to the rest of the euro area.  
I will not elaborate too much on this issue. I will only mention that items related to TARGET2 
in  the  balance  sheets  of  national  central  banks  across  the  Eurosystem  are  a  natural 
consequence of the de-centralised provision of credit to banks in the euro area. TARGET2 
balances of central banks enable booking cross-border payments and are as such automatic 
reflections  of  short-term  cross-border  base  money  movements.  It  is  thus  misleading  to 
present  those  balances  as  a  sort  of  “stealth  bail-out”  from  some  national  central  banks  to 
particular euro area countries.  
The  size  of  TARGET2  net  balances  of  an  individual  central  bank  is  not  a  one-to-one 
counterpart of the cumulated current account imbalance of the respective country. Several 
other factors, such as the degree of integration of the euro area money market and capital 
market  flows  play  an  even  larger  role.  Furthermore,  positive  net  TARGET2  balances 
represent  claims  against  the  Eurosystem  as  a  whole,  not  bilateral  claims  against  other 
national  central  banks.  Finally,  the  claim  that  Eurosystem  operations  entail  base  money 
flowing  out  of  creditor  countries  to  refinance  euro  area  periphery  banking  systems  is 
unsubstantiated. The supply of credit in the euro area, like almost everywhere in the world, is 
determined  by  the  decisions  of  commercial  banks  and  there  is  no  reason  to  assume  that 
domestic  banks  creditor  countries  are  subject  to  any  base  money  constraint,  given  their 
permanent access to Eurosystem operations, especially when these are conducted through 
fixed-rate full-allotment tenders.  
Conclusion 
During the financial crisis central banks have intervened swiftly to protect financial stability, 
which is a key precondition to achieve price stability. While this function has now been widely 
recognised,  some  concerns  have  been  voiced  that  central banks  have  taken  on  too  many 
risks in their balance sheets.  
The  point  that  I  wanted  to  make  today  is  that  taking  on  more  risk  in  times  of  distress  is 
inherent in the financial stability function of central banks. The central bank is the only patient 
investors  who  can  intervene  at  times  of  crisis  as  a  counterpart  to  distressed  short  term 
investors with a view to ensuring market liquidity and restoring confidence. However, this can 
happen only if the financial independence of the central bank is safeguarded, otherwise the 
credibility of its monetary policy aimed at ensuring price stability may be jeopardised. This is 
why  central  banks  manage  their  risks,  albeit  not  necessarily  in  the  same  way  as  private 
financial institutions because of the fundamental differences which exist between the two.  
Hopefully these differences are now better understood, and misperceptions about the role of 
central banks corrected. 
Thank you for your attention.  
                                                  
5  See, for instance, H.-W. Sinn, 1 June 2011, “The ECB stealth bailout”, VOX. 
6  See,  for  instance,  Buiter,  W.,  E.  Rahbari  and  J.  Michels,  9  June  2011,  “TARGETing  the  wrong  villain: 
TARGET2  and  intra-Eurosystem  imbalances  in  credit  flows”,  Citigroup  Global  Economics  View;  K.  Whelan, 
7 June 2011, “Professor Sinn Misses the Target.” 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 7
