Peter Pang: Managing capital flows – the search for a framework 
Welcoming address by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  and  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
Joint Seminar for the book launch on “Managing Capital Flows: the Search for a Framework”, 
Hong Kong, 21 April 2011. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
1. 
Let me thank Mr Kawai for inviting me to this event. It’s my honour to welcome you 
to  this  joint  seminar  by  the  Asian  Development  Bank  Institute  (ADBI)  and  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  to  mark  the  launch  of  the  new  book,  “Managing  Capital 
Flows: the Search for a Framework”. This is a topical issue right at the centre of attention of 
policymakers in this region. And as the title suggests, it is also a subject that we are still in 
search for an answer. 
2. 
There is an old Chinese proverb saying that “water can keep a boat afloat but it can 
also capsize the vessel”. This suitably characterises the nature of international capital flows  
– it brings both benefits and risks to the development process in Asia. Capital inflows have 
been playing a key role in the economic development of the region – funding investments 
and bringing along technology and skill transfers. These were conducive to the emergence of 
the “four Asian Tigers” in the 1980s, and the rapid modernisation process of China, India and 
other  Asian  economies.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pro-cyclicality  and  highly  volatile  nature  of 
capital  flows  poses  significant  macroeconomic  management  challenges  to  policymakers.  If 
not  properly  managed,  the  build-up  of  excesses  amid  strong  capital  inflows  and  the 
subsequent bursting of the bubbles could be detrimental to financial stability, wreaking havoc 
on economic growth.  
3. 
Managing  capital  flows  has  been  a  dynamic  learning  process  for  policymakers  in 
developing economies. Prior to the Asian financial crisis, Asian economies embraced capital 
flows with little wariness of the downside risks. The dominant flow pattern at that time was for 
Asian governments to invest their savings in high-grade government papers of the advanced 
economies. The funds were then recycled back to Asia in the form of highly volatile short-
term  capital  flows.  These  resulted  in  serious  imbalances  in  the  balance  of  payments 
accounts,  and  mismatches  in  currency  and  maturity  in  the  balance  sheets  of  banks.  The 
subsequent  shifts  in  market  sentiment  and  expectations  led  to  abrupt  reversals  of  capital 
flows out of Asia. Currency crashes amplified the adverse effects as capital fled the region in 
a  drove.  The  Asian  Miracle  went  bust.  The  capital  flows  that  had  once  fertilised  the 
impressive growth eventually caused a capsize when the Asian financial crisis hit us in 1997 
– a lesson that we all still vividly remember. 
4. 
The Asian financial crisis gave us a much-needed wakeup call at a dear price. Yet, 
looking  back,  the  crisis  also  has  its  silver  linings:  the  painful  adjustments  that  followed 
prompted  governments  to  strengthen  economic  fundamentals,  enhance  banking  systems, 
deepen  local  bond  markets,  and  build  up  foreign  reserves  to  cope  with  potential  external 
shocks.  Because  of  these  developments,  the  region  has  been  able  to  emerge  from  the 
recent  global  financial  crisis  relatively  unscathed  and  is  now  one  of  the  key  driving  forces 
supporting the global economic recovery. 
5. 
But we cannot afford to be complacent, as we are now confronted with a new round 
of  challenges  in  uncharted  waters.  The  unprecedented  monetary  easing  in  the  advanced 
economies has led to global excess liquidity. And with the robust recovery of the emerging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
markets,  there  are  powerful  push  and  pull  factors  driving  investors  to  search  for  yields  in 
developing economies including Asia. From Q3 2009 to Q4 2010, the net capital inflows to 
emerging Asia1 amounted to US$541 bn, the largest inflows in recent years.  
6. 
The strong capital inflows and resultant abundant liquidity have led to exchange rate 
appreciation, fuelled credit growth and driven up asset prices in the region. With output gaps 
closing,  inflationary  pressures  are  accelerating  in  a  number  of  Asian  economies.  Capital 
flows  also  complicate 
the  macroeconomic  policy  responses.  While  exchange  rate 
appreciation and monetary tightening could theoretically cool down the economy, in practice, 
they  may  attract  even  more  speculative  inflows  to  profit  from  interest  rate  arbitrage  and 
currency appreciation.  
7. 
So  how  should  we  cope  with  these  challenges  presented  by  the  unprecedented 
scale  of  global  excess  liquidity?  Given  the  global  nature  of  fund  flows  and  the  increasing 
interconnectedness of the global financial system, it is obvious that national policies alone 
are  insufficient  to  tackle  the  challenges.  We  need  greater  international  and  regional 
cooperation  to  manage  risks  posed  by  volatile  capital  flows  to  global  financial  stability.  I 
believe there are three main areas for cooperation.  
8. 
First is enhancing the resilience of the global and regional financial systems through 
financial regulatory reforms. A large amount of work in this area is under way at the G20, the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  various  standard  setting  bodies  –  including  but  not 
limited  to  strengthening  banks’  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  reducing  moral  hazard 
posed  by  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  and  reforming  the  OTC  derivatives 
markets. Recently, the FSB decided to set up regional consultative groups, including one for 
Asia, to bring together central banks, finance ministries and regulators in different regions. 
These groups are expected to serve as a platform for us to discuss and cooperate on issues 
of interest to regional financial stability, and to reflect the region’s collective views to the FSB 
in the international standard setting process.  
9. 
The  second  area  is  enhancing  the  global  and  regional  financial  safety  nets.  We 
welcome the recent significant augmentation of IMF’s resources and lending facilities. These 
enhancements  will  allow  the  IMF  to  respond  more  effectively  and  speedily  to  member 
countries 
Initiative 
Multilateralisation (CMIM) further enhances the regional capacity to cope with capital flows 
and  safeguard  financial  stability  of  the  region.  The  HKMA  fully  supports  this  important 
regional  initiative,  and  indeed  we  have  played  an  active  role  in  its  development  and 
participated directly in the arrangement. 
10. 
The third area is enhancing the capacity of regional capital markets to absorb capital 
inflows  and  channel  them  to  productive  uses.  In  this  regard,  the  HKMA  took  the  lead  in 
developing the Asian Bond Funds (ABF) under the aegis of the Executives’ Meeting of East 
Asia  Pacific  Central  Banks  (EMEAP).  The  ABF,  as  a  pioneer  product,  aimed  to  provide  a 
convenient  low-cost  local-currency  instrument  for  investment,  and  at  the  same  time  help 
identify  and  remove  the  impediments  to  bond  market  development.  In  parallel,  with  the 
strong  support  from  the  ADB,  ASEAN+3  members  have  undertaken  a  range  of  projects 
under  the  Asian  Bond  Markets  Initiative  to  promote  the  development  of  the  local  currency 
bond  markets.  Notwithstanding  these  regional  efforts,  we  still  have  a  long  way  to  go  in 
developing a regional bond market that is broad and deep enough to channel the region’s 
abundant savings to meet its huge investment needs. Continued national and regional efforts 
in this regard are much needed. 
the  establishment  of 
in  need.  Regionally, 
the  Chiang  Mai 
                                                 
1   Emerging Asia includes China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and 
Thailand. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
At the domestic level, there has been growing recognition that there is no one-size-
11. 
fits-all  approach  to  capital  flows  management.  While  conventional  macroeconomic  policies 
are  useful  in  containing  overheating  in  the  overall  economy,  their  deployment  is  often 
constrained  by  their  broad-brush  nature  and  the  concern  about  attracting  even  more 
speculative  inflows.  Therefore,  many  developing  economies  have  also  adopted  other 
prudential and capital account measures to manage capital inflows and to contain the build-
up  of  excesses  in  specific  sectors  of  the  economy  and  the  banking  system.  For  example, 
some  regional  economies  have  recently  tightened  the  mortgage  underwriting  standards  of 
their banks, and limited banks’ foreign currency borrowing and derivatives positions.  
12. 
To effectively manage capital flows, policymakers would need to improvise with the 
apparatuses  in  their  policy  toolkit  and  apply  a  policy  mix  tailored  to  their  domestic 
circumstances. It is like the use of “Chinese herbal medicine” – we feel the pulse, carefully 
calibrate a combination of remedial herbs (i.e. policies), and follow through with continuous 
fine-tuning in the light of market reactions. The process is pragmatic and, to a large extent, 
interactive.  
13. 
Given  the  need  for  customised  solution  at  the  national  level,  the  sharing  of 
experience is therefore very important. We welcome the timely publication of this book, which 
provides a good basis for studying the different approaches to managing capital inflows by 
different economies. Individual countries’ experiences would, collectively, help shed light on 
the formulation of an effective policy framework.  
14. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me end my remarks by quoting a line from the book: “Risk 
of crisis as financial integration increases will never disappear, and countries must pursue 
protection from risks of volatility and sudden stops”2. We should always be vigilant, even in 
peace time. To Mr Kawai and other authors, congratulations yet again on the launch of this 
new and important book.  
15. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
2   Chapter 4: “Managing large capital inflows: taking stock of international experiences” (by Susan Schadler). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
