Glenford Ysaguirre: From the global financial crisis to more robust 
regulatory frameworks and resilient financial systems 
Feature address by Mr Glenford Ysaguirre, Governor of the Central Bank of Belize, at the 
Caribbean  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors  XXIX  Annual  Conference,  San  Pedro  Town, 
16 June 2011. 
 A pleasant good morning to Mr. Cleviston Haynes – CGBS Chair; representatives from the 
Association of Supervisors of Banks of the Americas (ASBA), the Office of the Supervisor of 
the  Currency  (OCC),  the  US  Department  of  the  Treasury,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC); members of CGBS; participants of this, the twenty-ninth annual CGBS 
conference. Ladies and gentlemen, let me join my staff in welcoming you to Belize and to 
the,  warm,  friendly  and  scenic  location  of  San  Pedro,  Ambergris  Caye.  It  is  indeed  my 
pleasure to have this opportunity to address this gathering today.  
I understand that you have a very heavy agenda so my intent is to be very brief and not to 
stray from the script as is often my wont. As leading entities charged with the supervision of 
the  financial  sector,  we  all  carry  an  enormous  responsibility  and  one  that  ought  not  to  be 
taken lightly. Today, I see the work of the CGBS as one of the few shining examples of a 
regional institution that does not seem to be afflicted with that, oh so common and familiar 
malady I call the CARICOM MALAISE. This is that common condition where we meet a lot, 
talk a lot, agree on a lot, debate a lot, and then we resolve not to do a damn lot. Let me give 
you an example: Take our attempt to get members to adopt a single draft model Banking Act 
across  the  region.  While  unanimously  agreed  to  almost  six  years  ago,  it  languishes  in 
suspension  as  formal  acceptance  by  a  few  jurisdictions  is  as  yet  forthcoming  with  no 
explanations for the protraction.  
But, my purpose here today is not to dwell on the negative, but rather to plant an idea whose 
time  I  think  has  come.  I  hope  it  will  pique  your  interest  sufficiently  for  you  to  forgive  my 
departure from the normal feature address format.  
The theme for today’s conference is very fitting and timely:  
“From the global financial crisis to more robust regulatory frameworks and resilient 
financial systems”  
I like this theme because it is forward looking and is in perfect consonance with the idea I am 
about  to  propose.  This  theme  is  saying  to  me  that  we  must  not  be  too  engrossed  in  the 
business of analyzing the past lest we forget to look ahead toward unchartered waters we 
must yet traverse. I think that after three and one half years of meetings and conferences we 
are all fatigued with an overload of hind-sight wisdom that offers perfect explanations for the 
2008 global financial crisis that none or very few saw coming. The irony is that very few of us 
saw the coming of the 2008 crisis because we were too busy analyzing the crisis before that 
one.  Now,  the  fact  that  the  Caribbean  went  relatively  unscathed  from  the  global  financial 
crisis, except for the CLICO and BAICO experiences, is by no means an indication that we 
were any better prepared; in my view it was mere lucky happenstance and this is what we 
need to address in the future.  
I am sure Caricom Heads of Government at their June 2009 meeting in Georgetown, Guyana 
had this near miss catastrophe squarely in their rearview mirrors when they agreed on the 
urgency of putting in place a strong framework for regional financial stability. Citing, among 
other things, the CLICO and BAICO experiences, they tasked the Committee of Central Bank 
Governors  to  prepare  a  proposal  for  the  creation  of  a  regional  architecture  for  financial 
stability  for  final  consideration  by  the  Council  for  Finance  and  Planning  (COFAP).  The 
mandate was to accelerate the construction of a robust regional financial stability framework.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 The Committee of Central Bank Governors set about this task diligently. First, they secured 
funding  from  the  Inter-American  Development  Bank  for  a  Regional  Financial  Risk 
Assessment  Project  under  the  aegis  of  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  and  Finance  (the 
CCMF). Then, a three-day workshop for regional regulatory stakeholders was held in Port of 
Spain,  Trinidad  on  3  to  5  March  2011  to  discuss  the  requirements  and  actions  needed  to 
develop the framework and to agree on the outline of the terms of reference for the planning 
and implementation of a financial architecture that supports regional financial stability.  
From all accounts, the workshop was well attended and yielded several recommendations on 
governance  and  operational  structure  of  a  regional  financial  stability  board.  However, 
progress on this project recently stalled as governors remain fundamentally at odds over a 
few of the major recommendations, in particular:  
• 
The  recommendation  for  the  CCMF  to  become  the  central  reporting  body  for 
financial stability;  
The  legality  of  regional  regulators  sharing  sensitive  confidential  information  with  a 
non-regulatory body outside of members’ jurisdictions; and  
• 
The methodology and approach for the Regional Financial Risk Assessment Project.  
On the matter of the CCMF serving as the central reporting facility, there were questions as 
to its appropriateness, ability and capacity to manage such a task:  
• 
• 
Does it have the necessary financial and human resources?  
Do  they  have  the  required  expertise,  bearing  in  mind  that  this  is  a  research 
institution?  
How will the issue of legality and confidentiality be resolved?  
• 
From  recent  discussion  and  exchanges  between  governors  at  and  after  the  27  May  2011 
Governors’ caucus held in Bridgetown, Barbados it does not appear that we are anywhere 
near to resolving these issues and a sub-committee of Governors was appointed specifically 
to  look  into  these  issues,  among  others.  So,  when  I  was  tasked  by  my  supervision 
department to make this feature address, these were some of the issues that governors were 
still hotly debating and I became fearful that this very important project may also fall victim to 
the dreaded CARICOM MALAISE.  
It then dawned on me that the CGBS and not the CCMF may be the only salvation and the 
ideal rescue vehicle for this project. In 1983, CARICOM Central Bank Governors envisaged 
the  need  for  an  entity  to  spearhead  the  enhancement  of  regional  banking  supervision 
practices  in  line  with  internationally  accepted  standards.  Hence,  the  birth  of  CGBS,  an 
institution  charged  with  charting  the  way  forward  for  supervisors  to  maintain  above-board 
practices and equilibrium in regulating financial sectors across the CARICOM region. Since 
then the CGBS has grown and accomplished much, and as I mentioned earlier, is one of the 
few CARICOM institutions that actually produces real work in the true spirit and meaning of 
regional integration. It is the obvious choice to be the central reporting facility and should be 
the  home  of  the  financial  stability  project;  financial  stability  review  falls  naturally  within  its 
bailiwick.  
What I am saying is that the time has come to legally establish the CGBS as CARICOM’s 
supranational financial regulatory authority. Such a structured CGBS would eliminate all the 
concerns  Governors  now  have  about  the  appropriateness  of  the  CCMF  for  this  role  in 
particular the concerns on the legality of regional information sharing. Presently, the conduct 
of  CGBS  members  towards  each  other  has  been  guided  by  a  protocol  based  on  mutual 
respect  and  trust.  There  is  a  Members’  Handbook  and  a  recently  signed  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  for  regional  cooperation  though  none  of  these  are  legally  binding.  In  the 
absence  of  proper  legal  authority,  there  is  no  real  enforcement  or  disciplinary  mechanism 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and we must rely solely on peer pressure or moral suasion for compliance with the rules of 
engagement.  
While  this  structure  may  have  been  adequate  in  more  prosperous  and  disciplined  times, 
indications already are that it will be severely tested in today’s crisis prone environment. The 
time has thus come for the CGBS to take on an even more substantive role. It must be given 
the authoritative muscle in order to fulfill its mandate of establishing regional conformity to 
international principles and best practices. The truth is that some of us already recognized 
this need when we recently requested that the CGBS establish some form of mechanism to 
resolve conflicts and disputes that may arise between members.  
Accordingly, I would like to propose that the CGBS consider, among other things:  
1. 
Establishing itself as a formal legal entity with bylaws, a Memorandum and Articles 
of Association to which members must legally and financially subscribe. This would 
provide  substantial  financing  since  almost  every  jurisdiction  in  the  Caribbean  is  a 
member of the CGBS.  
Establishing  a  permanent  secretariat  with  a  dedicated  staff.  This  can  be 
accomplished  by  us  either  agreeing  to  merge  with  or  subsuming  the  financially 
embattled CCMF. This move would reduce the need for regional Central Banks to 
finance  two  separate  institutions  and  provide  the  CGBS  with  a  permanent  staff 
capable of handling the macro-prudential requirements of a financial stability review. 
Currently,  all  CARICOM  members  participate  in  CGBS  whereas  only  a  dwindling 
handful subscribe to the CCMF.  
Establishing conditions for the entry and exit of countries as members of this body. 
This  would promote  more  disciplined  behavior  throughout  the  region  and  facilitate 
orderly progress in adopting international best practices.  
Establishing  a  mechanism  to  impose  sanctions  on  members  for  non-compliance 
with agreed standards.  
Establishing  an  implementation  plan  for  BASEL  II  across  the  region  and  the 
establishment of financial stability boards by members, and  
Establishing a Council to deliberate on disputes between members.  
6. 
While  this  venture  would  require  much  acuity,  it  is  the  uncharted  waters  that  we  must 
traverse. I am confident that it is doable; it is the natural progression for the CGBS and an 
idea  whose  time  has  come.  Having  made  my  pitch,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  must  now 
respectfully take my leave and allow you to get on with the business of the day. But before I 
go I would welcome your thoughts and feedback on the proposed new role for the CGBS as I 
intend to present this suggestion to the Committee of Governors for consideration.  
Lastly, please allow me to thank you for your time and patience and wish you a productive 
and successful conference.  
Enjoy the rest of your stay in Belize and may God bless you.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
