Ignazio Visco: Key issues for the success of macroprudential policies 
Speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Bank  of 
Korea–Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BOK-BIS)  Conference  on  Macroprudential 
Regulation and Policy, Seoul, 18 January 2011. 
 I would like to thank Paolo Angelini and Sergio Nicoletti Altimari for highly useful discussions and assistance. 
Macroprudential objectives and tools 
1. 
While the objectives of monetary and fiscal policies are clearly defined, and often precisely 
quantified, the situation is less clear in the case of financial stability. A broad consensus has 
emerged on the idea that “macroprudential” policies directed to preserving financial stability 
should limit systemic risk by addressing both the cross-sectional dimension of the financial 
system, with the aim of strengthening its resilience to adverse real or financial shocks, and its 
temporal dimension, to contain the accumulation of risk over the business or financial cycle. 
The  first  dimension  seems  to  me  to  be  of  paramount  importance.  The  second  dimension 
emphasizes  the  need  to  contain  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system,  i.e.  to  “lean 
against  the  financial  cycle”.1  Other  authors  argue  that  policy  should  be  assigned  more 
specific objectives, such as combating fire sales and credit crunches.2  
A key problem is that, whether a broad or a specific mandate is chosen, we are still far from 
an operational definition of these objectives. We do have an ample array of indicators and 
early warning signals, but we still lack a coherent framework to interpret them, to assess the 
need for macroprudential intervention, and to measure the success of the policies adopted.  
While the notion implicit in all definitions of macroprudential objectives is that what warrants a 
macroprudential regulatory intervention is systemic risk (a negative externality), systemic risk 
presents a number of challenges to the policymaker. First, it is hard to measure, because of 
its various dimensions: pro-cyclicality; network or contagion risk – the spillover effects of a 
single institution’s distress on the rest of the financial system; correlation risk, which reflects 
the common exposures of all financial institutions to the same risk factors; concentration risk, 
due  to  the  presence  of  a  few  dominant  institutions  in  key  financial  markets  and  activities. 
Second,  systemic  risk  may  be  extremely  difficult  to  spot  ex  ante.  For  instance,  in  the  late 
1990s  the  hedge  fund  industry  was  considered  a  main  source  of  systemic  risk,  and  a 
candidate  for  regulation,  but  this  risk  did  not  materialize.  By  contrast,  the  recent  crisis 
provides  several  examples  of  triggers  that  did  have  systemic  consequences  but  were  not 
seen as crucial ex ante: the behaviour of certain insurance companies; the supposedly safe 
mortgage market of the world’s financially most developed system; the European sovereign 
debt market.3  
These  difficulties  in  measuring  systemic  risk  have  important  implications  for  the  practical 
implementation  of  macroprudential  policy  and  for  the  accountability  of  the  macroprudential 
authority. As the new authorities start working, they will have to base their decision-making 
on  operational  arrangements.  The  year  that  has  just  begun  will  be  very  important  in  this 
respect. 
                                                 
1  See, for example, Bank of England (2009) and Borio (2003), (2010). 
2  See Hanson, Kashyap and Stein (2010). 
3  See Carosio (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Similar difficulties emerge in the definition of the appropriate macroprudential tools. Financial 
crises are often associated with wide fluctuations in credit and asset prices. Recent analyses 
indicate  that  such  tools  as  countercyclical  capital  requirements  or  loan-to-value  ratios  can 
attenuate  the  volatility  of  credit  and  asset  prices  and  dampen  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the 
financial  system,  helping  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  financial  crises.4  At  the  same  time, 
because systemic financial risk can emerge from many sources, different instruments may 
be required, to be chosen case by case. Furthermore, instruments may be under the control 
of  different  authorities,  for  example  those  responsible  for  microprudential,  fiscal  or  other 
economic  policies.  This  might  significantly  add  to  the  complexity  of  the  policy  process, 
reducing its timeliness and hence the likelihood of success.  
In Europe, responsibility for macroprudential policies has been assigned to a new body, the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), within the context of a comprehensive reform of the 
European  supervisory  architecture  approved  by  the  European  political  authorities  in  the 
autumn  of  2009  following  an  in-depth  analysis  conducted  by  the  De  Larosière  Committee 
and the European Commission. The reform also introduces a European System of Financial 
Supervision (ESFS) comprising, besides the macro-prudential authority, three new European 
Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) for the banking, securities and insurance sectors. The new 
authorities started operating on 1 January 2011. 
Regulation No. 1092/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council assigns a broad 
mandate  to  the  ESRB,  charging  it  with  macroprudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system 
within the European Union in order to contribute to the prevention or mitigation of systemic 
risks to financial stability in the Union.5 To this end the ESRB is to conduct analyses of the 
European 
risk  warnings  and,  when  called  on,  make 
recommendations, which it will submit to one or more member states or national supervisory 
authorities, the EU Council, the European Commission and the newly established ESAs. It 
will decide, after consulting with the Council, whether to make its recommendations public 
and will monitor follow-up, informing the Council and the ESAs where it finds the action taken 
to be inadequate. 
The  ESRB  itself  does  not  have  direct  enforcement  power;  it  will  act  mainly  through  other 
(European or national) authorities, essentially via an “act or explain” mechanism. Its lack of 
direct enforcement powers is a key difference with respect to the arrangement in the United 
States,  where  the  new  macroprudential  body,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council 
(FSOC),  is  assigned  direct  intervention  tools,  including  at  the  micro  level.  As  the  new 
authorities  begin  working,  it  will  be  important  to  monitor  how  this  difference  influences  the 
policy outcomes. A key challenge for the ESRB is to ensure that its recommendations have 
teeth, that the “act or explain” mechanism produces a good balance between the “act” and 
the  “explain”.  A  second  important  challenge  for  the  ESRB  will  be  to  ensure  that  country-
specific  and/or  sectoral  warnings  or  recommendations,  when  required,  are  adopted  in  a 
timely 
that 
recommendations  of  this  type  would  probably  have  been  more  effective  than  general 
recommendations to counter developments that turned out to have implications for European 
financial stability. The complexity of the ESRB’s structure might make it difficult to reach a 
consensus on national recommendations. A third challenge for the ESRB will be to ensure 
fashion.  The  European  experience  of 
three  years  suggests 
financial  system, 
issue 
last 
the 
                                                 
4  See Angelini, Neri and Panetta (2010) and Lambertini, Mendicino and Punzi (2011). 
5  Article  3(1)  of  the  Regulation:  “The  ESRB  shall  be  responsible  for  the  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the 
financial  system  within  the  Union  in  order  to  contribute  to  the  prevention  or  mitigation  of  systemic  risks  to 
financial stability in the Union that arise from developments within the financial system and taking into account 
macroeconomic developments, so as to avoid periods of widespread financial distress. It shall contribute to 
the smooth functioning of the internal market and thereby ensure a sustainable contribution of the financial 
sector to economic growth.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
effective  cooperation  with  the  authorities  of  the  new  European  System  of  Financial 
Supervision. 
Interaction between macroprudential and monetary policies 
2. 
The  objectives  of  macroprudential  policies  should  be  kept  separate  from  those  of  more 
traditional policies. There is consensus that there is no need to change central banks’ current 
mandate  of  preserving  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The  benefits  of  a  sound 
monetary framework have become more – not less – evident during the crisis. Had central 
banks failed to control inflation, and inflation expectations, monetary policy would have had 
much less room for manoeuvre.  
However, the increasing emphasis on financial stability and macroprudential policies poses 
challenges to monetary policy. Central banks should not have to stand by idly until a crash 
occurs  before  intervening.  There  is  evidence  that  a  loose  monetary  policy  can  stimulate 
excess risk-taking and leverage, or liquidity transformation, thus increasing systemic fragility 
and ultimately putting price stability itself at risk.6 Just how this should affect the conduct of 
monetary policy is still unclear. At the very least, however, we have learned that monetary 
policymakers should be aware of these channels and monitor a broad range of indicators, 
such as buoyant credit growth, increasing leverage of financial institutions and, in general, 
leading  indicators  of  financial  instability.  Some  authors  argue  that  monetary  policy  should 
react to financial variables and more generally to leading indicators of financial distress.7 
Over  longer  horizons  there  is  no  evident  trade-off  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability objectives – indeed, there are probably synergies. We need to lengthen the horizon 
of monetary policy by taking into account the interactions and feedbacks between the real 
and the financial sectors and the non-linearities that emerge especially during crises. Many 
of  the  effects  associated  with  financial  and  asset  prices  imbalances  are  likely  to  be  highly 
non-linear and complex. The reaction of monetary policy should then also be non-linear and 
respond  to  asset  price  misalignments  and  financial  imbalances.  When  the  probability  of  a 
crisis  becomes  non-trivial,  the  interest  rate  path  towards  ensuring  price  stability  might  be 
different than in normal circumstances. These aspects are not well captured in the empirical 
models  currently  used  to  support  monetary  policy  decisions,  and,  I  would  argue,  in  the 
prevailing flexible inflation targeting framework.8 There is a great need for further research to 
overcome these limitations. 
Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policy  interact  and  influence  one  another.  Monetary 
policy affects asset prices and credit, whose developments are crucial for financial stability, 
                                                 
6  Borio and Zhu (2008) argue that such a channel exists. Altunbas, Gambacorta and Marques-Ibanez (2010), 
Maddaloni and Peydró (2010) find empirical evidence consistent with this channel. 
7  See  Woodford  (2010),  Cúrdia  and  Woodford  (2010),  and  Lambertini,  Mendicino  and  Punzi    (2011),  among 
others.  
8  On the contrary, it is generally accepted that a flexible inflation targeting (FIT) approach, if sufficiently forward 
looking, should (perhaps informally) take account of the fact that “significant financial instability invariably will 
also have a significant impact on activity and inflation” (Bean, 2003, p. 18). In practice, however, in the design 
of  monetary  policy  actions  it  might  be  very  difficult  to  take  account  of  developments  that  are  subject  to 
considerable  uncertainty  and  may  materialize  with  long  lags  due  to  cumulative  and  non-linear  effects  of 
financial imbalances. Since “the real world is generally complex and non-linear, [even] within a well specified 
FIT framework, the implicit monetary policy reaction function would then also be non-linear (and possibly very 
complex,  as  it  would  not  be  possible  to  rely  on  certainty  equivalence)”  (Visco,  2003,  p.  24),  Indeed, 
considering a Taylor rule as a description of the normal conduct of monetary policy, I argued that for some 
purposes a linear rule with the interest rate expressed as a function also of asset price misalignments could be 
a simple and linear approximation (a Taylor “approximation”, after Brook Taylor the mathematician, within the 
Taylor “rule” introduced by John Taylor the economist!) of how central banks would behave (or perhaps should 
have behaved) in a non-linear and complex environment.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and the propensity to take risks. At the same time, macroprudential policies will likely react 
to, and affect, credit growth and asset prices, influencing the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism.  These  interactions  need  to  be  well  understood  and  taken  into  account  in 
formulating the two policies.  
Two  research  projects  recently  carried  out  at  the  Bank  of  Italy  have  focused  on  the 
interaction between monetary policy and macroprudential policy. The first study concentrates 
on  the  recent  housing  bubble  in  the  United  States.9  The  results  indicate  that  a  tighter 
monetary policy by the Fed between 2002 and 2006 would have not been sufficient to avoid 
the  bubble.  However,  by  appropriately  combining  a  tighter  monetary  policy  with  additional 
credit  restraint  by  means  of  an  aggressive  use  of  countercyclical  macroprudential  tools, 
policymakers could have dampened the housing boom. The second study suggests the need 
for  coordination  between  monetary  policy  and  countercyclical  macroprudential  policy,  to 
avoid conflicts in the use of their respective instruments (e.g., interest rates and bank capital 
ratios).10  While  the  benefits  of  such  coordination  are  small  in  “normal”  times,  they  can 
become  substantial  when  the  economy  is  hit  by  financial  shocks  that  severely  impair  the 
ability of the banking sector to provide credit to the economy. In this case, it may be optimal 
for  the  central  bank  to  “lend  a  hand”  to  macroprudential  policy,  partly  deviating  from  its 
primary objective of price stability in order to improve the overall stability of the economy. 
To  what  extent  do  countercyclical  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  have  the 
potential  to  affect  the  economy  independently  of  each  other?  Answering  this  question 
requires  the  development  of  new  analytical  frameworks.  The  ideal  framework  should  be 
simple enough to allow a proper understanding of the basic underlying mechanisms; at the 
same time, it should be sufficiently realistic to permit the two policies to usefully coexist, at 
least in principle. Clearly, this would be impossible in a very simple framework. For instance, 
in  a  standard  AS-AD  New  Keynesian  model,  the  two  policies  would  be  perfectly  linearly 
dependent, as they both end up influencing the only control available to the policymaker, the 
interest rate, either through open market operations or via the macroprudential instrument. 
In one possible modelling of the two channels, suggested by Angelini, Neri and Panetta in 
the above-mentioned Bank of Italy paper, monetary policy would set the level of the nominal 
interest  rate,  as  in  standard  models,  while  countercyclical  macroprudential  policy  would 
influence the differential between the interest rate on bank loans and the rate on deposits by 
setting a capital ratio. Is this channel powerful enough to make a difference? Are there other 
possible channels? In my view, these issues will require a substantial research effort. 
In Europe, consistency between monetary and macroprudential policies should be ensured 
by  the  structure  of  the  ESRB,  characterized  by  its  close  relationship  with  the  European 
System of Central Banks, which represents the backbone of the new institution.11 In practice, 
29 of the 37 voting members are central bankers, so central bankers alone can ensure the 
                                                 
9  Catte, Cova, Pagano and Visco (2010). 
10  Angelini, Neri and Panetta (2010). 
11   The ESRB General Board is composed of the president and the vice president of the ECB, the governors of 
the 27 central banks of the European Union, a representative of the European Commission, the chairs of the 
three ESAs, the chair of the Advisory Technical Committee (an advisory body made up of the representatives 
of all institutions participating in the ESRB) and three external members (the chair and the two vice-chairs of 
the Advisory Scientific Committee, a new advisory body made up of  experts), all with voting rights. In addition, 
the  representatives  of  the  national  supervisory  authorities  and  the  chair  of  the  EU  Economic  and  Financial 
Committee (EFC) will participate to the meetings without the right to vote. The chair of the ESRB is assigned 
to  the  president  of  the  ECB  for  the  first  five  years  (for  subsequent  mandates  possible  amendments  to  this 
provision  will  be  assessed  by  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council  by  December  2013).  A  Steering 
Committee  is  in  charge  of  preparing  meetings  and  ensuring  efficient  ESRB  operations.  The  Steering 
Committee consists of the ESRB chair and vice-chair, five central bank members of the ESRB, the chairs of 
the ESAs, the chair of the EFC and the Commission member. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
simple majority required for General Board approval, as well as the qualified majority of two 
thirds required to adopt a recommendation or to make a warning or recommendation public. 
The scope for potential conflicts between policies should also be limited to the extent that the 
tools  and  actions  of  macroprudential  policies  are  normally  more  selective,  sectoral  and 
geographically defined. For example, dealing with house price booms in a region or country 
in the currency union will be an issue for macroprudential policy; a generalized credit boom, 
on the other hand, will likely be a matter of concern for monetary policy as well. 
loan-to-value  ratios,  etc.)  may  be  appropriately  calibrated 
Interaction between macroprudential and microprudential policymakers 
3. 
A  number  of  practical  examples  show  that  microprudential  tools  (capital  and  liquidity 
requirements, 
to  serve 
macroprudential goals as well. If the tools are broadly the same but must serve two purposes 
and  be  used  by  two  different  authorities,  the  potential  for  conflict  arises.  It  is  not  hard  to 
imagine a scenario of economic downturn in which the macroprudential regulator would want 
to run down the equity buffers built up during good times in order to avoid a credit crunch, 
while the microprudential regulator, concerned with preserving the safety and soundness of 
individual institutions, might be reluctant to let that happen.  
Overall, there are both strong complementarities between macro and microprudential policies 
–  it  is  hard  to  imagine  the  success  of  one  policy  without  the  success  of  the  other  –  and 
potential  short-term  conflicts  and  overlaps.  Whatever  the  institutional  arrangements,  it  is 
crucial  to  ensure  a  continuous  exchange  of  information  and  to  set  up  well-defined 
mechanisms to resolve any conflicts between the two functions. 
From  this  viewpoint,  the  US  system  appears  well-designed.  In  Europe,  the  interaction 
between macroprudential and microprudential authorities may be relatively complicated: the 
latter  include  the  Basel  Committee,  the  European  Banking  Authority,  the  other  European 
supervisory  authorities  and  the  national  supervisors.  Cross-participation  in  the  governing 
bodies of the different authorities should limit coordination problems, but it is clear that the 
European regulators will be called upon to make efforts in this direction. Indeed, a proposal 
for  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  among  the  ESRB  and  the  ESAs  on  the  division  of 
responsibilities between micro and macrosupervisors is now being discussed.  
Access  to micro  data  may  be  problematic  for  the  ESRB.  Successful  analysis  will  probably 
require  the  ESRB  and  its  Secretariat  to  act  as  a  hub,  devising  meaningful  projects, 
decentralizing much of the analytical work to national authorities, and ensuring harmonization 
of the research protocols.  
Coordination among macroprudential bodies   
4. 
The new macroprudential regulatory framework will feature a primary role at the global level 
for  four  “global”  players  –  the  IMF,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  the  ESRB  and  the 
FSOC – and for a number of national macroprudential authorities. Effective action will require 
a stepped-up interaction and cooperation among these authorities.  
The  IMF  and  the  FSB  are  developing  a  monitoring  process  (the  so-called  Early  Warning 
Exercise)  that  permits  a  more  integrated  and  comprehensive  view  of  emerging  global 
developments  and  the  corresponding  risks.  Using  an  integrated  macro-financial  and 
regulatory perspective, the process should provide a first example of an organized, structural 
attempt to identify and prioritize systemic macro-financial risks at global level and to propose 
policy  responses.  The ESRB  will  also  conduct  a  regular  assessment of  systemic  risk  and, 
when  necessary,  translate  it  into  recommendations  for  the  adoption  of  mitigating  policies. 
The potential for overlap seems ample. Given the global mandates of the FSB and the IMF, 
effective  collaboration  could  have  these  two  organisations  focussing  on  the  analysis  of 
linkages  and  contagion  channels  across  the  main  macro  areas  and  on  developing  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
options to contain spillover risk. The ESRB, the FSOC and analogous national and regional 
institutions  elsewhere  could  focus  on  sources  of  risk  arising  within  their  jurisdictions  and 
devise policy measures to address domestic developments. The coming years will be crucial 
to assess the functioning of the new framework and to minimize potential inefficiencies. 
References 
Altunbas,  Y.,  L.  Gambacorta  and  D.  Marqués-Ibáñez  (2010),  “Does  monetary  policy  affect 
bank risk-taking?”, ECB Working Paper, No. 1166. 
Angelini, P., S. Neri and F. Panetta (2010), “Monetary and macroprudential policies”, mimeo, 
Banca d’Italia. 
Bank  of  England  (2009),  “The  role  of  macroprudential  policy:  A  discussion  paper”, 
November. 
Bean,  C.  (2003),  “Asset  prices,  financial  imbalances  and  monetary  policy:  are  inflation 
targets enough?”, BIS Working Papers, No. 140. 
Borio,  C.  (2003),  “Towards  a  macroprudential  framework  for  financial  supervision  and 
regulation?”, BIS Working Papers, No. 128. 
Borio,  C.  (2010),  “Implementing  a  macroprudential  framework:  Blending  boldness  and 
realism”,  keynote  address  for  the  BIS-HKMA  research  conference  on  “Financial  Stability: 
Towards  a  Macroprudential  Approach”,  Honk  Kong  SAR,  5–6  July  2010  (available  at 
http://www.bis.org/repofficepubl/ hkimr201007.12c.pdf). 
Borio, C., and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing 
link in the transmission mechanism?”, BIS Working Papers, No. 268. 
Carosio,  G.  (2010),  “Central  Banking  after 
Instruments” paper presented at the OeNB – 38th Economic Conference, June 1. 
Catte, P., P. Cova, P. Pagano and I. Visco (2010),”The role of macroeconomic policies in the 
global crisis”, Banca d’Italia, Occasional Papers, No. 69. 
Cúrdia,  V.,  and  M.  Woodford  (2010),  “Credit  Spreads  and  Monetary  Policy,”  Journal  of 
Money, Credit and Banking, 42(6 Supp.). 
Hanson,  S.,  A.  Kashyap  and  J.  Stein  (2010),  “A  macroprudential  approach  to  financial 
regulation”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming. 
Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino and M.T. Punzi (2011), “Leaning against boom-bust cycles in 
credit and housing prices”, this conference. 
Maddaloni, A., and J-L. Peydró (2010), “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision and 
Low  Interest  Rates.  Evidence  from  the  Euro  Area  and  the  U.S.  Lending  Standards”,  ECB 
Working Paper, No. 1248. 
Visco, I. (2003), “Discussion of “Asset prices, financial imbalances and monetary policy: are 
inflation targets enough?” by Charles Bean”, BIS Working Papers, No. 140. 
Woodford,  M.  (2010),  “Financial  Intermediation  and  Macroeconomic  Analysis”,  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.  
the  Crisis:  Responsibilities,  Strategies, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
