Njuguna Ndung’u: A new agricultural finance training programme for 
Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the  Certificate  in  Agricultural  Finance  (CAF)  and  the  East  African  Agricultural  Finance 
Network (EAAFN), Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 7 September 2011. 
 The Hon. Minister for Agriculture, Dr. Sally Kosgei;  
The Secretary General, East Africa Community, Amb. Dr. Richard Sezibera;  
Permanent Secretary, Dr. Romano Kiome; 
USAID East Africa Regional Director, Lawrence Meserve;  
Chief Executive Officers of Commercial Banks;  
Esteemed Members of AFRACA;  
Distinguished Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Good Morning:  
Hon.  Minister,  About  a  year  and  a  half  ago,  on  17th  March  2010,  we  gathered  here  to 
discuss innovative ways to increase financial flows to the agricultural sector. The delegates 
in that meeting identified limited human capacity in agricultural lending as an impediment to 
financing  the  sector.  The  Kenya  School  of  Monetary  Studies  was  tasked  to  address  this 
human resource gap amongst lending institutions.  
Ladies and gentlemen: I am pleased to inform you that after extensive consultations with 
key  stakeholders,  the  School  with  the  support  of  USAID-Competitiveness  and  Trade 
Expansion  Project  (COMPETE),  developed  a  Modular  Certificate  Training  Program  whose 
launch we are all here to witness.  
I wish to commend the team that steered the process of initiating this important program. In 
order  to  further  develop  this  sector,  this  committee  has  been  transformed  into  the 
East African  Agricultural  Finance  Network  (EAAFN)  with  a  view  to  nurture,  deepen  and 
consolidate the sector’s capacity building agenda.  
Hon.  Minister,  I  also  recognize  the  presence,  at  this  forum,  of  the  inaugural  class  of  the 
Regional  Certificate  Program  in  Agricultural  Finance.  I  hope  the  course  is  has  met  your 
expectations.  
Hon.  Minister,  Ladies  and  gentlemen:  The  rapid  growth  of  microfinance  suggests  that 
there may be a large market for rural and agricultural loans. It is therefore important to better 
understand  the  demand  for  and  use  of  agricultural  credit  to  develop  effective  products, 
institutions  and  policies.  That  is  why  the  CAF  program  mainly  targets  staff  working  in  the 
credit  and  product  development  units  in  regional  commercial  banks,  agricultural  SACCOs 
and Micro-finance Institutions.  
Hon.  Minister,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  again  expressing  the  Central 
Bank  of  Kenya’s  appreciation  of  various  institutions  that have  enabled  the  development  of 
this capacity building programme as well as the 22 financial institutions that are represented 
by the pioneer CAF participants.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
While  acknowledging  that  the  challenges  facing  agriculture  are  huge  given  the  growing 
population,  declining  land  sizes,  climate  change  that  has  imposed  severe  costs  on  the 
sector,  all  of  which  compound  the  problem  of  financing  agriculture,  the  challenges  are  not 
insurmountable, if we work together.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is now my pleasure and privilege to welcome The Hon. Minister 
for Agriculture, Dr. Sally Kosgei to give the key note address and officially launch the East 
African Agricultural Finance Network (EAAFN) and inaugurate the Regional Certificate 
Program in Agricultural Finance.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
