Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the 
Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 17 February 2011. 
 Nearly a decade has passed since the inflation targeting regime was introduced. In spring 
2001,  Norges  Bank  was  charged  with  the  task  of  setting  the  interest  rate  with  a  view  to 
keeping inflation low and stable. At the same time, new fiscal policy guidelines, also known 
as the fiscal rule, were implemented, charting a course for petroleum revenue spending.  
For the first time in a long time, economic policy in Norway was given an overall long-term 
anchor and a binding operational objective. In Report No. 29 to the Storting from 2001, the 
Storting was informed of the new guidelines. The report may not qualify as poetry, but it is a 
document to which I have a close relationship.  
This evening I will take a look at the experiences of these operational guidelines and discuss 
the following questions. Has the inflation target and the fiscal rule lived up to the expectations 
of ten years ago? And how can the experiences of the past ten years be used in addressing 
today’s challenges?  
In 2011 it is also ten years since Georg Akerlof, Michael Spence and Joseph Stiglitz were 
awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  in  Economics  for  their  work  on  asymmetric  information.  The 
theories  provide  a  backdrop  to  understanding  the  financial  crisis  that  engulfed  the  world 
economy in 2008.  
A lack of reliable information resulted in excess risk-taking by many, perhaps unknowingly. 
Investors and banks believed they could pass on losses to others or expected the authorities 
to intervene in the event of failure. It is now widely recognised that the regulatory framework 
for financial markets was too weak. Increased ambitions with regard to regulating financial 
markets and new and better instruments are on the agenda. I will revert to this later. 
But let me start with the external environment. 
The world economy: Keeping one’s house in order provides robustness 
The  global  economic  crisis  in  autumn  2008  was  the  biggest  economic  earthquake  in  our 
time.  The  following  year,  world  GDP  fell  for  the  first  time  in  generations.  The  crisis  was 
triggered by an abrupt decline in the US housing market, but a tightly interwoven financial 
sector caused the problems to spread rapidly across countries and sectors.  
When the bubble burst, excessive optimism in the financial sector turned to deep pessimism. 
The  flow  of  credit  dried  up.  It  became  expensive  and  difficult  for  financial  institutions  to 
procure funding even though the problems had originated in asset value losses in a faraway 
region.  Cross-border  trade,  which  is  dependent  on  well  functioning  credit  channels,  was 
adversely affected.  
Even an expansionary economic policy, with record-low interest rates, low tax receipts and 
strong growth in public demand for goods and services, could not prevent the downturn from 
deepening  in  many  countries.  However,  it  did  help  reduce  its  duration  compared  with  the 
depression in the 1930s.  
Chart 1: Current account. As a percentage of world GDP. 2000 – 2010 
The crisis was preceded by a build-up of global imbalances. Large and growing deficits in the 
US were driven by high consumption and a large appetite for debt among US households. In 
the US, domestic spending had outpaced domestic production for a long period. Private debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
increased in the US, but also in Europe, matched by high saving in Asia – primarily in China. 
Asia’s willingness to purchase US bonds allowed the imbalances to grow. 
Global trade imbalances have been reduced somewhat over the past two years, but there is 
a considerable risk that they will persist. They must be corrected through structural changes 
in the real economy. This may weaken growth in the world economy in the coming decade. 
Asian economies, however, have fared well through the crisis. Emerging economies are now 
sufficiently large so that growth in their economies provides impetus to production in other 
regions. 
Chart 2: GDP. Constant prices. Index, 2000=100 
The financial crisis hastened the pace of change in the world’s economic geography. If GDP 
is set at 100 in the year 2000, it would have grown to 112 for the euro area and 118 for the 
US up to last year. The figure for Brazil is 143 and 271 for China. If the trend continues China 
could outgrow the US to become the largest economy in the world in the course of the next 
10–20 years.  
In the US, Japan and most European countries, key rates have in practice reached a lower 
boundary.  The  authorities  cannot  provide  further  impetus  to  the  economy  through  interest 
rate  cuts  and  currency  depreciation.  Western  countries  with  trade  deficits  would  have 
benefited  from  a  boost  to  their  exports.  A  stronger  Chinese  currency  could  be  part  of  the 
solution.  
With  its  enormous  labour  reserves,  China  has  substantial  capacity  for  exporting  to  the 
wealthiest nations in the world. If more income is not spent on domestically produced goods 
and  imports,  it  is  probably  because  of  fundamental  structural  features  of  the  Chinese 
economy. Income is still low for large groups. A substantial share of income flows to state-
controlled enterprises and high-income groups with a high propensity to save. A substantial 
share of GDP is invested in new real capital, which in turn continues to fuel export growth.  
The  Chinese  economy  is  likely  to  change.  A  larger  share  of  income  will  be  channelled  to 
consumption. The current account surplus as a percentage of GDP has been reduced in the 
past few years.  
But  deficit  countries  in  the  west  must  come  to  grips  with  their  own  problems.  Demand  for 
goods and services in western countries cannot outstrip production on a sustainable basis. 
Households  in  Europe  and  the  US  can  now  be  expected  to  increase  saving.  Many  have 
experienced that debt does not evaporate as fast as assets.  
Chart 3: Government gross debt. As a percentage of GDP. 2000, 2005 and 2010 
Financial crises tend to be followed by debt crises. Someone has to pay the bill. The rapid 
growth in government debt in Europe and the US is consistent with a well known historical 
pattern. Fiscal policy was used actively in most countries to curb rising unemployment. The 
mistakes of the 1930s were not to be repeated. The intention was good and the policy was 
most likely appropriate, but weak public balances became even weaker. On top of this, some 
countries provided substantial government funding to banks. 
The situation came to a head in several euro area countries, initially in Greece, which had 
allowed deficits to creep up during the growth period. In the next round, Ireland, Portugal and 
Spain came under pressure and had to payer higher interest rates on new loans. The UK 
also  ran  a  government  budget  deficit  in  the  favourable  pre-crisis  years  and  when  tax 
revenues  rapidly  declined  and  social  security  spending  rose,  the  deficit  increased  to  more 
than 10 per cent of GDP and government debt doubled.  
The  authorities  in  many  countries  must  now  tread  a  difficult  balance.  Controlling  debt 
requires an economy with a back strong enough to carry it. It is not certain that low interest 
rates  are  sufficient  to  sustain  the  nascent  recovery  if  fiscal  policy  is  tightened.  Credible 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reforms that limit public spending in the long run, combined with moderate tightening in the 
short run, could be an appropriate strategy. Governments that saved during the expansion 
may have the scope for pursuing that approach. Greece did not save. The fiscal leeway for 
the  most  heavily  indebted  countries  is  limited  and  confidence  in  reforms  has  weakened, 
forcing them to implement austerity measures more rapidly.  
A common feature of the countries that fared well through the financial crisis was that they 
had kept their house in order. A long-term economic policy anchor provided latitude to use 
fiscal policy actively when this became necessary. The economies that fared well had also 
kept price and cost inflation under control in the years prior to the crisis. Norway falls into this 
group, even though our abundant natural resource wealth puts us in an exceptional situation.  
Economic policy guidelines 
Today  we  can  look  back  at  ten  years  of  inflation  targeting  and  the  fiscal  rule.  Despite  the 
financial crisis, this has been a golden period for Norway. Economic developments in Norway 
have been influenced by changes in global trade patterns, which I have described in brief. 
Asia has replaced Europe as our main trading partner for many goods, and the price of our 
exports has risen at a markedly faster pace than the price of our imports. National income is 
almost 30 per cent higher in real terms than ten years ago. EU enlargement provided us with 
access to a larger labour market and Norway’s population has grown faster than for many 
years. Unemployment has been low – close to an average 3 per cent through the decade.  
Chart 4: CPI and CPIXE. 12-month percentage change, 5-month moving average. 
January 2001 – December 2010 
CPI inflation has varied to some extent. Underlying inflation has naturally been more stable, 
but has been both higher and lower than the target. If we look at the ten-year period as a 
whole, inflation has been 2 per cent, that is to say close to the target.  
The notion of operational guidelines  
The past decade of low and stable inflation must be seen against the background of Norges 
Bank’s active use of the key policy rate. The interest rate has been set with a view to meeting 
the inflation target that was introduced in 2001. The notion of an operational economic policy 
framework sprang from the experience of economic planning in the 1960s and 1970s.  
The  first  decades  after  the  war  were  naturally  marked  by  high  ambitions  with  regard  to 
macroeconomic management at home and abroad. Through the 1970s, a period of soaring 
inflation,  stagnation  and  deepening  deficits,  the  pendulum  swung.  While  the  focus  had 
previously been on market failure, it shifted to management failure in many countries.  
On  the  theoretical  side,  the  economists  Finn  Kydland  and  Edward  Prescott  demonstrated 
that authorities operating a long-term plan may have strong incentives to deviate from that 
plan at a later stage.1 If firms and households see through this at the outset, they will adjust 
their  behaviour  accordingly,  undermining  the  long-term  plan.  If  the  authorities  make  a 
credible commitment to operational rules, they will come closer to achieving their long-term 
objectives.2  
                                                 
1   Finn  Kydland  and  Edward  Prescott  (1977):  “Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of  Optimal 
Plans”. Journal of Political Economy 85: 473–492. 
2   The  advantage  of  tying  oneself  to  economic  policy  objectives  does  not  conflict  with  the  ability  of  economic 
policy to stabilise the economy at the same time. On the contrary, a credible commitment to objectives can 
provide greater leeway for stabilising the economy. See, for example, Michael Woodford (2003) “Interest and 
Prices”, Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  clearest  expression  of  this  lesson  was  found  in  monetary  policy.  In  Norway,  the 
authorities set an objective for the value of the krone, but devalued when the krone came 
under pressure. The devaluations were over time incorporated into expectations and inflation 
surged.  It  is  tempting  to  quote  Hermod  Skånland,  who  stated  that  Norway  “early  and  with 
great perspicacity” charted a course for economic policy – and thereafter promptly embarked 
on a different path.3  
During the upturn in the mid-1980s, the interest rate was held low and public spending was 
high.  The  economy  became  vulnerable.  When  oil  prices  fell  in  1986,  a  change  of  course 
became imperative. All efforts were concentrated on bringing public spending under control. 
Interest rate setting was geared towards maintaining a steady krone exchange rate. The aim 
was to bring down inflation close to the level prevailing in other countries.  
The  banking  crisis  and  the  downturn  in  the  early  1990s  led  to  renewed  recognition  that 
market  forces  had  to  be  controlled  and  banks  regulated.  An  approach  based  on  broad 
economic  policy  cooperation  was  pursued.  Under  the  so-called  Solidarity  Alternative,  or 
wage  moderation  policy,  the  social  partners  were  to  ensure  moderate  wage  growth  and 
competitiveness. The authorities promised to deliver a stable krone. Structural reforms were 
implemented  to  increase  growth  capacity.  Confidence  in  monetary  policy  gained  a  firm 
footing and inflation and the real interest rate declined.  
But the regulatory pendulum that swings back and forth was still in motion. In the period up to 
the turn of the millennium, petroleum revenues were on the rise and fiscal policy came under 
pressure.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  amplified  fluctuations  in  the  economy  and  the 
social  partners  were  no  longer  able  to  rein  in  cost  growth.  The  Solidarity  Alternative  had 
played its role. Unexpected growth in petroleum revenues also highlighted the importance of 
designing  a  long-term  government  savings  plan.  We  needed  a  new  anchor  for  both  fiscal 
policy and monetary policy.  
Chart 5: Inflation. Moving 10-year average and variation in CPI. Per cent. 1980 – 2010 
Report No. 29 from 2001 sets out long-term guidelines for economic policy. The division of 
responsibility was further clarified. Norges Bank was given a clear responsibility for keeping 
inflation  low  and  stable.  The  government  and  the  Storting  can  build  on  Norges  Bank’s 
response  pattern  when  drawing  up  annual  budgets.  They  can  also  take  into  account  that 
increasing spending via government budgets may trigger an appreciation of the krone. The 
social partners can apply a low and stable rate of inflation when they negotiate the share of 
economic  growth  to  be  taken  out  as  real  wages  and  set  their  ambitions  with  regard  to 
employment.  
The guidelines and the financial crisis 
The financial crisis in 2008 put the economic policy guidelines to a severe test.  
The interest rate cuts that followed from the inflation target led to a reduction in households’ 
annual interest expenses of around NOK 40 billion. The krone acted as a buffer. The burden 
on leveraged companies was eased and many investment projects became profitable in an 
environment of lower interest rates. Monetary policy made a substantial overall contribution 
to Norway’s resilience to the crisis.  
                                                 
3   Speech  delivered  at  the  Petroleum  Seminar  at  the  Norwegian  Association  of  Economists  on  2  November 
1988. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6: Real interest rate. Per cent. August 1987 – February 1990 and June 2008 – 
December 2010 
Chart 7: Registered unemployment. Per cent. August 1987 – February 1990 and June 
2008 – December 2010 
Well  anchored  inflation  expectations  made  monetary  policy  effective  –  the  reduction  in 
Norges  Bank’s  key  policy  rate  was  perceived  as  a  decline  in  the  real  interest  rate.  Other 
central banks experienced that there was little scope for reducing the real interest rate to a 
sufficiently low level.  
This downturn contrasts sharply with the downturn in the 1980s when the interest rate had to 
be maintained at a high level to defend the krone exchange rate. At that time, there was a 
lack  of  confidence  in  both  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  The  costs  proved  to  be 
substantial. Unemployment increased more in line with that experienced in some European 
countries today.  
However, when the financial crisis reached Norway in 2008, our country was in a particularly 
favourable position. A long period of substantial petroleum revenues – and a clear savings 
plan – had provided us with considerable leeway. As a result, fiscal policy could also be put 
to  effective  use  during  the  downturn.  The  guidelines  stipulate  that  the  government  budget 
deficit shall over time be equivalent to 4 per cent of the capital in the Government Pension 
Fund Global, – more in bad times, less in good times.  
Chart 8: Fiscal policy. Change in the non-oil budget surplus from 2008 till 2010. In 
billions of NOK 
A fall in output and employment automatically leads to reduced taxes while unemployment 
benefits  increase.  An  important  aspect  of  the  fiscal  rule  is  that  it  includes  a  mechanism 
whereby  these  effects  also  translate  into  a  weaker  budget  balance.  These  automatic 
stabilisers  generated  strong  impulses  through  2009  and  2010.  The  decline  in  output  and 
employment automatically triggered a reduction in taxes and an increase in transfers of more 
than NOK 40 billion for the two years as a whole to the benefit of households and firms.  
The increase in the Government Pension Fund Global provided, under the fiscal rule, room 
for  a  NOK  25  billion  increase  in  spending.  The  government  and  the  Storting  approved 
additional spending, bringing the overall contribution from fiscal policy to more than NOK 100 
billion  in  these  two  years.  Hardly  any  other  country  provided  such  strong  overall  stimulus 
through the use of public instruments during the crisis.  
The guidelines from 2001 provide a clear long-term framework for monetary policy and fiscal 
policy and provide for cyclical adjustments in economic policy – in part automatically and in 
part through judgement. In this way, the guidelines reconcile the need for a flexible approach 
to macroeconomic management with the gains brought by a commitment to more long-term 
operational objectives.  
A decade of inflation targeting 
Inflation  is  so  low  today  that  most  people  barely  give  it  a  thought.  The  rate  of  increase  in 
consumer prices has disappeared from the front pages, where it was a frequent guest in the 
1980s. We do not miss inflation. 
Even  though  inflation  over  the  past  decade  has  been  close  to  the  target  of  2.5  per  cent, 
demanding trade-offs have had to be made over the years. The element of judgment in the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  been  put  to  the  test.  Through  the  years,  we  have  gained 
insight into the functioning of the Norwegian economy under an inflation targeting regime. Let 
me touch upon some of those insights.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Chart 9: Krone exchange rate, inflation and Norges Bank key policy rate. January 2001 
– December 2010 
The  experience  of  the  beginning  of  the  decade  revealed  how  demanding  it  is  to  strike  a 
balance between different monetary policy considerations in a small, open economy. When 
the key policy rate is raised to restrain a pronounced rise in domestic cost inflation, it can 
have  a  strong  impact  on  the  krone  exchange  rate,  as  observed  in  2002–2003.  This 
influences both the real economy and the inflation outlook. 
Midway  through  the  decade,  inflation  rapidly  declined.  China’s  entry  into  the  WTO  and 
increased imports into Norway from Asia led to a persistent fall in prices for many goods. The 
combination of very low inflation and strong economic growth was a new aspect that posed a 
challenge to the conduct of monetary policy. Interest rates – both at home and abroad – were 
set  at  a  low  level.  At  the  same  time,  this  contributed  to  amplifying  the  cyclical  upturn  in 
Norway.  
Towards  the  end  of  the  decade,  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  interest  rate  was  reduced 
sharply  again  and  to  record-low  levels,  which  was undoubtedly  not  a  difficult  decision  to 
make at that time. A persistently low interest rate, on the other hand, can pose a challenge in 
an economy where there is a strong willingness to borrow and property prices are rising, if 
this  should  lead  to  imbalances  further  ahead.  The  upturn  in  the  Norwegian  economy  now 
seems to have gained a firm footing. Low inflation prospects still imply a low interest rate. On 
the other hand, the consideration of guarding against the risk of future financial imbalances 
that  may  disturb  activity  and  inflation  somewhat  further  ahead  suggest  that  the  key  policy 
rate should not be kept low for too long.  
Chart 10: Percentage change in the CPI since the beginning of each decade. 1980s and 
2000s 
Chart 11: Percentage growth in mainland GDP since the beginning of each decade. 
1980s and 2000s 
Drawing some of the threads together from the past decade, it can be said that inflation has 
been  fairly  stable  and  close  to  the  target,  which  shows  that  monetary  policy  has  been 
effective. Compared with the 1980s, for example, inflation has been considerably lower the 
past  decade  and  growth  in  the  mainland  economy  has  been  markedly  higher.  There  has 
been  no  conflict  between  low  inflation  and  high  economic  growth  as  many  economists 
previously maintained.4  
The  challenges  encountered  have  provided  new  insight.  Inflation  is  not  self-stabilising  and 
there are costs involved in bringing it back to target. 
The  Bank’s  analyses  and  communication  have  evolved.  The  Bank  has  gained  insight  into 
how  the  interest  rate  functions  under  an  inflation  targeting  regime.  Economic  agents  have 
become  familiar  with  our  response  pattern.  In  interest  rate  setting,  we  do  not  give  weight 
exclusively to bringing inflation back to target, but also take into account the impact of the 
interest  rate  on  output and  employment.  After  a  decade  of  learning,  inflation  targeting  has 
become more flexible. 
That flexibility is good to have, and easy to lose. Without results showing that the inflation 
target  is  in  fact  reached  over  time,  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  is  put  at  risk.  In 
assessing  various  considerations,  monetary  policy  must  be  geared  to  meet  its  primary 
objective  –  low  and  stable  inflation.  Other  instruments  must  be  used  to  attain  other 
objectives.  
                                                 
4   See, for example, Leif Johansen, Offentlig Økonomikk [Public Economics] (1965). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Implementation of the fiscal rule 
Chart 12: The Government Pension Fund Global. As a percentage of GDP. 2000 – 2010 
We  have  also  gained  ten  years’  experience  of  rules-based  economic  policy  in  the  area  of 
fiscal policy. The Government Pension Fund Global has grown from close to NOK 400 billion 
in 2001 to more than NOK 3.1 trillion today. As a percentage of GDP, the size of the fund is 
in line with that projected in 2001. 
When the Fund was established, it was natural to build on existing expertise in the central 
bank gained through management of the foreign exchange reserves – the wealth was to be 
invested  abroad.  The  central  bank  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  an  appropriate 
institutional setting for the Fund.  
Under the fiscal rule, government oil revenue spending over the past ten years has totalled 
NOK  730  billion  in  current  kroner.  This  is  around  NOK  100  billion  more  than  a  strict 
interpretation of the fiscal rule would imply.  
Chart 13: Relative labour costs. Projections from the National Budget for 2003 and 
actual developments. Percentage change since 2001 
Increased spending over government budgets crowds out other activity. Ministry of Finance 
calculations5 showed that a scaling back of private enterprise was an unavoidable implication 
of the fiscal rule. Labour costs in Norway were estimated to rise by 4–8 per cent more than 
among  trading  partners  in  the  period  to  2010  as  a  result of  a  more  rapid  phasing-in  of  oil 
revenues.  
The  Ministry  of  Finance  figures  were  conservative,  but  nonetheless  too  optimistic.  Labour 
costs rose more rapidly. In the course of the decade, competitiveness actually deteriorated 
by 20 per cent.  
When the fiscal rule was introduced in 2001, it was emphasised that some of the additional 
fiscal leeway provided by the oil revenues would be used to strengthen the long-term growth 
potential of the Norwegian economy, for example by investing in infrastructure, research and 
education.  The  Report  to  the  Storting  in  2001  noted  that  “[…]  a  high  tax  level  entails 
economic costs […]”.  
The  authorities  have  used  the  fiscal  leeway  to  implement  standard  increases  and  raise 
spending in a number of areas. On the other hand, the priority given to measures aimed at 
boosting productivity and hence the long-term growth potential, including adjustments to the 
tax system, seems to have receded somewhat into the background. 
The main objective of fiscal policy is to secure the provision of good public services, ensure 
an appropriate distribution of income and invest in major infrastructure. This objective must 
apply in good times as well as bad.  
At the same time, all desirable spending programmes  must be prioritised within an overall 
budget framework. Fund structures or other forms of financing outside the ordinary budget 
are only a way of avoiding budget constraints. This would weaken the credibility of the fiscal 
rule, which in turn would affect interest rate setting. Again – policy rules and words must be 
followed  up  by  action.  In  the  words  of  former  Norges  Bank  Governor  Hermod  Skånland: 
Once the authorities have charted a course, they should not embark a different path. 
                                                 
5   National Budget for 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Lessons from the financial crisis – financial stability and supervision  
Chart 14: Household debt. As a percentage of GDP. 2000, 2005 and 2010 
I have described how Norway differs from other European countries after the financial crisis. 
While  many  EU  countries  are  in  the  economic  doldrums  and  are  facing  high  government 
debt, Norway has made use of its fiscal leeway and has fared well. However, there is one 
area  in  which  Norway  differs  from  other  countries  in  a  manner  we  perhaps  do  not  like: 
Norwegian households are among the most heavily indebted in Europe. 
Rising debt and property prices are mutually reinforcing. Higher asset prices lead to higher 
collateral values for loans. Easier access to credit also leads to increased purchasing power 
when property is offered for sale. This increases risk in the financial system. The high level of 
borrowing,  particularly  among  US  households,  was  an  important  factor  contributing  to  the 
financial crisis in autumn 2008. Although debt growth has slowed in Norway, the level of debt 
shows no sign of falling. 
While monetary policy and fiscal policy have been anchored within a long-term, operational 
framework  over  the  past  ten  years,  there  has  been  no  comparable,  coherent  regulatory 
system for financial markets. Requirements are currently imposed on individual banks, but 
without adequate regard to overall risk in the financial system. The financial crisis highlighted 
the need to strengthen the current framework. 
In the event of shocks to the economic system, the authorities have a role as lender of last 
resort. This also has a side effect – banks may feel at liberty to take on excessive risk. The 
banks keep the profits in good time, while they expect the public to foot a share of the bill in 
the event of failure. 
Regulation of the financial sector must therefore secure financial stability, but at the same 
time protect the public against losses. Akerlof, Spence and Stiglitz – the 2001 Nobel Prize 
laureates – described how market participants adapt their behaviour and provided important 
background for the literature on the design of regulations. We should not have ambitions to 
fine-tune the economy, whether it is the real economy or the financial economy. But we must 
have  ambitions  to  establish  a  sound  operational  framework  that  protects  society  against 
losses. This is now on the agenda in Norway and in other countries.  
I would like to highlight three main aspects of this work: 
First,  the  financial  crisis  revealed  that  banks  held  insufficient  capital,  excessive  short-term 
market funding and inadequate liquidity buffers. The new Basel III framework sets out stricter 
requirements. Higher and better-quality capital will increase banks’ resilience to pronounced 
fluctuations in the economy without their having to tighten lending abruptly. The new rules 
aim to moderate growth in banking in periods of expansion.  
Second,  the  new  framework  includes  macroprudential  tools  that  can  be  applied  as 
necessary.  Banks  may  be  subject  to  additional  capital  requirements  if  credit  growth  in  the 
wider economy is excessive. The requirement is intended to ensure that banks build up an 
extra capital buffer when systemic risk increases. Loan-to-value ceilings on mortgage loans 
may also be imposed. 
Third,  the  authorities  must  acquire  tools  that  enable  banks  to  be  wound  up  in  an  orderly 
manner.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  that  the  structure  of  banking  groups  is  transparent. 
Banks must also draw up plans for their own liquidation in the event of difficulties. Owners 
and creditors – not taxpayers – must bear the losses. The interest rate on banks’ funding will 
then reflect the risk they take rather than an implicit government guarantee. This will in itself 
have a preventive effect. 
In some areas, banking sector regulation in Norway has been stricter than in other countries. 
Over  time,  this  has  been  a  strength,  not  a  weakness,  for  Norwegian  banks.  The  new 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
international rules are to be phased in gradually from 2013 to 2019. That is a long time to 
wait.  
The  authorities  must  cooperate  across  national  borders  on  regulations,  the  timing  of  their 
implementation  and  enforcement.  The  dividing  line  between  our  own  and  other  countries’ 
banks  is  becoming  increasingly  blurred.  Our  close  relationship  with  our  neighbours  also 
applies to the financial sector. Leading the way together with a coordinated introduction of 
new and stricter rules could be of mutual benefit. 
The Ministry of Finance has overriding responsibility for financial stability. However, it can be 
demanding to restrain debt growth in times of strong optimism and confidence in the future. 
Our experience of well defined mandates and a clear delegation of responsibility in the field 
of  monetary  policy  has  been  positive.  The  legal  authority  to  implement  macroprudential 
measures to safeguard financial stability should be delegated, just as the government has 
delegated responsibility for interest rate setting. 
Norges  Bank  should  be  assigned  formal  responsibility  to  provide  concrete  advice  on 
macroprudential  measures  for  the  financial  sector.  The  Bank  has  a  highly  competent  staff 
with a broad background and a daily presence in financial markets. Norges Bank is therefore 
prepared  to  provide  advice  on  the  measures  that  should  be  implemented.  Finanstilsynet 
(Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway) should be responsible for implementation. The 
central  bank  and  Finanstilsynet  are  both  housed  in  this  building  –  but  communication 
between the two institutions should take place through public channels. This will provide a 
clear division of responsibility. 
Could  the  discussion  about  new  banking  sector  regulation  be  a  case  of  the  pendulum 
swinging  back  towards  the  regulatory  optimism  that  I  described  earlier?  The  picture  is 
probably more nuanced. The banks have shown a striking ability to adapt, a skill which they 
hardly intend to relinquish. It must be acknowledged that no regulation can prevent financial 
institutions from encountering difficulties. A new regulatory framework must therefore ensure 
that banks have the ultimate responsibility for the risk undertaken. Regulatory compliance will 
then also be in their own interest. 
Conclusion 
In my address this evening, I have sought to gather together some historical threads relating 
to  the  design  of  economic  policy  through  our  recent  history  and  at  the  same  time  provide 
some  glimpses  of  developments  in  the  field  of  economics.  Views  on  macroeconomic 
management  have  changed  in  this  period  –  influenced  by  economic  developments  and 
events. Perhaps the policy response during the financial crisis also reflected a swing of the 
pendulum  towards  increased  regulatory  optimism.  On  the  other  hand,  the  financial  crisis 
required  full  deployment  of  instruments.  Measures  were  far-going  and  some  were 
unconventional. In some countries, the bill to be paid is substantial. 
In  their  prize-winning  work,  Kydland  and  Prescott  raised  the  question  of  discretion  versus 
policy  rules.  Today,  we  have  perhaps  opted  for  “both,  please”.  An  economic  policy  that  is 
conducted blindly according to a rule, or only oriented towards solving day-to-day problems, 
can have adverse effects. Report No 29 from 2001 attempted to reconcile the gains brought 
by  a  commitment  to  more  long-term  operational  objectives  with  the  need  for  a  flexible 
approach  to  macroeconomic  management.  The  monetary  policy  framework  provides  for 
flexibility in inflation targeting.  
When  drawing  up  economic  policy,  a  general  lesson  is  that  responsibility  must  be  placed 
where appropriate. Monetary policy shall be oriented towards low and stable inflation. The 
interest rate must not be overburdened with many objectives, but can contribute to stabilising 
fluctuations in the economy. The policy for financial stability must not seek to take over the 
risk  from  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  but  identify  the  risks  to  which  they  are 
exposed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The past ten years have been a golden period for the Norwegian economy, probably owing 
to a combination of skill and luck. Oil revenues have given us considerable benefits. But the 
wealth must also be managed in a sound manner. We will encounter new challenges. We 
cannot take for granted that these favourable circumstances will persist, which makes it all 
the more important to adhere to economic policy guidelines that are based on the principles 
of  long-termism  and  credibility.  This  provides  a  sound  basis  for  navigating  through  future 
rough  waters.  History  does  not  repeat  itself.  But  the  pendulum  will  swing  back  and  forth, 
come what may. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
  14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
  16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17
