K C Chakrabarty: Agricultural productivity and credit – issues and way forward 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  The 
National Seminar on Productivity in Indian Agriculture, College of Agricultural Banking (CAB), 
Pune, 2 September 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Thanzason Sonna and Smt Pallavi Chavan in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1. 
Prof. M. S. Swaminathan, Shri A. S. Bhattacharya, CMD, Bank of Maharashtra, Ms 
Kamala Rajan, Principal, CAB, Shri R. L. Sharma, Vice-Principal, CAB and other members of 
faculty, distinguished panelists, participants, ladies and gentlemen! It is a pleasure to be here 
this  morning  for  the  “National  Seminar  on  Productivity  in  Indian  Agriculture”  organized  by 
CAB, Pune. 
In  the  Indian  context,  the  policy  of  self-sufficiency  in  food  which  led  to  Green 
2. 
Revolution had served the country well. The country currently has sufficient stocks of wheat 
and  rice  which  are  above  buffer  stock  norms  and  food  security  reserve  requirements. 
However, in the medium to long term, concern over food security is likely to become more 
intense.  This  is  because  land  is  scarce  and  its  supply  is  limited.  Further,  sustained 
dependence on food imports is not an option that is viable in Indian context. Therefore, food 
safety  net  for  the  present  and  future  population  requires  enhanced  agricultural  production 
and productivity. This is already attracting the attention of the Reserve Bank of India. Thus, 
this Seminar organized by CAB, Pune is very topical and the theme has great bearing on the 
future growth of India. 
3. 
And who could be a better person than Prof. M. S. Swaminathan to set the tone for 
this Seminar. It is indeed a matter of great privilege that Prof. M. S. Swaminathan is in our 
midst today. Known as the “Father of the Green Revolution in India” for his leadership and 
success  in  introducing  and  further  developing  high-yielding  varieties  of  wheat  in  India,  his 
vision is to rid the world of hunger and poverty. Prof. Swaminathan is an advocate of moving 
India  to  sustainable  development,  especially  using  environmentally  sustainable  agriculture, 
sustainable food security and the preservation of biodiversity, which he calls an “evergreen 
revolution”.  He  has  worked  worldwide  in  collaboration  with  colleagues  and  students  on  a 
wide  range  of  problems  in  basic  and  applied  plant  breeding,  agricultural  research  and 
development and the conservation of natural resources. It was only in the fitness of things 
that  he  delivered  the  inaugural  address  today.  Sir,  we  are  overwhelmed  by  your  insightful 
address and I am sure all of us have immensely benefited listening to his valuable views on a 
subject which is not only very dear to you but also so vital for the country’s economic growth. 
4. 
I also note that the Seminar includes several eminent speakers with vast experience 
on  the  subject.  There  are  sessions  on  agricultural  productivity,  role  of  research  and 
technology  in  improving  agricultural  productivity,  linkages  between  productivity  and  farm 
income, incentivizing productivity enhancing investments, relation between credit growth and 
productivity growth and mitigation of risks in agriculture. In my address today, coming as do 
from  the  RBI,  I  would  broadly  focus  on  major  trends/issues  in  agricultural  productivity  and 
credit,  and  the  role  of  agricultural  credit  in  improving  agricultural  productivity.  I  would  also 
touch upon some of the steps that can yield results in the short-term. 
Importance of agriculture  
As  you  are  aware,  the  recent  Indian  growth  story  has  been  service-led.  Services 
5. 
sector has completely replaced agriculture, which was traditionally the largest contributor to 
India’s GDP. However, the fact that agriculture has the smallest share in GDP of only about 
14 per cent today from a high of more than 50 per cent , does not belittle its importance for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  Indian  economy.  This  is  because  first,  as  we  all  know,  agriculture  remains  the  largest 
employer  having  a  share  of  around  60  per  cent.  Secondly,  it  holds  the  key  to  creation  of 
demand in other sectors and remains by far an important indirect contributor to India’s GDP 
growth. The agriculture sector needs to grow at least by 4 per cent for the economy to grow 
at 9 per cent. Thus, though having a small share, the fluctuations in agricultural production 
can  have  large  and  significant  impact  on  overall  GDP  growth.  Thirdly,  since  food  is  an 
important component in basket of commodities used for measuring consumer price indices, it 
is  necessary  that  food  prices  are  maintained  at  reasonable  levels  to  ensure  food  security, 
especially for the deprived sections of our society. In fact, food security is emerging as an 
important policy concern, and the role of agriculture in ensuring equitable access to food has 
added a new perspective for policy makers.  
Trends in agricultural productivity  
6. 
I would like to discuss certain trends in agricultural productivity in India. As is well-
known,  the  year  1968  marked  the  beginning  of  a  turning  point  in  Indian  agriculture.  The 
country was dependent on agricultural imports for almost two decades after independence. 
Production of rice and wheat grew at 28.0 per cent and 23.6 per cent, respectively, during 
1967–68  while  their  yields  during  the  same  year  grew  at  19.6  per  cent  and  24.4  percent, 
respectively. This was the first time that such high growth in production and yield of both rice 
and wheat was witnessed in the country. These levels of growth remain one of the highest 
achieved so far. The development of high-yielding variety (HYV) of seeds in mid 1960s and 
the  subsequent  use  of  the  fertiliser-pesticides-irrigation  package,  better  seeds,  improved 
irrigation and education of farmers led to quantum jumps in the productivity. Consequently, 
production of wheat, rice and foodgrains grew at an average rate of 21.9 per cent, 10.3 per 
cent and 10.9 per cent, respectively, during the subsequent years 1967–1970. This may be 
attributed to significant rise in yield of wheat, rice and foodgrains which grew at an average 
rate  of  11.2  per  cent,  7.9  per  cent  and  8.1  per  cent,  respectively,  during  the  same  years. 
These  growth  rates  have  also  been  unprecedented.  High  growth  in  production  and  yield 
continued during the subsequent decades of 1970s and 1980s. Production of wheat, rice and 
foodgrains during 1970s–1980s grew at an average rate of 5.1 per cent, 4.0 per cent and 
3.3 per cent, respectively. The yields of wheat, rice and foodgrains grew at an average rate 
of 3.1 per cent for wheat and rice, and 2.9 per cent for foodgrains, respectively, during the 
same  period.  These  rates  of  growth  in  production  and  yield  were  much  higher  than  the 
average  annual  rate  of  growth  of  population  of  2.2  per  cent  during  the  same  period.  This 
enabled the country to achieve self-sufficiency in terms of wheat and rice (Table 1).  
 
The productivity of Indian agriculture, however, witnessed a fatigue with the average 
7. 
growth rate of production of wheat, rice and foodgrains during 1990–2010 coming down to 
2.6 per cent, 1.4 per cent and 1.6 per cent, respectively. This was due to stagnancy in yield 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of wheat, rice and foodgrains which grew at an average rate of 1.7 per cent, 1.2 per cent and 
1.6  per  cent,  respectively,  during  the  same  period.  Moreover,  the  average  growth  rate  of 
foodgrains  production  at  1.6  per  cent  during  1990–2010  trailed  the  average  population 
growth of 1.9 per cent (Table 1). As a result, the per capita net availability of foodgrains per 
day  came  down  from  510.1  grams  in  1991  to  444.0  grams  in  2009.  The  corresponding 
figures for pulses were 41.6 grams and 37.0 grams, respectively. 
8. 
Low yield per unit area across major crops has become a regular feature of Indian 
agriculture in recent years. This can be attributed to structural weaknesses of the agriculture 
sector reflected in low level of public investment, exhaustion of the yield potential of new high 
yielding varieties of wheat and rice, unbalanced fertiliser use, low seed replacement rate, an 
inadequate incentive system and post harvest value addition. Some of the other reasons that 
can be attributed to the low agricultural productivity in our country are (i) Lack of irrigation 
facilities in major part of the cultivated land; (ii) Small and fragmented land holding with the 
cultivators;  (iii)  Lack  of  timely  availability  of  quality  seeds,  fertilizers  for  providing  all  major 
and minor nutrients for the crops and insecticides in many parts of the country; (iv) Lesser 
availability of photo period as compared to countries like those in Mediterranean sea areas. 
9. 
Productivity of Indian agriculture is low as compared to the productivity at the global 
level.  Estimates  of  yield  of  rice  as  of  April  2011  in  India  was  3.2  tonnes  per  hectare  as 
against 7.5 tonnes per hectare in the United States, 6.7 tonnes per hectare in China and an 
average of 4.3 tonnes per hectare for the world (Chart 1). Similar contrast in yields have also 
been observed in case of wheat and coarse cereals though yield gaps as regard oilseeds 
were lesser i.e., 1.0 tonne per hectare, 2.7 tonnes per hectare and 2.1 tonnes per hectare for 
India, United States and China respectively. Even the most productive States in the country 
fall short of world standards in terms of yields of major crops. 
 
10. 
During  2010–11,  Punjab  with  the  highest  yield  in  rice  produced  3.8  tonnes  per 
hectare as against the world average of 4.3 tonnes per hectare. Yield of oilseeds in Tamil 
Nadu, the highest in India, at 2.1 tonnes per hectare was lower than 2.7 tonnes per hectare 
in  China  and  United  States.  However,  yield  of  wheat  at  4.5  tonnes  per  hectare  in  Punjab 
during 2010–11 is higher than that of the United States and the world average though it was 
marginally lower than 4.7 tonnes per hectare in China. Further, there exists a wide variation 
in productivity of these crops across States/regions in India (Charts 2–4). There is an urgent 
need  to  address  inter-regional,  inter-State  and  intra-State  disparities  in  agricultural 
productivity.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
There  is  also  a  need  to  emphasize  on  increasing  productivity  of  millets  such  as 
11. 
Jowar and Bajra. The productivity of other crops such as oilseeds, pulses, and horticulture 
also needs to be improved. Shortfall between demand and supply of key food items like milk 
and  eggs  is  likely  to  occur  which  needs  to  be  addressed.  According  to  National  Dairy 
Development Board (NDDB), India would need 180 million tonnes of milk by 2021–22. This 
would  effectively  mean  that  the  current  addition  to  annual  production  of  milk  which  is 
2.5 million  tonnes  at  present  must  be  doubled  to  5  million  tonnes  per  year  to  achieve  self 
sufficiency in 2021–22. Likewise, National Institute of Nutrition has recommended 11 kg of 
meat  and  180  eggs  per  capita  consumption  for  our  country,  whereas  the  per  capita 
availability of meat is just 1.6 kg and per capita availability of eggs is 42. As per the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan, demand-supply gap during 2009–10 with respect to oilseeds is estimated to 
be around 13.4 per cent in oilseeds, 18.7 per cent in pulses and 2.0 per cent in foodgrains. 
Estimates by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) show that in order to meet 
demand  requirements  of  food  items  like  oilseeds,  fish,  eggs  and  fruits  by  2020–21, 
production have  to  grow  at  an  annual  rate  of  6.0  per  cent,  3.5  per  cent,  3.4  per  cent  and 
2.9 per  cent,  respectively,  for  the  period  of  15  years  i.e.,  during  2006–07  to  2020–21 
(Table 2).  Therefore,  a  meaningful  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  productivity  of  all 
segments  of  agriculture  is  needed  for  effective  policy  intervention.  Also,  creation  of 
opportunities  and  efforts  to  shift  workforce  engaged  in  agriculture sector  to  agro-industries 
and agro-services to increase employment would have to be made. 
 
12. 
In  recent  years,  yields  of  crops  have  remained  low  and  there  has  been  a 
progressive hike in minimum support price (MSP) for wheat and rice. This may be seen as a 
continuation  of  policy  tilt  in  favour  of  price  intervention  as  against  non-price  intervention 
followed  in  the  post-reform  years.  This  has  ensured  sufficient  and  steady  procurement  of 
foodgrains which can cater to meet the demand of the public distribution system (PDS) and 
various  welfare  schemes  of  the  Government.  However,  for  various  reasons,  off-take  of 
foodgrains has not kept pace with procurement. 
13. 
Skewed incentives as regard rice and wheat have affected land use and cropping 
pattern with public procurement remaining concentrated in a few States. Currently in  most 
States, the MSP is a purely a notional price as far as farmers are concerned. Farmers know 
that they have an option to sell their produce at MSP but they have no access to Government 
granaries or take-in windows.  
14. 
Lower off-take, despite adoption of the Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) 
under  which  foodgrains  are  procured  and  distributed  by  the  State  itself  ,  combined  with 
higher procurement has resulted in large stocks of foodgrains, which are often higher than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the required buffer norms and food security reserves. In the past three decades, except for a 
few years, aggregate procurement of rice and wheat has been higher than their off-take. 
15. 
To sum up, Indian agricultural situation today, therefore, is a mix of declining yields, 
low  productivity,  inter  and  intra-state  and  regional  disparities,  skewed  incentives  and 
inappropriate  food  stock  management  in  the  backdrop  of  increasing  concerns  on  food 
security  and  food  price  volatility.  In  this  context,  a  frequent  refrain  is  that  credit  is  not 
available.  While  empirically  this  is  not  the  case,  let  me  ask  you  all  whether  credit  is  an 
important component of raising productivity? If yes, then do we know the direction of credit? 
Can credit alone solve all the problems of declining or low agricultural productivity and how, 
after  all,  do  we  improve  productivity?  I  would  like  to  focus  on  major  trends  in  agricultural 
credit and its role in improving productivity. 
Trends in agricultural finance 
16. 
In  India,  where  the  formal  financial  system  is  predominantly  bank-oriented,  banks 
play an important role in financing the needs of agricultural sector. With the aim of facilitating 
the timely and adequate credit flow to agriculture, the sector has been targeted as a part of 
the  priority  sector  lending  programme  introduced  after  nationalisation  of  banks  in  1969. 
Domestic commercial banks have been directed to allocate 18 per cent of net bank credit to 
agriculture  and  allied  activities.  The  directed  credit  programme  has  clearly  resulted  in  a 
significant increase in the amount of credit allocated to agriculture over the years (Table 3). 
Moreover, the Government of India also directed commercial banks, RRBs and cooperatives 
to double the flow of agricultural credit over a span of three years since 2004. Further, the 
scheme of interest rate subvention was introduced by the since 2006.  
 
17. 
Growth in agricultural credit and number of accounts, which was on a declining trend 
during  1990–2000  has  picked  up  in  early  2000s  and  continued  till  2006–07,  but  is  again 
showing a declining trend in the recent years (Chart 5). During the period of high growth in 
agricultural credit, the share of indirect credit was on an increase (Chart 6) but has remained 
stagnant  in  subsequent  years.  Moreover,  the  share  of  small  and  marginal  farmers  in  total 
credit,  which  was  at  about  27  per  cent  each,  stayed  unchanged  at  that  level  between  
2004–05 and 2006-07, even as agricultural credit growth was on a rise (Chart 7). This clearly 
meant that the benefits of doubling of agricultural credit to small and marginal farmers have 
been relatively less. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
It  has  also  been  observed  from  available  data  that  the  share  of  total  agricultural 
18. 
credit  supplied  through  rural  branches  has  seen  a  decline  from  55.5  per  cent  in  1990  to 
38.5 per  cent  in  2010  (Table  4).  The  contribution  of  urban  and  metropolitan  branches  to 
agricultural  credit  has  increased  from  14.9  per  cent  to  33.7  per  cent  during  this  period, 
indicating that credit disbursement is mainly through non-rural branches. The available data 
raises questions about the segments to which the credit is actually flowing and whether it is 
reaching the intended beneficiaries.  
Table 4: 
 Non-availability of relevant MIS 
19. 
The  analysis  of  flow  of  agricultural  credit  and  its  impact  on  productivity  is 
constrained  by  the  absence  of  granular  data  other  than  total,  direct  and  indirect  credit. 
Further,  there  is  limited  data  on  agricultural  credit  to  various  crops,  horticulture  and  allied 
activities  even  on  a  consolidated  basis.  The  dearth  in  the  availability  of  granular  and 
disaggregated data greatly hampers policy making. For instance, banking system at present 
does  not  capture  data  on  finance  to  agriculture  sector  other  than  total  credit,  direct  and 
indirect  credit.  There  is  also  great  confusion  among  banks  in  the  figures  relating  to  credit 
disbursed  and  credit  outstanding.  The  number  of  beneficiary  accounts  is  not  under  focus. 
There is no systematic segmentation of data among Scheduled Commercial Banks/ Regional 
Rural Banks/State Co-operative Banks/District Central Cooperative Banks. 
This  brings  me  to  my  last  section  on  what  are  the  challenges  in  improving 
Recommendations for improving agricultural productivity  
20. 
productivity and in what way these challenges can be overcome.  
21. 
The major challenge in this regard is that nearly 80 per cent of the land holdings in 
India  are  below  2  hectares  in  size.  Unless  factor  productivity  is  increased,  small  farm 
agriculture will become un-remunerative. However, the smaller the farm, the greater is the 
need  for  marketable  surplus  in  order  to  get  cash  income.  Therefore,  improving  small  farm 
productivity,  as  a  single  development  strategy,  can  make  the  greatest  contribution  to  the 
elimination of hunger and poverty. The wide differential in productivity across States and the 
fact  that  agriculture  is  a  State  subject  itself  poses  a  challenge.  Slow  rate  of  infrastructural 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
development hampers physical connectivity, marketing and information dissemination across 
all regions uniformly which acts as a bottleneck in improving productivity.  
22. 
this Seminar: 
Hence, the following suggestions/approach may be deliberated by the participants of 
       Credit is no doubt an important element in agricultural production but is surely not 
the only indispensable input. In fact, there is a need for credit to be explicitly linked 
to  other  supportive  inputs  and  activities  in  farming  that  eventually  facilitate  value 
creation and higher incomes for farmers. More importantly, a number of other allied 
activities  and  related  services  such  as  technology,  soil  conservation,  irrigation, 
storage and marketing etc, can be supported by credit with great advantage. These 
measures would also help in reducing costs of production. 
Pricing of credit needs to be market-based to ensure effective flow of credit to all 
sections of the agricultural community. Emphasis has to shift from subsidized credit 
to  timely  and  adequate  credit  at  reasonable  cost  especially  where  credit  delivery 
system is very weak and complex. 
It is also important to carefully monitor the usage of credit right from the input to the 
output stage so as to ensure proper utilization. Monitoring of credit should not only 
be  limited  to  crops  but  also  to  related  activities  that  are  funded  by  financial 
institutions like NABARD.  
Productivity  improvement  through  efficient  deployment  of  investible  resources  in 
agriculture is the key to ensuring food security. It is possible to improve productivity 
through a multi- pronged approach without increasing the intensity of resource use 
by leveraging on improved management of agricultural practices or agronomy, soil 
conservation,  extension  services,  storage  and  marketing  facilities,  technology 
transfer,  updating 
in 
a framework of public-private partnership by engaging farmers, NGOs and industrial 
(FICCI,  CII  etc.  )  and  other  stake  holding  institutions  and  associations.  This 
framework can be modeled in the shape of a multi- purpose cooperative structure 
which  should  aim  at  project  based  approach  to  ensure  focus  on  the  ultimate 
objective of improving productivity and welfare of both farmers and consumers. 
technology  and 
farmers  of 
techniques 
farming 
latest 
The  delivery  of  credit  by  co-operative  sector  need  to  be  improved  and  NABARD 
should  play  a  key  role  in  converging  credit  services  with  other  requirements  that 
support agriculture and allied activities including updating the farmers which help in 
facilitating  completion  of  production  cycles  and  ultimate  value  creation.  Although, 
schemes  such  as  Kisan  Credit  Cards  have  helped  in  improving  credit  linkage  to 
farmers but we need to urgently look into ways to increase the supply of agricultural 
credit especially to small and marginal farmers.  
Strengthening of cooperatives not only from the credit delivery angle but also from 
the skill enhancement and knowledge angle - technology thus needs to be brought 
in through an integrated and cluster approach. In my opinion, Primary Agricultural 
Co-operative  Societies  (PACS)  are  the  best  vehicle  for  rural  credit  disbursement. 
So, linking of co-operative sector with commercial banks may be an option where 
the co-operative banks are weak. 
Credit needs can be fulfilled in regions where creditworthy producers can get credit 
due  to  the  advantage  of  pre-existing  infrastructural  facilities  such  as  functioning 
supply chains and marketing networks. After enhancing credit flow to these regions, 
the next logical step would be to build on this experience to take credit to all other 
regions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
    There  is  a  need  to  strengthen  micro-insurance,  particularly  for  small  farmers  to 
adequately weather vagaries of nature, which affect these farmers more adversely. 
An institutional mechanism to take care of marketing and storage risk is needed. 
As  emphasized  earlier,  lack  of  granular  data  on  credit  availed  or  demanded  as  a 
constraint for effective policy making. In this respect the need for a holistic MIS can 
be hardly overemphasized. The MIS of banks, RBI, NABARD, financial institutions, 
State and Central Governments has to be revamped. 
In the recent years, we have witnessed declining yields which is worrisome from the 
standpoint of achieving food security. It is, therefore, necessary to promote modern 
scale  neutral  agricultural  technologies  with  greater  emphasis  on  bank  credit  to 
agriculture as a tool to improve productivity.  
there  should  be  renewed  emphasis  on 
indigenous  research  and 
Finally, 
development  on 
farming,  rainwater  harvesting  and 
sustainable water use, high yielding seed varieties with pest and drought resistant 
traits. In this regard, the role of agriculture research institutions and related support 
agencies cannot be lost sight of. 
for  dry-land 
technology 
Conclusion 
23. 
This  is  not  an  exhaustive  list.  However,  I  feel  that  instead  of  lamenting  that 
productivity has been low, we must look at the past to the Green Revolution in the 1960s to 
draw confidence that productivity can be improved. We need to find ways to surmount the 
existing constraints and step up productivity using finance as a tool. The Green Revolution 
paved the way for food security in India. No major technological breakthrough has emerged 
since  then, and  with  the  need  for  higher  production  growing,  a  second  green  revolution  is 
inevitable.  In  fact,  to  borrow  a  term  coined  by  Prof  Swaminathan,  we  need  an  evergreen 
revolution. However, to cater to the food security and food safety net, India needs a higher 
production along with enhanced productivity in cereals, pulses, oilseeds, vegetables, poultry, 
meat, fish and milk. I am sure the Seminar would be very useful in generating new ways and 
means to do so. To achieve this goal, India needs to invest more in agriculture and allied 
sectors. I wish the deliberations of the Seminar a success and hope that an actionable plan 
would emerge out of it and the participants would take it upon themselves to implement it in 
their  respective  organizations  so  that  regional  and  inter  and  intra-State  disparities  can  be 
narrowed down and we can effectively contribute to increasing agricultural productivity in our 
country. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
