Caleb M Fundanga: Improving the savings culture of Zambians 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official launch of 
CETZAM’s “Tusunge” Savings Product, Lusaka, 8 July 2011. 
 The Board Chairperson of CETZAM Financial Services Limited, Mr Frederick Nduna; 
Members of the Board of CETZAM Financial Services Limited; 
The Chief Executive Officer of CETZAM Financial Services, Mr Dyson Mandivenga; 
Chief Executive Officers and Representatives of various organisations present; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  Board  of  Directors  and  Management  of  CETZAM  Financial 
Services Limited (CETZAM) for inviting me to this occasion, which marks the official launch 
of the “Tusunge” Savings Product. May I commend the  Management  of CETZAM for their 
foresight  in  developing  this  new  savings  product,  which  will  go  a  long  way  towards 
inculcating a savings culture and enhancing financial inclusion within our financial sector.  
As  a  financial  sector  regulator,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  is  pleased  to  be  associated  with  the 
achievements of the institutions we regulate, particularly where these developments lead to 
increased access to financial services for the Zambian public. This is what CETZAM is doing 
this morning. CETZAM’s focus to introduce innovative products is adequate testimony of its 
commitment to serve the financial needs of the Zambian people.  
I  am  informed  that  one  of  the  key  objectives  of  CETZAM  Financial  Services  Limited  is  to 
provide  sustainable  microfinance  services  to  the  economically  disadvantaged  citizens  of 
Zambia. In so doing it targets the entrepreneurial poor, the majority of whom are women. I 
also know that CETZAM was licensed by the Bank of Zambia as a deposit-taking MFI on the 
3rd of October 2008. Today, CETZAM has 5 branches in Lusaka, Livingstone, Ndola, Kitwe 
and  Chingola  while  9  satellite  offices  have  been  set  up  in  the  provinces  to  serve  its  rural 
clients.  
Mr.  Chairman,  The  Bank  of  Zambia  is  particularly  encouraged  by  CETZAM’s  role  as  an 
active lender to the Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) sector, which is a growth sector in 
Zambia’s  economy.  It  is  also  gratifying  to  note  that  the  company  currently  has  about 
8,000 active clients with a repayment rate of over 90%. 
Distinguished  invited  guests,  an  important  element  for  financial  service  providers  is  to 
endeavour to keep their customers satisfied by offering superior but affordable products and 
delivering excellent service. The ability to offer diverse products appealing to a wider range 
of clients leads to enhanced access to financial services. The Bank of Zambia is determined 
to  facilitate  the  introduction  of  new  and  innovative  financial  products,  to  tap  savings  and 
facilitate the interface between savings and investment. The Bank of Zambia will, therefore, 
continue  to work  in  close  collaboration  with  the  financial sector  to  cultivate  partnerships  in 
order to establish the framework necessary for building strong institutions that will mitigate 
risks and build confidence in the sector.  
Mr. Chairman, as you are aware, Zambia’s economy has continued to grow underpinned by 
growth  in  various  sectors  including  Agriculture  which  has  recorded  significant  increase  in 
output of maize in 2009 and 2010. It is also worth noting that a large portion of the Zambian 
population  depends  on  agriculture  for  its  livelihood,  yet  lending  to  agriculture  has  been 
limited. The challenge, therefore, is to devise financial products that meet the requirements 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of the rural and pre-dominantly agricultural areas while at the same time devising means of 
“ring fencing” the financial institutions from risks associated with agricultural lending.  
However,  I  am  pleased  that  the  improved  performance  in  the  agricultural  as  well  as  other 
sectors  of  the  economy  is  expected  to  continue,  which  will  invariably  translate  into  higher 
incomes in Zambia. Potentially, the scope for savings both in the formal and informal sectors 
is expected to improve; hence, products such as the one CETZAM is launching today are 
likely to capture this potential.  
Furthermore,  I  am  reliably  informed  that  the  “Tusunge”  Savings  Product  offers  a  cheaper 
option  of  funding  for  CETZAM  which  undoubtedly  should  trigger  a  reduction  in  the  cost  of 
credit.  The  product  has  a  minimum  deposit  balance  of  K20,000,  unlimited  withdrawals,  no 
withdrawal charges and an interest rate of 6 percent per annum. The product is specifically 
targeted  at  the  informal  sector  and  SMEs.  People  in  the  informal  sector  and  SMEs  who 
hitherto were unable to open savings accounts with banks due to high minimum deposits and 
service charges should find the “Tusunge” Savings Product attractive.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, in the face of an ever growing fear of donor fatigue, public deposits 
and private capital are likely to be the main source of funding for the microfinance industry to 
achieve the growth required for it to have significant impact on financial inclusion and poverty 
reduction across the region.  
Notwithstanding this, allow me now to reflect on some of the key challenges in the financial 
sector that all of us must strive to address:  
(i) 
Increasing access to financial services by the SME’s who form the backbone of the 
economy.  This  sector  provides  employment  for  many  people  who  cannot  be 
absorbed into formal employment. However, increased access to financial services 
remains a key challenge to this segment.  
Although  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  licensed  25  Microfinance  Institutions,  most  of 
them  operate  along  the  line  of  rail  providing  mainly  salary-backed  loans.  There  is 
need  for  microfinance  institutions  to  support  production  by  providing  finance  to 
agriculture  and  manufacturing  instead  of  merely  providing  consumption  related 
salary backed loans.  
There is need for all microfinance institutions to utilise the credit reference bureau at 
all times. A robust credit reporting apparatus will enable the financial sector to share 
critical customer information that will lead to lowering the credit risk and ultimately 
lending rates in the financial sector.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  reiterate  the  Bank  of  Zambia’s  concerns  with  regard  to  high 
lending  rates  being  charged  by  financial  institutions,  especially  Microfinance  Institutions, 
which  are  inhibiting  the  expansion  of  credit.  I  acknowledge  that  some  financial  institutions 
have begun to lower their interest rates but I am certain that there is room to do more. The 
continued  lowering  of  lending  rates  by  Microfinance  Institutions  will  not  only  stimulate  our 
economy but also reduce non-performing loans in the industry as low lending rates reduce 
the risk of default.  
I am informed that CETZAM’s interest rates range from 48% to 72% per annum. I have also 
been informed that CETZAM introduced an agricultural loan product for rural areas and last 
year  lowered  the  interest  rate  from  60%  to  48%  per  annum.  It  is  my  sincere  hope  that 
CETZAM will further reduce lending interest rates to these clients that they are targeting for 
savings deposits.  
The  Bank  of  Zambia  undertakes  to  continue  pursuing  policies  that  will  drive  financial 
innovation,  build  strong  financial  institutions  and  partnerships  to  ensure  a  stable  financial 
sector  in  the  country.  It  goes  without  saying  that  strong  financial  institutions  can  weather 
shocks more easily and thus contribute to Zambia’s economic growth.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to take this opportunity to once again congratulate 
and commend the Management of CETZAM for introducing this new savings product, which 
is expected to improve the savings culture of the ordinary Zambians in the community. I am 
hopeful it will be a successful product.  
With  these  remarks,  it  is  now  my  singular  honour  and  privilege  to  declare  CETZAM’s 
“Tusunge” Savings Product officially launched.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
