Charles I Plosser: The US economic outlook and the normalization of 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  Society  of  Business  Economists  Annual  Conference, 
London, England, 9 June 2011. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
Good  morning.  Thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  speak  before  your  Society.  As  business 
economists,  you  are  well  aware  of  the  extraordinary  economic  times  in  which  we  live.  A 
financial crisis and arguably the worst global recession of the post-war era have challenged 
policymakers  in  the  U.S.  and  abroad.  In  many  nations,  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities 
undertook  extraordinary  actions  to  mitigate  the  damage,  and  for  most  of  the  hardest  hit 
countries, the recession trough has passed and a moderate recovery is underway. Yet the 
actions taken leave a legacy of huge government budget deficits, short-term interest rates at 
record lows, and central bank balance sheets of unprecedented magnitudes. 
Even as our economies recover, policymakers face some daunting challenges as we try to 
unwind  these  extraordinary  actions  and  rebuild  confidence  and  credibility  in  our  monetary 
policy frameworks. Today I would like to discuss my outlook for the U.S. economy and some 
thoughts about ways to begin the normalization of U.S. monetary policy. I believe there are 
several steps the Federal Reserve can take to ensure a successful exit from this period of 
extraordinary accommodation, including taking a page out of the Bank of England’s book by 
announcing  an  explicit  numerical  goal  for  inflation.  As  always,  my  remarks  reflect  my  own 
views  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  or  my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Economic outlook  
Let me begin with an update on the U.S. economy. We are nearly two years into a moderate, 
sustained  recovery  from  financial  crisis  and  the  worst  economic  downturn  since  the  Great 
Depression.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year,  the  level  of  real  GDP  finally  passed  its  pre-
recession  peak,  but  it  did  so  with  some  7½  million  fewer  workers,  a  reflection  of  strong 
productivity growth. 
This year’s first-quarter GDP growth, at just below 2 percent, was somewhat disappointing. 
But I believe that this weakness will likely prove to be a temporary soft patch and that the 
underlying fundamentals remain in place for the economy to resume growing at a moderate 
pace  in  the  second  half  of  this  year,  and  to  strengthen  a  bit  more  next  year.  Such  soft 
patches are not that uncommon. Indeed, last year we experienced just such a bump in the 
road.  Yet,  after  what  I  described  as  the  summer  doldrums,  the  economy  picked  up 
momentum to give us just under 3 percent growth for the full year. 
I  think  the  slower  growth  in  the  early  part  of  this  year  has  similarly  been  influenced  by  a 
number  of  temporary  factors.  In  particular,  severe  weather,  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
aftermath of the disaster in Japan, political events in the Middle East and North Africa, and 
higher  food  and  energy  prices,  all  have  weighed  on  growth.  Oil  and  commodity  price 
increases  and  supply  chain  disruptions  from  the  devastation  in  Japan  may  have  some 
carryover  into  the  second  quarter,  but  I  believe  any  loss  of  momentum  is  likely  to  be 
transitory. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Of course, the drama being played out in Congress over debt and spending has provided yet 
another  source  of  uncertainty  for  the  economy.  Progress  in  that  arena  would  undoubtedly 
improve  confidence  going  forward  and  reduce  uncertainty.  Monetary  policy  cannot  and 
should not be viewed as a substitute for sound fiscal policies. As I have argued many times 
in the past, monetary policy is not the silver bullet that many would like to think it is. It cannot 
solve all of our economic ills, and attempting to do so can be quite dangerous for economic 
stability.1 
I anticipate moderate but above-trend growth of around 3 to 3½ percent for the remainder of 
this  year  and  next.  The  overall  strength  in  some  sectors  will  more  than  offset  persistent 
weaknesses  in  others,  so  that  the  recovery  will  be  sustained  and  more  broad-based  as  it 
continues. Improvement in household balance sheets and better labor market conditions will 
support  moderate  growth  in  consumer  spending.  Solid  growth  in  corporate  earnings  will 
support  continued  healthy  advances  in  business  spending  on  equipment  and  software. 
Housing,  however,  will  likely  remain  a  weak  spot  in  the  U.S.  economy,  with  flat  to  slightly 
falling prices and little new construction. 
Outside  of  recent  supply  disruptions  in  the  auto  industry,  I  anticipate  that  growth  in 
manufacturing will remain a source for optimism. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook 
Survey  of  manufacturers  has  proven  over  the  years  to  be  a  useful  barometer  of  national 
trends in manufacturing. In April and May, the measures of current activity saw some pull-
back from the very high numbers of February and March, but the numbers show that activity 
in the manufacturing sector continues to expand. Moreover, the survey’s indicators of future 
activity,  a  measure  of  firms’  expectations  for  activity  six  months  from  now,  also  signal 
continued expansion. 
Consumer  spending,  which  makes  up  about  70  percent  of  GDP  in  the  U.S.,  is  also 
increasing. Like GDP, real consumption has surpassed its previous peak and appears to be 
growing at a moderate pace. Households continue to pay down debt and rebuild some of the 
net worth that was destroyed during the recession. Higher energy and food prices have been 
a drag on recent consumer spending. But more important than gas prices for the health of 
the economy and the strength of consumer spending is job growth. So let me turn to labor 
markets. 
Labor markets  
Overall, conditions in the labor markets continue to gradually improve. But the path has not 
been a smooth one nor has it been as robust as one might like. In May, nonfarm payrolls 
expanded by 54,000 jobs, after growing by 232,000 jobs in April and 194,000 in March. The 
U.S. economy has added over 780,000 jobs since the first of the year. The private sector has 
managed to increase payrolls by more than 900,000, but government employment has been 
shrinking, thus dragging net hiring down below 800,000. May’s uptick in the unemployment 
rate to 9.1 percent was a bit disappointing, but even with that, the unemployment rate has 
fallen by 0.7 percent since last November. 
Despite  these  modest  improvements  in  labor  market  conditions,  millions  of  Americans 
remain  unemployed.  So  we  have  a  long  way  to  go.  But  as  the  economy  strengthens  this 
year, I expect that businesses will continue to add to their payrolls. With continued growth in 
employment, I expect to see modest declines in the unemployment rate, to about 8½ percent 
by the end of this year, and then to a range of 7 to 7½ percent by the end of 2012. 
                                                 
1   See  Charles  Plosser,  “The  Scope  and  Responsibilities  of  Monetary  Policy,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Philadelphia Annual Report 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Inflation 
Inflation  has  risen  in  recent  months  as  the  prices  of  energy  and  other  commodities  have 
surged.  These  prices  have  been  extremely  volatile  of  late,  and  despite  some  recent 
retrenchment, they remain considerably above their levels of just over six months ago, when 
the Fed embarked on its plan to purchase $600 billion of long-term U.S. Treasuries. While 
headline  inflation  has  risen  markedly,  there  has  been  less  of  an  increase  in  the  so-called 
core  measures  of  inflation,  which  exclude  food  and  energy  prices,  but  even  they  are  up 
noticeably over the same period. 
There are signs that firms are becoming better able to pass along some of their increased 
costs  to  their  customers.  For  example,  in  response  to  a  special  question  in  our  Business 
Outlook  Survey  in  February,  over  56  percent  of  manufacturers  said  they  had  already  put 
through  price  increases.  Nearly  60  percent  of  all  respondents  said  they  had  planned  to 
increase prices over the next three months. Our survey’s prices paid index, an indicator of 
firms’ input costs, has been at high levels for the past six months. And the prices received 
index, an indicator of the prices that firms are charging their customers, turned positive last 
fall and continues to suggest that firms are likely to be testing their pricing power. In the May 
survey, 20 percent reported higher prices for their own goods, while just 3 percent reported 
price reductions. As commodity prices stabilize, headline inflation should come back down. 
However, I see the inflation risks in the U.S. as being clearly to the upside. 
In an environment with very accommodative monetary policy, a key to keeping commodity 
price increases from passing through to other goods and services and creating more general 
inflation is to ensure that longer-run inflation expectations stay anchored. So far, that seems 
to be mostly the case. But, of course, expectations are well-anchored until they are not. So it 
is somewhat troubling to me that expectations of inflation in the medium to longer term are 
moving up and down as much as they are. It suggests that the public and the markets may 
not have as much confidence in the Fed’s ability, or willingness, to deliver on its price stability 
mandate. 
When  we  think  about  oil  prices  and  inflation,  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  inflation  is  a 
monetary phenomenon. In looking back to the Great Inflation of the 1970s, we learned it was 
not high oil prices per se, but easy monetary policy in response to high oil prices that caused 
the rise in general inflation. Accommodative monetary policy allowed the large increase in oil 
prices  to  be  passed  along  in  the  form  of  a  general  increase  in  prices.  As  that  happened, 
people and firms began to expect higher inflation – they lost confidence that the central bank 
would keep inflation in check – and those expectations influenced their decisions, making it 
that much harder to reverse the rising tide of inflation. 
Thus, a key lesson from the 1970s is that the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to 
maintaining price stability must be preserved. Once that credibility is lost, it is very difficult to 
regain, and economic outcomes are worse as a result. My colleagues and I on the FOMC are 
committed to ensuring that does not happen again. Yet we must be willing to do more than 
just talk about our commitment. We must be willing act – that is, undertake the necessary 
and difficult policies to ensure that medium- to longer-run inflation expectations remain stable 
and our credibility remains intact. This includes taking the right actions at the right time to exit 
the extreme accommodative policy that is now in place. 
Normalization of monetary policy 
During the last three years, the Federal Reserve, like many other central banks around the 
world,  has  taken  extraordinary  actions  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  and 
support  the  return  of  economic  growth.  Our  traditional  instrument  of  monetary  policy,  the 
federal funds rate, has been near zero for about two and a half years. The Fed’s balance 
sheet  has  grown  more  than  threefold,  from  nearly  $900  billion  before  the  crisis  to  about 
$2.7 trillion  today,  and  its  asset  composition  has  shifted  significantly  from  mostly  short-  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
medium-term Treasuries to longer-term Treasuries, mortgage-backed securities (MBS), and 
agency debt. As our economy recovers, we must normalize our monetary policy framework.  
Some  people  have  questioned  whether  the  Federal  Reserve  has  the  tools  to  exit  from  its 
extraordinary positions. We do. But the question for the Fed and other central bankers is not 
can  we  do  it,  but  will  we  do  it  at  the  right  time  and  at  the  right  pace.  How  central  banks 
manage the exit from such extraordinary policies will be the key to preserving our credibility 
and the public’s confidence in our institutions. Our success in coping with this challenge will 
be at least as difficult and perhaps as important for our future economic well-being as our 
actions during the crisis. 
Of course, the exact way policy is normalized will vary from central bank to central bank. I will 
focus my discussion on the U.S. and the elements that I believe will be critical for the Fed. 
Yet  the  principles  that  guide  my  thinking  on  these  matters  are  important  and  apply  more 
broadly  to  a  range  of  policy  discussions.  I  want  to  stress  three  key  elements  to  the 
normalization effort. The first is clearly defining what we mean by normalization of our policy 
framework. The second is developing a systematic and credible plan for how policy will be 
conducted  to  achieve  this  normalization.  The  third  is  effectively  communicating  to  the 
markets  and  the  public  about  our  intended  policy  framework  and  our  plan  to  get  there.  I 
believe, as part of its communications, the Federal Reserve would do well to adopt an explicit 
numerical inflation goal, just as the Bank of England and many other central banks do. This 
type of clarity will reduce uncertainty and limit discretion that may lead to greater instability. 
Let me discuss each of these three elements of exit. For the U.S., I believe normalization 
should  be  a  return  to  a  framework  in  which  the  federal  funds  rate  is  the  FOMC’s  primary 
policy  instrument  and  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  is  composed  predominantly  of  short-  to 
medium-term Treasury securities, as it was before the crisis. This means the Fed will need to 
sell assets from its balance sheet and shrink the volume of excess reserves to a level that 
allows  the  federal  funds  rate  to  trade  above  the  interest  rate  the  Fed  pays  on  excess 
reserves  and  below  the  Fed’s  primary  credit  rate,  the  lending  rate  the  Fed  charges  for 
discount window loans. This framework is generally referred to as a corridor system and is 
fairly common among central banks around the world, including the Bank of England and the 
ECB.  
As I mentioned, the Fed’s balance sheet is currently three times larger than it was before the 
crisis  and  is  composed  of  longer-term  Treasuries  and  longer-term  mortgage-backed 
securities and housing agency debt. Normalization will require returning the composition of 
the  Fed’s  portfolio  to  predominantly  Treasuries  with  a  significantly  shorter  duration.  In  my 
view, the central bank should not be in the business of allocating credit to specific sectors of 
the economy, such as housing. That credit allocation should rest with the markets and the 
fiscal authorities should they choose to intervene, not the central bank. By mingling monetary 
and fiscal policies, the Federal Reserve puts at risk the independence of its monetary policy 
and therefore the desirable economic outcomes it is capable of delivering. 
We should make it clear to the public that normalization of monetary policy will mean a return 
to the federal funds rate as our primary policy instrument and that means a much smaller 
balance sheet, dominated by Treasury securities. 
Policymakers  should  also  develop  and  articulate  a  coherent  and  credible  plan  for 
normalization.  In  late  March,  I  proposed  a  systematic,  rule-based  approach  that  would 
involve the Fed’s selling assets from its portfolio as it increased its policy rate, with the pace 
of sales dependent on the state of the economy. The plan would get us back to a normal 
operating environment in a timely manner, with the Fed’s balance sheet reduced to a size 
that  would  again  allow  the  federal  funds  rate  to  be  the  primary  policy  instrument.  An 
alternative plan might be to set the balance sheet on something like a pre-determined glide 
path that would shrink the balance sheet steadily over time. In general, changes to the path 
would face a high threshold. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Perhaps more important than the details of any approach to exit is the very establishment – 
and communication – of a systematic plan to do so. Of course, monetary policy will always 
be dependent on the evolution of the economy, but the more we can articulate how we will 
conduct  policy  during  the  transition  to  a  more  normal  policy  framework,  the  more  we  will 
reduce uncertainty and contribute to stability. 
Indeed, transparency is always an important ingredient in sound monetary policymaking, but 
as we exit from the period of extraordinary policy, it is even more important. Given the large 
amount of liquidity present in the U.S. banking system, it is reasonable for the public to be 
concerned about inflation. As we normalize the policy framework, we, as policymakers, need 
to do all we can to ensure that the public’s expectations of inflation remain stable. 
The majority of monetary economists and central banks, including the Bank of England, now 
consider some form of inflation targeting a best practice. It is time for the Fed to adopt this 
practice, as I have advocated for nearly 20 years. 
Some  argue  that  because  the  Federal  Reserve  does  not  have  a  single  mandate  for  price 
stability as other central banks do, it should not set an explicit inflation objective. I disagree. 
The U.S. Congress set the Fed’s mandate to conduct monetary policy to “promote effectively 
the  goals  of  maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.” 
Adopting  an  inflation  objective  does  not  mean  controlling  inflation  at  the  expense  of 
economic stability. On the contrary, most economists, myself included, agree that focusing 
on  price  stability  is  the  most  effective  way  for  monetary  policy  to  promote  all  parts  of  its 
mandate. 
Moreover,  committing  to  a  stated  goal  to  keep inflation  low  and  stable can  help  to reduce 
market uncertainty and enhance the credibility and accountability of our central bank. During 
the  transition  from  a  very  accommodative  policy  stance  to  a  more  normal  operating 
environment,  it  is  especially  important  that  the  public  have  confidence  in  the  Fed’s 
commitment to do so in a manner that does not let inflation accelerate. Thus, in my view, this 
would be an opportune time for the Fed to commit to an explicit numerical inflation objective. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  just  within  the  last  year  or  so,  the  public  discussion  in  the  U.S.  has 
swung  from  concerns  that  the  U.S.  might  face  a  period  of  sustained deflation  to  concerns 
that monetary policy and rising commodity prices could produce higher-than-desired inflation. 
These  swings  in  public  concern  indicate  how  much  uncertainty  there  is  in  the  lookout  for 
inflation. We should seek to ensure that this does not translate into a lack of confidence in 
the Fed to maintain price stability. As we work to exit from this period of extreme monetary 
accommodation  in  a  way  that  neither  leads  to  higher  inflation  nor  risks  undermining  the 
recovery, the public’s confidence in the Fed’s commitment to price stability will be crucial. For 
this reason, it would be highly desirable for the Federal Reserve to publicly commit to a clear 
and explicit inflation objective. While an inflation target is not a panacea for all the challenges 
facing monetary policymakers, it is an important element in a credible program for monetary 
and economic stability. 
Conclusion 
In summary, my forecast is for the economy to continue to expand at a moderate pace and 
for inflation to move back down from its current level as oil prices stabilize. Despite weakness 
in the first quarter, I expect annual growth to be 3 to 3½ percent over the remainder of this 
year  and  next.  As  the  economy  strengthens,  prospects  for  labor  markets  will  continue  to 
improve, with the unemployment rate descending to between 7 to 7½ percent by the end of 
2012. 
As  the  economy  evolves,  the Federal Reserve remains committed to its long-run statutory 
goals  of  price  stability  and  maximum  employment.  We  must  carefully  watch  for  signals  of 
inflation and altered expectations to ensure that monetary policy stays ahead of the curve. As 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
we  move  forward  in  this  time  of  change,  clear  communications  regarding  our  actions  and 
objectives will be of the utmost importance. 
I  believe  we  can  be  most  successful  in  exiting  from  this  period  of  extraordinary 
accommodation  and  nontraditional  policies  if  we  communicate  a  systematic  plan  that 
describes  where  we  are  headed  and  how  we  will  get  there.  Such  a  plan  would  be 
strengthened if the FOMC adopted an explicit numerical objective for inflation, which would 
help ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
