Subir Gokarn: Financial stability 
Welcome remarks by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Kumarakom, Kerala, 10 June 2011. 
 Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  distinguished  Governors,  Dr.  Reddy,  Mr.  Caruana,  Mr.  Ninan, 
Mrs. Thorat,  Deputy  Governors,  our  guests  from  SAARC  central  banks  and  friends.  On 
behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  I  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  you  all  to  the 
SAARCFINANCE  Governor’s Symposium 2011 on the theme of Financial Stability. Just to 
refresh  your  memories,  the  last  Governors  Symposium  organized  by  us  under  Dr.  Reddy 
was  in  2005  at  Mumbai  which  dealt  with  the  theme  of  “Communications  Policy  of  Central 
Banks”. 
Financial Stability is indeed a most appropriate theme for this meeting. The recent financial 
crisis  also  termed  as  “the  great  recession”  clearly  brought  financial  stability  to  the 
centrestage of public policymaking. The global financial crisis that swept the economic and 
financial systems across the world during the last three years has shaken our beliefs in some 
near truths. 
One,  it  has  questioned  the  premise  that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  are 
complementary. Rather financial stability can be jeopardized even in an environment of price 
stability and macroeconomic stability. 
Two,  it  is  now  impossible  to  imagine  of  sustained  growth  without  financial  stability.  Any 
disruption in the financial system anywhere in the world has the potential of affecting the real 
economy not only in that country but also elsewhere. We have seen that domestic and global 
financial stability are not mutually exclusive domains. With increasing financial globalization, 
there  was  a  growing  realisation  about  this,  but  the  extent  of  transmission  of  disruptions 
during  the  recent  financial  turmoil  through  different  channels,  namely  finance,  trade  and 
confidence  channel  was  unthinkable  before  the  crisis.  It  also  came  as  an  unpleasant 
revelation that even those countries which had not contributed to the immediate causes of 
the  crisis  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  an  unwholesome  international  financial  climate.  Hence, 
domestic  financial  stability  cannot  become  a  realistic  goal  in  the  absence  of  a  conducive 
global environment. 
Three, the two-speed recovery, accompanied by a widening of global economic imbalances 
is  at  the  centre  of  a  new  configuration  of  risks.  These  are  visible  on  a  variety  of  
fronts – sovereign debt risks, financial fragility, the search for yield, and related stresses in 
emerging-market  economies  and 
the  current 
environment, financial stability has to be viewed not only in terms of lessons from the crisis, 
but also in terms of the future risks and challenges. 
There  is,  thus,  a  clear  recognition  of  the  importance  of  financial  stability  policy.  However, 
several  questions  have  arisen,  to which  we  still  do  not  have  answers.  We  may  attempt  to 
address at least a few of them. I would like to highlight the prominent ones. 
First, as increasing number of central banks start including financial stability in their policy 
mandates  along  with  price  stability,  we  need  to  consider  whether  financial  stability  has  to 
shift from being an implicit variable to an explicit variable of the economic policy. As a recent 
IMF survey (December 2010) pointed out, although financial stability is a formal mandate in 
most of the countries, the definition of financial stability is informal in almost 80 per cent of 
the respondents. If financial stability is to be made an explicit objective for central banks, the 
search  for  an  operational  definition  and  measurment  of  financial  stability  come  to  the 
forefront.  
foreign  exchange  markets.  Hence, 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In this context, it is important to recognise that financial stability, difficult enough to define, is 
even more difficult to measure. Though theoretically one would prefer composite indicators of 
financial stability (threshold or benchmark values) over individual variables as indicators of 
financial system stability, in practical terms, assessments of financial stability revolve around 
monitoring  several  indicators  conveying  about  the  health  of  the  institutions,  markets  and 
infrastructure. Considering that the construction of a single aggregate measure of financial 
stability is a difficult task given the complex nature of financial systems, it would be useful to 
have an appropriate template and methodology for the key indicators. 
As an initial step, the IMF in December 2010 conducted a stock-taking survey of international 
experiences  with  financial  stability  and  the  evolving  macroprudential  policy  framework 
covering 63 countries and European Central Bank which also include all the G20 countries 
and those subject to mandatory Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). 
Second, the appropriate role of the central banks in maintaining financial stability and their 
relationship with other relevant bodies has intensified as new arrangements are being put in 
place in several countries and being planned in others. Under the reformed financial stability 
framework, the allocation of responsibilities with respect to financial stability and instruments 
to manage stability are still being rigorously debated worldwide. 
Third, the financial stability mandate for central banks may have implications for monetary 
policy  as  well.  Although  a  predominant  focus  on  price  stability  may  have  yielded  low  and 
stable  inflation  in  terms  of  prices  of  goods  and  services,  the  lowering  of  returns  in  the 
commodity/service  producing  sectors  could  have  diverted  the  search  for  yields  to  the 
financial sector. This has called into question the pre-crisis consensus on the best practice in 
monetary policy framework as the one characterised by “a single target” (i.e., price stability) 
and “a single instrument” (i.e., short-term policy interest rate). The financial stability mandate 
and  governance  arrangements  for  central  banks  must  be  compatible  with  their  monetary 
policy responsibilities. 
Fourth, as it is being widely recognised that analysis through a micro-prudential lens makes 
policymakers  prone  to  ignoring  the  implications  for  systemic  stability  of  financial  market 
imperfections,  including  those  stemming  from  information  frictions,  moral  hazard  implicit  in 
too-big-to-fail  firms  outside  regulatory  purview  and  the  negative  externalities  when  firms 
too-interconnected-to-fail  failed.  While  supplementing  micro-prudential  approach  by  a 
macro-prudential approach, the role of the central bank regard need to be designed taking 
into  account  the  synergies  and  conflicts  in  the  assignment  of  functions  to  various  policy 
agencies. 
Fifth, the financial regulatory reforms spearheaded at the international level by the G20 aims 
at  increasing  the  resilience  of  the global  financial  system.  In  the  process,  the  international 
best practice trajectory itself has shifted upwards with the introduction of Basel III and other 
reforms. Nevertheless, when it comes to country specific implementation in an internationally 
consistent manner, there are several practical challenges. Any substantial adjustments in the 
financial  sector  in  tandem  with  the  international  prescriptions  in  some  SAARC  economies 
might  have  implications  for  steady  state  growth  in  individual  economies  as  well  trade  and 
financial cooperation within the region. Further, many countries are still recovering from the 
crisis and any new impositions may disrupt this. Moreover, unlike developed economies, the 
SAARC  economies  also  need  to  factor  in  the  inter-linkages  between  growth  and 
socio-economic  outcomes.  Even  a  small  decline  in  growth  may  have  magnitudinally  wider 
repercussions as growth is critically linked with inter-regional equity and poverty. Hence the 
region needs to calibrate the time and magnitude of adjusting to the global new normal.  
Sixth, for SAARC countries, because they are at different stages of development there may 
be some other features of the financial sector which pose challenges to the stability of the 
system which are not there in advanced economies. For example, it is important to ensure 
that  the  crucial  goals  of  financial  literacy  and  financial  inclusion  are  not  ignored  in  the 
overdrive  for  financial  stability.  In  India,  the  newly  created  FSDC  has  included  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
literacy  and  inclusion  in  its  mandate  apart  from  those  of  macroprudential  and  financial 
stability responsibilities. 
Against  this  backdrop,  let  me  now  introduce  to  you  the  format  of  the  Conference.  We  will 
cover the conference theme in two special talks and two technical sessions. We begin with 
the key note address by our Governor Dr.Subbarao followed by presentation by two guest 
speakers,  Mr.  Jaime  Caruana,  General  Manager,  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and 
Dr. Y.V.Reddy,  Former  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  Then  we  move  on  to  the 
presentation  of  papers  and  discussions  where  participants  from  fellow  SAARC  member 
countries  shall  share  their  country  experience  on  financial  stability.  It  will  be  interesting  to 
notice the differences/similarities in mandates, powers and accountability arrangements that 
are  needed  in  different  circumstances.  For  convenience,  we  have  spread  the  discussions 
over two technical sessions, with a lunch break in between. This will be followed up with a 
panel discussion of Governors, dealing with future challenges. The panel discussion will be 
moderated by Mr. T.N. Ninan, President of Editors’ Guild of India. 
Friends and Colleagues, I trust we will have fruitful discussions during the day that will set 
the outline of our reaction function to the global developments in financial stability. With these 
words,  I  once  again  welcome  you  all  to  the  Conference.  I  wish  you  all  a  pleasant  stay  in 
Kumarakom. This is one of the premier tourist locations in the country, combining aesthetic 
appeal with the pursuit of ecological sustainability, which is an apt metaphor for the issues 
and concerns that we will talk about during the rest of the day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
