Anand Sinha: Banking on technology 
Comments  by  Mr  Anand  Sinha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
seminar  for  directors  of  banks  on  “IT  governance,  technology  management  and  data 
warehouse/CRM cyber security”, organised by the Institute for Development and Research in 
Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, 13 May 2011. 
 Inputs from Dr Anil K Sharma and Smt Nikhila Koduri are gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
I would like to thank IDRBT for inviting me to address you on the above topic. I must 
appreciate  IDRBT  for  choosing  this  topic  for  the  Seminar  and  inviting  Directors  of  Indian 
banks, as all the issues chosen for the Seminar are very relevant today for banking. 
2. 
At the outset, I would like to quote Bill Gates who has very rightly summarized the 
significance of technology in today’s world and I quote “The first rule of any technology used 
in a business is that automation applied to an efficient operation will magnify its efficiency. 
The  second  is  that  automation  applied  to  an  inefficient  operation  will  magnify  the 
inefficiency”. 
3. 
We have traversed a long way from the Industrial revolution to the IT revolution; and 
banks have benefitted a lot from this technological revolution. Information Technology (IT) is 
a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  sophisticated  products, evolution  of  better  market 
infrastructure and the implementation of reliable techniques for risk management. The most 
significant impact of IT has been the manner in which it has facilitated financial transactions 
across  the  globe.  Effective  use  of  technology  has  a  multiplier  effect  on  growth  and 
development  of  the  economy.  IT  plays  a  fundamental  role  in  banking.  By  introducing  the 
possibility of online financial transactions, IT in banking has immensely scaled up the level of 
activity by making services and products easily available at an affordable cost and accessible 
to an ever increasing set of people. Information and communication technology functions are 
fundamental to the success and stability of banks as well as in increasing their outreach to 
the unbanked or underbanked areas of the country with limited “brick and mortar” structures. 
It is, therefore, necessary that banks prioritise these functions at the highest level. 
4. 
We have travelled a long way from the era of “3-6-3” banking. The world of banking 
is not the same anymore. Financial globalization gathered momentum in the 1970’s with the 
development of computing power. But along with this technological development came the 
risks  which  were  manifested  in  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  Banks  and  financial 
institutions introduced complex products whose risks were not adequately understood. With 
the  expertise  on  these  highly  complex  products  being  confined  to  a  very  small  group  of 
specialists,  the  senior  management  and  the  Board  of  Directors  were  unable  to  provide 
adequate oversight, resulting in governance deficit. IT is also a highly specialized field and 
from governance perspective, it is important that Directors of banks have a reasonable grasp 
of the issues involved so that IT can be used in most optimal way in banks. 
The  topic  of  the  seminar  is  IT  Governance,  Technology  Management  and  Data 
5. 
Warehouse/CRM Cyber Security. These issues are very significant to the present times. As 
banks  are  investing  in  technologies  to  ensure  secure  and  efficient  banking  channels,  it  is 
necessary  that  a  thought  is  given  to  adopting  appropriate  Governance  framework, 
technology management methodologies and foolproof security mechanisms. Today, I would 
like to speak on these issues from a central bank’s perspective. My presentation is divided 
into four main parts based on the topic of the Seminar. The last part would be focused on the 
IT Vision document for 2011–17 that has been released by the RBI recently. This has a great 
relevance for the banks as well as for the RBI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
IT Governance  
6. 
You are all aware that the increased focus on IT Governance has stemmed from the 
concern  for  investment  in  IT  infrastructure  and  the  ever-increasing  dependence  on  IT  for 
operating  and  managing  day-to-day  business  activities.  IT  Governance  focuses  on 
information  technology  systems,  their  performance  and  alignment  of  technology  with 
business and risk management. With the high rate of technological obsolescence, the need 
for proper IT governance, particularly in the case of banks, is gaining more prominence. You 
would  agree  with  me  in  saying  that  adoption  of  IT  Governance  in  banks  would  result  in 
effective control on, and better utilization of, the huge IT infrastructure created by banks. 
7. 
In implementing an effective governance structure, organizations, particularly those 
having significant IT investments, are constrained by certain factors. Common among such 
inhibiting  factors  are  challenges  in  aligning  the  business  and  IT  strategies,  need  for 
appropriate  and  re-engineered  business  processes  and  delivery  models,  lack  of  project 
ownership and insufficient risk and resource management. For ensuring better governance 
there  is  a  need  to  put  in  place  robust  risk  management  systems  encompassing  effective 
infrastructure,  information  and  security  policies,  incident  reporting  and  business  continuity 
management.  These  management  systems  must  be  subject  to  regular  review  and 
monitoring.  
Relevance to banks 
8. 
A consistent IT Governance policy provides institutions with tools which ensure that 
IT investment drives business areas to meet its goals. IT Governance depends strongly on 
corporate governance and the overall corporate strategy, which means that IT strategy and 
IT processes should be in consonance with the business goals. In other words it means that 
IT  Governance  provides  tools  to  manage  IT  structures  and  processes  in  order  to 
appropriately support the business strategy. 
9. 
Implementing new IT Governance in banks may be very challenging. For addressing 
the  structural  inadequacies  in  the  areas  of  IT  governance,  information  governance,  data 
governance, information security governance; there is an imperative need to have synergy 
among these areas. 
10. 
Adoption of a structured IT Governance framework would enable banks to manage 
their  businesses  in  a  manner  that  would  bring  about  benefits  to  their  customers  as  also 
facilitate the growth of banks in this fiercely competitive world. 
11. 
A  working  group  constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  has  recently  (in  January  2011) 
released a report on information security, electronic banking, technology risk management, 
and cyber frauds. This Report includes a Chapter on IT Governance which can serve as a 
guiding model for banks. This chapter, inter alia, deals with roles and responsibilities and an 
organizational framework for implementing IT Governance. It also suggests an organisational 
structure  and  elucidates  the  recommended  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  personnel 
involved in implementation of such a structure. In its recently released IT Vision document 
2011-17,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  made  certain  recommendations  with  regard  to  IT 
Governance, which are extremely relevant for banks as well as the Reserve Bank. 
Benefits of IT Governance: doing more with less 
12. 
As  I  have  mentioned,  banks’  investments  in  IT  are  most  fruitful  when  they  match 
technology  strategy  with  business  strategy,  implement  systems  in  a  disciplined  way,  and 
balance value creation with increased IT capabilities. 
13. 
In this context of IT investments, Indian banks have an inherent advantage in terms 
of factor cost (IT labour costs in India are lower than those in Asian or European markets) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  distribution  strategy  (using  alternative  channels  effectively).  This  low  cost  servicing 
capability can give a competitive edge to the Indian banks seeking to do business outside the 
country.  Use  of  IT  governance  can  help  achieve  these  objectives.  Thus,  the  benefits  of 
employing effective IT governance framework are manifold. 
Beyond CBS: next generation banking 
14. 
Banks must look beyond Core Banking i.e. transaction processing. They must use 
risk management techniques effectively. This would not be possible unless the data handling 
capability in their Core Banking Solution is enhanced. It is now common knowledge that the 
banking of the future will be that which would be driven by the customers. This would require 
banks to create value for its customers and evolve a business model, taking into account the 
profile  of  existing  and  targeted  customers  and  their  needs  vis-a  vis  the  range  of  products 
offered.  This  would  enable  them  to  emerge  stronger  and  more  competitive.  With  higher 
technological  and  financial  awareness,  customers  today  are  looking  for  banks  to  offer  the 
following: 
More choices in terms of product selection 
• 
Simplified banks’ forms and procedures 
• 
Prompt services and alerts (such as e-mail, SMS etc)  
• 
Transparency of charges and fees  
• 
Complete view of account relationship 
• 
15. 
Coupled  with  this,  there  is  an  increasing  use  of  alternate  channels  such  as  the 
Internet  and  mobile  devices,  by  customers.  This  impact  has  made  the  rules,  in  managing 
channels  and  the  process  of  reaching  customers,  a  moving  target.  Banks  would  need  to 
re-design their strategies and respond appropriately to the rules as they change. If banks do 
adopt  suitable  processes,  it  would  bring  about  cost  savings  and,  in  the  long  term,  more 
profitable customer relationships. 
Customer empowerment 
16. 
With  a  view  to  achieving  higher  focus  of  customer  service,  banks  should  be 
conscious  of  the  customer  needs  and  should  take  care  not  to  cram  too  many  additional 
features into products making them too complex to understand and use, as this could lead to 
a  decline  in  customer  experience.  If  customers  want  a  particular  service,  technology  can 
make  it  happen.  So,  the  focus  for  banks  should  be  on  knowing  and  developing  viable 
solutions and services suiting their customers’ demand. Banks would have to balance their 
service  offerings  across  customer  segments  and  provide  a  reliable  and  adequate  of 
information. Learning from the crisis, I urge upon banks to use technology to devise products 
and processes which are socially “optimal”. 
Treading the path carefully 
17. 
While doing so, banks must also be aware of the fact that data confidentiality is an 
issue that must be dealt with very carefully. This is an area of concern for banks and their 
customers.  It  is  true  that  in  the  recent  years  technological  advances  have  been  made  by 
banks in providing secured internet technologies to contain hacking and phishing. This has 
also enabled to put in place strong risk management processes within the bank. This must 
be continued by the banks not only to minimise financial loss but also, more importantly, to 
safeguard  trust  and  confidence  of  their  customers.  Banks,  while  designing  processes, 
products and channels, must ensure that banking experience remains easy and simple for 
their  customers.  The  long  term  success  of  any  bank  cannot  be  achieved  without  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
development of new business ideas, innovative products and services and focus on retention 
of customers. 
Financial inclusion and technology  
18. 
Financial inclusion is high on the agenda for the Reserve Bank as well as banks. 
Operating cost of providing financial inclusion and charges levied on the users are important 
dimensions of the process of financial inclusion. Technology has to play an important role in 
reducing  the  transaction  cost  of  banking  services,  particularly  in  the  rural  and  unbanked 
areas so as to make financial inclusion a commercially viable proposition for banks. This may 
come  about,  for  example,  if  banking  service  providers  are  willing  to  enter  into  passive 
infrastructure sharing. The challenge for banks, in the context of financial inclusion, would be 
to get the technology pieces together and adopt a strategy that is viable and sustainable in 
the long run. 
19. 
Major steps have been taken by Reserve Bank of India (RBI), Government of India 
and banks, to enable financial inclusion of weaker sections of the society. IT is the differential 
factor  in  this  regard.  The  game  changers  in  the  realm  of  financial  inclusion  i.e.  the  UID 
project, mobile banking, hand-held devices, smart cards, business correspondents, routing of 
payment under government social schemes through banks and micro-finance, are the factors 
that will take financial inclusion a long way in the country.  
Another  aspect  of  relevance 
Technology management  
20. 
Technology includes the use of materials, tools, techniques and sources of power to 
make  life  easier  or  more  pleasant  and,  work,  more  productive.  Whereas  science  is 
concerned  with  “how”  and  “why”  things  happen,  technology  focuses  on  “making” 
things happen. Technology influenced human endeavour as soon as people began using 
tools. It accelerated with the Industrial Revolution and the substitution of machines for animal 
and human labour. Accelerated technological development has also had costs, in terms of air 
and water pollution and other undesirable environmental effects. 
is  Technology 
21. 
Management.  As  we  are  aware,  Technology  Management  is  a  subset  of  management 
discipline  that  allows  organizations  to  manage  their  technological  resources  to  create 
competitive advantage. Each organization has to decide its strategy, possibly, by identifying 
emerging technologies to suit business and market needs. 
22. 
The role of the technology management function in an organization is to understand 
the  value  of  technology  for  the  organization.  Continuous  development  of  technology  is 
valuable,  as  long  as  there  is  a  value  for  the  customer  and,  therefore,  the  technology 
management  function  in  an  organization  should  be  able  to  guide  when  to  invest  on 
technology development and, more importantly, when to withdraw. 
23. 
Alternatively,  Technology  Management  can  also  be  defined  as  the  integrated 
planning,  design,  optimization,  operation  and  control  of  technological  products,  processes 
and  services.  A  functional  definition  of  Technology  Management  could  be  that  it  is  the 
management of the use of technology for human advantage. 
the  present  circumstances 
in 
Technology and innovation 
24. 
Perhaps  the  most  authoritative  input  to  our  understanding  of  technology  is  the 
diffusion of innovations theory developed in the first half of the twentieth century. It suggests 
that all innovations follow a similar diffusion pattern – best known today in the form of an “s” 
curve.  In  broad  terms  the  “s”  curve  suggests  four  phases  of  a  technology  life  cycle  – 
emerging, growing, maturing and aging. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Taken together these concepts provide a foundation for formalizing the approach to 
25. 
managing  technology.  Technology  Management  involves  optimization  –  “if  things  can 
happen with a needle, there is no need to use a sword”. Right choice of technology is what 
helps organizations to grow faster. “Right Decision at right time is the key to success”. Since 
adoption  of  newer  technology  involves  cost,  one  has  to  be  prudent  in  selection  of  right 
technology for the required purpose. 
Technology management in banks 
26. 
Priorities of contemporary bank technology management are dictated by increased 
competition and the development of the global banking industry. The recent financial crisis 
has  led  banks  to  shift  their  priorities  towards  working  more  on  the  quality  of  their  loan 
portfolios and stable sources of funds. Maintenance of the high quality of customer service 
has become the main focus of the bank technology management. 
Data ware house 
27. 
benefits. Story goes like this: 
Let  me  tell  you  a  well  known  story  which  describes  a  data  warehouse  and  its 
“Some  market  analysts  were  trying  to  analyse  an  elephant  with  their  eyes 
blindfolded.  One  touched  the  tail  of  an  elephant  and  analysed  it  as  a  “ROPE”, 
another  felt  the  feet  of  an  elephant  and  analysed  it  as  a  “TREE  TRUNK”,  yet 
another touched the torso of the elephant and analysed it as a ‘BIG STONE’ ”. 
28. 
This exactly is the situation when one analyses a customer of the bank from only 
one  sub-system.  Unless  we  have  the  complete  profile  of  a  customer  from  the  integrated 
database,  we  cannot  possibly  differentiate  between  “good”  and  “bad”  customers.  Data 
warehousing technology can make it happen by integrating various sub-systems into a data 
warehousing framework. 
Deep impact: technology and warehousing 
29. 
Banks in India have adopted Core Banking Solution and it has helped the customer 
to carry out “Anywhere Banking”. The next move forward can be the integration of various 
systems to create a centralized database consisting of customer information and other data. 
This concept is what is called “Data Warehousing”. Banks can make use of various tools and 
techniques  to  analyse  this  data  for  enhancing  their  businesses.  Individual  systems  help  in 
running the business of banks, but if the banks have to optimize their businesses, they have 
to invest in Data Warehousing Technology. Many banks in India already have adopted this 
technology. Reserve Bank of India has also invested in creating its data warehouse which is 
made available to the general public through the link “Database on Indian Economy: RBI’s 
Data Warehouse” (http://dbie.rbi.org.in). This is useful for researchers and economists. 
Cyber crime  
30. 
Another issue that is of relevance in today’s banking is the increasing cybercrime. 
The capabilities and opportunities provided by the Internet have transformed many business 
activities, augmenting the speed, ease, and range with which transactions can be conducted, 
while also lowering many of the costs. Criminals have also discovered that the Internet can 
provide  new  opportunities 
rapidly  growing 
interconnectivity  of  IT  systems,  and  the  convergence  of  their  technology  towards  industry-
standard  hardware  and  software  components  and  sub-systems,  renders  IT  systems 
increasingly  vulnerable  to  malicious  attacks.  Strengthening  of  IT  resilience  can  ensure  a 
for  pursuing  unlawful  business.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
prompt action at a modest marginal cost, both in terms of minimising losses and resuming 
normal operations quickly. 
31. 
The concept of cyber crime is not radically different from the concept of conventional 
crime. Both include conduct involving commission or omission, which cause breach of law. 
While the characteristics of these crimes are different, the motivations of the criminals are 
much  the  same.  The  advent  of  the  computer  has  only  provided  another  means  and 
opportunity  to  such  criminals.  Speedy  prosecution  and  effective  plugging  of  loop  holes  in 
laws can serve as effective measures to counter such crimes. 
Implications for business 
The  implications  of  all  this  for  business  can  be  far-reaching.  There  is  a  need  for 
32. 
major changes in perception about cyber-security and in planning and implementing security 
measures.  These  are  particularly  important  if  e-commerce  is  to  attain  its  full  potential. 
Perhaps  the  most  important  change  required  is  the  change  in  the  mindset.  This  has  two 
distinct  but  overlapping  dimensions:  security  has  to  be  understood  in  broad  rather  than 
narrow  terms,  and  security  can  no  longer  be  an  after-thought.  It  needs  to  be  part  of 
intelligence, planning, and business strategy. 
Making new technologies pay-cyber security  
33. 
A major challenge for the banks is in keeping themselves updated with the changes 
in technology in spite of the fact, that such updation keeps increasing their expenditure on 
computer  security.  Computer  security  measures  can  be  beefed  up  by  using  anti-virus 
software,  access  control  and  firewalls  and  by  employing  qualified  IT  or  IT-security  staff. 
Additionally, there should be adequate training of staff on computer security. Considering all 
the  factors  that  militate  against  computer  security  of  organizations,  it  is  possible  that  total 
eradication of computer crimes may not be achieved. It can, however, be reduced through 
public education, robust law enforcement, compliance using effective security technologies 
and the establishment of a foolproof framework for the prosecution of computer criminals. 
There  are  several  specific  issues  that  need  to  be  considered  carefully  to  keep 
Keeping a check  
34. 
incidents of cyber crime at bay. A few illustrative ones are as follows: 
Recognize that the real problem is crime, not hacking  
a. 
Business intelligence must include criminal intelligence analysis 
b. 
Be vigilant of money laundering opportunities 
c. 
Develop partnerships and information-sharing arrangements 
d. 
35. 
As directors of banks, you have the responsibility of ensuring that there is a robust 
process  for  detecting  and  reporting  suspicious  transactions  and  that  the  methodology 
adopted  by  fraudsters/cyber  criminals  is  thoroughly  analysed  for  taking  corrective  action. 
When  such  information  comes  to  the  notice  of  the  Reserve  Bank;  measures  are  taken  to 
disseminate the modus operandi for the benefit of banks.  
36. 
In  its  Report  on  Information  Security,  Electronic  Banking,  Technology  Risk 
Management  and  Cyber  Frauds,  RBI  has  dealt  with  the  issue  in  detail  and  made  specific 
recommendations for banks to adopt. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Role of cert-in  
37. 
You are all aware that Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-IN), a 
part  of  the  Ministry  of  Communications  and  Technology,  GoI  has  a  major  role  to  play  in 
combating  cyber  crimes.  Its  roles  and  functions  include  incident  response  and  offering 
recovery  procedures  and  incident  tracing.  As  a  proactive  approach,  it  also  issues  security 
guidelines and acts as a national repository of, and a referral agency for, cyber intrusions. It 
also  analyses  the  trends  and  patterns  of  intrusion  activity  and,  as  a  response,  it  aids  the 
users to prevent recurrences of similar incidents. IDRBT has been nominated as the sectoral 
CERT  for  banking  and  financial  sector.  I  suggest  that  banks  coordinate  with  IDRBT  and 
make use of this for fighting cyber intrusion. 
IT Vision Document 2011-17 
38. 
Coming to the concluding part of my address, I would like to draw your attention to 
the RBI’s recently released IT Vision document for 2011-17, the major recommendations of 
which relate to transforming the RBI into a knowledge organisation, using IT as a strategic 
resource,  improving  IT  governance  and  reviewing  of  IT  processes  for  better  alignment 
between business objectives and IT. The action points that emerge for RBI and banks from 
this document relate to the following issues: 
Focus for RBI 
39. 
The  main  recommendation  is  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to  transform  itself  into  an 
information  intensive  knowledge  organisation.  Other  recommendations  include  harnessing 
human resource potential, migrating to enterprise architecture for IT systems and adopting 
appropriate  business  process  re-engineering.  Conformity 
internationally  accepted 
standards and usage of business intelligence from data warehouse for optimal Management 
Information  Systems  (MIS)  with  effective  Decision  Support  Systems  (DSS)  are  also 
recommended. 
40. 
Improved  IT  Governance,  effective  project  management,  evolution  of  well  defined 
information policies as well as information security frameworks, better vendor management 
and outsourcing practices are the other significant recommendations of the document. The 
document  also  suggests  reviewing  of  IT  processes  for  better  alignment  between  business 
objectives and IT. 
to 
financial 
risk  management, 
inclusion  and  customer 
Focus for banks 
41. 
The  Vision  Document  sets  priorities  for  commercial  banks  to  move  forward  from 
their  core  banking  solutions  to  enhanced  use  of  IT  in  areas  such  as  MIS,  regulatory 
reporting,  overall 
relationship 
management.  It  also  dwells  on  the  possible  operational  risks  arising  out  of  adopting 
technology  in  the  banking  sector  which  could  affect  financial  stability  and  emphasizes  the 
need for internal controls, risk mitigation systems, fraud detection / prevention and business 
continuity plans. 
42. 
Although  banks  have  deployed  technology  for  transaction  processing,  analytical 
processing by banks is still in a nascent stage. Banks may work towards reaping benefits of 
technology  in  terms  of  cost  reduction,  improved  customer  services  and  effective  flow  of 
information within the banks and to the regulator. The Reserve bank has drawn up an action 
plan to implement the recommendations of the Vision document. A High powered Committee 
has also been constituted in the Reserve Bank which has the responsibility to ensure time 
bound and effective implementation of these recommendations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Conclusion 
43. 
In conclusion, I would like to say that banks need to take a disciplined approach to 
IT  architecture,  create  standardised  platforms,  and  wring  more  business  value  from 
technology investments. It is here that IT Governance plays a very significant role. Adoption 
of  appropriate  IT  solutions  for  moving  towards  acquiring  information  from  the  customer-
centric perspective along with account- or product-centric perspective would place the banks 
at a competitive advantage. The banking industry relies on technology; to run their systems 
efficiently, effectively and securely as also to move ahead of its competitors. It is here that 
methodologies of technology management will play a significant role. The Data Warehouse 
solution in banks must be implemented in an iterative manner and to maximise its benefits, it 
must be used creatively. 
Computer crimes cause banks huge financial losses which have an adverse effect 
44. 
on  the  economy.  Most  banks  have  measures  in  place  to manage  the  occurrence  of  cyber 
crimes  but  based  on  the  fact  that  technologies  advance  on  a  continuous  basis,  bank 
managements  should  try  to  keep  up  with  these  advances  in  order  to  efficiently  combat 
computer  crimes  and  reduce  them. Lastly,  I  would  urge  upon  banks  to  have  a  look  at  the 
recommendations in the IT Vision document and initiate suitable action. 
45. 
I would conclude by saying that technology is a means for the banks to render better 
customer service, increase their business and profitability as well as manage risks. The time 
has come for banks to adopt and adapt appropriate technology. As Albert Einstein has said 
“where there is the necessary technical skill to move mountains, there is no need for the faith 
that moves mountains”. It is with this premise that we need to move forward.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
