Øystein Olsen: Use of models and economic theory in Norges Bank 
Lecture  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Department of Economics, University of Oslo, Oslo, 8 September 2011. 
 The lecture is based on previous speeches and newspaper articles. A brief comment on recent developments is 
included in the final section. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
Allow me to start by thanking you for your invitation to give this year’s Schweigaard lecture. 
Anton  Martin  Schweigaard  was  one  of  the  leading  statesmen  of  19th  century  Norway.  He 
was  a  jurist,  a  politician  and  an  economist.  Although  “revival  of  productive  forces”  and 
“expansion of national wealth” were to Schweigaard important objectives for economic policy, 
most important was the promotion of “moral progress”, “public decency” and “the perfection 
of political and legal institutions”.1 
I  doubt  that  Schweigaard  was  always  impressed  by  the  perfection  of  political  institutions, 
perhaps  in  particular  the  institution  of  Norges  Bank.  Schweigaard  grew  up  in  modest 
circumstances in the small market town of Kragerø on the coast of southern Norway – a town 
severely affected by the British blockade of Norway during Denmark-Norway’s involvement in 
the Napoleonic Wars in the early 1800s. Norges Bank was established in 1816, the year after 
the Wars ended. The Storting decided that a compulsory silver tax would be levied to provide 
capital  for Norges  Bank.  Schweigaard’s  brother  wrote2:  “When  the compulsory  payment  to 
Norges  Bank  came  in  addition  –  Anton  and  I  witnessed  our  parents’  silverware  and  gold 
ornaments  being  melted  down  to  pay  the  tax  –  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  many  of  the 
town’s inhabitants found it difficult to make ends meet, which unfortunately was also the case 
with my parents and grandmother, and times were hard.” But Schweigaard was a talented 
man  and  it  was  said  that  he  had  probably  never  been  as  happy  as  when  he  passed  his 
examen artium with flying colours and was admitted here to the University of Christiania. 
I expect that as you embark on your economics studies, you will get down to business with 
the  same  energy  and  enthusiasm  as  Schweigaard  did  then.  I  expect  you  will  learn  that 
economics is not a perfect subject. But I know that the study of economics will provide you 
with a useful tool to further improve both the subject and the institutions. In my lecture today, 
I will provide some insight into how Norges Bank makes use of economic models and touch 
upon the issues you will have the opportunity to explore further in the course of your studies. 
Inflation is a persistent rise in the general price level or, in other words, a fall in the value of 
money.  When  inflation  is  high,  it  is  as  a  rule  also  variable.  This  generates  uncertainty  for 
households  and  firms.  It  is  costly  to  bring  high  inflation  under  control.  However,  inflation 
should not become too low either. Deflation is often synonymous with recession. 
Central  banks  have  always  had  a  natural  responsibility  for  stabilising  the  value  of  money. 
Schweigaard  was  concerned  with  stabilising  the  krone’s  value  in  silver  terms.  Since  that 
time, Norway has operated various regimes with the aim of stabilising the value of money. A 
silver standard for the krone was followed by the gold standard. Later Norges Bank sought to 
stabilise the krone’s value against other currencies, first the pound sterling and thereafter the 
US  dollar.  For  a  long  period  after  the  war,  various  fixed  exchange  rate  systems  were 
introduced under international agreements, which were subsequently abandoned in favour of 
                                                 
1  Slagstad, Rune (1998), “De nasjonale strateger” (National strategists), Pax 
2  Aubert, L. M. B. (1883), “Anton Martin Schweigaards barndom og ungdom” (Anton Martin Schweigaard’s early 
years), P.T. Mallings Boghandels Forlag 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
a  more  unilateral  stabilisation  of  the  krone  against  various  currencies.  Since  2001,  the 
objective  of  monetary  policy  has  been  low  and  stable  inflation.  Rather  than  stabilising  the 
value  of  money  indirectly  through  an  exchange  rate  target,  we  now  aim  to  attain  a  more 
direct objective which we believe monetary policy can achieve over time. 
   The  operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to 
2½ per  cent  over  time.  Monetary  policy  shall  also  contribute  to  stabilising  output  and 
employment. In this respect, inflation targeting is flexible. 
The inflation target is symmetrical – it is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too 
low as an inflation rate that is too high. The inflation target provides economic agents with an 
anchor for inflation expectations. Decisions concerning saving and investment can be based 
on the assumption that inflation in Norway will be around 2½ per cent over time. 
Norges  Bank’s  instrument  to  meet  the  inflation  target  is  the  key  policy  rate,  which  is  the 
interest rate on banks’ deposits in Norges Bank. This interest rate forms the basis for banks’ 
lending and deposit rates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Bank’ monetary policy assessments and decisions must be based on knowledge it can 
obtain on interactions within the Norwegian economy and how the interest rate interacts. But 
we need a methodical apparatus to structure this knowledge.  
Like other central banks, Norges Bank uses economic models as an aid in monetary policy 
analysis. Economic models can help us to interpret historical developments, make forecasts 
for  the  future  and  analyse  the  effect  of  the  interest  rate.  For  an  economic  model  to  be 
relevant,  it  must  be  fit  for  its  intended  purpose.  A  model  that  is  to  be  used  as  an  aid  in 
making interest rate decisions requires different attributes and is based on different principles 
than  models  that  for  example  seek  to  provide  optimal  near-term  inflation  and  output 
forecasts. 
 In this chart, the time axis has been divided into three: short term, medium term and long 
term.  There  are  no  sharp  dividing  lines  between  these  horizons.  Nonetheless,  the  time 
horizon imposes various requirements on economic theory and models for our purposes. 
The starting-point for the analyses is important. Current statistics and anecdotal information 
can serve as a basis for providing some indication of how the economy has evolved up to the 
present. But the information set is uncertain. Statistics are published with a lag and are often 
revised. Data from different sources can provide different pictures of the situation at hand. 
Statistical models can provide us with good support and help distinguish between news and 
noise  in  the  data.  They  can  capture  time  series  properties  in  data  and  correlations  that  in 
many cases will be able to produce good forecasts of developments in the months ahead. 
There are certain similarities between projecting developments in the Norwegian economy in 
the  coming  months  and  forecasting  the  weather.  Meteorologists  have  observed  that 
averaging  forecasts  from  a  large  number  of  models  generally  produces  more  accurate 
forecasts.  To  project  consumer  price  inflation  in  the  coming  quarters,  the  Bank  has 
developed a system for averaging forecasts from about 170 different statistical models, all of 
which are intended to project inflation in the Norwegian economy in the very near term.3 The 
model  weights  are  determined  on  the  basis  of  historical  accuracy  and  are  continually 
adjusted  so  that  models  with  better  predictive  power  are  given  greater  weight  in  the 
                                                 
3  The models are grouped into three classes: factor  models, indicator models and VAR  models. The models 
within each class may contain different variables or be variants of one another. For a detailed discussion, see 
Aastveit, K.A, K. Gerdrup, A.S. Jore (2011) “Short-term forecasting of GDP and inflation in real time: Norges 
Bank’s system for averaging models”, Staff Memo 9/2011, Norges Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
subsequent  round.  The  Bank  has  a  similar  system  including  almost  250  models  for 
forecasting  mainland  GDP.  The  projections  from  these  systems  of  models  extend  four 
quarters ahead in time and are published at regular intervals on the Bank’s website. We call 
this apparatus SAM (System for Averaging Models). 
For  projections  with  slightly  longer  horizons,  the  Bank  parts  company  with  weather 
forecasters. While meteorologists are unlikely to influence the weather with their predictions, 
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  setting  can  actually  influence  economic  developments  in  the 
medium term. This places particular demands on the system of analysis and involves other 
demands than if the sole purpose were to make forecasts. Norges Bank has developed the 
Norwegian  Economy  Model  (NEMO),  which  we  use  as  an  aid  when  drawing  up  one-year-
ahead to four-year-ahead forecasts. 
NEMO is a model for analysing fluctuations in the Norwegian economy around a long-term 
trend.  In  the  medium  term,  the  economy  may  in  periods  deviate  substantially  from  trend, 
referred to as cyclical fluctuations. When the fluctuations subside, we must assume that the 
economy is moving towards equilibrium. The long-term trend is not determined by monetary 
policy, but by assumptions regarding technological developments and the supply of labour 
and capital.  
When we set the interest rate, we give weight to both the current situation and the outlook 
two  to  three  years  ahead.  The  statistical  models  help  us  understand  the  current  situation, 
while the equilibrium properties frame the analysis. NEMO describes how the interest rate 
can  be  set  to  bring  the  economy  from  its  current  starting-point  back  to  the  long-term 
equilibrium  path.  As  a  support  tool  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  such  a  model 
apparatus is thus particularly relevant. I will come back to the main features of NEMO later. 
 As I mentioned earlier, Norges Bank operates under a formal monetary policy mandate. The 
Bank’s objective is to stabilise inflation and provide the economy with a nominal anchor. As a 
minimum,  an  economic  model  to  be  used  as  support  for  interest  rate  decisions  should  be 
based on the assumption that monetary policy can steer inflation. 
Economic agents can be expected to look ahead when making consumption and investment 
decisions. It is not only current economic policy that is likely to matter to them, but also what 
they expect it will be in the future. Expectations must therefore be incorporated and play a 
role in a monetary policy model. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Many  economists  previously  held  the  view  that  unemployment  could  be  reduced  by 
accepting  slightly  higher  inflation  over  time.  Monetary  policy  was  oriented  accordingly  and 
inflation  accelerated  in  many  countries,  without  a  sustained  decline  in  unemployment.  It 
turned out that bringing rising inflation under control involved substantial real economic costs. 
In the past 20 years, inflation has been consistently low and stable. Economic growth has 
been just as high, if not higher, since inflation came down to a low level, compared with the 
years when inflation was high and at times at double-digit levels. 
 For the model to be relevant it should build on long-term relationships that we believe to be 
valid  and  it  should  be  consistent  with  data.  For  example,  the  model’s  relationships  should 
describe  how  the  interest  rate  works,  in  line  with  relevant  empirical  observations  of  the 
Norwegian economy. 
It  is  also  of  considerable  importance  to  us  that  the  economic  mechanisms  in  the  model 
should be understandable and easy to communicate. The model apparatus is to function as 
a  useful  tool,  both  in  the  internal  process  ahead  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  and  in 
Norges Bank’s external communication. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 A model will never be able to provide an exhaustive description of reality. In 1979, the British 
statistician  George  Box  stated:  “Essentially,  all  models  are  wrong,  but  some  are  useful”. 
Models  can  help  to  identify  key  driving  forces  and  ensure  a  valid  line  of  reasoning  and 
consistency over time. This will enable the model to play an important role in the analytical 
basis for interest rate setting. At the same time, we must use common sense and experience 
when  evaluating  the  model-based  results  and  supplement  these  results  with  our  own 
professional judgement. In this respect, the Bank has a pragmatic attitude regarding the use 
of models. 
Before I discuss Norges Bank’s suite of models in greater detail, I would like to look at a few 
key  macroeconomic  variables  and  their  interaction.  Studying  fundamental  statistical 
relationships provides important insight into the functioning of the economy. Along with the 
theoretical  foundation,  such  insight  is  one  of  the  most  important  building  blocks of  a  good 
analytical apparatus for implementing monetary policy. 
Let  me  begin  by  taking  a  look  at  the  relationship  between  output  and  inflation.  In  recent 
years,  consumer  price  inflation  (CPI)  has  fluctuated  between  0  and  3  per  cent.  Mainland 
GDP  growth  has  also  fluctuated,  giving  rise  to  economic  cycles.  The  chart  shows 
developments in the two variables measured as deviations from long-term trend growth, in 
other  words  an  “inflation  gap”  and  an  “output  gap”.4  When  the  output  gap  is  positive,  the 
                                                  
4  The gaps express deviations from estimated trends in seasonally adjusted figures for mainland GDP and CPI 
adjusted  for  tax  changes  and  excluding  energy  products  (CPI-ATE),  respectively.  The  trends  are  estimated 
using a Hodrick Prescott (HP) filter on quarterly data with λ=40000. The output gap in this analysis is a technical 
estimate and does not fully correspond with the output gap in Norges Bank’s Monetary Policy Report. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy  is  usually  in  an  upturn,  while  the  economy  is  in  a  downturn  when  the  gap  is 
negative. 
The blue line in the chart shows that GDP growth was markedly higher than trend growth in 
the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  and  in  the  period  from  2003  to  2008,  but  that  it  has  risen 
somewhat  more  slowly  in  the  period  following  the  financial  crisis.  When  developments  in 
output  are  compared  with  inflation,  a  pattern  emerges.  A  pickup  in  GDP  growth  has 
consistently  occurred  4–5  quarters  before  a  rise  in  inflation.5  While  the  chart  says  nothing 
about causality, turning points in GDP growth seem to be a fairly reliable leading indicator of 
turning points in inflation. 
 The  path  from  changes  in  output  to  inflation  passes  through  the  labour  market,  among 
others.  We  have  seen  that  when  economic  growth  has  picked  up,  unemployment6  has 
declined one to two quarters thereafter. The relationship between the “output gap” and the 
“unemployment gap” is fairly strong. This is a useful observation because GDP figures are 
published with a considerable lag and often subject to revision, while the unemployment data 
published at the end of each month are not revised. If there is uncertainty about the GDP 
figures – which there often may be – falling unemployment can be an indication of a recovery 
in economic growth.  
Labour market developments, in turn, affect wage growth, as illustrated by the blue line in the 
chart. High unemployment results in low wage growth, and vice versa. The chart shows that 
in  periods  of  falling  unemployment,  wage  growth7  moves  up  fairly  rapidly.  Changes  in 
unemployment appear to have a fairly immediate impact on wage growth. 
                                                 
5  The correlation between these two data series is highest when the output gap is deferred 4–5 quarters into the 
future. 
6  Unemployment measured according to LFS 
7  Mainland hourly wage growth from quarterly national accounts 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Not unexpectedly, there is also a close statistical relationship between wage growth and the 
rise in prices for domestically produced goods. It appears to take about one year for changes 
in wage growth to feed through to inflation. 
Such observations of data provide a picture of some of the interrelationships in the economy, 
but  they  say  little  about  causality  or  how  interest  rates  feed  through  to  the  economy. 
Correlations  are  nevertheless  interesting  as  a  background  for  the  analytical  tools  that  are 
used in interest rate setting. 
 Historically, the interest rate has been set in response to various developments and shocks. 
In this respect, the interest rate is an endogenous variable, that is to say it is dependent on 
other economic variables. The relationship between the interest rate and other key variables 
has through history also been influenced by shifting monetary policy objectives. 
Let  us  look  at  two  different  situations.  In  the  first,  there  is  an  unexpected  sharp  rise  in 
inflation. In response, the interest rate could be raised to bring inflation down again, which 
will  curb  growth  in  household  and  corporate  consumption  and  investment.  In  the  second, 
there is a sudden sharp pickup in demand for goods and services. The interest rate might be 
raised in this case too in order to prevent inflation from rising at a later stage. In historical 
data, a higher interest rate can go hand in hand with both lower growth and higher growth. It 
is  demanding  to  identify  the  effects  of  interest  rate  changes  when  studying  historical  data 
series. Trygve Haavelmo, Nobel Prize winner and a former professor here in the Department 
of Economics, called this a problem of identification. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 In order to analyse the effects of the interest rate, we need an analytical apparatus that can 
take into account the interdependency between the interest rate and the other variables we 
want  to  analyse.  A  simple  approach  involves  using  a  vector  autoregressive  (VAR)  model. 
You may come across this type of model in your statistics and economics courses. The VAR 
model  I  am  going  to  present  here  includes  mainland  GDP,  the  interest  rate,  the  krone 
exchange rate and inflation.8 All the variables are a function of lagged values of themselves 
and the other variables. The system of equations is estimated on historical data. To estimate 
the  model,  the  relationship  between  some  of  the  variables  is  predetermined  in  line  with 
economic theory. For example, assumptions can be made concerning the sequence in which 
the different variables will affect one another. 
A  common  approach  to  analysing  the  effect  of  the  interest  rate  in  models  where  it  is 
endogenously determined is to apply an exogenous impulse or a shock to the interest rate. 
This means that the interest rate is raised in response to factors other than those that can be 
explained historically by the other variables in the model. 
The effect of such a rise in the interest rate will depend on the variables included in the model, 
the model’s structure and estimation period. On the one hand, the result can be more robust if 
we use a long time-series in the estimation. On the other hand, historical changes in monetary 
policy regimes can influence the results. It may therefore be of greater interest to confine the 
estimation period to, for instance, the period of inflation targeting – the past ten years. 
                                                 
8  Consumer price inflation adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE) 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The chart shows the effect of an interest rate increase on output and inflation over time in 
11 VAR  models.  These  models  only  differ  in  that  they  are  estimated  on  data  from  slightly 
different  time  periods.  In  each  estimation  we  use  data  up  to  the  present,  but  start  the 
estimation at different points in time between 1986 and 1996. 
In the analysis, the interest rate is raised by 1 percentage point, that is, an interest rate shock is 
applied. Thereafter the model takes over and the interest rate gradually falls back, in line with 
the model’s estimated reaction pattern. In the course of a couple of years, the interest rate has 
returned  to  its  starting  point.9  As  the  chart  shows,  the  degree  of  spread  in  the  results  is 
considerable. If we were to draw a fan chart, or confidence intervals, around each model, it 
would become clear that the uncertainty is even greater than the spread alone indicates. The 
results  must  therefore  be  interpreted  with  caution.  If  we  were  nevertheless  to  draw  a 
conclusion on this basis, it must be that an interest rate increase will dampen GDP growth in 
the course of the subsequent year – all else being equal. Somewhat further ahead, inflation will 
also recede. As the interest rate returns to normal, GDP growth and inflation will pick up again. 
 Our macroeconomic model NEMO has a more precise theoretical construction than the VAR 
models. NEMO is a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)  model, and has many 
features  that  are  similar  to  corresponding  models  in  other  central  banks.  It  describes  the 
behaviour  of  households  and  firms.  Economic  agents  are  forward-looking  when  making 
decisions  so  that  expectations  are  of  significance.  There  are  three  economic  agents: 
households, firms and a central bank. Households demand goods and supply labour. They 
assess how much to spend relative to saving and how much they should work subject to their 
budget  constraints.  Firms  decide  how  much  to  produce  and  set  prices  to  maximise  their 
profits,  given  expected  prices  for  the  input  factors  labour  and  capital.  These  are  key 
mechanisms in microeconomic theory. 
The long-term growth potential of the economy is determined by technological developments. 
There is no long-term trade off between inflation and unemployment. As prices and wages 
respond  with  some  lag,  monetary  policy  can,  however,  influence  demand,  output  and 
employment in the short and medium term. In the light of these mechanisms, NEMO can be 
called a New Keynesian model, with Keynesian properties in the short and medium term and 
classical properties in the long term. 
You  will  learn  more  about  this  type  of  model  in  your  macroeconomics  courses  and  the 
method  for  estimating  such  models  in  econometrics,  although  perhaps  not  until  you  reach 
Master’s level. 
                                                 
9  Thereafter the interest rate falls slightly below the starting point for a period. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Before I show you how the interest rate works in NEMO and compare the results with the 
VAR model, I would like to show you how monetary policy is modelled in a model such as 
NEMO. 
In  the  model,  the  central  bank’s  objective  is  to  steer  inflation.  The  interest  rate  is  set  to 
stabilise  inflation  at  2.5  per  cent  somewhat  further  ahead  and  weight  is  also  given  to 
stabilising developments in output. In some cases, a change in the interest rate will enable 
both objectives to be met at the same time. But situations can also arise where an interest 
rate change cannot bring inflation back to target without output moving in the wrong direction. 
Then, a trade-off must be made between the objectives and attaining them will take longer. 
The  central  bank’s  objective  is  formalised  through  a  loss  function.  The  loss  function  can, 
somewhat simplified, be illustrated as follows: 
 In the equation, π denotes inflation, π * the inflation target and x is the output gap. The loss 
function includes deviations of output from potential output and deviations of inflation from 
the  inflation  target.  The  deviations  enter  the  loss  function  quadratically,  that  is  the  central 
bank’s “loss” – or disadvantage – increases with large deviations from the targets either way. 
The trade off between stabilising inflation close to target and avoiding fluctuations in output 
and  employment  is  expressed  by  the  parameter  λ.  The  lower  λ  is,  the  greater  the  weight 
given by the central bank to stabilising inflation. If λ is equal to zero, all other considerations 
are  set  aside,  while  λ  greater  than  zero  is  the  expression  of  a  system  of  flexible  inflation 
targeting. 
In NEMO, the interest rate is set with a view to minimising the overall “loss” as expressed in 
such a loss function. Consideration is then given to the effect of the interest rate it on inflation 
and  output  and  their  interaction.  The  chart  is  a  simplified  illustration  of  the  model.  The 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
economic relationships are illustrated here by a simple New Keynesian model, which you will 
become more familiar with in the course of your studies.10 
 NEMO is an empirical model, that is to say it is estimated on Norwegian data. In order to see 
how monetary policy works in NEMO, we have increased the interest rate to the same extent 
as in the VAR models. As indicated by the red line in the chart, NEMO provides a description 
of monetary policy that is broadly consistent with that derived from the VAR models,11 in spite 
of  the  different  principles  on  which  the  models  are  based.  Overall,  it  appears  that  a  one 
percentage point increase in the interest rate dampens output growth by about ½ percentage 
point and inflation by around ¼ percentage point. The effect of the interest rate increase on 
GDP  reaches  its  maximum  after  about  one  year,  while  the  maximum  effect  on  inflation 
occurs with a lag of close to two years. 
                                                 
10  See Alstadheim, Ragna et.al (2010), “Monetary Policy Analysis in Practice”, Norges Bank Staff Memo 11/2010 
11  The  estimation  is  based  on  a  one  percentage  point  increase  in  the  interest  rate,  followed  by  a  gradual 
reduction in line with the response pattern in the model 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  Norges  Bank  publishes  three  times  a  year,  includes  a 
discussion of key trends and an analysis of the interest rate path ahead. The models I have 
described here are key support tools. But a model will never be able to tell us exactly how 
the interest rate should be set. The ultimate assessment is, as mentioned, a result of Norges 
Bank’s professional judgement and will also capture considerations that are not sufficiently 
taken into account by our models. As such, the models are only a tool. But, a model such as 
NEMO  is  a  useful  tool  for  analysing  developments  and  in  interest  rate  setting.  It  helps  us 
interpret  and  understand  the  dynamics  of  the  Norwegian  economy  and  can  help  us  to 
achieve consistency in our monetary policy response pattern. 
The chart shows our forecasts for inflation and the output gap in the June Report (2/11). The 
output gap was assumed to increase somewhat further ahead, with the downturn in the wake 
of the financial crisis being followed by a mild upturn. The low level of inflation would then 
gradually move up to target. 
 The interest rate path presented in June indicated that the interest rate would gradually be 
raised  towards  a  normal  level  in  the  next  years.  This  was  conditional  on  the  economic 
outlook we presented at that time. 
Our forecasts provide an expression of what we consider to be the baseline path. But the 
forecasts  are  uncertain,  as  illustrated  by  the  fan  chart.  Our  interest  rate  forecast  is  not  an 
unconditional  promise,  but  signals  how  we  will  set  the  interest  rate  if  developments  in  the 
Norwegian economy are in line with our projections. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
The  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Report  also  presents  alternative  scenarios  for  the  Norwegian 
economy. If developments are broadly in line with expectations, economic agents can expect 
that  the  interest  rate  will  be  set  in  line  with  that  projected  by  Norges  Bank.  If  conditions 
change,  as  was  the  case  in  August,  Norges  Bank  will  naturally  adapt  the  monetary  policy 
stance in the light of new economic prospects. 
Through summer, dramatic falls on stock exchanges and political unrest made the headlines. 
There are now prospects of lower economic growth in many countries. In both the US and 
many countries in Europe, public debt is high and fiscal deficits are substantial. At the same 
time,  measures  to  reduce  the  deficit  in  the  short  term  will  also  dampen  activity.  Some 
economists  fear  a  renewed  economic  setback  in  the  US  and  the  financial  markets  are 
characterised by turbulence and uncertainty. 
 The US and EU authorities are facing demanding decision-making processes. In the US, the 
political  parties  and  the  people  are  divided  in  their  views  on  taxation  and  the  exercise  of 
central  government  authority,  reflected  for  example  in  the  absence  of  measures  to 
strengthen central government revenues. The debt problems in the EU are being aggravated 
by the lack of a similar coordination of fiscal policy to support the European monetary union. 
Government  finances  in  many  of  the  countries  now  experiencing  problems  have  been 
weaker than required under the EU’s own rules for several years. 
Measures have been put in place. The EU countries have established a joint fund to provide 
loans for countries with debt problems. The ECB has intervened with support purchases of 
government bonds. These measures are limited in scope and duration and are intended to 
be replaced by more permanent resolution mechanisms once they have been implemented. 
The political authorities may still, in time, find suitable and more permanent solutions, both in 
Europe and the US. But the road ahead may be both bumpy and long. 
The  Norwegian  economy  is  robust.  Government  finances  are  sound,  banks  are  solid, 
unemployment is low and the economy is growing at a fairly solid pace. At the same time, we 
must  acknowledge 
turbulence  and  weaker  prospects 
internationally.  Norway  is  an  open  economy.  Norwegian  firms  will  be  affected  if  demand 
slows or funding becomes more difficult. Monetary policy can respond rapidly to changes in 
the outlook, for example as reflected in Norges Bank’s decision to keep the key policy rate 
unchanged at the August monetary policy meeting. 
influenced  by 
that  we  are 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
therefore 
introduced 
Earlier this week, the Swiss National Bank decided to announce a minimum exchange rate 
for the Swiss franc against the euro owing to the substantial appreciation of the Swiss franc. 
Interest rates and inflation in Switzerland are close to zero and growth is low. According to 
the  Swiss  National  Bank,  a  further  appreciation  could  have  resulted  in  a  recession  with 
deflationary  developments.  Measures  were 
to  prevent  such 
developments. The Norwegian krone appreciated sharply after the announcement. A krone 
that is too strong can over time result in inflation that is too low and growth that is too weak. 
In that case, monetary policy measures will be taken. In Norway, the key policy rate is the 
relevant instrument. 
The Norwegian krone market is small by international standards. This means that the krone 
exchange rate can fluctuate considerably in times of international turbulence. This will also 
be the case the day foreign exchange market participants decide to shift out of their krone 
positions. The exit may prove narrow if too many investors decide to withdraw at the same 
time. 
I  began  my  lecture  with  Schweigaard’s  childhood  experience  of  his  family  having  to 
surrender gold and silver for the establishment of Norges Bank. This experience cannot have 
given  him  much  confidence  in  public  institutions.  As  an  adult,  both  as  a  professor  of 
economics  and  a  national  politician,  Schweigaard  became  a  trendsetter  in  the  area  of 
monetary policy conduct. 
Schweigaard’s fundamental view was based on “empirical methods” rather than the “empty 
speculation”  of  idealism.12  This  still  applies  to  monetary  policy.  Theoretically  anchored 
models  and  improved  methods  for  quantifying  them  empirically  provide  a  better  basis  for 
conducting an effective economic policy, which we take on board when we apply and further 
develop models and the analytical apparatus in Norges Bank. Knowledge about relationships 
in  the  Norwegian  economy,  in  conjunction  with  professional  judgement,  provides  a  good 
platform. 
Thank you for your attention and good luck with your studies! 
                                                 
12  Slagstad, Rune (1998), “De nasjonale strateger” (National strategists), Pax 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
