K C Chakrabarty: Connecting the dots 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
6th CII (Confederation of Indian Industry) BANKing TECH Summit 2011, Mumbai, 28 June 
2011. 
 Shri  N  Chandrasekaran,  CEO  &  MD,  Tata  Consultancy  Services  Ltd.,  Shri  Praveen 
Toshniwal,  Chairman,  CII  Western  Region,  Mr  Robert  Lattimore,  ED,  Price  Waterhouse 
Coopers (PwC), Shri Dev Ranjan Mukherjee, Head-CII Gujarat State, distinguished guests, 
friends from the media, ladies and gentlemen. I am thankful to CII for having invited me over 
to address the participants of the 6th BANKing TECH Summit 2011. At the outset, I would 
like to congratulate CII and PwC for presenting their report titled “Changing the rules of the 
game through technology” and I hope that this report would provide an insight into several 
challenges which technology seeks to address. 
Technology is changing the cultural and business landscapes beyond recognition. You would 
agree  that  world  over  organisations  are  using  the  transformative  power  of  technology  to 
create  business  value  for  today,  and  step-function  growth  for  tomorrow.  And  the  Banking 
sector is no exception. 
You would be wondering about the title of the speech and what is its relation to banking. I 
have  taken inspiration  from  one  of  the  quotes  of  Steve  Jobs  in  his  address  to students  of 
Stanford University and I quote: 
“You  can’t  connect  the  dots  looking  forward;  you  can  only  connect  them 
looking  backwards.  So  you  have  to  trust…in  something  –  or  your  gut, 
destiny,  life  whatever.  This  approach  has  never  let  me  down,  and  it  has 
made all the difference in my life.”  
Can  we  not  be  inspired  by  this  and  work  towards  “connecting  the  dots”  in  our  banking 
“space” to create a suitable business environment?  
My speech today is divided into three main parts. In the first part, I would be touching upon 
how  banking  in  India  has  changed/evolved  over  the  years,  what  the  perceived  benefits  of 
technology usage are and the complex role of the Indian banker. In the second part, I would 
be speaking on the drivers of the next generation banking which would touch upon analytics, 
technologies (including disruptive ones) and current and possible trends in technology that 
can  be  used  by  banks  which  would  emerge  as  the  game  changers.  In  the  third  part,  I 
would be covering the recent technological initiatives of the Reserve Bank. 
PART I 
Introduction - genesis of the Indian banking system 
The early 1980s were instrumental in the introduction of mechanisation and computerisation 
in  Indian  banks.  This  was  the  period  when  banks  as  well  as  the  RBI  went  very  slow  on 
mechanisation, carefully avoiding the use of “computers” to avoid resistance from employee 
unions. However, this was the critical period acting as the icebreaker, which led to the slow 
and steady move towards large scale technology adoption. 
Over the years technological innovation in banking was meant to achieve a broader reach in 
terms  of  consumer  banking  and  continued  inclusive  growth,  to  meet  the  demands  of 
households  and  businesses,  movement  from  “class”  banking  to  “mass”  banking  and  quick 
transmission of information inexpensively and conveniently. We have moved a long way from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  age  of  mechanization  in  the  Indian  banks  to  the  present  age  where  banks  are 
successfully experimenting with disruptive technologies. 
Perceived benefits of technology usage 
It was expected that technology adoption would enable the banking sector to be integrated 
with  the  global  financial  markets,  adopt  international  best  practices  and  ensure  delivery  of 
superior customer service. It was also envisaged to result in greater productivity, profitability, 
and  efficiency;  faster  service  and  customer  satisfaction;  convenience  and  flexibility;  and 
space  and  cost  savings.  It  was  presumed  that  robust  and  reliable  services  would  be 
delivered to their customers at a lower cost, as well as help banks to make better decisions. 
IT  usage  was  also  expected  to  result  in  improving  process  integration  and  flexibility, 
decreasing  operational  exceptions  that  climb  through  the  management  hierarchy,  thus, 
freeing up management time for decision making. 
But  has  this  happened?  Have  the  banks  been able  to  deliver  what  they  were  expected  to 
deliver  with  adoption  of  technology?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are  not  very 
encouraging. Often the inhibiting factors attributed to this would be poor strategic alignment 
between  business  and  IT  strategy,  absence  of  appropriate  and  re-engineered  business 
processes and delivery models, lack of project ownership, poor risk management, ineffective 
resource management and missing governance principles. 
Also  the  human  resources  in  banks  were  drained  as  they  have  not  done  appropriate 
Business Process Re-engineering before implementing IT projects. Further, the banks lacked 
in  possessing  business  and  IT  plans  to  leverage  technology  for  increasing  business  and 
profits. Last but not the least, banks have not used information for MIS and Decision Support 
systems. 
Complex role of the Indian banker - manage financial inclusion and CRM 
The role of the Indian banker is very challenging. At one end of his spectrum lies the demand 
to achieve financial inclusion as nearly 50% of the country’s population is yet to be covered 
under the formal system of banking and at the other end lies the task to fulfill the needs of 
the existing customer. 
Customer Relationship Management - completing the picture 
A  bank  which  closely  integrates  its  technology  strategy  with  its  business  strategy  can 
certainly hope to reap the benefits of CRM as it would help the bank to select and reach the 
target customers using the right channels, understand the value of the customers to the bank 
and optimize service quality, “sense and respond” to customers’ needs through appropriate 
cross-selling and up-selling tactics besides re-selling opportunities.  
Banks  are  realizing  the  need  to  understand  their  customers  like  never  before.  Today’s 
customer  expects  –  actually  demands  –  to  be  treated  as  an  individual  Consumer  and 
business  depositors  will  be  more  valuable  to  the  banks  than  ever  before;  failure  to 
communicate with these customers at the right time, through the right channel, with the right 
offer will slowly wear away the client base. Further availability of a single view of customer 
would also facilitate the banks. The earlier they realize and accept these issues, the faster 
they  would  be  able  to  face  competition  from  their  counterparts.  The  need  of  the  hour, 
therefore, is to be awake and alive to the needs of the masses and to ensure that benefits of 
technology percolate to even the weakest of them. As the saying goes “the strength of the 
chain is determined by the weakest link”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Strength of the chain - financial inclusion 
I am sure this gathering of bankers needs no introduction to financial inclusion. Today, the 
concept is an integral part of every banker’s responsibility with the focus being on “inclusive 
growth”.  With  increasing  adoption  of  technology  by  banks,  it  is  but  natural  that  all 
stakeholders  expect  benefit  from  it.  But  is  it  fair  that  the  fruits  should  be  enjoyed  only  by 
those who have access to it or those who can afford it? This in fact has been focus of the 
Government – Central Bank commitment to IT-enabled financial inclusion. Setting up of the 
Financial  Inclusion  Technology  Fund  as  well  as  urging  the  banks  to  formulate  a  board 
approved  Financial  Inclusion  Plan  for  three  years  up  to  March  2013  are  some  of  the 
initiatives in this direction. Besides resources and strategic planning, the next obvious focus 
area  is  the  delivery  model  and  this  is  where  technology  provides  value.  We  need  to 
remember that we should work towards bringing nearly 400 million citizens to the formal fold 
of the banking sector. It is not just about opening “no frill” accounts. As of today, 75 million 
“no frill” accounts have opened but there are hardly any transactions in them. Banks need to 
work  towards  providing  a  full  range  of  financial  services  and  this  would  need  a  low  cost, 
reliable, easy to use and secure technology backbone linking 6 lakh villages in the country in 
the next 4/5 years. 
The first priority is to get all banks on adopting Core Banking Solution, including all RRBs. 
Next,  a  multi-channel  approach  using  handheld  devices,  mobiles,  cards,  micro-ATMs, 
branches, kiosks etc. can be used. However, it should be ensured that the transactions put 
through such front-end devices should be seamlessly integrated with the banks’ CBS. 
Often a multitude of operational issues are quoted as reasons for lagging behind in financial 
inclusion targets. Till such time complete technology integration can take place on all fronts, 
there  are  bound  to  be areas  where  intermediate  brick-and-mortar  structures  need  to  be  in 
place.  Even  with  Business  Correspondents  issues  arise  regarding  their  supervision, 
customer grievance redressal etc. Certain accounting issues in this regards are also being 
addressed. All these operational issues and many more can be resolved if banks begin to 
look  at  financial inclusion  as  a  business opportunity  rather than  an  obligation  to  fulfill  their 
CSR objective. 
One  final  observation  before  I  move  to  Part  II.  Banks  have  to  realise  that  for  Business 
Correspondent  (BC)  model  to  succeed  the  BCs  who  are  the  first  level  of  contact  for 
customers  have  to  be  compensated  adequately  so  that  they  too  see  this  as  a  business 
opportunity.  Is  this  happening?  To  my  mind  the  answer  is  in  the  negative.  Similarly  as 
regards MSPs (mobile service providers) acting as BCs reports reaching us still suggest that 
the true spirit of co operation is yet to stabilise with each still trying to destabilise the other. 
The entire world is looking at this experiment in India and I would urge all of you to get your 
acts together. 
PART II 
Drivers of next generation banking - game changers 
The first decade of this century is behind us and with it, we have seen the euphoria of growth 
and  also  the  despondencies  brought  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  We  have  seen  that 
technology alone cannot be the panacea for all evils. There is a serious responsibility thrust 
upon  us,  and  technology  –  the  next  generation  technology  –  should  be  able  to  help  us 
navigate our way forward. Some of such key drivers which would evolve as game changers 
are mentioned below. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Identity management 
UIDAI  can  emerge  as  a  major  game  changer  as  it  would  transform  the  management  of 
identity  of  citizens  into  a  digital  mode.  By  its  usage,  customer  acquisition  and  service  can 
dramatically  improve.  Banks  would,  therefore,  need  to  innovate  and  build  systems  around 
UIDAI architecture to deliver full range of financial services. The requirements of adhering to 
the Know Your Customer (KYC) norms of banks may become easy if a citizen acquires an 
Aadhar card. 
Competition 
Interalia,  keen  competition  among  banks  as  also  IT  solution  providers  and  BCs  would 
necessitate  devising  unique  business  strategies  and  demand  that  the  banking  industry 
develop  a  robust  next-generation  architecture 
IT.  Thus 
competition would stand out as a game changer. 
to  enable  customer-centric 
Use of analytics 
Analytics can hold the key to optimized performance, informed decisions, actionable insights 
and trusted information thus emerging as a game changer. By bringing together all relevant 
information in an organization, banks can answer fundamental questions such as: 
What is happening? Why is it happening? What is likely to happen in the future? How 
should we plan for that future? 
Banks  can  use  analytics  in  a  big  way  for  Business  Intelligence  encompassing  simple 
querying  and  reporting  mechanisms  that  improve  decision-making,  Analytical  Applications 
using  data  models,  process  workflows  etc.,  Financial  Performance  and  Strategy 
Management  comprising  budgeting  &  planning  and  scorecards  and  Advanced  Analytics 
including data mining, predictive modelling, “what if” simulations etc. Banks may also look at 
carrying out “Sentiment analysis” to better understand internal customer data and understand 
perceptions about bank’s brand, products and services, and identify problems with customer 
experience so that banks can act efficiently and effectively. 
Plugging the weak links - prevention of frauds 
Banks themselves hold the most powerful weapon to predict and prevent fraud – data and 
hold a rich trove of information about customers, transactions, accounts and broader trends 
and patterns. The effective use and analysis of that data can become a game changer as it 
can  identify  fraud  patterns,  anomalies  and  common  data  points  that  reveal  associations 
between fraudulent accounts and group fraud activity. Banks must deploy the most powerful 
analytics  available,  consolidate  data  and  various  fraud  components,  and  make  use  of 
multilayered  detection  technology.  After  all,  it  is  just  good  business  to  protect  the  most 
important asset of banks i.e. customers. 
Big data – big promise 
Big  data  is  one  of  the  recent  technology  trends  that  is  catching  up.  This  catch  phrase 
encompasses  the  data,  tools,  platforms  and  analytics  needed  to  turn  large  repositories  of 
internal and external data into trends, statistics and other actionable information to help in 
taking  their  decisions.  As  costs  fall  and  new  ways  to  correlate  data  are  devised,  Big  data 
analytics may become commonplace thus surfacing as a game changer. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Alternate channels - role of the social media 
Social media is a blending of technology and social interaction for the co-creation of value 
and this can emerge as another game changer. It is one evolving channel that might help 
banks  to  generate  insights  on  customer  attitudes  and  preferences,  which  can  be  used  to 
inform marketing campaigns and help deliver better customer experiences. For banks, use of 
the  social  media  has  its  pros  and  cons.  One  influencer  can  drive  thousands  of  potential 
customers to a website. However, that same influencer can spread his or her dissatisfaction, 
causing  erosion  in  brand  equity  and  profitability.  Regardless,  embracing  social  media  may 
not be a choice for banks as of now; though it is an imperative. Fortunately, as social media 
has evolved, so too has the technology to understand users and their networks. The myriad 
benefits  that  come  from  analyzing  social  media  data  include  product  and  service  quality 
improvements, assessing customer sentiment and uncovering fraud rings. Banks can tap into 
the root of what social media means to the community, enjoy success by way of returning 
real value for their institutions. 
Customer value innovation 
Customer experience is no longer the sole domain of the branch. It exudes in everything we 
do, and customers are demanding a better experience across the bank. An emerging field in 
customer experience and behavioural research and marketing is the area of value innovation 
which can be an eventual game changer.  Innovation of the customer experience is no longer 
a choice but a necessity and more importantly a competitive weapon. An Innovations group 
or  network  created  across  the  bank  can  be  a  useful  tool  to  generate  new  ideas.  Here  I 
recollect the quote of Jeffrey Immelt, CEO of General Electricon the subject of innovation and 
I quote: 
“The  only  source  of  profit,  the  only  reason  to  invest  in  companies  in  the 
future is their ability to innovate and their ability to differentiate”. 
Current and possible future trends in technology 
Before I move over to Part III of my speech, I would like to talk about the current trends in 
technologies. It is likely that cloud computing would still remain a medium-low priority. It had 
been  estimated  that  globally,  emergence  of  new  technologies  such  as  back  office 
virtualisation, mobile telephony and Service Oriented Architecture (SoA) will reduce absolute 
spending on IT. You are all aware that Mobile telephony is pervasive with close to 700 million 
subscribers and is ubiquitous. And therefore, Mobile banking has the potential to emerge as 
a  game  changer  in  terms  of  costs,  convenience,  and  speed  of  reach.  Business models  of 
banks, telecom operators and other stake holders need to converge. 
All the above would stand out as major game changers in the future. 
PART III 
Recent initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank in the area related to technology 
I would like to draw your attention to the recent initiatives that have been taken up by the 
Reserve Bank in the areas relating to technology. 
IT vision for the Reserve Bank - 2011–17: 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  released  its  IT  Vision  document  for  2011–17.  The  major 
recommendations  of  this  document  relate  to  transforming  the  RBI  into  a  knowledge 
organisation,  using  IT  as  a  strategic  resource,  IT  governance  and  environmental  friendly 
initiatives  (including  green  computing).  The  Vision  Document  also  sets  priorities  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the  need 
commercial banks to move forward from their core banking solutions to enhanced use of IT 
in  areas  like  MIS,  regulatory  reporting,  overall  risk  management,  financial  inclusion  and 
customer  relationship  management.  It  also  dwells  on  the  possible  operational  risks  arising 
out  of  adopting  technology  in  the  banking  sector  which  could  affect  financial  stability  and 
emphasizes 
fraud 
detection / prevention  and  business  continuity  plans.  Although  banks  have  deployed 
technology  for  transaction  processing,  analytical  processing  by  banks  is  still  in  a  nascent 
stage.  Banks  may  work  towards  reaping  benefits  of  technology  in  terms  of  cost  reduction, 
improved  customer  services  and  effective  flow  of  information  within  the  banks  and  to  the 
regulator. Steps have already been initiated to implement the recommendations as given in 
the Vision document. 
risk  mitigation 
systems, 
controls, 
internal 
for 
Automated data flow 
Banks have been advised to submit a roadmap indicating the returns which can be sourced 
directly from their systems to a centralized repository without manual intervention and then 
for submission to the Reserve Bank. It was also decided to prescribe a quarterly monitoring 
format  in  which  the  banks  were  advised  to  certify  the  list  of  returns  which  have  been 
internally generated from the IT source systems without manual intervention. 
Next generation RTGS (NG-RTGS) 
The existing RTGS system, even with all upgrades, is not in a position to handle increasing 
volumes  due  to  various  limitations  with  regard  to  scalability,  flexibility  and  adaptability  to 
technological  advancements.  Further,  there  have  been  developments  globally  regarding 
features and functionalities. Therefore it was decided to replace the application to a higher 
level by using the latest technology and redefined business requirements. 
Report of the Working Group on Information Security, Electronic Banking, Technology 
Risk Management and Cyber Frauds 
The above Report examined various issues arising out of the use of Information Technology 
in  banks  and  made  its  recommendations  in  nine  broad  areas  i.e.  IT  Governance, 
Information  Security,  IS  Audit,  IT  Operations,  IT  Services  Outsourcing,  Cyber  Fraud, 
Business Continuity Planning, Customer Awareness programmes and Legal aspects. 
The  objective  of  this  Report  is  to  serve  as  a  common  minimum  standard  for  all  banks  to 
adopt  as  well  as  lay  down  the  best  practices  for  banks  for  a  safer  and  sounder  banking 
environment.  The  final  guidelines  in  the  respective  areas  as  mentioned  above  have  been 
issued to banks for implementation. 
Keeping  the  customer’s  perspective  in  mind,  banks  would  need  to  ensure  that  they 
implement  solutions 
their 
applications/solutions to ensure customer’s delight as also proliferation of banking services; 
albeit the cost of providing adequate security. Having said this, I would caution the banks that 
unless  they  keep  them  simple,  they  run  a  risk  of  losing  their  customer  base  to  their 
competitors. It is also imperative that redundancy or alternate service delivery channels are 
available  to  the  customer.  We  need  to  give  a  thought  about  this  and  provide  workable 
systems  at  the  earliest  if  we  have  to  retain  the  customer  within  the  fold  of  the  banking 
system. 
Developments in IT have also brought along a whole set of challenges to deal with. These 
include  rapid  changes  in  technology,  complexities,  high  costs,  security  and  data  privacy 
issues,  new  laws  and  regulations  and  inadequate  trained  manpower.  There  is  a  need  to 
enhance  the  governance  of  IT  and  institute  robust  information  security  measures  in  the 
banking  sector  based  on  extant  international  standards  and  best  practices.  Given  the 
instances of cyber fraud in banks recently, it is necessary to improve controls and examine 
latest  available 
that  exploit 
technology 
to  build 
the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the need for pro-active fraud risk assessments and management processes in commercial 
banks. Banks must also work towards ensuring dissemination of the IT security policy and 
procedures and related parameters amongst all operative functionaries of banks. 
Summary 
How  can  banks  achieve  enhanced  customer  profitability?  A  bank  can  take  the  first  step, 
which is to consolidate and streamline customer segment data. With accurate, segmented, 
easy-to-access data, analysis tools can be used to develop strategies and models, determine 
appropriate  sales  channels,  calculate  value  measures,  and  set  targets  to  advance  the 
profitability of each customer segment and individual customer. When the process is running 
smoothly, the bank can use business intelligence and planning technologies to monitor the 
success of its initiatives and feed the information gained back into a continuous improvement 
cycle; thus riding its way to success and meet its growth and customer profitability targets. 
Banks should move towards setting new standards that would enable them to attract, retain, 
and  service  customers  with  superior  speed,  efficiency,  and  satisfaction.  In  the  banking 
industry  use  of  Information  Technology  (IT)  is  omnipresent.  From  acquiring  a  customer, 
servicing the customer’s needs, building the customer relationship to managing employees, 
processes  and  partners,  every  action  in  the  bank’s  value  chain  relies  on  technology  to 
ensure  efficacy  and  efficiency.  Retail  banks  that  will  survive  and  thrive  in  the  current 
economic  climate  are  using  new  technologies  and  channels  to  grow  revenue  from  basic 
services, such as deposits and loans, by understanding customer needs, providing relevant 
products and services cost-effectively and calculating the unique lifetime value of customers 
to the institution. 
I would conclude by posing the following three questions to the audience: Is it possible for 
us to make our banking paperless? Cheque less? Cash less? I know that the answers to 
these questions are not easy and nobody has a readymade answer. But this should put us 
on the track to think “differently” and think “Big”. It would definitely take time to achieve the 
above goals but it is not impossible. Let me tell you that this is already happening globally. It 
is possible for us to leapfrog to achieve the above objectives? I hope it would be possible for 
the  participants  this  Summit  to  deliberate  on  these  issues  and  give  some  broad 
recommendations for the banking sector to emulate. 
I wish the Summit a grand success. Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
