Stefan Ingves: What is a useful central bank? 
Speech  by  Mr  Stefan  Ingves,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Norges  Bank 
Symposium, Oslo, 18 November 2010. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  event  in  the  honour  of  my  colleague  of  many  years, 
Mr Svein Gjedrem. The programme of the symposium raises several highly-relevant issues 
for central bankers. In my presentation, I would like to talk about crisis as a momentum for 
change, both in what we do and how we do it. I will start from the Swedish banking crisis of 
the 1990s and its implications for the development of the Riksbank. I will then proceed by 
looking at the present situation and what conclusions we and other central banks may need 
to draw from the recent global financial crisis. My focus will be on nexus between monetary 
policy, financial stability and macro-prudential regulation. 
In common with all leaders, central bank managers face the fundamental issues of ”Where 
are  we  going?”  and  ”How  do  we  get  there”?  As  in  most  other  sectors,  central  banking 
experiences changes over time and, also as in other sectors, the momentum for change is 
never  stronger  than  in  the  aftermath  of  a  crisis.  Today,  I  would  like  to  illustrate  this  by 
describing the Riksbank's thinking after our previous crisis, the changes this led to, and how 
we should use the current momentum for change (that is following the latest global crisis) to 
create a useful central bank in the period ahead. This refers to our organisation as well as to 
the  main  substantive  issues  in  monetary  policy,  regulation  and  the  supervision  of  financial 
stability. 
Prior to the crisis of the 1990s, Sveriges Riksbank was an organisation in which operational 
tasks, and to a certain extent regulation, predominated. The flagship of our organisation was 
the trading room, which had the task of maintaining a stable exchange rate, but most of our 
employees worked with the manufacture and distribution of cash. As long as the regulations 
governing the credit markets and currency flows remained in place, the Riksbank had scores 
of employees working with these regulations too. 
What are the tasks of the central bank? 
The crisis of the 1990s forced us to reconsider all this. The forced change of currency regime 
from  fixed  to  floating  implied  a  failure,  although  in  reality  the  Riksbank  could  not  have 
succeeded.  We  had  two  main  goals,  maintaining  low  interest  rates  but  also  the  fixed 
exchange rate, but we had only one instrument, namely monetary policy. Instead we became 
an  early  adopter  of  what  was  then  the  relatively  new  concept  of  inflation  targeting,  at  the 
same time as the exchange rate was allowed to float. Sweden had also been hit by a severe 
bank crisis and we saw that the central bank should play an important role in the effort to 
prevent anything like this happening again. These became our two main tasks, just as they 
have  become  in  many  other  countries.  Maintaining  price  stability  and  preventing  financial 
crises – monetary policy and financial stability. 
Both  of  these  tasks  required  three  things  that  in  combination  with  each  other  make  great 
demands of an organisation – accountability, openness and confidence. These prerequisites 
are  required  not  least  in  the  field  of  financial  stability,  where  we  were  not  given  any 
operational tools to use in peacetime; we were expected to be able to influence behaviour 
through our analyses and communication – moral suasion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
How should these tasks be achieved? 
So, my example of how to define a useful central bank began with the question WHAT, that 
is what tasks should we perform? Obviously, however, we must also ask ourselves HOW we 
should perform these tasks. Regarding the HOW, I will focus on two issues: The staffing and 
competencies of the internal organization and the governance structure. The journey that we 
have travelled since the 1990s has entailed building up know-how and expertise for our main 
tasks and focusing our operations on these tasks. In order to fund this costly investment in 
competence and communication and to focus the organisation on the main tasks, all of the 
other  operations  of  the  Riksbank  have  been  reviewed  and  made  more  efficient.  A  clear 
illustration of this renewal and redirection of competence at the Riksbank is that the number 
of employees has fallen significantly in this period from 1,100–1,200 including companies, or 
750  excluding  companies,  to  the  current  level  of  350,  while  personnel  costs  are  at 
approximately the same level as previously. Today, more than 70 per cent of our employees 
have an academic degree and we have some 50 PhDs. I am sure that the same tendencies 
can be seen in other central banks. 
The concrete effects of this in our case are that we have reduced our involvement in cash 
management  to  a  minimum,  subcontracted  the  production  of  statistics,  rationalised  our 
administration and so on. In other words, we simply decided to perform only those tasks that 
we  had  the  potential  to  perform  better  than  anyone  else.  Only  around  5  per  cent  of  the 
Riksbank's employees worked directly with monetary policy and financial stability when we 
began this journey (even fewer if we include all those who worked with the manufacture of 
cash in our companies); today, more than one third of our employees work in these policy 
fields.  Traditional  operational  duties  for  a  central  bank  like  cash  management,  payment 
system, asset management and statistics still occupy a significant share of our workforce, but 
they are not dominating the organization like they used to.  
Managing independent and self-financed institutions, we must find ways to constantly put the 
pressure  of  efficiency  on  the  organisation  ourselves.  We  do  not  have  the  “time  to  market” 
pressure  that  private  companies  have.  This  raises  questions  that  in  my  opinion  have 
appeared  far  too  seldom  on  our  agendas;  questions  about  management,  about  setting 
objectives  and  managing  resources,  about  internal  control  and,  not  least,  questions  about 
governance. How should we lead the operations of a central bank?  
Generally, a central bank may learn from any type of successful organisation, we are not that 
different. But we face a special challenge. Our governance model has often been created to 
arrive  at  a  well-founded  monetary-policy  decision.  Such  a  decision  benefits  from  a  careful 
process with a wide-ranging discussion of different scenarios that finally results in a collective 
decision-making discussion in (in our case) a group of six. This is a structure that has worked 
well  for  our  policy  decisions,  but  few  organisations  voluntarily  choose  a  collective  of  six 
individuals for the operational management of its activities. 
Our  challenge  has  thus  been  to  draw  a  clear  line  between  the  structure  for  making  policy 
decisions  and  that  for  other  decisions.  At  the  Riksbank,  this  has  entailed  relieving  the 
Executive  Board  of  responsibility 
this 
responsibility to a lower level in the line organisation. This has been – and still is – easier 
said  than  done  and  requires  constant  attention.  It  also  demands  discipline  on  the  part  of 
those  at  the  top  of  the  organisational  chart.  Nevertheless,  this  has  been  important  in  not 
burdening those at the top with micro-management tasks and in ensuring that no decision-
maker has an information advantage ahead of a policy decision. 
A final reflection regarding internal matters (following the perspectives of WHAT we should 
do and HOW we should do it) is in fact WHERE? Our playing field is increasingly stretching 
beyond  national  borders,  above  all  in  the  case  of  stability  work  in  an  open  economy  with 
cross-border  banking  operations.  In  the  central  bank  of  the  past,  international  work  was 
something that was conducted by experts in this "craft" (whatever this craft may be). Today, 
the international arena is a necessary playing field for us in the performance of our ongoing 
for  day-to-day  management  and 
transferring 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
tasks  and  we  must  create  an  organisation  that  is  capable  of  working  effectively  and  in  a 
coordinated  way  in  several  different  arenas  at  the  same  time.  International  work  must 
become an integral part of our day-to-day work on the issues, not least since the outcome of 
international negotiations will affect ourselves in the form of EU-legislation or peer pressures 
from the BIS, IMF or other bodies. 
Lessons from the recent financial crisis 
So far, I have discussed how the Riksbank organisation has developed on the basis of the 
experience  gained  during  the  previous  crisis.  What  lessons  should  we  now  learn  from  the 
latest global crisis? What are the greatest challenges and what form should a useful central 
bank take in the future? I will now go on to speak about some conceivable changes in the 
work  on  monetary  policy,  financial  regulation  and  financial  stability  and  –  not  least  –  the 
interaction  between  them.  In  addition  to  new  thinking  on  policy  and  other  issues,  we  also 
need to adapt our organisations and our governance to achieve optimum efficiency. 
The recent financial crisis provided additional input into the discussion on how the work on 
financial  stability  can  become  more  effective  and  what  instruments  are  appropriate  in 
achieving  this  goal.  Furthermore,  having  clearly  proved  that  there  are  close  links  between 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability,  the  financial  crisis  has  revitalised  the  debate  on 
whether  central  banks  need  to  consider  not  only  price  stability  but  also  financial  stability 
when setting interest rates. Just a couple of years back, the common view was that since it 
was difficult to predict a crisis, a central bank should try to do no more than react forcefully 
when the crisis was already a fact. The main explanation of this reassessment is probably 
that the costs of a financial crisis – and hence the potential benefits of preventing a crisis – 
can turn out to be much bigger than previously thought. 
In my view, regulation and supervision remain the first line of defence in preventing unsound 
developments  in  financial  markets.  The  financial  crisis  has  clearly  shown  that  there  is  an 
urgent need to reassess the regulation of the financial sector, in addition to strengthening the 
macro-prudential framework. But even with stricter regulation and supervision in place, this 
will not necessarily exclude monetary policy from having some role to play in the prevention 
of  a  financial  crisis.  Both  instruments  have  their  own  advantages  and  disadvantages.  I 
believe  that  one  of  the  challenges  for  the  future  is  to  find  an  appropriate  mix  between 
monetary  policy  on  the  one  hand,  and  regulation  and  supervision  combined  with  macro-
prudential surveillance on the other. Let me elaborate on these points. 
Monetary policy may naturally play some role in the prevention of financial crisis. After all, the 
policy rate affects the cost of credit, as regulation does. Simply put, the banks’ lending rate 
can be described as a function of the central bank’s policy rate plus an interest rate margin or 
spread. The interest rate margin is a function of the compensation charged by the banks for 
administrative  costs  and  capital  costs,  risk  premiums  and  the  banks’  profit  margins.  More 
stringent  regulations  will  entail  increased  costs  for  the  banks,  and  the  interest  rate  margin 
and the lending rate will thus increase, as it will when the policy rate is increased.  
In this sense monetary policy and financial regulation are clearly intertwined. Thus, a central 
banker  must  always  keep  in  mind  that  the  increased  use  of  regulatory  tools  will  inevitably 
affect monetary policy in different ways. Regulations will affect the interest rates that firms 
and  households  meet  and  this  is  something  that  the  central  bank  needs  to  take  into 
consideration when setting the policy rate – in much the same way as monetary policy has to 
take into account changes in interest-rate spreads due to changes in financial conditions. 
Regulation vs. policy rate 
Even if regulation and supervision are the first lines of defence, I do believe that the policy 
rate can also be used to counteract the build-up of imbalances in financial markets. When 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
facing an excessive and rapid increase in property prices and credit volumes, central banks 
should “lean against the wind”, that is keep interest rates higher than would otherwise be the 
case.  
This is by no means in contradiction with monetary policy’s goal of stabilising inflation and 
the  real  economy.  The  reason  is  that  by  “leaning  against  the  wind”,  the  development  in 
property prices and credit volumes becomes more balanced, and then the real economy and 
inflation become more stable as well. However, there are complications involved when trying 
to integrate this thinking into the conventional forecasting framework. It is, for example, not 
entirely  easy  to  incorporate  the  risks  that  may  be  associated  with  the  rapid  increase  of 
property  prices  and  credit  volumes  into  the  normal  work  of  forecasting  and  analysis.  At 
present,  efforts  are  being  made  to  better  include  financial  variables  in  the  central  banks’ 
forecasting models. A related problem is that property prices and borrowing are occasionally 
driven by psychological factors. These factors are difficult to capture in economic models, as 
these are often based on the assumption that participants will act in a rational manner. Thus, 
central banks are often forced to think outside the box and also rely on judgement. 
There are also other challenges facing “leaning”. Firstly, the imbalance must be identified at 
a  sufficiently  early  stage.  Because  of  monetary  policy  lags,  reacting  too  late  can  be 
counterproductive.  Of  course,  one  must  also  be  sufficiently  certain  that  unsustainable 
leverage  building  up,  so  that  the  upturn  is  not  being  driven  by  fundamental  factors. 
Otherwise, a higher interest rate would hinder growth unnecessarily. Furthermore, the policy 
rate is a blunt instrument in so far as it impacts all lending in the economy. If imbalances in 
financial markets require a significant tightening of monetary policy, this could have severe 
negative effects on the rest of the economy. It can require decision-makers to make difficult 
choices and it is a tough challenge to communicate.  
In this sense, regulations have the advantage that they can be applied in a more focussed 
manner,  which  can  mean  that  they  can  be  applied  more  flexibly  than  leaning  against  the 
wind. At the same time, the very bluntness of the policy rate is one of its strengths compared 
with regulations. As the policy rate impacts the cost situation in the economy in general, it is 
difficult  to  circumvent  it.  Consequently,  applying  the  policy  rate  or  regulatory  tools  as  the 
situation requires may be the most practical path.  
Let  me  now  shift  the  focus  from  monetary  policy  to  the  work  on  financial  stability,  but  the 
issue will still to a large extent be how to achieve a balance between financial stability and 
monetary policy. 
Challenges for regulatory design 
Not only the regulations but also the whole area of macro-prudential surveillance aiming at 
financial  system  stability  have  become  a  highly  topical  issue  in  the  aftermath  of  the  latest 
crisis.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  financial  regulation  was  excessively  focused  upon  individual 
institutions under the erroneous assumption that the system would remain stable as long as 
the  individual  institutions  were  stable.  Consequently,  processes  that  created  risks  on  the 
system level were ignored. I certainly welcome the current international discussion regarding 
the  inclusion  of  more  explicit  systemic-risk  preventive  regulations,  or  macro-prudential 
regulation, in the regulatory framework. 
An  important  challenge  for  the  design  of  a  new  regulatory  framework  will  lie  in  finding  an 
appropriate balance: On the one hand, the regulations will need to be sufficient to effectively 
reduce  the risk  of  financial  crisis; on  the  other  hand  they  should  not  be  so  stringent  as  to 
impose unnecessary costs on the financial sector. It is a matter of finding the right level of 
regulation. In this context it is very illuminating to read the so called MAG and LEI reports 
which attempt to translate various levels of Basel III-regulation into estimated higher interest 
costs  for  the  end-borrower.  As  an  example,  each  percentage  point  in  higher  capital  is 
calculated to lead to 15 basis points in higher interest cost.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Proposals  of  time-varying  regulation,  such  as  time-varying  capital  requirements,  are 
particularly  interesting.  Their  more  apparent  connection  with  risk  build-up  may  make  them 
less costly than the alternative of introducing a constant higher minimum requirement. Time-
varying  regulations  might  also  be  structured  in  a  way  to  be  more  pointed  than  monetary 
policy,  which  also  varies  with  time.  For  instance,  reducing  the  LTV  threshold  ratio  for 
maximum lending against real estate can be more effective in mitigating a housing bubble 
than general interest rate increases. Along the same line of thought, another possibility is to 
introduce differentiated regulation. After all, the credit market is not entirely homogenous and 
it  is,  for  example,  possible  to  make  a  distinction  between  a  household  market  and  a 
corporate market. Making some regulation sector specific is also a viable way of reducing the 
regulatory costs.  
There  is  also  a  debate  regarding  the  role  that  central  banks  should  play  in  matters  of 
supervision and the application of rules. Various institutional arrangements can be imagined. 
One  possibility  would  be  for  the  central  bank  to  determine  the  policy  rate  and  for  the 
supervisory authority to determine regulations. Time-varying regulations also raise the issue 
of  what  would  be  an  appropriate  form  of  institutional  organisation.  In  this  context,  one 
possibility would be for the central bank to not only to determine the policy rate but also to 
determine  the  time-varying  regulation,  while  the  implementation  of  non-time  variable 
regulation  would  be  the  responsibility  of  the  supervisory  authority.  Does  it  make  sense  to 
merge  the  central  bank  with  the  supervisory  agency?  Obviously,  the  financial-stability 
analysis,  and  to  some  extent  also  the  monetary-policy  analysis,  must  be  informed  by  the 
micro-prudential  analysis,  and  vice  versa.  Countries  have  chosen  different  approaches  to 
this, often based on country-specific characteristics such as legislation or even tradition. I am 
open  and  do  not  believe  in  a  one-size-fits-all solution.  The  important  aspects  are  that  you 
ensure  an  open  exchange  of  information  and  close  cooperation  between  the  functions,  as 
well as adequate resources.  
On governance we must also take into account what is called “political economics”. The most 
efficient  theoretical  solution  may  not  be  achieved  if  it  contradicts  interests  of  power  and 
influence.  
How should we structure the decision-making process in order to take account of the nexus 
between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability?  Central  banks  have  adopted  different 
approaches: Some have a separate Board for monetary policy, others also have a separate 
Board for financial stability. Most central banks have the same Board for both, but may have 
separate Deputy Governors responsible for each of the two strands. 
What matters, as I see it, is that “the buck stops somewhere”. There must be a decision at 
some  high  managerial  level  which  balances  the  interests  of  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability as well as other central bank responsibilities. The organisation and processes of the 
central  bank  must  also  be  structured  so  that  they  facilitate  the  analysis  preceding  the 
decision  leading  to  a  balanced  view,  based  on  both  monetary  and  financial  stability 
considerations. For instance, there should be inter-departmental working groups.  
Financial stability lies within the Riksbank’s mandate 
The  importance  of  having  a  well-structured  framework  for  monitoring  overarching  financial 
system  stability  and  identifying  potential  weaknesses  is  relatively  new  compared  to  the 
structures for conducting monetary policy. In Sweden (probably also in Norway), it started as 
a result of the banking crisis in the early 1990s.  
The Riksbank sees system stability as being in our remit. The Riksbank Act states that we 
shall “promote a safe and efficient payment system” and we interpret “payment system” in a 
broad sense including not only the narrow payment infrastructure but also major banks and 
other institutions and markets that are necessary for the intermediation of payments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Should the responsibility for financial stability rest with the central bank? Yes, I think so. The 
supervisory agencies are structured to focus on the microprudential aspects, but the central 
banks are organised and staffed for macroprudential analysis, which is also needed for the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  supervisory  work  needs  to  take  the  overall  systemic 
situation into account but the macro analysis they need could well be performed elsewhere 
and shared with the supervisors. 
The next question is what kind of mandate the central bank needs for its financial stability 
work. This is a tricky issue. An inflation-targeted monetary policy is relatively straight-forward, 
but how to define “financial stability”? A seemingly precise definition, without matching tools, 
could lead to failures and reduced confidence in the central bank, and also for its monetary 
policy. On the other hand, if the definition is too general it will be impossible for Parliament 
and  others  to  evaluate  how  the  central  bank  manages  the  task.  Maybe,  there  could  be  a 
hierarchy  of  targets  –  a  broad  one  in  the  legislation  and  a  narrower  one,  which  may  be 
adapted  to  the  actual  situation,  which  is  then  communicated  by  the  central  bank  to  the 
general public on a regular basis. This is similar to monetary policy practices. 
A related issue is the one on central bank independence. Our present independence refers 
to the conduct of monetary policy. Do we need an extension so that it also covers our work 
on  financial  stability?  This  question  has  not  been  fully  analysed  yet,  but  I  think  that  the 
politicians  would  hesitate  to  transfer  such  powers  unless  central  bankers  can  find  really 
strong arguments. 
There are several arguments for conducting financial stability work in the central bank such 
as: 
– 
– 
There is a clear link to monetary policy; 
Central  banks  usually  run  the  large  value  payment  system  which  is  an  important 
nexus in the financial system; 
Central  banks  may  provide  exceptional  liquidity  assistance  –  ELA  –  to  problem 
banks, but must then understand the implications for the system as such; 
 Not only banks will destabilise the system; 
Systemically-important institutions pose even greater challenges than we thought; 
Liquidity developments must be closely monitored; 
Much of the stability work is crisis-oriented – both the precautionary work and that dealing 
with  actual  crisis  situations.  The  Riksbank  participates  in  many  international  fora  that 
promote stronger frameworks to prevent or at least to manage crises. The recent global crisis 
led  to  a  number  of  conclusions  showing  that  we  need  a  broader  framework  in  which  to 
analyse financial stability and deal with problem situations. For instance: 
– 
– 
– 
There are clear linkages between submarkets and also between jurisdictions. 
The experience gained during the crisis leads to some specific challenges for central banks: 
– 
Central banks must maintain a sufficient capacity to provide liquidity to meet sudden 
needs, but at the same time we must maintain strong incentives to avoid the banks 
and  markets  relying  on  central  bank  funding  rather  than  approaching their  normal 
channels. 
We must review our framework for extending ELA; 
Our  analysis  needs  to  focus  more  than  before  on  liquidity  developments  in  major 
cross-border bank groups. Where such groups exist, the home country of the parent 
bank is vulnerable to threats to financial stability in other countries, both where the 
funding  markets  are  located  and  those  where  the  group  has  subsidiaries  or 
branches.  For  Sweden,  this  situation  is  accentuated  since  our  banking  system  is 
four  times  larger  than  our  GDP,  and  since  our  major  banking  groups  depend  on 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 funding in international markets to a high degree. The financial stability analysis will 
have to expand to identify threats early on and to deal with them. We must be alert 
to potential contagion between unsustainable monetary and fiscal policies in other 
countries  and  their  potential  repercussions  on  the  stability  of  our  own  country’s 
financial groups. 
The crisis showed the need for clear roles and mandates for the authorities involved 
in crisis management, in particular for resolving problem banks. The Riksbank, the 
Financial Supervisory Authority, the National Debt Office and the Ministry of Finance 
had frequent contacts throughout the crisis and coordinated their actions. That said, 
the  division  of  responsibilities  is  not  clear  in  all  situations  and  the  Riksbank  has 
asked  Parliament  to  clarify  the  legislation  on  this  and  a  number  of  other  crisis-
related issues.  
Matching goals with tools 
The Riksbank has a fairly well-developed structure for macro-prudential analysis. But if we 
do identify deficiencies, how can we implement the necessary changes? Winston Churchill 
once pleaded, in a famous World War II speech, to President Roosevelt: "Give us the tools, 
and we will finish the job!" 
So far, the Riksbank has lacked specific “hard” tools for financial stability. We have relied on 
communication and moral suasion, hoping that our arguments will convince financial system 
actors  to  change  their  behaviour.  Our  experience  is  mixed.  Before  the  crisis,  our  banks 
reduced their credit expansion to the Baltic countries, warned by us, but they did too little and 
too  late.  One  conclusion  is  that  we  must  be  even  clearer  and  more  forceful  in  our 
communications. The Riksbank is presently analysing its tool kit with the aim of arriving at a 
proposal in the near future. 
I  do  not  think  it  is  necessary  that  the  tools  should  be  vested  with  the  central  bank.  For 
instance, there could be a rule implying that if the central bank sends a recommendation to 
the supervisory authority, they must “act or explain”. The supervisors could then use micro-
prudential  tools  such  as  increasing  bank  capital  requirements  for  certain  activities  or 
jurisdictions or reducing the maximum level of loan-to-value ratios. 
As in my previous discussion on monetary policy versus regulation, I believe that monetary 
policy  and  promoting  financial  stability  are  mutually  interdependent.  During  the  recent 
financial  crisis,  we  observed  the  difficulties  of  conducting  monetary  policy  in  a  non-stable 
financial environment. Interest rate signals from the central banks were sometimes dwarfed 
by  contradictory  events  in  the  markets.  Conversely,  financial  stability  is  dependent  on  a 
smooth and predictable monetary policy. Hence, in the long run, the interests of monetary 
policy  and  financial  stability  coincide.  However,  in  the  short  term  we  may  need  new  tools, 
which are better focussed on the specific situation.  
To sum up: Central banks need to adapt their work processes, organisation and governance 
to  achieve  an  optimal  balance  between  monetary  policy,  financial  stability  and  micro-
prudential goals. There is not yet any internationally-agreed best practice on these issues but 
the  debate  is  vivid.  Everybody  realises  that  these  issues  must  be  solved  before  there  is 
another system-wide crisis.  
External evaluation also of financial stability work 
Before ending, I would like to mention the present external analysis of the Riksbank on the 
lessons from the financial crisis in relation to our monetary policy and financial stability work. 
This will reveal if we are – indeed – a useful central bank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Each year, since the Riksbank was granted autonomous status in 1999, the Committee on 
Finance  has  carried  out  its  own  evaluation  of  monetary  policy.  In  2006,  the  Committee 
commissioned an external independent evaluation of Swedish monetary policy covering the 
period  2000–2005.  In  2007,  a  year  after  the  first  external  independent  evaluation  was 
published, the Committee on Finance decided to repeat this exercise every four years. In the 
spring of this year, the Committee appointed professors Charles Goodhart and Jean-Charles 
Rochet to carry out the second external independent evaluation, which is to be completed by 
the autumn of 2011.  
This  time,  the  evaluators  are  to  review  Swedish  monetary  policy  in  2005–2010  and  in 
particular to analyse the lessons to be learned from the financial crisis. The evaluation will 
not only cover monetary policy but also the Riksbank’s work with financial stability and the 
results  of  this  work,  with  emphasis  on  the  analysis  done  and  measures  taken  before  and 
during the financial crisis. Among other things, the terms of reference of the evaluation also 
stipulate the need to examine whether the remit of promoting a safe and effective payment 
system in the Riksbank Act is formulated in such a way as to ensure that the Riksbank can 
effectively work for financial stability. Furthermore, the evaluators are to investigate whether 
the Riksbank has the instruments and competencies required to maintain financial stability.  
Final words 
To end where I started: I foresee that current trends on staffing will continue. The portion of 
the  Riksbank  staff  outside  the  core  activities  will  be  further  reduced,  but  the  competence 
level will increase yet higher. Governance issues will be high on our agenda, not least trying 
to  find  suitable  solutions  for  monetary  policy,  financial  stability  and  the  interdependence 
between them. 
All of these issues are very much in line with my thoughts on what has to be done to create a 
truly useful central bank – to allude to the theme of this Symposium. I thank you for listening. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
