Rundheersing Bheenick: 2010 – annus horribilis and coping strategies 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 27 January 2011. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius’ website (http://bom.intnet.mu). 
 Dear Stakeholders, 
1. 
Labelling 2010 “annus horribilis” does not even begin to do justice to the range and 
depth of “nasties” that this fateful year unleashed on us. Impervious to the concerted battery 
of policies and measures – many unusual and unconventional – rolled out to combat it, the 
global economic crisis raged on and completed its 4th year. The sovereign debt crisis in the 
Eurozone  periphery  which  hit  the  world  in  April  2010  gave  still  another  dimension  to  the 
global crisis, adding to the woes generated by the US subprime mortgage crisis in 2007, the 
British  Northern  Rock  fiasco  in  2008,  and  the  global  Lehman  Brothers  debacle  in  2009. 
Closer to home, the “considerable internal turbulence” that I wrote about in my last Letter to 
Stakeholders  of  28  January  2010  emerged  into  a  full-blown  crisis  before  the  ink  was  dry. 
Within a fortnight, I found myself, as ex-Governor, embattled and embroiled in a very public 
Fact Finding Committee while the Bank found itself without a substantive Governor for three 
months. 
As  things  turned  out,  my  good  name  was  cleared  by  the  Fact  Finding Committee 
2.  
and  I  was  entrusted  a second  mandate.  My  position  was  further  comforted  by  a  landmark 
judgment  from  the  Supreme  Court  whose  ruling  augurs  well  for  good  governance  at  the 
Bank. I am therefore delighted to be able to share with you, just as I have been doing for the 
past three years, the highlights of the past year, and my own reflections on developments in 
the banking sector and the economy at large.  
3.  
Terms  like  “exceptional”  or  “extraordinary”  have  been  used  to  describe  the  times 
which the financial world has been going through. As new challenges keep coming up, the 
“extraordinary”  seems  set  to  become  the  “new  normal”.  During  most  of  2010,  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius Tower continued to battle strong headwinds and stormy waves, struggled to keep 
the country’s financial and monetary affairs in order, and contributed its share to the national 
effort to keep the economy on an even keel. At the helm of the Bank, I could feel the weight 
of  the  responsibility  and  the  immensity  of  the  task  of  steering  the institution  through  these 
rough seas to calmer waters. Governing is not an easy job and will never be – these days 
central bank Governors are all in it together or as the French would say: Nous sommes tous 
logés  à  la  même  enseigne!  Fellow-Governors  would  no  doubt  understand  my  plight!  The 
story goes that King Solomon had tasked a servant with the specific job of whispering to him 
constantly – irrespective of whether things were going well or badly – “This too will pass.” 
Challenging as the current situation may be, we can confidently say that this too will pass 
but, when it passes, it is extremely unlikely that we shall revert to the status quo ante. 
4.  
The  economy,  global  or  domestic,  did  not  improve  much  compared  to  last  year. 
After  some  signs  of  recovery  at  the  end  of  2009,  the  global  economy  was  hit  by  another 
outbreak  –  the  euro  debt  crisis  which  brought  with  it  a  fresh  wave  of  uncertainty  and 
heightened  risk  aversion.  Global  economic  recovery  turned  out  to  be  slow  and  uneven. 
Unemployment  stayed  persistently  high.  Consumer  demand  in  our  main  export  markets 
stayed weak. Our small and vulnerable economy continued to suffer from the slowdown in 
our main markets; driven by foreign direct investment inflows, our currency appreciated; our 
export operators shouted their “misery” at the top of their voice, casting a pall of pessimism 
over the business community. Policymakers moved decisively and in concert to take steps to 
revitalize the economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  Bank  embarked  this  year  on  an  unconventional  journey  and  was  quite 
5.  
innovative. When exporters started complaining about exchange rate volatility, we introduced 
foreign  currency  swaps  to  help  exporters  mitigate  their  foreign  exchange  risk.  When  we 
suspected that the foreign exchange market was not functioning as it should have been, we 
initiated  a  forensic  investigation  and  ended  up  supplying  foreign  exchange  directly  to  the 
largest  domestic  buyer  of  foreign  currency.  We  came  up  with  measures  such  as  Special 
Deposits  and  revised  our  approach  to  monetary  operations;  in  addition  to  the  usual  short-
term Bank of Mauritius Bills, we introduced Bank of Mauritius Notes of longer-term maturity to 
deal with the unprecedented level of excess liquidity in the system, itself accentuated by a 
mis-timed net redemption of Treasury paper. The Monetary Policy Committee boldly slashed 
the  Key  Repo  Rate  by  a  full  percentage  point  at  the  first  sign  of  further  slackening  of 
domestic economic activity expected in Q1 2011. The Bank took the parallel decision to raise 
the Cash Reserve Ratio from 5 per cent to 6 per cent. These policy actions were meant to 
complement  the  Economic  Restructuring  and  Competitiveness  Programme  put  in  place  by 
Government  to  foster  and  support  long-term  restructuring  and  deleveraging  of  firms  in  the 
export-oriented sectors. Towards the end of the year, the Finance (Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act 2010 brought significant changes to the Banking Act 2004 and the Bank of Mauritius Act 
2004, which gave the Bank more room for manoeuver. 
6.  
In  the  press  and  among  other  economic  commentators,  much  scepticism  was 
expressed  about  the  merits  of  some  of  our  initiatives.  Doubts  were  cast  on  the  likely 
effectiveness of our policies. There was unrelenting pressure, beyond the business lobby, to 
rejig  our  exchange  rate  regime  and  depreciate  the  rupee.  We  maintained  a  firm  and 
principled  stand,  focusing  on  price  stability  and  its  corollary,  distributional  neutrality.  In  the 
circumstances, our exchange rate regime proved robust – our rupee showed relative stability 
in the second half of the year, in contrast with the currency manipulation going on in other 
parts of the world. The historically-low inflation rates recorded during the year are another 
success story. Our banking sector remained one of the drivers of growth in the economy and, 
except  for  the  tenacious  excess  liquidity,  there  were  no  signs  of  instability  in  the  financial 
system. These contributed to lift business sentiment in the country in H2 2010. 
7.  
Let  me  give  a  brief  overview  of  the  main  developments  of  the  past  year.  As  in 
previous  Letters  to  Stakeholders,  some  of  the  issues  are  explored  in  greater  detail  in  the 
links at the end of the relevant paragraphs. 
8.  
Economy The Mauritian economy maintained a commendable growth path despite 
a challenging external and internal environment. In 2010, the economy grew by 4.2 per cent, 
not  much  below  the  trend  rate  and  significantly  higher  than  the  3.1  per  cent  of  2009.  The 
“Construction”,  “Hotels  and  Restaurants”,  “Transport,  Storage  and  Communications”  and 
“Financial Intermediation” sectors remained the main drivers of growth. The unemployment 
rate barely moved, rising from 7.3 per cent in 2009 to 7.5 per cent in 2010, in sharp contrast 
with  rising  joblessness in  many  advanced  economies.  We  expect  a  growth  rate  of  4.2  per 
cent in 2011. This would depend on recovery in our main trading partners but could be faster 
if we succeed in reducing our export-dependence on slow-growing traditional partners. The 
time is ripe to develop a new economic model for Mauritius, more resilient to future shocks, 
and able to provide a firmer foundation for sustainable growth.  
Monetary Policy Over the past year or so, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) 
9.  
attained its cruising speed. The inclusion of two distinguished foreigners as members of the 
MPC  brought  an  international  perspective  and  provided  additional  insights  to  enrich  the 
deliberations of the Committee. Decisions were taken most of the time either by consensus 
or by unanimity, reflecting the growing maturity of the MPC while avoiding group-think. MPC 
members are functioning as one entity. This enabled the MPC to maintain a stable monetary 
policy  stance  for  18  months.  Thus  the  Bank  achieved  with  success  its  mandate  of 
maintaining price stability. We brought down the headline inflation rate from 8.5 per cent in 
March 2009 to 2.3 per cent in January 2010, the period over which the Key Repo Rate (KRR) 
had been kept on hold at 5.75 per cent. We succeeded in containing inflation below 3 per 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
cent  until  November  2010,  with  an  expected  surge  in  December  in  the  wake  of  rising 
commodity prices.  
10.  
At its September 2010 meeting, after weighing the risks to the growth and inflation 
outlook over the policy-relevant horizon, the MPC decided unanimously to cut the KRR by 
100 basis points to support domestic recovery. We were swimming against the tide as many 
emerging country Central Banks had already started monetary tightening while others were 
on hold. The MPC left the policy rate unchanged at its last meeting of the year in December. 
The  significant  monetary  easing  provided  additional  support  to  the  on-going  economic 
restructuring  and  gave  exporters  of  goods  and  services  breathing  space  to  embark  on  a 
major  drive  to  improve  productivity,  diversify  products  and  markets,  and  enhance  national 
competitiveness. 
Monetary policy formulation is a task that requires constant upgrading of skills and 
11.  
knowledge to stay ahead of the curve. This year, with technical assistance from the IMF, we 
embarked on the development of a macroeconomic model to provide greater consistency in 
policy advice and risk analysis, and help in the process of monetary policy decision-making. 
After three  years of operating experience, the MPC is ripe for a review of its composition, 
methods  and  procedures.  As  the  year  ended,  we  were  finalising  details  for  hiring  an 
independent consultant to carry out this exercise. I have no doubt that the review would lead 
to  a  stronger  and  more  transparent  MPC,  with  greater  focus  on  the  real  economy  and  its 
intricacies, and clarify the role of the central bank in preserving macroeconomic and financial 
stability. 
Financial  and  Money  Market  Excess  liquidity  continued  to  plague  the  banking 
12.  
system  during  the  year.  The  resulting  aggressive  bidding  for  Treasuries  drove  short-term 
yields to all time-lows, accentuating the disconnect with the KRR. Two reasons can account 
for  this  unprecedented  level  of  excess  liquidity:  (i)  the  substantial  net  redemption  of 
Government  securities  and  (ii)  the  slowdown  in  the  pace  of  credit  growth  in  the  wake  of 
slackening economic activity. 
13.  
To  contain  the  growing  level  of  excess  reserves,  we  revisited  our  approach  to 
monetary operations with the introduction of new longer-term Bank of Mauritius instruments. 
In August and September 2010, we issued Bank of Mauritius Bills with maturities of 91-Day, 
182-Day and 364-Day and Bank of Mauritius Notes of 2-Year, 3-Year and 4-Year maturities. 
Furthermore, we increased the Cash Reserve Ratio on two occasions, from 4.50 per cent to 
5.00  per  cent  in  mid-June  2010,  and  to  6.00  per  cent  in  October  2010.  With  the 
implementation of these measures, banks’ excess reserves briefly returned to normal levels. 
They started increasing again in December.  
14.  
Domestic  Foreign  Exchange  Market  Towards  the  end  of  2009,  the  volume  of 
transactions on the domestic spot foreign exchange market declined, causing some volatility 
in  the  market.  We  viewed  the  situation  as  being  exceptional  enough  to  warrant  our 
intervention to maintain orderly conditions in the market. This led the Bank to devise foreign 
currency  swaps  facilities  tailor-made  for  the  needs  of  the  export-oriented  sectors,  to  inject 
liquidity  in  the  market,  thereby  avoiding  the  build-up  of  uncertainty  in  the  system  and 
hampering economic activity.  
15.  
With the introduction of the foreign currency swaps facility, activities in the foreign 
exchange  market  rapidly  returned  to  normal  and  liquidity  conditions  remained  comfortable 
throughout the year. The notable exception was the unwarranted volatility and nervousness 
observed in May 2010. Suspecting currency manipulation on transactions during the period 
14 to 26 May 2010, we considered it vital to thoroughly investigate the matter. We retained 
the services of a forensic expert to probe into potential foreign exchange market irregularities 
and manipulation that could have taken place in the domestic foreign exchange market.  
Euro  weakness  The  Euro  crisis  was  in  full  swing  when  I  started  my  second 
16.  
mandate in late May 2010 and, as mentioned earlier, export sector operators and business 
lobbies shrieked about the threats of a weak euro to their business. I immediately set about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
calming the market and held a series of meetings with businesses and their associations as 
well as with consumer representatives, including the Mauritius Export Association, the Joint 
Economic Council, the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Association des 
Consommateurs  de  l’Ile  Maurice  and  the  Institute  for  Consumer  Protection.  There  were 
strong calls, relayed by the media, for the Bank to engineer an immediate depreciation of the 
rupee “before it was too late” – in the words of an influential leader-writer – or, worse to peg 
our  rupee  to  the  euro,  failing  which,  it  was  claimed,  there  would  be  massive  layoffs 
accompanied  by  a  hollowing-out  of  our  industrial  fabric.  Never  before  has  vested  interest 
masqueraded so brazenly as the public interest. We stood firm on our stand that a Central-
Bank-engineered  fall  in  the  value  of  the  rupee  could  provide  some  immediate  benefit  to 
certain  sectors  but  this  would  be  at  the  detriment  of  the  wider  economy  and  against  the 
country’s longer-term interest. We were severely criticised in many quarters, especially the 
business press, but, with hindsight, it is easier to appreciate the stand that we took.  
17.  
A corollary to the rupee appreciation against the euro and depreciation against the 
US dollar in the early months of 2010 was the worsening of the excess demand for foreign 
currencies  –  importers,  looking  for  dollars,  were  keen  to  purchase  foreign  currency  and 
exporters, with export earnings mostly in euros, more inclined to stay on the sideline. At the 
request  of  the  State  Trading  Corporation  which  encountered  difficulties  to  obtain  foreign 
currency from the market to meet the import bill for food staples and fuel, the Bank agreed to 
meet its foreign exchange requirements as from June 2010 through direct sales. In parallel, 
we purchased the foreign exchange from the market itself with a view to retaining a neutral 
position and preventing a build-up of supply pressures. Faced with unprecedented currency 
volatility, we began intervening in the forex market in mid-July 2010, after an unbroken spell 
of 85 weeks since November 2008 when prevailing conditions did not warrant intervention. 
We ended the year with a net purchase of foreign currency of USD315.6 million.  
18.  
Throughout  2010,  we  maintained  the  foreign  currency  swaps  facility  that  we  had 
introduced in December 2009 but its range was extended to include swaps of shorter periods 
from  one  to  three  months.  We  continued  to  make  available  to  banks  the  Special  Foreign 
Currency Line of Credit, aggregating USD125 million, which we had introduced in December 
2008 for the financing of the country’s trade when domestic banks faced unusual conditions 
and could not rely on traditional trade lines from their correspondent banks overseas. 
19. 
 As a result of our actions and initiatives during the year to ensure orderly conditions 
on the market, we observed some normalisation in the Domestic Foreign Exchange Market 
which recorded a total turnover of foreign exchange transactions that was slightly higher than 
that of last year. More importantly, we have been able to contain the volatility of the rupee 
exchange  rate  with  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  indices,  MERI1  and  MERI2, 
remaining quite stable and moving rather close to their trend level throughout the year. 
Reserves  Management  Despite  the  turbulent  times,  the  Bank  has  succeeded 
20.  
against  all  odds  in  maintaining  a  comfortable  level  of  reserves.  Our  earlier  fears  that  we 
might find ourselves in the grip of the sudden stop syndrome, and begin to lose reserves, 
proved  unfounded.  In  December  2010,  the  gross  external  reserves  of  the  Bank  exceeded 
Rs78  billion  while  net  international  reserves  crossed  the  Rs106-billion  mark,  representing 
around  44  weeks  of  imports.  Our  gold  holdings  amounted  to  around  Rs4.9  billion  as  at 
31 December 2010. 
21.  
In my previous Letters to Stakeholders, I had mentioned the consultations which I 
had  initiated  with  the  Sovereign  Investments  Partnership  (SIP)  Department  of  the  World 
Bank, and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), since 2008. We were driven by the 
need  to  enhance  the  returns  on  our  foreign  exchange  reserves  which  had  witnessed  a 
drastic 
these 
consultations  and,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank,  I  signed  an  Investment  Management  and 
Consulting  Agreement  with  the  Vice  President  and  Treasurer  of  the  International  Bank  for 
Reconstruction and Development in Washington DC in October 2010, with the objective of 
low-interest-rate  environment.  We  successfully  concluded 
the 
fall 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
diversifying  our  portfolio  into  new  asset  classes.  We  thus  joined  the  nearly  three  dozen 
central  banks  and  a  dozen  other  international  financial  institutions  that  have  chosen  to 
entrust the management of some of their reserves to SIP, which currently manages around 
90 billion dollars of assets. A second reserve manager, and one which is so big in terms of its 
placing power and reserves under management, will ensure competition in the management 
of  our  growing  reserves  which,  until  then,  had  been  entrusted  to  the  BIS  only.  We  also 
signed an Agreement with the BIS for the management of a euro portfolio in addition to our 
existing US dollar and Pound Sterling portfolios. 
22.  
As far back as 2007, when we were faced with significant Foreign Direct Investment 
inflows, I had mooted the idea of setting up a Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF). Then, as now, 
we  also  had  to  grapple  with  the  excessive  focus  of  the  National  Pension  Fund  (NPF)  on 
rupee instruments, with a consequential negative pressure on domestic rates. The SWF was 
envisaged  as  a  vehicle  to  harness  the  resources  of  the  NPF  together  with  the  “excess” 
reserves of the Central Bank – for which the Bank could have a bigger risk appetite than for 
its core reserves that it must manage conservatively – , supported by some investments from 
Government-linked institutions and the central Government itself. The whole fund would be 
managed under the aegis of the Central Bank and would still qualify as reserves in the IMF 
definition.  That  was  our  vision  of  a  SWF  through  which  we  hoped  to  achieve  several 
favourable  outcomes  simultaneously  –  to  enhance  our  returns  on  our  foreign  exchange 
reserves, diversify the portfolio of partner institutions, and relieve pressure on Treasury rupee 
instruments. We welcome the announcement of the creation of the SWF in the 2011 Budget 
Speech. Prior to the setting up of the fund, there would be consultations with experts in the 
field to advise us on the model that would best suit our needs. 
Stimulus  Package  Following  consultations  with  Government  and  other 
23.  
stakeholders, the Bank made available to Small and Medium Hotels, and Small and Medium 
Planters two Special Lines of Credit of Rs1.5 billion and Rs0.5 billion respectively, to support 
these  sectors  in  the  wake  of  the  euro  crisis.  This  measure  was  announced  as  the  Bank’s 
contribution to the Economic Restructuring and Competitiveness Programme. 
Debt Management Our priority over the recent years has been the lengthening of 
24.  
the maturity profile of Government debt and the development of an active secondary market 
for Government securities. The latter would enable price discovery and the development of a 
yield curve which could be used as a reference for pricing other fixed-income securities, thus 
paving the way for the development of corporate bonds. Our ultimate objective is to broaden 
and deepen our financial markets. We thus came up with a series of measures ranging from 
auctions  of  single-maturity  instruments  and  the  issue  of  10-year  and  15-year  benchmark 
bonds. We also issued an index-linked bond to diversify the Government debt portfolio and to 
extend the range of investment opportunities for investors.  
25.   We  continued  work  on  modernising  the  conduct  of  auctions  of  public  paper.  The 
process of on-line auctioning of Treasury Bills, which now relies on a web-based solution, will 
switch to live mode in 2011. This will result in reduced time for submission, processing and 
settlement of bids. We shall extend this to the auctions of Treasury Notes and Government 
Bonds at a later stage. 
Market Development Since I first joined the Bank as Governor, I have endeavoured 
26.  
to create conditions conducive to the development of a liquid and vibrant money and foreign 
exchange market. Although we recognise that this is no easy task, given the small size of our 
market and the limited number of players, we have taken a number of steps in that direction. 
We worked closely with a Sub-Committee of the Mauritius Bankers Association on Capital 
Market Development to review the current setup of the Primary Dealer System and identify 
measures to boost secondary market trading. We have developed a reference money market 
rate, to be known as the PLIBOR – Port Louis Inter Bank Offered Rate – which will be used 
as  a  benchmark  for  both  money  and  foreign  exchange  transactions,  including  derivatives 
transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
We  welcomed  a  new  player  in  our  financial  markets,  the  Global  Board  of  Trade 
27.  
(GBOT),  which  was  launched  in  October  2010.  GBOT  is  the  first  international  multiasset 
class  tech-centric  exchange  that  offers  a  basket  of  commodity  and  currency  derivative 
products as well as currency pairs. GBOT started with brisk business in its very first days of 
trading. We expect that the launch of GBOT will stimulate the forward markets in currencies. 
One  word  of  caution  to  those  who  might  be  tempted  to  use  this  platform  for  rupee 
speculation – the Bank is closely monitoring developments in this area. 
Bank’s  Balance  Sheet  The  capacity  of  the  Bank  to  conduct  open-market 
28.  
operations to absorb excess liquidity is constrained by the low return on our foreign assets 
resulting  from  the  successive  cuts  in  interest  rates  by  major  central  banks  where  our 
reserves  are  mainly  invested.  The  significant  decrease  in  income  on  our  foreign  assets 
impacted negatively on the Bank’s profitability. Thus during FY 2009/10, the Bank’s operating 
profit decreased to Rs72 million from Rs1.4 billion in the previous year. 
29.  
Although profitability and profit-maximisation per se do not figure among the Bank’s 
objectives  and,  rightly,  are  not  the  focus  of  our  attention,  we  need  a  central  bank  with  a 
strong balance sheet at the apex of our financial system so that we are always in a position 
to  play  our  role  in  safeguarding  and  upholding  the  public  interest.  Central  banks  are 
increasingly  perceived  as  independent  guardians  of  stability  –  we  are  conscious  of  the 
heightened expectation and trust that central banks inspire in the public. In addition to the 
search  for  yield  via  portfolio  diversification  and  re-visiting  our  risk-return  stance  which  I 
mentioned before, we need to envisage other measures to strengthen our balance sheet. 
Banking  Sector  Performance  Our  banking  sector  continued  to  be  resilient  and 
30.  
strong. In year-on-year terms, total assets of banks registered a growth of 13.4 per cent and 
credit  to  the  private  sector  increased  by  10.9  per  cent  as  at  end  Q3  2010.  Segment  A 
(domestic) assets grew by 7.5 per cent while Segment B (offshore) assets grew by 17.3 per 
cent. Domestic credit expanded by 11.2 per cent while Segment B credit facilities grew by 
19.6  per  cent.  Deposits  remained  the  major  source  of  funding  for  banks,  accounting  for 
73 per  cent  of  total  resources.  Between  September  2009  and  September  2010,  their  total 
deposits grew by 14 per cent. Our banks recorded a slight decline in their level of profits but 
nonetheless remained quite profitable, with a Return on Assets of 1.2 per cent as at end Q3 
2010, compared to 1.7 per cent for the corresponding period in the previous year.  
31.  
The performance of Non-Bank Deposit Taking Institutions (NBDTIs) did not evolve 
much. A notional decline of one per cent in total assets was registered over the 12-month 
period  ending  September  2010  as  a  result  of  the  migration  of  assets  held  by  two  leasing 
companies  to  the  banking  sector.  To  achieve  regulatory  convergence,  there  is  now  a 
requirement for NBDTIs to move over to a system of Capital Adequacy Ratio as the indicator 
of  financial  strength.  In  line  with  the  provisions  of  the  Banking  Act  2004,  ABC  Leasing 
Company Ltd was the first NBDTI to graduate to a full bank – ABC Banking Corporation was 
licensed  on  1  June  2010.  With  the  coming  into  operation  of  this  bank,  there  are  now 
19 banks operating in Mauritius.  
Regulation and Supervision We sharpened and streamlined our approach to the 
32.  
supervision of banks and other financial institutions falling under our purview and remained 
vigilant throughout 2010. We followed closely developments in international accounting and 
supervisory standards and issued new guidelines to the industry to ensure that our banking 
industry follows international best practices.  
33.  
Our onsite and offsite monitoring was strengthened further. We made our CAMEL 
rating more dynamic and broad-based. In consultation with the banking sector, we finalised 
plans to make the CAMEL rating of banks public as from Q1 2011. Given that many of our 
domestic banks are not rated, we take the view that the publication of the CAMEL rating will 
help to plug a vital information gap. In this area also, we are taking an unconventional step – 
it is not common for such ratings to be placed in the public domain. I must compliment our 
bankers for their sagacity in agreeing to go along with us on this front.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The reforms undertaken by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), 
34.  
which were agreed by the Governors and Heads of Supervision and endorsed by the G20 
leaders, culminated in the issue of new global regulatory standards, the Basel III framework. 
According to Nout Wellink, Chairman of the BCBS, Basel III, which prescribes higher levels 
of capital adequacy and incorporates a global liquidity framework, will reduce significantly the 
probability  and  severity  of  banking  crises  in  future,  protect  financial  stability  and  promote 
sustainable economic  growth.  The  overall  capital  adequacy  ratio  of our banks  was around 
16 per  cent  on  average  under  Basel  II  –  higher  than  the  minimum  required.  We  do  not 
foresee any major problem for our banks to attain the revised capital adequacy requirements 
of Basel III. 
Islamic  Banking  As  indicated  previously,  we  granted  our  first  Islamic  banking 
35.  
licence in the Mauritian jurisdiction in October 2009 which was a major step in translating the 
vision  of  the  Authorities  to  provide  an  alternative  mode  of  financial  intermediation,  thus 
enhancing the options available to bank customers. We expect the bank to be operational by 
the end of Q1 2011. 
36. We have taken some decisive steps forward in our quest to make Mauritius a centre of 
high  quality  Sharia-compliant  financial  services.  First,  building  on  our  membership  of  the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board,  we  participated  actively  in  the  preparatory  work  and 
became  a  founder  member  of  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation 
(IILM)  –  a  Supranational  body  created  to  issue  bench  mark  Islamic  liquidity  instruments  – 
launched  during  the  year  and  headquartered  in  Kuala  Lumpur,  Malaysia.  This  gives  us 
membership on the Governing Board of IILM for a period of ten years and access to Sharia-
compliant  financial  instruments  for  better  liquidity  management.  Second,  the  Bank  entered 
into  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  central  bank  of 
Malaysia, which inter alia envisages support for building skills. We intend to use this support 
to sharpen our regulatory and supervisory oversight of Islamic banks in Mauritius.  
Payments Systems The modernisation of the payments system has been on the 
37.  
cards  since  2007  but,  like  many  other  significant  projects  at  the  Bank,  got  unfortunately 
entangled  with  protracted  procurement  difficulties  arising  from  the  Boardroom  squabble 
referred to earlier. With these hurdles cleared, the Bank will soon be equipped with a state-
of-the  art  payments  system,  a  model  for  the  region,  which  would  serve  as  a  platform  to 
implement a series of innovative projects such as the Bulk Clearing System and the Cheque 
Truncation  System.  Already,  the  new  software  for  the  Mauritius  Automated  Clearing  and 
Settlement System, which we commissioned during the year, allows us to provide extended 
multi currency services – a première in Africa.  
Central  Bank  Statistics  We  directed  our  efforts  towards  improving  the  quality, 
38.  
coverage and timeliness of banking statistics as part of our contribution to the IMF’s Special 
Data  Dissemination  Standards.  We  made  ourselves  more  visible  in  the  international 
statistical  community  by  our  admission  to  full  institutional  membership  in  the  prestigious 
Irving  Fisher  Committee  on  Central  Bank  Statistics  in  February  2010  and  by  participating, 
along with the Central Statistics Office, in marking the 1st World Statistics Day. The World 
Statistics  Day  is  celebrated  across  the  globe  in  recognition  of  the  importance  of  official 
statistics and of the core values of service, integrity and professionalism in providing those 
statistics.  As  providers  of  data  on  banking,  money,  finance  and  international  trade,  we 
subscribe fully to these values.  
Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau  The  Mauritius  Credit  Information  Bureau 
39.  
(MCIB)  has  proved  to  be  an  efficient  platform  for  critical  information-sharing  to  enhance 
borrower discipline and proper risk management by lenders. We extended the scope of the 
MCIB to other credit providers outside the banking sector and we are currently envisaging 
the inclusion of new products in the MCIB database.  
Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  The  Bank  is  considering  the  establishment  of  a 
40. 
Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  (DIS)  as  an  additional  safety-net  for  the  banking  sector.  Two 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Overseas  Missions  As  in  the  preceding  years,  I  am  providing  details  of  the 
factors would facilitate the implementation of the DIS in Mauritius: first the Banking Act 2004 
already  provides  for  the  establishment  of  the  DIS  and,  second,  the  local  financial 
environment is dominated by banks. A working group has been set up at the Bank to look 
into the development of a DIS framework for Mauritius. The Bank is endeavouring to secure 
participation in the International Association of Deposit Insurers as an Associate in order to 
be  able  to  draw  on  professional  advice  and  capacity-building  technical  assistance  in  this 
area. 
Regional and International Presence We continued to mark our presence on the 
41.  
regional and international front. My Deputy Governors and I attended various meetings both 
in the region and further, and we ensured that the Bank was duly represented in regional and 
international fora when our own commitments did not allow us to be away from the Bank. In 
addition,  we  hosted  and  facilitated  a  number  of  regional  and  international  meetings  which 
improved the Bank’s visibility further. A sure sign of the growing interest of global financial 
players in our jurisdiction was the visit of a delegation from the Industrial and Commercial 
Bank  of  China  –  the  largest  commercial  bank  in  China.  This  was  the  second  time  that  a 
delegation  of  bankers  from  China  visited  the  Bank  –  the  first  delegation  came  from  China 
Development Bank.  
42.  
The  office  of  AFRITAC  (South),  one  of  the  two  new  African  Technical  Assistance 
Centres which the IMF is establishing in Africa, will be temporarily located on the 15th Floor 
of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Tower  until  we  manage  to  complete  the  renovation  of  the  old 
building – this was another project that fell victim in the prolonged Boardroom battle – where 
AFRITAC will have a dedicated floor. This office will also increase our visibility at both the 
regional and international front.  
43.  
overseas engagements of the Governor and the Deputy Governors.  
COMESA Committee of Central Bank Governors We had the pleasure to host the 
44.  
31st  Meeting  of  the  Bureau  of  the  COMESA  Committee  of  Governors  of  Central  Banks  in 
August 2010. At the regular meeting of the COMESA Committee of Central Bank Governors 
held  in  Mauritius,  it  was  decided  that  central  banks  should  aggressively  promote  REPSS  
–  the  Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System  –  in  their  country  with  all  major 
stakeholders.  The  Bank  accordingly  launched  a  REPSS  sensitisation  campaign  to  present 
the  system  to  the  Mauritius  Bankers  Association,  commercial  banks,  and  to  the  Mauritius 
Export Association.  
At the 15th meeting of the COMESA Committee of Governors held in Khartoum in 
45.  
November, I handed over the chairmanship to the Governor of the Central Bank of Sudan but 
continue as first Vice-Chairman. The Bank’s participation in these and other regional fora at 
the  level  of  SADC,  AACB,  and  ADB,  translates  the  Bank’s  willingness,  involvement  and 
commitment to take regional integration further.  
Memorandum  of  Understanding  The  Bank  continued  to  expand  its  network  of 
46.  
Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) with other regulatory bodies and agencies. We signed 
an  MoU  with  the  Competition  Commission  of  Mauritius  relating  to  mutual  consultation 
regarding competition in the financial system and to enhance cooperation and coordination in 
cases of anti-competitive behavior where both institutions may have overlapping powers. We 
signed an MoU with Bank Negara Malaysia to establish a collaborative framework aimed at 
enhancing  mutual  cooperation  on  capacity-building  and  human  capital  development  in  the 
financial services sector. The Bank also entered into an MoU with the Agricultural Research 
and  Extension  Unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Agro  Industry  Food  Production  &  Security  for  the 
development of a Bamboo Garden in Midlands.  
Dialogue  with  Stakeholders  We  intensified  our  dialogue  with  our  stakeholders 
47.  
during the course of the year. This dialogue process, that I have endeavoured to reinforce, 
has  been  able  to  build  up  a  synergy  among  different  economic  actors  rendering  our 
policymaking  more  effective.  As  the  Mauritian  economy  got  buffeted  by  the  turmoil  in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
international markets, this exercise allowed us to feel the pulse of the economy and to come 
up with the most appropriate measures.  
48.  
We closed our dialogue with our stakeholders by the traditional end-of-year Annual 
Dinner in honour of Economic Operators which saw a record attendance. This occasion was 
graced  by  the  presence  of  the  Managing  Director  of  De  La  Rue,  today  the  world’s  largest 
commercial printer of banknotes, which obtained its first banknote printing contract 150 years 
ago to supply Mauritius with banknotes of three denominations. This was also the occasion 
for the Bank to launch the second platinum commemorative coin of the “Father of the Nation 
Platinum Series.” The third coin of the series will be issued in 2011. The second and third 
coins  bear  on  their  obverse  Mauritian  National  Heritage  Sites,  namely  the  Aapravasi  Ghat 
and  Le  Morne  Brabant  respectively,  and  on  their  reverse,  the  effigy  of  the  Father  of  the 
Nation, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam. After the third year, all three coins will be issued in a 
collector’s set. 
Human Resources and Capacity Building During the course of the year, 15 staff 
49.  
members retired from the Bank under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme. We recruited two 
analysts while two left the Bank on 31 December 2010. Over the last three years, the size of 
the Bank’s workforce has declined from 261 in December 2008 to 241 in December 2010, 
and we are endeavouring to change the skills set and knowledge base of our staff to reflect 
the changing nature of the Central Bank’s functions. The challenges facing the Central Bank 
are  becoming  more  daunting.  Our  staff  benefited  from  a  wide  range  of  training  courses  in 
their respective areas of work, underscoring our ever-increasing need to keep abreast with 
the latest developments in the banking and finance world. The issues that central banks the 
world over have to deal with have drastically changed and we need to have very diverse and 
specialized skills within the Bank to meet the challenges. In the course of the coming year I 
intend to supplement our training calendar with an executive training program on leadership, 
team-building and management skills. 
Corporate  Social  Responsibility  I  launched  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  National  Inter 
50.  
Club Youth Championship in 2007 in the context of the Bank’s 40th Anniversary celebrations. 
Today  the  Championship  has  become  a  regular  fixture  in  the  Bank’s  calendar  of  activities 
and  constitutes  an  essential  part  of  our  corporate  social  responsibility  to  the  Nation.  Our 
objective  in  organising  this  event  is  to  give  the  opportunity  to  our  youth,  in  Mauritius  and 
Rodrigues, to show their talents in sports. We are proud to note that this event has been a 
very  fertile  ground  for  the  establishment  of  National  records.  It  is  equally  rewarding  that 
12 athletes, who first came to national attention at the Bank-sponsored championship, have 
been selected to represent the country in the “Jeux des Iles 2011” in Seychelles.  
Overall  Assessment  of  the  Year  2010  In  the  preceding  paragraphs,  I  have 
51.  
endeavoured to give you some of the highlights of the year that has just gone by. Against the 
backdrop of the continuing global crisis, complicated by a governance crisis at the Bank, the 
job  of  the  Central  Bank  Governor  has  proved  to  be  still  more  challenging  than  usual.  The 
year started on a very uncertain note but ended on a quite different tone. It began with dark 
mutterings and a back-handed compliment from a local newspaper crowning the Governor 
“L’Homme  (Controversé)  de  L’Année”  –  The  “Controversial”  Man  of  the  Year.  This  was 
followed by deafening cries from various quarters that the Governor of the Central Bank had 
made abusive use of his powers. Ironically, the year ended on an altogether different note, 
with a newspaper headlining “Super Bheenick”, and claiming that the Governor was set to 
become  a  super  Governor  with  wide-ranging  powers.  Such  statements  were  prompted  by 
some  measures  announced  in  the  Budget  Speech  and  by  changes  that  the  Finance 
(Miscellaneous  Provisions)  Act  2010  brought  to  the  relevant  banking  and  central  bank 
legislation. I am sad to see that there has been a wrong reading of many of those measures 
in some quarters and this has distorted the debate somewhat.  
52.  
The fact of the matter is that, with the amendments to the banking legislation and 
the measures announced in the Budget Speech, the Bank has been endowed with additional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
responsibilities.  The  amendments  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  2004  are  intended  to  give 
greater flexibility to the Bank and give us the means to operate expeditiously. We want to 
develop the foreign exchange and derivatives market, which is part of our financial market 
development and financial deepening agenda. We already have operations on derivatives – 
the  foreign  currency  swaps.  We  will  be  able  to  promote  the  development  of  the  Islamic 
money market and the issuance of Sharia-compliant instruments, and instruments other than 
the Bank of Mauritius Bills, for the management of liquidity in the market. The amendments 
to the Act will also allow us to grant loans to non-financial institutions in emergency situations 
to  minimise  costs  to  both  the  final  borrower  and  the  taxpayer.  That  is  the  logic  behind  all 
these  changes  –  to  allow  the  Central  Bank  to  operate  more  efficiently  as  well  as  pre-
emptively. We may also be looking at a revamping of the financial regulatory landscape with 
the potential merger of the Financial Services Commission and the Bank of Mauritius and we 
shall be guided by the expert advice of consultants in the field. 
53.  
Let  me  summarise  about  how  we  have  fulfilled  our  mandate  this  year.  On  the 
inflation  front,  we  achieved  a  signal  success  –  we  have  witnessed  historically-low  rates  of 
inflation in the past two years. Our country has witnessed an annual pre-crisis growth rate of 
5 percent on average – our biggest challenge would be to achieve higher growth rates. Our 
banks are healthy, profitable and well-capitalised, and we are ready to move to Basel III. On 
the  financial  stability  side,  we  do  not  face  much  vulnerability  as  we  keep  enhancing  our 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  We  have  even  been  commended  by  international 
institutions for the appropriateness of our policies, especially our exchange rate policy. So I 
have  a  number  of  reasons  to  feel  satisfied  and  happy.  Most  of  all,  I  feel  a  sense  of 
accomplishment with regard to my mandate. Having said that, we are perfectly aware of the 
challenges that 2011 will bring with it and we have no intention of resting on our laurels.  
54.  
Dear Stakeholders, at the beginning of a new year, when the world economy is on a 
two-speed  recovery  path  –  with  advanced  economies,  our  main  partners,  still  recovering 
slowly,  and  the  emerging  economies  bubbling  along  to  the  point  of  overheating,  in  some 
cases  –  ,  the  global  economic  environment  still  remains  very  uncertain.  Our  small  and 
vulnerable economy is likely to suffer new strains and stresses. But I look at the future with 
cautious optimism. We have been able to stay the course at the height of the crisis and I am 
confident that we will be able to come out of it in pretty good shape. Let us therefore harness 
all our resources and efforts to make things better for all of our fellow-citizens. 
I wish you all a very happy and prosperous New Year. 
Rundheersing Bheenick 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
