Charles I Plosser: A credible commitment to normalization 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  conference  “Capital  Markets  in  the  Post-Crisis 
Environment”,  hosted  by  the  Global  Interdependence  Center  and  the  Bank  of  Finland, 
Helsinki, 6 June 2011. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
Good morning. It is indeed a pleasure for me to be with you today. This is my first visit to 
Finland and it has proved to be more beautiful than I imagined. So I want to thank the Global 
Interdependence Center and the Bank of Finland for their hospitality and the opportunity to 
participate in this conference. 
It is also a pleasure to join my central bank colleagues from France, Sweden, and, of course, 
Finland at such an event. 
The theme of this session, central bank policy after the crisis, is both timely and extremely 
important.  The  financial  crisis  and arguably  the  worst  global  recession  of  the  post-war  era 
have challenged policymakers around the world. While for most of the hardest hit countries, 
the recession trough has passed and a moderate recovery is underway, the actions by fiscal 
authorities and  central  banks,  intended  to  mitigate  the  damage  from  the  crisis,  have  left  a 
legacy  of  governments  with  huge  budget  deficits  and  central  banks  with  record-low  short-
term interest rates and balance sheets of unprecedented magnitudes. 
Yet  even  though  the  policy  responses  by  central  banks  were  similar  and  extraordinarily 
accommodative, a few have already moved toward normalization. As we are likely to hear 
shortly from Stefan Ingves, the Riksbank has raised its policy rate to 1¾ percent from just 
25 basis points since the middle of last year. This tightening of policy was accompanied by a 
reduction in its lending to the Swedish banking system, which reached more than 300 billion 
Swedish krona at the depth of the crisis. Other central banks, including the Federal Reserve 
and the Bank of England, face some daunting challenges as they try to unwind from their 
extraordinary actions and seek to restore confidence and credibility in their monetary policy 
frameworks. Today I would like to share with you my perspective on how I think about the 
normalization of monetary policy in the U.S. I should note the usual disclaimer applies in that 
I speak for myself and not necessarily for the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
The new normal  
My  thoughts  about  normalization  are  driven  by  some  fundamental  principles  that  I  believe 
should guide the way central bankers approach policy. I believe that policymakers should do 
their utmost to be clear about their goals and objectives and then communicate how policy 
will be conducted to achieve those goals. Committing to a systematic, or rule-like, approach 
to  policy  decisions  makes  policy  more  predictable  and  will  generally  improve  economic 
outcomes.  Policy  choices  should,  of  course,  be  dependent  on  changes  in  economic 
conditions, but the nature of the response should be communicated to the public in advance, 
so that they understand how policy is likely to react to an evolving economy. 
Thus,  the  first  step  in  thinking  about  how  central  banks  should  plan  their  exit  from 
unprecedented policies is determining the goal or where you want to go. You simply do not 
start out on a trip without some idea of where you are headed. Put another way, if we are to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
design an appropriate exit strategy, we must know what the policy framework will look like at 
the end of the journey. Before describing where I think we should be headed, let me review 
the current state of affairs. During the last three years, the Federal Reserve, like many other 
central banks around the world, has taken extraordinary actions to mitigate the impact of the 
financial  crisis  and  support  the  return  of  economic  growth.  Our  traditional  instrument  of 
monetary policy, the federal funds rate, has been near zero for nearly two and a half years. 
Since  it  is  infeasible  to  reduce  the  targeted  federal  funds  rate  below  zero,  the  Fed 
implemented  additional  policy  accommodation  through  changes  in  its  balance  sheet.  As  a 
result,  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  has  grown  more  than  threefold,  from  nearly  $900  billion 
before the crisis to about $2.7 trillion today, and its asset composition has shifted significantly 
from mostly short- to medium-term Treasuries to longer-term Treasuries, mortgage-backed 
securities (MBS), and agency debt. 
I believe that as it normalizes policy, the Fed should be headed toward a system in which, 
first,  the  federal  funds  rate  is  re-established  as  the  primary  instrument  of  monetary  policy; 
second, the Fed’s balance sheet is much smaller, probably less than $1 trillion, so that the 
federal  funds  rate  trades  above  the  interest  rate  paid  on  reserves;  and  third,  the  balance 
sheet’s  composition  returns  to  predominantly  shorter-term  U.S.  Treasuries.  For  those  who 
get excited about the minutiae of central bank operating procedures – and I know there are 
some of you in the audience – this system is referred to as a corridor system and has been 
used by a number of central banks around the world, including the Riksbank and the ECB. 
For the U.S., this decision of which system we choose is probably more of an issue than for 
many central banks because prior to the crisis, the Federal Reserve Board was not permitted 
to  pay  interest  on  reserves  and  now  it  is.  The  corridor  system,  which  I  prefer,  calls  for 
monetary policy to set the federal funds rate at a level within a corridor between the interest 
rate paid on reserves and the rate at which the Fed is willing to lend to banks through the 
discount window – or lending rate. For the policy rate to lie above the rate paid on reserves, 
the supply of reserves must be limited. If the supply of reserves is very large – as is currently 
the  case  –  banks  have  no  incentive  to  economize  on  reserves  and  the  federal  funds  rate 
would  equal  the  interest  rate  on  reserves.  As  a  consequence,  the  interest  rate  paid  on 
reserves becomes the de facto policy rate and the fed funds rate becomes irrelevant. This 
environment is sometimes called a floor system. 
I  believe  the  choice  of  an  operating  framework  is  important.  While  we  would  be  able  to 
conduct monetary policy by simply setting the interest rate we pay on reserves and allowing 
the federal funds market to become irrelevant, the floor system is very troubling to me. In a 
floor  system,  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet  would  become  irrelevant.  Thus,  one  could 
envision using it as an independent instrument of policy, perhaps increasing it or decreasing 
it as needed to provide emergency liquidity to the banking system. The problem is that the 
floor system offers no restrictions on how the balance sheet might be used. If our operating 
framework  divorces  our  balance-sheet  decisions  from  monetary  policy,  it  becomes  a 
tempting  instrument  for  future  policymakers  inside  or  outside  the  central  bank  to  use  it  for 
non-monetary-policy purposes. This could jeopardize the independence of the central bank 
and,  if  abused,  would  be  a  source  of  many  unforeseen  problems.  For  example,  using  the 
Fed’s balance sheet to conduct fiscal policy-like actions could prove detrimental to long-run 
economic stability. So I believe the corridor system, with its constraints on the balance sheet, 
is  more  likely  to  preserve  central  bank  independence  and  limit  the  temptation  to  use  the 
Fed’s balance sheet as an instrument of fiscal policy. 
A road map to the future 
Once we know where we want to go, we can begin to map out a path that will take us there. 
By  articulating  a  systematic  plan  that  gets  us to  our  objective,  we  improve  communication 
with the public, reduce uncertainty in the marketplace, and lend credibility to the commitment 
that policymakers will follow through. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Any exit plan that is to lead us to a corridor-like operating system has to describe how the fed 
funds rate or interest rate on reserves will be increased and how the balance sheet will be 
reduced.  There  are  many  ways  to  do  so,  but  in  every  case,  we  must  remember  that 
monetary policy decisions should be contingent on the evolution of the economy. 
In late March 2011, I outlined a proposal for a systematic, rule-based approach that would 
involve the Fed’s selling assets from its portfolio as it increased its policy rate, with the pace 
of sales dependent on the state of the economy. The plan would get us back to a normal 
operating environment in a timely manner, with the Fed’s balance sheet reduced to a size 
that would again allow the federal funds rate to be the primary policy instrument. 
I  also  suggested  that  the  first  step  of  the  normalization  process  would  be  to  increase  the 
interest rate paid on reserves and the targeted federal funds rate away from the zero bound, 
perhaps to 50 basis points. The Federal Open Market Committee would also announce its 
intention  to  stop  re-investing  the  proceeds  from  maturing  agency  and  Treasury  securities. 
These decisions would initiate the normalization process and begin to raise the funds rate 
and  shrink  the  balance  sheet  from  the  start.  How  the  process  evolves  from  that  point  will 
depend on the plan and the state of the economy. 
The Committee would also announce that at subsequent meetings it would regularly evaluate 
the policy rate based on economic conditions, as it always does. Sales of assets between 
meetings beyond those maturing would also be tied to economic conditions, just as policy 
rate decisions are. The Fed would announce a pace of sales, which would increase when the 
Committee  chose  to  increase  the  policy  rate.  Since  the  amount  of  securities  to  be  sold 
between meetings would be determined in advance, the public and markets would see the 
Fed shrinking its balance sheet in a predictable manner. For example, the Committee might 
set  a  sales  pace  of  $20  billion  of  assets  between  FOMC  meetings  and  announce  that  for 
each  25  basis  points  the  funds  rate  target  is  raised,  it  would  increase  sales  by,  say, 
$125 billion of assets during the intermeeting period, which is about the pace at which we 
bought securities. If the policy rate was not raised there would be no additional sales. There 
is  logic  to  selling  assets  faster  when  the  policy  rate  rises.  If  the  economy  is  growing  then 
market demand for both risk and duration is also likely to expand. So selling assets is likely 
to be less disruptive. Note that asset sales would not be a separate policy decision but driven 
by the same monetary policy decision process used to change the policy rate. This plan is 
consistent with the Fed’s dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment growth. It 
recognizes that our policy actions will be dependent on the evolution of the economy and ties 
the shrinking of the balance sheet explicitly to those actions. 
Of  course,  other  plans  could  be  adopted.  For  example,  an  even  simpler  alternative  plan 
might  be  to  announce  in  advance  that  we  will  shrink  the  balance  by  some  fixed  dollar 
quantity between each FOMC meeting or each month. That pace would not change unless 
something extraordinary occurred. Such a plan, in essence, puts the shrinking of the balance 
sheet on a predetermined glide path, which would allow the markets to predict how the Fed’s 
balance sheet and asset sales will evolve. The major difference between this plan and the 
first one I described is that asset sales would not be conditioned on the state of the economy 
but would proceed at a steady pace. As a result, the interest rate would become the primary 
policy instrument and vary with economic conditions. To make such a plan credible, I believe 
that the Committee would have to state clearly that the hurdle for deviating from the planned 
pace of sales would be a high one. Otherwise, the temptation to manipulate the pace of sales 
based on some unspecified criteria might arise. Indeed, the major thrust of either plan is to 
avoid just such a temptation. A good plan will provide clear, reliable guidance on how asset 
sales will proceed and the conditions under which they may or may not change. 
Either of these plans represents a viable strategy for normalization. One makes asset sales 
state contingent in the same way that policy rate decisions are state contingent. The other 
puts  sales  on  a  predetermined  path  while  the  federal  funds  rate  becomes  the  main 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
instrument  for  implementing  policy.  Both  are  plausible  plans,  and  it  is  not  clear  that  one 
strategy dominates the other. 
Perhaps  more  important  than  the  details  of  any  exit  plan  is  the  very  establishment  of  a 
systematic plan itself – one that can be clearly communicated to the markets and the public 
in a way that reduces uncertainty. A systematic plan will help define for the public and the 
markets not only where we are headed but also how we will get there. Of course, monetary 
policy  will  always  be  dependent  on  the  evolution  of  the  economy,  but  the  more  we  can 
articulate how we will conduct policy during the transition to normalization, the more we will 
reduce uncertainty and contribute to stability. Announcing an explicit plan in advance would 
also  enhance  the  credibility  of  our  commitment  to  normalization.  If,  for  some  reason,  the 
Committee chose to deviate from the plan, it would be forced to explain its reasons to the 
public. 
This brings me to one final but important consideration for the Fed’s normalization strategy. 
Unlike  most  of  the  major  central  banks  around  the  world,  including  the  ECB,  the  Bank  of 
England, and the Riksbank, the Federal Reserve has not clearly announced and committed 
itself  to  an  inflation  target.  Some  form  of  inflation  targeting  is  widely  accepted  as  a  best 
practice by the majority of central bankers and monetary economists around the globe. Given 
the extraordinary amount of liquidity present in the U.S. banking system, it is reasonable for 
the  public  to  be  concerned  about  the  prospects  for  inflation  down  the  road.  If  the  public’s 
expectation of inflation continues to drift upward, whether it is caused by higher commodity 
prices,  concerns  over  fiscal  deficits,  or  the  Fed’s  large  balance  sheet,  we  could  find  our 
credibility under pressure. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  just  within  the  last  year  or  so  the  public  discussion  has  swung  from 
concerns that the U.S. might face a period of sustained deflation to concerns that monetary 
policy and rising commodity prices could produce higher-than-desired inflation. It is troubling 
that  the  public’s  inflation  concerns  can  be  so  volatile.  It  suggests  that  there  may  be  less 
confidence in the credibility of the Fed’s commitment to price stability than we might desire. 
Yet,  if  we  are  to  exit  from  this  period  of  extreme  monetary  accommodation  in  a  way  that 
neither leads to higher inflation nor risks undermining the recovery, the public’s confidence in 
the  Fed’s  commitment  to  price  stability  will  be  crucial.  For  this  reason,  it  would  be  highly 
desirable for the Federal Reserve to publicly commit to a clear and explicit inflation objective. 
Conclusion 
The  actions  taken  in  response  to  the  economic  and  financial  crisis  have  left  the  Federal 
Reserve  and  a  number  of  other  central  banks  far  from  what  most  central  bankers  would 
consider a normal operating environment. One of the challenges policymakers must face is 
how to commit to a plan for normalizing the operating framework for monetary policy. There 
is  no  one  right  plan  to  achieve  this  outcome.  However,  it  is  very  important  that  we  think 
carefully  about  that  process  and  seek  ways  to  credibly  commit  to  exit  from  the 
unprecedented policies. 
I  have  tried  to  outline  some  of  the  features  that  I  think  will  be  important  for  the  Federal 
Reserve  as  it  seeks  to  unwind  its  large  balance  sheet  and  establishes  a  new  operating 
framework for monetary policy. 
I  believe  we  can  be  most  successful  if  we  communicate  a  systematic  plan  that  describes 
where  we  are  headed  and  how  we  will  get  there.  Moreover,  such  a  plan  would  be 
strengthened if the FOMC adopted an explicit numerical objective for inflation, which would 
help ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
