Jean-Claude Trichet: The essence of economic and monetary union 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, as the Guest of 
Honour at the Schaffermahlzeit, Bremen, 11 February 2011. 
 Gentlemen,  
I have given speeches in many different places  over the years, but today’s setting here in 
Bremen is a very special one.  
Speaking at an event that has taken place every year since 1545 is a very great honour. We 
central bankers pride ourselves on thinking about the long term, but even for us, 466 years is 
a deeply humbling period of time. 
I would like to thank you very, very warmly for inviting me to become part of this longstanding 
tradition in the nautical, commercial and political life of your city.  
This dinner is unique, not just in Germany but across Europe. And as guests can be invited 
only once in a lifetime, we cherish every minute of this fortune. Let me therefore thank you on 
behalf of all of the guests here today.  
 The  name  “Freie  Hansestadt  Bremen”  speaks  volumes  of  this  city’s  long  history  of  proud 
independence. Yet the historic independence of Bremen has never meant isolation. 
On the contrary, the greatness of this city lies in the Hanseatic League, an early example of 
the  principles  on  which  the  European  Union  is  founded  –  that  commercial  and  cultural 
interchange  builds  common  interests  between  peoples  –  and  that  such  interchange  raises 
the costs of conflict, facilitates compromise and fosters cooperation. 
The Hanseatic cities symbolised the principle of “doux commerce” about which Montesquieu 
would  later  write:  “nations  that  traffic  with  each  other  become  reciprocally  dependent;  and 
their union is founded on mutual necessities.”  
Monetary  matters  were  part  of  a  thriving  environment  for  commerce  for  centuries,  and  at 
times single currencies were established. For a long period in the 14th to 16th centuries, in 
the  Wendischer  Münzverein,  the  core  cities  of  the  Hanseatic  League  –  Lübeck,  Hamburg, 
Lüneburg, Wismar, Rostock, Stralsund – shared a common currency, the “Lübische Mark”.  
Today, a far wider group of great port cities shares a common currency. The ports of the old 
Hanse-cities Bremen, Hamburg, Lübeck, Rostock, Wismar and Tallinn all lie within the euro 
area  –  but  so  too  do  Helsinki,  Rotterdam,  Antwerp,  Bordeaux,  Cadiz,  Porto,  Marseilles, 
Genoa and Venice – to name but a few.  
The  European  single  market  is  a  vast  economy.  The  euro  area  itself  is  a  truly  continental 
economy.  The  population  of  331  million  exceeds  slightly  that  of  the  United  States,  and  in 
geographical terms Lisbon and Helsinki are almost as distant as Los Angeles and New York.  
Interestingly,  the  European  Union  as  a  whole  and,  in  particular,  the  euro  area  are 
significantly more open in terms of trade and finance.  
In the year prior to the crisis, 34% of GDP of the euro area was imported or exported. In the 
United  States,  the  ratio  was  24%  of  GDP.  The  euro  area  is  the  world’s  largest  exporter, 
accounting for 15% of world trade – 50% higher than the shares of each the United States 
and China.  
Europe’s  openness  is  also  remarkable  in  international  finance.  Last  year,  international 
financial  assets  and  liabilities  reached  almost  170%  of  GDP,  compared  with  140%  for  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
United States and 80% for Japan. Inward and outward direct investment, at 47% and 39% of 
GDP, are larger than for the United States, where both are less than 30%. The euro area is 
indeed a remarkably open economy.  
Speaking in Bremen, I would say that the euro area of today is a continuation of the best 
tradition of the Hanse: open to the world.  
 The  maritime  traditions  of  Bremen  resonate  deeply  with  me.  Having  family  roots  in  Saint-
Malo in my beloved region of Bretagne, I share your passion for sailing and the sea.  
Indeed, I have often used a seafaring metaphor for Europe’s monetary union, arguing that it 
is better to be on a large and steady ship rather than on a small vessel, particularly in the 
turbulent waters we have experienced in recent years. 
As guardians of the single currency, we at the European Central Bank know that we have to 
stay on course. We have only one needle in our compass, which is price stability. We are 
presently observing an increase of prices largely reflecting higher energy prices. As I said on 
behalf  of  the  Governing  Council  both  in  January  and  in  early  February,  risks  from  the 
medium-term outlook for price developments are still broadly balanced but could move to the 
upside. This is the reason why we must remain permanently alert.  
 This evening I would like to speak to you about the achievements of our monetary union and 
about  the  challenges  for  the  broader  construction  of  EMU  –  Europe’s  economic  and 
monetary union.  
Having had the privilege of serving as ECB President for the past seven years, I can report 
that  we  have  achieved  a  great  deal,  and  all  Europeans  should  take  pride  in  these 
achievements. Yet several improvements need to be made to our economic union. 
We  need  to  ensure  that  monetary  union  is  complemented  by  fiscal  and  macroeconomic 
policies  that  are  focused  on  sound  and  stable  principles  and,  therefore,  foster  sustainable 
growth.  
We need to ensure that all governments have sound public finances.  
And we need to ensure that the rules that govern EMU are sufficiently strong to ensure that 
all parties act in a way that serves our common interest.  
All of this to achieve our common goal: a union of individual freedom and collective respect; 
a union of responsibility and cooperation; and a union of stability and prosperity. 
Achievements of the euro  
1. 
Let me begin with what we have achieved. The euro was introduced to manage economic 
and monetary interdependence between European countries; to reap the full benefits of their 
economic  and  political  cooperation  for  the  individual  and  collective  good;  and  thereby  to 
contribute  to  lasting  peace  and  friendship  among  peoples.  All  of  this,  while  preserving  the 
diversity that makes Europe unique. 
The specific construction of our modern economic and monetary union rests on two separate 
economic and monetary pillars. Under the monetary pillar, there is only Europe: the single 
currency,  the  single  monetary  policy,  and  the  single  central  banking  system  –  the 
Eurosystem, which consists of the ECB and the national central banks of the 17 members of 
the euro area.  
The economic pillar is more decentralised, with responsibility for fiscal and economic policies 
in the hands of individual countries. These policies should be steered by overall rules and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
coordinated to ensure that national economic policies are fully compatible with the fact that 
we have a single currency without being part of a political federation. 
When it is working properly, this structure balances the independence of nations and their 
economic  interdependence  that  is  at  the  heart  of  EMU.  It  should  represent  an  approach 
where  sovereignty  is shared,  meaning  that it  is  neither exclusively  national  nor exclusively 
European.  
When  EMU  was  first  established,  many  people  asked  how  monetary  union  could  function 
effectively in a Europe of sovereign states. The answer is that it can function effectively with 
an appropriate economic union.  
Not  necessarily  an  economic  union  with  a  single  fiscal  authority.  Not  necessarily  an 
economic union that presupposes an achieved political federation. But an economic union in 
which national policies are set within agreed limits and are subject to rigorous and effective 
mutual surveillance. 
If  the  question  is  asked  how  to  improve  the  economic  pillar,  the  answer  is  to  have  more 
stringent rules and stronger mechanisms to ensure compliance.  
The “M” in EMU 
2. 
Let me discuss the two pillars in a little more detail, first the M in EMU. In monetary policy 
terms, the ECB has a clear assignment: to deliver price stability.  
According  to  our  primary  mandate,  our  definition  of  price  stability  means  an  inflation  rate 
below  but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  This  is  the  needle  in  our  compass.  Our 
medium-term orientation means, figuratively speaking, that we provide the steady hand on 
the tiller. 
How  can  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area  have  confidence  in  the  steady  course  of  monetary 
policy? They need only look at some facts. 
Over the 12 years since the launch of EMU, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area 
has been 1.97%. This is the best result of a major central bank in the euro area over the last 
50 years.  
For Germany, the inflation rate has been even lower than the average since the euro was 
launched. From 1999 to 2010, inflation averaged 1.5% per year. By comparison, the average 
inflation  rate  in  Germany  in  the  1990s,  prior  to the  introduction  of  the euro,  was  2.2%  per 
year. In the 1980s, it was 2.8%. In the 1970s, it was 4.9%. 
The  ECB  has  sailed  this  steady  course  in  what  has  often  been  stormy  weather.  We  are 
currently  focused  on  the  crisis,  but  even  before  2008  we  did  not  always  experience  calm 
waters. 
In 1999, we began with a completely new institution – the ECB – and a cooperation among 
central banks as one unified system. Over the years, we have had to cope with the bursting 
of  the  internet  bubble,  the  aftermath  of  the  events  of  11  September  2001,  the  jump  in  oil 
prices to $145 per barrel, rising prices of food and commodities, and then of course the worst 
financial crisis since the Great Depression.  
Yet  throughout  these  very  different  economic  shocks  –  which  could  have  been  either 
inflationary  or  deflationary  –  citizens  in  the  euro  area  have  remained  confident  in  our 
steering.  Proof  of  this  is  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been  firmly 
anchored in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. 
Observers and financial markets are also expecting in the years to come that price stability 
will  be  maintained,  and  inflation  will  remain  low.  For  this  year  and  next,  inflation  rates  are 
expected to be just below 2%, and for the next five years, professional forecasters currently 
foresee inflation of precisely 2%.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
As you can see from these figures, it is clear that monetary policy in EMU has fulfilled its role 
of delivering price stability and will continue to do so.  
The “E” in EMU 
3. 
Let me turn to the economic pillar, the E of EMU.  
Here, we need fundamental reforms.  
Economic union is a fundamental counterpart to monetary union. 
A  single  market  with  a  single  currency  calls  for  a  very  solid  framework  for  handling  the 
collegial governance of national fiscal policies and macroeconomic policies.  
This is something recognised by the citizens of Europe, particularly those in the euro area. 
Surveys indicate that, on average in euro area countries, more than four out of five euro area 
citizens are in favour of greater policy coordination between countries to overcome the crisis. 
This  is  something  very  important:  Citizens  want  a  stronger  coordination  of  economic  and 
financial policies among the countries of the euro area.1 
European integration has led the people of Europe to reappraise the value of cooperation in 
difficult times. The euro area countries are in the avant garde of this process. Being together 
in a single ship – in an ever closer union – is what holds Europe together through stormy 
weather.  
Already Jean Monnet recognised, back in 1950, that it is the necessities of interdependence, 
which become more evident in times of crisis: “L’Europe ne se fera pas d’un coup, ni dans 
une construction d’ensemble: elle se fera par des réalisations concrètes, créant d’abord une 
solidarité de fait.” 
What  does  more  coordination  require?  It  means  making  two  vital  sets  of  changes  
–  strengthening  economic  governance  and  enhancing  the  opportunities  for  sustainable 
growth. Let me address these changes in turn.  
Need to strengthen economic governance 
a. 
The first change that is required is what I have called a true “quantum leap” in the rules that 
regulate how countries make their national economic policies. Countries need clear rules and 
procedures to guide policy-making and sanctions if they stray from a sustainable path. 
This means strengthening the Stability and Growth Pact, the framework first negotiated by 
the  German  finance  minister  Theo  Waigel  to  prevent  countries  accumulating  excessive 
public debts and deficits.  
Equally  importantly,  it  means  putting  in  place  a  new  framework  for  overseeing  economic 
policies  more  broadly  –  such  as  competitiveness,  current  account  balances  and  levels  of 
private borrowing – to prevent problems emerging in the private sector.  
Let me lay out for you why strengthening the Pact is so important. 
The period between 1999 and 2008 was generally acknowledged as a period of economic 
fair weather. Yet in this period, hardly any euro area country put their fiscal house in order, 
attaining what might be called a safe budgetary position.  
What is more, governments decided to weaken the Pact in 2004 and 2005. This initiative was 
led by the euro area’s largest economies. The ECB voiced its “grave concerns” at the time. I 
                                                 
1   Economic Governance in the EU, Standard Eurobarometer survey 74 (published 12 January 2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
now  see  that  many  acknowledge  that  the  weakening  of  the  Pact  was  a  serious 
misjudgement. 
But  the  crisis  has  given  us  an  opportunity.  It  has  made  plain  the  flaws  in  the  Pact  that 
allowed  countries’  fiscal  policies  to  become  a  problem,  not  just  for  themselves,  but  for 
everyone else within the monetary union. We now have an obligation to fix the flaws.  
First  and  foremost,  this  means  creating  stronger  and  more  binding  rules  for  fiscal  policy, 
backed up by reinforced sanctions or mechanisms to ensure compliance with the rules.  
Second,  a  new  framework  is  needed  to  monitor  competitiveness  and  to  ensure  that 
measures are taken to control them. We need to put in place binding rules that guide policies 
towards sustainable and balanced growth. 
Such  a  reform  package  is  currently  before  the  European  Parliament.  The  ECB  very  much 
counts  on  the  Parliament  to  call  for  very  clear  and  strong  governance  rules,  including 
automaticity in triggering procedures and sanctions, which will be to the long-term benefit of 
Europe’s citizens. 
In  a  union  with  a  single  monetary  policy  and  17  different  fiscal  and  economic  policies,  a 
“quantum leap” in economic governance is necessary to ensure that the degree of economic 
union is fully commensurate to the already achieved monetary union.  
Need to enhance growth potential 
b. 
The  second  change  that  is  required  to  the  economic  pillar  of  EMU  relates  to  Europe’s 
potential for growth.  
Europe has fared reasonably well in the past decade. Adjusted for differences in population 
growth, per capita GDP growth in the euro area has been almost the same as in the United 
States,  at  about  1%  per  year.  The  euro  area  has  also  made  significant  progress  on 
employment, which has grown by over 14 million, compared with a rise of 7.8 million in the 
United States.  
This  is  encouraging,  but  it  remains  insufficient.  We  cannot  be  complacent  in  any  respect. 
Europe must develop its growth potential continuously. All countries must pursue resolutely 
their structural reforms, in pension systems, product market and labour markets. Jointly, they 
have devised the Europe 2020 strategy. Education, research and innovation is one key area; 
resource efficiency a second; and high employment and social cohesion the third main area.  
The  European  Central  Bank  fully  supports  all  efforts  along  this  Europe  2020  strategy.  A 
specific example is the completion of the Single Market in services. It makes full economic 
sense that the internal market in services, which is the sector in which the majority of people 
work,  is  fully  completed.  New  areas  of  growth,  like  the  digital  sector,  energy  and  the 
environment will clearly benefit from more competition and create new jobs.  
Conclusion 
4. 
Let me draw to a conclusion. We are today 12 years into economic and monetary union. I 
have emphasised our achievements and I have emphasised where we need to strengthen 
the framework.  
Monetary union can function effectively in a Europe of sovereign states with an appropriate 
economic  union.  And  creating  an  appropriate  economic  union  is  where  the  reform  efforts 
need to be directed.  
For  that,  we  have  to  do  in  Europe  what  Alexis  de  Tocqueville  so  admired  in  19th  century 
America, whose greatness did not lie “in being more enlightened than any other nation, but 
rather in the ability to repair her faults.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
When repairing the faults in our governance framework, we must not let the indications of 
economic recovery distract ourselves from the urgency for action. Policy-makers must keep 
in mind that the governance failures of the past are still to be fixed and the growth challenges 
of the future still to be solved. 
While I have stressed the challenges we face, we must also recognise our achievements.  
Europe is in the vanguard of nations working together peacefully.  
We have replaced confrontation and conflict with cooperation and consensus.  
We  have  combined  political  freedom  with  economic  freedom  and  social  peace.  These  are 
remarkable achievements – and they are quite clearly achievements to which many people 
elsewhere in the world are aspiring.  
It  is  for  this  reason  that  I  have  dedicated  all  my  working  life  to  put  the  French-German 
friendship to the service of Europe as a whole, with all nations united. And it is for this reason 
that I believe deeply in our economic and monetary union.  
The Europe to which I have dedicated my career is one where different countries, different 
regions and different cities retain what Victor Hugo called their “distinct qualities or glorious 
individualities”.  
It is also a Europe whose cities, regions and countries realise that, through working together, 
they can be greater still. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
