Mario Draghi: Challenges of surveillance and coordination 
Introductory comments by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of 
the Financial Stability Board, at the VIth International Symposium of the Banque de France 
on “Which regulation for global imbalances?”, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 The recent crisis has greatly raised our awareness of two processes that have been shaping 
the  world  economy:  first,  the  growing  interconnections  between  economies,  that  make  the 
global  system  vulnerable  even  to  local  shocks;  second,  the  move  towards  a  multi-polar 
setting in which no single dominant politico-economic power exists and new subjects, such 
as the fast-growing emerging economies, are coming to the fore.  
Both processes are a reflection of fundamentally benign developments, such as free trade, 
free  capital  movements  and  the  spreading  of  technological  innovation  which  have  brought 
enormous benefits to the world economy. However, as the crisis has forcefully shown, the 
potential for inherent instability is greater; and the damage that may result from this instability 
is too large to ignore.  
In  the  past  decades,  after  the  end  of  the  Bretton  Woods  regime,  weak  forms  of  policy 
cooperation prevailed. In terms of the international monetary arrangements in place, it was a 
“non-system”.  For  a  long  time,  stronger  forms  of  international  policy  coordination  were 
deemed  unnecessary:  many  theoretical  and  empirical  analyses  in  the  1980s  converged  to 
show that any gains from such macroeconomic coordination were likely to be of modest size.  
However,  we  may  now  need  to  revisit  that  fairly  sceptical  conclusion.  In  the  new  global 
environment,  policies  (and  policy  errors)  in  individual  economies  can  have  substantial 
spillover effects. Moreover, the costs of uncoordinated policies may increase in a non-linear 
fashion if those policies lead to large systemic breakdowns.  
In my view  there is one main, simple lesson we should take from the crisis: if we want to 
preserve the gains brought by open, competitive markets on a global scale, we need stricter 
and more effective international cooperation.  
The common response to the crisis was a quantum leap forward in international economic 
relations. With a coordinated, prompt and synchronous set of policy measures we managed 
to avoid the worst consequences for the global financial system and the world economy. As 
the situation improves, it would be naïve to think that we can now go back to the previous 
loose coordination.  
There continue to persist underlying “fault lines” (to use the words of Raghuram Rajan) that 
pose significant risks at the global level: an uneven recovery, diverging economic policies, 
protracted  low  levels  of  interest  rates,  increased  sovereign  debts,  large  imbalances  in 
international payments, and pressures on exchange rates.  
Correspondingly, we should continue to improve international cooperation. There are three 
main priority areas:  
– 
– 
first we need to complete the reform of the international financial system;  
second,  we  have  to  develop  a  better  system  of  macroprudential  surveillance, 
refining the authorities’ ability to identify systemic risk and, especially, to act upon 
early warnings;  
third, crucially, we need to establish a coherent set of norms, rules of conduct and 
formal institutions shaping coordination of national economic policies.  
 We have come a long way towards strengthening the financial system since the crisis began. 
My own experience in the Financial Stability Board is that it is certainly possible – at times 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
even  surprisingly  easy  –  to  come  to  a  shared  diagnosis  and  devise  a  common  response 
even to extremely complex problems, when there is a willingness to do so.  
The  new  Basel  III  regulatory  framework  is  now  in  place,  with  new  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements  and  limits  to  financial  leverage.  Its  gradual  phasing-in  will  prevent  it  from 
hampering  the  economic  recovery.  The  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets  will  have  a 
sounder and more transparent basis. We have identified many of the perverse incentives that 
encouraged excessive risk taking – in banks’ executive compensation systems, in the role of 
credit  rating  agencies  and  in  accounting  rules  –  and  we  have  begun  to  rectify  them.  The 
activity  of  the  FSB  is  now  concentrating  –  in  accordance  with  the  mandate  given  by  the 
G20  –  on  two  crucial  priorities:  tackling  the  moral  hazard  problem  posed  by  systemically 
important institutions (SIFIs) and extending the rules to the “shadow banking system”.  
The reform of the financial system is however not complete. There is a danger that, as the 
world economic recovery advances, the sense of urgency – a major propeller so far – might 
now weaken. It would be unforgivable not to keep the momentum in international cooperation 
and miss the occasion to decisively strengthen the international financial system. There are 
two  obvious  compelling  reasons  for  this.  First,  neither  our  public  finances  nor  our  citizens 
would  be  ready  to  withstand  a  new  crisis.  Second,  in  a  global  system  where  external 
imbalances remain large and capital flows may be subject to sudden reversals, it is essential 
to rely on a financial system that is at the same time efficient and more robust, immune to the 
perverse incentives that led to the accumulation of excessive risks that generated the crisis.  
Consistent implementation of the agreed reforms at the national level is the arena where the 
effectiveness of international cooperation will be tested. In the absence of a global enforcer 
the only practical way forward is to strengthen both the peer review process and the reach of 
international  institutions,  in  primis  the  IMF,  which  retains  the  responsibility  for  surveillance 
over the global financial system.  
Significant  progress  has  also  been  made  in  setting  up  top-down,  system-wide  oversight 
arrangements  at  the  national,  regional  and  international  levels.  These  arrangements  are 
designed  to  deliver  more  encompassing  surveillance,  with  broadened  macro-prudential 
perspectives  and  better  mechanisms  for  triggering  actions  on  identified  risks.  Examples 
include  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  in  Europe,  the  Financial  Services  Oversight 
Council in the US, and the IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise to assess macro-financial risks 
and systemic vulnerabilities at the global level.  
A lot remains to be done in this, in many respects, unchartered territory. We now need to 
improve  analytical  tools,  design  instruments  of  intervention,  elaborate  organizational 
arrangements  by  which  the  different  authorities  can  effectively  share  information  and, 
especially, coordinate actions to prevent and to manage critical situations. A painful lesson of 
the recent crisis – and the many preceding it – is that the authorities did too little to act upon 
“early  warnings”  that,  though  weak  and  imprecise,  were  often  clear  enough  to  have 
warranted more forceful preventive action.  
Challenges even more severe lay ahead on the macroeconomic policy front. Here the risk is 
very tangible that, with the emergency now over, a purely domestic orientation again prevails 
in  economic  policy  decisions  –  a  tendency  of  which  some  signs  are  unfortunately  already 
evident. The consequence would be larger imbalances, increasingly erratic capital flows, and 
greater  exchange  rate  volatility  –  all  factors  that  ultimately  can  hamper  the  recovery.  It  is 
imperative  to  resist  such  tendencies  and  abide  to  the  pledge  –  repeatedly  stated  by  the 
G20 – to work together to ensure a lasting recovery and set the world economy on a path of 
strong and sustainable growth.  
A  “new  Bretton  Woods”  is  perhaps  a  rhetorical  exaggeration  but  we  do  need  a  common 
realization  that  the  present,  weak  cooperation  arrangements  for  managing  the  world 
economy are inadequate. Greater interdependence requires stronger policy cooperation and 
some form of disciplining mechanism to ensure that national policies are mutually consistent. 
Stronger  cooperation  in  turn  necessarily  presupposes  an  agreed  set  of  benchmarks  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rules in all the relevant fields. Individual economies should not only continue to “keep their 
own  house  in  order”  –  which  is  probably  at  this  point  a  still  necessary,  but  insufficient 
condition.  They  must  also  be  induced  to  take  more  fully  into  account  the  global  effects  of 
their own policies, whose mutual consistency needs to be ensured.  
To  achieve  this  objective  we  need  a  decisive  improvement  in  the  governance  of  the 
international  monetary  system,  addressing  those  problems  that  have  hindered  its  proper 
functioning.  The  central  issue  is,  in  my  view,  the  need  for  a  more  effective  process  of 
multilateral surveillance over national economic policies.  
Some steps forward are being taken. The “legitimacy deficit” of international bodies has been 
at least in part addressed with the agreement on the IMF quota reform at the Seoul summit 
of November 2010; the very same leadership role taken by the G20 in international economic 
affairs is a recognition of the need to increase legitimacy and representation. The IMF has 
been  given  more  resources  and  more  incisive  monitoring  power,  for  example  by  making 
FSAPs  compulsory  for  all  systemically  relevant  members  over  a  5-year  cycle,  and  is 
enhancing its traditional machinery for surveillance (bilateral and multilateral).  
In  parallel  the  G20  is  proceeding  with  its  own  peer  review  process  (the  Framework  for 
Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth) to identify objectives for the global economy and 
the  policies  needed  to  achieve  them.  The  evaluation  of  the  mutual  consistency  of  such 
policies  is  the  goal  of  the  “Mutual  assessment  process”  (MAP).  The  MAP  requires  an 
assessment  of  the  nature  and  the  root  causes  of  impediments  to  the  adjustment  of 
persistently large imbalances and indicative guidelines, composed of a range of indicators, to 
facilitate  a  timely  identification  of  imbalances  that  require  preventive  and  corrective  action. 
This is an essential and, at the same time, a very demanding task.  
As agreed by the G20, there must be a shift to a more balanced global pattern of demand. 
Some progress in this direction is being made, but important challenges remain. Emerging 
market  countries  of  systemic  relevance  ought  to  prioritize  structural  reforms  and  greater 
exchange  rate  flexibility  to  strengthen  domestic  demand;  further  fiscal  consolidation  is 
necessary  in  advanced  countries,  based  on  growth-friendly  measures;  finally,  all  G20 
members  should  implement  product  and  labour  market  reforms  to  boost  their  potential 
output.  
It is also to be welcomed that both the IMF and the G20 under the French presidency have 
started ambitious and comprehensive discussions on possible avenues for the reform of the 
international monetary system.  
Let me conclude by saying that in all the above fields Europe can and should bring to the 
international  debate  a  wealth  of  experience.  In  Europe,  we  have  come  –  in  some  cases 
rather belatedly – to the realization of the close interdependence among our economies and 
of the consequent need for effective rules and governance. The single currency is acting as a 
powerful  device  to  reinforce  surveillance,  coordination  and  the  peer  review  process  in  an 
institutional  setting  where  economic  policy  decisions  remain  to  a  very  large  extent  in  the 
national domain. This makes Europe a natural laboratory for experimenting solutions that can 
be of use at the global level as well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
