Kiyohiko G Nishimura: The importance of financial infrastructure in 
seeking a more resilient financial system – from an Asian regional 
perspective  
Keynote speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 
Bank of Korea International Conference 2011, Seoul, 26 May 2011. 
 Introduction: resiliency of the financial system 
1. 
Governor Kim, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I am delighted and honored to 
have  the  opportunity  to  deliver  this  keynote  speech  at  the  Bank  of  Korea  International 
Conference. 
The  theme  of  this  2011  conference,  “Future  of  the  International  Financial  Architecture,”  is 
timely and very important, because it points us directly to the lessons we should draw from 
the recent crises, including the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the sovereign debt problems in 
some  European  nations,  and  even  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  and  its  massive 
tsunami in March this year. I am delighted to be able to participate in this conference, and 
hope to contribute to it, representing the Bank of Japan. 
Before proceeding with my speech, let me first express my sincere gratitude, on behalf of the 
Bank of Japan and the Japanese people, to all the people around the world who have given 
their generous support to the severely damaged area of East Japan. We are deeply grateful 
for  all  the  prompt  and  compassionate  physical  assistance  and  financial  donations  we 
received from so many overseas jurisdictions. 
The disaster reminded me once again of the utmost importance of a resilient financial market 
and  system,  in  which  a  central  bank  plays  an  essential  part.  In  spite  of  the  magnitude  9 
earthquake,  the  Japanese  financial  system  maintained  its  soundness,  although  some 
regional financial institutions were severely affected. Our payment and settlement systems 
have  functioned  effectively  and  without  serious  disruption  in  delivering  necessary  cash 
across  the  entire  nation,  including  the  disaster-hit  areas.  Although  significant  volatility  was 
temporarily  observed  in  the  week  following  the  disaster  on  March  11,  the  Japanese  stock 
market has recovered its value since then, and the foreign exchange market has regained its 
stability. 
We must bear in mind, however, that such financial stability was not necessarily achieved in 
the case of past disasters. The San Francisco earthquake of 1906 is a case in point. That 
earthquake destroyed San Francisco, which was then the financial center of the West of the 
United States. Huge demand for cash was generated in the West for its reconstruction and 
insurance payments, at a time when the United States had no central bank system.1 Market 
participants then tried to address this urgent situation by transmitting money to the West from 
New York City, but ironically, their action resulted in a significant shortage of liquidity in the 
nation’s financial center. In consequence, short-term interest rates increased rapidly, and the 
New York money market lost its functionality. The contagious impact was also observed in 
overseas financial markets such as London.2 
                                                 
1  The Federal Reserve System, which serves as the U.S. central bank, was created by an act of Congress on 
December 23, 1913. 
2  For details see Robert F. Bruner and Sean D. Carr (2007), “The Panic of 1907: Lessons Learned from the 
Market’s Perfect Storm,” Wiley, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In this speech, I will focus on the determinants of the resiliency of a financial system, and the 
role of regional cooperation in seeking a more stable and resilient system. Here, I argue that 
it is of utmost importance to build a liberalized, transparent, and deep financial market and 
system, without arbitrary intervention, whether formal or informal. In particular, from an Asian 
regional  perspective,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  need  to  improve  the  region’s  financial 
infrastructure,  including  its  payment  and  settlement  systems,  so  that financial  markets  can 
maintain their functionality even during a crisis. 
In the following, I will first review a variety of policy efforts introduced in the region since the 
Asian currency crisis to address the risks related mainly to massive capital outflows. This is 
followed  by  my  views  on  how  to  cope  with  harmful  volatility  in  the  financial  market  and 
system.  Finally,  I  will  conclude  by  emphasizing  the  importance  of  improving  payment  and 
settlements systems in the region. 
2. 
Successful efforts since the Asian currency crisis: but don’t be too 
complacent 
The more than ten years since the Asian currency crisis has literally been a period of reform 
for  Asian  financial  markets.  Bearing  the  important  lessons  in  mind,  Asian  authorities  have 
made a variety of policy efforts to strengthen the resilience of their economies and financial 
markets,  including  the  self-insurance  of  accumulating  foreign  reserves,  multilateral  swap 
agreements  under  the  “Chiang  Mai  Initiative”,3  and  reduction  of  their  dependency  on 
off-shore  short-term  funding.  They  have  also  endeavored  to  and  succeeded  in  improving 
their fiscal positions. Coupled with the high growth potential of Asian economies, these policy 
efforts  have  proved  effective  in  helping  Asia  steer  through  the  global  financial  crisis,  often 
called the “financial tsunami”, which followed the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 
2008. 
Such  a  success  story  would,  however,  be  short-lived,  if  Asian  economies  were  too 
complacent to address the challenges that capital flows and domestic inflation bring. Owing 
to their high growth potential, Asian economies have again experienced large capital inflows, 
creating  an  environment  that  is  likely  to  increase  volatility,  particularly  in  asset  prices 
(Slide 1). In addition, the recent surge and increasing volatility in commodity prices, which is 
in  part  explained  by  financial  factors,  may  accelerate  existing  domestic  inflation  risks  in 
emerging Asia (Slide 2). 
The challenge now is how to cope with the short-term, harmful volatility that disruptive capital 
flows  may  cause,  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  and  enhancing  the  long-term 
welfare-improving efficiency that steady capital flows bring about. Capital flows are beneficial 
for  the  Asian  region,  where  there  is  large  potential  demand  for  public  and  private 
infrastructure.  Thus,  they  are  absolutely  necessary  for  the  further  development  of  Asian 
financial markets, as well as for further growth in Asian economies. 
Volatile capital flows are often said to be beyond the control of regional authorities. I believe 
this is true to a great extent because Asian financial markets are still lacking in depth and 
liberalization. Their ability to cope with large-scale external shocks through, for example, the 
modulation of capital flows, therefore remains far from sufficient. 
                                                 
3  There are ongoing debates on, among other issues, the appropriateness of the current scale  of 120  billion 
U.S.  dollars  relative  to  the  total  size  of  economy,  and  the  manner  of  collaboration  with  the  International 
Monetary  Fund.  These 
the  
14th  ASEAN+3  Finance  Ministers’  Meeting  on  May  4,  2011  in  Hanoi,  Vietnam,  coupled  with  the  important 
issue  of  the  participation  of  member  central  bank  governors  from  its  15th  meeting.  The  gathering  will  then 
become the “ASEAN+3 Finance Ministers’ and Central Bank Governors’ Meeting” from 2012. 
the  Joint  Ministerial  Statement  of 
issues  were  addressed 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
Short-term measures to cope with financial instability: don’t forget their long-
term consequences 
Recently,  many  Asian  economies  have  again  experienced  a  surge  in  capital  inflows. 
Large-scale capital inflows are said to have brought three major problems. First, they have 
caused  rapid  currency  appreciation  in  a  short  period  of  time,  which  is  undermining  the 
competitiveness of export industries and dampening corporate confidence. This is especially 
detrimental to Asian emerging economies with their relatively high dependence on exports. 
Second,  these  massive  capital  inflows,  together  with  their  favorable  economic  expansion, 
have pushed stock prices to historical peaks and brought about a rapid increase in property 
prices.  Such  developments,  if  continued  for  an  extended  period  without  appropriate  policy 
actions, would increase the unwelcome risk of asset price bubbles. Third, increases in asset 
prices  and  bank  lending  are  stimulating  excessive  consumer  spending  and  business 
investment  through  wealth  effects,  leading  to  the  risk  of  an  overheating  economy  and 
accelerating  inflation.  Indeed,  inflationary  pressures  and  inflation  expectations  have  been 
rising  in  many  Asian  emerging  economies,  fueled  also  by  the  recent  surge  in  commodity 
prices. 
In  response  to  these  challenges,  many  Asian  economies  have  adopted  short-term  policy 
responses, such as restrictions on capital inflows and macro-prudential policy measures, as 
well as foreign exchange market intervention. Since last year, they have introduced a variety 
of  quantitative  regulations  and  tax  measures  to  mitigate  the  risks  that  excessive  capital 
inflows may cause. Moreover, in an effort to curb overheated property investment, they have 
strengthened  regulations  and  taxation  on  property  transactions,  lowered  the  required  
loan-to-value  ratio  for  financial  institutions,  and  imposed  tighter  limitations  on  bank  loan 
volumes.  These  specifically  targeted  policy  actions  have  indeed  begun  to  take  effect.  For 
example, the upward pressure on property prices seems to have eased somewhat in several 
economies. 
However,  such  favorable  effects  may  be  the  exception,  and  these  policies  may  have 
unintended adverse effects on the economy if they are in place for longer than necessary, 
such  as  distorting  optimal  credit  allocation  and  impeding  necessary  structural  reforms. 
Moreover,  temporary  success  in  these  short-term  measures  may  tempt  policy  makers  into 
postponing measures necessary to cope with real and fundamental problems. 
In  particular,  monetary  and  other  macroeconomic  policy  actions  must  not  fall  behind  the 
curve. Although the increase in interest rates may attract further capital inflows, we should 
not  rely  too  much  on  the  above-mentioned  short-term  regulatory  and  macro-prudential 
measures.  As  was  evident  from  Japan’s  experience  of  the  past  bubble,  delayed  monetary 
and  macroeconomic  policy  responses  may  bring  about  an  accumulation  of  “excesses”  in 
employment, business capacity, and debt under an inflexible labor market or high investment 
irreversibility.  Such  accumulated  excesses  may  persist  for  an  extended  period,  and  may 
hamper  economic  growth  in  the  years  following.  After  all,  regulatory  and  macro-prudential 
measures  are  supplementary  to,  but  not  substitutive  for  traditional  or  conventional  policy 
measures. 
Let  me  move  on  to  the  longer-term  issues  associated  with  vulnerability  to  unanticipated 
external shocks. As I mentioned earlier, steady capital inflows are beneficial in bringing about 
welfare-improving efficiency in the long run. In order to ensure their benefits, I would like to 
emphasize  the  importance,  here  in  Asia,  of  long-term  policy  efforts  to  develop  more 
liberalized,  deep,  and  well-balanced  financial  markets,  or  I  may  say,  a  better  financial 
infrastructure  or  architecture.  Deep  and  well-balanced  financial  markets,  side-by-side  with 
free and stable capital flows, enhance the effectiveness of resource allocation. It should be 
emphasized that liberalized and deep financial markets also strengthen the effectiveness of 
macroeconomic policies, through improvements in the monetary transmission mechanism. 
The Asian authorities are together in having recognized this long-term perspective, and they 
have  been  making  collaborative  efforts  over  the  past  decade  to  develop  their  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
markets,  particularly  their  bond  markets.  Examples  of  such  efforts  include  the  Asian  Bond 
Fund (ABF) initiatives launched by the EMEAP,4 in which the Bank of Japan also takes part, 
and the Asian Bond Markets Initiative (ABMI) of the ASEAN+3 process.5 
Asian  financial  markets  have  developed  remarkably  in  recent  years  thanks  to  these  policy 
efforts  (Slide  3).  Nevertheless,  they  are  still  much  smaller  and  less  liquid  than  their 
counterparts in advanced economies, magnifying the impact of short-term volatility of capital 
flows  on  their  stock  and  bond  prices,  and  accordingly  on  their  foreign  exchange  rates.  In 
particular,  the  secondary  and  repo  markets  as  well  as  the  primary  markets  for  corporate 
bonds remain relatively underdeveloped in the region, compared with the expanding primary 
markets  for  government  bonds.  This  situation  needs  to  be  addressed  through  more 
cooperative and collaborative efforts among Asian economies, including Japan. 
Moreover, in a broader sense of the infrastructure issue, there is still an excess of regulations 
on  cross-border  transactions,  including  those  applied  to  foreign  exchange,  overseas 
remittances,  and  foreign  inward  investments,  as  well  as  an  over-complex  taxation  system. 
The  lack  of  transparency  is  often  criticized,  as  well  as  the  seeming  arbitrariness  found 
sometimes  in  the  enforcement  of  such  regulations.  They  remain  an  impediment  to  the 
promotion of transactions and to the development of liberalized and deep financial markets in 
this region. 
Improving payment and settlement systems in Asia: respect free markets 
4. 
I would like to emphasize the utmost importance of improving the post-trade infrastructure of 
securities  markets  in  Asia.  This  would  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  as 
Asia’s financial markets continue to develop. As I mentioned earlier, Japan’s payment and 
settlement  systems  were  not  disrupted  by  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  and  have 
continued to function effectively, helping to ensure financial and social stability. 
The role of payment and settlement systems is to settle claims and obligations arising from 
transactions. While the infrastructure making financial contracts straightforward and smooth 
could be compared to arteries pumping out blood into the body of the economy, the payment 
and settlement system would then be the veins carrying the blood back to the heart (Slide 4). 
Both  of  them  are  absolutely  necessary  for  the  proper  functioning  of  the  financial  system, 
especially for cross-border transactions. The international financial system would stall if the 
veins,  or  the  payment  and  settlement  system,  became  choked  with  blood  clots.  In  this 
respect,  it  is  extremely  important  to  ensure  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the  payment  and 
settlement system, as well as its stable operation, even in times of crisis. 
From  the  cross-border  perspective,  however,  I  recognize  at  least  two  problems  in  the 
post-trade infrastructure for cross-border securities trading in the Asian region.6 
                                                 
4  The EMEAP was established in 1991, and consists of eleven central banks and monetary authorities in the 
Asia  and  Pacific  region,  namely  Australia,  China,  Hong  Kong,  Indonesia,  Japan,  Korea,  Malaysia,  New 
Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. 
5  Under the ABF initiatives, EMEAP member central banks invest a portion of their foreign reserves in sovereign 
and quasi-sovereign bonds of eight EMEAP jurisdictions. The ABF initiatives have promoted the recognition of 
local currency-denominated bonds issued in Asia, and acted as a catalyst to accelerate and harmonize legal, 
regulatory, and tax reforms related to bond investments in the region. The ABMI has also made a variety of 
efforts  and  achievements,  including  providing  technical  assistances  and  credit  guarantees,  as  well  as 
enhancing information disclosure for investors, aiming at improving the issuance and investment environment 
on government and corporate bonds in the region. 
6  There  have  been  relative  improvements  in  domestic  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  Asia.  Online 
securities payment and settlement systems have been constructed, and delivery-versus-payment settlement 
has  been  achieved.  Many  jurisdictions  have  also  already  realized  settlement  cycles  of T+2  to T+3. Further 
improvements may still be needed in some jurisdictions to establish legislation on settlement finality. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First, settlement risks associated with cross-border securities trading remain, and sufficient 
measures  have  not  yet  been  introduced  to  manage  them.  For  example,  the  U.S.  dollar  is 
usually  employed  as  the  intermediary  for  obtaining  the  investment  currency.  However,  in 
many  cases  in  Asia,  the  settlement  between  the  local  currency  and  the  U.S.  dollar  is  not 
made through payment-versus-payment settlement. In addition, since invested securities are 
held  or  settled  through  a  multi-tiered  system  involving  central  securities  depositories  and 
sub- and global custodian banks, custody risks are inherent across the tiers. 
Second, as operational procedures often need to be adjusted individually in order to meet the 
regulatory and system requirements of each jurisdiction, operational costs are quite high for 
intermediaries  between  issuers  and  investors,  such  as  central  securities  depositories,  
sub-  and  global  custodians,  and  international  central  securities  depositories.  This  in  turn 
increases the costs for investors.7 
In order to support strong and sustainable economic growth in Asia, it is important to develop 
deep  and  liquid  bond  markets,  as  well  as  to  build  the  infrastructures  supporting  such 
markets.  In  this  respect,  the  Asian  economies  must  endeavor  to  rectify  these  and  other 
problems,  not  only  individually,  but  also  on  a  collaborative  basis  by  recognizing  the  whole 
Asian region as one single market. As for the direction of the action to be taken, we should in 
particular  build  an  infrastructure  for  ensuring  efficient  and  safe  cross-border  payment  and 
settlements, and expand measures to maintain market liquidity even in times of crisis.8 
There are two conceptual issues to be considered when designing Asia’s future cross-border 
payment  and  settlement  system.  One  is  to  what  extent  the  system  should  be  integrated, 
while the other is to what extent the public sector should be involved in the function. 
As for the degree of integration desirable, the more integrated the infrastructure, the easier it 
becomes  to  adopt  better  functions.  However,  it  would  then  be  more  costly  and  difficult  to 
reach  agreement  on  the  location  for  its  installation.  As  for  public  sector  involvement, 
generally  speaking,  the  more  the  public  sector  is  involved,  the  safer  the  infrastructure 
becomes.  However,  it  is  then  likely  that  the  scope  of  the  services  would  be  limited,  while 
raising private sector suspicion of possible state interference. Since the involvement of the 
public  sector  in  payment  and  settlement  systems  is  traditionally  high  in  Asia,  it  might  be 
realistic for us to consider the above-mentioned issue not as a choice between two mutually 
exclusive options, but as a decision on how to combine the efforts of both the public and the 
private sectors. 
In  attempting  to  strike  a  better  balance  in  such  trade-offs,  we  should  follow  three  basic 
principles. The first is to respect the choices of market participants using the payment and 
settlement  systems  and  ensure  good  governance.  The  second  is  to  enhance  the  use  of 
central bank money in payments and settlements as a means of reducing settlement risks. 
The third is to adopt a gradual approach that takes into account the differences in the degree 
of market liberalization among Asian economies. 
The  use  of  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  by  central  banks  could  be  one  of  the 
measures used to maintain market liquidity in times of crisis. If we have an infrastructure in 
which  central  banks  can  be  flexible  in  providing  their  local  currencies  against  highly  liquid 
foreign  assets  as  collateral,  this  would  contribute  to  the  smooth  funding  of  locally  active 
financial institutions, and thereby enhance the stability of domestic financial markets. 
                                                 
7 
In  addition,  a  variety  of  identification  codes  and  message  formats  are  used  in  the  payment  and  settlement 
systems, and they still fall short of the international standards. 
8  Discussions  have  been  held  at  the  ABMI  of  the  ASEAN+3  process  and  other  forums  on  ideas  to  build  a 
cross-border payment and securities settlement system in the region. We should continue to make progress in 
these  discussions  and  take  measures  to  put  the  ideas  into  action  in  each  field,  ranging  from  removing 
transaction impediments to developing payment and settlement systems, and to test them in practice. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Japan  has  made  substantial  improvements  in  the  post-trade  infrastructure  for  Japanese 
government bonds, which have the largest market volume in Asia. Improvements have been 
made,  for  example,  in  aspects  of  the  payment  and  settlement  system,  the  legislation 
governing  securities  settlement,  and  the  tax  system  for  non-residents.  I  believe  that  our 
experience will also be helpful in promoting the development and stability of financial markets 
across the Asian region. Working in close cooperation with the relevant institutions, the Bank 
of Japan hopes to be able to contribute to the development of financial infrastructures in both 
Japan and the Asian region by sharing the knowledge obtained from our experience. 
Now, let me wrap up. Motivated by the lessons of the Asian currency crisis, Asia is the most 
active  region  in  terms  of  policy  cooperation  and  coordination  aimed  at  building  robust 
financial markets and systems. However, to be honest, the policy goal has not yet been fully 
achieved,  as  the  markets  and  systems  are  still  under-developed.  We  Asian  policymakers 
need to make more cooperative and coordinated efforts to construct better systems (both in 
terms  of  hard  and  soft  aspects)  that  are  sufficiently  resilient  against  large  unanticipated 
shocks,  including  sudden  capital  outflows  and  natural  disasters,  even  though,  realistically 
speaking, there may be no perfect design. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
  6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
