Duvvuri Subbarao: Global challenges, global solutions – some remarks 
Lead  intervention  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and 
leader  of  the  Indian  delegation  at  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee 
(IMFC), International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 16 April 2011. 
 Mr. Chairman 
1. 
Recent  experience  suggests  that  globalization  offers  incredible  opportunities  but 
also poses immense challenges. If the years before the global financial crisis – the period of 
the  so  called  “Great  Moderation”  –  demonstrated  the  benefits  of  globalization,  the 
devastating toll of the crisis showed its costs. Just as in the case of an economy, there are 
price setters and price takers, in the international economy too, there are economies which 
shape  the  forces  of  globalization  and  those  that  have  to  shape  their  policies  to  adjust  to 
those forces of globalization. The post-crisis reform effort – whether here at the IMF or at the 
other  global  fora  such  as  the  BCBS,  FSB,  WTO  –  is  all  aimed  at  managing  the  forces  of 
globalization for maximizing our collective welfare. For these reforms to be sustainable, it is 
important that they are even handed as between those who shape the forces of globalization 
and those who have to adjust to the forces of globalization.  
EMEs in the global context 
2. 
Before I get to specific issues, let me make a brief comment on EMEs in the global 
context. The shift in the global balance of power in favour of EMEs is by now a familiar story. 
It may be useful to put some numbers around that. Setting GDP at 100 in the base year of 
2000,  against  the  aggregate  growth  of  17  per  cent  in  the  decade  2000–10  of  advanced 
economies, emerging market and developing countries (EMDCs) grew by 82 per cent and 
BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, China) by a whopping 127 per cent. When we look at shares in 
global GDP, the share of advanced economies in the global GDP dropped from 80 per cent 
in the year 2000 to 67 per cent in 2010, with a mirror increase in the share of EMDCs.  
3. 
2010 was a year of recovery, and EMEs powered this by contributing to nearly three 
quarters  of  global  growth  in  2010.  EMEs  were  also  the  motive  force  behind  the  estimated 
expansion of world trade by 12 per cent last year, an impressive reversal from shrinkage of 
11 per cent in 2009.  
4. 
These  trends  have  an  interesting  implication  for  the  decoupling  hypothesis,  which 
was intellectually fashionable before the crisis. As a matter of fact, the crisis failed to validate 
the decoupling hypothesis, as all EMEs were affected, admittedly to different extents. What 
the  crisis,  in  fact,  reinforced  is  that  the  economic  prospects  of  advanced  economies  and 
EMEs are interlinked through trade, finance and confidence channels.  
5. 
want to address five topics which are all interconnected. 
Let me now move on to specific issues. In the context of the theme of the session, I 
Global rebalancing 
First  is  the  issue  of  global  rebalancing.  Global  rebalancing  will  require  deficit 
6. 
economies  to  save  more  and  consume  less,  while  depending  more  on  external  demand 
relative  to  domestic  demand  for  sustaining  growth.  Surplus  economies  will  need  to  mirror 
these efforts – save less and spend more, and shift from external to domestic demand. The 
problem  we  have  is  that  while  the  adjustment  by  deficit  and  surplus  economies  has  to  be 
symmetric,  the  incentives  they  face  are  asymmetric.  Managing  rebalancing  will  require  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
shared  understanding  on  conducting  macroeconomic  policies  to  minimize  disruptions  to 
macroeconomic  stability.  These  adjustments  have  several  components.  Importantly,  letting 
exchange  rates  remain  aligned  with  economic  fundamentals,  and  an  agreement  that 
currency interventions should not be resorted to as an instrument of trade policy should be 
central to a coordinated approach at a multilateral level. 
Capital flows 
7. 
That  takes  me  to  the  second  facet  of  global  imbalances  –  return  of  lumpy  and 
volatile  capital  flows.  Since  capital  flows  have  become  such  an  emotive  topic  around  the 
world in recent months, it is important to be mindful of a few realities. First, EMEs do need 
capital flows to augment their investible resources, but such flows should meet two criteria: 
they should be stable; and they should also be roughly equal to the economy’s absorptive 
capacity.  The  second  reality  that  we  must  remember  is  that  capital  flows  are  triggered  by 
both  pull  and  push  factors.  The  pull  factors  are  the  promising  growth  prospects  of  EMEs, 
their  declining  trend  rates  of  inflation,  capital  account  liberalization,  and  improved 
governance. Among the push factors are the easy monetary policies of advanced economies 
which create the capital that flows into the EMEs. 
8. 
 To  the  extent  that  lumpy  and  volatile  flows  are  a  spillover  from  policy  choices  of 
advanced economies, managing capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem 
of emerging market economies. How this burden is to be shared raises both intellectual and 
practical challenges. The intellectual challenge is to build a better understanding of the forces 
driving capital flows, what type of policy instruments, including capital controls, work and in 
what situations. The practical challenge is the need to reach a shared understanding on an 
organizing  framework  for  cross  border  spillovers  of  domestic  policies  in  capital-originating 
countries, and the gamut of policy responses by capital receiving countries.  
9. 
Managing  capital  flows  involves  two  important  things.  First,  we  need  to  make  a 
judgment on how important the externalities are. And, second, we need to make an objective 
assessment of what combinations of policies may be used to minimize their impact. Now that 
it is broadly accepted that there could be circumstances in which controls can be a legitimate 
component  of  the  policy  response  to  surges  in  capital  flows,  policymakers  must  have  the 
flexibility,  and  discretion, 
to  adopt  macroeconomic,  prudential  and  capital  account 
management policies. Importantly, they should be able to do so without a sense of stigma 
attached to particular instruments.   
Framework for the adjustment process 
10. 
Let me now move on to the third issue which is the framework for the adjustment 
process  to  secure  and  preserve  global  financial  stability.  The  adjustment  process  should 
ensure  that  individual  actions  of  countries  add  up  to  a  coherent  path  forward.  I  want  to 
emphasise two aspects of this.  
 
First, the IMF’s surveillance function is critical – it assumes a vital, pre-emptive role 
in  preserving  global  and  national  stability.  The  forthcoming  Triennial  Surveillance 
Review  provides  an  opportunity  to  take  stock  of  the  steps  taken  and  to  assess 
recent experience, including the adequacy of the legal framework for surveillance.  
Second, reserve accumulation has to be viewed in the context of economic growth 
and  development.  The  insurance  that  reserves  provide  against  sudden  stops  and 
reversals of capital flows far outweigh the opportunity costs of holding reserves. The 
experience of the crisis has amply demonstrated this. What constitutes an adequate 
level  of  reserves  is  a  country-specific  question,  involving  a  judgment  based  on 
practical  experience.  Clearly,  there  can  be  no  “one-approach-fits  all”  to  such 
assessments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 Global reserve currency 
11. 
My fourth point relates to a global reserve currency. The recent crisis has brought 
home the complex challenges arising from the world having a single reserve currency. In the 
ongoing search for solutions, one option is to have a menu of alternative reserve currencies 
which fulfill the required criteria – full convertibility; the exchange rate determined by market 
fundamentals; a significant share in world trade; liquid, open and large financial markets in 
the  currency  issuing  country;  and  also  the  policy  credibility  to  inspire  the  confidence  of 
potential investors. There is a debate on whether the SDR can be a reserve currency. For 
the SDR to take on this significant role, several prerequisites have to be in place, which are 
now well known and need no elaboration here. At the present time, the SDR does not satisfy 
these conditions. Thus, we see the move to a multicurrency world as a gradual evolution.  
Protectionism 
12. 
The  last  issue  I  want  to  raise  concerns  protectionism.  Recent  international 
developments mark an “ironic reversal” in the fears about globalization. Previously, it was the 
EMEs  which  feared  that  integration  into  the  world  economy  would  lead  to  welfare  loss  at 
home.  Those  fears  have  now  given  way  to  apprehensions  in  advanced  economies  that 
globalization means losing jobs to cheap labour abroad.  
13. 
There  is  concern  in  some  quarters  that  even  as  open  protectionism  has  been 
resisted relatively well during the current crisis, covert protectionism has been on the rise. 
The short point is that in the years ahead, the pressures for protectionism will mount, and 
protectionism will also take new forms. Global welfare will be maximized when collectively we 
resist  short-term  pressures,  and  put  our  collective  long-term  interest  ahead  of  individual 
short-term advantage.  
Global cooperation 
14. 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  thrust  of  all  that  I  have  said  is  that  global  challenges  demand 
global solutions. The need for global cooperation in solving our most pressing problems of 
today is vital. The crisis has taught us that no country can be an island, and that economic 
and financial disruptions anywhere can cause ripples, if not waves, everywhere. The crisis 
also taught us that given the deepening integration of countries into the global economic and 
financial  system,  uncoordinated  responses  will  lead  to  worse  outcomes  for  everyone.  The 
global problems we are facing today are complex, and not amenable to easy solutions. Many 
of them require significant, and often painful adjustments at the national level; and in a world 
divided by nation-states, there is no natural constituency for the global economy. At the same 
time, the global crisis has shown that the global economy, as an entity, is more important 
than ever. The IMF is central to these reforms so that it continues to spearhead and weave 
together the fabric of international cooperation. This is in the common interest of all of us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
