Thomas M Hoenig: Monetary policy and the role of dissent 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the Central Exchange, Kansas City, 5 January 2011. 
 My January presentation at the Central Exchange, greater Kansas City’s business women’s 
association, has become an annual event and an opportunity that I have enjoyed immensely.  
In particular, I want to recognize the WIN/WIN program initiated by the Central Exchange. I 
am personally a supporter of this campaign to increase the number of women on boards of 
directors and in executive positions in greater Kansas City to a level of 20 percent by 2015. 
More importantly, I am a believer in the business case for gender diversity and am fortunate 
to  have  an  outstanding  leadership  team  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City.  It 
happens that 50 percent of those positions are filled by women. Currently the immediate past 
chairman  and  current  deputy  chairman  of  our  Board  is  Lu  Cordova,  an  entrepreneur’s 
entrepreneur from Boulder, Colo. She was an outstanding chair during difficult economic and 
financial times. The Tenth Federal Reserve District, and the entire Federal Reserve System, 
benefitted from her outstanding leadership. Lu will be speaking here at the Central Exchange 
in March, and I encourage you to attend that program as well.  
Today I want to discuss two related topics. First, I will outline my economic outlook for 2011. 
And since it is because of my outlook for the economy during this past year that I have found 
myself in the minority view among my colleagues at the Federal Reserve, I will to spend just 
a few minutes discussing the monetary policy process.  
The economic outlook  
As  we  begin  2011,  recent  economic  data  indicate  a  firmer  tone  in  the  outlook,  and  I  am 
increasingly confident that the recovery is both sustainable and likely to gain strength over 
the next several quarters. That said, I expect the recovery to be moderate, with real GDP 
growing about 3 ½ to 4 percent a year over the next couple years.  
To put this outlook into perspective, it is important to remember that a major and necessary 
rebalancing – including the deleveraging of consumers, businesses, and financial institutions 
–  is  taking  place  within  our  economy.  Moreover,  this  is  occurring  while  state  and  local 
governments are struggling with budgets and mounting debt loads. With these adjustments, 
growth necessarily will be more modest than in past recoveries. Under such circumstances, 
the fact that we can talk about the likelihood of a sustainable recovery is highly encouraging.  
Before turning to the outlook for this year, let me begin with a brief look back at economic 
events in 2010. Last year began with solid gains in the first quarter. The nation’s real GDP 
grew at an annual rate of 3.7 percent and employment rose 261,000. Then the economy hit a 
soft  patch  in  the  middle  of  the  year  with  growth  in  output  and  employment  slowing. 
Fortunately, though, we appear to be coming out of that soft patch with the economy growing 
at a 2.6 percent rate in the third quarter and expected to accelerate to about a 3 percent rate 
in the fourth quarter.  
Over the last few months, we have seen clear signs of improvement. Consumer spending 
has  steadily  trended  up  and  is  likely  to  gain  further  strength  as  confidence  rebounds, 
personal incomes continue to rise, and the labor market gradually improves.  
The trend in business spending has been supportive of growth. For example, over the last 
year, spending on equipment and software increased almost 20 percent. And I expect that 
strong  corporate  profits  –  they  grew  26  percent  last  year  –  and  sales  growth  will  keep 
business investment a key source of strength going forward.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Also, the recently passed fiscal actions, in which Congress and the president extended the 
Bush-era tax cuts and unemployment insurance, and then also temporarily reduced payroll 
taxes,  will  provide  a  further  boost  to  aggregate  demand  next  year,  although  not  without 
longer-run risks to the economy.  
While the consumer and business sectors of the economy are rebounding, the same cannot 
be said for housing. As you know, housing lost momentum after the end of the homebuyer 
tax credit, and house prices continue to decline. Moreover, the inventory of unsold homes is 
exerting downward pressure on house prices and housing activity. As the broader economy 
continues  to  grow,  though,  I  expect  that  we  will  see  a  turnaround  in  housing  this  year. 
However, there are many issues tied to the housing crisis that could impede recovery, and 
much depends on how these issues are addressed in the next several months.  
Employment is the other issue that seems difficult to understand and solve. Unfortunately, 
while  private  jobs  are  being  added  to  the  economy,  the  pace  of  job  gains  is  not  strong 
enough to bring unemployment down to where we would all like. In fact, although the United 
States  added  over  1  million  net  new  jobs  through  November,  the  unemployment  rate 
remained  at  9.8  percent.  Forward-looking  surveys,  including  our  Bank’s  manufacturing 
survey, point to gains in employment over the next six months, and if history is any guide, we 
should see these increases accelerate over the course of the year. I would also note that our 
manufacturing survey points to expected gains in production and capital spending, which will 
contribute to improving job growth. Even so, with the number of people out of work and the 
growing numbers of new job entrants, it will be some time before we see the unemployment 
rate well below 9 percent.  
Given the immediate levels of slack in the economy, core inflation will remain modest in the 
near  term.  However,  given  the  degree  of  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  in  place  in  the 
economy  currently,  inflation  should  move  higher  over  the  medium  and  longer  term, 
depending  on  what  further  steps  are  taken  in  these  policy  areas.  Also,  the  risk  of  further 
disinflation or outright deflation is small and, with an improving economy, should only decline 
further in the coming months. It is also noteworthy that long-run inflation expectations even 
now remain above 2 percent and should exert upward pressure on inflation during the course 
of the recovery.  
There are, of course, risks to the outlook. First, I am concerned about what might happen to 
the economy if we fail to deal successfully with our long-run fiscal challenges. The budget 
deficit is the largest we have seen, as a share of GDP, since World War II. With these large 
budget  deficits,  total  federal  debt  outstanding  is  almost  $14  trillion,  or about  94  percent  of 
GDP.  Moreover,  projections  of  deficits  and  debt  show  the  federal  debt  will  continue  to 
increase, suggesting that fiscal policy is unsustainable and must be changed soon. As we 
have  seen  elsewhere,  the  reaction  of  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates  to  unsustainable 
fiscal policy can be sharp and disruptive. While specific recommendations on fiscal policy are 
not the purview of the Federal Reserve, I would urge serious consideration of proposals that 
have been offered by several groups, including the Simpson-Bowles deficit reduction plan. 
These are reasonable starting points for addressing the intractable problem that may have 
very serious ramifications for future monetary policy.  
A second concern I have is the consequences that will follow when we combine our current 
fiscal  projections  with  a  highly  accommodative  monetary  policy.  In  essence,  the  Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) has maintained an emergency monetary policy stance in a 
recovering economy and has continued to ease into the recovery. I believe these actions risk 
creating a new set of imbalances, or bubbles. Importantly, such actions as they continue are 
demanding the saving public and those on fixed incomes subsidize the borrowing public.  
To summarize, I am pleased to be able to say that in my view the economy is in recovery, 
although at a moderate pace. Over time, barring unexpected surprises, the recovery should 
gain momentum, which will encourage hiring and slowly bring down the unemployment rate. 
While we would all like to see the unemployment rate come down more quickly, and in fact 
2 
 should  gain  momentum,  we  must  also  acknowledge  that  our  economy  is  adjusting  to 
decades of excess consumption, high government debt and spending, and a low domestic 
savings level. These factors must also adjust, and this will take time as well. The very fact 
that we are in what appears to be a sustained recovery speaks well of our economy and its 
flexibility to adjust and regain strength over time.  
Dissent and monetary policy deliberations  
My  view  of  the  economy’s  prospects  and  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy  differ 
from the majority view among my Federal Reserve colleagues.  
Last  year,  I  was  a  voting  member  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  Reserve  Bank 
presidents vote in rotation, so I will be a participant rather than a voting member this year. It 
is a matter of public record that I dissented, or cast a “no” vote in all eight meetings in 2010. 
Based  on  audience  questions,  news  coverage  and  pundit  columns  throughout  the  year,  it 
has become obvious to me that the role of dissent in the FOMC is misunderstood and viewed 
without  context.  The  idea  that  a  dissenting  vote  is  confusing,  counterproductive,  and 
generally undesirable is unhealthy. It is also historically inaccurate.  
In my remaining time today, I will discuss why dissenting views at the FOMC are critical to 
the  success  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  that  public  debate  was  the  intent  of  its 
congressional founders. I will also describe how open debate and dissent are fundamental to 
achieving  transparency  of  FOMC  deliberations  and  to  supporting  the  credibility  of  the 
committee in difficult economic times.  
History  
When  the  Congress  created  the  Federal  Reserve  nearly  a  century  ago,  it  believed  very 
strongly that the best policy is not made in isolation, but encompasses a wide range of views 
from all affected interests. A Federal Reserve Bank was established in Kansas City, as well 
as 11 other major cities across the United States, to make sure the views of communities 
nationwide had a voice in Federal Reserve policy. The founders knew that such broad-based 
participation would lead to better decision making.  
This structure is replicated on the Federal Open Market Committee, which is the body that 
makes  decisions  about  our  nation’s  monetary  policy  through  changes  in  an  interest  rate 
known as the federal funds rate, and, over the last couple of years, changes in the size of the 
Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  and  the  interest  rate  it  pays  on  excess  reserves.  The 
FOMC is made up of 12 members: Seven of them are the Federal Reserve governors who 
have been appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. Governors always have 
a vote at the FOMC. The other five members are presidents of the regional Federal Reserve 
Banks who are appointed by their local boards of directors. The New York Bank’s president 
always  has  a  vote,  and  the  other  11  presidents  share  the  remaining  four  votes  in  a  set 
rotation.  As  a  result,  while  all  12  Reserve  Bank  presidents  are  active  participants  in  the 
FOMC  debate,  the  seven  politically  appointed  governors  always  have  a  majority  of  votes 
over the five voting Reserve Bank presidents.  
The  regional  Bank  presidents  fill  a  critical  role  at  the  Fed’s  policy  table.  They  have  the 
responsibility  of  representing  their  respective  Federal  Reserve  Districts  in  providing  their 
unique  perspective  on  national  policy  issues.  As  dictated  by  the  FOMC’s  structure, 
Washington  and  Wall  Street  not  only  participate  in  all  discussions  but  have  a  permanent 
vote.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  to  have  independent  voices  at  the  table  that  regularly  interact 
with Main Street business and community leaders in the rest of the country.  
In this structure, it is a key point to remember that each member was given a vote, not an 
advisory role. In FOMC policy votes since 1995 – which is essentially the current era of Fed 
policy – there was a dissenting vote about one-third of the time. Going back a bit earlier in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the 1990s to the ’90–91 recession, there were far more significant levels of dissent for both 
tighter and less restrictive monetary policy. During the Paul Volcker era, the chairman nearly 
lost  one  policy  vote.  In  addition,  there  were  30  dissenting  votes  cast  in  Volcker’s  final 
30 meetings as Fed chairman.  
Transparency  
There  are,  of  course,  commonalities  between  the  end  of  the  Volcker  era,  the  1990–91 
recession and today: In each of these periods the economy was poised at a critical juncture 
and broad disagreement prevailed about the appropriate policy course – and not just around 
the Fed policy table. By the very nature of our political system, these were also periods of 
extreme political pressure to provide increased stimulus with an eye toward short-term gains 
and  with  a  promise  to  take  appropriate  steps  at  some  later  point  to  remove  that  stimulus 
before inflationary pressures could become a problem.  
Leaving  those  issues  aside,  last  year  some  suggested  that  dissenting  votes  confuse  the 
market  and  that  public  disagreement  among  members  reduced  the  effectiveness  of  Fed 
policy, including the second round of quantitative easing, known as QE2.  
As an economist, I cannot be certain that my views are correct. Certainly, a majority of my 
counterparts  on  the  FOMC  last  year  did  not  agree  with  my  views.  But  it  is  important  to 
recognize  that  in  the  face  of  uncertainty,  arriving  at  the  best  policy  decision  is  built  on 
divergent opinions and vigorous debate.  
Because  of  this,  the  role  of  open  dissent  is  at  least  as  critical  to  FOMC  monetary  policy 
decisions as it is to deliberations by the Supreme Court, the United States Congress or any 
other  body  with  important  public  responsibilities  from  the  local  through  the  federal  level.  If 
you find it unusual to consider the FOMC as being similar to these other deliberative bodies, 
it is perhaps because many–including some former Federal Reserve officials–tend to speak 
of Fed policy as being done by a single actor.  
In  2004,  then-Fed  Governor  Ben  Bernanke  talked  about  this  issue  in  a  speech  where  he 
noted  the  “diversity  of  views  and  opinions  likely  to  exist  among  the  members  of  a  large 
committee create further challenges of effective communication.”1 
Despite these challenges, he went on to talk about the importance of making these divergent 
views  broadly  known:  “Although  at  times  it  feels  cacophonous,  the  willingness  of  FOMC 
members  to  present  their  individual  perspectives  in  speeches  and  other  public  forums 
provides  the  public  with  useful  information  about  the  diversity  of  views  and  the  balance  of 
opinion on the Committee.”  
Credibility  
Some would suggest, of course, that monetary policy is not like a Supreme Court ruling. This 
line of reasoning comes from an idea that a unanimous FOMC is more likely to foster the 
confidence that is so critical to the functioning of our economy and financial system. To this 
line of thinking, dissent becomes even more dangerous in periods of high uncertainty.  
A deliberative body does not gain credibility by concealing dissent when decision making is 
most difficult. In fact, credibility is sacrificed as those on the outside realize that unanimity – 
difficult  in  any  environment  –  simply  may  not  be  a  reasonable  expectation  when  the  path 
ahead  is  the  most  confounding.  The  question  then  becomes:  Should  the  debate  that  is 
happening  privately  remain  hidden  from  the  public  eye  until  the  meeting  minutes  or 
                                                 
1   Jan. 3, 2004 
4 
 transcripts  are  later  released?  And  in  the  interim,  is  the  nation  somehow  better  served  by 
giving  the  public  the  impression  that  the  entire  body  is  in  agreement  to  the  prescribed 
approach even when that is not the case?  
In the mid-1980s, after the vote Chairman Volcker nearly lost created a bit of a media circus, 
Herbert Stein wrote a very interesting column about the issue for The Wall Street Journal. 
Mr.  Stein,  who  had  been  chairman  of  the  Council  of  Economic  Advisers  under  two 
presidents, wrote that divergent views at the policy table should not be worrisome. It is more 
important, he wrote, that there are visible principles at work in shaping these views.  
Stein  wrote  that  in  creating  the  central  bank  of  the  United  States,  “Congress  intended 
diversity (of views) and the Federal Reserve … benefits from the appearance that diversity is 
at least possible.”2 
To  suggest that  public support  is  somehow  encouraged  by  unanimous  decisions suggests 
little appreciation for the public and their understanding about the challenges we face. To me, 
that  fosters  a  loss  of  confidence  that  can  be  difficult  to  recover.  As  a  result,  the  body 
becomes less able to respond to a crisis and is left more vulnerable to its critics.  
The  Federal  Reserve’s  founders  recognized  this  a  century  ago.  I  hope  we  continue  to 
recognize  its  critical  importance  in  the  years  to  come.  As  for  me,  I  recognize  that  the 
committee’s majority might be correct. In fact, I hope that it is. However, I have come to my 
policy position based on my experience, current data and economic history. If I had failed to 
express my views with my vote, I would have failed in my duty to you and to the committee. 
 
                                                
2   The Wall Street Journal, April 4, 1986 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
