Masaaki Shirakawa: Global imbalances and current account imbalances 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Banque de France 
Financial Stability Launch Event, Paris, 18 February 2011. 
 The debate surrounding global imbalances gained increasing attention after the turn of the 
century  as  the  United  States’  current  account  deficit  ballooned,  while  the  current  account 
surplus  of  some  emerging  market  countries,  notably  China,  increased  dramatically.  Some 
have argued that global imbalances were one of the key causes of the recent credit bubble in 
the United States and hence the global financial crisis. Thus, as the world economy recovers 
from the severe recession, the possible expansion of global imbalances is receiving renewed 
attention.  If  global  imbalances  were  to  become  unsustainable,  it  could  derail  the  nascent 
global economic recovery. Against this background, the G20 Leaders have made “external 
sustainability” a key item on the G20 agenda for 2011. 
The global imbalance debate contains a host of issues. How much emphasis should be put on 
adjusting  current  account  imbalances  per  se?  What  are  the  causes  of  current  account 
imbalances? Does the fact that the largest deficit country provides the key reserve currency 
delay the adjustment process, as the incentive to reduce deficits is weaker? How much does 
the fact that some current account surplus countries have fixed or relatively inflexible exchange 
rate  systems  influence  current  account  imbalances?  The  introduction  of  new  reserve  assets 
would likely reduce the demand for US dollars, but would it reduce the precautionary demand 
for reserves, thereby reducing current account imbalances? These issues are closely linked to 
the  broader  discussions  on  the  international  monetary  system  and  remind  us  of  the  original 
Bretton Woods debate between White and Keynes almost 70 years ago. 
Among  the  various  topics,  this  paper  will  focus  on  the  appropriateness  of  using  current 
account  surpluses  and  deficits  as  an  indicator  for  assessing  the  sustainability  of  global 
imbalances. In the first section, I will review Japan’s own experience, especially during the 
1980s when current account surpluses increased significantly and the country struggled to 
deal with external pressures to reduce current account surpluses, and in the second section 
look at experiences from the current global crisis. The third section will draw some lessons 
from the past and present. The fourth section will consider issues which need to be taken 
into consideration as we work to avoid the next global crisis, and the fifth and final section 
identifies some challenges for policymakers. 
The Japanese experience 
1. 
Looking  back  at  the  developments  of  Japan’s  current  account  balance  over  the  last  fifty 
years, with the rapid improvement in the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector, Japan 
began  to  continuously  record  trade  surpluses  and  as  a  result  current  account  surpluses 
starting from the mid-1960s (Chart 1). The only exceptions were the periods 1973–1975 and 
1979–1980, when surging oil prices due to the first and second oil crises led to a fall in the 
trade surplus.  
 
 
 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Chart 1 
Current account balance of Japan 
Ratio to nominal GDP 
 Entering the 1980s, Japan’s trade and current account surplus increased sharply and this was 
accompanied  by  increased  external  pressure,  both  bilaterally  and  multilaterally,  to  reduce 
Japan’s surplus. In the first half of the 1980s, the focus was on constraining exports in specific 
sectors such as the voluntary restraints on automobile exports to the United States, and on “the 
opening  up  of  Japan’s  domestic  markets”  to  overseas  products  and  services.  With  regard  to 
liberalisation of financial markets, Japan’s Ministry of Finance and the US Treasury set up the 
“Yen-Dollar  Committee”  in  November  1983.  The  Committee  released  its  report  in  May  1984, 
which  provided  a  detailed  plan  to  liberalise  Japan’s  financial  and  capital  markets  and  to 
internationalise the yen. Meanwhile, the yen which had briefly reached 177 yen to the dollar in 
the late 1970s, generally moved in the range of 200 to 250 yen to the dollar during the first half of 
the  1980s,  and  the  view  that  the  yen  should  strengthen  to  reduce  Japan’s  trade  and  current 
account surplus mounted among its major trading partners. In September 1985, the G5 Ministers 
of Finance and Central Bank Governors announced in the “Plaza Accord”1 that “there are large 
imbalances  in  external  positions  which  pose  potential  problems”  and  “agreed  that  exchange 
rates should play a role in adjusting external imbalances”. As is well acknowledged, based on 
this agreement the G5 began to intervene jointly in the foreign exchange markets to bring down 
the value of the dollar. The five countries also made individual commitments as a part of the 
Plaza Accord, and Japan, among various measures, committed to “further opening up of Japan’s 
domestic market to foreign goods and services” and noted that “efforts to stimulate demand will 
focus on increasing consumption and investment through measures to enlarge consumer and 
mortgage credit markets”. In the area of monetary policy, Japan agreed to “flexible management 
of monetary policy with due attention to the yen rate”. As a result of this agreement and ensuing 
intervention,  the  yen  which  had  been  around  240  yen  to  the  dollar  before  the  Plaza  Accord 
appreciated sharply and touched 152 yen to the dollar in September 1986. The ratio-to-GDP of 
                                                 
1 
“Announcement  of  the  Ministers  of  Finance  and  Central  Bank  Governors  of  France,  Germany,  Japan,  the 
United Kingdom and the United States” (September 22, 1985). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Japan’s  current  account  surplus  peaked  at  4.2%  in  1986  and  began  to  decline  thereafter.2 
However, Japan’s trade surplus with its major trading partners remained at high levels, and the 
view gradually took hold that exchange rate adjustments alone cannot significantly reduce trade 
imbalances.  External  pressure  on  Japan  to  reduce  its  surplus  began  to  focus  more  on  the 
expansion  of  domestic  demand.  In  February  1987,  at  a  meeting  in  Paris,  the  G6  Finance 
Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  released  the  “Louvre  Accord”.3  The  Ministers  and 
Governors “agreed that the substantial exchange rate changes since the Plaza Agreement will 
increasingly contribute to reducing external imbalances and have now brought their currencies 
within ranges broadly consistent with underlying economic fundamentals” and they also “agreed 
to cooperate closely to foster stability of exchange rates around current levels”. The Ministers 
and Governors also recognised “that the large trade and current account imbalances of some 
countries pose serious economic and political risks”. Each member once again made specific 
commitments and Japan agreed to “follow monetary and fiscal policies which will help to expand 
domestic demand and thereby contribute to reducing the external surplus”. Additionally, the Bank 
of Japan “announced that it will reduce its discount rate by one half percent” to 2.5%.  
Although the Japanese economy grew rapidly at an annual pace of 4.7% between 1986 and 
1988, and asset prices showed double digit increases, the very low policy rate of 2.5% was 
maintained for over two years until May 1989, as inflation rates remained stable at low levels.4 
This period of a very low policy rate was much longer than in Germany which maintained its 
policy  rate  at  2.5%  for  less  than  a  year.5  In  spite  of  repeated  intervention  by  the  major 
countries  following  the  Louvre  Accord,  the  yen  continued  to  strengthen  against  the  dollar 
reaching 121 yen to the dollar in November 1988, raising concerns about a slowdown in the 
domestic  economy,  mainly  in  the  export-related  sectors.  In  the  meantime,  bilateral  pressure 
from the United States continued. The US Congress passed an omnibus trade bill6 in 1988 and 
the  following  year  Japan  was  identified  by  the  US  government  as  one  of  the  countries 
conducting  unfair  trade  practices.7  In  1989,  the  Structural  Impediments  Initiative  began 
between the US and Japanese governments. A joint report was finalised in June 1990 and the 
Japanese government committed to instituting a public investment program totaling as much 
as JPY 430 trillion  (roughly 100% of nominal  GDP) over a  ten  year period.8 Japan’s current 
account  surplus  dropped  to  1.4%  of  GDP  in  1990,  but  as  the  bubble  burst  and  economic 
growth  slowed,  the  ratio  of  current  account  surplus  to  GDP  rose  once  again  and  averaged 
2.4% during the 1990s.  
More recently Japan’s current surplus has averaged 3.3% of GDP since 2000. However, its 
composition  has  changed  significantly.  In  the  past,  Japan’s  current  account  surplus  was 
generally a reflection of its trade surplus (Chart 2). But during this decade, the share of the 
trade surplus has declined and in recent years three-quarters of the current account surplus 
is taken up by the income account surplus. The large income account surplus is to a large 
extent  predetermined  by  Japan’s  accumulation  of  external  assets  over  the  years  through 
portfolio and direct investments. 
“Statement of the G6 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors” (February 22, 1987). 
                                                 
2  Due in part to the initial J-curve effect, there was a time lag before the surplus began to actually decrease. 
3 
4  The average year-on-year change in CPI between 1986 and 1988 was 0.5%. 
5  The Bundesbank reduced its discount rate from 3.0% to 2.5% in December 1987 and raised it again to 3.0% 
in July 1988. By the time the Bank of Japan raised its discount rate to 3.0% in May 1989, the policy rate in 
Germany was 4.5%. 
“Omnibus Foreign Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988”. 
6 
7  Brazil and India were also designated. 
8  According to the report (Japan Structural Impediments Initiatives Joint Report), public investment during the 
previous decade (Fiscal 1981 to 1990) was estimated at JPY 263 trillion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 2 
Trade balance of Japan 
Ratio to nominal GDP 
 What does the Japanese experience tell us?  
First,  how  effective  were  exchange  rate  adjustments  and  other  macroeconomic  policies  in 
reducing  current  account  imbalances?  They  surely  helped  in  bringing  about  a  reduction  in 
the trade surplus as part of cyclical dynamics, and thus a decrease of the current account 
surplus. However, aside from cyclical components, underlying current account trends were 
little  changed.  The  attempt  to  make  further  adjustments  through  macroeconomic  policies, 
especially through prolonged accommodative fiscal and monetary policy was unsuccessful. It 
rather had the detrimental side-effect of being one of the factors that fueled the expansion of 
the bubble and hence led afterwards to the serious predicament.  
Incidentally,  depending  on  the  structure  of  the  current  account  balance,  surpluses  and 
deficits can be to a large extent predetermined. In Japan’s case, as mentioned above, the 
large income account surplus has driven the current account surplus in recent years. When 
we look across the G20 countries, this is not an isolated case. Australia’s current account 
deficit can to a large extent be explained by its income account deficit. The trade balance 
does  have  a  large  share  of  the  current  account  in  many  countries,  but  other  components 
such as the income account often have non-negligible and sometimes significant impact on 
the  overall  picture  of  the  current  account  balance  (Chart  3).  This  is  a  reflection  of  the 
structure of their economies and needs to be well understood when assessing the evolution 
of the current account. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 
Current account balances of G20 members  
Ratios to nominal GDP – 2005–2009 average 
Second,  was  the  current  account  surplus  indicative  of  “imbalances”?  The  current  account 
surplus may have been indicative of “imbalances”, but does not provide sufficiently granular 
information to make an effective assessment. The emergence of unsustainable imbalances 
seems to be better and more clearly captured through other indicators such as large jumps in 
asset  prices  and  the  rapid  expansion  in  corporate  sector  debt  (Charts  4  and  5).  Japan’s 
continuously large current account surplus itself did not provide clear hints with regard to the 
bubbles that turned out to be the root cause of serious damage to economic stability.  
 Chart 4 
Major economic indicators of Japan (1980–1992)  
Exchange rate and official discount rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Asset prices and bank lending 
Real GDP and CPI 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5 
Japan’s corporate sector debt 
Ratio to nominal GDP 
 Third, how does exchange rate policy influence the overall economy? An excessive focus on 
preventing the appreciation of the currency and on easing the negative effects of exchange 
rate appreciation fostered expectations that a low interest rate environment would continue. 
This became one of the factors that led to the emergence of the bubble, thereby impairing 
the  stability  of  the  economy.  The  accommodative  monetary  policy  following  the  Louvre 
Accord,  reflected  the  external  pressure  to  reduce  the  current  account  surplus  as  well  as 
domestic concerns about the negative impact of the appreciation of the yen on the Japanese 
economy.  
The recent global financial crisis 
2. 
In the run up to the recent global financial crisis in the mid-2000s, concerns were raised that 
a disorderly adjustment would occur through a sharp fall in the value of the dollar and a jump 
in  long-term  US  interest  rates.  Such  a  view  focused  on  the  widening  US  current  account 
deficit  and  the  large  increase  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  emerging  market  countries, 
and  the  possibility  that  such  countries  may  at  some  point  become  reluctant  to  continue 
financing the US deficit. However, as we all know, what came to pass was quite different. At 
the  outset  of  the  financial  crisis,  as  market  participants  became  extremely  risk  averse,  a 
global  flight-to-quality  occurred.  US  long-term  rates  fell  substantially  as  demand  for  US 
Treasuries increased, and the dollar strengthened against most other currencies.  
This experience, similar to the Japanese experience, also highlights the need to look beyond 
current  account  balances  and  identify  what  constitutes  underlying  imbalances.  Then  the 
question  becomes  “How  can  we  identify  the  imbalances  or  distortions  which  could  lead  to 
unsustainable global imbalances? What type of information do we need to focus our attention 
on  which  is  not  sufficiently  captured  in  current  account  data?”.  Taking  into  account  the 
additional  experiences  from  the  current  financial  crisis,  I  would  like  to  point  out  two  areas 
where attention should be focused. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Build-up of excess leverage 
2.1 
First, the build-up of excess leverage in the economy. When we look at long-term trends in 
ratio-to-GDP  of  the  savings  and  investment  balance  which  is  equivalent  to  the  current 
account balance (Chart 6), one can notice that the net negative savings in the United States 
widens in the 2000s. These changes in themselves do not tell us whether such changes are 
sustainable or not. However, when we additionally examine the developments in household 
debt, we can see large deviations from longer-term trends (Chart 7). Such developments are 
similar  to  the  Japanese  situation  in  the  1980s,  only  the  sector  where  excess  leverage 
materialised  is  different.  In  Japan,  the  build-up  was  in  the  corporate  sector  (Chart  5). 
Certainly, large deviations from longer-term trends in themselves are not definitive, but are a 
strong indication that unsustainable financial imbalances are likely to be accumulating. What 
is important is to have both an economy-wide assessment and assessment at a somewhat 
more disaggregated level, for example at the sector level. This would enable policymakers to 
obtain a better sense of where imbalances may be accumulating. 
Chart 6 
Investment-savings balance of the United States 
Ratio to nominal GDP 
 It is also important to understand the mechanism of how credit, which supports the build-up 
of leverage, is provided. Before the current crisis, special investment vehicles (SIVs) set up 
by US and European banks frequently purchased various structured products originated by 
the sponsoring bank. Once the subprime loan market collapsed, the credit and liquidity risks 
of  the  SIVs ended  up  with  the sponsoring  institutions,  as  reputational risks  forced  them  to 
extend support. A similar situation had evolved in Japan during its bubble period in the late 
1980s.  Non-bank  financial  companies  were  used  aggressively  to  expand  residential  and 
commercial  real  estate  lending  often  to  circumvent  regulatory  limits,  especially  after 
regulators introduced overall limits on bank lending growth to these sectors. Although such 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
non-bank  companies  were  structured  so  that  they  were  not  consolidated  on  to  banks’ 
balance sheets, most of the losses ended up with the parent banks. Both the recent US and 
Japanese  experience  highlight  the  need  to  look  beyond  the  banking  system.  The  shadow 
banking system played a key role in both countries. 
Chart 7 
United States’ household sector debt 
Ratio to nominal GDP 
 Gross capital flows and risk profile of financial institutions 
2.2 
Second, gross capital flows. The net capital flows corresponding to current account balances 
do  not  provide  us  with  sufficient  information  to  locate  possible  sources  of  unsustainable 
imbalances. It will need to be supplemented with other sources of data. A case in point would 
be  recent  developments  in  the  euro  area.  The  current  account  of  the  euro  area  has  been 
generally balanced during the past decade. But BIS banking statistics show that euro area 
banks  actively  intermediated  US  dollar  funds  from  the  international  banking  system  to  the 
non-banking sector in the United States (Chart 8). Although the netted amount was small, the 
accumulation of risks such as maturity mismatches, currency mismatches and credit risks, 
which increased on a gross basis was substantial. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 8 
Euro area banks’ cross-border US dollar claims  
BIS reporting banks’ cross-border claims by currency  
Chart 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Globally, banks, especially European banks, had been borrowing short-term dollar funds in 
the  interbank  market  and  investing  in  long-term  assets.  The  dollar  funding  risk  in  the 
international  banking  system  had  been  rapidly  increasing  in  the  mid-2000s,  becoming 
substantially larger than the funding risk for other major currencies (Chart 9). As the crisis 
unfolded,  counterparty  credit  concerns  increased  in  global  financial  markets  and  banks 
began to hoard dollar liquidity. The US dollar interbank funding market froze up and many 
market  participants  struggled  to  obtain  dollars.  Serious  tension  continued  in  the  financial 
markets until central banks including the Bank of Japan began to provide US dollars through 
bi-lateral swap lines arranged with the US Federal Reserve. 
BIS  banking  statistics  and  other  sources  of  information  help  us  fill  the  gaps  in  the  current 
account data. There was a large inflow of funds from banks in advanced European countries 
before  the  crisis,  which  were  rapidly  withdrawn  after  the  summer  of  2007  (Chart  10).  BIS 
reporting banks’ overall cross-border exposures to the Unites States have fallen more than 
20% since reaching its peak in first quarter of 2008, and especially exposures to the private 
sector, which include investments in structured products, have fallen nearly 30% (Chart 11). 
Cross-border flows through the international banking system  
Chart 10 
BIS reporting banks’ total foreign claims on the United States by sector  
Chart 11 
 12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
By  obtaining  micro-level  information  on  financial  institutions,  central  banks  and  other 
supervisory  and  regulatory  authorities  can  assess  the  true  risk  profile  of  individual 
institutions. It also provides the basis for grasping the distribution of risks at various levels of 
aggregation, including at the overall macro-level. It will be important to develop a macro-level 
understanding of where risks are concentrated in the financial system as well as the possible 
interlinkages among market participants. 
Assessing global imbalances 
3. 
Current account balances provide us with helpful information on the state of the economy. At 
the same time, the current crisis as well as other past experience show the potential risks of 
simply using current account balances as an indicator of unsustainable global imbalances. 
Although not an exhaustive list, I would like to highlight three points as lessons from current 
and past experiences.  
First, surpluses and deficits emerge as a result of the voluntary choices of economic entities 
and  thus  should  not  be  automatically  deemed  as  problematic.  Trends  in  current  account 
surpluses and deficits are the reflection of longer-term trends in savings-investment activities 
which  are  strongly  influenced  by  economic  developments  and  demographics.  Current 
account surpluses and deficits will only lead to problems when they become unsustainable, 
and thus a careful overall assessment is required. 
Second,  distinguishing  between  the  structural  and  cyclical  components  of  the  Current 
account  balance  is  often  a  difficult task.  Trying  to  adjust  the  structural component  through 
macroeconomic policy and exchange rate policy entails the risk of causing the development 
of financial imbalances which may destabilise the economy. A narrow policy focus on current 
accounts per se can be counter-productive.  
Third,  central  banks  and  other  authorities  need  to  assess  the  possible  emergence  of 
unsustainable imbalances using a wide range of indicators such as asset prices, leverage, 
gross  capital  flows  and  information  on  risk  pricing  and  risk  profiles  of  financial  institutions. 
Current  account  data  only  provide  us  with  a  partial  picture.  In  the  past,  when  the  cross-
border flow of goods and services dominated interrelationship among economies, assessing 
current  account  and  trade  balances  would  give  us  a  relatively  good  picture  of  emerging 
external imbalances. But the size of global capital flows has dramatically increased and the 
speed with which capital moves to and from one country to another has accelerated as well. 
The growing use of derivatives adds another layer of complexity. The approach for assessing 
global imbalances needs to change accordingly. 
Preparing for new types of crises 
4. 
Mankind has continuously searched for “monetary anchors” or “monetary benchmarks”. This 
endeavor  has  been  a  repetition  of  initial  success  followed  by  failure  or  outdatedness  as  a 
result  of  rapid  changes  in  the  economic  and  financial  system.  In  the  realm  of  monetary 
policy, money supply targeting was often used in the 1970s in many advanced economies. 
However, with rapid financial innovation, its relationship with inflation developments became 
unstable  and  was  eventually  abandoned.  Inflation  targeting  emerged  as  a  new  monetary 
policy  framework  in  the  1990s,  but  the  challenges  in  its  effective  implementation  have 
surfaced  as  bubbles  developed  in  the  run-up  to  the  current  financial  crisis,  especially  in 
identifying imbalances when they appear in forms other than inflation of goods and services. 
With regard to the international monetary system, we have moved in the past from the gold 
standard  to  managed  floating  exchange  rate  systems.  Currently,  the  major  currencies  are 
free  floating,  but  many  countries  still  have  fixed  or  managed  floating  regimes.  Current 
account imbalances can be one of many possible indicators. But there is no single indicator 
which  can  identify  emerging  imbalances,  let  alone  unsustainable  global  imbalances.  A 
sufficiently  flexible  policy  framework  which  can  adapt  to  rapidly  changing  economic  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
financial conditions is required. The process through which crises unfold is unique for each 
crisis.  We  must  learn  from  past  experience,  but  strategies  for  the  last  war  do  not  assure 
success in future battles. Keeping an open mind is important. 
Chart 12 
Financial account of emerging countries 
 As policymakers work to develop a framework for identifying and dealing with unsustainable 
global imbalances in a rapidly evolving economic and financial environment, they need to be 
cognizant  of  three  key  elements:  two  longer-term  trends  and  one  element  unique  to  the 
current environment.  
First, though needless to say, we  are experiencing a further acceleration in economic and 
financial globalisation. In addition, due to technological advances, the interlinkages between 
financial  markets  and  among  market  participants  are  becoming  increasingly  complex. 
Shocks  in  one  part  of  the  world  will  swiftly  spillover  to  other  parts  and  often  through 
unexpected channels. The effects of the risk-taking channel of monetary policy can be larger 
and more widespread than in the past. Search-for-yield behaviour by global investors is one 
such example.  
Second, the share of emerging market countries in the world economy is increasing. Their 
share in the world economy which was 20% in 1990 and 2000 has increased to 31% in 2009 
on  a  current  price  basis,  and  they  are  expected  to  account  for  seven-tenths  of  global 
economic growth in 2010. Emerging economies have become the drivers of global growth, 
and consequently their responsibilities as members of the global community have increased. 
For example, it needs to be recognised that the implications of inflexible exchange rates in 
major emerging economies on the global economy have become larger. The perspective of 
an orderly structural adjustment process for domestic industries may warrant a gradual shift 
from  fixed  exchange  rates  to  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  system  and  a  controlled 
appreciation  of  the  home  currency.  But,  at  the  same  time,  policymakers  in  emerging 
economies need to recognise that such a policy both hampers the flexible implementation of 
domestic  macroeconomic  policies  including  monetary  policy,  and  exports  the  cost  of  the 
adjustment to other countries. If other countries follow and take similar measures to delay the 
appreciation of their currencies, the impact on economies which allow flexible exchange rate 
movements could be magnified. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third, we are now in the unique situation where some advanced economies are recovering 
from  the  aftermath  of  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  and  as  a  result,  the  world  is  facing  an 
uneven pace of recovery. On the one hand, emerging economies are continuing their robust 
growth. On the other hand, due in part to the balance-sheet adjustment process following the 
bursting of the bubble in some countries, recovery in advanced economies is slow. Central 
banks  in  advanced  economies  have  introduced  unconventional  measures  to  implement 
extremely  accommodative  monetary  policy.  As  advanced  economies  face  the  zero  lower 
bound in interest rates and a weak transmission mechanism constrained by balance-sheet 
adjustment needs, monetary easing through the traditional interest rate or credit channel is 
not working to the extent normally expected. Instead, in an integrated global financial system 
and with the divergent pace of economic growth, capital is rapidly fl owing into high growth 
emerging economies which do not face such constraints (Chart 12). The risk-taking channel 
is working more effectively at the global level.  
Correlations among emerging market equity and commodity indexes  
Chart 13 
 Since the emerging economies are not hampered by the aftereffects of the bursting of the 
bubble,  the  stimulative  effects  of  such  capital  inflows  could  be  unexpectedly  large.  With 
short-term interest rates at very low levels in advanced economies, carry trade activity has 
picked  up  and  correlation  among  emerging  economy  equity  markets  as  well  as  between 
emerging equity markets and commodity  markets is rising (Chart 13). If such capital flows 
lead  to  the  development  of  bubbles  and  abrupt  reversals  in  the  future,  the  negative 
repercussions  would  not  only  be  harmful  for  emerging  economies,  but  also  for  the  global 
economy. 
Challenges for policymakers 
5. 
In order to prevent the emergence of unsustainable global imbalances, policymakers need to 
dig down beyond changes in the current account balance to capture underlying imbalances. 
A key sea change that we are witnessing is that through rapid globalisation the identification 
of harmful imbalances and implementing rebalancing measures can no longer be a purely 
domestic process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
In  formulating  macroeconomic  policy,  the  traditional  emphasis  was  to  ensure  domestic 
stability  or  to  put  one’s  house  in  order.  However,  with  the  deepening  of  globalisation,  the 
simple sum of each country’s policy action may not necessarily achieve an optimal outcome 
at the global level. Policymakers in both advanced and emerging economies need to rethink 
the  meaning  of  domestic  stability.  The  direct  impact  of  policy  measures  on  the  domestic 
economy  does  not  provide  a  comprehensive  view.  It  has  become  ever  more  important  to 
review the spillover effects of their policies across borders which will also reverberate back to 
each country through economic and financial interlinkages. 
When  considering  possible  financial  imbalances  stemming  from  large  capital  inflows  or 
inflexible exchange rate regimes, there are no easy solutions which would satisfy each and 
every country’s needs both from an economic and political standpoint. But since we are all in 
the  same  boat,  if  we  all  start  rowing  in  different  directions,  the  risks  of  a  fallacy  of 
composition would increase. There are no mechanical or automatic mechanisms which can 
guide  our  economic  policies.  The  complexity  of  how  the  current  crisis  unfolded  across 
financial markets and economies as well as the new difficulties that continue to emerge as 
the global economy moves through the gradual recovery phase, are reconfirming this point. 
For  policymakers,  humbly  learning  from  each  other’s  experiences  and  deliberate  and 
constructive  dialogue,  though  perhaps  not  fancy  solutions,  are  essential,  as  our  boat 
continues through uncharted waters. 
Bibliography 
Bank of Japan International Department (2010)  “Japan’s balance  of payment  for  2009”, 
BOJ Reports & Research Papers. 
Bernanke (B.) (2005) 
“The  global  saving  glut  and  the  US  current  account  deficit”,  Remarks  at  the  Sandridge 
Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia.  
Blanchard (O.) and Milesi-Ferretti (G. M.) (2009) 
“Global imbalances: in midstream?”, IMF Staff Position Note SPN/09/29. 
Borio (C.) and Disyatat (P.) (2010) 
“Global  imbalances  and  the  financial  crisis:  reassessing  the  role  of  international  finance”, 
Asian Economic Policy Review 5, No. 2: 198–216.  
Feldstein (M.) (2008) 
“Resolving  the  global  imbalance:  the  dollar  and  the  US  saving  rate”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 22, No. 3: 113–125. 
Fender (I.) and McGuire (P.) (2010) 
“Bank structure, funding risk and the transmission of shocks across countries: concepts and 
measurement”, BIS Quarterly Review, September. 
Kohn (D.) (2010) 
“Global imbalances”, Remarks at the High-Level Conference on the International Monetary 
System, Zurich, Switzerland. 
Obstfeld (M.) and Kenneth (R.) (2009) 
“Global imbalances and the financial crisis: products of common causes”, Paper prepared for 
the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference. 
Okina (K.), Shirakawa (M.) and Shiratsuka (S.) (2001)  
“The asset price bubble and monetary policy: Japan’s experience in the late 1980s and the 
lessons”, Monetary and Economic Studies 25, No. S–1: 395–450. Bank of Japan Institute for 
Monetary and Economic Studies. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Shirakawa (M.) (2010) 
“Revisiting the philosophy behind central bank policy”, Speech at the Economic Club in New 
York.  
Shirakawa (M.) (2010) 
“Advanced  and  emerging  economies  –  Two-speed  recovery  –”,  Speech  at  the  Bauhinia 
Distinguished Talk in Hong Kong SAR. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
