Alan Bollard: Looking into the crystal ball – a forecast and some risks for 
the year ahead 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 28 January 2011. 
 I would like to thank Kirdan Lees, Manager Issues and International, Economics Department, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand, for his assistance in this speech. See slides at the end of the document. 
Introduction: 
For  New  Zealanders,  Christmas  and  New  Year  are  the  times  for  family,  relaxation  and 
reflection  on  the  year  past.  January  is  the  month  when  we  traditionally  look  ahead,  and 
consider what the year may hold. This speech presents our economic view of 2011, and then 
poses a series of international and domestic risks to that forecast. Of course our forecasts 
will not turn out to be completely accurate. The risk analysis is a way to examine some of the 
complexities that may affect us. 
What we can and cannot forecast: 
There are limits to what we, the Reserve Bank, and indeed any economists, can forecast. 
Like meteorologists, economists have a reasonable understanding of what might happen in 
the  near  term,  but  over  the  longer  term,  perhaps  beyond  six  quarters  or  so,  uncertainty 
begins to increase. We generally find we can predict movements over the business cycle but 
struggle to adequately deal with big changes in structures or behaviours. 
Over  the  long  term,  we  resort  to  analysing  patterns  and  trends  in  the  data  in  ways  not 
dissimilar to how meteorologists look to la Nina and el Nino events to help understand the 
longer term picture. These patterns and trends do contain useful information but, like long-
term  weather  forecasts,  provide  limited  comfort  if  you  want  to  know  if  it  will  rain  on  your 
wedding day in Christchurch in early summer. 
We regularly assess our forecast performance and look for ways to improve what we do. We 
find  our  activity  forecasts  a  year  ahead  are  reasonably  accurate  and  likewise,  we  can 
forecast  some  price  information,  particularly  for  that  part  of  the  economy  little  affected  by 
international  trade.  However,  exchange  rates  and  international  prices  are  much  harder  to 
forecast.  
Of  course  forecasting  has  been  particularly  difficult  as  the  world  pulls  out  of  the  Global 
Financial Crisis. People’s behaviours and business’s behaviours have changed significantly 
and we have little from history to guide us about how enduring or deep these changes may 
go. In addition, the recovery has been rocky and fragile. In this speech we go further and 
look at some “what-ifs”, identifying some economic developments that could make a sizable 
difference  to  our  forecast  picture.  We  examine  a  number  of  international  and  domestic 
scenarios that could conceivably impact us. These scenarios contain both “good” and “bad” 
outcomes, and some have perverse or indeterminate collateral implications that make it hard 
to classify them. 
Moreover,  these  scenarios  are  not  necessarily  independent  events.  Interactions  between 
shocks  can  be  complex  and  important;  and  when  it  comes  to  the  Global  Financial  Crisis, 
nothing is simple. For example, Howard Davies’ recent book documents 38 different things 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that went wrong during the Global Financial Crisis.1 Many  of these were inter-related, and 
those interrelations made the situation worse.  
But before we turn to the risks to our outlook, we will focus on what we think will happen over 
2011,  based  on  our  view  at  the  time  of  the  latest  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  updated  for 
data over the last month. 
What we think will happen over the next year: 
The Global Financial Crisis was a deep and damaging event. Even in New Zealand where 
we  have  been  less  affected,  recovery  has  been  slow  and  patchy.  In  fact,  2010  was  a 
disappointing  year:  we  initially  saw  recovery  happening,  but  the  second  half  went 
unexpectedly soft (as it did in many OECD countries). During 2011 we expect the recovery to 
pick up and gradually become more secure. 
The  international  outlook  continues  to  be  uneven.  Growth  in  the  Asian  region  has  been 
strong but has brought its own difficulties with inflation and asset price bubbles building. The 
outlook  for  Western  and  developed  economies  is  still  spongy  as  these  economies  slowly 
recover  from  the  aftershocks  of  repairing  damaged  bank  balance  sheets  and  ongoing 
government  fiscal  exposures.  Commodity  prices  have  reached  very  high  levels,  driven  by 
emerging market demand. These high commodity prices generate stronger export revenue 
and provide a much-needed boost to incomes. 
However,  farmers  continue  to  use  this  income  boost  to  repair  balance  sheets.  Indeed  the 
business  sector,  broadly  speaking,  continues  to  behave  cautiously,  opting  to  rebuild 
company balance sheets rather than take on new investment. We think that investment will 
start to pick up in the second half of this year as confidence returns, but it is by no means 
clear how persistent business caution will remain. 
The national construction market remains very soft. But the picture for the next few years is 
dominated by the significant impact of the Canterbury earthquake. Major damage has been 
done to homes, businesses and infrastructure, with a consequent significant loss of value. At 
the  same  time,  there  will  be  a  big  increase  in  economic  activity  as  the  repair  work  gets 
underway.  There  are  many  estimates,  but  we  think  that  earthquake-related  construction 
spending  will  add  at  least  $5  billion  to  New  Zealand’s  nominal  GDP.  While  essential 
infrastructure  rebuilding  will  be  frontloaded,  our  business  contacts  suggest  much  of  the 
commercial rebuild may be a prolonged process lasting several years. All else being equal, 
this will add some pressure to prices and the exchange rate, but we think this is manageable. 
Housing  turnover  within  the  Canterbury  region  has  been  impaired,  and  nationally  turnover 
remains at low levels, despite the floating mortgage market being well below historic norms. 
While firming over the past couple of months, we believe the current level of house sales is 
consistent with continued softness in house prices this year.  
As  forecast,  the  December  consumer  price  index  jumped  4%  as  a  result  of  the  GST 
increases. Despite this, we think price inflation remains comfortably under control. This is the 
message that was communicated in the December Monetary Policy Statement and repeated 
in  our  January  OCR  Review  this  week.  Consequently,  it  now  seems  prudent  to  keep  the 
OCR low until the recovery becomes more robust and underlying inflation pressures show 
more obvious signs of increasing. 
                                                 
1   See Howard Davies, “The Financial Crisis: who’s to blame”, Polity Press 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Four international risks: 
The  forecasts  for  the  year  are  crucially  dependent  on  a  number  of  international  risks.  A 
number  of  large  economies  have  faced  very  unusual  conditions  as  they  emerge  from  the 
Global Financial Crisis, and this has resulted in high uncertainty. We highlight a number of 
these risks. 
US economic gloom or boom: 
1. 
US recovery has been quite slow overall, but the labour and housing markets have been hit 
particularly  badly.  The  US  labour  market  remains  just  below  double-digit  rates  of 
unemployment, with over 15 million men and women unemployed. The number of long-term 
unemployed is particularly worrying, with over 6 million unemployed for more than 6 months. 
As the effects of the crisis linger, it becomes particularly difficult for the unemployed to find 
work. With the US housing market moribund from low household income, confidence effects, 
falling  prices  and lengthy  legal  delays  on  the mortgage  foreclosure  process,  workers  have 
been either unwilling or simply unable to move to seek new employment.  
Moreover,  in  the  US,  both  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  face  constraints.  While  the 
Federal Reserve can pump more money into the system this risks losses on the securities 
they  hold  in  return  for  this  cash.  In  addition,  quantitative  easing  no  longer  has  the  same 
surprise  impact;  reducing  mortgage  interest  rates  at  the  margin  has  little  impact  on 
households facing unemployment and unable to sell their own home. There is little room for 
further fiscal stimulus since Federal and State debt positions are extremely stretched. While 
US firms and households continued their deleverage at the end of 2010, the US Government 
is still increasing its debt position.  
If  this  US  domestic  gloom  continues  or  worsens,  it  is  difficult  to  see  American  consumers 
playing any part in driving world recovery. Further, it could impact equity markets, and start to 
focus financial markets on the size of US state and Federal debt. 
But just as possible, the US may surprise us with economic strength over 2011. Many US 
businesses  hoarded  cash  over  2010.  But  now  flow  of  funds  data  show  non-financial  firms 
started  borrowing  again  in  the  third  quarter  of  last  year,  though  retaining  cash  from  bond 
issuance rather than undertaking new investment. It would not be difficult for businesses to 
ramp up investment quickly, and then demand for labour could increase almost as rapidly as 
labour was shed going into the crisis. 
Under  this  scenario,  US  consumers  would  start  to  spend  again,  acting  as  an  engine  of 
growth for trans-Pacific trade. Incomes would rise, providing a much needed boost to the US 
housing  market.  Markets  might  even  worry  about  a  pick-up  in  inflation  from  the  current 
extremely stimulatory settings, in which case the Federal Reserve would have to rapidly call 
in  stimulus  measures,  increasing  policy  rates  during  2011,  with  some  consequent  market 
disruption.  In  this  scenario,  the  US  dollar  would  presumably  appreciate,  taking  some 
pressure off the New Zealand dollar and providing an improved opportunity to rebalance our 
economy towards export growth.  
Sovereign debt reaches crisis point  
2. 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  cruelly  exposed  some  governments  with  extended  public  debt 
positions,  high  fiscal  deficits,  inappropriate  regulatory  environments  and  low  productivity 
environments. Stimulus packages for the economy and rescue packages for certain banks 
have  pushed  some  sovereign  balance  sheets  into  crisis.  Financial  markets  have  been 
merciless in the way they have signalled sovereign weakness, and indicate tough treatment 
ahead. This has most obviously occurred with the PIIGS group of countries in the Eurozone, 
pushing European authorities into the very uncomfortable positions of having to underwrite 
individual country balance sheets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
There  is  a  possibility  that  this  situation  could  worsen  in  2011.  So  far,  the  risk  spreads  on 
sovereign bonds have stayed stubbornly high. More European countries are feeling the heat. 
Managed sovereign defaults could still occur, and these could impact the banking systems of 
core European countries. Investors continue to re-evaluate the price of sovereign debt in the 
euro  area.  Moreover  the  countries  that  have  implemented  austerity  plans  could  find  the 
terrain rougher and the recovery harder than first thought. This would imply more spill-over to 
the  wider  euro  area  economy.  Some  eastern European  economies  on  the  periphery  could 
suffer, and countries outside the euro area might not be immune.  
Renewed fragility in funding markets could have other effects. Slow growth and high debt in 
Japan, together with its skewed demographic profile, could worry volatile markets, and other 
Western  countries  would  not  be  immune  from  this.  A  scenario  of  renewed  capital  market 
fragility would also make life much tougher for Australian and New Zealand banks, and that 
would be extremely damaging to our economic recovery. 
Emerging markets out-perform and bubbles burst 
3. 
One feature of the post-crisis world has been the ability of emerging markets, characterized 
by  the  BRICs  grouping  of  Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China,  to  recover  rapidly  from  the 
massive fall in global demand during the recession. This suggests that these countries now 
contain many of the institutional features, some put in place in the Asian region as a result of 
the Asian crisis, that will foster growth and provide more resilience to shocks that may hit the 
global economy across 2011 and beyond.  
This group of countries has managed to finally attain their place at the world table as the new 
G-20 order is hammered out. This change in the underlying geopolitik will be complex and 
not  just  occur  over  2011,  but  during  the  next  decade.  But  in  the  short-run  strength  in  the 
BRICs is underpinning the global recovery and this could intensify further. If this happens, it 
will  boost  New  Zealand’s  trading  prospects.  At  the  same  time  there  is  a  real  risk  of  over-
heating. 
Much of the strong growth in China was driven by the extension of credit through the latter 
part of the  crisis. This helped China to post double digit growth rates for most  of the past 
year.  But  now  there  are  general  signs  of  over-heating  through  Asian  economies,  risking 
asset bubbles: Chinese asset prices, Hong Kong and Singaporean property, capital inflows 
into other East Asian economies, inflation in India, and house prices in Australia. A worse 
scenario  for  New  Zealand  would  see  the  Asian  banks,  which  until  now  largely  have  been 
insulated  from  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  affected  by  deflating  asset  prices.  Domestic 
demand could slow, Asian countries turn protectionist, and current account surpluses rise. 
A material slowing in Chinese growth appears a likely scenario. After recent extended efforts 
to moderate this economy, policymakers might need to apply the brakes in response to rising 
consumer  prices.  This  could  be  very  disruptive,  risking  loan  defaults,  poor  bank  balance 
sheets, capital controls, exchange rate tensions, import protection and a regional slowdown. 
One effect would be to hit industrial commodity prices. A disruption of this magnitude would 
have  another  undesirable  effect:  knocking  Australia’s  terms  of  trade,  and  exposing  rising 
imbalances  in  that  country.  New  Zealand  would  lose  the  advantage  of  the  China/Australia 
growth locomotive that has helped drive our own export demand over the last twelve months. 
In such a situation, some of the shock would likely be offset by a lower New Zealand dollar, 
though this would have to be balanced against higher imported inflation. 
The commodity boom intensifies 
4. 
One  possibility  for  2011  is  that  the  commodity  boom  could  intensify,  surprising  us  with 
stronger  export  prices  for  primary  exporters,  continuing  the  theme  in  2010.  With  a  strong 
dollar hurting manufacturing exporters, so far the boom has been widespread across most 
commodities. This includes hard commodities, like the coal, copper and iron ore used to help 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fuel China’s growing economy, and also soft commodities like dairy, meat and fish, as food 
demand grows throughout the Asian region.  
Over the long term, the infrastructure construction in China is likely to sustain high prices for 
hard  commodities,  while  rising  demand  by  emerging  middle  classes  in  Asia  suggests 
increased  demand  for  protein  and  soft  commodities.  Moreover,  as  the  global  economy 
settles into a new post-crisis order, many long held structural supply chain relationships are 
changing, often exacerbated by weather-related shocks. In the last year we have seen the 
effects of Ukrainian drought, Russian log taxes, US oil spillages, Chilean earthquakes, and 
Brazilian  and  Queensland  floods  on  primary  production  and  prices.  La  Nina  weather 
conditions could suggest more volatility ahead. 
New Zealand farmers are still recovering from the last commodity boom when some over-
committed, and are still looking to reduce the debt they built up. A more measured reaction 
this  time  is  important.  New  Zealand  stands  well  placed  to  benefit  from  some  of  these 
changes  through  2011.  As  oil  prices  rise,  Western  governments  encourage  bio-fuel 
conversion  which  exacerbates  the  soft  commodity  price  pressures.  New  Zealand  Inc.’s 
import bill rises, but farmers and primary exporters do well. But as oil prices rise, this places 
pressure  on  inflation  not  just  in  New  Zealand,  but  globally,  risking  a  bursting  of  the 
commodity boom just like the 2007–08 event. Indeed if oil prices escalate beyond $100 for 
long, growth in much of the world will suffer again. 
As  trade  relationships  change  this  creates  opportunities  for  New  Zealand  exporters.  For 
example,  Australia  supplying  meat  to  Asia  and  Russia  leaves  a  gap  for  New  Zealand  to 
export  beef  to  the  US  market;  while  prices  for  New  Zealand  forestry  have  benefitted  from 
regulatory  controls  implemented  in  the  Russia  Federation  that  have  created  a  shortage  of 
logs for Chinese markets, increasing the price of New Zealand logs. 
However, high commodity prices put upward pressure on food prices and any intensifying of 
the  boom  will  generate  potentially  severe  inflation  in  the  Asian  region  in  particular. 
Additionally, over the past two or three years many financial market participants have looked 
to  build  a  position  in  commodities  as  a  new  asset  class  in  its  own  right,  alongside  more 
traditional assets, such as stocks. The extent of these positions and how this might play out if 
the boom intensifies is yet to be determined but it constitutes a key risk for 2011. 
Four domestic risks: 
Of course, just as there are international drivers and risks to the outlook, there are several 
key risks and drivers to New Zealand’s growth path on the domestic front. One overarching 
theme  for  the  domestic  economy  is  the  extent  to  which  households,  firms,  and  even  the 
government  want  to  keep  reducing  their  respective  debt  position,  and  how  much  they  are 
able to do so. 
New Zealanders save but don’t spend 
1. 
One possibility we could confront during 2011 is that the cautious household reaction we saw 
over 2010 turns out to be a structural change in behaviours rather than a cyclical response to 
a  marked  recession.  House  prices  could  be  forced  to  drop  much  further  to  reach  true 
economic values. This would cast a pall of gloom over the market, with homeowners keeping 
houses off the market, not re-building, and trying to pay off mortgages faster, saving more, 
and spending less. The construction and retail sectors would suffer as a result. Under this 
scenario, the Reserve Bank might have to reconsider some further monetary policy stimulus. 
Such restrained spending would keep domestic demand in check for 2–3 years, constraining 
growth short-term but building a stronger base for long-term growth.  
The  positive  side  of  this  risk  is  that  it  would  accelerate  New  Zealand’s  much  discussed 
rebalancing,  reducing  the  current  account  deficit,  improving  competitiveness,  reducing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
exchange  rate  pressure,  relieving  pressure  on  funding  markets,  and  reducing  our  external 
vulnerability generally. The negative side is that New Zealanders would have to reduce their 
consumption compared with pre-GFC years, and that could create an emigration exodus. 
Financial market fragility 
2. 
Another negative scenario would be if financial markets, scarred by European debt, were to 
become  more  allergic  to  indebted  small  countries  generally.  In  that  situation  local  banks 
could find their funding markets increasingly fragile, and with an overly cautious eye on Basel 
III, and more interesting expansion opportunities elsewhere, the cost and availability of credit 
would tighten for New Zealand business. This would limit business re-investment and mean 
some  businesses  might  hit  capacity  bottlenecks  later  in  the  year  when  demand  starts  to 
recover.  
In addition, funding market fragility would be bad news for our public debt. If participants in 
fragile  sovereign  funding  markets  were  to  form  a  view  that  New  Zealand  exposure  is  less 
attractive, credit rating agencies might re-assess New Zealand sovereign debt, meaning that 
debt  servicing  costs  could  rise.  If  the  market  were  to  form  the  view  that  the  government 
deficit was increasingly structural and hard to correct, and if the New Zealand Government 
were forced to consolidate faster, this could generate a contractionary effect on consumption, 
which would be difficult to counter with monetary policy. And in such an environment, looser 
fiscal policy would not be a serious option. 
Construction boom 
3. 
While  we  have  outlined  a  number  of  negative  risks  to  the  business  environment,  one  that 
could  be  more  positive  would  be  a  large  pick-up  in  construction  this  year.  There  are  two 
obvious drivers. Firstly the Canterbury earthquake: our estimates suggest that the $5 billion 
rebuild  added  to  nominal  GDP  comprises  about  $1  billion  of  damage  to  infrastructure  and 
about $1 billion to commercial buildings, with the remaining $3 billion comprising residential 
claims. In itself this is very big by New Zealand standards, indicated by the fact that it will add 
one percentage point to growth each of the next two years. However, these estimates are 
uncertain and damages from ongoing aftershocks, suggest the extent of the ultimate rebuild 
could be significantly larger. 
In addition the relatively strong inward migration, the limited investment during the last few 
years, growing demand in the Auckland region, and leaky homes rectification means that the 
stock  of  housing  could  be  falling  behind  demand.  Rectifying  these  would  put  additional 
pressure  on  resources,  increasing  prices  already  lifted  by  GST  and  other  taxes/charges. 
Households might start to ratchet up their expectations about future inflation and in such a 
case the Reserve Bank could be confronted with the need to increase policy rates to dampen 
the accelerating inflation outlook.  
The rugby world cup  
4. 
One driver of growth over 2011 is, of course, the Rugby World Cup. We think the event will 
add  about  $700 million  to  the  New  Zealand  economy  over  the  six  weeks  of  the  event, 
contributing approximately a third of a percent to GDP. More optimistic assumptions about 
multiplier effects would suggest a stronger impact, during months which are normally a tourist 
down-time. Winning the World Cup would also boost general confidence. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
How likely is it that New Zealand will win? We have asked our expert team of forecasters to 
answer  this  question.  They  have  pointed  out  several  solid  facts:  we  have  always  won  the 
World Cup at home; we will have a Cantabrian leading the team and another directing the 
back-line.  Our  expert  team  of  forecasters  predict  that  on  average,  the  All  Blacks  will  beat 
Australia in the final at Eden Park, by 23.9 to 15.6. 
How to plan your business for whatever 2011 brings: 
Sorry, that’s your job! Good luck for the year! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
 14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
 16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
 18 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19
