Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The challenges of surveillance and coordination 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the International Symposium of the Banque de France: Regulation in the Face of 
Global Imbalances, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
There is a broad consensus that the crisis we’ve been living through the last three years is 
the result of imbalances accumulated both at the macro and micro level, mainly in advanced 
economies.  Surveillance  of  these  imbalances  was  clearly  insufficient.  Any  prescription  to 
improve the resilience of our economies must thus include a strengthening of surveillance. 
I will concentrate in my remarks on macroeconomic issues. 
There  has  been  a  lot  of  discussion  on  what  went  wrong  with  surveillance,  in  particular  at 
international level. The IMF should be praised, in particular, for having its own surveillance 
process independently evaluated. The results of this analysis were published in January this 
year.1 Maybe in Europe we should follow the same transparent and open procedure to get a 
better understanding of what didn’t work. 
The recommendations offered by the Independent Evaluation Office are mainly  procedural 
and  concern  the  workings  of  the  IMF.  They  included  creating  an  environment  that 
encourages  candour  and  diverse  or  even  dissenting  views;  overcoming  the  silo  mentality; 
speaking  truth  to  power;  and  delivering  clear  and  consistent  messages.  These  are 
recommendations which should probably be taken to heart by other institutions too. 
I  would  like  to  address  a  more  fundamental  issue,  concerning  the  ability  of  our  current 
analytical tools to capture the changes which have taken place over the last two decades. As 
surveillance is ultimately based on a conceptual framework, then if that framework is biased, 
we are inevitably less able to capture imbalances and to detect risks to the world economy. 
So it’s important to assess whether the crisis has challenged some of the main assumptions 
of our framework. 
Work in this area has already started, to some extent. One key assumption which has been 
challenged,  for  instance,  regards  the  efficient  market  hypothesis.  In  prevailing  models, 
markets are assumed to price risk efficiently and to reflect underlying fundamentals. Thus, as 
long  as  asset  prices  do  not  reflect  a  change  in  the  market  assessment  of  risk,  the  risk  is 
assumed  not  to  exist  or  is  underestimated.  And  often  policy-makers  behave  as  if  the  risk 
simply didn’t exist as has been the case for sovereign risk or inflation risk. 
I would also like to examine another fundamental assumption of our economic models which 
has largely gone unchallenged, or at least has been insufficiently considered in my view. It is 
the  impact  of  “globalisation”,  i.e.  the  strong  and  sustained  growth  of  emerging  market 
economies (EMEs), on the long-term trends of the world economy, including the effects on 
advanced economies (Charts 1 and 2). In most of our macro models, long-term  variables, 
such as potential growth or the “natural rate of interest” or the non-accelerating inflation rate 
of  unemployment  (NAIRU),  play  a  very  important  role.  They  determine,  for  instance,  the 
output gap, domestic inflationary pressures, and as a consequence the structural indicators 
that  are  used  to  assess  fiscal  policy  and  the  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  These 
variables  are  estimated  in  large  advanced  economies  like  the  US  as  if  the  latter  were  a 
closed economy. They are considered as independent variables for the rest of the world.  
                                                 
1 
IMF  Performance  in  the  Run-Up  to  the  Financial  and  Economic  Crisis:  IMF  Surveillance  in  2004–07, 
10 January 2011. See http://www.ieo-imf.org/eval/complete/pdf/01102011/Crisis_Report_English.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To  use  some  model  terminology,  most  of  our  models  are  built  on  the  assumption  that Ῡ  
–  which  represents  the  long-term  growth  rate  of  the  economy  –  is  influenced  mainly  by 
domestic factors such as productivity and population growth. Similarly, r* – which represents 
the  world  interest  rate  for  most  small  open  economies  –  is  assumed  to  be  determined  by 
long-term equilibrium conditions in the US.  
Given the importance of these variables for our models, a bias in their measurement would 
have a direct impact on the assessment of economic conditions, on the forecasts and on the 
policy prescription. It would seriously undermine surveillance. For instance, if the long-term 
trend growth of the economy is overestimated, the output gap (in absolute terms) would as a 
consequence be overestimated too and so would the deflationary risks. Monetary and fiscal 
policies would then be considered, ceteris paribus, as excessively tight and there would be a 
bias towards excessive expansion, with a view to achieving an optimistic rate of growth. The 
borrowing capacity of countries, households and companies would also be overestimated if 
their  potential  growth  were  overestimated.  Ex  post,  the  miscalculation  of  growth  potential 
would result in an excessive accumulation of debt, both public and private, a misalignment 
between the interest rate and its long-term “neutral” level, and insufficient savings. 
As  shown  by  Kydland  and  Prescott  in  their  work  on  time  inconsistency  of  optimal  policy, 
which was later applied to monetary policy by Barro and Gordon, policy-makers who aim at 
excessively  “optimistic”  growth  will  conduct  an  inconsistent  policy  which  will  generate 
instability.  The  solution  to  this  problem,  at  least  for  monetary  policy,  is  to  set  a  rule  or 
establish an independent central bank which is aware of such an inconsistency and has a 
sufficiently long horizon to avoid it. This assumes however that the independent policy-maker 
knows  what  the  right,  “not  over-optimistic”  long-term  growth  of  the  economy  is.  He  or  she 
also has to know what the right model of the world economy is. 
This brings me back to the question I raised at the start, i.e. the impact of globalisation on the 
long-term  growth  of  advanced  economies.  Let  me  put  it  differently:  is  potential  growth  in 
those economies being affected by the fact that one part of the world, with nearly two-thirds 
of its population, is growing on average by 6–7% (or more) per year? If so, in what ways? 
One  hypothesis  which  we  may  want  to  assess  and  test  is  that  the  so-called  “long  term 
equilibrium” variables which are so important in our economic models are in fact affected by 
globalisation, as advanced economies are becoming smaller and smaller. Not taking this into 
account  may  induce  policy-makers  to  misjudge  the  situation  and  cause  international 
surveillance to fail. 
These are clearly very difficult issues to examine. However, it seems to me that the analysis 
so far is insufficient. I won’t go into detail but would just like to pose some questions. 
Growth 
The first issue, or question, I would like to raise is whether the increase in growth rates in 
EMEs has had, and will have, a negative or a positive impact on trend growth in advanced 
economies.  Taking  a  standard  neo-classical  trade  model,  the  answer  depends  on  various 
assumptions.  
The  prevailing  consensus  is  that  globalisation  provides  opportunities  for  all,  including 
advanced  economies;  their  growth  will  not  necessarily  suffer.  This  is  the  conventional 
wisdom. Paul Samuelson, however, has pointed out the restrictiveness of assumptions which 
are required to obtain the above-mentioned result.2 He draws attention to the fact that the 
long-term  impact  of  innovation  abroad  in  a  world  of  free  trade  and  mobile  capital  is  not 
                                                 
2  P.  Samuelson  (2004),  “Where  Ricardo  and  Mill  Rebut  and  Confirm  Arguments  of  Mainstream  Economists 
Supporting Globalization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 3, pp. 135–146. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unconditionally  welfare-enhancing.  His  observations  have  not  given  rise  to  much  debate. 
Maybe it’s time to revive such a debate.  
There  are  several  ways  in  which  faster  growth  in  EMEs  may  have  a  negative  impact  on 
advanced economies and dampen their production potential, at least for some time. One way 
is through the classical side-effect of comparative advantage. If the dislocation phenomenon 
is long and sizeable enough, the transition to the new steady state is bound to take a long 
time,  during  which  growth  will  be  subdued.3  There  may  be  reasons  for  believing  that  the 
adjustment  process  we  are  currently  experiencing,  with  hundreds  of  millions  of  people 
gaining access in a very short time to the market economy, is not necessarily consistent with 
the  simplified  trade  models  that  we  used  in  order  to  analyse  changes  in  comparative 
advantage.  
Some of these issues linked to globalisation have been considered from the perspective of 
technological  change.  In  “Fault  Lines”,  for  instance,  Raghu  Rajan  considers  that  the  main 
reason for the rising inequality in the US over the last 20 years has been the inability of the 
middle class to adapt to new technologies. The changes in technology required to maintain 
the  advanced  economies’  competitive  position  may  be  the  result  of  the  rise  in  productivity 
and the competitiveness of EMEs, especially if this affects low value-added sectors as well 
as increasingly high-tech sectors and services.  
The US economy was capable of growing at a fast pace prior to the crisis mainly through 
borrowing. Such borrowing was rational only if households and firms expected their income 
to increase in the future, at a faster pace, and if asset prices continued to increase, which 
ultimately did not happen. In fact, economic growth and asset price increases were the result 
of overly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies, predicated on measures of output gaps 
which  turned  out  to  be  much  smaller  than  estimated  in  real  time,  as  well  as  regulatory 
failures justified by the desire to improve access to borrowing.  
Another way in which faster growth in EMEs can impact negatively on growth in advanced 
economies is through changes in the terms of trade (Chart 3). These changes can occur via 
different channels. One is through commodity prices (Chart 4). For a given supply, the higher 
and persistent growth in EMEs is pushing up demand for commodities, in particular food and 
energy,  and  increasing  these  prices  permanently,  in  terms  of  overall  levels  and  rates  of 
change. Of course, this depends on supply elasticity. However, it may take time to develop 
new  sources  of  supply  that  can  keep  up  with  demand.  The  increase  in  commodity  prices 
weighs  negatively  on  countries  which  consume  more  of  these  products  –  mainly  the 
advanced economies – and on those with lower productivity growth.  
Another  “negative-impact”  channel  is  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect,  according  to  which 
prices  of  manufactures  and  services  in  EMEs  increase  more  rapidly  than  in  advanced 
economies. To the extent that these prices remain lower than those in advanced economies, 
any  increase  will  worsen  the  latter’s  terms  of  trade,  especially  if  domestic  production  is 
limited or has been totally offshored.  
To sum up, there is a need for more analysis of how growth potential is affected by ongoing 
developments, such as globalisation. My impression is that there is too little work being done 
on this issue; I fear that we will exit from the crisis with the same old analytical instruments 
and assessment that we had prior to the crisis – the very same ones which were responsible 
for the insufficient surveillance of economic developments and policies. 
                                                 
3  L.  Bini  Smaghi  (2009)  “Towards  the  G8  –  strategies  for  emerging  from  the  crisis”,  LUISS  Guido  Carli 
University, Rome 27 May 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Inflation 
Inflation  is  the  second  way  in  which  the  strong,  steady  progress  of  the  EMEs  is  affecting 
advanced economies (Chart 5). Ongoing increases in the prices of imported products have 
an impact on inflation in the advanced countries.4 This effect occurs through two channels. 
The  first  is  simply  mechanical,  arising  from  the  weight  of  imported  goods  in  the  basket  of 
goods  and  services  purchased  by  households.  For  example,  food  and  energy  account  for 
about 30% of the average shopping basket in the euro area. Assuming that, as a result of 
increased  demand  from  EMEs  and  insufficient  supplies,  commodity  prices  increase  on 
average by 4% a year, more or less in line with the growth rate of the world economy (or 
long-term interest rates, according to the Hotelling rule), average prices in the euro area will 
increase by 1.2% simply because of the effect of these products.  
What about the implications for prices of other products? The remaining 70% of the basket 
includes  manufactured  goods  and  services,  some  of  which  are  imported  and  others  are 
produced  domestically.  Assume,  for  simplicity’s  sake,  that  these  goods  are  only  produced 
domestically.  If  the  prices  of  these  products  grow  at  a  rate  of  2%  per  year,  the  overall 
average  inflation  is  2.6%,  exceeding  the  2%  objective  of  most  central  banks  in  advanced 
countries, including the ECB’s. If some of these goods and services are produced abroad, 
the  rate  of  their  price  increase  may  be  even  higher,  due  in  particular  to  the  Balassa-
Samuelson effect that I mentioned previously. As the shifting of production to countries with 
lower wages tends to fade away, any wage increase or exchange rate appreciation in EME 
will lead to higher import prices in advanced economies.  
The  central  bank  then  has  to  choose  between  either  revising  the  inflation  rate  objective 
upwards  and  taking  account  of  imported  inflation,  or  maintaining  the  inflation  objective 
unchanged, which means lower core inflation. In both cases, headline inflation is bound to be 
higher than core inflation. This means that price increases for imported goods must not feed 
into wages and domestic prices. 
The  implications  for  monetary  policy  are  quite  complex.  The  stance  of  monetary  policy 
cannot be assessed on the basis of core inflation, given that the interest rate incorporates 
expectations of headline inflation. Keeping the policy interest rate unchanged while headline 
inflation rises – even if core inflation remains unchanged – implies de facto allowing for the 
monetary stance to become more accommodative. Over time this is likely to impact on core 
inflation.  
It is certainly a challenge to make sure that core inflation remains subdued and lower than 
headline inflation if imported goods prices increase by more than 2%. This can be achieved 
without additional monetary policy tightening only in a friction-less world, in which domestic 
wage and price-setters accept the permanent change in relative prices.  
We obviously need more work on these issues, which are particularly relevant in light of past 
experience.  Indeed  over  the  past  decade  international  and  national  institutions  have  often 
made  forecast  errors  in  the  same  direction,  underestimating  inflation  and  overestimating 
growth in advanced economies (Chart 6). This has led to an overly accommodative policy. If 
we want to avoid repeating the same bias, we should be more alert to this issue. 
Macroeconomic policies 
Another  way  in  which  advanced  economies  are  affected  by  globalisation  is  through  its 
unbalanced  nature.  Globalisation  is  very  advanced  in  trade  and  economic  activity.  In  the 
financial  area,  however,  globalisation  is  more  limited,  in  the  sense  that  EMEs  are 
characterised  by  an  excessive  demand  for  and  an  insufficient  production  of  high  quality 
                                                 
4  L. Bini Smaghi (2011) “The challenges facing monetary policy”, Bologna, 27 January. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial assets. Many EMEs are net savers and export capital to advanced economies. This 
is the result of various factors, not least the lower degree of globalisation of their policies and 
institutions.  This  limited  globalisation  can  be  seen  particularly  in  the  lack  of  independent 
monetary  policies  and  the  pegging  of  exchange  rates,  which  leads  to  the  accumulation  of 
large foreign exchange reserves and to misaligned prices (Chart 7).  
As  a  result  of  these  imbalances,  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies  may  be  lowered 
artificially, to a level which may create problems for their pursuit of price and financial stability 
(Chart 8). Again, in most of our macro models the interest rate which affects global financial 
markets  (the  so-called r*)  is  anchored  on  the US  economy.  This  is clearly  not  the  case in 
reality  as  the  US  rate  is  affected  by  capital  flows  from  the  rest  of  the  world  which  are 
evidently  not  easy  to  “sterilise”.  The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  is  affected  by  such 
influxes.  Given  that  the  US  interest  rate  is  nevertheless  the  reference  for  global  financial 
markets,  the  reflow  of  funds  produces  second-  and  third-round  effects  on  EMEs  and  on 
advanced economies (Chart 9). We are witnessing a paradox: EMEs as a whole are being 
inundated with short-term capital inflows, and yet they are net capital exporters. 
We have also failed to understand how these capital flows have increased the liquidity in the 
financial system and influenced the behaviour of economic agents. For instance, the impact 
that the pre-crisis low interest rate level had on the propensity of financial institutions to relax 
credit  standards,  to  increase  leverage  and  to  pursue  carry  trades  was  underestimated 
(charts 10, 11, 12). Policy-makers not only ignored it but considered that this had nothing to 
do with risks to price stability, that it was related to financial stability and had to be addressed 
through prudential regulation.  
Another  issue  which  requires  further  discussion  is  the  role  that  the  financial  industry  has 
played  in  advanced  economies.  The  conventional  wisdom  is  that  financial  innovation  and 
financial  deepening  promotes  growth.  However,  the  evidence  is  controversial  and  it  is  not 
clear  to  what  extent  the  industry  has  benefited  the  long-term  growth  potential  of  these 
economies. To be sure, it has increased their fragility, especially with respect to their public 
finances. It is no surprise that most of the countries with the largest deficits and the largest 
increase  in  debt  after  the  crisis  have  been  those  in  which  the  financial  sector  played  an 
increasing role, also as a source of fiscal revenue. As the financial industry becomes less 
profitable,  and  provides  less  tax  revenue,  the  gap  has  to  be  filled  by  other  sources  of 
taxation,  or  lower  public  expenditures,  which  may  be  politically  difficult  to  accept.  These 
aspects may not have been fully incorporated in the projections for the adjustment of public 
finances  in  many  advanced  economies,  unless  it  is  expected  that  the  financial  sector  will 
return to its pre-crisis peak, which is a risky assumption.  
More generally, this crisis has shown the vulnerability of public finances to volatile structures 
in the economy. In good times, volatile sources of income, such as those from the financial 
sector or the housing market, may overestimate the soundness of public finances, while the 
adjustment costs in the downturn may be enormous. A case in point is that of Ireland, which 
during  the  pre-crisis  years  was  able  to  reduce  taxes  and  increase  expenditures  for  an 
amount of about 12% of GDP (in the period 2003–2008), thanks to the rise in revenues from 
the  financial  sector  and  from  housing.  The  comparatively  large  size  of  these  two  sectors 
made Irish public finances vulnerable to the bust of the cycle, leaving personal income tax as 
the  shock  absorber  until  the  economy  recovers.  Interestingly,  the  fiscal  package  that  is 
included in the Irish adjustment programme with the IMF is of a comparable magnitude to the 
pre-crisis fiscal expansion. 
Surveillance has clearly failed to understand this phenomenon. More attention needs to be 
paid  to  the  overall  size  and  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole  in  the 
various countries, and to the ability of these countries to absorb shocks affecting not only a 
single financial institution but the whole financial system. It is now fashionable to stress-test 
the banks. It would probably be appropriate to stress-test countries as well.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Conclusions 
Let me conclude by suggesting that surveillance of the world economy, in particular some of 
its systemically relevant members, has to focus more on the sustainability of their policies, in 
particular their fiscal and monetary policies. Some policies may appear to be sustainable on 
the  basis  of  assumptions  which  may  turn  out  to  be  simplistic,  especially  those  relating  to 
long-term  trends  of  growth  and  inflation.  In  particular  they  may  not  take  sufficiently  into 
consideration the impact of broader developments under way in the global economy.  
As Keynes said, we may be “slaves of some defunct economist”. The textbooks which most 
of us studied depicted a world economy different from the one we are confronted with today 
and  certainly  different  from  the  one  which  will  take  shape  in  the  coming  years.  That 
environment was characterised by one large economy, which set the reference interest rate, 
and by many small ones. What used to be the leading economies are getting smaller and 
smaller, while others are growing fast and becoming systemically relevant. The imbalances 
are the result of both sides not fully recognising these opposite developments and acting as if 
the old paradigm was still valid.  
What is required are not changes at the margin, but a global framework that can encompass 
the unprecedented changes which are taking place. Otherwise our analysis will fall short, our 
surveillance will remain weak, and the policy mistakes may become more frequent, and more 
costly. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 Chart 1: Real GDP in selected countries and regions 
Note: Annual; 1992 = 100. Data based on IMF WEO October 2010 database. Grey shaded area indicates the evolution based 
on the IMF October 2010 WEO projections up to 2015. 
Sources: IMF WEO and ECB staff calculations. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
Chart 2: Real GDP per capita in selected countries and regions 
Note: Annual; 1992 = 100. Data shown is calculated on the basis of 2000 constant US dollar series. 
Sources: World Bank Development Indicators Database, Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations. 
Chart 3: Terms of trade developments in selected countries and regions 
 Note: Annual; average 1996–1998=100; three year moving averages shown. Data based on IMF WEO October 2010 
database. 
Sources: IMF WEO, Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 4: Commodity price developments 
Note: Last observation refers to 2010Q3 for EME real GDP. For Brent oil prices and commodity price indexes data is quarterly 
up to 2010Q4. Last data point in chart for Brent oil price is spot price on 2 March 2011 and for non-energy commodity indexes 
January 2011. EME real GDP index for 1996Q2 = 100. Oil prices are quoted in US dollars. 
Sources: Haver Analytics, IMF IFS and ECB Staff Calculations. 
Chart 5: Inflation rates in selected countries and regions 
 Note: Annual; %. Data based on IMF WEO October 2010 database. Grey shaded area indicates the evolution based on the 
IMF October 2010 WEO projections up to 2015. 
Sources: IMF WEO, Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6: IMF WEO two year ahead forecast errors 
Note: Forecast errors were calculated as the actual minus the two year-ahead autumn projected figures produced during the 
preceding year. A positive figure thus shows an underestimation, a negative figure an overestimation. 
Sources: IMF WEO and ECB staff calculations. 
Chart 7: Foreign exchange reserves in selected countries and regions 
 Note: Monthly; billion USD. Last observation refers to December 2010 in the case of the US, China and the euro area and to 
November 2010 in the case of EMEs and World. 
Sources: IMF IFS, PBoC, Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 8: Real ex-post short-term interest rates and real GDP growth – US and EA 
Note: Last observation refers to January 2011 for the US and December 2010 for the euro area. 
Sources: National sources, Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations. 
Chart 9: Real ex-post short-term interest rates and real GDP growth – China and EMEs 
  Note: Last observation refers to January 2011 for China and November 2010 for EME aggregate. Aggregate created on the 
basis of GDP PPP weights from IMF October 2010 WEO (2009 fixed weights). 
Sources: National Sources, Haver Analytics and ECB staff calculations. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 10: Monetary policy accommodation and lending standards 
Note: Monetary policy accommodation is proxied by the residual of an estimated monetary policy reaction function (with 
inverted sign). For the US it is based on G. Rudebusch (2009), “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis”, 
San Francisco Fed Economic Letter. For the euro area it is based on an update of the reaction function estimated in 
L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2010), “Financial Factors in Economic Fluctuations”, ECB WP No. 1192. The 
lending standards are the net percentage of respondents tightening lending standards to enterprises. Subject to data 
availability, the sample is 1997–2007. The lead of monetary policy varies. 
Source: ECB Staff calculations. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Chart 11: Monetary policy accommodation and price of risk 
Note: Monetary policy accommodation is proxied by the residual of an estimated monetary policy reaction function (with 
inverted sign). For the US it is based on G. Rudebusch (2009), “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis”, 
San Francisco Fed Economic Letter. For the euro area it is based on an update of the reaction function estimated in 
L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2010), “Financial Factors in Economic Fluctuations”, ECB WP No. 1192. The price 
of risk of equity is derived from the VIX-index following Bekaert et al. (2010), “Risk, uncertainty and monetary policy”, NBER 
Working Paper Series No. 16397. The charts are based on the historical decomposition derived from their multivariate model, 
extended also to the euro area. Subject to data availability, the sample is 1997–2007. 
Source: ECB staff calculations. 
 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 12: Monetary policy accommodation and leverage 
Note: Monetary policy accommodation is proxied by the residual of an estimated monetary policy reaction function (with 
inverted sign). For the US it is based on G. Rudebusch (2009), “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis”, 
San Francisco Fed Economic Letter. For the euro area it is based on an update of the reaction function estimated in 
L. Christiano, R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2010), “Financial Factors in Economic Fluctuations”, ECB WP No. 1192. For the US 
leverage is computed as the year-on-year change in the leverage ratio of brokers and dealers. For the euro area it is 
computed as the year-on-year change in the leverage ratio of OFIs computed on the basis of asset transactions to make sure 
that movements in leverage are not dominated by revaluation of assets. Subject to data availability, the sample is 1997–2007.
Source: ECB Staff calculations. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
