Eric S Rosengren: A look inside a key economic debate – how should monetary policy 
respond to price increases driven by supply shocks? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Eric  S  Rosengren,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Boston,  to  the  Massachusetts  Chapter  of  NAIOP,  the  Commercial  Real 
Estate Development Association, Boston, 4 May 2011. 
 Of  course,  the  views  I  express  today  are  my  own,  not  necessarily  those  of  my  colleagues  on  the  Board  of 
Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC). 
I would like to thank David Begelfer and his colleagues at NAIOP Massachusetts for inviting 
me to join you today to discuss the economy and monetary policy.  
I am happy that financial markets and the economy have made significant progress since the 
depths of the financial crisis, but I am far less happy that the recovery to date has been so 
undesirably slow and anemic. In my reading of economic history this is, unfortunately, typical 
of economic downturns that are accompanied by severe financial disruptions. 
The debate I’d like to focus on today is the one over the likely impact of recent increases in 
the prices of food and energy, and how monetary policy should respond. The Fed’s policy 
stance, as you know, is currently very accommodative – a stance that I believe is appropriate 
given  the  tentative  recovery  and  still-high  unemployment.  But  with  food  and  energy  prices 
rising, some observers think the Fed should shift its stance to less accommodation – slowing 
economic growth now to ensure we don’t have undesirably high inflation in the future – even 
though current measures of core inflation (that is, inflation omitting volatile food and energy 
prices) remain low by historical standards.  
As  the  recovery  continues  –  albeit  slowly  –  several  events  have  occurred  that  further 
complicate the outlook for inflation and real economic activity. Political upheaval in the Middle 
East has contributed to sharply higher oil prices. Severe weather has reduced harvests from 
Russia to Australia, causing higher prices for many agricultural products. And Japan’s tragic 
earthquake and tsunami caused not only terrible loss of life, but also disruption to a supply 
chain that is increasingly global. 
So  today  I  would  like  to  discuss  how  monetary  policy  should  react  when  the  economy  is 
buffeted  by  a  series  of  these  so-called  “supply  shocks.”  I’d  like  to  just  highlight  my  major 
points before getting into the data and analysis that underpin my perspective. 
First, I want to explain that while I will be making distinctions in this talk between so-called 
“core” and overall or total measures of inflation, we at the Federal Reserve look at all prices, 
including food and energy prices, when developing U.S. monetary policy. While we often use 
core measures as a guide to where overall inflation is most likely to go, our goal is to stabilize 
overall inflation. 
Allow me to preview one of my conclusions. Because my analysis suggests that recent food 
and oil price increases have their roots in concerns about wheat harvests in Russia and oil 
production in Libya and the like, I do not believe that monetary policy is the appropriate tool 
to respond to these disruptions. While many observers see food and energy prices rising and 
assume  the  Fed  should  tighten  policy  –  raise  the  cost  of  money  and  credit  –  to  head  off 
inflation, I would suggest taking a step back and recognizing that tighter U.S. monetary policy 
will do nothing to stabilize Libyan oil production, reduce uncertainty about political stability in 
the rest of the Middle East, or increase the wheat harvest in Russia.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In fact, tightening monetary policy solely in response to contractionary supply shocks would 
likely make the impact of the shocks worse for households and businesses. To see why this 
is so, it is important to keep in mind how supply shocks affect the economy.1  
First,  supply  shocks  can  lead  to  increases  in  food  and  energy  prices  that  slow  economic 
growth. For example, because a person’s need to drive may not be very flexible, spending on 
gas consumes a bigger portion of their budget. So an oil shock tends to force consumers to 
reduce their spending on other goods and services as they absorb higher oil costs.2  
Second, while the prices of goods directly affected by the supply disruption increase, other 
prices in the marketplace may be unaffected – at least initially. If the supply shock involves 
food or energy, this dynamic causes measures of total inflation to rise, but does not have a 
large impact on what economists call core inflation – which excludes the volatile food and 
energy sectors. But in the longer-run, the impact of the supply shock on the prices of other 
goods will depend importantly on how inflation expectations respond to the shock. If people 
expect that food and energy prices will stabilize – in other words, that the price shock will be 
temporary  –  and  do  not  believe  that  the  central  bank  will  allow  any  long-run  effect  on 
inflation, then the disruption to total inflation will likely be temporary and the total inflation rate 
will eventually converge with the lower core inflation rate. Since 1986, this has largely been 
what  happened  when  we  experienced  these  types  of  supply  shocks  –  as  I’ll  illustrate  in  a 
moment with some charts.  
Alternatively,  if  expectations  of  inflation  do  rise  in  response  to  the  supply  shock,  then 
(nominal) wages and salaries across the economy will be pressured to increase over time to 
keep pace. If that happens, the supply shock could affect prices throughout the economy – 
not  just  those  that  that  were  part  of  the  initial  supply  shock.  In  this  case,  the  core  rate  of 
inflation  rises  to  converge  with  the  higher  measure  of  total  inflation.  This  was  the  U.S. 
experience in the 1970s, for reasons I’ll discuss in a moment. 
We  at  the  Fed  need  to  very  closely  monitor  the  data  to  make  sure  that  inflation  remains 
contained. And we will. But as I believe I will demonstrate this morning, the most likely result 
is that these supply shocks cause slower growth in the near term while having only a modest 
effect on longer-term inflation rates – which has been the U.S. experience since 1986.  
Unemployment remains quite elevated, at 8.8 percent, and I anticipate a slower return to full 
employment  than  we  would  have  experienced  absent  these  supply  shocks.  With  the  core 
inflation rate over the prior year at a little above 1 percent, I anticipate only a gradual return 
of  core  and  total  inflation  rates  to  something  like  our  consensus  “stable”  rate  of  about 
2 percent, over the medium term.  
If the economic data continue to support this outlook then the current, accommodative stance 
of monetary policy is appropriate, and can remain in place and continue to support economic 
growth  –  so  that  we  continue  to  make  progress  toward  our  goals  of  returning  to  full 
employment  and  a  sustainable  long-run  inflation  rate  –  the  two  elements  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s dual mandate from Congress.  
                                                 
1  My colleague Geoffrey Tootell, Director of Research at the Boston Fed, has prepared an illuminating public 
policy brief that investigates whether commodity price spikes cause long-term inflation. The brief examines the 
relationship  between  trend  inflation  and  commodity  price  increases  and  finds  that  evidence  from  recent 
decades supports the notion that commodity price changes do not affect the long-run inflation rate. Evidence 
from earlier decades suggests that effects on inflation expectations and wages played a key role in whether 
commodity price movements altered trend inflation. 
2  Readers may be interested in “Oil and the Macroeconomy in a Changing World,” the proceedings of a 2010 
symposium held at the Boston Fed to explore the interactions between energy prices, growth, and inflation – 
the determinants of oil prices and about the effect that oil prices have on the world economy. The proceedings 
are available at http://www.bostonfed.org/economic/conf/oil2010/index.htm 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The impact of recent supply shocks 
Now that you know my basic take on this key – and current – economic debate, allow me to 
flesh out my perspective with the supporting data and analysis. The full impact of the recent 
shocks to supply that I mentioned at the outset will likely emerge over time. But clearly there 
have  been  significant  increases  in  a  variety  of  food  and  energy  prices.  As  Figure 1 
illustrates, the recent turmoil in the Middle East has contributed to a significant increase in oil 
prices, which have risen to over $100 a barrel. This is well above the average of nearly $80 a 
barrel experienced over 2010, but at the same time still well below the peak of $146 a barrel 
that occurred in mid July, 2008.  
The recent volatility in oil prices, as the chart shows, is quite striking. Sharp increases have 
been followed by sharp decreases. This is one reason we may not want to overreact to price 
changes – they could be transitory.  
Figure 2 shows the movements in oil prices – their percent change from a year earlier, in the 
top line – relative to the change in compensation (the lower line), since 2000. Oil prices have 
risen recently, but based on the history captured in this chart, one would not expect much of 
a response in wages and salaries. This, of course, is one reason why consumers feel worse 
off after an oil supply shock. Prices at gas stations in Massachusetts are now around $4.00 a 
gallon,  yet  most  people’s  need  to  drive  cars  has  not  changed  much  if  at  all.  So  income 
available  for  buying  other  goods  and  services  has  been  squeezed  by  the  increase  in  oil 
prices.3  
Some  softness  in  measures  of  consumer  confidence  suggests  that  consumers  tend  to  be 
less  confident  about  the  future  when  oil  prices rise.  If  consumers  pull  back  spending  as  a 
result of a supply shock, it has the potential to be a drag on the economy. The Boston Fed’s 
statistical  modeling  suggests  that  a  $20  increase  in  the  price  of  a  barrel  of  oil  will  shave 
roughly four-tenths of a percentage point off the rate of economic growth over two years, and 
cause the unemployment rate to be roughly two-tenths of a percentage point higher than it 
would  be  absent  the  oil  shock.  While  this  is  certainly  not  enough  to  completely  stop  the 
recovery, it does imply a slowing down of its pace. 
Oil is not the only commodity to experience price increases of late. A variety of agricultural 
prices  have  also  increased.  For  example,  Figure  3  shows  the  movement  of  wheat  prices 
over  the  last  decade.  Droughts  in  Russia,  flooding  in  Australia,  and  increased  demand  in 
emerging markets have all placed upward pressure on wheat prices.  
As with oil prices, higher food prices appear to be responding to supply and demand features 
of  this  market  –  and  these  types  of  price  changes  cannot  be  offset  by  monetary  policy.  It 
goes without saying that monetary policy cannot alter the supply of oil from volatile parts of 
the  world,  nor  weather  conditions  in  countries  that  are  major  exporters  of  agricultural 
products. Monetary policy can have a role in insuring that relative price changes do not alter 
inflation  expectations.  Rising  inflation  expectations  could  make  it  difficult  to  achieve  a 
moderate and acceptable inflation rate over the medium term. 
Historical experience with supply shocks 
Supply shocks are not unique to this period. However, the evidence shows that the economic 
impact  of  supply  shocks  on  inflation  has  changed  over  time  –  actually  quite  dramatically. 
Figure  4  shows  the  inflation  rate  (total  inflation  and  core,  which  again  excludes  food  and 
energy) since 1970. What is striking is the way the behavior of the two series differed in the 
1970 to 1985 period versus the period from 1986 to the present. The interplay of core and 
total inflation is very, very different in the more recent period than it was in the former.  
                                                 
3  Even future purchases can be affected, if saving for them is squeezed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I realize that delving into topics like total and core inflation can seem a bit abstract. So let me 
bring  in  something  a  bit  straightforward  –  energy  prices  and  inflation.  Figure  5  shows  the 
profound effect that energy prices had in the 1970s on core inflation. In the 1970s the lines 
move up and down together as core inflation increased with energy prices. That is why my 
earlier  chart  shows  core  and  total  inflation  moving  so  closely  in  that  era.  But  since  1986, 
dramatic movements in energy prices have not affected core prices.  
My  next  two  figures  look  at  each  period  separately.  Figure  6  shows  that  for  much  of  that 
earlier period, inflation rates were much higher than they are currently. From 1970 to 1985, 
inflation was quite volatile – with total inflation (measured by the all-items Consumer Price 
Index or CPI) peaking at almost 15 percent, in 1980. The key observation is that during this 
period, increases in core inflation tended to follow increases in total inflation (which includes 
food and energy). The oil and food price increases “pulled” core inflation. 
In contrast, Figure 7 shows the total and core inflation rates since 1986. During this period, 
inflation has been lower and less volatile. And unlike in the earlier period, core inflation does 
not follow or gravitate to the level of total inflation. Total inflation jumps up and down as food 
and  energy  prices  live  up  to  their  reputation  for  volatility.  The  spikes  are  tough  on 
households,  to  be  sure.  But  importantly,  total  inflation  eventually  gravitates  to  the  core 
measure that excludes food and energy. Core inflation stays “moored.” 
Figure 8 represents another way to use the available data to explore this relationship. It too 
shows that the increases in total inflation in recent years have generally been temporary. For 
each  quarter  from  1998  to  2010,  the  figure  plots  the difference  between  total  inflation  and 
core  inflation  at  the  time,  and  the  total  inflation  rate  two  years  later.  What  it  shows  is  that 
when there is a supply shock such that total inflation (including food and energy) exceeds 
core inflation, two years later total inflation tends to be lower – when supply shocks such as 
oil prices drive up total inflation relative to core, the total tends to come back down toward the 
core inflation rate. 
Figure 9 performs similar analysis but focuses on the future core inflation rate, instead of the 
total.  It  shows  no  strong  relationship.  When  total  and  core  inflation  diverge,  core  inflation 
tends to stay put.  In other words, in recent years, when something like an oil shock causes 
total  inflation  to  diverge  from  core,  there  was  no  consistent  implication  for  the  future  core 
inflation rate. The shock to total inflation did not become embedded in core inflation. 
Why  is  all  this  important?  If  supply  shocks  tend  to  have  a  transitory  impact  on  headline 
inflation, and do not pass through to any meaningful extent into core inflation, then monetary 
policy need not respond to the price increases caused by the supply shock. Currently, we 
have  experienced  sharply  higher  food  and  energy  prices.  If  the  relationship  we  document 
over the last 13 years continues, we should expect the impact on inflation to be transitory – 
and  that  total  inflation  will  converge  back  to  core  inflation,  which  remains  well  below 
2 percent.  
To digress, it is likely the case that supply shocks have become transitory because of the 
way  in  which  monetary  policy  has  tended  to  respond.  So,  as  long  as  monetary  policy 
behaves about as it has in recent years, then there is no reason to expect supply shocks to 
have lasting effects.  
So is Fed policy behaving as it has since the mid 1980s? Interestingly, although Fed policy is 
perceived  as  exceptionally  accommodative,  because  of  hitting  the  zero  lower  bound  the 
federal funds rate is actually higher – has come down less – than would be expected if the 
Fed behaved as it has over the last 25 years. The current level of the funds rate suggest that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
we have been less accommodative in recent years given that interest-rate reductions (policy 
easing) ran into at the zero lower bound.4  
Why the different reaction to supply shocks over time? 
But  how  confident  should  we  be  that  the  relationship  we  have  experienced  over  the  past 
25 years  –  little  response  in  medium  term  inflation  rates  to  supply  shocks  –  will  continue? 
The answer is rooted in why we are seeing different reactions to supply shocks – in other 
words a different interplay of total and core inflation – now versus in the past. 
There  are  a  variety  of  reasons  why  medium-term  inflation  has  not  been  significantly 
influenced by short-run supply shocks in recent years. In my view the reasons include the 
increased  role  of  services  in  the  economy,  the  importance  of  labor  costs  in  such  an 
economy, the reduced share of oil consumption relative to GDP, and as I mentioned earlier 
the improved conduct of monetary policy versus the 1960s and 1970s.5  
Figure 10 shows that the service sector has grown from a little over 60 percent of private 
sector employment in 1970 to a little over 80 percent in 2010. As the economy has come to 
emphasize services versus manufacturing, it may be that commodities (and thus their prices) 
have become somewhat less important to the production of goods and services.  And goods 
prices are more volatile than services prices, and more likely to be priced like commodities. 
Figure  11  shows  the  per  capita  consumption  of  oil  declining  in  the  United  States. 
Conservation  measures  by  consumers  and  businesses  have  made  the  economy  less 
dependent on oil than in the 1970s. While oil remains a very important commodity, the trend 
towards  reducing  dependence  on  oil  provides  greater  insulation  from  oil-induced  supply 
shocks. 
Figure  12  shows  the  U.S.  share  of  world  oil  consumption  (in  blue)  ticking  down,  but  also 
clearly  shows  (in  red)  the  steady  climb  in  the  share  consumed  by  three  of  the  so-called 
emerging-market economies – China, India, and Brazil. Figure 13 shows the growth in oil 
consumption  in  those  three  countries,  in  the  upper  three  lines.  Both  charts  depict  quite 
strikingly the heightened demand for oil emanating from emerging markets.  
Returning  to  the  U.S.  and  inflation  concerns,  Figure  14  shows  that  the  growth  rate  of 
employee  compensation  has  generally  been  declining  over  the  past  two  decades.  With 
compensation slowing and productivity increasing, many firms have been profitable and able 
to withstand increases in commodity prices without passing such costs on to final prices. This 
fits with the observation that higher food and energy prices have not tended to have much of 
an  impact  on  prices  in  situations  where  food  and  energy  are  not  direct  costs  of  doing 
business. 
                                                 
4  The  Fed’s  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchases  have  partly,  but  not  completely,  substituted  for  the  constraint 
imposed by the zero lower bound on policy easing. With all the excess capacity – a reflection of our inability to 
be as accommodative as we might have liked, given the zero bound – it seems unlikely that supply shocks will 
turn into increased inflation expectations that will affect wages and non-oil, non-food prices. 
5  Vice Chair Yellen notes that “a key lesson from the experience of the late 1960s and 1970s is that the stability 
of longer-run inflation expectations cannot be taken for granted. At that time, the Federal Reserve’s monetary 
policy  framework  was  opaque,  its  measures  of  resource  utilization  were  flawed,  and  its  policy  actions 
generally  followed  a  stop-start  pattern  that  undermined  public  confidence  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
commitment  to  keep  inflation  under  control.  Consequently,  longer-term  inflation  expectations  became 
unmoored,  and  nominal  wages  and  prices  spiraled  upward  as  workers  sought  compensation  for  past  price 
increases and as firms responded to accelerating labor costs with further increases in prices. That wage-price 
spiral was eventually arrested by the Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker, but only at the cost of a 
severe recession in the early 1980s. Since then the Federal Reserve has remained determined to avoid these 
mistakes and to keep inflation low and stable.”  
[http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20110411a.htm] 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure  15  shows  two  measures  of  inflation  expectations,  plotted  alongside  oil  price 
movements. The red line shows what professional forecasters expected inflation to average 
over the next 10 years, at various points in time. Their expectations have declined somewhat 
over  the  past  20  years,  but  what  is  striking  is  the  relative  stability  of  their  inflation 
expectations.  In  addition,  there  was  no  significant  reaction  to  the  oil  price  shock  that  we 
experienced in 2008. The chart also shows a second measure of inflation expectations – the 
University  of  Michigan  Survey  (the  green  line),  which  asks  respondents  about  their 
expectations for inflation over the next 5 to 10 years.6 Again these expectations are not very 
responsive  to  movements  in  oil  prices,  and  have  remained  quite  stable  over  the  past  two 
decades. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  countries  can  be  affected  quite  differently  by  supply  shocks.  As 
Figure 16 shows, the importance of food in the “basket” of goods purchased by consumers 
can vary greatly by country. In less developed countries, food is a very significant component 
of overall purchases by consumers. In a developed country such as the United States, food 
is a much smaller share of overall purchases. Thus the impact of a food-supply shock on the 
overall  inflation  rate  and  on  other  important  economic  variables  such  as  wages  and  total 
imports  can  vary  widely  by  country.  Given  the  different  impacts  of  supply  shocks,  it  is  not 
surprising that monetary policy is likely to react differently to a supply shock such as food, 
depending on the unique characteristics of the particular country. 
Figure  17  shows  that  in  the  United  States,  the  importance  of  food  as  a  component  of 
inflation  measures  has  been  declining  over  time.  And,  despite  improvements  in  energy 
conservation that have lowered the per capita consumption of oil, higher energy prices have 
contributed to recent increases in the importance of energy in the consumer price index. The 
fact  that  food  and  energy  prices  have  been  quite  volatile  recently,  but  remain  a  relatively 
small part of the entire basket of goods, helps to explain why core inflation rates have not 
been particularly responsive to food and energy shocks. 
Concluding observations 
In  conclusion,  I  recognize  that  recent  supply  shocks  have  caused  pressures  on  many 
household budgets, and have led some analysts and observers to become concerned about 
potential long-term inflationary impacts. However, I think the evidence shows that over the 
past  25  years  most  supply  shocks  have  been  transitory  –  and  have  had  no  long-lasting 
imprint on longer term inflation, or on inflation expectations.  
Nonetheless,  recent  historical  trends  do  not  always  continue,  so  it  is  important  to  monitor 
inflation dynamics very closely to make sure that this pattern is continuing in the incoming 
data. In particular, I will look intently at whether there is any evidence that the expectations of 
underlying  inflation  have  changed.  To  date,  expectations  seem  quite  stable  and  show  no 
evidence of diverging from the recent past. I am committed to responding decisively, and as 
forcefully as necessary, to ensure that long-term inflation expectations remain stable and that 
food and energy price increases are not passing through to other prices.7 
Given the important role of labor costs in a developed, services-focused economy such as 
the United States, it is important to closely monitor trends in labor markets. Currently, wages 
                                                 
6  The average annual expected price change they expect over the next 5 to 10 years. 
7  See for example the comments on commodity price pressures and monetary policy by my colleague William 
Dudley,  president  of  the  New  York  Federal  Reserve  Bank  and  Vice  Chair  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee: “Inflation expectations are well-anchored today and we intend to keep it that way. A sustained rise 
in medium-term inflation expectations would represent a threat to our price stability mandate and would not be 
tolerated.” 
[http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2011/dud110228.html] 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and salaries are reflecting heightened unemployment, and show no evidence that potential 
inflation concerns are placing upward pressure on wages and salaries.  
Core  inflation  rates  tend  to  be  a  reasonable  predictor  of  inflation  in  the  intermediate  term. 
Core inflation remains well below my long-run target for inflation. This gives us flexibility to 
focus on accommodative monetary policy doing what it can to promote more rapid growth in 
the economy. As Figure 18 illustrates, the percent of the adult population that is employed 
now is quite low in relation to recent history, and has shown only a slight improvement over 
the course of the recovery.  
So with significant slack in labor markets, stable inflation expectations, and core inflation well 
below  our  longer  run  target,  there  is  currently  no  reason  to  slow  the  economy  down  with 
tighter  monetary  policy.  Until  we  make  more  progress  on  both  elements  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  mandate  –  employment  and  inflation  –  the  current,  accommodative  stance  of 
monetary policy is appropriate. 
Thank you. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
   8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
    10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
    12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
