Athanasios Orphanides: The role of central banks – lessons from the 
crisis 
Panel remarks by Mr Athanasios Orphanides, Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus, at the 
VIth  International  Symposium  of  the  Banque  de  France  on  “Which  regulation  for  global 
imbalances?”, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 The topic of this session is lessons from the crisis, specifically regarding the role of central 
banks.  Let  me  start  with  a  question:  How  do  we  learn  in  our  profession?  The  answer,  I 
believe,  is  that  our  main  guide  is  history.  Indeed,  one  of  the  many  differences  between 
central  banking  and  the  natural  sciences  is  that  in  central  banking,  unlike  the  natural 
sciences, we cannot run controlled experiments to improve our knowledge. As a result of the 
crisis, we are experiencing a unique natural experiment to draw lessons from. I fully expect 
this  episode,  which  unfortunately  is  still  mutating  and  evolving  in  some  areas,  to  provide 
material for myriads of PhD theses and other studies for decades to come. 
What  do  we  mean  by  “lessons”  for  the  role  of  central  banks?  Lessons  in  the  sense  of 
learning things we did not know? Or in the sense of reaffirming things we knew? In my view, 
we have some of each but, in addition, we have seen an evolution in the consensus views on 
familiar questions. Let me focus on just a few1. 
*** 
The crisis has reaffirmed the benefits of an independent central bank focused on maintaining 
price stability and safeguarding well-anchored inflation expectations in line with price stability. 
The focus on price stability yields gains in credibility and allows central bank flexibility as well 
as the ability to act decisively when needed on other issues. As an example, let me remind 
you of the decisive provision of liquidity in August 2007 and later in September 2008. Another 
example is the decisive policy easing in response to the crisis. The risks of deflation were 
greatly  reduced  because  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  term  remained  well-
anchored, in line with our definition of price stability2. The new spike in energy prices, that 
reminds us of the spectre of stagflation risks, once again reaffirms how important it is to act 
decisively to ensure that inflation expectations remain well-anchored to preserve stability. 
 Another lesson reaffirmed is that monetary policy is not just about setting policy rates. Even 
though  the  academic  consensus  was  converging  to  this  view  before  the  crisis,  monetary 
policy  is  not  just  about  determining  current  and  future  overnight  interest  rates.  As  both 
practical experience and also earlier generations of academics have taught us, there is much 
more to monetary policy.  
Prior to the crisis, some were concerned about the zero bound on short-term nominal rates. 
However,  the  large  array  of  unconventional  measures  employed  successfully  by  various 
central banks around the world to engineer further policy easing has dispelled the fear that 
the zero bound is like hitting a wall, rendering monetary policy helpless. The management of 
a central bank’s balance sheet has been understood as an important policy tool. We have 
also learned, in some cases while forced to innovate on the way, about operational aspects 
                                                 
1  
I would like to note that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect views of my colleagues 
on the Governing Council of the European Central Bank. 
2   See also the instructive analysis by John C. Williams, the newly appointed President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  San  Francisco,  who  has  examined  the  role  of  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  for  containing 
deflation risks in the US (Williams, 2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for  policy.  Examples 
list  of 
that  matter 
counterparties. In revised editions of central banking textbooks, I expect to find discussions 
of these things that were absent from the pre-crisis editions. 
framework  and 
the  collateral 
include 
the 
 There have also been lessons about the strategy of monetary policy. In my view, the crisis 
has reaffirmed the danger associated with the temptation to fine tune the real economy, in 
addition  to  maintaining  price  stability.  One  way  to  pose  this  debate  is  by  contrasting  two 
views. 
The  first,  the  stability  oriented  approach,  can  be  characterised  as  attempting  to  dampen 
economic fluctuations by promoting stable economic growth over time, subject to the primary 
focus on price stability. 
The second, the activist view, can be seen as suggesting that, in addition to price stability, an 
equally  important  goal  of  monetary  policy  is  to  actively  guide  the  economy  towards 
attainment of its “potential.” That is, an important guide to policy is the “output gap”, which 
measures how far GDP deviates from its potential. But policy activism in this sense can be 
dangerous. Trying too hard to close real activity gaps can lead to worse results in both price 
stability and economic stability. The reason is simple. Too often, the measures of the output 
gap that our experts can produce give the wrong signal in real time, when policymakers need 
to take decisions. 
Distracting  attention  away  from  price  stability  by  attempting  to  fine  tune  the  real-economy 
might  result  in  a  central  bank  remaining  too  accommodative  for  too  long  following  a 
recession. There are numerous examples of policy recommendations that have proved to be 
wrong for this reason, and not just from the 1970s. This risk must be avoided. 
Nothing  should  distract a  central  bank’s  focus  on  preserving  price  stability.  A  central  bank 
should strive to remain focused and be pre-emptive in its fight against inflation. 
How  activist  central  banks  can  be  is  an  issue  where  there  seems  to  be  quite  a  bit  of 
disagreement so let me be more explicit by using the euro area as an example. Let us take 
the  first  ten  years  of  the  euro  area  and  look  at  real-time  estimates  of  the  output  gap  as 
published  by  the  IMF  and  by  the  European  Commission  (EC).  (The  information  can 
conveniently be found on their websites.) Both organisations have suggested, virtually every 
spring  since  1999,  that  the  output  gap  for  the  year  reported  would  be  negative.  If  we 
compare these to recent retrospective estimates we observe a significant bias. The bias is 
mainly due to the fact that the experts are now more pessimistic about what potential output 
was  in  the  euro  area  than  they  were  in  the  past.  This  is  not  the  experts’  fault.  We  simply 
cannot know in real time. And this applies not only to the size of the output gap, but even to 
its sign. In comparing what the experts tell us now and what they were telling us then, in real 
time, the sign of the output gap is revealed to be incorrect in more than half of the years in 
the first decade of the euro area.  
Consider the year 2006, the year before the financial turmoil began. According to the IMF 
and the EC, the euro area operated below its potential that year with the gap being around 
minus 1 percent (see Figure 1). As late as 2008, the year 2006 was still being seen as one of 
wasted resources. But by 2009, with revised estimates, the experts were telling us that three 
years earlier, the euro area was overheated and output exceeded its potential by a significant 
amount. 
Mismeasurement of the output gap can lead to errors not only in monetary policy – if and 
when  central  banks  incorrectly  rely  on  this  information  –  but  can  also  lead  to  mistakes  in 
fiscal policy. In 2006 we had a fiscal deficit in the euro area as a whole. Alarms about fiscal 
soundness should have sounded before the crisis. But the alarms would have sounded much 
louder if the EC, the IMF and others had not suggested that the economy was running below 
potential.  Inappropriate  reliance  on  mismeasured  output  gaps  can  lead  to  complacency 
during good times. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I recount this example about how the output gap can be misused in policy debates because 
once again, as we are coming out of the crisis, some voices are stressing the extent of the 
output gap that the euro area is facing today, perhaps drawing conclusions about policy that 
could again be reversed as time goes by.  
The focus on price stability must remain unrelenting. 
 That  said,  another  lesson  is  the  following:  the  central  bank  focus  on  price  stability  is 
insufficient  to  maintain  overall  stability  in  the  economy.  The  crisis  has  confirmed  that  a 
central bank with a price stability objective and insufficient regulatory powers cannot ensure 
broader financial stability in the economy.  
The  crisis  has  revealed  a  general  underappreciation  of  systemic  risks  in  micro-prudential 
supervision. It has highlighted the need for a more system-wide macro-prudential approach 
towards supervisory oversight to ensure overall stability in the financial system. As a result, 
we see a shift in emphasis with new organisations created in some jurisdictions to address 
this gap. In the euro area, the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board is meant 
to serve this role.  
By  definition,  micro-prudential  supervisors  focus  on  individual  institutions  and  cannot 
effectively assess the broader macroeconomic risks that pose a threat to the financial system 
as  a  whole.  This  is  a  task  best  suited  to  central  banks.  But  for  central  banks  to  better 
enhance financial stability they must be provided with the right tools. Consider, for example, 
an episode of persistently high credit growth in an environment of price stability. Adjusting 
the  interest  rate  tool  is  unlikely  to  be  the  most  appropriate  response.  Ideally,  under  such 
circumstances,  the  central  bank  should  have  at  its  disposal,  either  directly  or  through  its 
participation  in  a  macro-prudential  body,  the  macro-prudential  levers  with  which  to  contain 
the risk of a potential financial disturbance. These could comprise the power to vary capital 
requirements,  leverage  ratios,  loan-to-value  ratios,  margin  requirements  and  so  forth. 
Considering the important informational synergies between micro-prudential supervision and 
systemic  risk  analysis,  bringing  micro-supervision  close  to,  if  not  under  the  same  roof  as, 
other central bank functions seems an attractive proposition. This should contribute to better 
management of overall economic stability. 
A concern has been expressed that an expanded role by central banks in this direction could 
compromise their independence that is so critical in defending their primary objective of price 
stability.  That  may  indeed  be  a  risk.  But  precisely  because  central  banks  are  generally 
among  the  most  independent  institutions,  they  can  strengthen  the  independence  of  the 
supervisory environment. The risk of political pressure delaying a needed tightening in credit 
conditions via macro-prudential tools, for example, can be minimised if the central bank has 
a  key  role.  In  my  view,  this  benefit,  together  with  the  benefit  of  informational  synergies, 
outweigh the risks. 
 I close with a very old lesson for central banks: humility. This crisis was not just a once-in-a-
generation crisis.  It  proved  to  be much  worse.  I  hope  subsequent  relative  calm allows  our 
22nd  century  counterparts  to  characterise  this  as  a  once-in-a-century  event.  But  central 
banks must not let their guard down. The next crisis might well challenge the limits of our 
knowledge in new and as yet unknown ways. 
References 
Williams,  John  C.  (2009)  “The  risk  of  deflation”,  FRB  San  Francisco  Economic  Letter,  12, 
27 March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
