Anand Sinha: Macroprudential policies – Indian experience 
Address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Eleventh 
Annual International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector on “Seeing both 
the  Forest  and  the  Trees  –  Supervising  Systemic  Risk”,  co-hosted  by  The  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The International Monetary Fund, and The World 
Bank, Washington DC, 2 June 2011. 
Inputs from Dr. D P Rath, Muneesh Kapur and Rajinder Kumar are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good  Morning.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  share  with  you  our  experience  in 
implementing macroprudential policies in India. The current global financial crisis has brought 
to fore serious lacunae in the approach to regulation and supervision and put the issue of 
systemic  risk  on  to  the  regulatory  agenda.  A  comprehensive  definition  of  systemic  risk  is, 
“The risk of disruptions to financial services that is caused by an impairment of all or parts of 
the financial system, and can have serious negative consequences for the real economy.”1  
2. 
There are two facets to systemic risk. One is in terms of its distribution within the 
system at any given point in time and another is its evolution with time. The cross-sectional 
dimension is how risk is distributed within the system at any given point in time. Systemic risk 
in  this  dimension  arises  due  to  the  inter-connectedness  of  institutions,  balance  sheet 
entanglements,  common  exposures  and,  sometimes,  even  common  business  models  of 
financial institutions. The time dimension on the other hand deals with how aggregate risks in 
the financial system evolve over time – the procyclicality issues in the financial system. The 
dynamics of the financial system and the macroeconomy interact with each other increasing 
the amplitude of booms and busts. The larger is the boom, the larger is the bust and larger is 
the damage to the economy.  
Systemic risk management and macro prudential policy 
3.  
The set of policies which deal with managing the downside of systemic risk is known 
as  macro  prudential  policy.  Macroprudential  policies  primarily  use  prudential  tools  to  limit 
systemic risk and thereby minimize disruptions in the provision of key financial services that 
can have serious consequences for the economy by (i) dampening the buildup of financial 
imbalances;  (ii)  building  defenses  that  contain  the  speed  and  sharpness  of  subsequent 
downswings and their effects on the economy; and (iii) identifying and addressing common 
exposures,  risk  concentrations,  linkages  and  inter-dependencies  that  are  sources  of 
contagion and spillover risks that may jeopardize the functioning of the system as a whole2. 
While the third objective of macroprudential policy [(iii) above] is concerned with the cross-
sectional  dimension,  the  first  two  objectives  [(i)  and  (ii)  above]  are  concerned  with  the 
procyclicality issues. The second objective of building defenses, i.e., increasing the resilience 
of the financial system is viewed as a narrow objective and is attained by build-up of buffers 
during boom times which can be used when risks materialize during busts. The first objective 
of dampening the buildup of financial imbalances is considered a broader objective and is 
essentially “leaning against the wind” aspect during the boom phase for dampening the credit 
                                                 
1 
2 
IMF-BIS-FSB(2009). 
IMF(2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and asset price boom. The buildup of buffers should achieve this objective by affecting the 
cost  of  credit,  though  evidence  is  not  unequivocal  in  this  regard.  A  more  ambitious 
interpretation of the first objective would be moderation of credit supply through both booms 
and  busts  i.e.  ensuring  stable  credit  supply.  While  the  objective  of  dampening  the  credit 
exuberance  during  boom  and,  thereby,  moderate  credit  supply  looks  plausible,  increasing 
credit  supply  during  busts  by  leaning  against  the  wind  i.e.  by  releasing  buffers,  does  not 
seem  as  plausible  because  of  risk  aversion  that  is likely  to  set  in  among  banks and  other 
economic  agents  as  well  as  the  market  pressure  and  expectation  from  banks  to  maintain 
high levels of capital when risks are apparently highest. Thus macroprudential policy is likely 
to have asymmetric impact from “leaning against the wind” during booms and busts. BCBS 
and FSB are currently involved in developing a range of macroprudential policies to deal with 
the  procyclicality  issues  as  also  with  systemically  important  financial  institutions  and  other 
aspects of systemic risk on account of inter-connectedness and common exposures. 
4. 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been using macroprudential polices, more notably 
the countercyclical policies, since 2004 as a toolkit for ensuring financial stability though it 
had used them sporadically even earlier. It would be useful to describe the broad structure of 
the  Indian  financial  system  and  the  linkages  between  the  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability in India, to provide a backdrop for discussing the implementation of polices. 
Structure of the Indian financial system 
5. 
The Indian financial system is heavily dominated by commercial banks. Within the 
banking system, public sector banks (majority shareholding held by the Government of India) 
account for nearly 70 per cent of the banking system assets. 
6.  RBI  regulates  banking  sector,  non-banking  financial  companies  (NBFCs),  as  also  the 
money, forex and Government securities markets which are dominated by banks. Thus, the 
interconnectedness  channels,  both  from  the  institutional  and  market  perspectives,  come 
within  the  regulatory  ambit  of  RBI.  There  are  separate  regulators  for  capital  markets, 
insurance  sector  and  pension  funds.  With  many  Indian  banks  having  expanded  into  the 
above mentioned activities through subsidiaries, associates or otherwise, there has been a 
need  for  coordination  among  sectoral  regulators  which  has  been  ensured  through  inter-
regulatory bodies within the umbrella of a high level committee chaired by the Governor, RBI 
and with representatives from Ministry of Finance. This institutional arrangement has recently 
undergone  a  change  with  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Council 
(FSDC) chaired by the Finance Minister. 
Role of RBI in maintaining financial stability 
7. 
The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  1934  provides  a  broad  legal  mandate  to  RBI  to 
secure  monetary  stability  and  generally  to  operate  the  currency  and  credit  system  of  the 
country  to  its  advantage.  In  practice  this  meant  the  dual  objective  of  growth  and  price 
stability, the relative emphasis being dependent on the context. Since 2004, RBI has added 
financial stability as an additional objective in view of the fast growing size and importance of 
the  Indian  financial  sector3.  It  is  in  this  setting  that  RBI  has  been  using  macroprudential 
framework  in  both  time  and  cross-sectional  dimensions  for  quite  long  without  christening 
these policies as macroprudential policies as is the case with some other countries, notably 
some Asian countries. Operationally, while pursuing multiple objectives, multiple indicators, 
including growth in credit and money, are used to track the macroeconomic conditions. India 
being  a  bank-dominated  economy,  the  bank  credit  becomes  a  key  monetary  policy 
                                                 
3  Y.V.Reddy (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
transmission  channel.  Thus,  the  aggregate  bank  credit  growth  has  always  formed  an 
important variable in the conduct of monetary and countercyclical policies. 
Elements of macro-prudential framework in India 
Overview 
8. 
RBI’s  countercyclical  policies  have  focused  on  banks  due  to  the  centrality  and 
criticality of the banking system in the Indian economy. In any case, application of counter-
cyclical  policies  to  the  shadow  banking  system  i.e.  the  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies 
(NBFCs) is extremely challenging. These policies have aimed at increasing the resilience of 
the  banking  system.  The  instruments  used  have  been  time  varying  risk  weights  and 
provisioning norms on standard assets for certain specific sectors wherein excessive credit 
growth, in conjunction with sharp rise in asset prices, has caused apprehension of potential 
build-up  of  systemic  risk  and  asset  bubbles.  In  the  process,  the  policies  have  “leaned” 
against  the  wind  and  have  had  the  desired  effect  of  moderating  the  credit  boom  in  the 
specified  sectors  both  through  signaling  effect  and  affecting  the  cost  of  credit.  Evidence, 
though  limited,  suggests  that  the  leaning  against  the  wind  has  been  more  effective  in 
dampening the lending exuberance in the boom phase than in the downturn in ensuring a 
stable credit supply. Several measures have been taken to reduce the inter-connectedness 
among banks on the one hand and between banks and NBFCs on the other, and limits have 
been  placed  on  common  exposures  to  address  the  cross-sectional  dimension  of  systemic 
risk. 
Objective of counter-cyclical policies 
9. 
The objective of these policies is best stated in the words of Dr. Y.V Reddy, former 
Governor  RBI.  “The  RBI  articulated  its  approach  to  countercyclicality  in  its  policies  by 
indicating the criticality of the banking system for large segments of the population and for 
the  economy  as  a  whole.  Hence  the  RBI  adopted  a  precautionary  approach  to  essentially 
protect the banking system from a “bust” were it to occur for any reason.”4 This was amplified 
in  October  2005  in  the  Mid-term  Review  of  Annual  Policy  for  the  year  2005–06,  while 
increasing  provisioning  on  standard  assets  across  the  board  (except  for  SMEs  and 
agriculture): 
“Traditionally,  banks’  loans  and  advances  portfolio  is  pro-cyclical  and  tends  to 
grow 
faster  during  an  expansionary  phase  and  grows  slowly  during  a 
recessionary  phase.  During  times  of  expansion  and  accelerated  credit  growth, 
there is a tendency to underestimate the level of inherent risk and the converse 
holds good during times of recession. This tendency is not effectively addressed 
by the prudential specific provisioning requirements for the impaired assets since 
they capture risk ex post but not ex ante.  
The various options available for reducing the element of pro-cyclicality including, 
among  others,  adoption  of  objective  methodologies  for  dynamic  provisioning 
requirements,  as  is  being  done  by  a  few  countries,  by  estimating  the 
requirements  over  a  business  cycle  rather  than  a  year  on  the  basis  of  the 
riskiness of the assets, establishment of a linkage between the prudential capital 
requirements  and  through-the-cycle  ratings  instead  of  point-in-time  ratings  and 
establishment of a flexible loan-to-value (LTV) ratio requirements where the LTV 
ratio would be directly related to the movement of asset values.”  
                                                 
4  Y. V. Reddy (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It  is  apparent  that  the  policy  does  not  specifically  mention  ensuring  stable  credit 
10. 
supply though this would certainly be a collateral objective. It is also notable that while other 
available  options  i.e.,  dynamic  provisioning,  through  the  cycle  ratings  for  capital  purposes 
and  time  varying  LTV  ratios  have  been  discussed,  the  policy  prescription  preferred  was 
increasing  provisions  on  standard  assets  which  is  somewhat  akin  to  dynamic  provisioning 
though  not  exactly  similar.  Moreover,  RBI  never  used  cap  on  LTV  ratios  till  much  later  in 
2010 but in a different context. 
Methodology 
11. 
Ideally,  a  sound  macro-prudential  policy  should  be  based  on  the  determination  of 
the economic cycles, assessment and measurement of the build-up of systemic risk and also 
the effect of the stance of other public policies like monetary policy, fiscal policy etc., on the 
risk  taking  behavior  of  the  financial  sector.  Since  the  development  of  a  framework  is  in 
infancy, RBI’s methodology has not been based on extensive statistical analysis or modeling 
or on determination of build-up of asset bubbles. It is largely judgmental based on trends in 
aggregate credit and sectoral credit growth in the macro-economic settings. For this reason, 
it  has  not  been  rule  bound  which  will  require  either  some  model  or  at  least  some 
measurement  of  systemic  risk  and  its  sensitivity  to  the  prudential  parameters.  While 
undertaking counter-cyclical measures during the high GDP and high credit growth period of 
2004–08, there was no explicit attempt to determine the deviation of the credit to GDP ratio 
from its long term trend, though the GDP growth and the macro-economic setting were kept 
in view. Similarly, the possibility and not the absolute proof of asset bubbles was explored in 
terms  of  broad  indicators  and  possible  threats5.  Some  evidence  from  Annual  Financial 
Inspections  of  banks  carried  out  by  RBI,  together  with  market  intelligence  on  possible 
loosening of underwriting standards due to aggressive lending, was also factored in.  
Dimensions of RBI’s macro-prudential policies 
Counter-cyclical policies 
12. Implementation of countercyclical capital and provisioning regulations in India during the 
period from December 2004 to December 2010 is reflected in Table 1 below. 
                                                 
5  Y. V. Reddy (2011). 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
13. 
Table 2 indicates the movement in monetary measures as well as the movement in 
the  provisioning  norms  and  risk  weights  of  the  specific  sectors  during  the  three  phases  of 
implementation of the countercyclical policies. 
  
14. 
The period covered in Table 2 is divided into three distinct phases from monetary 
policy perspective which correspond to three phases from countercyclical policy perspective. 
The monetary tightening and easing phase corresponds respectively to increase in sectoral 
capital  and  provisioning  requirements  (build  up  phase)  and  easing  of  these  requirements 
(release phase). The period wise classification from this perspective is: – (i) Build-up phase: 
September  2004–August  2008,  (ii)  Release  Phase:  October  2008–April  2009,  and 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(iii) Re-build-up  phase:  October  2009  till  date.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  monetary  and 
countercyclical  measures  have  always  been  in  the  same  direction  i.e.  have  been 
complementary so far. 
Build-up phase: (September 2004–August 2008) 
15. 
During  2004–08,  the  Indian  economy  exhibited  high  real  GDP  growth,  of  around 
9 per cent per annum. Given the high growth and inflationary pressures, monetary policy was 
in a tightening mode to contain aggregate demand and inflation. During this period, India also 
received  large  capital  flows,  which  were  intermediated  by  the  banking  sector.  High  growth 
created  a  huge  demand  for  bank  credit.  While  the  overall  bank  credit  growth  accelerated 
sharply (to over 30 per cent), credit growth to certain sectors such as real estate accelerated 
much more sharply (reaching more than 100 per cent, year-on-year, for an extended period 
April  2005–July  2006  and  remained  above  50  per  cent  till  later  than  mid-2007). 
Concomitantly, asset prices, especially those of real estate, rose sharply. This exposed the 
banking sector to huge risks. In view of the rapid credit expansion in the period 2003–06, it 
was explicitly indicated by the RBI in April 2006 that growth of non-food bank credit, including 
investments in bonds/debentures/shares of public sector undertakings and private corporate 
sector and commercial paper, would be calibrated to decelerate to around 20 per cent during 
2006–07  from  a  growth  of  above  30  per  cent.  Inflationary  expectations  had  also  started 
firming up and as a part of monetary management, the repo rate was increased by 300 basis 
points in stages to 9 per cent by August 2008 from its level of 6 per cent in September 2004. 
Further, the Cash Reserve Ratio was also raised by 450 basis points in stages from 4.5 per 
cent in September 2004 to 9 per cent. In order to protect banks’ balance sheets against such 
risks,  the  Reserve  Bank  tightened  prudential  norms  in  the  form  of  provisioning  norms  and 
risk weights in specific sectors beginning October 2004 (Table 1). 
16. 
Noticing  the  steep  increase  in  bank  credit  to  the  commercial  real  estate  sector  in 
conjunction  with  that  in  the  prices  of  real  estate,  risk  weights  for  banks’  exposure  to 
commercial real estate were increased from 100 per cent to 125 per cent in July 2005, and 
further to 150 percent in May 2006. The risk weights on housing loans extended by banks to 
individuals, were increased from 50 to 75 per cent in December 2004. Subsequently, while 
the  risk  weights  on  smaller  size  housing  loans  (priority  sector)  were  reduced  from  75  to 
50 per cent, the risk weights on larger loans and those with LTV ratio exceeding 75 per cent 
were increased to 100 per cent. When there was a boom in consumer credit and equities, 
risk  weights  for  consumer  credit  and  capital  market  exposures  were  increased  from 
100 percent  to  125  per  cent.  The  provisions  for  standard  assets  were  revised  upwards 
progressively in November 2005, May 2006 and January 2007, in view of the continued high 
credit  growth  in  the  real  estate  sector,  personal  loans,  credit  cards  receivables,  loans  and 
advances qualifying as capital market exposures and loans and advances to the NBFCs. The 
provisioning  requirement  for  all  other  loans  and  advances  classified  as  standard  assets, 
namely, direct advances to the agricultural and small and medium enterprise sectors and all 
other loans and advances were kept unchanged. 
17. 
The  tightening  of  prudential  norms  made  the  credit  to  targeted  sectors  costlier 
thereby moderating the flow of credit to these sectors. There is evidence that moderation in 
credit flow to these sectors was also in part due to banks becoming cautious in lending to 
these  sectors  on  the  signaling  effect  of  RBI’s  perception  of  build  up  of  sectoral  risks.  For 
instance, these measures helped moderate the flow of credit to the commercial real estate 
sector. The credit growth decelerated to around 50 per cent by 2008 from a very high level of 
around 150 per cent (Y-o-Y basis) in late 2005 as shown in the graph below. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
18.  Simultaneously, as indicated earlier, monetary policy was also in a tightening mode to 
contain demand pressures. Thus, while monetary tightening helped in containing the overall 
credit  growth,  prudential  norms  moderated  the  credit  growth  to  the  specific  sectors.  Thus, 
monetary policy and prudential norms complemented each other. That is, we deployed both 
interest rates and prudential instruments during 2004–08 to ensure both price stability and 
financial stability.  
 Release phase: 2008–09 (October 2008 to April 2009) 
19.  The Indian economy was also impacted by the global financial crisis, though a major 
part of the impact was felt indirectly through channels of trade and cross-border capital flows. 
In order to mitigate the adverse impact of the global financial crisis on the Indian economy, 
the  Reserve  Bank  aggressively  eased  the  monetary  policy.  During  this  period,  prudential 
norms  were  also  relaxed  in  a  countercyclical  fashion,  again  mainly  following  a  sectoral 
approach  (Tables  1  and  2).  The  relaxations  focused  primarily  on  real  estate  and  NBFC 
sector as these were the segments which had been most severely hit due to the downturn. In 
addition  to  easing  of  risk  weights  and  provisioning  norms  for  standard  assets,  RBI’s 
prudential  framework  governing  restructuring  of  advances  (corporate  workouts)  was  also 
temporarily modified to facilitate restructuring of greater number of units which had potential 
viability but had been affected in a most unexpected manner. However, despite the easing of 
monetary  policy  and  aggressive  relaxation  in  prudential  measures  in  a  countercyclical 
fashion, the credit growth slowed down substantially due to, among other reasons, subdued 
credit demand and risk aversion among banks as is clear from Table 3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Table 3 
Credit to select sectors during September 2008 to September 2009  
(Per cent) 
Source: Reserve Bank of India.  
 20. 
The  credit  growth,  overall  as  well  as  to  the  target  sectors,  decelerated.  During 
October  2008  to  September  2009,  the  credit  growth  to  commercial  real  estate  (CRE) 
decelerated from 45 per cent to 34 per cent on a year-on-year basis, to NBFCs from 61 per 
cent to 30 per cent, and to housing from 11 per cent to 6 per cent (Table 3). The total non-
food credit during the same period decelerated from 29 per cent to 13 per cent. 
Re-build phase: October 2009 onwards 
21. 
By late 2009, domestic growth began to recover from the slowdown induced by the 
global financial crisis. However, while the overall credit growth continued to remain subdued, 
credit growth to the commercial real estate sector remained high well above the overall credit 
growth  (Table  4).  As  indicated  in  para  19,  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the 
Reserve  Bank  had  temporarily  modified  its  prudential  guidelines  for  restructuring  of 
advances. However, the extent of restructured advances to the commercial real estate sector 
was relatively high. Accordingly, provisioning norms on standard assets were increased for 
the commercial real estate sector in November 2009. This was the period when the Reserve 
Bank began exiting from crisis-driven expansionary monetary policy as India was confronted 
with  an  upturn  in  inflation  –  a  rising  wholesale  price  index  (WPI)  inflation  and  stubbornly 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
elevated consumer price index (CPI) inflation. The exit began by reversing the immediately 
reversible  unconventional  measures  such  as,  restoring  of  export  credit  refinance  facility  to 
pre-crisis  level,  and  discontinuation  of  special  refinancing  facilities  extended  to  scheduled 
commercial banks, etc. 
Deployment of gross bank credit by major sectors 
Table 4 
Source: Reserve Bank of India.  
 22. 
In December 2009, as the economy had just emerged from the crisis, there were 
apprehensions about asset quality on account of exuberant lending during the boom phase. 
Since  banks  were  still  making  good  profits,  it  was  decided  to  prescribe  a  Provisioning 
Coverage  Ratio  (PCR)  of  70  percent  of  gross  non-performing  advances,  as  a  macro-
prudential  measure,  with  a  view  to  augmenting  provisioning  buffer  in  a  counter-cyclical 
manner. Banks had to achieve this by September 2010. 
23. 
PCR  was  intended  to  be  an  interim  measure  and  it  was  hoped  that  it  would  be 
replaced by a forward-looking counter-cyclical provisioning methodology being developed by 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  International  Accounting 
Standards  Board  (IASB)  or  by  a  methodology  similar  to  Spanish  dynamic  provisioning 
framework we are working on. Since in the absence of a calibrated methodology it would be 
difficult to allow banks to use the countercyclical provisions built up under PCR freely and 
there were certain design issues too, it was decided to freeze the PCR with reference to the 
gross NPA position in banks as on September 30, 2010. The buffer (surplus of provisions 
over specific provisions) will be allowed to be used by banks for making specific provisions 
for NPAs during periods of system wide downturn, with the prior approval of RBI. It may be 
added  that  the  banking  system  has  already  exceeded  the  70  per  cent  PCR  though  some 
banks have yet to reach that level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
24. 
By November 2010, the Reserve Bank had raised the policy rate by 150–200 basis 
points  on  account  of  concerns  about  high  and  stubborn  inflation.  During  this  period, 
residential  property  prices  had  risen  sharply  and  had  attained  the  pre-crisis  level.  Some 
banks had come out with certain residential housing loan schemes (teaser loans and 10:90 
scheme) where RBI had apprehensions about asset quality going forward. Moreover, it was 
felt that these schemes were creating artificial demand for housing loans which could push 
up the housing prices further (which had already reached pre-crisis levels) with the potential 
of  putting  housing  beyond  the  reach  of  many.  In  November  2010,  therefore,  the  Reserve 
Bank initiated the following measures: (i) the provisioning norm for “standard” teaser housing 
loans was increased from 0.4 per cent to 2.0 per cent in November 2010; (ii) for the first time 
a  cap  on  Loan  To  Value  (LTV)  ratio  was  prescribed  at  80  per  cent  in  December  2010  for 
loans  above  Rs.2  million  and  at  90  per  cent  for  loans  up  to  Rs.2  million;  and  (iii)  the  risk 
weight for residential housing loans of Rs.7.5 million and above, irrespective of the LTV ratio, 
was raised to 125 per cent. These measures are, however, intended to serve more a micro-
prudential rather than a macro-prudential objective. 
25. 
(i) 
Concluding observations on countercyclical policies 
View regarding the implementation of countercyclical policies was based on tracking 
of  various  indicators  in  the  economy,  notably  the  general  credit  growth  and  the 
sectoral credit growth. This was complemented with market intelligence and some 
feedback  from  the  Annual  Financial  Inspections  of  banks.  No  detailed  statistical 
analysis or modelling was used. The decisions were judgmental based on constant 
monitoring of macroeconomy and were not rule based.  
RBI, being the monetary authority as well as the regulator and supervisor of banks, 
NBFCs and important segments of markets i.e. forex, Govt. Securities and money 
markets, had the necessary information and overall view of the risks building up in 
the system. It was, therefore, well placed to operate the countercyclical policies.  
Monetary policy and the countercyclical policy were in the same direction (Table 2). 
Such a coordinated response was facilitated due to RBI’s wide regulatory ambit. If 
policies  are  not  well  coordinated,  the  costs  of  implementing  such  policies  may  be 
high.  
It  was  important  to  deal  with  sectoral  exuberance  through  countercyclical  policies 
even as monetary policy, while dealing with inflation scenario, dealt with generalised 
exuberance. Interest rate alone, being a blunt instrument, would not have been able 
to  handle  the  sectoral  exuberance,  or  else,  the  cost  to  the  economy  would  have 
been higher.  
Combination of risk weights and provisioning requirements for standard assets were 
used  as  countercyclical  policies.  It  would  appear,  however,  that  varying  the 
provisioning requirements may have been more effective than varying risk weights 
in moderating credit flow to the specific sectors. This is because, since the average 
capital adequacy ratio of banks operating in India has been well above 12 per cent 
for  the  last  many  years  (as  on  December  2010,  it  was  above  14  per  cent),  risk 
weights may not always be effective in dampening the growth of credit as banks can 
continue  to  finance  riskier  sectors  yielding  higher  returns  by  allowing  their  capital 
adequacy  ratios  to  fall  by  a  few  basis  points  and  still  remain  much  above  the 
regulatory requirements. To the extent higher risk weights translate into increase in 
interest  rates,  demand  for  credit  may  come  down.  On  the  other  hand,  varying 
provisioning requirement would be potentially more effective as it would impact the 
Profit and Loss account of banks to which banks are more sensitive.  
The  countercyclical  policies  were  able  to  dampen  exuberant  credit  growth  in  the 
targeted sectors. However, their effect was asymmetrical during downturn. Despite 
aggressive easing of monetary policy and prudential measures in a countercyclical 
fashion,  the  credit  supply  did  not  increase  adequately.  The  credit  growth  slowed 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
down substantially due to, among other reasons, subdued credit demand and risk 
aversion among banks. 
Since the monetary policy and countercyclical policies have operated in tandem, it is 
difficult to isolate the effect of countercyclical policies from that of monetary policy.  
(vii) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Dealing with cross-sectional dimension of systemic risk 
To  address  systemic  risks  arising  out  of  inter-connectedness  among  banks  and 
26. 
between  banks  and  NBFCs  (shadow  banks)  and  from  common  exposures,  some  of  the 
important measures taken are as under: 
27. 
(i) 
Prudential limits 
For  limiting  interconnectedness  of  banks,  prudential  limits  have  been  put  on 
aggregate interbank liabilities as a proportion of their net worth  
In  order  to  ensure  that  inter-bank  market  functions  in  a  non-disruptive  manner, 
access to un-collateralised funding market is restricted to banks and primary dealers 
and there are caps on both lending as well as borrowing by these entities.  
Investment  in  the  capital  instruments  of  other  banks  and  financial  institutions  is 
restricted to 10% of investing banks’ capital funds, in addition to the stipulation that a 
bank cannot hold more than 5% of other bank’s equity. Though these cross-holding 
limits  are  primarily  designed  to  ensure  that  the  capital  of  banks  and  financial 
institutions is contributed largely by investors outside the financial system, reduction 
in inter-connectedness is also a collateral objective.  
In order to contain regulatory arbitrage, banks’ exposure to NBFCs is subject to tight 
limits  and  NBFCs  have  been  increasingly  subjected  to  more  stringent  prudential 
regulations. Systemically important NBFCs are closely monitored.  
Investments in liquid schemes of Debt-oriented Mutual Funds (DoMFs) by banks are 
subject to a prudential cap in relation to their net worth. This limit has been placed in 
the  backdrop  of  banks’  investments  in  liquid  schemes  of  DoMFs  having  grown 
manifold.  The  liquid  schemes  rely  heavily  on  institutional  investors  such  as 
commercial  banks  whose  redemption  requirements  are  likely  to  be  large  and 
simultaneous.  DoMFs,  on  the  other  hand,  are  large  lenders  in  the  over-night 
markets such as collateralised borrowing and lending obligation (CBLO) and market 
repo, where banks are large borrowers. DoMFs also invest heavily in Certificates of 
Deposit  (CDs)  of  banks.  Such  circular  flow  of  funds  between  banks  and  DoMFs 
could  lead  to  systemic  risk  in  times  of  stress/liquidity  crunch.  Thus,  banks  could 
potentially face a large liquidity risk.  
Restrictions on exposure to complex activities and products 
28. 
Banks’  large  involvement  with  complex  products  such  as  exotic  derivatives  and 
other  risky  activities  like  private  equity,  venture  capital  funds,  etc.  is  disfavoured  by  RBI. 
Additional capital requirements are also prescribed in certain cases where reputational risk is 
considered to be high. 
Financial  conglomerates  represent  domestic  systemically 
Monitoring of financial conglomerates 
29. 
financial 
institutions.  While  there  is  no  differential  prudential  framework  for  these  banks,  they  are 
subject  to  more  intense  supervisory  oversight.  Since  Indian  financial  system  is  bank 
dominated, banks are the holding companies for most of the financial conglomerates. Since 
important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
2004, a mechanism for close monitoring of the financial conglomerates has been put in place 
through offsite surveillance, regular interaction with the CEOs of parent companies and other 
entities in the group and periodic reviews by College of Supervisors having members from 
sectoral  and  financial  market  regulators.  The  focus  of  the  supervisory  process  is  on 
management of group-wide risks, intra-group transactions and corporate governance. There 
are prudential regulations regarding Group capital adequacy, exposure limits and intra-group 
transactions. 
Monitoring of common exposures 
30. 
Banks’ exposure to capital market is subject to a regulatory limit of 40 per cent of 
their  net  worth,  both  on  solo  as  well  as  Group  wide  basis.  Banks’  exposures  to  sensitive 
sectors such as real estate are closely monitored. Exposure of systemically important NBFCs 
to sensitive sectors is also closely monitored. 
interbank  rupee 
Enhancing transparency and risk mitigation in OTC transactions 
31. 
Recognising the risks associated with OTC transactions, considerable emphasis has 
been placed on their transparency and risk management. While the regulatory reporting on a 
periodic basis was already in place for these transactions, electronic reporting platforms were 
set  up,  about  a  decade  ago,  to  enable  online  capturing  as  well  as  real-time  information 
dissemination.  The  electronic  reporting  platform  was  setup  in  2002,  to  start  with,  for  the 
secondary market transactions in government securities. Such reporting arrangements have, 
subsequently,  been  extended  to  other  important  segments  of  OTC  market  and,  currently, 
cover transactions in corporate bonds (both outright as well as repo), CPs, CDs, call/notice 
money  and 
interest  rate  derivatives.  The  recently  permitted  CDS 
transactions  also  are  proposed  to  be  reported  to  the  trade  repository  to  be  set  up  for  this 
purpose.  There  is  a  proposal  to  set  up  a  single  point  reporting  mechanism  for  all  OTC 
interest rate and forex derivative transactions. 
32. 
As regards the issue of CCPs, CCP settlement of OTC trades in certain segments 
commenced  as  back  as  in  2002.  CCP  system  for  Government  securities  transactions  was 
put  in  place  in  April  2002  while  Forex  (spot  and  forward)  transactions were  brought  under 
CCP  settlement  in  Nov  2002.  CCP  settlement  of  IRS  and  FRA  trades  is  under  advanced 
stage  of  finalization.  With  the  setting  up  of  mandatory  reporting  and  the  guaranteed 
settlement  of  OTC  transactions  across  various  segments  of  the  financial  markets,  the 
transparency and counterparty risk management issues have been considerably addressed. 
However, keeping in consideration, the concentration of risks in the CCP, the oversight of the 
CCP  systems  is  being  actively  pursued  to  contain  systemic  risks.  This  would  be  further 
strengthened as part of certain proposals in Basel III Framework relating to capitalisation of 
banks’ exposure to CCPs which are likely to be finalized by BCBS towards the end of this 
year.  
Other micro-prudential measures 
33. 
financial stability. Some of these measures are: 
(i) 
• 
Several  other  micro-prudential  measures  have  been  taken  which  contribute  to 
Forex liabilities and capital account management 
There is a limit on overseas borrowings by banks, other than for lending for exports. 
Limits are also placed on net open positions in relation to bank’s capital funds. 
Excessive volatility of capital funds results in significant costs to the economies and 
has  implications  for  financial  stability.  While  equity  flows  both  FDI  as  well  as 
portfolio, have been accorded substantial freedom in the capital account regime in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 12 
  (ii) 
• 
 India,  debt  flows  are  regulated  with  quantitative  and  price  based  measures.  Debt 
flows are also calibrated into sovereign as well as corporate debt. 
The sovereign balance sheet has been protected from crisis inasmuch as India does 
not have foreign currency market borrowing and has limited dependence on foreign 
investors in respect of domestic currency debt. The general experience of Emerging 
Market  Economies  (EMEs)  is  that  foreign  investors  in  sovereign  debt  prefer  short 
term  investments.  However,  since  India  has  a  strong  domestic  investor  base, 
elongation of maturity of debt has been possible.  
Other measures 
Banks have to maintain a minimum of 24 per cent of their liabilities in the form of 
liquid assets, largely domestic sovereign securities. This provides adequate liquidity 
buffer. 
Profit  on  sale  of  assets  under  securitization  to  SPVs  is  allowed  to  be  recognized 
only  over  the  life  of  the  securities  issued  by  the  SPVs.  This  effectively  constrains 
incentives for “originate-to-distribute” model.  
the  macro  prudential  authority  and  evolving  a  methodology 
Concluding remarks 
34. 
Macro-prudential  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  involves  a  paradigm 
change. These are very early days and there is no doubt that over a period of time, various 
aspects of these policies would evolve. Currently, because of its infancy, there are several 
unsettled issues. The identification and measurement of systemic risk which has to be the 
starting  point  for  designing  macro-prudential  policies  needs  a  lot  of  work.  Other  important 
issues illustratively are:  better understanding of the interaction of macro-prudential policies 
with other public policies, particularly with monetary policy; development of a tool kit to deal 
with systemic risk; designing of a robust early warning system regarding build up of systemic 
risks;  evolving  an  optimal  mix  of  rules  and  discretion  while  operating  macro-prudential 
policies;  extending  the  perimeter  for  macro-prudential  instruments  to  cover  the  shadow 
banking system also which is going to be a very challenging task; defining the mandate and 
powers  of 
to  ensure 
accountability  of  such  authority;  and  putting  in  place  a  framework  for  international 
cooperation, etc.  
35. 
The  institutional  set  up  for  macro-prudential  authority  is  evolving  and  varies  from 
country to country, the common denominator being that central banks typically play a major 
role  in  the  conduct  of  these  policies.  The  institutional  structure  for  macro-prudential 
regulation  in  India  has  also  undergone  a  change  recently.  RBI  has  historically  been  the 
macro-prudential regulator. Post crisis, in India, as in several other jurisdictions across the 
world, the institutional mechanism for financial stability has been sought to be strengthened. 
In  December  2010,  the  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC),  under  the 
chairmanship of the Finance Minister, has been set up to deal with issues related to, inter 
alia, financial stability, inter-regulatory coordination and macro-prudential supervision of the 
economy, including the functioning of large financial conglomerates. The Council has all the 
financial sector regulators as members. A Sub-Committee of the FSDC, which is chaired by 
the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  will  assist  the  Committee.  The  Sub-Committee  is 
expected  to  evolve  as  the  operative  body  for  financial  stability  in  normal  times  while  the 
FSDC would have a broad oversight and will assume a central role in crisis times. Now that 
the FSDC is in place, conventions and practices will develop over a period of time which will, 
while serving the goal of financial stability, also ensure that the autonomy of the regulators is 
not eroded.  
36. 
making, needs to be finalized at the earliest. 
The  methodology  for  forward  looking  countercyclical  provisioning  which  is  long  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
37. 
While  the  BCBS  has  put  in  place  guidance  for  national  authorities  operating  the 
countercyclical buffer based on the credit/ GDP metric, it is difficult to apply this methodology 
to India and other EMEs as there is a large structural component in the credit/GDP metric 
which  needs  to  be  identified  and  segregated  from  the  cyclical  component.  Similarly, 
experience shows that the credit exuberance is in specific sectors which a credit/GDP metric 
may not be able to address adequately. 
38. 
Since  the  EMEs  are  undergoing  rapid  structural  changes,  the  credit  GDP  ratio  is 
likely to trend upwards much faster. The credit GDP ratio in India has shown a steady rising 
trend  since  2001  as  a  result  of  which  the  credit  gap  has  been  generally  positive  and 
increasing during 2001–2011. However, output gap during the same period has alternated 
between positive and negative depending on the state of the economy. This suggests that 
the positive credit gap at times was co-synchronous with negative output gap. While negative 
output  gap  would  suggest  that  the  economy  was  in  a  downswing  requiring  expansionary 
monetary policy, positive credit gap trending upwards would, in a mechanical sense suggest 
application of capital buffers. This suggests that a more nuanced approach is required in the 
case of India, and, possibly, other EMEs, to counter procyclicality. It would also seem that 
the  sectoral  approach  would  be  the  more  appropriate  one  as  we  have  found  in  India.  It 
would, therefore, be useful to devise a methodology for segregating the structural component 
from  the  cyclical  component  in  the  credit/GDP  metric  and  devise  a  robust  methodology  to 
deal with the sectoral approach including jurisdictional (international) reciprocity. 
39. 
The issue of communication while applying countercyclical policies has not received 
sufficient attention. As discussed earlier, the countercyclical prudential policies are likely to 
be less effective during downturns in ensuring stable credit supply. This is understandable 
because the risk perception is high in a downturn and the use of capital buffers for continued 
lending  could  be  somewhat  counter-intuitive.  Maybe  a  nuanced  communication  regarding 
these  policies  and  the  actions  taken  under  them  at  different  points  of  time  can  create  the 
right environment and understanding for these policies to work optimally during downturns. 
As the central banks have perfected the art of communication regarding monetary policy over 
a period of time, there would be a need for macro prudential authorities to similarly improve 
communication in this regard. 
Bibliography 
Bank of England, November 2009, “The Role of Macroprudential Policy”, Discussion paper. 
Borio,  Claudio,  February  2003,  “Towards  a  macroprudential  framework  for  financial 
supervision and regulation?”, BIS Working Papers No. 128. 
Borio, Claudio, July 2010, “Implementing a Macroprudential Framework: Blending boldness 
with realism”, Bank for International Settlements. 
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  May  2010,  “Macroprudential  Instruments  and 
Frameworks: a Stocktaking of Issues and Experiences”. 
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  January  2011,  “Practical  approaches  to 
designing and conducting Macroprudential policy”. 
Financial Stability Board, February 2011, “Macroprudential Tools and Frameworks”, Update 
to G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors.  
Galati, Gabriele and Richhild Moessner, February 2011, “Macroprudential policy – a literature 
review’, BIS Working Papers No. 337. 
Gopinath, Shyamala, 2010, “Macro-Prudential Approach to Regulation – Scope and Issues”, 
Paper presented at the ADBI-BNM Conference on ‘Macroeconomic and Financial Stability in 
Asian Emerging Markets’ Kuala Lumpur. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
“Enhancing  Financial  Stability  and  Resilience- 
Group  of  Thirty,  October  2010, 
Macroprudential policy, Tools, and Systems for the Future”. 
International Monetary Fund, April 2010 “Global Financial Stability Report”. 
----, May 2010, “Central Banking Lessons from the crisis”. 
----, March 2011, “Macro Prudential Policy: An Organising Framework”. 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Financial  Stability  Board, 
October  2009,  “Guidance  to  Assess  the  Systemic  Importance  of  Financial  Institutions, 
Instruments, and Markets: Initial Considerations” Report to the G-20 Finance Ministers and 
Governors. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  and  Muneesh  Kapur,  2009,  “Managing  the  Impossible  Trinity:  Volatile 
Capital Flows and Indian Monetary Policy”, Working Paper, Stanford Centre for International 
Development. 
Reddy, Y.V., 2011, “Global Crisis, Recession and Uneven Recovery”. 
Reserve Bank of India, 2010, Financial Stability Report. 
----, Mid-term Review of Annual Policy Statement, October 2005. 
----, Annual Policy Statement for the year 2006–07, April 2006. 
----, Annual Policy Statement for the year 2011–12, May 2011. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
