Karolina Ekholm: The interest rate, the exchange rate and inflation 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting at 
Danske Markets, Stockholm, 4 April 2011. 
 The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the Executive 
Board of the Riksbank or the Riksbank’s staff. I would like to thank Johanna Jeansson and Pär Österholm for their 
great assistance in the writing of this speech. 
Today, I will give an account of my stance at the latest monetary policy meeting in February. 
However,  I  will  keep  this  relatively  brief  –  the  main  part  of  my  talk  will  focus  on  the 
significance of the exchange rate in the monetary policy process. There is no target level for 
the exchange rate, but, as it affects both inflation and resource utilisation, it is of fundamental 
interest to the Riksbank’s analysis work. The fact that it is difficult to forecast does not mean 
that it can be ignored. 
The current situation and the monetary policy decision 
In February, the majority of the Riksbank’s Executive Board decided to raise the repo rate to 
1.5  per  cent  and  to  revise  the  interest  rate  path  upwards  slightly.  The  justification  for  this 
decision was that the Swedish economy remains strong. For example, GDP growth in 2010 
was  historically  strong  (see  Figure  1).  The  development  of  the  labour  market  is  also 
continuing  to  be  strong,  and  unemployment  has  fallen  somewhat  more  steeply  than  was 
anticipated  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  December.  Furthermore,  inflation  has 
increased at a slightly faster rate due to higher energy and commodity prices. On the whole, 
growth abroad is also deemed to be strong. While it is true that developments in Europe are 
still  uncertain  due  to  the  fiscal  problems  in  several  European  countries,  prospects  in  the 
United States are judged to have brightened somewhat. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  on  a  number  of  occasions  over  the  last  year,  I  have  entered 
reservations against monetary policy decisions, including the most recent one in February. 
One important argument for me has been that increased interest rate differentials in relation 
to other countries may have effects on the exchange rate. During the autumn in particular, 
my reservations have essentially been due to my scepticism of the assumption that foreign 
central  banks  will  raise  their  policy  rates  at  the  rate  specified  by  the  Riksbank’s  main 
scenario. In my opinion, this has meant that the main scenario’s repo rate path has given rise 
to a considerably larger interest rate differential in relation to other countries than has been 
assumed in the Riksbank’s forecast. This could lead to a greater appreciation of the Swedish 
krona than this forecast suggests, which, in turn, would dampen both inflation and resource 
utilisation. My view has been that the further appreciation of the Swedish krona has risked 
leading to impaired target fulfilment, and this has been the motivation behind my stance in 
favour of a lower repo rate path than that decided upon. 
Am I not concerned that a lower repo rate path would lead to excessive inflation, considering 
how inflation has increased recently due to higher energy and commodity prices? It remains 
to  be  seen  how  permanent  these  increases  will  be.  In  our  most  recent  forecast,  which 
assumed the stabilisation of these prices, underlying inflation, even in the main scenario, was 
estimated at less than 2 per cent for most of the forecast period (see Figure 2). On the basis 
of this forecast, there is thus scope for a more expansionary monetary policy. 
 
 
One  matter  that  I  intend  to  address  at  the  next  monetary  policy  decision  is  the  wide  gap 
between CPI inflation and CPIF inflation that we saw in January and February. This gap is 
partly due to a detail, related to mortgage costs, in the calculation method used, which also 
results  in  higher  CPI  inflation  over  the  rest  of  the  year  than  was  forecast  in  the  monetary 
policy report in February. However, in my opinion, the underlying inflationary pressure in the 
economy is still low, which, for example, is reflected by the low outcome for CPIF inflation. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy has to be forward-looking, as its influence on the economy is subject to a 
time-lag. Consequently, the monetary policy significance of temporary variations in the CPI in 
the near future should not be exaggerated. However, if long-term inflation expectations and 
wage formation risk being tangibly affected, we should consider taking measures. 
How should the exchange rate be taken into account? 
The Riksbank has no target for the exchange rate, but, in a small, open economy such as 
Sweden’s,  the  exchange  rate  is  an  important  determinant  for  both  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation.  However,  the  analysis  of  exchange  rates  is  an  admittedly  difficult  area.  I  will 
explain some of the difficulties involved in this analysis, as well as how they have affected my 
view  of  the  manner  in  which  the  exchange  rate  should  be  handled  in  the  monetary  policy 
analysis. 
The exchange rate’s empirical relationship with interest rate differentials in relation to 
other countries 
Let me first clarify my earlier claim that a greater interest rate differential in relation to other 
countries  than  that  forecast  in  the  Riksbank’s  main  scenario  may  lead  to  a  greater 
appreciation of the krona than that forecast by the Riksbank. 
The  theoretical  basis  for  this  is  formed  by  a  condition  known  as  uncovered  interest  rate 
parity. This is a theoretically fundamental concept and is used frequently. Uncovered interest 
rate parity says that the interest rate differential between two countries corresponds to the 
anticipated change in the exchange rate during the period in question. For example, if the 
one-year interest rate was 2 percentage points higher in Sweden than in the United States, 
this  would  be  compatible  with  a  2-per  cent  weakening  of  the  Swedish  krona  against  the 
US dollar  during  the  year.  The  logic  behind  this  is  that  “risk-free”  investments  in  different 
currencies ought to have largely the same expected return. 
According  to  uncovered  interest  rate  parity,  a  higher  interest  rate  in  Sweden  than  abroad 
should  thus  be  linked  with  an  expected  future  weakening  of  the  krona.  So  how  is  this 
connected  to  my  claim  that  the  krona  would  become  stronger  as  a  consequence  of  an 
increased  interest  rate  differential  in  relation  to  other  countries?  The  answer  lies  in 
expectations and in what has already been priced on the market. This can be explained by a 
simplified example. Assume that the interest rate is originally as high in Sweden as in the 
rest of the world. In that case, uncovered interest rate parity says that the anticipated future 
exchange rate will be the same as the current exchange rate. If this expectation of the future 
exchange rate is taken for granted, an unexpected interest rate increase in Sweden would 
lead  to  an  inflow  of  capital  and  an  appreciation  of  the  krona.  The  krona  would  now  be 
expected to weaken in the period ahead, as the present rate is stronger than the anticipated 
future rate. Note that, on average, the krona will be stronger during the period in question 
due  to  the  rise  in  interest  rates  in  this  example.  The  krona  thus  appreciates  today  before 
moving towards the same anticipated future exchange rate as previously.  
However,  empirical  support  for  uncovered  interest  rate  parity  is  mixed.1  As  in  all  empirical 
analysis, it is difficult to isolate the effects of interest rate differentials on the exchange rate. 
Furthermore, there are difficulties in measuring expectations, and there may be frictions on 
the  financial  markets  that  mean  that  the  relationship  does not  fully  hold  true.  Be  that  as  it 
may,  the  presence  of  other  factors  complicating  the  relationship  is  hardly  reason  to 
completely disregard it. 
                                                 
1   See,  for  example,  Chinn  and  Meredith  (2004)  for  an  outline  and  Lothian  and  Wu  (2011)  for  a  recently 
published empirical study. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The exchange rate is volatile 
Another circumstance complicating the analysis is the tendency for floating exchange rates 
to  be  highly  volatile.  This  is  illustrated  in  Figure  3,  which  shows  the  development  of  the 
krona’s trade-weighted exchange rate. The figure shows that the krona can both depreciate 
and  appreciate  to  a  relatively  large  degree  over  relatively  short  periods.  For  example,  the 
krona depreciated by almost 20 per cent in TCW terms between the second quarter of 2008 
and  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  Unease  on  the  financial  markets,  which  tends  to  weaken 
comparatively  small  currencies  like  Sweden’s,  contributed  towards  this.  Following  this,  the 
krona  appreciated  strongly  and  now  lies  at  approximately  the  same  level  as  prior  to  the 
financial crisis. 
 
 
This  volatility  in  itself  argues  that  a  central  bank  with  an  inflation  target  should  not  focus 
unduly  on  exchange  rate  fluctuations.2  If  the  central  bank  were  to  react  to  every  such 
fluctuation, monetary policy would also be volatile. This is obviously undesirable as it may 
mean  that  the  central  bank  itself  becomes  a  source  of  unnecessary  disruptions  in  the 
economy. 
A  volatile  exchange  rate  can  be  regarded  as  particularly  problematic  if  the  central  bank 
allows  the  exchange  rate  to  take  a  very  prominent  position  in  its  analysis,  for  example  by 
                                                  
2   This  is  closely  linked  with  Krugman’s  (1989)  assertion  that  exchange  rates  are  so  volatile  because  the 
fluctuations are of so little significance to the economy. This effect is generated by a feedback loop in which 
increased volatility reduces the exchange rate’s effect on trade, which, in turn, leads to an even more volatile 
exchange rate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relying  on  what  is  known  as  a  Monetary  Conditions  Index  (MCI).  An  index  of  this  kind  is 
intended to summarise, in one measurement, the effects of interest rates and the exchange 
rate on inflation and resource utilisation. Somewhat simplified, the idea behind the MCI can 
be described as this: all other factors being equal, if the exchange rate is strengthened, the 
interest  rates  should  be  lower,  and  vice-versa.  During  several  of  the  initial  years  of  the 
inflation-targeting  regime,  the  Riksbank  used  an  MCI  in  its  monetary  policy  analysis.3  Its 
intention during this period was to demonstrate very clearly that, in a small, open economy, 
the exchange rate influences inflation and resource utilisation. Today, the Riksbank no longer 
uses any such index as a summarising measure. One reason for the abandonment of MCI 
was that it could be interpreted in an excessively mechanistic way: when the exchange rate 
weakened,  MCI  tended  to  be  used  in  a  simplified  manner  as  an  argument  for  a  higher 
interest  rate,  and  vice-versa.  Considering  the  wide  fluctuations  that  can  take  place  in  the 
exchange rate over short periods, an MCI in which a large weight is placed on the exchange 
rate means that very large changes to the interest rate may be demanded to compensate for 
exchange rate fluctuations.4 
The exchange rate pass-through on import and consumer prices is uncertain 
The price of imported consumer goods is partially determined by the exchange rate. If the 
krona is weakened, importers must generally pay more in Swedish kronor for goods bought 
overseas.  Importers  must  choose  how  to  handle  this.  Should  they  increase  their  prices  to 
compensate  for  the  increased  purchase  prices  or  should  they  reduce  their  margins?  The 
answer to this question depends on a number of factors. 
In the short term, importers may avoid price changes, as far as this is possible. Partially, this 
is  because  price  changes  are  intrinsically  costly,5  but  also  because  firms  often  wish  to 
maintain customer goodwill by not immediately passing increased costs along. Furthermore, 
many firms hedge their foreign trade on the foreign exchange forward market so as not to be 
affected by short-term exchange rate fluctuations.6 
This very time horizon is an important aspect of exchange rate fluctuations. If the change is 
deemed to be temporary, it is reasonable to assume that many firms will avoid changing their 
prices and that the pass-through will thus be moderate. If, on the other hand, it is deemed to 
be permanent, the pass-through should be greater, as otherwise margins will be lower (in the 
event  of  a  depreciation  of  the  krona).  Another  important  aspect  here  is  the  competitive 
situation  on  the  market.  On  a  market  characterised  by  strong  competition,  it  will  be  more 
difficult for a firm to increase prices without losing sales. 
The general demand situation can also play a part. It will probably be easier to raise prices in 
a  period  of  high  economic  activity,  when  many  domestic  competitors  will  also  have  a 
tendency to increase their prices, than in periods in which domestic demand is developing 
weakly.  
Empirical studies suggest that, for example, a weakening of the exchange rate by 4 per cent 
will increase import prices by about 2 per cent, which is to say that the pass-through is about 
                                                 
3  See  Hansson  and  Lindberg  (1994)  for  a  description.  The  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
New Zealand have also used similar measures. 
4  However, MCI has also been called into question on a number of other bases and is currently considered by 
many  not  to  be  a  reliable  variable  for  use  in  monetary  policy  analysis.  See,  for  example,  Stevens  (1998), 
Svensson (2001) and the European Central Bank (2002). 
5  So-called menu costs. 
6  This means that a firm has contracted to buy or sell a certain amount of a currency at a future date at a given 
exchange rate. This allows the firm to eliminate exchange rate risk in its overseas transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
50 per cent over the short term.7 The pass-through on consumer prices will be lesser, as the 
price  in  Sweden  for  imported  goods  is  also  determined  by  domestic  components  such  as 
wages, taxes and transportation costs. A pass-through of about 15 per cent over one year 
would seem to be a reasonable assessment.8 
Figure  4  illustrates  the  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate  on  import  prices  and  consumer 
prices.  It  shows  a  clear  connection  between  the  exchange  rate  and  import  prices.  The 
connection between the exchange rate and consumer prices is weaker. 
 
 
However,  the  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate  may  be  non-linear,  so  that  minor  or  no 
adjustments  are  made  in  the  event  of  small  changes  in  the  exchange  rate,  and  relatively 
major adjustments are made in the event of large changes in the exchange rate. But it may 
also be the case that relatively large changes in the exchange rate have minor or no effects 
on  consumer  prices,  depending  on  what  are  known  as  composition  effects.  Firms  can 
choose to import other products or to import from other countries.9 
                                                  
7   See, for example, Campa and Goldberg (2005)  and Sveriges Riksbank  (2001, 2004). In the long term, the 
pass-through will be higher – estimates vary between 80 and 100 per cent (Sveriges Riksbank, 2001, 2004). 
Full  pass-through  is  a  reasonable  assumption  over  the  very  long  term,  when  permanent  exchange  rate 
changes are considered. 
8   See, for example, Ekholm (2010). 
9   See Marazzi et al. (2005) for a more detailed discussion. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The effects on the economy of the real exchange rate 
When  the  general  public  discusses  exchange  rates,  this  usually  means  the  nominal 
exchange  rate.  However,  economists  are  more  focused  on  the  real  exchange  rate,  which 
shows the price of foreign goods expressed in Swedish kronor against the price of Swedish 
goods in kronor. In other words, the real exchange rate reflects Sweden’s purchasing power 
and competitiveness. The stronger the real exchange rate becomes, the greater purchasing 
power a Swedish krona will have abroad. At the same time, a stronger real exchange rate 
means that Swedish-produced goods will be more expensive compared with foreign goods, 
and competitiveness will thus decrease. 
The real exchange rate is the one that is most important to the real economy; the nominal 
exchange rate should primarily be regarded as an asset price that affects the real exchange 
rate over the relatively short term. As Figure 5 shows, the nominal and real exchange rates 
have co-varied closely during the inflation-targeting regime. The explanation for this is that, 
as I mentioned, exchange rates that are determined freely by the market tend to be volatile. 
At  the  same  time,  most  of  Sweden’s  trading  partners  have  monetary  policy  frameworks 
resembling  our  own,  so  inflation  rate  differences  are  generally  fairly  minor.  The  nominal 
exchange  rate  can  change  rapidly,  but  prices  generally  move  more  slowly.  All  in  all,  this 
means that short-term fluctuations in the real exchange rate, to a large extent, are driven by 
variations in the nominal exchange rate. 
 
 
Movements  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate  were  smaller  before  1992,  when  Sweden  had  a 
fixed exchange-rate regime, even if the devaluations carried out during the 1970s and 1980s 
led to relatively large fluctuations. However, even during periods with fixed nominal exchange 
rates,  large  fluctuations  took  place  in  the  real  exchange  rate.  These  were  driven  by 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
differences in inflation rates between Sweden and the rest of the world. Between 1982 and 
1992,  the  real  exchange  rate  strengthened  markedly,  with  Swedish  competitiveness  being 
undermined considerably as a result. 
Changes  in  the  real  exchange  rate  mainly  affect  the  economy  via  net  exports,  in  which  a 
weakening of the real exchange rate tends to increase net exports. Slightly simplified, it could 
be said that higher net exports lead to increased resource utilisation, higher wage growth and 
thus  to  higher  inflationary  pressures.  The  exchange  rate  effects  arising  in  inflation  via  net 
exports can thus be seen as being significantly less direct than those arising via import prices, 
which I discussed earlier. Changes in the real exchange rate may entail adjustments to the 
economy that monetary policy may need to consider. For example, during a real appreciation 
of the krona, exporting and import-competing firms may have to review their costs so as to 
restore competitiveness. Among other strategies, the firms can achieve this by implementing 
operational  changes  to  increase  productivity.10  Such  adjustments  can  contribute  towards 
lower inflationary pressures, as increased productivity lowers unit costs. Another possibility for 
some  firms  is  to  move  operations  overseas.  For  major  firms  with  broad  international 
operations, it may be relatively easy, in some cases, to reorganise operations so that costs 
arise  in  another  currency  than  Swedish  kronor.  However,  for  smaller  firms  with  all  of  their 
production in Sweden, relocating operations overseas is generally associated with high costs. 
Monetary policy decision-making in consideration of the exchange rate  
I  would  now  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  how  everything  I  have  said  so  far  about  the 
exchange rate affects my view of monetary policy analyses and decisions. 
As its influence on the economy is subject to a time-lag, monetary policy has to be conducted 
in a forward-looking manner. Consequently, forecasts play a decisive role in analyses and 
decision-making.  At  the  same  time,  the  exchange  rate,  like  other  prices  set  on  financial 
markets,  is  very  difficult  to  forecast.11  Nevertheless,  due  to  its  significance  for  the 
development  of  small,  open  economies  such  as  Sweden’s,  it  is  important  to  form  an 
understanding of exchange rate developments. 
The Riksbank tries to analyse and forecast the development of the trade-weighted exchange 
rate, which is to say the value of the Swedish krona against a basket of the currencies of 
Sweden’s most important trading partners. Due to the volatile nature of the exchange rate, 
no  attempts  are  made  to  capture  short-term  variations  in  it.  Instead,  the  focus  lies  on  the 
more  long-term  trend.  The  starting  point  for  this  a  statistical  model  in  which  the  real 
exchange  rate  is  related  to  relative  GDP,  the  terms  of  trade  and  net  foreign  assets.12 
However, the final forecast for the exchange rate considers the fact that the exchange rate 
both influences and is influenced by a multitude of other variables, including the interest rate 
differential in relation to other countries.13  
                                                 
10   See, for example, Ekholm et al. (2008). Pressure on firms to improve productivity can be seen as a positive 
aspect  of  a  strong  real  exchange  rate.  A  weak  real  exchange  rate  is  otherwise  frequently  seen  as  being 
advantageous for a country as it benefits its exporting firms. 
11   In  the  evaluation  of  different  forecast  strategies,  it  has  been  shown  that  it  is  difficult  to  outperform  what  is 
known as a naïve forecast – that is, using the current actual value as a forecast. See, for example, Meese and 
Rogoff (1983). However, a number of other studies show more positive results for the possibilities of making 
forecasts, for example Mark (1995) and Gourinchas and Rey (2007). 
12   See Sellin (2007) and Lagerwall and Nessén (2009). 
13   It may be noted that, as the rate of inflation in Sweden tends to be about the same as it is among most of 
Sweden’s  trading  partners,  there  is  a  high  degree  of  similarity  in  the  forecasts  for  the  nominal  and  real 
exchange rates. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  main  scenario  in  the  Riksbank’s  most  recent  Monetary  Policy 
Reports  is  based  on  a  forecast  that,  in  my  opinion,  expects  excessively  high  policy  rates 
abroad.  One  of  the  most  important  reasons  that  I  expect  lower  policy  rates  is  the  public 
finance situation prevailing in parts of the world. In the United States, the United Kingdom and 
large parts of the euro area, there is little to no scope for using fiscal policy to give an extra 
boost to the recovery. All that remains, therefore, is relatively expansionary monetary policy. 
Moreover,  I  see  a  risk  that  the  desire  to  avoid  stronger  exchange  rates  will  lead  to  lower 
interest  rates  in  general  abroad.  When  it  is  not  possible  to  use  fiscal  policy  to  stimulate 
domestic demand, it is tempting to put one’s hope in exports. Countries will then be unwilling 
to allow exchange rates to take a direction that will lead to poorer competitiveness for them. 
One consequence of my assessment of foreign policy rates is that the main scenario’s repo 
rate  path  entails  a  greater  interest  rate  differential  in  relation  to  other  countries  than  was 
assumed  in  the  Riksbank’s  forecast.  In  the  most  recent  monetary  policy  decision,  the  gap 
between the main scenario’s forecast of foreign policy rates and the forecast I preferred was 
certainly significantly narrower than it was during the autumn of 2010 – but, even so, it still 
concerned a difference of more than 50 basis points towards the end of the forecast horizon 
(see  Figure  6).  This  could  mean  that  the  krona  will  appreciate  more  than  the  forecast 
suggests. 
 
 
To  illustrate  the  effects  that  lower  international  interest  rates  would  have  on  Swedish 
monetary  policy  if  the  actual  interest  rates  were  to  be  adjusted  completely  towards  the 
Riksbank’s repo rate path, I would like to show you an analysis included in the minutes of the 
most recent monetary policy meeting. Figure 7 shows model simulations of the effects on the 
CPIF and unemployment, according to the main scenario’s repo rate path and according to 
the repo rate path I voted for, under the assumption that foreign interest rates will be lower 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
than in the forecast, particularly towards the end of the forecast period.14 My preferred repo 
rate path, which goes up to 3.25 per cent at the end of the forecast period, gives a lower 
unemployment forecast than does the main scenario’s repo rate path. 
It may seem that the target fulfilment of the CPIF forecast is worse, as it lies above 2 per cent 
towards  the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  However,  my  assessment  is  that  this  is  an 
overestimate of inflation. Inflationary pressures are influenced by resource utilisation, and it 
can  probably  be  expected  that  the  level  of  resource  utilisation  that  is  consistent  with 
unchanged  inflationary  pressures  will  actually  rise  during  the  forecast  period.  In  deep 
recessions,  it  is  usual  for  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market  to  be  impaired  initially,  as 
typically  the  jobs  that  have  disappeared  differ  from  those  arising  once  the  economy  has 
recovered.  However,  eventually  it  does  start  to  function  normally.  In  that  case,  perhaps 
inflationary pressures will be significantly lower towards the end of the forecast period than is 
shown by these simulations. The difference in outcome between the two repo rate paths is 
partially  due  to  the  different  development  of  the  exchange  rate,  but  it  is,  of  course,  also 
largely due to the divergence of the interest rates influencing investments and saving. 
 
                                                  
14  In the figure, foreign policy rates are obtained from adjusted implied forward rates at the date of the Monetary 
Policy Report. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  exchange  rate  effects  of  choosing  another  repo  rate  path  are  naturally  uncertain. 
However, the fact that the exchange rate in general is associated with great uncertainty does 
not mean that it can be disregarded when decisions are taken on the repo rate path. And, in 
my opinion, neither does the fact that market interest rates do not fully incorporate the repo 
rate path – possibly because they are influenced by foreign interest rates to a large degree – 
form  a  strong  argument  for  disregarding  the  potential  exchange  rate  effects  of  increased 
interest rate differentials. As a matter of principle, I consider that monetary policy should be a 
matter  of  choosing  the  repo  rate  path  that  gives  the  forecast  for  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation  with  the  best  target  fulfilment  when  fully  incorporated  into  expectations.  Another 
principle is that high uncertainty is not an argument for refraining from using the best forecast 
as a basis for decisions. 
Conclusion 
In summary, I would like to say that, even if there are factors suggesting that the significance 
of the exchange rate should not be exaggerated, it is my opinion that it should be considered 
in monetary policy decisions. Recently, the development of the exchange rate has been an 
important reason for the reservations I have entered against monetary policy decisions. 
The Swedish economy grew very strongly during 2010, but this should be seen in the light of 
the very steep fall that started in 2008 and continued in 2009. My assessment is that there 
are still relatively many unutilised resources in the Swedish economy and that both resource 
utilisation and inflationary pressures will continue to be lower than normal over large parts of 
the Riksbank’s forecast period. Contributing to this is the fact that the krona has (nominally) 
strengthened  by  about  10  per  cent  over  the  last  year,  which  is  more  than  was  previously 
expected. As a stronger krona dampens both inflationary pressures and resource utilisation, I 
believe  that  a  lower  repo  rate  path  than  that  decided  upon  would  lead  to  better  target 
fulfilment. 
References 
Campa, J. M. and Goldberg, L. S. (2005), “Exchange Rate Pass-through into Import Prices”, 
Review of Economics and Statistics 87, 679–690. 
Chinn,  M.  D.  and  Meredith,  G.  (2004),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Long-Horizon  Uncovered 
Interest Parity”, IMF Staff Papers 51, 409–430. 
Ekholm, K. (2010), “Monetary policy and the exchange rate”, speech at HQ Bank, Stockholm 
12 January 2010. 
Ekholm, K, Moxnes, A. and Ulltveit-Moe, K. H. (2008), “Manufacturing Restructuring and the 
Role of Real Exchange Rate Shocks”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6904. 
European Central Bank (2002), Monthly Bulletin, June 2002. 
Gourinchas,  P.-O.  and  Rey,  H.  (2007),  “International  Financial  Adjustment”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy 115, 665–703. 
Hansson,  B.  and  Lindberg,  H.  (1994),  “Monetary  Conditions  Index  –  a  Monetary  Policy 
Indicator”, Economic Review 1994:3, 13–19. 
Krugman, P. (1989), Exchange Rate Instability, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Lagervall, B. and Nessén M. (2009), “The long-term development of the krona”, Economic 
commentaries no. 6, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Lothian,  J.  R.  and  Wu,  L.  (2011),  “Uncovered  Interest  Rate  Parity  over  the  Past  Two 
Centuries”, Journal of International Money and Finance 30, 448–473. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Marazzi, M., Sheets, N. Vigfusson, R., Faust, J., Gagnon, J., Marquez, J., Martin, R., Reeve, 
T. and Rogers, J. (2005), “Exchange Rate Pass-through to U.S. Import Prices: Some New 
Evidence,” International Finance Discussion Paper 833, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System. 
Mark,  N.  C.  (1995),  “Exchange  Rates  and  Fundamentals:  Evidence  on  Long-Horizon 
Predictability”, American Economic Review 85, 201–218. 
Meese, R. A. and Rogoff, K. (1983), “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies: Do 
They Fit Out of Sample?”, Journal of International Economics 14, 3–24. 
Sellin,  P.  (2007),  “Using  a  New  Open  Economy  Macroeconomics  Model  to  Make  Real 
Nominal Exchange Rate Forecasts”, Working Paper No. 213, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Stevens, G. R. (1998), “Pitfalls in the Use of Monetary Conditions Indexes”, Reserve Bank of 
Australia Bulletin August 1998, 34–43. 
Svensson,  L.  E.  O.  (2001),  “Independent  Review  of  the  Operation  of  Monetary  Policy  in 
New Zealand: Report to the Minister of Finance”. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2001), Inflation Report 2001:3. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2004), Inflation Report 2004:2. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
