Yves Mersch: Current challenges in the sovereign debt crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the  SWF 
(Sovereign Wealth Fund) Forum, Montreux, Switzerland, 24 October 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure and privilege to talk in front of this audience of experts and practitioners. I 
do thank the SWF Forum for this opportunity to share my thoughts on the current challenges 
of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe.  
Montreux  seems  to  be  the  perfect  setting  for  a  central  banker  to  speak.  Is  there  a  better 
symbol  for  stability  and  long-term  nature  than  the  surrounding  Alps?  And  Lake  Geneva 
represents a perfectly balanced level of liquidity – while central bankers have to deal with the 
contradiction  of  abundant  global  monetary  liquidity  and  a  shortage  of  market  liquidity  in 
certain asset classes.  
But without further ado, let me embark in today’s topic. 
Need for clarification: the often forgotten strengths of the euro area 
Some countries in the euro area face a combination of high levels of indebtedness, budget 
deficits and weak or absent growth. Amid growing market turmoil and the risk of contagion an 
increasing number of economists call for debt restructuring in the affected countries. These 
proposals  often  share  an  anti-Euro  sentiment  and  seem  to  be  in  accordance  with  the 
naysayers who were taking potshots at the Euro even before its inception in 1999.  
However, many critics ignore the euro area’s strengths. There is a need for clarification. Let 
me start by stressing some facts:  
1. 
Since  its  inception  almost  13  years  ago,  the  euro  area  has  experienced  an 
unprecedented level of price stability.  
The euro area has logged real per-capita income growth of around 1 percent a year 
since 1999, just below the U.S.’s 1.1 percent. Observers often look only at headline 
growth figures, where the difference is bigger. But the figures match once adjusted 
for population growth.  
During the same period of time, the euro area has created 14 million jobs, six million 
more than the USA.  
Contrary to common belief, the heterogeneity within the euro area is not significantly 
bigger than between U.S. states.  
On a consolidated base public finances are in a much better shape than those of 
other major currency areas. The euro area as a whole will run a budget deficit of 
about 4.5 percent of gross domestic product this year. The International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) expects a U.S. budget shortfall of about 10 percent this year.  
According  to  the  IMF  the  aggregate  debt-to-GDP  for  the  euro  area  stands  at 
87 percent. For the US the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2011 is expected to be 100 percent.  
The current account is broadly in balance, different from other advanced economies 
of similar size. For this year the IMF forecasts a current account deficit of 3 percent 
for the U.S. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Still, there is no room for complacency. The sovereign debt crisis in several Member States of 
the euro area and financial markets turmoil indicate that we are facing very challenging times.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Currency without a state 
The above mentioned figures are publicly available and communicated by the ECB and the 
national central banks of the Euro system on a regular basis. Why then, one may ask, are 
markets still so suspicious? The main reasons lie in the specific set-up of a currency regime 
without a government in general and the euro area in particular. Although the euro area has 
a centralized monetary policy, fiscal policy is still in the hands of national authorities. Several 
problems arise in this context. Let me highlight just one of them: 
There can be the case for moral hazard in so far as fiscal profligacy of one single member 
state could be averaged out by the virtuous behavior of the majority of the other countries. 
The  incentive  structure  is  flawed  because  it  can  lead  to  unsustainable  fiscal  policies  of 
individual  member  states  which  in  turn  would  generate  negative  spill  over  effects  to  the 
monetary union as a whole.  
The founding fathers of the euro area were aware that the management of a single currency 
in a union of sovereign states would be challenging and that effective rules were required to 
safeguard the credibility of the currency.  
At the very core of that framework the no-bail-out clause and the Stability and Growth Pact 
were installed. The first should have excluded free rider incentives and the second should 
have  aligned  national  fiscal  policies  to  prevent  negative  spill  over  effects  to  the  currency 
union as a whole.  
But the global financial crisis with its consecutive phases has disclosed the weaknesses of 
that institutional set up. The financial crisis with the epicenter at the US subprime mortgages 
markets erupted in August 2007. After its dramatic deterioration in September 2008 it turned 
into a sovereign debt crisis in spring 2010. The pre-crisis situation of public finances differed 
in  the  various  countries  of  the  euro  zone,  sometimes  significantly.  Regardless  of  whether 
private debt has been socialized or the problem was from the beginning in public finances 
itself,  the  outcome  was  a  drastic  increase  in  the  public  debt  burden.  The  financial  aid 
packages  for  stressed  banks  and  fiscal  and  social  stimulus  programs  to  combat  the 
recession disclosed painfully the limits of the financial capacity in some countries. 
With  hindsight  we  have  to  acknowledge  that  some  countries  allowed  fiscal  profligacy, 
weaknesses in the banking sector and deteriorating competitiveness. The institutional setup 
could  neither  prevent  nor  resolve  a  severe  crisis  of  the  magnitude  that  we  are  currently 
experiencing.  Although,  the  instruments  and  procedures  were  available,  they  were  not 
implemented, ignored, or watered down.  
In a nutshell: the euro area suffered from serious weaknesses in the fields of financial, fiscal 
and  economic  governance  on  the  preventive  side  and  had  lacked  a  crisis  resolution 
mechanism.  
Sovereign default is no panacea 
The current situation is characterized by widespread instabilities, the contagion of stress from 
smaller to larger countries threatening the financial system as a whole. To solve the problem, 
a number of voices call for debt restructuring in the affected countries. These calls for default 
tend to ignore some severe obstacles. Let me mention some of these. 
The default of a company or even a private household cannot be compared to a sovereign 
default. As Governments have to discharge duties of public interest they cannot be dissolved 
via an insolvency process as how it is practiced with a distressed corporation. The demand 
for public goods will remain; the need to provide them likewise. 
Moreover,  for  firms  in  severe  financial  distress  it  is  common  practice  to  pass  some  of  the 
burden from the debtor to the creditor to arrange a settlement among the parties involved. 
Both,  debtors  and  creditors  alike  share  an  incentive  to  do  so.  The  liabilities  of  the  debtor 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
decrease and the creditor – compared to a fully fledged insolvency – reduces losses. The 
private  creditor  might  benefit  in  relative  terms  from  a  bail-in.  He  therefore  can  agree  upon 
rescheduling a loan or converting debt into equity. 
The problem with the sovereign case starts with the blurred distinction between solvency and 
liquidity of a country. The question whether a company faces the threat of insolvency can be 
answered relatively clearly. Its assets and cash flow can be compared to its liabilities and the 
chances  of  cost  containment  and  generating  additional  funds  to  tackle  the  threat  of 
insolvency.  
For a government things are more complex. Like a private firm a state can reduce its costs 
and  spur  revenues  when  liabilities  exceed  assets  and  revenues.  But  governments  can  do 
more.  On  top  of  the  privatization  of  publicly  owned  assets,  public  expenditures  can  for 
instance be diminished by cutting the salaries of civil servants and public employees – a far 
more difficult task for a private company.  
Beyond  the  public  budget  and  the  value  of  marketable  assets  a  government  can  increase 
revenues by levying taxes. The entitlement to tax is unique to the state and grants access 
funds  and  means  from  an  owner  without  the  duty  of  compensation.  By  consequence,  a 
government with liquidity problems has much more leeway to avoid default. 
All this, of course, relies heavily on the political will of the government and capability of the 
administration.  The  feasibility  of  such  measures  in  turn  depends  to  a  huge  extent  on  the 
people’s attitude, i.e. in particular the willingness of the social and economic elites to pay for 
the state. Cultural and social issues clearly play an important role here. 
To sum up, the concept of insolvency as an objective inability to pay is not an operational 
concept for sovereign debt.1 
Still, for a highly indebted country it apparently seems attractive to lower the debt burden by 
default. Such a political decision is based on the assessment of the balance of benefits and 
costs. To make it clear: the disadvantages outweigh the advantages of that sweet-seeming 
but poisoned temptation.  
– 
The  defaulted  sovereign  will  lose  access  to  international  capital  markets  as  a 
consequence of the ultimate loss of credibility. 
The  assumption  that  a  sovereign  default  would  abolish  the  need  for  austerity 
measures is misleading. At least countries with a primary deficit – the rather normal 
case for a country in financial distress – will still have to consolidate its budget.  
Strong  repercussions  on  national  income  are  to  be  expected  due  to  the  negative 
wealth effects, capital outflows and trade disruption.  
The domestic banking sector will suffer due to necessary write-offs on the affected 
government  bonds.  Domestic  banks  tend  to  hold  those  as  major  creditors. 
Financially stricken banks might cause a credit crunch, restricting the access of the 
real economy to funding. A negative feedback loop might be generated. 
The  international  financial  system  will  be  jeopardized,  in  particular  in  times  of 
increased insecurity and market volatility. International market turmoil might trigger a 
negative loop affecting the domestic economy of the debtor country.  
    Legal considerations and empirical evidence 
On top of these economic arguments, legal aspects have to be taken into account. Different 
from individuals and firms, in the absence of war a sovereign country cannot be forced to 
                                                 
1  See Hellwig, Martin (2011), p. 63. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
fulfill its financial duties. Given that restriction, a global consensus has build that contracts 
and obligations between nations have to be binding although they are merely based on trust. 
The sovereign signature is the supreme symbol of a countries legal system. To breach an 
international  agreement  puts  the  credibility  of  the  whole  country  in  question,  including  its 
legal and economic system.  
These  legal  issues  might  not  matter  in  the  ivory  towers  of  contemporary  economists.  In 
reality,  however,  markets  can  only  function  properly  when  they  are  embedded  in  a  sound 
legal framework. During the 1980s and ‘90s parts of Latin America and several countries of 
the former Soviet Union experienced severe social frictions when they were exposed to the 
dynamics of pedigreed free markets without the prior set-up and implementation of a sound 
legal system. 
Beyond  this  theoretical  reasoning  there  is  empirical  evidence  a  sovereign  default  is  no 
panacea  for  heavily  indebted  countries.  Although  there  are  individual  cases  in  which 
restructuring was manageable and to that extent successful, these cases are rare.  
By  contrast,  most  of  the  times  restructuring  of  sovereign  debt  was  disorderly,  devastating 
and time consuming. The average length of the negotiations was 2½ years with the durations 
varying greatly. While sometimes negotiations have taken just a few months like in Uruguay 
in 2003, in Pakistan in 1999, in Chile in 1990 or in Romania in 1983. In other occasions it 
took many years to return into calmer waters, for example in Vietnam from 1982 until 1998, 
Jordan from 1989 to 1993, Peru from 1983 to 1997 and Argentina more recently.2 
All  these  reasons  represent  the  foundation  why  Governments  try  to  avoid  a  default  by  all 
means.  By  consequence  sovereign  bonds  –  in  particular  in  industrialized  countries  –  are 
generally regarded as a largely risk-free investment. They form the basis for the risk free rate 
not  being  backed  by  equity.  As  such  they  are  also  the  anchor  for  many  transactions  and 
valuations in the financial sector.  
The particular case of a monetary union 
The above mentioned arguments also apply to a monetary union like the euro area. But there 
are additional particularities.  
1. 
Due  to  the  high  level  of  integration  in  financial  markets  and  trade,  there  is  an 
elevated  risk  of  contagion  in  case  of  a  sovereign  default  in  the  euro  area.  The 
potential consequences for banks that would need to write off parts of their assets 
would be severe. Negative feedback loops to the real economy were likely. 
The  incentive  structure  might  become  flawed.  Moral  hazard  could  be  aggravated 
with regard to the borrower. If a Member Country knows that it does not have to fully 
service its contractual liabilities obligations but instead restructure its debt, it may be 
tempted to accumulate excess levels of debt.3 
The  credibility  of  the  monetary  union  as  a  whole  could  be  scratched.  If  investors 
paint  the  solvent  member  states  with  the  same  brush,  risk  premia  on  sovereign 
bonds would rise sharply affecting the whole specter of credit.  
Last but not least, there are legal considerations. Generally, if a government does 
not service its financial obligations it breaches its legal obligations (independent of 
the effective lack of enforceability by the creditors already mentioned). In the case of 
the euro area there is an additional trait. Article 126 paragraph 1 of the treaty (which 
is  binding  for  all  EU  countries  not  only  those  whose  currency  is  the  Euro)  clearly 
2. 
3. 
4. 
                                                 
2  See Bini Smaghi (2011); Reinhard et al. (2003); Ozler (1993).  
3  See ECB Monthly Bulletin (10:2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
states  that  a  Member  State  “shall  avoid  excessive  government  deficits”.  Although 
there  is  some  scope  for  interpretation  what  “excessive”  means  it  can  hardly  be 
doubted that a deficit that leads to a sovereign default was ultimately excessive.4 
Working for the better: Closing the implementation gap … 
These sound arguments call for the avoidance of a sovereign default by all means. But what 
is to be done instead? 
The superior avenue is a combination of crisis resolution to curtail the panic and prevention 
measures to regain confidence. 
In more detail this means:  
1. 
Those countries under the rescue umbrella have to fully implement the conditions of 
the respective programs in order to return to a sustainable level of debt and regain 
competitiveness. During the adjustment process they receive financial aid from the 
Luxembourg  based  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF).  In  order  to 
eliminate any doubts on the sufficient fire power of the EFSF, governments of the 
euro area Member States should provide appropriate leveraging of the fund – not to 
be  confounded  with  monetization.  It  is  also  important  that  the  EFSF  operationally 
can intervene in the secondary markets as soon as possible to tackle fundamentally 
unfounded distortions in the sovereign bonds markets. These distortions hamper the 
smooth functioning of the single monetary policy stance. 
Macroeconomic imbalances and unsustainable fiscal policies must be avoided in the 
future.  Prevention  is  key.  The  recent  agreement  reached  by  the  European 
Parliament  and  the  Council  on  the  “Six  Pack”  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  The 
Stability and Growth Pact has been strengthened; imbalances and competitiveness 
will  be  monitored  at  an  early  stage.  But  this  economic  governance  package  falls 
short  of  greater  automaticity  in  decision-making  that  the  ECB  has  long  advocated 
for.  
2. 
For the time being, the implementation gap must be closed. Most of the above mentioned 
proposals are mirrored by decisions that have been taken already. As soon as possible the 
new  governance  rules  must  be  applied  completely  and  rigorously.  Moreover, 
the 
governments  of  the  euro  area  member  states  must  implement  all  the  decisions  of  the  EU 
summit of 21 July. Swift implementation is a necessary condition to resolve the confidence 
crisis the euro area currently faces. 
… but being prepared for the worst: increasing resilience and ring fencing 
Nevertheless, if a countries debt burden becomes unsustainable, a restructuring of sovereign 
debt cannot be excluded as ultimate resort. To be prepared for the worst, several lines of 
defense have to be strengthened: 
1. 
In  order  to  mitigate  foreseeable  tensions  in  the  financial  industry,  banks  have  to 
clean their balance sheets as quickly as possible. They need to build up a stronger 
equity  position  by  retaining  profits  and  moderation  in  remunerations,  bonus 
payments  in  particular.  Preferably  they  can  search  for  recapitalization  via  capital 
markets.  If  this  is  not  feasible,  Government  must  step  in  to  recapitalize  solvent 
banks. Where it would be necessary, the EFSF can be approached to recapitalize 
banks.  
                                                 
4  See Siekmann, Helmut (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
2. 
It must be crystal clear that in the unlikely case of a restructuring of one country, this 
would  be  a  unique  case.  The  impression  that  restructuring  was  a  standard 
instrument of the crisis management tool kit must be avoided by all means. In order 
to  do  so,  countries  with  elevated  debt  levels  would  have  to  speed  up  their 
consolidation  efforts  to  send  out  signals  of  credibility  to  the  markets.  Sound  and 
credible public finances are the best way to ring fence from markets suspicion.  
In any case it is advisable to avoid any restructuring that is not purely voluntary or that shows 
elements  of  compulsion,  and  to  avoid  any  credit  events  and  selective  default  or  default. 
Rather, the Member States of the euro area need to demonstrate their determination to their 
own individual sovereign signature, in order to ensure financial stability in the currency union 
a whole.5 
Concluding remarks 
The epicenter of the global financial crisis has shifted from the US to the euro area. The rapid 
spreading of the crisis is reducing the options at hand to tackle the crisis.  
Europe has already taken important decisions to improve its crisis resolution mechanism and 
to strengthen preventive measures to avoid macroeconomic imbalances and unsustainable 
fiscal policies.  
It  is  important  to  implement  these  rules  now  and  make  the  institutions  operational,  as 
markets tend to lose patience. There is a strong appetite for a comprehensive solution.  
The  banking  sector  must  increase  its  resilience  against  sudden,  external  shock.  This  is 
particularly important in times of high market volatility and elevated uncertainty. Quick action 
is  needed  to  clean  up  banks’  balance  sheets  and  recapitalize  them,  where  it  is  deemed 
necessary.  
On top, countries with elevated debt levels and augmented budget deficits have to put public 
finances  on  a  more  sustainable  path  and  spur  growth  by  structural  reform.  Sovereign 
defaults should be avoided as the cost most likely would outbalance the benefits by far. The 
ECB  has  repeatedly  objected  to  all  concepts  of  debt  restructuring  that  are  not  purely 
voluntary  or  that  have  elements  of  compulsion;  any  credit  events  and  selective  default  or 
default should be avoided. A strong and transparent commitment to sound public finances is 
the best weapon to combat market attacks.  
*** 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
5  See ECB Monthly Bulletin (10:2011). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
