Gill Marcus: Assessing the risks to the inflation outlook – the challenges 
to monetary policy in highly uncertain times 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  Swiss 
Chamber Southern Africa, Johannesburg, 15 November 2011. 
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  address  the  Swiss  Chamber  today.  One  of  the  many 
demands of being a Governor is that of travel. And it is in this capacity that over the past 
two years I have had the privilege of visiting Switzerland on a regular basis, as Basel is the 
home of the Bank for International Settlements (the BIS) – the bank for central banks. It is 
indeed  a  beautiful  country,  and  one  of  the  advanced  economies  that  is  experiencing  the 
challenges arising from significant inflows of capital as investors seek safe havens. 
South  Africa  has  had  long-standing  trade  and  financial  ties  with  Switzerland,  and  in  these 
troubled times it is important that such relationships are not only preserved but enhanced. 
We are certainly living in interesting but difficult times, because the possibility that things can 
go horribly wrong are very high. A break-up of the Eurozone, previously unthinkable, is now 
being  mentioned  by  some  of  the  European  leaders  who  had  previously  dismissed  such 
speculation. But even a less catastrophic scenario of a disorderly Greek default could have a 
disproportionate impact on the global economy. Unfortunately we do not know how long this 
process is going to take, and various attempts to resolve the problem have simply kicked the 
can forward, and perhaps bought more time. The dramatic leadership changes over the past 
week  in  both  Greece  and  Italy  demonstrate  just  how  urgent  the  need  for  concrete  and 
credible action is. We do know that we are getting closer to the end game at what seems to 
be increasing speed, but we do not know when that will happen and what form it will take. 
This  makes  policy-making  extremely  complicated,  as  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to 
meaningfully quantify the risks, and build them into policy decisions.  
It is against this heightened global uncertainty that the Monetary Policy Committee met last 
week, and decided to keep the repurchase rate unchanged at a 30 year low of 5,5 per cent. 
The  MPC  assessed  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  to  be  on  the  upside,  and  today  I  will 
expand on two interconnected risks that featured strongly in the MPC deliberations, namely 
the global outlook and the impact of the exchange rate. 
As has been the case for the past two years or so, risks to the global outlook coming from 
the advanced economies have predominated policy discussions. There are three interrelated 
issues: the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, the unfolding banking crisis in Europe, and the 
inability of the advanced economies to generate sustainably higher growth.  
This is indeed an irony and a change from previous decades when the majority of the global 
risks emanated from emerging markets. And while these risk events, such as the Asian crisis 
of 1997/8, had contagion effects they were generally limited to other emerging markets, and 
the impact on advanced economies was minimal. 
In  the  MPC  meeting,  the  global  growth  assumption  in  the  forecasting  model  had  been 
revised down, but did not reflect the worst case scenario for Europe. As the Eurozone crisis 
has engulfed Italy and parts of the European banking system, the stakes have increased. It 
was difficult enough to get agreement on actions to provide liquidity to the smaller countries, 
and Greece in particular. It is debatable whether the partial solutions that have been devised 
are  adequate  to  build  a  fire-break  around  Italy,  whose  financing  needs  dwarf  those  of  the 
combined  European  periphery.  Rates  on  newly  issued  5-year  Italian  debt  exceeded 
6 per cent yesterday (14 November) and at 6,29 per cent was the highest rate paid by Italy 
since June 1997. Rates on Spanish debt also exceeded 6 per cent. Thus it is clear that we 
are no longer talking about the periphery of Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Compounding the debt problem is the slow growth that is being experienced in the Eurozone, 
with the ECB now expecting a mild recession in the region. The European Commission sees 
stalled growth in the Eurozone until at least the middle of 2012, and has revised its forecast 
for Eurozone growth in 2012 from 1,8 per cent to 0,5 per cent. The Commission sees a high 
probability  of  a  protracted  period  of  economic  stagnation.  Italy  is  expected  to  grow  by 
0,1 per cent in 2012, due in part to fiscal austerity measures. Some analysts forecast a deep 
recession in Italy which would exacerbate the negative debt dynamics of that country. The 
Greek economy is expected to contract by –2,8 per cent. The AAA rating of France now at 
risk, and the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which was established as a means 
to  provide  liquidity  support  to  member  states,  is  experiencing  problems  leveraging  their 
funds. Despite its AAA rating from two of the main rating agencies, spreads on EFSF 5-year 
bonds have more than trebled in the past weeks, and lack of bids in a recent auction resulted 
in a failed auction with only €3 billion of an anticipated €5 billion worth of bonds being issued. 
The stability of the European banking system is also being brought into question as a result 
of the large exposures of French and German banks in particular to peripheral debt. At the 
same time, the requirements of Basel III have also meant that banks have had to increase 
their capital ratios. With bank share prices at low levels, the incentive is for banks to achieve 
their required ratios through deleveraging, i.e. through reducing lending. A credit crunch is a 
distinct possibility at a time when the region is already heading into a recession. 
Cumulative  fiscal  tightening  in  Greece  and  Portugal  over  2011  and  2012  is  around 
8 percentage  points  of  GDP,  while  in  France,  Italy,  and  Spain  cumulative  fiscal  tightening 
over  those  two  years  of  between  3 ½  to  4 percentage  points  of  GDP  is  expected.  Fiscal 
tightening on this scale would constitute a significant headwind to growth at the best of times. 
However,  the  headwinds  are  amplified  as  this  fiscal  tightening  is  being  applied  at  a  time 
when Europe as a whole looks like it is moving into recession and may be at the early stages 
of a credit crunch. 
There are no easy solutions to the European debt problem. There is a need for adjustment 
and for financing, and much of the policy paralysis is a result of different parties wanting to 
minimise their share of the burden. Not surprisingly, the creditor countries such as Germany 
see the solution for debtor countries to come from increased austerity. But not all countries 
can be creditors simultaneously. For every creditor there must be a debtor, and these debits 
and  credits  have  their  counterparts  in  the  current  account  deficits  and  surpluses  of  these 
countries. For every net exporter there has to be a net importer. As Martin Wolf has recently 
reminded  us,  since  the  world  cannot  trade  with  Mars,  creditors  are  joined  at  the  hip  to 
debtors, and any adjustment cannot be one-sided. 
These developments in the euro area have important lessons for other single currency areas, 
including moves towards monetary integration in Africa. Some of these lessons include the 
following: 
 
It  is  not  sufficient  to  have  macroeconomic  convergence  criteria.  This  is  a  static 
approach, in the sense that once achieved, the pressure is off. Recent experience 
shows how quickly these ratios can be reversed. An effective monetary union needs 
to  ensure  that  there  are  effective  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  these  criteria  are 
sustained. The Growth and Stability Pact failed because there was no real sanction 
involved for countries that transgressed the rules. 
This  points  to  the  need  for  a  single  fiscal  authority.  While  this  was  previously 
recognised,  the  political  difficulties  of  achieving  agreement  on  this,  and  to  allow 
politically sensitive issues such as tax policies, expenditure requirements, and fiscal 
transfers to be made by a supranational body, would have significantly delayed or 
even perhaps stymied the implementation of the single currency. 
It is increasingly apparent that a further weakness in the design of the Eurozone was 
the lack of a lender of last resort. While in principle the ECB can, and has been in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  2 
  effect  playing  this  role  and  taking  a  large  amount  of  risky  assets  onto  its  balance 
sheet,  it  is  questionable  whether  it  can  continue  to  do  so  without  intense  political 
pressure  from  some  of  the  member  states  who  feel  that  the  ECB  is  operating 
outside of its mandate. At present it is the individual central banks that stand behind 
the ECB. There is no unified fiscal authority that guarantees its activities. 
It would be wrong to think that sorting out the fiscal issues would have prevented the 
crisis. These issues are a manifestation of a deeper problem of divergent levels of 
competitiveness.  The  underlying  assumption  of  a  monetary  union 
that 
competitiveness  will  remain  constant,  i.e.  the  internal  real  exchange  rates  will  be 
unchanged. In the past ten years the peripheral countries have lost competitiveness 
to varying degrees, in the case of Greece by about 30 per cent. There is no internal 
mechanism to prevent this, and in fact the single currency allowed for automatic and 
continuous  financing  of  these  divergent  trends  at  low  rates  of  interest.  Italy’s 
problem is not only fiscal in nature. Italy is after all running a primary surplus. In the 
absence  of  an  exchange  rate  adjustment  mechanism,  the  only  way  to  adjust  is 
through an internal devaluation, implying falling nominal and real wages, and fiscal 
austerity. This is the classic expenditure reduction case under fixed exchange rates. 
The  inability  to  change  the  nominal  exchange  rate  imposes  severe  adjustment 
costs. 
is 
While  exchange  rate  flexibility  would  ease  the  burden  of  adjustment,  countries  that  find 
themselves  with  appreciating  currencies  in  response  to  developments  elsewhere  find  it 
extremely  uncomfortable  as  well.  Countries  with  stable  macroeconomic  environments  are 
better  placed  to  shield  themselves,  but  it  is  almost  a  truism  that  no  country  can  actually 
escape the fall out of the global uncertainties that are currently prevailing. Switzerland, as a 
model of macroeconomic rectitude and with its safe banking system, is a good example of 
this. In the context of increasing risk aversion, there is a search safety rather than for yield. 
The  interest  returns  from  investing  in  Switzerland  are  minimal  or  negative,  yet  the  country 
continued  to  receive  significant  capital  inflows  causing  the  Swiss  franc  to  appreciate  to 
uncomfortably  strong  levels.  Attempts  to  stem  the  tide  in  2010  through  intervention  were 
eventually abandoned after losses of around CHF 30 billion were incurred. At that stage the 
Swiss franc exchange rate was around CHF 1,45 to the euro. More recently, when the franc 
reached close to CHF 1 against the euro, the Swiss National Bank reentered the market and 
announced  its  intention  to  prevent  the  franc  from  appreciating  beyond  CHF 1,20.  To  date 
they have been successful, but it is unclear whether this will be sustainable in the face of an 
extreme  bout  of  risk  aversion  in  financial  markets.  While  flexible  exchange  rates help  with 
adjustment, these adjustments are not easy or without costs. 
South Africa’s attractiveness to capital flows and consequent appreciation pressures was in 
part  due  to  the  search  for  yield  in  an  environment  of  abnormally  low  interest  rates  in  the 
advanced economies. But the exchange rate response to risk aversion is the opposite to that 
of the Swiss franc. Since late July, as the Eurozone crisis intensified, the rand, along with 
numerous  other  emerging  market  currencies  depreciated.  Since  July  2011,  the  rand  has 
depreciated  by  about  20 per cent  against  the  US  dollar,  and  has  traded  in  a  range  of 
between R6,65 and R8,50. As is often the case, the rand tends to be one of the more volatile 
currencies.  Nevertheless  these  movements  have  been  mirrored  in  a  number  of  other 
currencies, for example the Mexican peso and the Brazilian real. 
These exchange rate developments have implications for monetary policy. As was noted in 
the MPC statement, the exchange rate is now seen to impart an upside risk to the inflation 
outlook.  
How  inflation  responds  to  exchange  rate  movements  depends  on  a  number  of  complex 
factors,  including  the  speed,  duration  and  the  extent  of  the  depreciation.  Small  changes 
usually have a relatively small impact on inflation, as is the case where the depreciation is 
expected to be of limited duration. Furthermore, the extent to which pricing was done at the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
previous  level  of  the  exchange  rate  could  determine  the  extent  to  which  producers  can 
absorb  the  increased  prices  and  costs.  We  must  also  distinguish  between  a  once-off 
depreciation and a continuous depreciation. The latter is likely to lead to much more severe 
impacts on inflation, and most likely to lead to a price-wage-exchange rate spiral. A once-off 
depreciation would be expected to elicit some price response, but the impact on inflation is 
likely to be of limited duration, once the pass-through has occurred.  
So from a monetary policy perspective the challenge is not only to take a view on the future 
path of the exchange rate, but also the impact of these moves on inflation. The view of the 
MPC at this stage is that underlying support for the rand is still there, as the factors that led 
to the strong rand in the first place still prevail, and interest rates in the advanced economies 
are expected to remain lower for longer.  
However in the short run the volatility of the rand will be determined by bouts of risk aversion 
in global financial markets. The general expectation, as reflected in the consensus forecasts, 
is that the rand is unlikely to return to previous elevated levels of below R7 to the dollar, but 
is expected to appreciate somewhat from current levels. This view would seem to assume 
some orderly near-term resolution of the Eurozone crisis. Because the MPC assessed the 
risks  emanating  from  the  global  economy  to  be  on  the  downside,  it  sees  an  upside  risk 
coming from the exchange rate. Does this necessarily imply that should the Eurozone crisis 
deteriorate, any further exchange rate depreciation would ultimately lead to a tightening of 
monetary policy? The answer clearly depends on what is happening to other factors as well. 
We  should  recall  that  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  in  2008/09  monetary  policy  was  loosened 
despite the much more pronounced depreciation that is currently being experienced. At that 
stage  there  were  a  number  of  offsetting  effects  that  meant  that  a  more  benign  inflation 
outlook could be expected. These factors included the widening output gap and associated 
contraction in domestic expenditure, and the collapse of global commodity prices. 
We  should  not  forget  that  the  weaker  rand  also  comes  with  its  advantages.  It  makes  our 
exports  more  competitive,  and  imported  goods  more  expensive,  which  should  provide  a 
boost to domestic producers. This is in effect an easing of monetary conditions for domestic 
producers. However this advantage will be short-lived if offset by higher wage and other input 
costs which offset the advantage faced by producers.  
The decision to keep the repurchase rate unchanged was an outcome of a careful weighing 
up of the different risks to the inflation outlook, including the contradictory pressures coming 
from the exchange rate and the global economy. The MPC was of the view that monetary 
policy was sufficiently accommodative to support the economy at this stage, but at the same 
time it was concerned about the upside risks to inflation, which is now expected to breach the 
target for a longer period than previously anticipated.  
It still appears that inflation is being driven by cost-push factors, as illustrated by the benign 
core  inflation  outcomes.  However,  the  interaction  between  higher  headline  inflation  and 
inflation  expectations  of  wage  and  price  setters  is  critical.  To  date  inflation  expectations 
appear to be anchored at around the upper level of the target range, but the longer inflation 
remains  outside  the  target,  particularly  if  it  surprises  on  the  upside,  the  more  precarious 
these expectations become, and the greater the upside risk to the inflation outlook. 
The Bank sees medium-term inflation outside the target range at this point, and regards the 
breach, although extended, to be temporary. In addition, the weak state of the economy also 
impacts on the approach taken. But we have to be vigilant on both sides. There is always a 
possibility  of  upside  surprises  to  growth  or  a  dislocation  of  inflation  expectations  from  the 
target range, which could take inflation well above the target range. However, on the other 
side, although our assumption for European growth has been lowered, it does not contain the 
worst case scenario of a meltdown in the Eurozone which would have severe implications for 
the global economy and South Africa. Although this is seen as a tail risk, it is not a remote 
possibility. As noted in the recent statement, the MPC is prepared to take appropriate action 
should the need arise. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In conclusion, the European environment holds many uncertainties and possible unthinkable 
consequences, and it is difficult to preempt this in our policy choices. At the same time, the 
combination of rising inflation and sluggish domestic growth holds the risk of a stagflationary 
environment. Monetary policy will maintain its focus on achieving the inflation target over the 
medium term, but will remain sensitive to the domestic economic situation.  
However, an accommodative macroeconomic environment cannot on its own generate the 
higher  rates  of  growth  that  this  economy  requires  for  employment  creation.  Part  of  the 
solution will need to come from improving much needed infrastructure, such as energy, rail 
and  ports,  which  will  strengthen  the  country’s  export  capacity.  There  is  also  the  need  for 
sustained efforts to enhance South Africa’s ties with its traditional trading partners such as 
Switzerland, and also to develop new trading relations outside the Eurozone. 
These  are  indeed  very  challenging  times,  a  time  of  great  uncertainty.  Nevertheless  it  is  a 
time that needs thoughtful answers, collective action, courage and integrity. It is a time that 
questions what we know, what we thought we knew, and the paradigm of our thinking.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
