Hirohide Yamaguchi: Recent financial and economic developments and 
challenge of revitalizing Japan’s economy 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the JCIF (Japan 
Center for International Finance) International Finance Seminar, Tokyo, 22 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for having me at the JCIF International Finance Seminar. Today, I will talk about 
the  financial  and  economic  developments  at  home  and  abroad,  followed  by  my  thoughts, 
from a medium- to long-term perspective, against the background of a declining trend in the 
growth potential of Japan’s economy and challenges toward the future.  
I. 
Developments in the global economy 
Current situation and future of the global economy 
Let me start with the developments in the global economy. Looking back, the global economy 
continued to mark a high growth rate in the recovery process from the Lehman shock, led by 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  The  pace  of  growth  has  been  slowing, 
mainly in advanced economies, since this spring.  
In  the  United  States,  which  was  the  epicenter  of  the  Lehman  shock,  balance  sheet 
adjustment,  mainly  in  households,  has  been  weighing  on  the  economy,  and  the  pace  of 
recovery  remains  quite  moderate.  In  Europe,  the  economies  were  recovering  moderately 
after the Lehman shock, but their growth rates have recently been clearly decelerating as the 
sovereign  debt  problem,  which  started  from  peripheral  countries  including  Greece,  have 
aggravated. 
The  pace  of  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  which  have  been 
achieving  high  growth,  is  somewhat  slowing.  That  is  because  real  purchasing  power  has 
declined  due  to  a  rise  in  energy  and  food  prices,  and  monetary  tightening,  which  was 
implemented to contain the overheating of the economies, have shown effects. In addition, 
there  are  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  advanced  economies.  While  the  slowdown  in  the 
pace  of  growth  itself  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  which  have  been 
somewhat  overheating,  is  desirable  in  achieving  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability, 
inflationary pressure in those economies is yet to be contained. 
For the time being, the pace of growth in the global economy will remain decelerated, mainly 
in  the  advanced  economies,  amid  lingering  strains  in  international  financial  and  capital 
markets. Thereafter, the growth rate of the global economy will rise again led by emerging 
and  commodity-exporting  economies,  which  have  high  growth  potential.  Such  outlook  is 
associated  with  great  uncertainties.  In  particular,  the  consequences  of  the  sovereign  debt 
problem in Europe remain unforeseen.  
So I will now talk about the sovereign debt problem in Europe. 
European sovereign debt problem and accumulation of financial and economic 
imbalance 
The origin of the sovereign debt problem was Greece’s massive fiscal deficits that surfaced 
toward the end of 2009. In the spring of 2010, Greece faced difficulty in raising funds in the 
market and was driven into a corner which was said to be a Greek crisis. As a result, Greece 
received financial support by euro area countries and the International Monetary Fund. The 
Greek  government  subsequently  announced  various  fiscal  structural  reforms  including  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reduction  in  public  servants’  salaries  and  revisions  in  the  tax  system.  However,  amid 
negative  economic  growth,  a  fiscal  deficit  reduction  was  not  achieved  in  a  pace  initially 
envisaged, and Greece faced a second round of crisis toward this summer. 
In the meantime, a decline in market confidence in fiscal sustainability, which started from 
Greece, has spilled over to peripheral countries including Ireland and Portugal, which was in 
a tough fiscal situation, as well as bigger economies such as Spain and Italy. 
The  yields  of  government  bonds  in  those  countries  have  risen  substantially  and  market 
prices have declined significantly. European financial institutions, mainly those which held a 
large  amount  of  such  government  bonds,  have  faced  deterioration  in  their  balance  sheets 
and difficulty in raising funds in the markets. They have started to strive to reduce the size of 
balance sheets through measures including tightening their lending stance. As a result, firms’ 
and households’ sentiment has deteriorated and economic activity has been slowing. 
At present, in Europe, a rapid adverse feedback loop seen during the Lehman shock has not 
been generated, but the adverse feedback loop of the fiscal situation, the financial system, 
and economic activity seems to have started to act. 
On the back of the sovereign debt problem in Europe, there are factors that are essentially 
common  to  the  Lehman  shock.  Namely,  against  a  backdrop  of  accommodative  financial 
conditions  in  the  mid-2000s,  a  rise  in  asset  prices,  and  optimistic  growth  expectations, 
financial and economic imbalances have been accumulated. 
In  the  United  States,  on  the  back  of  “technological  innovation  in  finance”  as  seen  in  an 
expansion  of  securitized  products,  financial  institutions’  and  investors’  risk  awareness 
concerning financial products including subprime loans became lenient. That, together with 
accommodative  financial  conditions  and  a  rise  in  housing  prices,  has  led  to  a  significant 
increase in home loans and an accumulation of imbalances, mainly in the household sector, 
and consequently induced the Lehman shock. 
In European peripheral and other countries, due to the ease of fiscal funding on the back of 
confidence  in  “a  single  currency  euro”  and  excessive  expectations  for  economic  growth 
potential  and  an  increase  in  tax  revenue,  fiscal  discipline  has  tend  to  become  loose.  Of 
course,  a  major  player  in  the  expansion  of  imbalances  in  such  a  case  is  the  government 
sector, but also in the private sector, there have been inefficient investment and excessive 
employment supported by accommodative financial conditions, and productivity and external 
competitiveness have declined.  
Intrinsically, the government sector and the private sector, just because the countries are the 
members of the Euro, cannot continue to raise funds at low interest rates, which are beyond 
those  sectors’  real  strength,  and  continue  to  increase  spending.  Once  the  funding 
environment for the governments and the private sector becomes severe, due to a decline in 
confidence in fiscal conditions and a surge in government bond yields, economic activity will 
decline and a reverse whirl will start. 
Toward problem resolution 
A quick fix for the problem unfortunately does not exist. The accumulation of imbalances is 
like a chronic disease induced by the neglect of health for many years. For a cure, it takes 
time  to  improve  physical  health.  Namely,  the  road  to  normalization  is,  by  restoring  fiscal 
discipline and raising economic growth potential, to repay debt and not to accumulate debt 
again in the future. While it is important to take responses including funding support and debt 
restructuring,  those  are,  so  to  speak,  policy  measures  to  “buy  time”  and,  in  order  to  gain 
market  confidence,  it  becomes  necessary  to  show  the  market  that  countries  have  the 
capability to repay debt in the future.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
If the road toward the resolution of the sovereign debt problem in Europe is understood as 
just described, economic activity and financial systems in Europe are likely to be unstable for 
the time being.  
In addition, while I do not go into detail today, it should be noted that the United States is 
faced with a similar problem in that it suffers from the legacy of the accumulation of financial 
and economic imbalances. 
II. 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
Japan’s economy after the great earthquake disaster 
I will next talk about Japan’s economy. In the wake of the Great East Japan Earthquake on 
March 11, economic activity plunged. Because of the damage to production facilities and a 
severe  power  shortage,  the  nationwide  and  worldwide  supply  chains  were  cut  off,  and 
production  and  exports  declined  substantially.  Households’  and  firms’  sentiment  slumped 
and spending declined. Looking at the developments thereafter, supply-side constraints were 
removed at a pace faster than expected and, around the summer, economic activity almost 
recovered to the pre-quake level.  
Together with the restoration of damaged facilities, firms made various efforts and attempts, 
including  producing  in  alternative  facilities  at  home  and  abroad  as  well  as  ensuring  parts 
procurement  from  alternative  sources.  As  for  a  power  shortage  in  the  summer,  severe 
constraints  on  economic  activity  were  avoided  due  to  the  efforts  to  save  electricity  and  to 
level  electricity  usage.  In  those  ways,  “strength  in  the  field”,  or  genbaryoku,  of  Japan’s 
economy has been fully exerted in the experience of the recent earthquake disaster 
Outlook and risk factors for Japan’s economy 
Japan’s economy is in a situation in which supply-side constraints were almost removed and 
economic activity will be determined by demand-side developments. For the time being, the 
economy will be affected by a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the 
yen as well as flood damage in Thailand. After that, Japan’s economy is expected to return to 
the  moderate  recovery  path  because  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas  economies  will 
subsequently  increase  led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  and  because 
demand related to reconstruction after the earthquake will gradually grow. 
According to the projection in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) 
that the Bank released recently, the real GDP growth rate is projected to remain relatively 
low in fiscal 2011 due in part to the effects of the disaster. The growth rate is projected to rise 
in fiscal 2012, partly because of an increase in reconstruction-related demand, and continue 
to register somewhat high growth in fiscal 2013. Turning to prices, the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI will remain at around 0 percent for the time being, and is projected to be 
around 0.5 percent toward fiscal 2013 on the back of an improvement in the supply-demand 
balance. 
Such  an  outlook  is  accompanied  by  high  uncertainties.  First,  the  source  of  the  utmost 
uncertainty is the consequences of the aforementioned sovereign debt problem in Europe. 
Fortunately, as Japanese firms have been performing vigorous management since the burst 
of  a  bubble,  they  have  sufficient  management  vitality  at  present.  Japanese  financial 
institutions have also been restoring soundness in their assets and striving to reinforce their 
capital.  The  robustness  of  the  financial  system  has  been  maintained.  Therefore,  despite 
continued  strains  in  European  financial  and  capital  markets,  financial  conditions  in  Japan 
remain accommodative, supporting economic activity from the financial side. 
As  the  US  economy  is  not  in  its  best  condition,  suffering  the  aftereffects  of  the  Lehman 
shock, due vigilance is necessary against a possibility that a shock initiated in Europe will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
lead  to  intensify  global  investors’  risk  aversion  or  to  a  lower-than  expected  growth  in  the 
global economy as a whole. In those cases, downward pressure could also be exerted on 
Japan’s economy through the financial channel of the appreciation of the yen and a plunge in 
stock prices, the real economic channel including a decline in exports, and the channel of 
sentiment of economic entities, including firms. 
Second, uncertainty about demand related to reconstruction after the earthquake disaster. In 
the  disaster-stricken  areas,  various  activities  toward  reconstruction  that  include  the 
reconstruction  of  disaster-affected  facilities  have  already  been  underway.  Demand  for 
reconstruction in the worst-hit areas, including the Tohoku coast areas, is likely to gradually 
gain  momentum  as  reconstruction  plans  that  include  the  overall  picture  of  urban 
development become specific. However, full-scale reconstruction demand, including private 
investment,  should  be  seen  with  a  certain  margin  of  error  in  terms  of  size  and  pace  of 
implementation. 
Third,  uncertainty  about  firms’  and  households’  growth  expectations.  After  the  earthquake 
disaster, Japan’s economy is faced with new difficulties, including the problems of electricity 
supply,  in  addition  to  the  problem  of  the  downtrend  in  economic  growth  rate  due  to  the 
demographic  vortex.  Depending  on  responses  to  those  problems,  firms’  and  households’ 
growth expectations could change and induce unexpected effects on future developments in 
economic activity. In what follows, I will talk somewhat in detail about those problems, which 
relate to the topic of today’s seminar “Strategy for Revitalization of Japan’s Economy”.  
III. 
Japan’s medium- to long-term challenges and toward their resolution 
Downtrend in growth rates 
After the burst of a bubble, Japan’s economy has often been referred to as a “lost decade” or 
“lost twenty years”. Recently, in the United States and Europe, in which prolonged economic 
stagnation has started to be worried about, the phrase “Japanization” has also been used. 
Looking  at  Japan’s  real  GDP  growth  rate,  the  average  growth  rate  was  relatively  high  at 
above 4 percent in the 1980s, but fell substantially to around 1.5 percent in the 1990s and 
further to less than 1 percent in the 2000s. Given such downtrend in the economic growth 
rate, it is likely that the growth potential of Japan’s economy has recently been structurally 
weakening. 
The reasons for the weakening growth potential are complicated. Broadly speaking, it seems 
that  the  system  and  the  business  practice  which  were  formed  in  the  past  higher  growth 
period as well as firms’ behavioral principle could not sufficiently adapt to two large changes 
going  on  since  the  1990s.  The  two  changes  in  the  business  environment  were  the 
intensification of global competition and the domestic demographic vortex. 
The first change, global competition, accelerated in the 1990s. Globalization enabled various 
and  quick  combinations  of  advanced  economies’  capital  and  technology  and  emerging 
economies’  labor  force,  and  opened  the  door  to  emerging  economies  to  high  growth. 
Potential business opportunities expanded beyond borders, and, in that regard, globalization 
was  a  change  that  brought  new  growth  opportunities  for  Japanese  firms  and,  eventually, 
Japan’s  economy.  At  the  same  time,  globalization  ushered  in  a  “mega  competition”  era. 
Japanese firms were strongly required to gain strength to promote differentiation from many 
overseas rivals and become among the first to tap potential demand. While it is a fact that 
Japanese firms have been going in that direction, the speed has not necessarily fast enough, 
compared with the speed of changes in the business environment. 
The second change, the demographic vortex has also progressed markedly since the 1990s. 
The  population  of  workers,  namely,  the  working-age  population,  defined  as  the  population 
between 15 and 65 years old, started to decline since the mid-1990s and the pace of decline 
has been accelerating. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Such change in the demographic composition could induce a shortage of labor and becomes 
a factor in reducing growth potential from the supply side. At the same time, on the demand 
side, the change will prompt structural changes of the demand content because necessary 
goods and services will differ, according to each stage of life. Mass consumption markets, 
including housing and consumer durables, will shrink, while demand for various goods and 
services  that  raise  the  quality  of  life,  such  as  medical  and  nursing  care  services,  will 
increase,  at  least  potentially.  If  changes  on  the  supply  side  cannot  catch  up  with  the 
substantial changes in the demand structure, potential needs will not lead to actual spending 
and remain untapped, while excess supply will continue in markets for existing goods and 
services and economic activity will be under downward pressure. In Japan’s economy since 
the  1990s,  it  is  likely  that  a  supply  and  demand  mismatch  has  chronically  remained  and 
continued to act as one of the reasons for inducing low economic growth. 
Background of delayed responses to changes in the business environment 
Why  Japan’s  economy  failed  to  adapt  to  changes  including  globalization  and  the 
demographic  vortex?  I  would  like  to  point  out  the  following  three.  First,  external 
exclusiveness. Second, rigidity in resource allocation. Third, a lack of the financial function 
that supports firms’ challenges to new businesses. Let me elaborate on those. 
First, external exclusiveness. Japan’s economy has basically been maintaining high export 
competitiveness even since the 1990s. The share of exports in the nominal GDP or the sheer 
size  of  trade,  which  is  the  sum  of  exports  and  imports,  is  by  no  means  large.  In  addition, 
while  Japanese  firms  have  been  actively  expanding  overseas,  if  the  ratio  of  foreign  direct 
investment to the nominal GDP is compared with that in other major countries, Japan is at 
quite a low level. What is more pronounced is a small number of foreign firms’ advancement 
to  Japan,  namely,  a  low  level  of  inward  direct  investment.  Also  in  terms  of  people,  the 
acceptance  of  foreign  workers  is  overwhelmingly  small  and  the  number  of  foreign  tourists 
who visit Japan is at a low level. 
As described, if one looks at the extent of internationalization in terms of people, goods, and 
capital, Japan is not necessarily a country opened externally. Since the 1990s, even though 
business  opportunities  across  borders  have  substantially  expanded,  Japan’s  economy  has 
lacked openness to utilize such chances. 
Second,  rigidity  in  resource  allocation.  In  Japan’s  economic  system  that  was  established 
before  the  1980s,  long-term  stability  was  valued  in  the  relationship  between  management 
and labor, firms and firms, and firms and financial institutions. Such system, which used to be 
beneficial, has become a factor in hampering economic growth recently, when globalization 
and the demographic vortex have progressed and speedy metabolism and business model 
conversion have been called for. In that regard, an old-style safety net also has an aspect of 
constraining the effectiveness of resource allocation in the economy as a whole. 
Third,  a  lack  of  the  financial  function  that  supports  firms’  challenges  to  new  businesses. 
Enhancing competitiveness by improving production efficiency and cost reduction has been 
techniques of Japanese firms since the high growth era, and I believe it is still the case even 
now. Since the 1990s, as emerging economies with low production costs have come to the 
forefront,  it  is  not  possible  any  more  for  Japanese  firms  to  earn  sufficient  profits  just  by 
improving production efficiency. Firms’ strategies to open people’s eyes to new values and 
create new markets should be strengthened. The problem is that such efforts do not always 
work. If so, the supply of risk money that supports such efforts will become critical. In that 
regard,  restructuring  of  the  financial  function  that  will  replace  the  traditional  main-bank 
system and mortgage-backed loans is only half done. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Direction for strengthening growth potential 
Looking at the medium- to long-term future of Japan’s economy, the pace of decline in the 
working-age population is projected to further accelerate. 
The  economic  growth  rate  can  be  divided  into  the  growth  rate  of  workers  and  the  rate  of 
productivity growth per worker. The acceleration of a decline in the working-age population in 
the future implies that there will be greater declining pressure on the number of workers. To 
avoid a downtrend in the growth rate in such situation, it is necessary to stave off a decline in 
the number of workers. Given that an increase in population and immigration is difficult in the 
short  run,  realistically,  it  is  necessary  to  make  efforts  to  encourage  the  employment  of 
potential  labor  force.  In  particular,  it  is  critical  to  solve  the  so-called  “M-shaped  curve” 
problem  that  women’s  labor  participation  rate  declines  after  marriage  and  childbirth,  and 
raise  woman’s  labor  participation  rate.  It  is  also  necessary  to  increase  opportunities  for 
healthy elderly people to work. 
Those measures alone have their limitations. Without an increase in productivity, a decline in 
the  growth  rate  cannot  be  staved  off.  To  raise  women’s  and  elderly  people’s  labor 
participation rates, some measures, including the expansion of part-time workers and men’s 
childcare  leave,  which  will  rather  result  in  reducing  productivity  per  worker,  will  become 
necessary. To overcome such adversities and clearly increase the rate of productivity growth 
is no easy matter. 
To begin with, now that Japan is trying to fight against a headwind of a continued decline in 
population over several decades and aging, we need to have resolution to convert our sense 
of value and reconstructing an economic society. Those are daunting tasks, but, as I have 
explained, the directions of the tasks have become clear to some extent. Let me summarize 
again. 
First, in order to benefit from the positive effects of globalization, open our country as much 
as possible. We need to increase not only trade but also the inbound and outbound traffic of 
capital and people. In addition to tourism and  medical care, it is important to enhance the 
openness in various areas including education, culture, arts, and research and development. 
Attracting people from overseas could stimulate economic activity in terms of demand and 
innovation. 
Second, enhance the latitude and flexibility of the economy as a whole through regulatory 
reform  and  improvement  in  flexibility  in  the  labor  market.  In  the  aging  society,  there  are 
areas,  including  medical  and  nursing  care  services,  in  which  potential  demand  will  indeed 
increase. Of course, public support will be essential for medical and nursing care services, 
through  which  the  public  should  fairly  enjoy  the  benefits.  There  is  room  for  encouraging 
market-based growth through deregulation and other measures. In addition, the employment 
system  need  to  be  reconstructed  into  a  further  flexible  system  so  that  transferring  of  job, 
learning of new skills, and various ways of working could be chosen more freely. 
Third, the supply of risk money that nurtures entrepreneurship. For firms to venture into new 
markets and generate profits and employment, the role of finance that shoulders such risk 
will  be  inevitable.  In  that  regard,  financial  institutions  are  required  to  refine  their  own 
knowledge, find firms’ business opportunities, and create demand for funds by themselves. 
In  addition,  without  relying  on  mortgage  collateral  or  borrowers’  guarantee  capability,  it  is 
also effective to diversify the form of lending, including the utilization of asset based lending, 
through being heavily involved in the process of firms’ cash flow generation. Furthermore, the 
activation of equity capital through funds is a critical element in supporting venture firms and 
speedy business strategy.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Needs for fiscal restructuring 
IV. 
While I have so far talked about the direction for strengthening growth potential of Japan’s 
economy,  an  important  challenge  that  also  relates  to  that  is  fiscal  consolidation.  Japan’s 
government debt outstanding is at an extremely high level, compared with other advanced 
countries. So far it has not yet led to a situation in which financial and capital markets are 
severely affected. As one can see from the sovereign debt problem in Europe, the market’s 
view on a country’s fiscal condition will change suddenly. It is not too much to say that there 
is always a risk that government bonds, which used to be regarded as “safe assets”, might 
change discontinuously to “risky assets”. Therefore, it is particularly a period like this when 
the markets are stable, when Japan needs to take steady steps toward fiscal consolidation. 
To  raise  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  through  the  aforementioned  efforts  will 
lead to a decline in fiscal deficit through an increase in tax revenue. In addition, if Japan’s tax 
system  and  social  security  system  change  to  sustainable  ones,  corresponding  to  the 
demographic vortex, it is likely to support the self-sustaining recovery power of the economy 
through reducing households’ future uncertainty, and lead to a rise in the medium- to long-
term  growth  rate.  It  is  critical  to  pursue  the  strengthening  of  growth  potential  and  fiscal 
consolidation concurrently, and let a positive feedback loop work.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
V. 
Finally, let me talk about the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy. The Bank has been pursuing 
powerful monetary easing in the framework of comprehensive monetary easing. 
First, the Bank sets the policy rate at 0 to 0.1 percent, which can be deemed a virtually zero 
interest rate. Second, the Bank is publicly committed to continuing this virtually zero interest 
rate  policy  until  it  judges  that  price  stability  is  in  sight.  And  third,  it  purchases  from  the 
markets not only long- and short-term government bonds but also risk assets such as CP, 
corporate bonds, and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts 
(J-REITs). The program for purchasing financial assets, called the Asset Purchase Program, 
started  at  35  trillion  yen  in  October  2010,  but  has  been  repeatedly  expanded  in  size  on  a 
significant scale to about 55 billion yen. Those measures aimed at encouraging a decline in 
longer-term risk-free interest rates and narrowing of various risk premiums.  
Such  pursuit  of  powerful  monetary  easing  has  become  one  of  the  factors  responsible  for 
stability  in  the  financial  environment  in  Japan,  despite  continued  strains  in  the  U.S.  and 
European financial markets.  
Apart from those measures, the Bank started in June 2010 the new lending framework of the 
Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth. 
It  is  a  measure  through  which  the  Bank  supplies  long-term  and  low  interest  rate  funds  to 
private  financial  institutions  that  lend  or  invest  in  the  promising  areas.  The  ceiling  of  the 
measure was initially set at 3 trillion yen and, taking it into account that the funds actually 
provided  have  come  close  to  the  ceiling,  the  Bank  established  a  new  line  of  credit  of 
500 billion yen to provide funds to financial institutions that undertake equity investments or 
asset-based lending.  
As  I  have  talked  today,  strengthening  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  is  a  critical 
challenge  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with,  and  if  that  challenge  is  met,  it  could  lead  to 
overcoming deflation through raising firms’ and households’ growth expectations. Based on 
that  recognition,  the  aforementioned  measure  aimed  at  supporting  private  financial 
institutions’ efforts from the financial front.  
The Bank will consistently make contributions as a central bank so that Japan’s economy will 
emerge from deflation and return to the sustainable growth path with price stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Concluding remarks 
I have today talked such issues as medium- to long-term challenges to Japan’s economy. I 
strongly hope that Japan will meet those challenges in the near future and restore its luster. 
At  that  time,  I  believe  that  the  word  “Japanization”  would  be  used  in  an  exact  opposite 
meaning. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
