Jens Weidmann: The world economy in transition – a European 
perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  European 
Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the  invitation.  It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honour  for  me  to 
speak here at the European Banking Congress before such a distinguished audience. The 
topic  of  this  year’s  congress  is  “the  big  shift”  and,  just  to  make  things  perfectly  clear,  this 
does not exclusively refer to the current crisis. While the crisis dominates centre stage, the 
“big  shift”  takes  places  in  the  background.  It  does  not  go  unnoticed  but  it  receives  less 
attention.  What  I  am  referring  to  is  the  continuous  rise  of  emerging  economies.  This 
development  is  to  the  crisis  as  plate  tectonics  is  to  a  volcanic  eruption:  it  is  slower  yet  its 
implications might be larger. But before we talk about the implications of the big shift, let us 
take a look at the facts. 
 Shifting economic powers 
2. 
Over the past few years, emerging economies have become ever more important players in 
the world economy. During the last decade, real GDP in these economies grew by roughly 
6% per annum. Over the same period, output in advanced economies rose by a little less 
than 2% on average. According to estimates by the IMF, emerging economies now account 
for almost half of global output, measured by purchasing power parities. The rising share in 
world GDP also implies an increasing role of emerging economies as generators of global 
growth. Between 2000 and 2010, they contributed on average two thirds to the increase in 
global output, again measured by purchasing power parities. Thus, they actually helped to 
stabilise the world economy during the recent crisis. 
Looking  into  the  future,  it  is  generally  assumed  that  emerging  economies’  share  of  world 
output will increase further. In this regard, the IMF projects that, by as early as 2016, China 
might  overtake  the  United  States  as  the  largest  economy  when  measured  in  purchasing 
power  parities.  However,  when  it  comes  to  such  predictions,  the  similarity  to  the  plate 
tectonics  that  I  mentioned  earlier,  ends.  While  plate  tectonics  involve  a  rather  predictable 
process,  the  structural  change  in  the  world  economy  is  certainly  not  predictable.  Take  the 
example of Japan. Not too long ago, Japan was perceived in a similar way to how China is 
perceived now: a country that was on the way to becoming the dominating economic power. 
However, this perception changed rather quickly after the bubble burst and Japan entered 
what is now labelled the “lost decade”. That is not to say that the two countries are similar. 
What I mean is that we cannot predict precisely what will happen over the next few decades 
by extrapolating past developments. 
This notwithstanding, for the past two decades China and other emerging economies have 
been influencing the world economy to no small degree and they will continue to do so – also 
from  a  central  banker’s  point  of  view.  Their  integration  into  the  world  economy  has 
dampened  inflation  worldwide,  in  particular  in advanced  economies.  The  reason  for  this  is 
quite  obvious:  a  growing  share  of  cheap  imports.  China,  in  particular,  with  its  seemingly 
unlimited supply of labour can produce comparatively cheaply. Nevertheless, the theory of 
development economics predicts that this supply will eventually be exhausted and a turning 
point  will  be  reached.  Recent  data  from  China  indicate  that  wage  growth  has  begun  to 
accelerate.  This  might  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  disinflationary  effect  of  globalisation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
might  be  reduced  or  even  reversed.  However,  I  would  not  go  so  far  as  to  predict  strong 
inflationary  pressures  in  advanced  economies  emanating  from  this  effect  because  other 
countries such as Vietnam or India might join China as important global workbenches. That 
said, strong growth in emerging markets has undoubtedly contributed to price increases in 
commodities over recent years, which has had an impact on inflationary trends in advanced 
economies, too. 
The  strong  growth  of  emerging  economies  and  their  increasing  integration  in  the  world 
economy is definitely to be welcomed as it offers huge opportunities for advanced economies 
and  emerging  economies  alike.  Ultimately,  globalisation  and  the  big  shift  are  more  than  a 
zero-sum  game  where  one  party  loses  what  the  other  party  gains.  Nevertheless,  the 
transition  entails  structural  changes  and  a  reallocation  of  resources.  Thus,  to  benefit  from 
globalisation, advanced economies have to stay competitive. The question is: are they doing 
so? I would like to discuss this question first from a European and then from a German point 
of view. 
The European debt crisis as a challenge and a chance 
3. 
As  early  as  1954,  Jean  Monnet,  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  the  European  Union,  said: 
“Our countries have become too small for today’s world, when compared to the potential of 
modern  technical  means  and  in  relation  to  the  dimension  of  America  and  Russia  today, 
China and India tomorrow.” In that sense, European integration and also the introduction of 
the  euro  could  be  interpreted  as  a  response  to  globalisation  –  as  an  attempt  to  create  a 
strong  regional  pole  in  an  increasingly  multi-polar  world.  And  indeed,  Monnet’s  vision  of  a 
single  European  market  has  become  reality;  goods  and  services,  labour  and  capital  flow 
more freely than ever before. This integration has brought prosperity to the people of Europe 
and  supported  Europe  in  the  global  political  arena.  These  benefits  should  serve  as  a 
reminder of how important it is to preserve these achievements along with a stable common 
currency. Regarding the current situation, however, it seems that Europe is being challenged 
as the debt crisis is putting a huge strain on the euro area, absorbing political and financial 
resources that could be put to more efficient use. 
According to the autumn economic forecast of the European Commission, recovery in the EU 
has stalled and the sovereign debt crisis is the most important downside risk – for the euro 
area, but also for the world economy. Thus, effectively combating the crisis is essential not 
only for financial stability but also with regard to the broader economic outlook. However, the 
foundation for a long-term solution of the crisis remains to be laid. To work out what has to 
be done, we have to take a look at the root of the crisis and there we find – among several 
factors – two key items: first, deficiencies in the institutional framework of monetary union, 
and second, structural deficiencies in various member states. However, the decisions taken 
for crisis resolution within the monetary union have so far not addressed these two issues 
sufficiently. 
Regarding  the  institutional  framework,  policy  makers  have  to  decide  which  direction 
monetary union is to take. As I have discussed in more detail in earlier speeches, there are in 
principle  two  conceivable  options  which  lead  to  a  consistent  and  economically  sustainable 
framework for monetary union. The first would be a return to the founding principles, that is, 
taking the responsibility of individual member states in matters of fiscal and economic policy 
seriously.  For  this  option,  it  would  be  necessary  to  strengthen  the  current  framework  in  a 
manner  that  really  ensures  sufficient  incentives  for  sound  public  finances  –  therefore,  the 
no-bail-out clause is an integral part of this approach. The second option would imply a major 
shift entailing a fundamental change in the federal structure of the European Union. It would 
involve  a  significant  additional  transfer  of  national  responsibilities  to  the  European  level, 
particularly in fiscal affairs. In the event that national governments do not comply with strict 
deficit and debt rules, they would have to delegate their fiscal sovereignty to the European 
level  –  at  least  temporarily.  Only  a  clear  decision  for  either  of  the  two  options  lays  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
foundation to preserve monetary union as a stability union in the long run and to safeguard 
its  role  in  the  global  economy.  It  is  up  to  governments  in  Europe  to  make  this  decision. 
Hence,  I  welcome  the  German  government’s  attempts  to  press  for  greater  political 
integration, including transfers of national responsibilities. Let me be clear: it will be a lengthy 
and arduous process requiring important legal changes. However, a credible commitment to 
this process could have beneficial effects right away. 
However,  so  far  there  is  no  consensus  on  this,  and  so  an  “in-between  approach”  is  being 
pursued. National fiscal policies are still decided at the national level while the resulting costs 
are borne by all member states. This approach lacks credibility because of its inconsistency. 
The lack of success in containing the crisis does not justify overstretching the mandate of the 
central bank and making it responsible for solving the crisis. However, a clear commitment to 
our mandate is an indispensable element of a prosperous future for the euro. It was only for 
this purpose that the Eurosystem was granted independence and this independence is not 
only a right but an obligation. I am convinced that the current crisis of confidence can not be 
overcome if trust in the legal and economic framework is lost. I am also convinced that the 
economic costs of any form of monetary financing of public debts and deficits outweigh its 
benefits so clearly that it will not help to stabilise the current situation in any sustainable way. 
Apart from the institutional framework of monetary union, the second aspect that has to be 
addressed  is  structural  deficiencies  in  a  number  of  member  states.  These  deficiencies 
include a lack of competitiveness, rigid labour markets and the failure to seize opportunities 
for growth. Solving the crisis also requires addressing these deficiencies: the labour markets 
in the relevant countries have to be reformed and made more accessible to a larger share of 
the  population;  the  efficiency  of  administration  has  to  be  increased  in  many  areas; 
opportunities for new businesses have to be created by facilitating the access to domestic 
markets for goods and services. Undertaking the necessary reforms is not only indispensible 
to overcome the sovereign debt crisis, it would also help to benefit from globalisation and the 
“big shift”.  
To sum up: the necessary measures are obvious and uncontested. The only thing that we 
are  short  of  seems  to  be  their  implementation.  And  as  I  have  just  argued,  the  current 
approach  to  crisis  management  has  not  helped  to  remedy  this.  Against  this  backdrop,  it 
might  be  consoling  to  take  a  look  at  the  German  experience  because  it  illustrates  how 
reforms eventually pay off. 
The German experience 
4. 
In  the  first  half  of  the  1990s,  the  price  competitiveness  of  the  German  economy  declined 
dramatically  because  a  number  of  domestic  imbalances  had  built  up  during  reunification. 
Among  these  were  an  oversized  construction sector  and  strong  wage  and  price  increases 
despite  a  decline  in  average  labour  productivity.  On  top  of  this,  the  Deutsche  Mark 
appreciated strongly. The loss of competitiveness put Germany in an extremely unfavourable 
position  on  international  markets.  Consequently,  the  corporate  sector  responded  with  a 
painful,  but  eventually  successful,  restructuring  process  which 
innovation, 
outsourcing, wage moderation and a balance sheet clean-up. 
The German government was also forced to act. Just after the turn of the millennium, the 
burst of the “New Economy” bubble caused an economic downturn and led to a protracted 
period  of  meagre  GDP  growth:  unemployment  was  persistently  high  while  overburdened 
social  security  systems  led  to  big  fiscal  deficits.  In  2003,  bold  labour market  reforms  were 
introduced. These reforms were accompanied by fiscal consolidation and adjustments in the 
social security systems, in particular the pension system. 
In any case, the reforms put Germany in a position to cope comparatively well with the crisis. 
Although  it  was  hit  rather  hard  when  the  world  economy  went  into  recession,  the  labour 
market proved to be quite resilient and private consumption remained robust at the height of 
included 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the financial crisis. Thus, Germany could serve as an anchor of stability for monetary union. 
For  this  to  remain  the  case,  it  would  be  advisable  to  now  stick  to  the  original  plans  to 
consolidate  the  budget.  Consequently,  the  recently  envisaged  tax  cuts  would  have  to  be 
counter financed, for example by cutbacks in tax expenditure. 
Leaving these current events aside, the question that remains is: Can other countries learn 
something  from  the  German  experience?  I  believe  it  provides  a  very  simple  and 
straightforward lesson that could be summarised by something the famous German author 
Erich  Kästner  once  said:  “Es  gibt  nichts  Gutes  außer  man  tut  es”  or  in  English:  “actions 
speak  louder  than  words”.  At  the  last  summit  of  EU  leaders,  promising  reforms  were 
announced by several countries – now they have to be implemented. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are living in difficult times that  are marked by a big shift in the 
structure  of  the  world  economy.  This  shift  harbours  the  potential  for  further  prosperity  but 
countries  have  to  adapt  to  the  new  environment.  And  here  it  seems  that  many  advanced 
economies  are  lagging  behind.  This  is  especially  true  for  Europe.  Policy  makers  have  to 
come  up  with  a  credible  solution  to  address  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  its  underlying 
structural  deficiencies.  The  experience  of  Germany  and  a  number  of  emerging  economies 
shows that reforms pay off in the end. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
