Duvvuri Subbarao: Bank resolution framework challenges in the Indian 
context 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI)-Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation (DICGC) International Conference “Role of deposit insurance in bank resolution 
framework – lessons from the financial crisis”, organized as part of DICGC’s Golden Jubilee 
celebrations, Jodhpur, 14 November 2011. 
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, let me once again extend a hearty welcome 
1. 
to  all  the  delegates  to  this  IADI-DICGC  International  Conference  on  the  Role  of  Deposit 
Insurance in Bank Resolution Framework – Lessons from the Financial Crisis. Welcome also 
to this Sun City of Jodhpur – on the edge of the Thar Desert – a city of forts and palaces, 
lakes  and  gardens,  and  folklore  and  legend   that  represents  –  in  its  mellifluous  blend  of 
tradition and modernity - the best face of India. 
DICGC 
2.  
This conference is also part of the golden jubilee celebrations of DICGC which has 
the distinction of being the second oldest continuing deposit insurance system in the world. 
Over  the  past  50  years,  the  DICGC  has  been  an  important  part  of  India’s  financial  sector 
development; it has grown and evolved, met many challenges and adapted to managing new 
risks. On the way forward, the DICGC will have to reinvent itself to meet the rising demands 
of a rapidly growing and structurally transforming economy. To do so, it has to learn from the 
experience of deposit insurance systems around the world and also from the experience of 
the global financial crisis. This conference, therefore, is an important learning opportunity for 
DICGC to move up the value chain in its business. 
Lessons from the financial crisis 
3.  
The financial crisis has taken a devastating toll on global growth and welfare. Three 
years on, the crisis is still with us; it has just shifted geography. In some respects, the 2008 
and 2011 crises are similar. Both trace their origins to the mispricing of risk – of private debt 
in  2008  and  public  debt  in  2011.  Both  began  from  deceptively  small  sources  –  sub-prime 
lending in the US in 2008 and government debt in Greece in 2011. The contagion impact in 
both cases was enormous and destructive. There are striking dissimilarities between 2008 
and  2011  as  well.  In  2008,  the  crisis  revolved  around  private  debt  and  complex  financial 
products making it difficult to determine where risk lay; in 2011, the crisis is centred around 
public  debt  with  much  greater  clarity  on  where  exposure  and  risk  lie.  Most  importantly,  in 
2008,  governments  were  a  part  of  the  solution;  in  2011,  governments  are  the  problem.  In 
2008,  we  were  dealing  with  unknown  unknowns;  in  2011,  we  are  dealing  with  known 
unknowns. 
4.  
What is striking, and what is important from the view point of this conference, is that 
no matter where a financial crisis originates, no matter what the causes are and no matter 
how it evolves, banks become the centre of the crisis. And when banks come under stress, 
deposit  insurance  becomes  a  critical  variable  in  containing  the  crisis  and  restoring 
confidence. To be able to discharge this responsibility efficiently and effectively is then the 
challenge for the deposit insurance system. 
5.  
The global financial crisis has triggered a re-examination of how financial safety nets 
function and of the relationships among supervisors, bank insolvency agencies and deposit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
insurers.  The  crisis  made  us  realize  that  depositors  are  more  risk-sensitive  than  we  had 
thought.  More  than  ever  before,  we  know  that  the  threat  of  even  small  losses  can  lead  to 
destabilizing runs. This reinforces the case for a truly integrated policy response to shocks, 
where agencies responsible for supervision, regulation, insolvency and deposit insurance act 
quickly and in a well-coordinated manner. 
6.  
We  also  learnt  from  the  crisis  that  three  pillars  are  required  to  support  a  resilient 
financial  system.  The  first  pillar  is  effective  supervision.  Important  lessons  have  emerged 
from  the  crisis  on  making  supervision  stronger  and  more  effective.  The  second  pillar  is  a 
robust regulatory framework that integrates a system-wide approach and has built-in buffers 
to smooth cyclical volatility. And the third pillar, the theme of this conference, is a resolution 
framework that is quick and effective, and one that creates the proper backstop to efforts at 
limiting excessive risk. 
7.  
There  are  varying  models  around  the  world  on  how  responsibilities  for  the  above 
three pillars are allocated across different agencies. The specific regulatory architecture of a 
country has implications for the role and mandate of the deposit insurance system. In some 
cases,  deposit  insurance  systems  are  actively  involved  in  the  resolution  process,  in  some 
cases less actively so, and in some cases not at all. In India, bank resolution rests entirely 
with the regulators and supervisors, and the DICGC plays only a pay-box role. I thought it 
appropriate therefore to use the platform provided by this conference to highlight some of the 
challenges we in India face in bank resolution, and in the process identify the tasks ahead for 
DICGC. 
Before  going  on  to  discussing  the  challenges  of  bank  resolution,  let  me  set  the 
Indian financial architecture 
8.  
context by giving a big picture of the financial system in India. 
9.  
Our financial system comprises commercial banks, cooperative banks, non-banking 
financial  companies,  insurance  companies,  provident  and  mutual  funds,  and  the  newly 
emerging  pension  funds,  with  overall  assets  close  to  140  per  cent  of  GDP.  Commercial 
banks, comprising of 60 per cent of the total financial assets, dominate the financial system. 
Within commercial banks, public sector banks, with nearly 75 per cent of total assets, have a 
commanding presence. Commercial banks in India are well-capitalized; system-level capital 
to risk-weighted assets ratio (CRAR) under the Basel II norms stood at 13.9 per cent as at 
the end of June 2011, well above the Indian regulatory minimum of 9 per cent. 
10.  
There  are  certain  structural  and  regulatory  features  that  make  India’s  financial 
system  resilient  to  stress.  Commercial  banks  are  required  to  hold  a  significant  proportion, 
currently  24  per  cent,  of  their  assets  as  government  paper.  The  Reserve  Bank  also 
mandates  a  reserve  requirement  whereby  banks  are  required  to  hold  reserves  with  the 
central  bank  to  the  extent  of  the  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  (CRR).  And  importantly,  the  fact  of 
government ownership of a large segment of commercial banks inspires public confidence. 
Needless  to  say,  all  the  insurance  implied  by  the  above  regulatory  and  structural  factors 
comes at a cost, and we struggle with balancing the costs and benefits. 
11.  
The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  has  an  over-riding  role  in  the  financial  safety-net 
architecture in India – it has responsibility for regulation and supervision of banks in addition 
to its traditional central banking functions. The Reserve Bank has broad resolution powers 
over  commercial  banks  under  the  Banking  Regulation  Act.  DICGC,  being  a  wholly  owned 
subsidiary  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  works  in  close  coordination  with  the  central  bank  to  offer 
protection to small depositors. 
A  recent  and  significant  development  on  the  financial  stability  front  has  been  the 
12.  
setting  up  of 
the 
chairmanship of the Finance Minister with a wide mandate of systemic oversight, regulatory 
coordination,  financial  sector  development  and  promotion  of  financial  literacy  and  financial 
the  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  under 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inclusion. A sub-committee under the chairmanship of Governor of the Reserve Bank acts as 
the  operational  arm  of  the  FSDC.  It  provides  a  mechanism  for  coordination  among 
regulators,  and  between  regulators  and  the  government  which,  as  we  realized  during  this 
crisis, is critically important, especially during stressed times. 
13.  
Failures of commercial banks in India have been rare. The last time we had a major 
commercial  bank  coming  under  distress  was  in  2004  and  that  was  resolved  by  effectively 
and  quickly  merging  it  with  another  strong  public  sector  bank.  Failures  among  urban 
co-operative  banks  are,  however,  quite  common.  For  banks  that  fail  to  meet  the  minimum 
prescribed  requirements,  we  institute  a  regular  monitoring  mechanism.  The  weak  bank  is 
required  to  put  in  place  a  plan  of  action  indicating  targets  for  critical  financial  parameters 
including  capital  infusion.  If  weakness  in  the  bank  persists  with  net  worth  turning  negative 
and  there  is  no  credible  action  plan  for  a  turnaround,  it  is  put  under  a  moratorium.  The 
purpose of imposing a moratorium is to prevent a run on the bank, stop asset stripping and 
give  time  to  the  regulators  to  identify  a  suitable  strong  bank  for  takeover.  The  process  of 
merger is put through as expeditiously as possible in a transparent and consultative manner. 
Importantly, in the Reserve Bank, we have a committee of the Board, the Board for Financial 
Supervision, which reviews our bank supervisory function and monitors the performance of 
banks, especially weak banks. 
14.  
The typical resolution methods that we have used in India are assisting the troubled 
bank in restructuring, or merging it with a strong institution, or closure. The most common 
method  has  been  assisted  or  compulsory  merger  when  the  weak  bank  is  merged  with 
another bank, usually a public sector bank. There were also cases of voluntary merger where 
a healthy bank voluntarily took over a weak bank. Apart from making payouts to banks that 
are put under liquidation, DICGC assists in mergers by meeting the shortfalls in depositors’ 
claims  up  to  the  coverage  limit  when  the  acquiring  bank  is  unable  to  meet  this  liability.  In 
case  of  smaller  urban  cooperative  banks,  the  general  approach  has  been  to  liquidate  the 
bank with reimbursement made to depositors. 
Bank resolution framework and deposit insurance 
The  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  importance  of  rapid  resolution  to  arrest 
15.  
contagion and restore stability. We need a resolution process where banks can be wound 
down  in  an  orderly  fashion,  removing  the  unsafe  or  unsound  elements  but  preserving  the 
vital  financial  activities.  International  financial  standard  setting  bodies  like  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  have 
emphasized the need for national authorities to have appropriate tools to deal with all types 
of financial institutions in difficulty so as to help maintain financial stability, minimize systemic 
risk, protect consumers, limit moral hazard and promote market efficiency. It is, of course, still 
“work in progress”. 
16.  
Where do we in India stand on this? Even as we have been able to resolve problem 
banks so far, it is not clear that our resolution framework has been put to severe test. There 
are  several  questions.  Is  our  resolution  process  quick  and  effective?  What  are  the 
fundamental  resolution  tools  that  we  must  have  to  confront  not  only  small  failures  but  the 
possible failures of medium and large banks? What constraints would we face in preserving 
value if our financial firms become globalized or systemically important? And importantly, for 
DICGC, what is the optimal role for the deposit insurer in the resolution regime? Should we 
consider  an  alternative  distribution  of  insolvency  responsibilities  among  the  safety  net 
players? 
17.  
Addressing these questions will require some fundamental changes in our legal and 
regulatory framework. I cannot, and do not, intend to attempt an action plan in this regard. 
What  I  will  do,  instead,  is  to  present  some  specific  issues  and  constraints  in  the  bank 
resolution framework of India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Appropriate legal framework 
I. 
18.  
The  first  challenge  is  developing  a  comprehensive  legal  framework  for  resolution 
that covers  all the different types of financial institutions. Currently, the relevant provisions 
governing  issues  such  as  control  of  management,  acquisition  of  the  financial  institution, 
suspension of business and winding up, are all spread over different laws and regulations. 
Moreover,  different  types  of  banks  are  covered  by  different  statutes.  For  example,  banks 
which are constituted as companies are governed by the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and 
the  Companies  Act,  1956  [private  sector  banks  and  foreign  bank  offices].  The  resolution 
regimes for public sector banks, viz., State Bank of India, its subsidiaries, nationalised banks 
and  regional  rural  banks,  which  have  been  created  by  separate  acts  of  Parliament,  are 
contained  in  their  respective  statutes.  In  the  case  of  co-operative  banks,  the  registrars  of 
co-operatives at the central or state-level are responsible for oversight of some aspects of 
their functioning, including their winding-up and restructuring. Deposit insurance is covered 
separately  in  the  DICGC  Act,  but  is  not  integrated  with  banking  laws.  All  in  all,  the  legal 
framework  governing  bank  resolution  is  spread  all  over,  making  the  framework  complex, 
confusing and oftentimes non-transparent. 
19.  
One big issue that needs to be addressed is whether the court-driven procedure as 
followed  in  India  for  bank  resolution  can  be  made  faster.  The  resolution  process  can  be 
further  delayed  if  the  shareholders  of  a  bank  challenge  the  authority  of  the  regulator  to 
resolve the bank. In India, an enterprise proposing to enter into a combination via a merger 
or an amalgamation is required to notify the Competition Commission, and the Commission 
has  been  allowed  up  to  210  days  to  decide  on  it  before  the  default  clause  kicks  in.  This 
further  complicates  the  resolution  of  banks  through  mergers  and  the  uncertainty  can  be 
potentially  destabilizing.  We  have  made  a  proposal  to  the  Government  to  exempt  bank 
mergers from this provision. 
20.  
We in India need to watch for “best practice” regarding the time frame for resolving a 
bank.  The  process  has  to  be  quick  enough  so  that  creditors  of  banks,  especially  small 
depositors, do not suffer undue losses and delays; maximum value is derived from the failed 
or  failing  institution;  and  the  shareholders  bear  the  brunt  of  the  loss.  We  also  know  that 
markets  penalize  delay  in  decision  making  and  uncertainty  over  the  future  of  a  failing 
institution.  This  conference  should  deliberate  on  what  is  a  reasonable  timeframe  for 
resolution for different types of institutions that harmonizes various competing interests. 
Extended role for deposit insurer 
II. 
21.  
The second issue that we need to address is where the “resolution authority” should 
lie  –  in  particular,  whether  DICGC  should  have  a  more  proactive  role  in  the  supervisory 
framework to aid early identification of bank failures and their effective resolution. Over the 
last fifty years, DICGC has done a good job in performing its “pay box” role. But in making 
quick  payments  to  depositors,  it  is  handicapped  by  inadequate  information  sharing 
arrangements  regarding  depositors.  In  India  failures  of  commercial  banks  have  been  rare, 
and  the  beneficiaries  of  the  deposit  insurance  system  have  mainly  been  the  urban 
co-operative banks. While the regulatory and supervisory framework for urban co-operative 
banks  has  over  time  been  brought  on  par  with  that  for  commercial  banks,  the  resolution 
mechanism for these banks is not fully in the hands of the Reserve Bank; we share authority 
with  the  central  or  state  governments  concerned.  Because  of  this  dual  control,  there  are 
delays  in  resolution  of  this  segment  of  banks  right  from  the  appointment  of  liquidators, 
gathering of information about depositors (which may not always be available in electronic 
form), depositor payouts and recovery of assets. 
22.  
Globally,  deposit  insurance  systems,  with  broad  mandates,  are  assuming  a 
significant  role  in  the  resolution  of  troubled  banks.  With  access  to  information  on  risk 
assessment of banks, they are able to take prompt corrective action. This arrangement gives 
the insurer greater ability to address costs as compared to pure pay-box systems. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Deposit insurers adopt a “least cost” approach for resolving a failed institution. This 
23.  
involves  closer  cooperation  and  coordination  of  appropriate  actions  taken  by  safety-net 
participants,  viz.,  the  government,  regulatory  bodies,  the  central  bank  and  the  deposit 
insurer.  Experience  shows  that  deposit  insurers  with  sufficiently  broad  mandates,  with 
adequate powers, operational independence, and assured sources of contingency funding, 
have  been  more  effective  in  building  and  maintaining  public  confidence  and  dealing  with 
financial crises. 
24.  
Some countries have undertaken a review of their deposit insurance systems and 
resolution  frameworks  and  instituted  important  changes.  In  India,  we  need  to  examine  the 
benefits of granting an extended mandate to the DICGC in resolution of failing banks from 
the point of view of faster settlement to depositors, lower costs and speed of resolution with 
associated benefits for the stability of the financial system. A solution to the problem lies in 
putting  in  place  a  clearly  defined  solvency  regime  and  a  properly  designed  resolution 
process.  The  Financial  Sector  Legislative  Reforms  Commission  appointed  by 
the 
Government is comprehensively reviewing all the laws that apply to the financial sector with 
the aim of making them supportive of an expanding and modernizing financial sector. It is 
expected that the Commission will recommend a fundamental restructuring of some laws so 
as to make the legal framework simple, transparent and efficient. From the Reserve Bank, 
we will present our view before the Commission, and streamlining of laws relating to bank 
resolution and reviewing the mandate of the DICGC will be part of our presentation. 
Cross-subsidization 
III. 
25.  
A third challenge that we have been facing arises from the heterogeneity of banks 
being  covered  under  deposit  insurance.  In  particular,  we  have  commercial  banks  and 
cooperative banks whose laws and structures are different and their failure rates, as I said 
earlier, are also different. But they are all covered by a uniform premium for insurance under 
the DICGC. This inevitably leads to cross-subsidization of cooperative banks by commercial 
banks.  Illustratively,  over  five  years,  on  an  average,  commercial  banks  contributed  92  per 
cent  of  the  premium  received  by  DICGC  while  the  entire  amount  of  payout  was  to 
co-operative banks, which account for only 14 per cent of the deposits insured by DICGC. 
26.  
This cross-subsidization, or charging premium at a uniform rate from all categories 
of  banks,  obviously  raises  a  moral  hazard.  One  option  for  reducing  cross-subsidy  is  to 
charge  a  risk-based  premium,  but  we  are  not  sanguine  that  this  is  necessarily  optimal  in 
India. There needs to be a clearer assessment of the tradeoff between minimizing the moral 
hazard  and  placing  the  additional  burden  of  a  higher  premium  on  banks  that  are  already 
weak and yet serve the very important objective of financial inclusion. Another concern is that 
imposition of risk based premiums could have a market impact, with stock prices of already 
weak banks negatively affected by the burden of higher premiums. On the other hand, cross-
subsidization  can,  in  fact,  be  justified  by  viewing  higher  premiums  on  larger  banks  as  a 
surcharge for their larger externalities on the rest of the system. I hope some of these cross-
subsidization and moral hazard issues will figure in the deliberations of this conference. 
Adequacy of deposit insurance fund 
IV. 
27.  
The  fourth  challenge  I  want  to  raise  relates  to  estimating  the  adequacy  of  the 
deposit insurance fund. Public confidence in deposit insurance will be determined largely by 
whether the public believes that the deposit fund is large enough to meet its commitments. 
DICGC  maintains  an  ex-ante  fund  that  is  funded  by  the  premium  collected  from  insured 
banks  and  income  generated  from  investment  of  funds.  For  maintaining  depositor 
confidence, the  fund  is required  to be  robust  enough  to  meet  claims arising  out of  routine 
failure  of  banks  under  normal  situations.  Going  by  the  past  record  of  failures,  the  fund 
maintained by DICGC appears adequate. But it is not clear that the fund will be able to meet 
claims  arising  from  the  putative  failure  of  a  couple  of  small  or  medium  size  commercial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
banks. Admittedly, no deposit insurer can maintain enough liquid funds to face a widespread 
financial crisis. In an extraordinary situation of systemic failure of banks, it is imperative that 
the deposit insurer is armed with unlimited and quick access to funds from the central bank 
and/or the government so that financial stability is not jeopardized. As we all know, it was 
arrangements such as this that played a crucial role in containing panic among depositors 
during the 2008 crisis. 
Cross-border bank resolution 
V. 
28.  
Another challenging area not only for us but also at the global level is cross-border 
bank resolution. The main problem is differences in laws and regulatory frameworks across 
countries  which  makes  resolution  difficult,  inefficient  and  costly.  There  is  clearly  a  strong 
case for moving towards a more harmonized legal and regulatory framework. 
29.  
In  India,  the  presence  of  cross  border  banks  is  relatively  small.  But  as  the  world 
economy recovers and global trade and financial transactions grow, India will increasingly be 
exposed  to  cross  border  risks.  Now  is  the  time  to  identify  steps  to  make  failure  resolution 
both fast and effective regardless of its provenance. We will need to strengthen relations with 
foreign supervisory authorities, intensify information sharing, and consider ways to develop a 
consensus on options for resolving a failing global institution. 
A connected issue in this context, one that has been engaging our attention for the 
30.  
past  few  years,  is  the  appropriate  framework  for  operations  of  foreign  banks  in  India.  In 
particular,  we  are  debating  whether  we  should  require  compulsory  local  incorporation  of 
foreign  banks.  The  organizational  structure  for  cross-border  banking  groups  differs  across 
the  world  and  reflects  the  diversity  of  their  business  models  and  the  varying  stages  of 
financial  development  of  different  countries.  Both  the  branch  and  subsidiary  models  have 
merits as well as limitations. The predominant view globally is that under a branch mode, it 
may be difficult to determine the assets that would be available in the event of the failure of 
the foreign bank to satisfy local creditors’ claims and the local liabilities that can be attributed 
to the branch. The subsidiary framework provides greater regulatory control and comfort to 
the  host  jurisdictions,  apart  from  easing  the  resolution  process.  In  crisis  situations,  the 
distinction between the branch and the rest of the bank, and the legal location of assets and 
liabilities can be really important. The Reserve Bank will be bringing out guidelines for the 
presence  of  foreign  banks  in  India  based  on  the  discussion  paper  that  was  released  in 
January this year. 
Resolution framework for SIFIs 
VI. 
31.  
The last challenge I want to raise is regarding regulation of systemically important 
financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  Oversight  and  regulation  of  SIFIs  is  currently  high  on  the 
international agenda, especially as they have a large presence in many countries and also 
encompass a huge non-banking sector. The treatment of SIFIs requires a host of skills and 
knowledge  that  all  countries  are  struggling  to  understand.  There  is  a  debate  on  the 
appropriateness of “systemic surcharges” that require SIFIs to hold additional capital. While 
such higher capital will impose additional costs on the firms, the benefits by way of stronger 
balance sheets that are able to withstand sharp financial shocks are expected to outweigh 
the costs. 
Equally importantly, we need to develop an effective resolution regime for non-bank 
32.  
financial institutions. Setting new risk management and supervisory standards for large and 
complex institutions is a huge task; their implementation will be even more demanding. So 
far, the differences in the regulatory and legal treatment of banks and non-banks have been 
understandable as their activities were concentrated in different markets. The emergence of 
large complex financial institutions and groups that straddle both banking and non-banking 
space makes the integration of such supervisory and resolution frameworks imperative. This 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
effort will require considerable time, resources, expertise and approach that incorporates a 
system-wide analysis of risks. 
33.  
Many Indian banks have grown and expanded to become “financial conglomerates” 
offering  different  financial  products  in  different  markets.  These  can  be  construed  as 
“domestic  SIFIs”.  This  poses  two  challenges  from  a  regulatory  perspective  –  absence  of 
adequate legal framework and limited inter-regulatory co-operation framework. 
34.  
First, enhancing the efficiency of resolution within the existing legal and regulatory 
framework is one of the key responsibilities of the newly created FSDC. An important task 
will be drawing up resolution plans that explicitly take into consideration information on inter-
linkages  among  institutions.  In  addition,  we  also  need  to  think  in  terms  of  a  mechanism 
similar to supervisory colleges for global SIFIs. 
35.  
Second, the supervision of such conglomerates must start with an understanding of 
banks’  business  models  and  risk  profiles.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  carved  out  a  “financial 
conglomerates monitoring division” to institute a system of close and continuous supervision 
of  large  and  systemically  important  banking  groups.  There  are  currently  twelve  institutions 
falling under this category, accounting for 53 per cent of total assets of the banking sector. 
We have also begun to apply a forward-looking approach by carrying out stress tests under 
various  scenarios  as  part  of  our  half-yearly  Financial  Stability  Reports.  The  FSDC  sub-
committee is currently engaged in developing an institutional framework for inter-regulatory 
coordination for monitoring large financial conglomerates. 
Conclusion 
36.  
The global financial crisis, as someone said, is too important to waste. We have, of 
course, learnt a lot of lessons. We now know that financial markets do not self-correct and 
that  the  costs  of  financial  destabilization  can  be  huge.  We  also  know  that  the  signals  of 
instability can be difficult to see in real time and we have therefore to be extra watchful. We 
are  also  more  sensitive  to  the  need  for  putting  in  place  quick,  effective  and  transparent 
resolution systems so that contagion can be arrested. 
37.  
Another big lesson of the crisis has been that even as each of us has to learn from 
the sum total of our collective experience, the solutions that we adopt have to be contextual 
and  tailored  to  country  circumstances.  This  applies  to  the  whole  gamut  of  regulation  and 
supervision of financial systems including the operation of deposit insurance systems. I hope 
this  conference  will  take  us  closer  to  “thinking  global  and  acting  local”.  I  wish  your 
deliberations all success. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
