José Manuel González-Páramo: The sovereign debt crisis and the future 
of European integration 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Oxford  University  European  Affairs  Society,  Oxford, 
24 November 2011. 
 the  Oxford  University  European  Affairs  Society  – 
Introduction  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  this  evening  in  the  “City  of  Dreaming 
Spires”.  The  aims  of 
fostering 
understanding of political, social and cultural issues across Europe – have never been more 
relevant  than  today.  In  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  Europe  faces  one  of  its  greatest  ever 
challenges.  The  question  is  how  to  confront  it.  We  should  learn  from  the  present  and  the 
recent past. And we should look forward, since future prosperity in Europe depends on our 
collective  success  in  overcoming  the  crisis.  Citizens  in  both  creditor  and  debtor  countries 
have to look beyond national interests. Ultimately, this can only be sustained through deeper 
common understanding and stronger sense of what it means to be European.  
The sovereign debt crisis will be the theme of my remarks today. I do not want to engage in 
the minutiae of the issue or signal any particular policy stance by the ECB. Instead, I would 
like  to  take  a  step  back  from  the  crisis  and  reflect  on  what  it  has  taught  us  so  far  about 
economic and monetary union in Europe. Obviously, I concentrate explicitly on the euro area, 
i.e. the seventeen countries sharing the single currency. The status and role of the United 
Kingdom, the dynamics of the British domestic debate on Europe, and the cooperation with 
the Continent in addressing the crisis are not the focus of my remarks.  
I have three main propositions.  
First, membership of EMU entails much deeper policy changes than were originally realised. 
In 1991, Hans Tietmeyer, the former President of the Bundesbank, remarked that “monetary 
union is not just a technical matter. It is in itself, to some extent, a political union”. What has 
become clear is that countries that adopt the euro as their currency are required to adjust 
fundamentally  the  way  in  which  they  conduct  their  economic  and  financial  policies.  At  the 
same  time,  ensuring  overall  stability  requires  far-reaching  coordination  in  economic  and 
financial  governance.  It  would  be  difficult  to  understand  that  in  the  world’s  second  largest 
monetary  area  governance  is  outsourced  solely  to  the  markets  and  ratings  agencies. 
Effective  governance  of  an  economic  area  of  such  importance  requires  much  closer 
economic and financial union.  
Second, in response to the crisis, a much more radical change in euro area governance has 
taken  place  than  many  observers  seem  to  acknowledge.  Europe  tends  to  reform 
incrementally, at times creating frustration at the pace of change. But those increments now 
add up to a fundamental overhaul of its economic management. The reasons this has not 
been more effective in calming the crisis are complex, but communication stands out among 
them: In “selling” their reforms, euro area authorities are forced to walk a tightrope between 
the expectations of national electorates and financial markets, and risk satisfying neither. The 
only  solution  to  this  democracy-market  dialectic  is,  again,  much  closer  economic  and 
financial union. 
Third,  and  contrary  to  a  strand  of  current  thinking,  the  Treaty  prohibition  on  monetary 
financing  is  supporting  rather  than  threatening  euro  area  integration.  In  the  euro  area,  the 
central bank is “doubly removed” from the political systems of individual countries: it is not 
only  constitutionally  independent,  but  also  elevated  to  the  supranational  level.  Euro  area 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
governments  cannot  expect  the  ECB  to  finance  public  deficits.  As  a  result,  they  must  be 
commensurately  more  ambitious  in  their  economic  policies  and  more  disciplined  in  their 
management of public finances to support their debt levels. Moreover, given the prohibition 
on  monetary  financing,  having  a  banking  sector  which  can  support  growth  and  provide 
adequate  financing  to  the  real  economy  in  Europe  requires  a  stronger  regulatory  and 
governance  framework,  so  as  to  prevent  negative  feedback  loops  between  banks  and 
sovereigns.  By  forcing  policymakers  to  focus  their  reform  efforts  on  the  right  priorities  the 
monetary financing prohibition offers an incentive to closer economic and financial union. 
First proposition: The need for radical changes in national economic policy-making 
Let me begin with my first proposition, that membership of EMU entails much deeper policy 
changes  than  were  previously  acknowledged.  The  crisis  has  shown  very  clearly  that 
countries  that  adopt  the  euro  have  to  alter  the  conduct  of  their  economic  policies.  These 
changes are fundamental. Among them, three are particularly relevant. 
First,  in  a  monetary  union  fiscal  and  supervisory  authorities  have  to  adopt  policies  that 
counteract  the  emergence  of  private  financial  imbalances  at  the  national  level.  This  is  a 
consequence  of  the  ECB’s  legal  obligation  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  – 
defined as an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Private debts 
denominated in euros cannot be “inflated away”.  
Second, fiscal and other national macroeconomic policies have to ensure competitiveness by 
resisting  increases  in  nominal  trends.  This  is  the  implication  of  sharing  an  exchange  rate; 
devaluation  cannot  be  used  as  a  tool  for  any  one  country  to  regain  competitiveness. 
Benchmarking against other euro area countries is unavoidable. 
Third, fiscal authorities have to build up sufficient buffers in good times to withstand adverse 
conditions. This follows from the prohibition on monetary financing which prevents the central 
bank from directly financing governments as well as the so-called “no bail out clause” of the 
Treaty  which  prohibits  a  Member  State  to  assume  the  liabilities  of  another  Member  State. 
The  failure  to  build  adequate  fiscal  buffers  during  times  of  economic  growth  means  that 
during  recessions  governments  are  forced  to  implement  fiscal  policies  that  are  more 
pro-cyclical than would otherwise be the case.  
Some in this audience may respond that these policy requirements were evident to sharp-
eyed observers. Indeed, the ECB had been making these points for many years. But they 
were not so widely acknowledged as to make a difference. For every economic argument in 
favour  of  policy  adjustment,  a  contrary  one  could  be  found  justifying  the  path  taken.  This 
meant  many  euro  area  countries  did  not  internalise  the  policy  requirements  of  monetary 
union. In fact, almost the opposite policies were pursued in some countries. 
The  lack  of  an  adequate  regulatory  and  macro-prudential  framework  meant  that  in  many 
economies  the  banking  sector  supported  an  unbalanced  and  unsustainable  expansion  of 
credit  during  the  period  of  low  interest  rates.  The  financial  sector  also  became  over-
leveraged and engaged in excessive risk taking. Although at the time many in the financial 
industry justified this with arguments about how financial engineering created possibilities for 
sophisticated  risk  diversification,  a  posteriori  it has  become  evident  that  risk  was  seriously 
mispriced in the period before the crisis.  
National  wage-setting  and  labour  market  regulatory  frameworks  have  also  proved  to  be 
inadequate.  Rather  than  resisting  nominal  trends,  before  the  crisis  strong  wages  put 
pressure  on  price  competitiveness, often  justified  by  theories  of  catching-up  effects.  Fiscal 
discipline  also  proved  too  lax.  Rather  than  building  up  buffers  during  “the  good  times”, 
increased  tax  revenues  associated  with  the  pre-crisis  housing  booms  were  treated  as 
structural rather than cyclical, justified by models demonstrating new growth trends. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Taken together, this meant that some of the euro area countries entered the global financial 
crisis in an unnecessarily vulnerable position. This explains to a large extent the situation we 
are now in. 
However, these policy failures were also made possible by a general failure to acknowledge 
the  new  governance  responsibilities  associated  with  membership  of  EMU.  Put  simply, 
“keeping  your  own  house  in  order”  is  necessary,  but  not  sufficient,  in  a  highly  integrated 
monetary union. It is the responsibility of every euro area government to exercise vigorous 
and effective mutual surveillance over others’ policies. As a crisis in a country like Greece 
representing  only  2%  of  euro  area  GDP  can  become  systemic,  disregarding  EMU 
governance may come at a high cost to taxpayers. 
Yet the latter was the attitude prevailing prior to the crisis. The Stability and Growth Pact – 
the  set  of  EU  level  rules  for  guiding  fiscal  policies  –  was  never  properly  implemented. 
Member States tended to adopt a principle of “non-interference” over each others’ policies. 
Peer  pressure,  on  which  the  framework  was  predicated,  gave  way  to  peer  support.  By 
watering-down of SGP in 2004–05, the largest euro area countries signalled that they had no 
stake in the rules. This allowed a certain country to run deficits over 3% of GDP every year it 
was in EMU and never face corrective action. 
Moreover,  the  euro  area  surveillance  framework  was  “blind  in  one  eye”,  with  no  formal 
framework  for  monitoring  macroeconomic  and  financial  imbalances.  The  Lisbon  Strategy 
focused  on  the  structural  level,  but  on  policy  implementation  rather  than  imbalances. 
Eurogroup  discussions  on  imbalances  had  no  enforcement  mechanism.  The  Lamfalussy 
framework for financial supervision did not use the concept of systemic risk. Thus a situation 
prevailed  where  countries  could  be  congratulated  for  strong  headline  fiscal numbers  when 
these data in fact reflected substantial imbalances that were building up in the private sector.  
To  a  certain  extent,  the  weakness  of  these  governance  procedures  was  linked  to  a 
misplaced faith in market discipline. The institutional design of EMU gave market discipline a 
central  role  in  economic  governance.  The  absence  of  a  transfer  mechanism  between 
Member States was supposed to encourage markets to actively discriminate between euro 
area issuers. This was based on the assumption that financial markets would always have 
perfect incentives to enforce the “rules of the game”.  
This assumption, in retrospect, looks somewhat naïve. It is well established in the academic 
literature  that  markets  have  complex  incentives  and  dynamics.  Market  psychology  tends 
towards  pro-cyclicality.  Perceptions  converge  around  certain  information  sources,  such  as 
ratings,  or  certain  benchmarks,  such  as  indices,  which  creates  herd  behaviour.  Structural 
features  of  the  financial  system,  such  as  the  role  of  ratings  in  financial  regulation  and 
investment mandates, create an embedded non-linearity in market reactions to news. 
What we witnessed in the euro area, therefore, was not a rigorous analysis of sovereign risks 
but  rather  an  undershooting  followed  by  a  dramatic,  and  perhaps  excessive,  correction. 
Spreads converged for all euro area countries before 2008, despite high debt levels in some 
countries and clear evidence of emerging imbalances. Now we have moved to the opposite 
extreme:  some  euro  area  countries  are  confronting  phenomena  like  sudden  stops  and 
buyers’ strikes that were in the past associated only with emerging markets. 
As  we  have  seen  in  recent  months,  market  discipline  can  be  a  strong  and  useful  force  in 
encouraging countries to make long-needed reforms. But it is also, clearly, an unstable way 
to  ensure  good  policies.  Reform  decisions  have  to  be  made  hastily  in  dramatic  meetings. 
Politicians  lack  time  to  explain  the  need  for  reform  to  their  constituencies  and  build 
consensus behind them. It may even be the case that countries have to go “too far, too fast” 
to restore market confidence. There is also a serious risk of uncontrollable contagion to other 
countries.  
In  other  words,  we  cannot  completely  delegate  governance  to  financial  markets.  The  euro 
area is the world’s second largest monetary area. It cannot depend solely on the opinions of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
ratings  agencies  and  markets.  It  needs  economic  governance  arrangements  that  are 
preventive and linear. This underscores my central point that a much more comprehensive 
approach to economic governance is now the priority for the euro area. And this means more 
economic and financial integration for the euro area, with a significant transfer of sovereignty 
to the EMU level over fiscal, structural and financial policies.  
Second proposition: Significant governance reforms have already been taking place 
Europe  has  responded  to  these  policy,  governance  and  market  failures  by  undergoing  a 
multi-year  process  of  institutional  reform.  This  leads  me  to  my  second  proposition:  that  a 
much more radical change in euro area governance has taken place than many observers 
seem to acknowledge. There is a tendency to see the euro area response to the crisis as 
perennially behind-the-curve – as “too little, too late”. I concede that national authorities have 
not always been effective in stabilising financial conditions. But I also think this assessment 
lacks  an  appropriate  benchmark.  Observers expect a new  “silver bullet” every few  months 
and when one is not delivered, they are disappointed. 
But  if  we  choose  a  more  appropriate  benchmark  –  say,  the  euro  area  in  2009  –  a  quite 
different picture emerges. The sum of the incremental steps taken since that date are, in fact, 
now a very big step. 
Take  for  example  economic  governance.  The  EU  Council  and  European  Parliament  have 
agreed on a legislative package that significantly limits the discretion of national authorities, 
even when imposing sanctions on themselves. This includes a framework for monitoring a 
wide  range  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  also  backed  by  sanctions.  Countries  are 
expected  to  anchor  fiscal  prudence  in  national  rules,  creating  a  much  more  “vertically 
integrated” concept of governance. All these measures were unthinkable four years ago. 
If we look at the conclusions of Euro Summit on 26 October – dismissed by some observers 
as  insufficient  –  we  see  even  more  radical  steps  envisaged  for  the  future.  Euro  area 
countries have committed to adopt balanced budget rules. They have agreed to base their 
budgets  on 
the 
recommendations  of  the  Commission  when  implementing  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact. 
Countries  in  the  Excessive  Deficit  Procedure  –  which  is  currently  14  out  of  17  euro  area 
countries – will allow the Commission to examine draft national budgets and monitor budget 
execution.  
Although some of the recent governance reforms, like those that formed part of the so-called 
“Six-pack” proposed by the European Commission, fall short of the “quantum leap” that the 
ECB had long advocated for the euro area, they still represent significant progress relative to 
the situation prevailing before the crisis. 
The  creation  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and  future  European  Stability 
Mechanism could also not have been imagined in 2007. The euro area has institutionalised 
the provision of sovereign liquidity and agreed to a Treaty change to ensure its legality. As 
the new facilities have developed, they have acquired a range of tools. The current mandate 
of the EFSF not only allows it to extend temporary loans to euro area governments in need, 
but also to buy bonds in both the secondary and primary markets, to act on the basis of a 
precautionary  programme  and 
to 
governments including in non programme countries. The resources committed to the EFSF 
are substantial. The ESM, which will have a paid-in capital of €80 billion and callable capital 
of €620 billion, has a capital base around three times that of the European Investment Bank. 
At the 26 October Euro Summit euro area leaders also agreed on two schemes which will 
allow  a  significant  leveraging  of  existing  EFSF  resources  in  order  to  increase  the  fund’s 
ability to act. 
But  perhaps  the  most  significant  development,  relative  to  past  expectations,  is  the 
implementation of root-and-branch reform programmes in a number of euro area countries. 
forecasts.  They  have  agreed 
finance  bank  recapitalisations 
independent  growth 
to  stick 
through 
loans 
to 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One should not underestimate the significance of EU-IMF programmes for structural changes 
in some economies. They are dealing with long-needed pension reforms, opening up closed 
sectors of the economy, modernising public administration. In terms of collective economic 
management,  this  development  goes  further  than  many  federations.  Can  we  imagine,  for 
example, the U.S. federal government requiring a similar depth of reform in California? 
Countries outside of EU-IMF programmes have also implemented major reforms. Spain has 
recently passed a constitutional balanced budget amendment, disproving the view that major 
policy  changes  are  impossible  in  an  election  year.  Italy  has  agreed  to  a  technocratic 
government to ensure structural reforms are implemented, and invited the IMF to give extra 
credibility  to  this  process.  All  euro area  countries,  except  those  under a  programme,  have 
committed  themselves  to  bringing  their  budget  deficits  below  3%  of  GDP  by  2013  at  the 
latest. Overall, the forward commitments of euro area countries to fiscal sustainability go far 
beyond what has been agreed in the U.S. or Japan. 
Each of these measures, seen individually, may not represent the “shock-and-awe” or “big 
bazooka”  that  some  commentators  and  markets  participants  call  for.  But  when  seen 
collectively,  they  represent  a  comprehensive  broadening  and  deepening  of  euro  area 
economic governance. And relative to a reasonable benchmark – the status quo ante – they 
are very significant developments. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  many  steps  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  financial  sector 
regulation and supervision. Under the leadership of the G20, a remarkable amount of work 
has  been  done  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  in  a 
demanding timeframe. Profound regulatory reforms need to be implemented to address the 
underlying deficiencies that have become apparent in our financial system.  
In  general,  Europe  is  exceeding  international  benchmarks  in  implementing  these  reforms. 
The  Commission  issued  a  proposal  in  July  2011  aimed  at  transposing  the  Basel  III 
framework  into  EU  Law.  By  doing  this,  it  is  among  the  first  to  introduce  the  Basel  III 
framework  and  is  taking  a  leading role  in  delivering  on  the  G20  commitments.  In  line  with 
Basel III, the Commission’s proposal (so-called CRD IV) provides for higher minimum capital 
requirements, a stricter definition of eligible capital and more transparency. It also introduces 
also entirely new concepts, such as mandatory liquidity requirements and a non-risk-based 
leverage ratio. 
Beyond  the  micro-prudential  dimension  of  regulation,  the  proposal  introduces  macro-
prudential  elements,  most  prominently  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  regime.  This 
constitutes an important safeguard to protect the banking sector from periods of excessive 
aggregate credit growth. And on top of this, the European Council has recently decided that 
European banks need to have a 9% core tier one capital ratio by the middle of next year, 
instead of by 2018, as agreed by the Basel Committee.  
Other important regulatory initiatives are underway. These include the establishment of an 
appropriate  regulatory  framework  for  over-the-counter  derivatives,  enhanced  oversight  of 
Credit  Rating  Agencies,  the  prevention  of  systemic  risk  coming  from  the  “shadow  banking 
sector”  and  an  EU  crisis  management  framework  for  bank  recovery  and  resolution.  As 
regards  the  supervisory  framework,  a  new  system  of  financial  supervision  has  been 
established creating, for the first time, European level macro-prudential supervision through 
the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). 
This discussion raises an obvious question: if so much has been achieved since 2009, why 
have euro area authorities not been more effective in halting the crisis? 
In  my  view  this  is  fundamentally  a  political  question,  related  to  making  policy  between 
17 sovereign  democracies.  Unlike  a  unitary  state,  the  euro  area  has  17  Heads  of  State, 
17 Finance Ministers, and countless national parliamentarians. It can only be expected that 
their communication on difficult topics may sometimes diverge. As we have seen on many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
occasions, this triggers difficult feedback loops between politics and markets which ultimately 
undermine the impact of agreed policy measures.  
On  one  level  this  is  a  procedural  problem:  our  institutions  are  not  effective  enough  in 
ensuring political leaders speak with one voice. But on a deeper level, it is a problem deriving 
from the fundamentally different expectations of domestic populations and financial markets. 
Markets  expect  messages  of  confidence,  of  immediacy,  of  unlimited  capacity  to  act. 
Domestic populations want to know the limits of their liability, to ensure that actions are just 
and fair, to make sure past mistakes are not repeated. 
A classic example of this divergence has been the debate over private sector involvement. 
For  a  domestic  audience,  banks  should  internalise  the  consequences  of  their  lending 
decisions  and  should  be  punished  for  their  past  behaviour.  But  from  a  financial  market 
perspective, such communication is disastrous. It signals to investors that assets that were 
previously risk-free are no longer so, that the euro area is a market where their investments 
are not guaranteed. And as markets are forward-looking, they sell their assets today. This 
immediately undermines the progress I have just described.  
A second example is the implementation of crisis response decisions. Markets expect quick, 
bold and “shock-and-awe” decisions on highly complex matters. They are exasperated that 
something  can  be  agreed  by  leaders  but  take  months  to  enter  into  force.  Yet  this  is  a 
necessary condition of operating in a system of 17 sovereign democracies. Decisions have 
to be explained, approval processes have to be followed, compromises have sometimes to 
be  made.  These  dynamics  were  witnessed  even  in  the  US  when  Congress  sent  back  the 
TARP in 2008. The net effect on the euro area, however, is that by the time decisions are 
eventually  implemented  the  expectations  of  market  have  moved  on.  The  impact  of  those 
decisions is then discounted.  
These  market-democracy  dialectics  provide  a  second  reason  why  a  more  integrated 
economic and financial union is so essential for EMU. The rationale for the original design of 
EMU – with centralised monetary policy, but decentralised economic policies – was linked to 
principles  of  subsidiarity  and  democratic  accountability.  This  was  consistent  with  the 
environment that prevailed 20 years ago. But these same principles now imply more Europe, 
not less. 
Subsidiarity is the principle that the centre should perform only those tasks which cannot be 
performed effectively at the national level. Can we really argue, in the current crisis, that the 
centre is not the more effective level to exercise, or at least coordinate, certain economic and 
financial policies? Democratic accountability is the principle that citizens should be able to 
hold their representatives responsible for decisions. If we need a stronger European centre, 
then  to  maintain  this  principle  we  also  need  profound  improvements  in  democracy  at  the 
European level.  
The justification for rethinking these principles can be found, I believe, by acknowledging that 
membership  of  EMU  entails  a  significant  degree  of  political  union.  We  have  seen  that 
preventing crises requires that all countries exercise close and effective mutual surveillance 
of  each  others’  policies.  We  have  seen  that  correcting  crises  requires  that  decisions  are 
taken jointly, with a euro area perspective. The need for institutionalised collective decision-
making is, fundamentally, what defines a political union. And this is de facto the condition of 
all euro area countries. 
Third proposition: ECB independence and the prohibition on monetary financing are 
essential for euro area integration 
This condition of de facto political union raises questions about the proper role of the central 
bank in EMU. The ECB is very much in the focus at the moment. Some observers call for it 
to play the role of a “national” central bank like the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England, 
and emulate their policies. But these viewpoints are partial. They overlook what is my third 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
proposition: that the Treaty prohibition on monetary financing by the ECB, over the medium 
term, is a force in favour of euro area integration and greater stability. 
The positive effects of the ECB’s policies are fairly obvious in the case of the banking sector. 
Our standard and non-standard measures ensure price stability in the euro area. While our 
standard  measures  signal  the  monetary  policy  stance,  our  non-standard  measures  ensure 
the transmission of the desired policy stance to the real economy in those market segments 
in  which  the  transmission  is  impaired.  Our  non-standard  measures  ensure  that  despite 
increased liquidity demand, financial institutions are able to continue lending to clients. 
However,  misconceptions  persist  related  to  the  Securities  Markets  Programme,  our 
programme  for  intervening  in  government  bond  markets.  The  SMP  deliberately  addresses 
the appropriate transmission of our monetary policy to the real economy in market segments 
which are impaired. Government bonds are crucial for the transmission of monetary policy, 
via  their  status  as  a  benchmark  for  borrowing  by  banks.  Put  simply,  left  unaddressed,  the 
malfunctioning  of  sovereign  bond  markets’  could  block  the  bank  lending  channel.  An 
important  difference  with  Quantitative  Easing  programmes  is  that  the  liquidity  injected  into 
the banking system via the SMP is sterilised by the ECB through regular liquidity absorbing 
operations.  
The  ECB  has  been  widely  recognised  as  an  institution  capable  of  timely,  decisive  and 
convincing action during tumultuous times. We see this as a mark of distinction. However, it 
would  be  erroneous  to  derive  from  this  that  it  should  be  a  political  institution  in  charge  of 
running the euro area economy. It cannot be and should not be. The ECB is a central bank, 
committed to its mandate to preserve price stability over the medium term. It is not the fiscal 
lender of last resort to sovereigns. Markets participants that call for the ECB to play this role 
may care only about the nominal value of their assets and the need to avoid losses. Whether 
or not the underlying asset – our currency as store of value – has been depreciated seems 
unimportant to them. But survey after survey shows that the people, the citizens of the euro 
area, want price stability. They care deeply about their purchasing power and the value of 
their  savings.  The  ECB  has  been  established  with  a  clear  mandate  to  meet  these 
expectations. 
Moreover,  what  these  calls  for  more  activism  overlook  is  the  positive  effects  of  the  ECB’s 
stance  over  the  medium  term.  There  are  some  in  the  academic  world  that  argue  that  one 
way out of the sovereign crisis would be for the central bank to act as a lender of last resort 
to  the  sovereign.  These  voices  suggest  that  euro  area  countries  are  more  vulnerable  to 
liquidity stresses relative to the situation in economies where the central bank is supposedly 
prepared to backstop the government bond market.  
Certainly the ECB, as the central bank of all EMU countries jointly, cannot act as the central 
bank  of specific  countries.  But  is  this  in  fact a  disadvantage  for  Europe?  In  a sense,  euro 
area  countries  have  given  up  sovereignty  over  their  national  currency.  This  implies  that 
maintaining their public debts at reasonable levels requires commensurately more convincing 
fiscal and economic policies. It also requires that they “tie their hands” in a credible manner 
through  stronger  and  more  automatic  economic  governance.  The  monetary  financing 
prohibition,  in  this  way,  is  a  spur  towards  better  policies  and  better  governance  –  in  other 
words, a closer economic union. 
Similarly,  the  monetary  financing  prohibition  changes  the  relationship  between  sovereigns 
and  their  national  banking  systems.  As  sovereigns  cannot  monetise  debt,  they  can  only 
backstop large banking sectors at a cost to their own creditworthiness. Insofar as this may 
undermine the balance sheets of the banks they are trying to save, it could end up triggering 
a  self-defeating  vicious  circle.  This  implies  that  the  only  viable  route  to  support  the  euro 
area’s  integrated  financial  sector  is  through  a  more  integrated  system  of  supervision  and 
resolution.  The  monetary  financing  prohibition,  by  constraining  the  resources  of  individual 
sovereigns, pushes the euro area in the direction of collective solutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Conclusion 
Let me now draw to a close. 
The key theme that has run through my remarks today is that, from every perspective, much 
closer  economic  and  financial  union  is  essential  for  the  euro  area.  We  have  had  this 
demonstrated in the clearest possible terms by the financial and sovereign debt crises. We 
have already taken important steps in this direction. Europe is ahead of others in addressing 
its  imbalances.  The  challenge  looking  forward  is  to  complete  the  process  towards  closer 
union and not settle for the “quick fix”. 
The  people  of  Europe  want  closer  cooperation  in  economic  and  financial  matters. 
Eurobarometer surveys find cross-country majorities in favour of closer cooperation to end 
the  crisis.  And  this  is  ultimately  unavoidable,  given  the  state  of  political  union  between 
countries that monetary union de facto creates. It is now a time for politicians to be bold and 
courageous,  to  recognise  these  trends,  and  to  complete  as  soon  as  possible  the  great 
project begun 60 years ago towards “ever closer union”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
