Malcolm Edey: The challenge of central clearing in OTC derivatives 
markets1 
Address by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the ISDA Annual Australia Conference, Sydney, 20 October 2011. 
 Good morning, and thank you to ISDA for the opportunity to speak here today. 
This conference is taking place at an interesting and challenging time for the global financial 
system. Obviously a good deal of attention right now is focused on Europe, particularly on 
the  problem  of  sovereign  debt  sustainability  and  its  interaction  with  the  condition  of  the 
European banking system. This is a source of significant uncertainty for the rest of the world. 
Policymakers are working hard to find solutions that will rebuild confidence, but the situation 
is still fluid and it remains an area that will need to be closely watched. 
In Australia meanwhile the financial system is continuing to perform relatively well. The broad 
outlines of that story are, I think, well known. During the GFC Australia avoided a recession 
and a banking crisis. Our banks are profitable and well capitalised, and their overall asset 
quality remains good. 
We can’t of course expect the Australian system to be entirely immune from the unfolding 
events  in  Europe,  but  a  couple  of  points  are  worth  emphasising.  The  first  is  that  the 
Australian banks have only limited direct exposures to sovereign debt in the countries that 
are  most  at  risk.  So  potential  effects  on  Australian  banks’  overall  asset  quality  are  not  an 
issue. The second point is that, since the height of the GFC, the Australian banks have done 
a  lot  to  strengthen  their  funding  positions.  They  have  increased  their  use  of  domestic 
deposits as a funding source, lengthened the average term of their wholesale funding, and 
correspondingly reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale debt. These things will help 
to  make  them  more  resilient  to  the  uncertainties  that  are  now  affecting  international  credit 
markets. 
As  important  as  these  current  challenges  are,  financial  regulators  around  the  world  have 
been focusing not just on those, but also on longer-term regulatory reforms. The reform effort 
is proceeding on a number of fronts, aimed at building more robust financial systems for the 
longer term and thereby reducing the risk of future crises. Many of these efforts are being 
coordinated  internationally  through  the  G20  process,  through  the  Financial  Stability  Board, 
and  through  standard-setting  bodies  like  the  Basel  Committee.  In  all  of  these  bodies 
Australia is actively represented. 
In broad terms, the various reforms draw on the lessons that emerged from the GFC, and 
they  seek  to  remedy  the  weaknesses  that  became  apparent  during  that  period.  Hence, 
among  other  things,  there  is  a  significant  effort  through  the  Basel  process  to  increase  the 
amount  and  quality  of  capital  in  the  global  banking  system,  and  to  strengthen  liquidity 
management by banks. Although, as I said, we didn’t have a banking crisis here during the 
GFC period, the Australian regulators recognise the importance of improving standards, and 
we are working on implementation of the various international initiatives in all these areas, 
and others. 
One particular piece of the picture that has absorbed a lot of our attention at the Reserve 
Bank  has  been  the  work  on  financial  market  infrastructure,  particularly  in  relation  to  OTC 
                                                 
1  For a more detailed treatment of the issues discussed in this speech, readers are referred to the Council of 
Financial  Regulators  Discussion  Paper,  Central  Clearing  of  OTC  Derivatives  in  Australia,  June  2011 
http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/consultations/201106-otc-derivatives/pdf/201106-otc-derivatives.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
why is there a general case for promoting central clearing?  
what are the complexities involved?; and  
where does the process stand in Australia?  
derivatives clearing. I know this is very relevant to ISDA members here today, and it’s on this 
topic that I want to focus my main remarks. 
At the Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009, G20 leaders agreed, among other things, to a 
common commitment to central clearing in key derivatives markets. The commitment states 
that “all standardised OTC derivative contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic 
trading  platforms,  where  appropriate,  and  cleared  through  central  counterparties  by  end-
2012  at  the  latest”.  Australia  was  part  of  that  agreement,  and  the  Australian  regulatory 
agencies,  like  those  in  other  G20  jurisdictions,  are  working  through  the  issues  associated 
with its implementation. 
In focusing on that today, I want to look at three questions: 
 
 
 
First, why central clearing? 
The general case for promoting central clearing in derivatives markets is based on the aim of 
reducing systemic risk by managing interconnectedness. In markets without central clearing, 
counterparty  exposures  build  up  bilaterally  and,  in  certain  kinds  of  products,  they  can 
accumulate  to  very  large  notional  amounts  over  time.  In  many  cases  this  might  not  be  a 
problem,  but  where  the  interconnections  are  extensive  enough  they  can  be  a  source  of 
systemic  risk.  The  risks  from  those  exposures  might  be  managed  well  by  individual 
institutions, but an institution can’t be sure that its dealings with others don’t expose it to a 
lower standard of risk control practiced by a counterparty, or anyone else in the market that 
is linked through bilateral trades. 
The clearing process, by novating positions to a central counterparty (CCP), allows risks to 
be centrally managed to a standard acceptable to the market and its regulators. Moreover, 
with legally enforceable multilateral netting, gross exposures can be drastically reduced. As 
long as the CCP is itself robust, the effect should be to reduce the scope for contagion and 
thereby limit the impact on the market if one or more of the participants fail. The experience 
with resolving the Lehman failure in 2008 testifies to the effectiveness of this mechanism in a 
crisis. We might also expect that confidence in this mechanism will help to underpin market 
liquidity during periods of financial stress. 
All  of  this  presupposes  that  the  CCP  is  itself  robust.  Of  course,  CCPs  themselves  have  a 
strong incentive to control their risks, since they are after all in the risk-reduction business. 
But  it  also  points  to  the  need  for  appropriate  regulatory  standards  to  ensure  that  the  risk 
controls in a CCP are commensurate with its significance for the wider system. 
Subject to that proviso, central clearing reduces aggregate counterparty risk by replacing a 
web  of  bilateral  exposures  with  a  set  of  potentially  much  smaller  net  exposures  of  each 
participant  to  a  CCP  with  robust  risk  management.  Individual  participants  benefit  from  the 
reduction in risk but, importantly, so does the stability of the system as a whole. In a nutshell, 
that  is  the  basic  case  for  promoting  central  clearing  as  a  policy  objective  in  systemically 
important derivatives markets. 
Which brings me to my second question: what about the complexities? 
When  talking  about  these  things  in  the  abstract,  it’s  easy  to  talk  as  though  a  central 
counterparty is truly “central”. But in fact, as we all know, it’s not that simple. There is a huge 
array of markets in financial instruments around the world and there are multiple CCPs for 
different instruments. Some instruments are centrally cleared already, many are not. Not all 
instruments  are  good  candidates  for  central  clearing,  because  they  are  not  sufficiently 
standardised and can’t easily be made so. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It’s also important to recognise that not all market participants are alike, and not all can be 
expected to have direct access to the major CCPs even when the new structures are fully in 
place.  So  the  abstract  model  in  which  all  participants  are  connected  to  the  central  clearer 
won’t be realised in practice. 
For all these reasons, the optimal configuration of clearing arrangements in the real world is 
far from obvious, and the way global markets will evolve in response to a mandatory clearing 
environment across multiple jurisdictions is hard to predict. 
Another complication is the question of interconnectivity between clearers. A central clearer 
should, in some sense, be central. In theory, netting benefits might be maximised by a single 
global  CCP  clearing  all  the  major  instruments,  with  all  active  traders  as  members  and  all 
positions  included  in  the  scope  of  multilateral  netting.  It’s  not  clear  that  such  an  outcome 
would be desirable even if it were possible. It would amount to a massive concentration of 
risk  at  a  single  point  and  would  give  rise  to  complex  operational  issues  and  questions  of 
jurisdictional oversight. 
But in any case, even if such an outcome were desirable, it won’t be achieved. The closest 
alternative might be to provide links that allow trades to be cleared between participants in 
different  CCPs.  The  question  of  how  this  might  eventually  occur,  or  even  of  whether  it  is 
achievable  at  all,  then  becomes  very  important.  The  weight  of  expert  opinion  is  that  the 
capacity  to  develop  these  links  is  still  a  good  way  off.  Links  between  CCPs  also  raise 
complex questions about the transmission of risks from one CCP to another, and these will 
need to be carefully studied. 
For the foreseeable future, then, we will be in a world in which there is a collection of CCPs, 
each of which has some source of competitive advantage in its own location or its own area 
of  specialisation.  That  advantage  might  derive  from  historical  legacy,  or  it  might  arise 
because  the  market  that  a  CCP  is  servicing  has  some  sort  of  natural  home  in  its  own 
location. But these markets will remain contestable and so the configuration of CCPs around 
the  world  is  likely  to  stay  fluid,  not  least  because  the  market  will  be  rapidly  evolving  in 
response to changing regulatory requirements. 
It is in this very unpredictable environment that the domestic regulators are considering the 
policy framework for central clearing in Australia. 
Before  I  come  to  that,  it’s  worth  reviewing  a  few  general  facts  about  the  Australian  OTC 
derivatives market. Its largest component, in terms of the amounts outstanding, is the market 
for single-currency interest rate swaps – the bulk of which are Australian dollar denominated. 
Australian  banks  (both  locally  incorporated  and  foreign  bank  branches)  have  aggregate 
notional principal amounts outstanding in this market of around $8 trillion.2 
But banks operating in Australia are not the only entities to transact in this market. From a 
jurisdictional point of view, we can (in principle) divide transactions in the global market for 
Australian  dollar  derivatives  into  three  types,  namely  local-to-local,  local-to-offshore,  and 
entirely offshore. In fact the distinction between a local and an offshore market participant is 
not entirely straightforward, since many local participants are affiliated with offshore entities. 
That  said,  the  available  data  suggest  that  all  three  of  those  transaction  types  form  a 
significant share of the market. Most of the activity that involves the large foreign banks as 
the two counterparties is already cleared through LCH SwapClear, while the remainder of the 
market is currently uncleared. 
It is of course misleading in another way to talk of these three market segments as if they 
were  separable.  They  are  in  fact  closely  interdependent,  and  liquidity  in  each  of  the  three 
parts benefits from the liquidity of the others. As a related point, the Australian dollar market 
                                                 
2  APRA data on banks’ off-balance sheet business as at end June 2011. Note that this figure double counts 
amounts outstanding between reporting banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the size of the market  
its fundamental role in hedging domestic interest rate risk, and  
the long duration of counterparty risk in these instruments.  
is itself interdependent with other global markets, and specifically with derivatives markets in 
other currencies. 
The  regulatory  agencies  in  Australia  have  indicated  that  they  view  the  Australian  dollar  IR 
swap market as being systemically important to the domestic financial system. This reflects a 
number of considerations, including: 
 
 
 
It is important to note, however, that although this market is large in relation to the Australian 
financial system, it is not large in global terms. 
The next largest OTC derivatives market in Australia3 is for FX-related derivatives4, in which 
the Australian banking system has a notional principal outstanding of around $4 trillion. Other 
OTC markets, such as those for commodity derivatives, are much smaller, though that is not 
to say that they don’t have the potential to grow over time. 
For various reasons, international regulators are at this stage giving priority in their regulatory 
strategies  to  single-currency  interest  rate  swaps.  Among  the  reasons  for  that  is  that  these 
instruments are often of relatively long duration and have very large volumes outstanding, as 
well as the fact that cross-currency instruments (the next biggest market) give rise to more 
complex jurisdictional issues. In Australia, for similar reasons, any mandatory clearing policy 
is likely to focus initially on the Australian-dollar interest rate swaps market. 
At  the  heart  of  the  policy  challenge  are  two  inter-related  questions:  should  there  be  a 
mandatory  clearing  requirement  in  this  market  and,  if  so,  should  it  include  a  locational 
requirement,  to  the  effect  that  trades  be  cleared  by  a  locally  incorporated  and  locally 
regulated CCP? Since there is no domestic CCP offering such a service currently, that would 
involve requiring industry to come up with a solution that meets the regulatory objectives. 
There are many factors that will have a bearing on this decision, but I think they boil down to 
finding  a  balance  between  the  two  objectives  of  stability  and  efficiency.  The  stability 
consideration  comes  from  the  point  that  I  made  at  the  outset.  The  purpose  of  promoting 
central clearing is to reduce systemic risk. CCPs reduce risk in one important respect, but 
they also concentrate it in a specific location. Where a market is systemically important to the 
Australian economy and financial system, this points to a case for the CCP that clears it to be 
subject  to  appropriate  safeguards  that  control  the  propagation  of  risks  to  domestic 
participants. This might be best achieved where the CCP is locally incorporated and subject 
to domestic regulation. At the least, it argues that the CCP should be subject to safeguards 
that take into account its systemic significance for the Australian market. 
The second set of considerations are those related to efficiency. We have to recognise that, 
even for instruments that are denominated solely in Australian dollars, the market is a global 
one. The cost-effectiveness of a local CCP will thus depend to a significant degree on global 
forces. I’ve tried to highlight the uncertainties involved in predicting how the global market will 
evolve. On that front, a number of submissions to our consultation process have emphasised 
the risk of splitting the Australian dollar market if any local clearing mandate turns out to be 
not sufficiently effective. 
The  cost-effectiveness  and  viability  of  a  local  CCP  for  this  market  will  also  depend  on 
aspects of the international regulatory environment that are not yet determined, including the 
                                                 
3  As measured by the amount outstanding. 
4  That is, FX swaps, forwards and options. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
extent of eventual mutual recognition of CCPs across borders by their respective regulators. 
We need to avoid an outcome where internationally active banks find themselves subject to 
inconsistent mandating requirements among the jurisdictions in which they operate. On that 
issue,  I  note  that  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  recently  begun  discussions  on  the 
challenges of mutual recognition, though these are still at an early stage. 
Adding  further  to  the  complexity  is  that  the  environment  is  already  being  shaped  by 
regulatory developments in the major jurisdictions, especially the US and Europe. Australian 
entities that are active in those markets will need to meet the clearing requirements that soon 
come into force there, and they will also be affected indirectly to the extent that they deal with 
counterparties that are subject to those jurisdictions. 
In the United States, the Dodd-Frank regulations on OTC clearing are likely to start taking 
effect around the second quarter of next year, and in Europe the corresponding regulations 
under EMIR5 are likely to take effect by around 2013. Even before then, market behaviour, 
and hence the environment for the Australian banks, will be influenced by the anticipation of 
those requirements. 
In broad outline, then, these are some of the key considerations that will need to be taken 
into account in determining the way forward in Australia. 
This brings me to my third question: where does the policy process in Australia now stand? 
In  June,  as  you  know,  the  Council  of  Financial  Regulators6  released  a  discussion  paper 
setting out these issues in detail and calling for submissions from interested parties. 
To help focus discussion, the Council paper put forward four propositions. In summary, these 
were: 
 
that in the absence of Australian regulatory action, domestic CCP solutions may not 
emerge;  
that  where  a  market  is  of  systemic  importance  to  Australia,  a  move  to  offshore 
central clearing might introduce risks to the Australian financial system that do not 
currently exist;  
that  the  Council  agencies  considered  the  market  for  Australian  dollar interest  rate 
swaps to be systemically important within Australia; and  
that  in  light  of  this,  the  Council  agencies  were  considering  the  case  for  a 
requirement  that  those  instruments  be  centrally  cleared,  and  as  part  of  that  were 
considering whether such clearing should take place domestically.  
   I stress that these were not conclusions. They were preliminary propositions that the Council 
agencies were seeking to test. 
In response to the paper, we have received around 30 submissions, including one from ISDA 
and a good number from ISDA members who are no doubt represented here today, along 
with  others  from  a  range  of  other  market  participants  and  interested  parties.  Most  of  the 
submissions are available on the Bank’s website. Council agencies have also engaged in a 
series of follow-up meetings with those who made submissions. I’ve participated in a number 
of those myself, and I’ve appreciated the spirit in which the industry has provided its input. 
If I’ve conveyed anything today, it’s that these are difficult and complex issues. Most of the 
submissions  have  stressed  that  point,  and  there  was  a  strong  view  from  industry  that  it’s 
                                                 
5  European Markets Infrastructure Regulation. 
6  Comprising the Reserve Bank of Australia, ASIC, APRA and the Australian Treasury. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
important to take the time to get it right.7 We take the complexities seriously, and we need to 
continue engaging with industry in the process of determining the best way forward. 
That said, the Council’s advice on these matters, when it’s made, will be determined by the 
public policy considerations of stability and efficiency that I’ve just outlined. Not all industry 
participants will have the same commercial interests and not all will be of the same view as 
to their preferred outcome. But where the industry contributions will be valuable is in helping 
to make clearer what are the costs and benefits, and the risks, of the alternative approaches. 
We hope to be in a position to put forward some conclusions from the consultation process 
soon, but I can’t foreshadow those today. In the meantime, I take the opportunity to thank all 
those  in  the  industry  who  have  made  constructive  contributions,  and  we  look  forward  to 
continued engagement. 
                                                 
7  But  not  too  long.  Others  have  pointed  to  the  need  to  respond  in  a  timely  way  to  the  rapidly  changing 
international environment. Again, it’s a question of balance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
