Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The new Islamic finance landscape 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Islamic  Financial  Intelligence  Summit  (IFIS)  2011  “The  new  Islamic  finance  landscape”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 15 November 2011. 
 This  decade  has  witnessed  dramatic  changes  in  the  Islamic  financial  landscape.  As  a 
dynamic industry, Islamic finance is responding to the forces of change emanating from the 
changing requirements of the real economy, the changing pattern and pace of globalisation 
and the wide spread financial reforms being undertaken at both the international and national 
levels. This transformation of the Islamic financial system is also taking place during the most 
challenging of times as the world enters the fifth year of the global financial crisis. A central 
aspect of the new Islamic financial landscape is also the increased focus on financial stability 
to enhance further its potential as a form of financial intermediation in an increasingly more 
challenging environment. 
It is my great pleasure to join this Islamic Financial Intelligence Summit organised by “The 
Banker” held this year in Kuala Lumpur, in association with Bank Negara Malaysia to speak 
on the subject on the “New Islamic Financial Landscape”. This event which is being held for 
the first time outside London brings together practitioners from the financial community from 
different parts of the world. While the focus of this Summit  will be on Islamic finance, it is 
inevitable that the discussions today will touch on the recent developments in Europe, given 
the  potential  impact  it  may  have  on  the  rest  of  the  world  and  the  need  to  implement 
strategies and policies for coping with the consequences of these developments. 
While  the  financial  solutions  being  implemented  in  managing  the  crisis  and  the  measures 
being introduced to mitigate the impact of the crisis by the rest of the world is important, it 
can  only  provide  temporary  relief.  It  is  the  structural  policies  and  reforms  that  are  more 
challenging to undertake that will ensure fundamental financial stability and a long lasting self 
sustaining economic recovery. 
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  changes  in  the  Islamic  financial  landscape  and  its 
increased potential  to  contribute  to sustainable growth,  increased  international connectivity 
following the increased pace of internationalisation of Islamic finance and new developments 
to achieve financial stability in the Islamic financial system. The changing financial landscape 
and the accelerated expansion in Islamic finance have also resulted in changes in the nature 
of  the  supporting  ancillary  services,  including  education  that  is  being  provided  for  the 
business and financial sectors.  
Islamic finance and fostering sustainable growth 
As the Islamic financial system evolves to become more diversified and more comprehensive 
to  meet  the  changing  requirements  of  the  real  economy,  it  is  increasing  its  potential  to 
fostering sustainable growth. Given that the inherent principle of Islamic finance requires that 
financial transactions be accompanied by underlying economic activity, it already ensures the 
close link between the expansion in financial assets with the real economy. As the Islamic 
financial  system  transitions  from  being  banking  centric  to  becoming  more  diversified  and 
comprehensive, it has been able to provide the spectrum of financial products and services 
to the range of activities in the economy, as required by small businesses to conglomerates, 
and by households to the high networth individuals. 
The development of intermediaries that previously was dominated by banks now comprises 
the range of financial institutions that also includes investment banking, specialised banking 
institutions,  takaful,  capital  market  intermediaries  and  microfinancial  institutions.  Financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
markets,  including  the  Islamic  money  and  sukuk  markets  have  been  instrumental  in 
intermediating  funds  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  Islamic  money  market  not  only 
facilitates liquidity management but also the implementation of monetary policy. The sukuk 
market  has  facilitated  the  raising  of  funds  by  businesses,  while  providing  investors  with  a 
range  of  instruments  for  investment,  thereby  facilitating  the  mobilisation  and  allocation  of 
funds to productive economic activity. 
Accompanied  by  research  and  development,  innovation  has  intensified.  Islamic  finance 
however  has  the  governance  arrangements  which  require  the  approval  process  by  the 
Shariah advisories. This ensures avoidance of the creation of financial instruments that have 
its origins from other financial instruments. A further principle of profit sharing and hence risk 
sharing also ensures a high degree of transparency and disclosure, thereby a greater shared 
responsibility on the viability of the products. 
The  rapid  expansion  of  Islamic  finance  is  reflected  in  more  than  600  Islamic  financial 
institutions  operating  in  more  than  75  countries  in  centres  that  are  now  beyond  Muslim 
jurisdictions. Indeed, Islamic finance is increasingly becoming part of the growth strategies of 
an  increasing  number  of  global  financial  institutions.  New  horizons  are  also  fast  emerging 
following legislative and regulatory changes in several non-traditional markets that have now 
emerged  as  the  fastest  growing  segment  in  the  international  financial  system.  In  fact,  the 
Banker’s  latest  2011  Top  500  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  report  being  released  at  this 
Summit shows that the global Islamic finance industry continues to experience double digit 
growth of 21%, with the Shariah compliant assets now breaching the USD1 trillion mark. 
The  rapid  expansion  of  Islamic  finance  essentially  reflects  its  ability  to  meet  the  changing 
requirements  of  the  global  financial  community  and  its  competitiveness.  The  elements  of 
checks  and  balances  in  Islamic  finance  that  promote  accountability  and  transparency 
enhances its potential as a stable form of financial intermediation. There is also a growing 
recognition  that  the  inherent  tenets  of  Islamic  finance  are  aligned  with  the  sustainable 
dimensions of ethical finance and responsible financing. 
As the new financial landscape emerges, it has also been accompanied by the development 
of ancilliary support services that include legal, accounting, taxation and Shariah advisory. In 
addition,  there  is  the  development  of  Islamic  indices,  information  repositories  and 
consultancy services. In the areas of human capital development there is a proliferation of 
programmes  and  certifications  that  focus  on  Islamic  finance.  Malaysia  is  committed  in  this 
pursuit and has put in place a comprehensive talent infrastructure in Islamic finance with the 
aim of meeting the increased demand for practitioners by the global Islamic finance industry. 
Dedicated  institutions  of  learning  such  as  the  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic 
Finance  (INCEIF)  and  the  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  (IBFIM)  have  been 
established to focus on education in Islamic finance.  
Increased international connectivity and Islamic finance 
Despite  the  continued  strains  experienced  in  the  economy  and  the  international  financial 
system, it is important to recognise the fundamental long-term global transformation that is 
taking  place.  In  this  recent  decade,  the  concurrent  rise  of  the  emerging  economies  is 
resulting  in  a  fundamental  realignment  in  the  global  landscape.  This  transformation  is 
characterised  by  the  shifting  balance  of  global  economic  strength  to  the  emerging 
economies, with its significant implications on the global economic and financial flows. The 
international  financial  landscape  will  also  be  inevitably  transformed  with  the  distribution  of 
financial centres becoming more dispersed. Increasingly, new centres of financial activities 
will  likely  to  emerge.  In  addition,  financial  system  inter-linkages  –  particularly  among  the 
emerging economies – will deepen, supported by the increased global trade and investment 
that  is  already  taking  place.  With  considerable  capacity  to  meet  large  investment 
requirements, opportunities therein lie in the more effective and efficient channelling of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sizeable  surplus  funds  towards  the  vast  productive  investment  opportunities  within  and 
across the emerging economies. 
These trends are being reinforced by the rapid expansion of financial institutions in emerging 
economies  that  have  ventured  beyond  national  borders.  Financial  institutions  from  the 
emerging economies have grown significantly in size and strength in this recent decade to 
now  account  for  almost  half  of  worldwide  financial  industry  market  value.  Eight  out  of  the 
twenty largest global banks, including the top two, are emerging market financial institutions. 
As  the  emerging  market  financial  institutions  continue  to  regionalise  and  internationalise, 
their role and importance can be expected to further expand. Another key development is the 
integration of financial markets amongst emerging economies, driven in part by the increased 
economic inter-linkages and the increased liberalisation trend in the financial sector.  
The rapid internationalisation of Islamic finance is reinforcing this trend and has enhanced 
the economic and financial connectivity between the emerging economies. The high level of 
savings  and  wealth  accumulation  in  several  of  the  emerging  economies,  including  in  Asia 
and  the  Middle  East,  need  to  be  effectively  channelled  towards  productive  investments 
including  for  large  infrastructure  development.  In  this  environment,  Islamic  finance  has 
emerged as a viable and attractive form of intermediation including financing of large scale 
infrastructure  projects.  Recent  examples  include  the  USD500  million  Islamic  Infrastructure 
Fund established in 2009 by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Islamic Development 
Bank (IDB) to meet the Shariah-compliant financing needs in the member countries.  
In addition, the advancements achieved in the sukuk market also provide evidence on the 
ability  of  Islamic  finance  in  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  differentiated  demands  of  the 
modern economy. The recent issuance of the world’s first offshore RMB sukuk by Khazanah 
Nasional  in Malaysia  reflects  the  growing  trend  of  multi  currency  sukuk  issuances  in  Asia. 
Growing at an average annual rate of 40 percent, the global sukuk market has demonstrated 
its ability to effectively intermediate funds across borders, allocating funds efficiently in the 
international  financial  system  and  fast  becoming  an  important  financing  and  capital  raising 
option. 
Islamic finance and financial stability 
An  important  aspect  of  the  new  financial  landscape  is  the  increased  focus  on  financial 
stability. The more market oriented systems with market-based finance activities, the creation 
of  new  financial  instruments  and  an  increasing  number  of  market  participants  with  global 
reach,  and  more  interconnected  financial  systems  has  expanded  the  potential  for,  and 
channels  through  which,  financial  shocks  are  transmitted  to  the  economy  and  across 
borders.  Indeed,  recent  experiences  with  crises  have  also  shed  new  insights  into  the 
complex web of relationships that exist between sovereign, financial and economic risks, and 
underscored the critical importance of strengthening the pillars of financial stability that can 
serve to contain the impact of a crisis.  
The  increased  focus  on  financial  stability  has  several  implications  for  the  new  financial 
landscape.  The  most  significant  will  be  the  fundamental  changes  in  the  regulatory 
environment.  These  include  changes  to  institutional  arrangements  for  oversight  of  the 
financial system – both at the international level and within national borders in a number of 
countries,  significantly  strengthened  prudential  standards  with  a  focus on  building stronger 
capital and liquidity buffers, increased transparency in financial transactions and exposures, 
and enhanced options to resolve failed financial institutions. 
Much  progress  has  already  been  made  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  in 
promulgating  an  extensive  set  of  prudential  standards  for  the  Islamic  financial  services 
industry  since  its  establishment  in  2002.  The  IFSB  has  already  introduced  standards  for 
capital  adequacy,  risk  management,  corporate  governance  and  Shariah  governance.  This 
important  work  has  been  significant  in  promoting  international  uniformity  of  the  regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
framework  and  international  best  practices  for  the  Islamic  financial  system  in  different 
jurisdictions. The IFSB has also established a facilitative platform to promote overall financial 
stability  through  the  Islamic  Financial  Stability  Forum  (IFSF)  that  serves  as  an  avenue  for 
cross-border engagement amongst regulators. 
The important goal of strengthening the foundation of the global Islamic financial system has 
also been reinforced further following the recent global financial crisis, through the work of 
the IFSB-IDB Task Force of Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability. In its report that 
was released in 2010, eight building blocks were identified to manage potential risks and 
vulnerabilities  to  the  Islamic  system.  These  include  steps  that  need  to  be  taken  for  the 
implementation  of  the  prudential  standards;  the  development  of  a  liquidity  management 
infrastructure; the introduction of strong financial safety nets; the development of an effective 
crisis  management  and  resolution  framework;  the  development  and  implementation  of 
accounting,  auditing  and  disclosure  standards;  the  formulation  of  an  effective  macro 
prudential  framework;  the  development  of  credible  credit  rating  institutions  and  processes; 
and finally, to strengthen efforts for capacity building and talent development for the Islamic 
financial services industry.  
Following these recommendations, this year, the International Islamic Liquidity Management 
Corporation  (IILM)  was  established  to  strengthen  the  liquidity  management  of  Islamic 
financial  institutions.  This  initiative  represented  a  collaboration  between  10  Central  Banks 
and  2  multilateral  development  institutions.  Its  aim  is  to  enhance  the  availability  of  liquid 
Shariah-based  Islamic  financial  market  instruments  –  a  crucial  step  in  promoting  more 
efficient  cross-border  liquidity  management  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  support 
increased cross-border flows. 
Cumulatively,  these  efforts  will  build  a  solid  foundation  for  the  orderly  growth  and 
development of Islamic financial system that will contribute to its continued resilience and the 
overall  stability  of  the  global  financial  system  in  a  way  that  better  serves  households  and 
businesses.  
Going  forward,  it  is  important  that  the  international  standard  setting  process  allows  and 
continues to promote the more effective integration and exchange of perspectives between 
Islamic  and  conventional  finance  to  ensure  a  coherent  global  framework  that  is  consistent 
across  similar  risks,  promotes  a  better  understanding  of  risk  interactions  between 
conventional and Islamic finance activities, and accelerates progress towards best practices 
based on the sharing of research, experiences and frameworks. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  a  statement  from  this  year’s  Per  Jacobsson  Lecture  given  by 
Sir Andrew  Crockett on what should guide us in our “efforts to devise a new and  stronger 
financial system”. “It should be global, it should be robust, it should be an effective servant of 
the real market economy”. This is what the new Islamic financial landscape has evolved to 
achieve.  With 
towards 
internationalization and the robust institutional arrangements and regulatory standards being 
introduced and implemented, it will indeed enhance the potentials for Islamic finance to not 
only serve the economy but to achieve sustainability in this more challenging environment. 
the  economy  and 
inherent  close 
trend 
links 
its 
its 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
