Alan Bollard: Economic impacts of seismic risk – lessons for Wellington 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and Mr Satish 
Ranchhod,  to  the  Rotary  Club  of  Wellington  and  Victoria  University  of  Wellington 
one day conference  “Organisational  Effectiveness  in  Times  of  Seismic  Risk”,  Wellington, 
18 October 2011. 
 With thanks to Don Abel, Stephanie Begley, Alan Boaden, Denys Bruce and Robert Cole for their contributions to 
this work. 
Introduction 
The earthquakes in Canterbury have had a profound human and economic impact that will 
continue to be felt for many years. The devastating nature of these events has highlighted 
the importance of risk management and the consequent organisational preparedness. This is 
particularly  true  for  Wellington,  a  city  that  is  built  on  hills,  flood  plains and  reclaimed  land, 
overlooking a harbour connected to Cook Strait, and dissected by a major active fault line at 
the intersection of the Indo-Australian and Pacific tectonic plates.  
It has been a little over a year since the first of the major earthquakes in Canterbury and we 
have seen these events produce highly complex and unforeseen outcomes. One of the least 
expected  outcomes  has  been  the  long  lasting  nature  of  the  earthquakes  through  their 
associated aftershocks. Planning in the face of such uncertainty is a great challenge, but it is 
vital  to  ensure  that  our  society  is  able  to  continue  to  function  effectively  in  times  of 
considerable  disruption.  From  the  perspective  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  organisational 
preparedness means both business continuity considerations for the Bank itself, as well as 
working to maintain economic stability.  
This paper focuses, firstly, on the impact of the Canterbury earthquakes on the economy and 
how the Bank has responded; secondly, the business continuity planning of the Bank itself; 
and thirdly, the lessons we can learn from Canterbury that we, as institutions, can apply in 
Wellington.  It  does  not  cover  the  important  topics  of  seismology,  engineering,  and  human 
issues. 
Economic effects of the Canterbury earthquakes 
The  earthquakes  in  September  2010  and  February  2011,  as  well  as  the  associated 
aftershocks, significantly affected the economic environment. In addition to the considerable 
impact these events had on people’s lives, there was substantial damage to assets, as well 
as disruptions to economic activity. 
The affected areas are home to around 12 percent of the country’s population and damage 
to  housing  was  extensive.  Out  of  a  total  housing  stock  of  approximately  220,000  homes, 
around 165,000 were impacted, including many that are now uninhabitable. There has also 
been  substantial  damage  to  commercial  assets  and  infrastructure,  particularly  within 
Christchurch’s central business district.  
It has proved very difficult to calculate the cost of the damage. It is likely over $20 billion (most 
of this involving damage to housing, with significant damage also to commercial buildings and 
infrastructure). Of course estimates of damage, estimates of insurance claims, and estimates 
of  reconstruction  can  all  differ  somewhat.  Our  working  assumption  is  that  there  will  be 
approximately $20 billion of rebuild. This is  equivalent to around 10 percent of  GDP,  which 
represents a very large shock in relative terms. (As a comparison, the massive earthquake 
that struck Japan in March 2011 is estimated to have caused damage equivalent to around 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
3 to 4 percent of Japan’s annual GDP.) We recognise that there is considerable uncertainty 
around these numbers and that revisions to this estimate are likely to continue for some time. 
Indeed, we frequently note that our working assumption is to the nearest $5 billion.  
It is also important to note that this assumption relates to the current replacement value of 
damaged assets. The nominal cost of rebuilding these assets could be larger as construction 
costs  and  prices  for  materials  may  well  increase  over  the  coming  years,  and  as 
reconstruction  incorporates  quality  improvements.  Indeed,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Insurance 
Oversight Team estimates that total property insurance claims (including buildings and other 
assets) stemming from the earthquakes could be considerably higher than these numbers. In 
addition, some of the damage caused will not have been insured or will not be repaired.  
The response to these events 
The devastating impact of the Canterbury earthquake necessitated a large and coordinated 
response by central and local government, as well as private sector agencies. New Zealand 
was  also  fortunate  enough  to  receive  assistance  from  other  nations  during  the  disaster 
recovery period that followed the February earthquake.  
For  the  Reserve  Bank,  the  earthquakes  raised  a  number  of  broad  concerns  related  to 
protecting  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  We  were  also  conscious  of  our  aim  of 
maintaining  medium-term  price  stability.  When  determining  the  appropriate  response  to 
achieve these goals, we considered three distinct phases in economic activity following the 
earthquakes:  disruption,  stabilisation  and  reconstruction.  Rather  than  representing  specific 
time  periods,  each  of  these  phases  relates  to  the  underlying  state  of  the  economic 
environment. In turn, each raised a different set of concerns. 
 
In the period of disruption that immediately followed the earthquakes, human life and 
safety were the dominant concerns, with recovery efforts led by Civil Defence. The 
Reserve  Bank  and  other  organisations  were  focused  on  ensuring  that  essential 
economic  activity  could  continue.  This  involved  the  maintenance  of  payments 
systems, including the supply of additional cash. We also focused on ensuring that 
key financial institutions were able to continue operations. 
After  immediate  safety  factors  were  addressed,  concerns  shifted  to  ensuring  the 
stability  of  business  and  economic  activity.  During  this  period,  we  have  been 
focused on the soundness of the financial system, including the financial health of 
key  economic  organisations.  We  have  also  focused  on  providing  appropriate 
support for economic activity.  
Over time, CERA and other organisations’ response to these events will shift again 
as economic conditions in Canterbury and the economy more generally improve. As 
this  occurs,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  focus  will  move  away  from  the  provision  of 
emergency  support,  and  towards  ensuring  that  the  degree  of  economic  stimulus 
provided is appropriate for achieving our medium-term policy aims. 
  Uncertainty about the state of the economy following the earthquakes has been very high. 
Over the past year, we have been engaged in a process of ongoing learning about the state 
of  the  economy  following  the  earthquakes  that  has  fed  into  our  policy  deliberations.  This 
process  will  continue  for  an  extended  period,  even  as  the  economy  continues  to  recover, 
although our focus will gradually shift.  
The earthquake and financial system soundness 
Cash handling and payments systems 
One  of  our  most  pressing  concerns  immediately  following  the  earthquakes  was  the 
maintenance  of  payments  systems.  In  the  aftermath  of  events  such  as  natural  disasters, 
there  is  strong  demand  for  food,  water,  petrol  and  other  necessities.  And  with  damage  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
power and telecommunications systems, access to cash is a key concern. Only two hours 
after  the  February  earthquake  the  Reserve  Bank  started  receiving  orders  from  banks  for 
more  cash  for  delivery  to  Christchurch.  Ensuring  cash  was  available  required  us  to  work 
closely with banks and Cash in Transit companies to meet the spike in demand. This task 
was complicated by damage to roads that meant travel, where possible in Christchurch, was 
taking about three times as long as normal.  
The public also needed information about where cash was available. To ensure this, Bank 
staff used Google maps to provide a live feed of operational and accessible ATMs. Overall 
about  $150  million  of  extra  cash  was  sent  to  Christchurch  in  the  week  of  the  earthquake, 
representing  about  $350  per  resident.  There  was  a  big  drop  in  electronic  payments  and 
increased demand for cash, initially in the form of $20 and $50 notes through the surviving 
ATM  machines.  We  learned  a  lot  about  ATM  configuration  to  ensure  operability,  and  the 
internet was very useful to provide up to date information on ATM availability. 
Banking 
An additional concern following the earthquakes was the stability of key financial institutions 
including  banks  and  insurers.  These  institutions  play  an  important  role  in  shaping  the 
ongoing conditions in Canterbury. Further, we were conscious that significant disruptions in 
one region could affect the functioning of these organisations at a national level.  
Most commercial banks do not have their core banking systems located in Christchurch, and 
those  that  do  had  effective  back-up  systems  located  outside  the  Christchurch  region. 
Additionally, banks’ disaster recovery procedures proved to be quite effective, and certainly 
had become much better honed by the time of the February earthquake. Banks took a long-
term  view  of  their  customer  relationships  through  the  provision  of  generous  customer 
assistance  packages,  and  generally  adopted  a  helpful,  constructive  attitude  to  their 
customers’ difficulties. Banks came together as an industry throughout the disaster, sharing a 
lot of information and advice amongst each other, and have opened small business support 
centres.  
Some households and businesses came under financial stress as a result of the earthquakes 
and  this  had  an  impact  on  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  However,  the  banking 
industry has not been subject to significant financial risks from the earthquakes. Losses on 
residential mortgages are expected to be relatively light due to insurance coverage and the 
Government’s  earthquake  recovery  packages.  In  addition,  many  smaller  commercial 
businesses were not located in areas where major damage occurred. Bank provisioning for 
credit  losses  totalled  nearly  $100  million.  Nevertheless,  there  remains  a  great  deal  of 
uncertainty in quantifying the effects of the earthquakes.  
Insurance 
The insurance sector has had a number of significant and complex concerns. A well funded 
and  functioning  insurance  sector  assists  with  the  recovery  from  a  significant  destructive 
event.  New  Zealand  is  fortunate  that  insurance  will  fund  the  majority  of  the  costs  of  the 
Canterbury earthquakes, and most of this funding comes from large offshore reinsurers. In 
other  parts  of  the  world,  such  as  Japan,  government,  businesses  and  households  bear  a 
much greater share of disaster costs. Since the September earthquake, almost $4 billion of 
insurance  claims  have  been  paid  out  by  the  Earthquake  Commission  (EQC)  and  private 
insurers. There is still much more to be paid out by insurers, and this will occur over several 
years while Christchurch is rebuilt.  
The  importance  placed  on  the  role  that  public  and  private  insurers  have  in  reducing  the 
financial  burdens  of  disasters  can  be  seen  from  the  EQC’s  $11  billion  of  funds  and 
reinsurance,  which  were  built  up  over  decades  and  are  available  to  meet  disaster  claims. 
This is backed up by a Government guarantee if more funds are needed. The Government 
also  decided  in  April  to  support  AMI  (the  biggest  residential  insurer  in  the  Christchurch 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
region),  in  order  that  policyholders  with  earthquake  claims  could  have  certainty  that  their 
valid claims would be paid. 
The magnitude and ongoing nature of the earthquakes raise a number of challenges for the 
insurance  sector,  and  potentially  the  economy  more  generally.  A  number  of  insurers  have 
suffered  significant  hits  to  their  balance  sheets.  On  the  other  hand  it  appears  that  the 
international  reinsurance  market  has  worked  as  we  would  hope,  bearing  in  mind  that  we 
have now suffered a series of insurance “events”. 
Following  the  Canterbury  earthquakes  there  have  been  both  temporary  and  longer  term 
changes in the insurance market. While the ground is still moving, there is limited availability 
of new cover for earthquakes in the Christchurch area. For most businesses and households 
this means they are not free to change insurers at present, while for those currently without 
insurance  cover  the  impact  is  more  significant.  Some  earthquake-prone  buildings  and 
infrastructure can no longer get insurance cover in Canterbury or elsewhere in New Zealand. 
Other  changes  to  date  include  higher  nationwide  premiums  to  fund  increased  reinsurance 
costs and bigger excesses.  
Property  insurers  that  have  had  their  reinsurance  program  renewing  since  February,  have 
generally been able to maintain or increase their reinsurance cover. However, reinsurance 
premiums have more than doubled, and in many cases a higher retention (claims borne by 
the insurer before reinsurance starts to pay out) also applies. We are now seeing delays in 
payouts  and  some  litigation  around  liabilities.  This  may  look  untidy,  but  it  may  also  be 
inevitable in such a complex situation. 
The effects on economic activity 
The earthquakes have resulted in severe disruptions to short term economic activity, and a 
loss in balance sheet values, but will bring significant stimulus in the medium term. Disruption 
was mainly due to reduced household and business spending, as well as lost exports and 
production in Canterbury. Furthermore, following the earthquakes we saw sharp declines in 
consumer  confidence  and  business  sentiment  economy-wide.  Sectors  most  affected  have 
been  tourism,  education  and  central  business  district  retailing.  Encouragingly,  however, 
some  of  the  significant  contributors  to  Canterbury’s  economy,  particularly  agriculture, 
manufacturing  and  professional  services  have  been  remarkably  resilient  after  the  first  few 
weeks. Construction and related services have been through a frustrating period of disruption 
and prolonged wait. But next year they will enter an era of huge expansion, New Zealand’s 
largest  ever  construction  project,  big  enough  to  drive  the  nation’s  growth  by  an  extra 
1 to 2 percent, but with the potential to also cause bottlenecks, skill shortages, cost increases 
and planning problems. Already there has been some population loss to the region, but next 
year this may turn around. 
Monetary policy and the earthquakes 
The Reserve Bank’s immediate focus following the earthquakes was the soundness of the 
financial system. We remained conscious of our focus on the maintenance of medium-term 
price stability. In the aftermath of the February earthquake, we did observe some near-term 
prices  increases  (for  instance,  in  commercial  and  residential  rents).  Consistent  with  the 
Policy Targets Agreement, monetary policy does not react to such short-term price changes. 
However, we were also conscious that the substantial reconstruction required in Canterbury 
would provide a large boost to economic growth over a period of five years or more. During 
this period, residential investment spending is likely to rise to a share of GDP similar to that 
seen during the mid-2000 construction boom. But in contrast to that earlier period, there will 
be a much higher concentration of work in one geographic area. Combined with increases in 
business investment spending, this will boost medium-term activity and inflationary pressures 
for an extended period. It would therefore be inappropriate, all else equal, for monetary policy 
to be stimulatory during the reconstruction period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This  concern  was  balanced  against  the  negative  impact  of  the  earthquakes  on  near-term 
activity. In the Canterbury region, activity certainly reduced. In addition, there were declines 
in  nationwide  consumer  confidence,  as  well  as  investment  and  hiring  intentions  among 
businesses  economy-wide.  It  was  difficult  to  know  how  large  or  long  lasting  such  impacts 
would  be  and  there  was  a  risk  of  a  marked  deterioration  in  economy-wide  activity. 
Furthermore, although GDP growth was likely to be higher than it might otherwise have been 
during the reconstruction period, the destructive effects of the earthquakes meant that New 
Zealand would still be worse off. 
Given these risks, the Bank reduced the official cash rate by 50 basis points following the 
February earthquake. We described this as an insurance measure, one that aimed to avoid a 
significant  and  persistent  deterioration  in  activity.  We  were  conscious,  however,  that 
depending  on  wider  economic  conditions,  this  insurance  would  need  to  be  removed  as 
rebuilding,  and  a  recovery  in  activity  more  generally,  drew  the  economy’s  resources  into 
production.  Since  that  time  however,  monetary  policy  has  had  to  account  for  a  number  of 
significant developments. These include the continuing sovereign debt concerns in Europe 
and  related  developments  in  financial  markets.  Business  confidence  appears  to  have  now 
recovered well nationwide, and to a large extent also in New Zealand. We believe the cuts in 
the OCR assisted this. 
Fiscal impact of the earthquakes 
The impact of the earthquake on the Government’s fiscal position has also been significant. 
Central  and  local  government  have  faced  significant  cost  increases  as  a  result  of  the 
earthquakes. The largest of these has been the $11.7 billion EQC insurance cost. This has 
exceeded EQC’s reinsurance cover of $4.2 billion, with the shortfall exhausting the National 
Disaster Fund. The Government also faces significant expenses related to the purchase of 
residential properties in the red zone, support for AMI, and costs associated with damage to 
infrastructure. 
In  addition  to  these  costs,  the  government  faced  significant  costs  related  to  welfare  and 
emergency  responses  (totaling  around  $363 million  at  end  of  June  2011).  Following  the 
earthquakes,  the  employment  situation  of  many  individuals  was  affected  with  around 
40,000 employees and 9,000 sole traders seeking assistance. It was also necessary for the 
Government  to  increase  spending  related  to  healthcare,  social  services  and  public 
administration and safety services. 
Earthquake-related  expenditure  estimated  at  $13.6 billion  contributed 
to  a  marked 
deterioration  in  the  Government’s  operating  deficit  over  the  2010/2011  year,  and  further 
earthquake  related  expenditure  will  be  required  over  the  coming  years.  The  resulting 
pressure on the Government’s debt position was highlighted by Standard and Poor’s when 
they downgraded New Zealand’s long-term sovereign rating to “AA” earlier this year. Fitch 
also  noted  some  concerns  about  the  impact  of  the  earthquakes  on  the  fiscal  debt  in  their 
latest assessment.  
In  response  to  the  costs  associated  with  the  earthquakes,  the  Government’s  June  Budget 
incorporated an increased focus on fiscal consolidation with a reduction in new discretionary 
spending over the coming four years. In addition, the Government has recently announced 
an increase in the earthquake cover levy component of home insurance, to cover the costs 
faced by the EQC and to rebuild its Natural Disaster Fund.  
As part of our response we have also been researching how other countries have responded 
to  similar  earthquakes.  Rapid  recovery  of  communications  infrastructure,  speedy  decisions 
on rebuild, and availability of finance, have led to rapid bounce-backs in industrial production, 
confidence  and  growth.  Where  the  New  Zealand  situation  looks  most  different  is  in  the 
lingering seismic instability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The lessons for Wellington 
We  have  learned  that  an  event  like  a  major  earthquake  has  many  unpredictabilities  and 
uncertainties  about  it,  elements  that  are  incident  and  location-specific,  with  characteristics 
that unfold in different ways. And these make it difficult to plan crisis responses in detail. We 
have learned the same thing about financial crisis, as in the semi-ironic title of the classic 
Reinhart  &  Rogoff  book  on  international  economic  crises  entitled  “This  Time  Is  Different”. 
This  means  institutions  need  to  focus  on  general  preparedness,  competency,  leadership, 
delegation powers and resilience, rather than on detailed plans for specific situations which 
may not repeat themselves. 
We have also learned that some earthquakes cannot be thought of as a short sharp event, 
but rather are a rolling set of shocks with a long period of continuing after-quakes. These can 
cause  on-going  damage,  delay  assessment,  continue  disruption,  and  slow  reconstruction. 
The impact of ongoing seismic instability on insurance and construction can be very marked. 
We have seen how earthquake damage is hugely sensitive to magnitude, depth, location and 
timing  of  day  and  week.  In  2009  the  biggest  earthquake  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere 
occurred  in  Fiordland,  7.8  on  the  Richter  Scale.  It  caused  no  damage  at  all.  The  much 
smaller  February  22  Christchurch  aftershock  was  so  disastrous,  not  just  because  of  its 
vertical  acceleration,  but  its  location  under  Christchurch  and  its  timing  on  a  week-day 
lunchtime. The same sensitivity could apply to Wellington. 
We  also  know  now  that  structural  damage  is  only  part  of  the  story.  The  February 
Christchurch earthquake showed that soil liquefaction can also cause land damage that is 
highly  problematic  for  buildings  and  underground  infrastructure.  Given  that  most  private 
insurance  does  not  cover  this,  it  presents  major  problems  for  rebuild.  This  is  further 
exacerbated  by  land-slips.  Both  liquefaction  in  valleys  and  reclaimed  land,  and  slips  on 
higher ground could cause major economic complications in Wellington. 
Christchurch  has  also  taught  us  that  some  sectors  are  very  sensitive  to  earthquake 
disruption. For Wellington we might assume that certain people-based industries (like tourism 
and education) would be vulnerable, although much office-based services would relocate as 
necessary once telecommunications and electricity could be resumed. Wellington might be 
expected to be more resilient in that many of the buildings have been built or altered with 
earthquakes  in  mind  (e.g.  wooden  houses  with  corrugated  iron  roofs  and  reinforced 
chimneys),  or  in  the  case  of  older  commercial  buildings,  reinforced  to  meet  earthquake 
standards.  These  standards  are  now  being  reviewed  in  the  light  of  Christchurch,  and  will 
likely be increased, requiring significant further upgrading in Wellington (and possibly driving 
a small commercial building boom as happened in the 1980s). The challenge here will be to 
avoid a costly regulatory over-reaction to a one-off event. 
Christchurch  with  its  flat  terrain  and  grid  roading  structure  allowed  easier  repair  of  above-
ground  infrastructure  and  access  to  all  suburbs.  This  cannot  be  assumed  in  Wellington 
where slips would close roads limiting access, and where the whole city could find its air, rail, 
sea,  motorway  and  road  links  with  the  region  cut  completely  for  some  time.  Hill  top 
communications  and  electricity  transmissions  are  quite  different  in  Wellington,  gravity-flow 
underground  piping  is  quite  different,  and  the  Cook  Strait  cable  represents  a  particular 
vulnerability. 
A further concern is that earthquake insurance coverage could become much more limited, 
more  expensive,  and  more  restrictive  in  Wellington,  following  the  Christchurch  experience. 
Already  we  are  seeing  big  increases  in  reinsurance  premiums,  tighter  covenants,  high 
excesses, and a move from full replacement to indemnity policies. 
Following  the  September  and  February  earthquakes,  there  was  immediate  transmission  of 
images world-wide with passers-by posting cell phone pictures live to television stations and 
on the internet. This engendered an immediate (but limited) market reaction, hitting the New 
Zealand dollar and stock prices. At the Reserve Bank, we spent time explaining the event to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
overseas  financial  institutions  and  that  limited  excessive  financial  market  reactions.  A  bad 
Wellington  earthquake  with  an  epicentre  in  the  nation’s  capital,  could  engender  a  more 
extreme financial market reaction, and it would be the Reserve Bank’s role to intervene to 
ensure an orderly foreign exchange market if that proved necessary. If the country’s political 
leadership and key administrative infrastructure were caught up in an earthquake, this could 
drive a bigger financial reaction, and make government policy responses much harder. 
Reserve Bank planning for emergencies 
In  the  event  of  an  emergency  the  Bank’s  focus  would  remain  on  the  maintenance  of 
economic stability, as much as possible. With this in mind, the Bank has been proactive in 
developing its policies and procedures to ensure the resilience of our organisation and the 
economy in the event of significant disruptions. 
Central to our planning has been the establishment of business continuity plans focused on 
the needs that may follow a major event, and how the Bank’s ability to perform its operations 
may be impeded. To ensure plans can be implemented successfully, key people from each 
department are assigned to support the Bank and its critical business functions in the event 
of disruptive incident. These plans and the related systems are tested regularly.  
The  Bank  has  also  focused  on  ensuring  that  the  necessary  infrastructure  is  in  place.  In 
particular,  a  seismic  assessment  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  main  office  was  undertaken  in 
September.  The  results  from  this  assessment  show  the  building  should  withstand  an 
earthquake greater than the Christchurch earthquake experienced.  
But  even  though  our  building  could  be  standing  after  an  earthquake,  there  is  a  risk  that 
damage to surrounding buildings could make the Wellington office inaccessible. To ensure 
that the Bank’s core functions can be maintained in such circumstances, an Auckland office 
has been set up that houses a dozen staff on a day-to-day basis. These staff are engaged in 
a  number  of  business  critical  roles  (including  foreign  reserves  management,  domestic 
liquidity,  and  payments  and  settlement  systems)  to  ensure  the  economy  of  New  Zealand 
would continue to function with some stability in the event of a major disaster. Furthermore, 
provisions  in  the  Reserve  Bank  Act  provide  for  the  delegation  of  key  aspects  of  the 
Governor’s role to the Auckland Office Manager, with appropriate safeguards. 
Conclusions 
The  events  in  Canterbury  are  particularly  salient  for  Wellington.  We  have  long  known  that 
this region is at risk from seismic events, and clearly we must prepare for potential disruptive 
events  of  any  sort.  However,  we  must  also  consider  what  degree  of  preparedness  is 
appropriate to ensure the survival of people, as well as organisational effectiveness. Several 
factors are relevant in this regard. 
 
Disaster  preparedness  is  necessary  and  desirable,  but  not  costless.  Increases  in 
safety standards (such as seismic strengthening) can result in significant costs for 
an economy that linger long after the risks they aim to address have occurred. They 
can also create a complicated regulatory environment that may result in significant 
impediments for activity. 
A related consideration is the frequency of events. While it is possible to prepare for 
very  low-frequency  high-impact  events,  doing  so  may  be  constraining  in  terms  of 
activity  and  prohibitive  in  terms  of  costs.  The  assessment  of  such  risks  in  New 
Zealand is currently very complex  and there is a lot of work currently going on to 
assess this. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 We must also be conscious of New Zealand’s characteristics as a nation. In contrast 
to  many  other  developed  economies,  we  are  geographically  and  economically 
isolated.  If  we  face  large  challenges,  we  may  do  so  with  little  external  financial 
support.  
Determining  the  appropriate  balance  of  such  concerns  in  advance  will  always  be  a 
challenging  task.  For  decision  makers,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  key  organisations  will 
have the capacity to operate effectively in the event of a significant shock. Additionally, we 
must be conscious that our response to events could be a drawn out process, and one that 
needs to evolve over time.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
