Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Malaysia and Turkey – the new silk route in 
Islamic finance – strategies for collaboration, cooperation and smart 
partnership 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  a  business  seminar  on  Islamic  finance  Istanbul:  “Malaysia-Turkey  Islamic 
finance cooperation: new solution – preferred partner”, Istanbul, 29 September 2011. 
 I have the honour today to welcome distinguished guests to the Business Seminar organised 
by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  held  in  this  beautiful  and  historic  city  of  Istanbul.  The  theme 
“Malaysia and Turkey: The New Silk Route in Islamic Finance – Strategies for Collaboration, 
Cooperation and Smart Partnership” was chosen as a reflection of our desire to strengthen 
economic and business ties for the mutual benefits of both countries. The emergence of the 
“Silk  Route”,  a  term  coined  by  Governor  Dr  Zeti  in  2006  opens  up  exciting  prospects  for 
countries and businesses. The new “Silk Route” not only carries traditional trade of goods 
and  services  of  old  but  also  manufactured  goods,  technological  innovation  and  know-how, 
portfolio  flows,  private  equity  investment  and  mobility  of  human  capital  and  knowledge. 
Today, Islamic financial products and services are truly “new” additions to this trade.  
Let me first express our heartfelt appreciation to His Excellency Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad 
for accepting our invitation to speak at this event, sharing his thoughts on Islamic finance. 
Tun  Dr.  Mahathir  needs  no  introduction.  Among  his  many  achievements  was  the  time  he 
steered  the  country  during  the  1997  –  98  Asian  crisis.  His  unorthodox  policies  then  have 
become  mainstream  now.  Under  his  leadership,  Malaysia  experienced  modernisation  and 
economic prosperity, a development most profound for my  generation. That modernisation 
included the early development of Islamic financial system. From the seeds planted during 
Tun  Mahathir’s  time,  we  are  now  seeing  the  maturing  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  in 
Malaysia that is innovative, competitive and increasingly internationalised. What was once a 
novelty has become an alternative means of conducting business. We owe this very much to 
Tun Dr. Mahathir’s foresight and wisdom. Not many people today realised that one of the first 
actions that Tun Dr. Mahathir took when he came to office in 1981 was to set up a National 
Steering Committee to implement Islamic banking in Malaysia. The report of this committee 
on  the  viability  and  strategy  of  the  Islamic  banking,  was  the  impetus  for  the  creation  and 
robust development of the Islamic financial industry in Malaysia. The rest they say is history.  
Global economic challenges and Islamic finance 
The world is transforming and its transformation is way beyond what we had seen before. 
This  is  an  era  of  radical  change,  new  rules  are  being  formulated,  standards  and  best 
practices that were in vogue hardly 5 years are now considered insufficient. It is changing at 
a scale and speed we had never experienced before, that require us to accelerate our own 
pace  of  transformation,  to  enable  us  to  survive  and  prosper  under  this  “new  normal” 
operating  environment.  The  world  is  currently  faced  with  wide-ranging  challenges  that 
include  among  others  –  excessive  indebtedness,  at  household  businesses  and  at 
sovereigns.  Many  are  grappling  at  finding  the  solutions  to  overcome  the  complex  issues 
facing them today. Some of the problems look uncannily similar to what we had faced in the 
1990s, but the solutions might be different this time. But whatever that solution might be, we 
must  never  discount  any  probable  answers  including  unorthodox  measures.  Experience 
during the Asian Financial Crisis had shown that unconventional measures could very well 
be  the  future  best  practices.  But  then,  yesterday’s  solution  may  no  longer  be  adequate  to 
address  today’s  challenges.  Therefore,  we  must  endeavour  to  search  for  new  alternatives 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and  embark  on  new  ventures  that  could  mitigate  the  contemporary  issues  and  challenges 
confronting us. And this is where Islamic finance can fit in and play a meaningful role.  
As an objective, we need to build the foundations for a stronger and more inclusive global 
economy  with  sustainable  growth  and  greater  shared  prosperity  by  all.  This  objective  is  in 
fact  fundamentally  in  line  with  the  role  and  relevance  of  Islamic  finance.  Islamic  finance 
emphasises  on  attainment  of  socio-economic  goals  espoused  on  Shariah  objectives.  It 
emphasises  on  a  strong  linkage  to  productive  economic  activity  to  generate  legitimate 
income. It also emphasises on accountability, fairness and transparency. All these reflect the 
fundamental values propagated in Islamic finance that could serve as a stable and resilient 
form  of  financial  intermediation.  When  Islamic  finance  is  applied  in  an  appropriate  and 
structured manner, it has a strong prospect to serve as a contributor to a sustainable global 
economic growth and financial stability.  
The  infrastructure  already  established  in  Islamic  finance  today  is  ready  to  serve  as  an 
effective  intermediary  for  the  conduct  of  global  business  including  promoting  greater  intra-
regional  trade  not  only  within  Asia  but  between  the  various  regions  of  emerging  markets. 
With more than 600 Islamic financial institutions that now operate in more than 75 countries, 
growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  15  per  cent,  Islamic  finance  can  be  a  platform  to 
strengthen economic ties between East and West Asia in trade and investments flows. The 
sukuk market in particular, has evolved as an important avenue for international fund raising 
and  investment  activities,  generating  significant  cross-border  flows.  Sukuk  issuances  have 
grown  in  diversity  and  sophistication.  The  diverse  sukuk  structures  of  Ijarah,  Istisna, 
Murabahah,  Musyarakah  and  Mudharabah  have  expanded  to  form  hybrid  sukuk  which 
include  exchangeable  and  subordinated  sukuks, 
its  usability  and 
compatibility to fund various forms of financing. For example, huge amount of funds could be 
raised,  via  sukuk,  for  the  purpose  of  financing  large  infrastructure  projects. It  is  this 
substantive advancement in Islamic finance that we believe greater business and investment 
ties could be built upon to enhance economic relationship between Turkey and Malaysia.  
increasing 
thus 
Turkey-Malaysia vast growth opportunities 
For Turkey and Malaysia, a productive partnership could be created when both parties are 
able  to  harness  the  strengths  of  each  other.  Turkey  is  Malaysia’s  eighth  largest  trading 
partner among the OIC member countries, has had a significant growth in terms of its trade 
with Malaysia, which has expanded at an annual average rate of 22.4 percent since 2006. 
While the volume of trade and investment between the two countries is still relatively small, 
where  Malaysia’s  trade  with  Turkey  accounts  for  0.3  percent  of  Malaysia’s  total  trade  and 
Malaysia’s investment in Turkey totalled to USD56.2 million as at end-2010, the figures also 
reflect the enormous opportunity for further growth. Turkey’s Prime Minister The Honourable 
Recep  Tayyip Erdoğan,  during  the  recent  visit  by  the  Malaysian  Prime  Minister  to  Turkey, 
has  suggested  a  leadership  aspiration  for  trade  volume  between  Malaysia  and  Turkey  to 
grow  from  USD1.3  billion  to  USD5  billion.  With  commitment  and  hard  work,  this  target  is 
certainly not impossible to achieve. I believe with a Strategic Framework Agreement that is 
planned to be signed later this year between our two Governments would further strengthen 
cooperation between the two through identification of important areas where we could focus 
and work on.  
Opportunity  to  enhance  trade  and  financial  linkages  between  Turkey  and  Malaysia  is 
immense.  Collaboration  between  the  two  countries  could  be  in  many  forms;  for  instance 
Turkish  investors  and  financial  institutions  could  use  Malaysia  as  a  gateway  to  the  Asean 
region. Malaysian financial community could use Turkey as a base to Central Asian region 
and Europe. In the area of Islamic finance, Malaysia is committed to be a partner with Turkey 
to further promote the business prospect in this country. Malaysia being an Islamic financial 
hub in Asia is willing to share with Turkey our 30 years of experience in developing its Islamic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  industry  and  our  knowledge  and  insights  in  operating  an  Islamic  financial  system 
that runs parallel with its conventional counterpart.  
funding.  The  extensive  privatisation 
Potential Turkey-Malaysia partnership in Islamic finance 
There  are  vast  opportunities  for  Turkey-Malaysia  bilateral  cooperation,  however  let  me 
mention  five  key  areas  of  possible  cooperation  that  could  increase  cross-border  activities 
between our two countries. These are in the area of sukuk issuance, promoting cross-border 
activities,  Islamic  fund  management,  partnership  in  innovation  and  in  education  and 
research. 
Firstly, in the area of sukuk issuance, we welcome Turkish financial and business community 
to  use  Malaysia’s  comprehensive  and  tested  infrastructure  with  its  extensive  investors 
network as a platform to raise funds such as sukuk and Islamic syndication financing. The 
multi-currency sukuk market in Malaysia is well developed and active with over 60% of the 
outstanding sukuk in the world originating from Malaysia. There is also the opportunity to list 
the  sukuk  on  Bursa  Malaysia,  the  Malaysian  bourse,  which  has  emerged  as  the  largest 
exchange for sukuk listing in the world. This gives the listed sukuks greater profiling, visibility 
and transparency in the global bond market. Collaboration in issuance of sukuk would indeed 
benefit  Turkey,  as  Turkey’s  aggressive  diversification  of  its  industrial  base  and  services 
sectors  will  require  huge  financing  needs  that  could  be  partially  met  through  the  Islamic 
financial  markets.  Large  infrastructure  projects  such  as  building  the  Bosphorus  shipping 
canal, the new railway lines and highways might require funding via issuing sovereign sukuk 
as  an  alternative  source  of 
in  basic  
industry –transportation, communication and banking – would also offer the corporates and 
alternative source of financing that is competitive and innovative.  
Secondly,  in  promoting  cross-border  financial  activities,  the  Turkish  financial  community 
could network with Malaysian-based investors, and practitioners to facilitate more business 
opportunities.  Malaysia  has  diverse  domestic  and  international  players  that  engage  in 
international  currency  business.  There  are  now  150  entities  in  Malaysia’s  Islamic  financial 
system which offer a wide spectrum of Islamic products and services. There are also more 
than  150  funds  in  Malaysia  including  real  estate  investment  funds  (REITs)  and  ETFs  that 
practise  ethical  investments.  These  entities  have  the  capabilities  to  structure  funds  for 
investment abroad, including into the emerging markets. Additionally, there are opportunities 
for ethical investments as more than 80% of equities listed on the Malaysian stock exchange 
are shariah compliant. As one strategy to enhance cross-border financial activities, Turkish 
banks and relevant entities might wish to consider being members of Bursa Suq Al Sila’ to 
facilitate liquidity management in the Islamic financial market. The Bursa Suq Al-Sila’ is the 
world’s  first  end-to-end  Islamic  multi-currency  commodity  trading  platform  to  enhance 
liquidity management for Islamic financial institutions. This fully-electronic platform facilitates 
sukuk  structuring,  Islamic  financing  and  investment  transactions  including  inter-bank 
placements  and  customer  deposits,  by  applying  the  concept  of  murabaha  and  tawarruq. 
Since  its  establishment  in  2009,  23  Commodity  Trading  Participants  from  Malaysia,  the 
Middle  East  and  Europe  have  been  registered  in  Bursa  Suq  Al-Sila’,  contributing  to  the 
growth in its trading volume where 1370 trades were recorded in Q1 2011 with a total value 
of USD18 billion as compared to 728 trades in the final quarter of 2010 that totalled to an 
estimated USD11 billion.  
Thirdly, opportunities to collaborate in the area of Islamic fund management. Following the 
launch of the first Participation Bank Index by the Istanbul Stock Exchange earlier this year, 
the  investment  products  introduced  in  the  Turkish  market  have  been  expanded  to  include 
Islamic  equity  funds  and  products.  Through  collaboration  and  strategic  alliances  between 
Malaysian Islamic fund management companies and the participation banks in Turkey, the 
development  and  distribution  of  Shariah  compliant  funds  across  borders  could  be  made 
possible and new investment options to divest the savings of retail clients, as well as in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
development  of  investment  strategies  to  meet  the  needs  of  high  net-worth  individuals  or 
sovereign funds.  
Fourthly, partnership in innovation – where the Malaysian and Turkish financial community 
could  jointly  develop  innovative  products  and  investment  instruments,  provide  consultation 
and  advisory  services  on  complex  legal,  accounting,  tax  and  Shariah  matters  as  well  as 
developing  human  talent  to  support  the  development  of  Islamic  finance.  Joint  Shariah 
research could also be conducted with International Shariah Research Academy, dedicated 
research in applied Islamic finance based in Kuala Lumpur. 
And  finally,  on  the  education  and  research  front,  possible  collaboration  can  be  explored 
between  the  International  Centre  of  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  or  INCEIF  and  Turkish 
universities  to  give  opportunities  for  Turkish  students  to  enrol  in  professional  and  post-
graduate  programs.  Students  from  Turkey  intending  to  deepen  their  knowledge  in  Islamic 
financial  industry  are  encouraged  to  consider  learning  opportunities  offered  by  Malaysia 
including  possible  attachments  with  Malaysian  financial  institutions.  As  I  speak,  efforts  to 
develop human capital are already taking place now, as a team from the Malaysian financial 
community  led  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  is  conducting  a  capacity  programme  on 
Islamic  finance  in  Ankara.  This  programme  is  held  in  collaboration  with  the  Islamic 
Development Bank. The programme offers wide ranging topics for Islamic finance and caters 
to the needs of a group of central bankers, regulators and Government officials. We wish to 
thank  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey  for  their  support  for  making  this  training 
initiative possible. 
Before  I  end  my  remarks,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  re-emphasise  our 
commitment to strengthen strategic collaboration with Turkey. With me is a delegation of the 
Malaysian  financial  institutions,  investment  institutions  and  professional  firms  ready  to 
explore, engage and leverage on each other’s market opportunities. There is much that can 
be  done  by  both  sides  to  jointly  explore  and  realise  the  potential  for  mutual  benefits.  I 
strongly  believe  that  today’s  event  will  end  on  a  positive  note,  with  both  Turkish  and 
Malaysian  delegation  able  to  identify  on  the  next  steps.  It  is  our  fervent  hope  that  the 
business  and  financial  community  of  both  countries  would  establish  regular  contacts  to 
further strengthen collaborative network and to follow through on some of the understandings 
reached today. 
I take this opportunity to offer for the next follow meeting or seminar to be held in Malaysia. It 
is always useful to see first-hand the opportunities and prospect that Malaysia has to offer. I 
wish  to  thank  you  all  for  your  participation  in  making  this  event  a  success  and  to  His 
Excellency Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad and the panel of speakers for the ideas, pointers and 
suggestions that you would share to make this event a successful one.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
