Narayana Kocherlakota: Making monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, at a meeting with business leaders, Sidney, Montana, 13 October 2011. 
 I thank Doug Clement, David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Kei-Mu Yi for very helpful comments. 
Thank you for that generous introduction, John. As Paul Drake described earlier, the board of 
directors of the Helena Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is meeting here 
in Sidney to commemorate John Franklin’s last meeting as a member of that board. I would 
like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  publicly  thank  John  for  his  generous  service  to  the  Federal 
Reserve, as well as other members of the board, past and present. It is important for people 
to  realize  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  represented  by  dedicated  citizens  like  John  and  his 
colleagues on all of the System’s bank and branch boards. In addition, each Federal Reserve 
bank  has  a  number  of  advisory  councils  representing  Main  Street  businesses,  agricultural 
producers, labor groups and community banks and thrifts, among other constituencies. As I 
will describe later, the input from these citizens plays an important role in the development of 
monetary  policy.  So  thank  you,  once  again,  to  John  and  the  rest  of  the  Helena  board  of 
directors, as well as others in the audience who have served us so well. 
I’d also like to offer congratulations, on behalf of myself and the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis,  to  Thomas  Sargent  and  Christopher  Sims,  winners  of  the  2011  Prize  in 
Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. In the 1970s, in separate research, Sargent 
and  Sims  developed  systematic  approaches  to  distinguishing  between  cause  and effect  in 
macroeconomic  data.  Now,  almost  40  years  later,  their  thinking  informs  the  making  of 
macroeconomic  policy  around  the  world.  I’m  especially  proud  that  much  of  the  work 
recognized by the prize committee  was done at the Federal Reserve  Bank of Minneapolis 
and  the  University  of  Minnesota.  My  predecessors  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis  deliberately  fostered  a  research  environment  that  could  give  rise  to  such 
important work, and this tradition continues today.  
In  the  rest  of  my  remarks  today,  I’d  like  to  touch  on  several  topics.  I’ll  begin  with  a  quick 
description of the structure of the Federal Reserve System and the deliberative process of 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  the  Fed’s  policymaking  group.  Then  I’ll  describe  the 
FOMC’s  objectives  and  discuss  its  recent  performance  with  regard  to  those  objectives.  I’ll 
close with a discussion of my dissents on recent FOMC decisions. After that, I’ll be pleased 
to  answer  any  questions  you  may  have.  And  before  I  begin,  I  should  remind  you  that  my 
comments  here  today  reflect  my  views  alone  and  not  necessarily  those  of  others  in  the 
Federal Reserve System, including my FOMC colleagues.  
The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve banks that, along 
with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System. Our 
bank represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts, and by area, we’re the second 
largest – thanks in no small part to the great state of Montana. Our district also includes the 
Dakotas, Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. 
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of monetary policy over the next six to 
seven weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve banks – including me – 
and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  including  Chairman  Bernanke, 
contribute to these deliberations. (Currently, there are only five governors – two positions are 
unfilled.)  However,  the  Committee  itself  consists  only  of  the  governors,  the  president  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and a group of four other presidents that rotates annually. 
Right now, that last group consists of the presidents from the Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Dallas 
and Chicago Federal Reserve Banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I’ve said that the FOMC meets (at least) eight times per year. But how do these meetings 
work? At a typical meeting, there are two so-called go-rounds, in which every president and 
every governor has the opportunity to speak without interruption. The first of these is referred 
to  as  the  economics  go-round.  It  is  kicked  off  by  a  presentation  on  current  economic 
conditions  by  Federal  Reserve  staff  economists.  Then,  the  presidents  and  governors 
describe their individual views on current economic conditions and their respective outlooks 
for future economic conditions. The presidents typically start by providing information about 
their district’s local economic performance. We get that information from our research staffs, 
but also from our interactions with business and community leaders in industries and towns 
from across our districts.  
The chairman speaks at the end of the first go-round. He briefly but thoroughly summarizes 
the  preceding  16  perspectives.  I  can  assure  you  that  this  is  no  easy  task  –  and  the 
chairman’s  balanced  and  thoughtful  treatment  of  our  remarks  is  one  of  the  many  reasons 
that he commands such respect among his colleagues. He then provides his own views on 
the economy.  
The Committee next turns to the second go-round, which focuses on policy. Again, the staff 
begins, with a presentation of policy options. After that, each of the 17 meeting participants 
has  a  chance  to  speak  on  what  each  views  as  the  appropriate  policy  choice.  This  set  of 
remarks is followed with a summary by the chairman, in which he lays out what he sees as 
the Committee’s consensus view for future policy. The voting members of the FOMC then 
cast their votes on this policy statement and thereby set monetary policy for the next six to 
seven weeks. 
I think that this description of an FOMC meeting highlights how the structure of the FOMC 
mirrors the federalist structure of our government. Representatives from different regions of 
the  country  –  the  various  presidents  –  have  input  into  FOMC  deliberations.  And,  as  I’ve 
described,  their  input  relies  critically  on  information  received  from  district  residents.  In  this 
way,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  deliberately  designed  to  give  the  residents  of  Main 
Street a voice in national monetary policy. 
I’ve  said  that  FOMC  participants  seek  to  adopt  what  they  view  as  the  appropriate  policy 
choice. That provides a natural segue into my next topic: the policy objectives of the FOMC. 
The FOMC has a dual mandate, established by Congress: to set monetary policy so as to 
promote price stability and maximum employment. In my view, the heart of implementing the 
price stability mandate is to formulate and communicate an objective for inflation. The central 
bank  then  fulfills  its  price  stability  mandate  by  making  choices  over  time  so  as  to  keep 
inflation close to that objective.  
Of course, the central bank’s job is complicated by economic shocks that may lower or raise 
inflationary pressures. The central bank provides additional monetary accommodation – like 
lower interest rates – in response to the shocks that push down on medium-term inflation. It 
reduces accommodation in response to the shocks that push up on inflation. By doing so, it 
works to ensure that inflation stays close to its objective.  
It  is  not  enough  to  have  an  objective  –  the  Federal  Reserve  must  also  communicate  that 
objective  clearly  and  credibly.  That  communication  serves  to  anchor  the  public’s  medium- 
and  long-term  inflationary  expectations.  Put  another  way,  without  clear  communication  of 
objectives,  the  public  can  only  guess  at  the  intentions  of  the  FOMC,  and  inflationary 
expectations and inflation itself will inevitably end up fluctuating – and perhaps by a lot. It is 
possible to undo these shifts in expectations, but doing so entails significant economic cost. 
The nation saw this all too clearly in the early 1980s, when tighter monetary policy necessary 
to rein in high inflation resulted in painful employment losses.  
The  Federal  Reserve  communicates  its  objective  for  inflation  in  a  number  of  ways.  For 
example, at quarterly intervals, FOMC meeting participants publicly reveal their forecasts for 
inflation five years hence, assuming that monetary policy is optimal. Those forecasts usually 
range between 1.5 percent and 2 percent per year. They are often collectively referred to by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
saying that the Federal Reserve views inflation as being “mandate-consistent” if it is running 
at “2 percent or a bit under.” 
Congress has also mandated that the FOMC set monetary policy so as to promote maximum 
employment. Some see an intrinsic conflict between the FOMC’s price stability mandate and 
maximum  employment  mandate.  But  there  is  actually  a  deep  sense  in  which  the  price 
stability and maximum employment mandates are intertwined. Imagine that inflation runs at 3 
or 4 percent per year for three or four years. The public will then start to doubt the credibility 
of the Fed’s stated commitment to a 2-percent-or-a-bit-under objective. The public’s medium-
term inflationary expectations will consequently begin to rise. As we saw in the latter part of 
the 1970s, these changes in expectations can serve to reinforce and augment the upward 
drift in inflation. At that point, the Federal Reserve will have to tighten policy considerably if it 
wishes  to  regain  control  of  inflation.  But  we  learned  in  the  early  1980s  that  the  resultant 
tightening – while necessary – generates large losses in employment. In other words, failing 
to meet its price stability mandate can also lead the FOMC, over the medium and long term, 
to substantial failure on its employment mandate.1  
Over the past year, the FOMC has communicated through its statements that it perceives the 
current unemployment rate to be elevated relative to levels that it views as consistent with its 
dual mandate. However, an important and ongoing communications challenge for the FOMC 
is  that  it  is  much  harder  to  quantify  the  maximum  employment  mandate  than  the  price 
stability  mandate.  Changes  in  minimum  wage  policy,  demography,  taxes  and  regulations, 
technological  productivity, 
insurance  benefits, 
entrepreneurial  credit  access  and  social  norms  all  influence  what  we  might  consider 
“maximum employment.” Trying to offset these changes in the economy with monetary policy 
can lead to a dangerous drift in inflationary expectations and ultimately in inflation itself.  
How has the FOMC performed relative to its dual mandate over the  past three and a half 
years, since the onset of the Great Recession at the end of 2007? In terms of price stability, 
the answer is: remarkably well. The personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation rate 
has  averaged  1.8  percent  per  year  from  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007  through  the  second 
quarter of 2011. In my view, this outcome is essentially consistent with price stability. 
Now, I want to be clear here about what I mean when I say “inflation.” That number I just 
gave you, 1.8 percent per year for more than three years, refers to what’s termed headline 
inflation. It includes all goods and services, including food and energy. When the Fed says 
that  it  is  committed  to  keeping  inflation  at  2  percent  or  a  little  less,  it  means  prices  for  all 
goods and services, including the gas we put in our cars and the food we put on our tables. 
When we make reference to year-over-year core inflation – that is, inflation without food and 
energy  –  it’s  only  because  we  believe  that  core  inflation  is  a  helpful  predictor  of  headline 
inflation over the next three or four years.  
The FOMC’s admirable performance on the price stability mandate is not due to luck. Since 
mid-2006, residential land prices in the United States have fallen by over 50 percent.2 Falling 
land prices were at the heart of the financial crisis from 2007 to 2009 and have generated a 
persistent fall in wealth and borrowing capacity for households. The associated declines in 
demand  for  consumption  goods  and  investment  goods  pushed  downward  on  prices  and 
inflation. 
job  market  efficiency,  unemployment 
                                                 
1   The  discussion  in  this  paragraph  is  largely  consistent  with  the  following  quote  from  Chairman  Bernanke’s 
response  to  a  reporter’s  question  in  April  about  the  Fed’s  ability  to  lower  the  rate  of  unemployment  more 
rapidly: “even purely from an employment perspective – that if inflation were to become unmoored, inflation 
expectations were to rise significantly, that the cost of that in terms of employment loss in the future, as we 
had  to  respond  to  that,  would  be  quite  significant.”  (See  transcript  of  Chairman  Bernanke’s  April  27,  2011, 
press conference, p. 14). 
2   See Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, LAND-PI (CSW) series. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Confronted  with  this  enormous  shock  to  the  economy,  the  Federal  Reserve  followed  an 
unprecedentedly and imaginatively accommodative policy. It kept interest rates near zero. It 
provided “forward guidance” by explicitly expressing its expectation that interest rates would 
stay  extraordinarily  low  for  an  extended  period.  It  bought  over  $2  trillion  of  longer-term 
government securities. Through these actions, the Fed provided an extraordinary amount of 
monetary  stimulus  –  and  so  was  able  to  meet  its  price  stability  mandate  in  the  face  of 
challenging circumstances. 
Unemployment does remain disturbingly high – over 9 percent. However, I am sure that it 
would be even higher without the enormous amount of monetary stimulus being provided by 
the  Fed.  Moreover,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC  could  only  have  systematically  lowered  the 
unemployment  rate  further  by  generating  inflation  rates  over  a  multiyear  period  that  were 
higher than its communicated objective of 2 percent. Such an outcome could potentially lead 
the public to lose faith in the credibility of the FOMC’s communicated objective and thereby 
increase the probability that the FOMC would lose control of inflation. As I discussed earlier, 
this  scenario  would  require  a  policy  response  that  would  generate  substantial  losses  of 
employment.  
I want to close my discussion of FOMC performance by explaining why there is no longer an 
intrinsic connection between the size of the Fed’s balance sheet and inflation. I’ve mentioned 
how the Federal Reserve has bought over $2 trillion of government securities. It has funded 
that purchase by tripling the amount of deposits held by banks with the Fed – what are called 
bank  reserves.  The  standard  reasoning  is  that  this  kind  of  reserve  creation  is  inflationary. 
Banks  are  only  allowed  to  offer  checkable  deposits  in  proportion  to  their  reserves. 
Economists  view  checkable  deposits  as  a  form  of  money  because,  like  cash,  checkable 
deposits make many transactions easier. In this sense, bank reserves held with the Fed are 
essentially  licenses  for  banks  to  create  a  certain  amount  of  money.  By  giving  out  more 
licenses, the FOMC is allowing banks to create more money. And if you took any economics 
in  school  you  learned:  more  money  chasing  the  same  number  of  goods  –  voilà,  inflation. 
Indeed, I think I’m pretty safe in saying that after four years in economics grad school, I’ve 
uttered  this  phrase  –  more  money  chasing  the  same  number  of  goods  creates  inflation  – 
more often than anyone else in this room. 
But this connection between bank reserves and inflation is simply not  operative right now. 
Banks have few good lending opportunities, and so they’re not trying to attract deposits. As a 
result, they are keeping nearly $1.6 trillion of reserves at the Fed in excess of what they need 
to  back  their  deposits.  In  other  words,  banks  have  the  licenses  to  create  money,  but  are 
choosing not to do so.  
I’m confident, though, that at some point in the future, the economy will improve and banks 
will once again have good lending opportunities. Some observers are concerned that once 
this happens, the banks’ excess reserves will serve as kindling for an inflationary fire. This 
concern  would  have  been  entirely  appropriate  three  years  ago.  But  in  October  2008, 
Congress  granted  the  Federal  Reserve  the  power  to  pay  interest  on  bank  reserves.  Right 
now, that interest rate is 25 basis points, or 0.25 percent. By raising that rate judiciously, the 
Fed has the ability to deter banks from using their reserves to create money, and through this 
mechanism,  the  Fed  can  prevent  inflation.  The  Fed’s  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves 
means  that  the  old  and  familiar  link  between  increased  bank  reserves  and  higher  inflation 
has been broken. 
Of course, this requires the Fed to raise the interest rate on reserves in response to changes 
in economic conditions. You might well ask: Will the Fed raise interest rates in a sufficiently 
timely and effective manner to keep inflation at 2 percent or a little less? But that’s always 
been  the  key  question  to  ask  about  Fed  policy,  even  when  the  Fed  had  a  much  smaller 
balance sheet. And that’s my point: Because the Fed can pay interest on reserves, the size 
of its balance sheet does not, in and of itself, undercut the credibility of its commitment to 
keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under. I believe that’s why both survey and market-based 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
measures  of  expected  inflation  over  the  next  five  to  10  years  have  remained  remarkably 
stable as the Fed has expanded its liabilities. 
Let  me  summarize  my  review  of  FOMC  performance  since  the  beginning  of  the  Great 
Recession  in  December  2007.  My  assessment  is  that,  despite  some  profound  economic 
shocks,  the  FOMC  –  led  by  Chairman  Bernanke  –  has  successfully  met  its  price  stability 
mandate by engaging in imaginative forms of monetary accommodation. These actions have 
also helped lower the unemployment rate. As part of its accommodative policy, the FOMC 
has greatly expanded its balance sheet. But it is important to understand that this expansion 
need  not  trigger  inflation  now  or  in  the  future,  because  the  Federal  Reserve  can  now  pay 
interest on bank reserves.  
With all that said, I’ve dissented from the FOMC’s decisions in the past two meetings. As I 
mentioned  earlier,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC’s  ultimate  effectiveness  relies  critically  on  its 
communication  and  the  credibility  of  that  communication.  I’ve  dissented  at  the  last  two 
meetings because I believe that the Committee’s decisions at those meetings diminish that 
requisite credibility. I’ll close my remarks today by explaining my thinking on this matter. 
The FOMC’s dual mandate, as I’ve said, is to keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under and to 
promote  maximum  employment  –  that  is,  to  keep  unemployment  low.  Over  the  past  few 
years,  the  Fed  has  quite  appropriately  provided  a  historically  unprecedented  level  of 
monetary  accommodation.  However,  as  inflation  rises  and  unemployment  falls,  the  FOMC 
should respond by lowering the level of accommodation. This kind of systematic response to 
changes in economic conditions is an essential part of good monetary policy for at least a 
couple of reasons. First, there is a great deal of empirical evidence and theoretical support 
for the idea that following a systematic policy rule, as economists call it, is what enables the 
Committee  to  achieve  its  dual  mandate  goals.  Second,  and  perhaps  more  importantly, 
actions speak louder than words. The Committee can claim that it intends to make monetary 
policy so as to fulfill its dual mandate. But the public will watch its actions carefully in this 
regard. If the Committee fails to reduce its immense amount of accommodation in a timely 
fashion, the public will begin to doubt the Committee’s claims about its goals.  
In  November  2010,  the  FOMC  undertook  a  second  round  of  purchases  of  long-term 
government securities – an action that has become known as QE2. This was a controversial 
move  in  some  quarters,  but  I  supported  it  –  and  I  believe  that  it  played  a  valuable  role  in 
reducing what seemed at the time to be a large risk of deflation. Let’s look back at economic 
conditions  at  that  November  2010  meeting.  The  unemployment  rate  was  9.8  percent  and 
was expected to be 9 percent a year later. The year-over-year core PCE inflation rate was 
less than 1 percent and was expected to rise to 1.3 percent over the course of 2011.  
Now, fast-forward to October 2011. The unemployment rate is 9.1 percent and is expected to 
be  near  8.5  percent  by  the  end  of  2012.  The  year-over-year  core  PCE  inflation  rate  is 
1.6 percent and is expected to stay near that level – or even higher – over the course of the 
coming  year.3  So,  since  November  2010,  the  unemployment  rate  and  the  outlook  for  the 
unemployment  rate  have  improved.  Inflation  and  the  outlook  for  inflation  have  both  risen 
closer  to  2  percent.  As  I’ve  just  discussed,  in  response  to  these  changes  in  economic 
conditions, the Committee should have lowered the level of monetary accommodation over 
the course of the year. Instead, through actions taken at its last two meetings, the Committee 
has  raised  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation.  In  this  sense,  the  Committee’s  recent 
actions in 2011 are inconsistent with the evolution of the economic data in 2011.  
I want to be clear about one additional point. Along with many private sector forecasters, the 
FOMC has overestimated the strength of the recovery over the past two years. Some have 
                                                 
3  
I’m  using  current  core  inflation  as  a  way  of  measuring  medium-term  pressures  on  headline  inflation.  See 
May 25, 2011, speech for more details. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
suggested  that  the  unexpected  slowness  of  the  recovery  is  a  justification  for  the  FOMC’s 
increasing  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation  over  the  past  couple  of  months.  But  I 
disagree with this argument. I’ve described how, as the economy recovers, the FOMC should 
respond  by  reducing  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation.  Logically,  it  follows  that  if  the 
economy recovers more slowly than expected, then the FOMC should respond by reducing 
the  level  of  monetary  accommodation  more  slowly  than  expected.  The  FOMC  should  only 
increase  accommodation  if  the  economy’s  performance,  relative  to  the  dual  mandate, 
actually worsens over time.  
To  sum  up:  The  Committee’s  actions  at  the  last  two  meetings  are  inconsistent  with  a 
systematic pursuit of its communicated objectives. It follows that these actions diminish the 
Committee’s  credibility  and  so  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  future  Committee  actions  and 
communications.  And  that’s  why  I’ve  dissented  from  the  Committee’s  actions  at  those 
meetings. 
Thank you very much for your attention, and I look forward to taking your questions.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
