Ignazio Visco: Closing of the cultural days of the European Central  
Bank – Italy 2011 
Address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the closing of the cultural days 
of  the  European  Central  Bank  –  Italy  2011,  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
17 November 2011.  
 Mr.  President,  Caro  Mario,  Cher  Christian,  Colleagues  of  the  Central  Banks,  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, 
I  attended  this  evening’s  closing  concert  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s  Cultural  Days 
dedicated to Italy with great pleasure and it is with great pleasure that I now take part in this 
ceremony in which the baton passes to Christian Noyer, Governor of Banque de France. 
Since October 19 the public in Frankfurt has had the chance to meet many representatives of 
contemporary Italian culture, artists known and admired the world over and emerging young 
talents. In this month a gust of Italy seems to have blown across Frankfurt (thanks, too, to the 
coincidence that the cultural events happened to be held at the same time as the installation 
of  an  Italian  president  in  the  Eurotower).  After  our  many  years  of  work  together  in  Banca 
d’Italia, I again express my best wishes to Mario Draghi as he takes up the challenge of his 
new position.  
Music has been the fil rouge of this month of Italian culture, inaugurated by the Orchestra 
Mozart  of  Bologna  under  the  direction  of  Maestro  Claudio  Abbado  and  concluded  this 
evening  by  the  remarkable  and  fascinating  performance  of  the  Orchestra  Verdi  of  Milan 
under  Maestro  Xian  Zhang.  In  between,  the  master  violinist  Uto  Ughi  performed  on  the 
occasion  of  the  Charity  event.  To  be  sure,  there  has  been  no  lack  of  significant  moments 
dedicated  to  the  other  expressions  of  Italian  culture,  with  the  participation  of  great 
contemporary Italian writers, such as Claudio Magris and Dacia Maraini, and the projection of 
a series of Italian movies in which six directors confronted the theme of the family between 
tradition and modernity. Contemporary music, too, has been showcased, with the virtuoso, 
high-energy  performance  of  Stefano  Bollani,  one  of  Italy’s  most  celebrated  young  jazz 
musicians. 
Still, we wanted to open and close the programme in the grand tradition of classical music. 
The  two  orchestras  –  the  Mozart  of  Bologna  and  the  Verdi  of  Milan  –  have  an  important 
common denominator: both are examples of how superb results can be achieved when there 
is the active will to discover and promote young performers and the conviction that music is 
both a means of education and a vehicle of ethical principles in society and for the formation 
of the younger generations. It was precisely this will and this conviction that gave birth to the 
Orchestra  Verdi  in  1993  and  the  Orchestra  Mozart  in  2004.  Both  testify  to  the  richness  of 
cultural  life  in  today’s  Italy  and  to  the  presence  in  our  country  of  a  host  of  ambitious  and 
successful initiatives for cultural development. 
My  sincere  thanks  naturally  go  to  the  one  of  the  great  protagonists  of  this  initiative  –  the 
public of Frankfurt. As in past editions, an extremely discerning public has given the Cultural 
Days the warmest welcome and responded enthusiastically to the events on the programme. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  have  this  further  confirmation  of  the  interest  that  the  German-
speaking  world  has  traditionally  taken  in  Italy.  From  Goethe’s  time,  from  Frankfurt  indeed 
right  down  to  the  present,  in  fact,  the  Italienreise  has  remained  a  significant  part  of  the 
formation  of  artists  and  thinkers  north  of  the  Alps.  Aside  from  our  reciprocal  stereotypes, 
about which so much has been written in both a serious and a humorous vein, the German 
people  –  intellectuals,  professionals,  simple  tourists  –  have  always  had  a  love  for  Italy.  A 
special  cultural  bond  between  the  two  countries  has  been  formed.  [A  journalist  from  Turin 
who  lived  for  many  years  in  Hamburg,  referring  to  Germans’  appreciation  of  the  Italian 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
lifestyle, gave his book on the relationship between the two cultures an efficaciously ironic 
title: “La Deutsche Vita”.] 
Banca d’Italia has always appreciated the role played by art and culture in nurturing the mind 
and creating a common national and European identity, so for our institution it has been a 
pleasure  to  take  part  in  organizing  the  Cultural  Days  this  year.  Among  other  benefits,  I 
believe that these events shorten the distance between citizens and central banks, enabling 
the  public  at  large  to  become  familiar  with  our  institutions  and  showing  our  generally 
“austere” class of central bankers in a different light. This was one more reason why Banca 
d’Italia  was  glad  to  embark  on  this  “adventure”.  My  thanks  to  the  staff  of  the  European 
Central  Bank  and  of  the  Banca  d’Italia  for  their  dedication  and  hard  work,  and  for  the 
excellent results attained. 
The ECB’s Cultural Days undoubtedly help to reinforce “unity in diversity” as Mario Draghi 
just  recalled.  This  motto  of  ours,  coined  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  fully  reflects  the  creative 
potential  inherent  in  our  heterogeneous  Europe.  In  his  remarks  at  the  Literaturhaus  on 
October 20th Claudio Magris, rightly considered the “most European” of contemporary Italian 
writers, described the European identity not as a set of roots delving down into the earth but 
as the branches of a tree reaching outward and intertwining with the branches of other trees. 
To me, this image is most evocative. Each of the individual national identities that contribute 
to our European identity is exactly like a tree, with its own deep roots in history and centuries’ 
worth  of  fruit,  but  above  all  horizontally  outstretched  towards  transparent,  vital  enlacement 
with its equally fruit-laden neighbours. 
In  closing,  let  me  offer my  best  wishes  to  Governor  Noyer  –  and  to the  European  Central 
Bank – for the preparation of next year’s Cultural Days. I am curious to learn the programme 
of events devoted to French culture. I am certain that Frankfurt will be treated to the best of 
France’s immense cultural heritage, in its profoundly European dimension yet also bearing 
the signs and the fruits of its contact with the other great civilizations of the world. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
