Jürgen Stark: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  a  hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the 
European Parliament, Brussels, 17 October 2011. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
It is a pleasure to be here today and share with you my thoughts on Economic Governance. 
This public hearing comes at a right time: important decisions have been taken, but major 
reforms are still crucially needed. I will therefore address, in turn, the three suggested issues 
for  discussion:  the  implementation  of  the  economic  governance  package,  the  longer  term 
reforms in the economic governance framework and the question of Eurobonds. 
Follow-up and implementation of the economic governance package  
1. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  congratulating  this  committee  on  the  passage  of  the  six  pack.  The 
adoption of a reinforced economic governance framework shows the ability of EU decision 
makers to address some of the shortcomings of the existing rules which came to light during 
the  crisis.  In  the  current  situation  of  market  turmoil  and  uncertainty,  it  sends  a  signal  of 
confidence to EU citizens and financial markets.  
The final text provides for a stronger framework than initially proposed by the Commission. 
And this is largely thanks to Parliament. Once again this committee has used its powers to 
instil  a  more  European  and  supranational  approach  in  economic  governance,  which  is 
incidentally very much in line with the ECB position, and I would like to thank you for that. 
As  you  know,  I  have  a  strong  attachment  –  to  say  the  least  –  to  a  set  of  binding,  quasi-
automatic  fiscal  rules  which  need  to  underpin  the  sharing  of  a  single  currency.  The  “new” 
Stability and Growth Pact all SGP III – if it can be called this way – should strengthen fiscal 
surveillance  and  enforcement  of  fiscal  discipline  in  euro  area  countries.  Equally  important, 
reinforced  the  statistical  governance  needs  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  the  framework,  and 
important progress also in this regard is the merit of this Committee’s intervention. 
The new macroeconomic surveillance framework represents an important addition to the EU 
surveillance toolbox. The scoreboard is a key element in this [and I am aware that Parliament 
is  very  attached  to  its  involvement  in  this  respect].  Let  me  stress  that  the  scoreboard  is  a 
means  to  an  end  –  namely  the  detection  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  that  threaten  the 
proper functioning of monetary union. The scoreboard should remain focused and concise to 
draw  the  attention  of  the  policy  makers  and  the  broader  public  to  the  emergence  of 
macroeconomic imbalances at an early point in time.  
Let  me  be  frank:  the  governance  package  is  an  important  step  forward.  But,  and  this  is 
unfortunately  a  big  “but”,  it  still  leaves  a  large  room  for  discretion  in  the  execution  and 
enforcement  of  the  surveillance  procedures.  The  effectiveness  of  tools  and  measures  that 
are  thankfully  contained  in  the  six  pack,  is  contingent  on  their  implementation,  not  just  in 
letter, but also in spirit.  
The  track  record  on  implementing  the  surveillance  mechanisms  is  less  than  stellar.  This 
applies 
in  presenting  sufficiently  strong  proposals  and 
recommendations,  and  the  Council  in  exerting  peer  pressure.  I  see,  therefore,  high 
“implementation risks”. The many exceptions and relevant or special factors that need to be 
the  Commission 
to  both 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
taken into account at different stages of the procedure unfortunately reinforce these doubts. 
Therefore,  the  ECB  regrets  that  one  of  the  key  aspects  of  the  quantum  leap  in  economic 
governance that it was advocating – greater automaticity in decision-making through the use 
of  reverse  qualified  majority  voting  to  the  maximum  extent  possible  –  was  only  partly 
achieved.  
I  call  also  on  this  Committee  to  use  the  new  tools  that  are  at  its  disposal,  such  as  the 
“economic  dialogue”,  to  enhance  transparency  and  promote  peer  pressure  and  market 
discipline. Equally, the European Semester should be improved further, to make a useful tool 
of  ex  ante  surveillance,  and  the  ongoing  discussion  Parliament  can  exert  pressure  in  this 
regard.  
Ultimately,  however,  what  really  needs  to  change  is  the  mindset  of  all  parties  involved  in 
surveillance: they have to assume the full responsibility for the smooth functioning of EMU. 
This means internalising what it means to be part of monetary union, exerting strong peer 
pressure when necessary, and being ready to take the guidance received from their peers or 
the supranational institutions.  
The real question is whether this more fundamental change can come about without some 
more  fundamental  shifts  in  competencies.  As  Jean  Monnet,  who  is  probably  often  cited  in 
this House, said “I have too often observed the limits of coordination. It is a method which 
promotes discussion, but it does not lead to a decision.” And yet the management of the euro 
area  economy  needs  effective  decisions,  and  not  just  inconsequential  discussions.  This 
leads me to my second point. 
Longer term reforms in the economic governance framework 
2. 
Current developments clearly show the need to reach a new quality of EMU governance by 
going  well  beyond  the  scope  of  the  economic  governance  package.  We  need  a  genuine 
economic union. I trust the EP will use the review clause included in the package to enable 
further  enhancements  to  the  euro  area  economic  governance  that  will  contribute  to  a 
smoother functioning of EMU, for instance by introducing greater automaticity.  
In  my  view,  more  fundamental  deepening  of  fiscal  and  economic  policy  surveillance  is 
necessary in the long run. This will involve a transfer of sovereignty to the European level 
with  much  stronger  powers  and  will  necessitate  stricter  constraints  on  national  budget 
policies.  
Those  reforms  will  require  a  comprehensive  Treaty  change  but  above  all,  an  adequate 
mechanism to ensure their democratic legitimacy through the appropriate involvement of the 
European Parliament and the national parliaments. Let me outline the cornerstones of such a 
governance reform. To ensure fiscal discipline, all planned deficits of more than 3% of GDP 
and  those  in  excess  of  a  country’s  medium  term  objective  would  be  approved  by  all  euro 
area  governments.  Past  fiscal  slippages  would  be  automatically  corrected  in  upcoming 
budgets without any room for discretion via the introduction of constitutional rules similar to 
the German “debt brake”. All Member States would also agree to implement full automaticity 
regarding  fines  and  sanctions.  Moreover,  countries  under  macroeconomic  adjustment 
programmes in the context of ESM assistance and which fail to remain on track would be 
placed under financial receivership.  
And finally, the institutional arrangements at both national and supranational level have to be 
strengthened.  At  the  national  level,  independent  budget  offices  would  ensure  reliable 
forecasts  –  a  prerequisite  for  sound  planning  and  implementation  of  budgets.  At  the  euro 
area level this needs to be complemented by an independent entity with a clear mandate and 
a  strong  institutional  framework  to  assess  the  implementation  of  fiscal  rules,  for  instance 
some form of European Budget Office. The “EBO” could potentially form the nucleus of what 
could become over time and in a step wised manner a European Ministry Finance. Strong 
and independent institutions at euro area and national levels enhance transparency and add 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
pressure  to  conduct  sound  policies,  as  well  as  effectively  counteract  possible  tendencies 
towards a lenient implementation of fiscal rules at the level of individual member states. 
Issuing common bonds in the euro area 
3. 
Further strengthening of economic governance is a must. Do not be mistaken that there is an 
alternative “silver bullet” that will resolve the current crisis and prevent future ones, such as 
the issuing of Eurobonds. Given that one of the root causes of the current sovereign debt 
crisis  are  unsustainable  fiscal  policies,  I  want  to  emphasise  that  this  calls  for  a  clear 
strengthening  of  incentives  for  prudent  and  sustainable  fiscal  policies.  The  introduction  of 
common  bonds  in  the  euro  area  would,  however,  clearly  weaken  such  incentives  without 
offering a long-term crisis resolution. Let me give you three main reasons for that: 
Firstly, the fact that financial markets demand higher yields to fund governments with weak 
fundamentals  clearly  provides  the  right  incentives  for  governments  to  ensure  sustainable 
finances. Credible fiscal consolidation and prudent levels of government debt are in general 
rewarded, whereas large budget deficits and mounting government debt are penalized in the 
form of high credit risk premiums. Eurobonds would eliminate this incentive mechanism as 
governments  would  face  the  same  funding  costs  regardless  of  the  state  of  their  public 
finances.  
Secondly,  the  introduction  of  Eurobonds  would  also  not  lead  to  lowering  the  costs  of  the 
current  sovereign  debt  crisis;  it  would  simply  redistribute  them.  Common  euro  area  bonds 
imply a transfer from countries with solid public finances – as they will no longer benefit from 
lower funding costs – to those with weak ones. Unsustainable fiscal positions can no longer 
be punished by high credit risk premiums. This redistribution aggravates exiting moral hazard 
problems and undermines the long-term fiscal sustainability in the euro area. On top of this, 
via  common  bonds  strong  and  weak  countries  enter  into  mutual  obligations  of  very  large 
size.  This  carries  the  risk  that  the  sound  countries  will  be  taken  hostage,  e.g.  to  accept  a 
gradual erosion of commonly agreed fiscal rules. 
Thirdly, it is not clear at all whether an introduction of Eurobonds would really help to resolve 
the sovereign debt crises. Part of the government debt in the euro area would of course be 
converted into common euro area bonds. The remaining part will, however, still need to be 
funded the old-fashioned way – by means of standard sovereign bonds. Whether financial 
market participants would be willing to buy and hold sovereign bonds of countries with weak 
fundaments  is  by  far  not  sure,  also  given  the  current  level  of  risk  aversion.  In  an  extreme 
case, we might see a complete flight out of individual sovereign bonds towards Eurobonds, 
which would rather lead to a worsening of the sovereign debt crisis and not to its resolution.  
Eurobonds do not offer a solution of the sovereign debt crisis and are not a viable instrument 
of government financing. Maybe it is worth remembering that all the proposals I have seen so 
far  for  Eurobonds  are,  at  the  heart,  governance  proposals.  None  of  them  can  do  with  out 
massively reinforced governance or outright sovereignty transfers to the supernational level. 
The  more  appropriate  way  to  look  at  Eurobonds  is  to  start  with  governance:  Only  with  a 
fundamental shift of our structures in the European Union – towards a real political union – 
could one conceivably create incentive and governance conditions that are commensurate 
with the issuance of common bonds. Before talking about Eurobonds, we should identify the 
necessary  reforms  that  focus  on  the  ultimate  objective:  institutional  arrangements  which 
provide credible incentives for sound fiscal and economic policies.  
Dear Chair, Honourable Members, I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
