Ewald Nowotny: European integration in a global economic setting – 
CESEE, China and Russia 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  (CEEI)  2011:  “European 
Integration 
in  a  Global  Economic  Setting  –  CESEE,  China  and  Russia”,  Vienna, 
21 November 2011. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  the  Conference  on  European  Economic 
Integration  2011  on  “European  Integration  in  a  Global  Economic  Setting  –  CESEE,  China 
and  Russia”.  A  particularly  warm  welcome  goes  to  Governor  Erkki  Liikanen  from  Suomen 
Pankki – Finlands Bank and to all the representatives of the Finnish central bank who have 
joined us here in Vienna for the conference. Moreover, I am pleased to welcome, for the first 
time,  all  our  viewers  at  Suomen  Pankki  who  are  watching  a  live  webcast  of  the  CEEI  on 
screen in Helsinki.  
In  the  history  of  the  CEEI,  this  is  a  very  special  year.  While  there  has  been  international 
cooperation in organizing the CEEI in the past, for example with the ECB or the IMF, this is 
the first CEEI we have jointly organized with a Eurosystem NCB – the Finnish central bank. 
Moreover,  this  is  the  first  time  we  have  extended  the  conference  topic  to  include  new 
economic areas – China and Russia. 
Of course, there are several very good reasons both for this cooperation and for broadening 
the conference topic. 
Some  of  you  may  know  that  the  OeNB  focuses  its  economic  analysis  and  research  on 
Central,  Eastern  and  Southeastern  Europe  (CESEE),  mainly  because  of  Austria’s  strong 
historical and economic links to the region. Similarly, Suomen Pankki – or more specifically 
the BOFIT, the Bank of Finland Institute for Transition Economies – has a regional research 
focus, namely on Russia and China, thus covering two of the most interesting and promising 
emerging  markets  of  the  world.  Given  this  year’s  conference  topic,  it  was  therefore  only 
logical to invite our Finnish friends to organize the CEEI 2011 with us – and we were very 
pleased that they accepted our invitation and supported us with their valuable expertise. 
For two decades, this conference series has been devoted to spreading and deepening the 
knowledge  of  European  economic  integration  with  a  particular  emphasis  on  CESEE 
economies in transition. Yet we decided to expand our focus this time. Of course, you might 
think  that  dealing  with  the  CESEE  region  alone  would  provide  topics  for  at  least  a  dozen 
further  conferences.  Definitely,  we  would  not  run  out  of  interesting  CESEE-related  topics, 
especially as the countries in this region are so different and there are so many aspects to 
look  at:  different  stages  in  the  catching-up  process,  different  stages  of  EU  integration, 
different stages of monetary deepening, etc. 
At the same time, however, this country-by-country approach contains a certain risk: the risk 
of  overlooking  fundamental  economic  developments  that  take  place  elsewhere  and  might 
affect the CESEE region as a whole. Developments in Russia, and even more so in China, 
seem to fall into this category. Given their huge size and market potential alone, it is quite 
obvious  that  economic  developments  in  these  two  countries  would  have  an  impact  on  the 
CESEE region. In turn, the CESEE region as a whole – and the euro area as well – may well 
have an impact on Russia and China, too. 
So to be able to see – and understand – European integration in a wider context of global 
economic  developments,  expanding  the  focus  of  the  CEEI  2011  to  include  two  major 
emerging economies was not only an obvious, but also a highly necessary step. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
During the next two days, we will investigate the economic impact of China and Russia as 
emerging global economic players on the catching-up process in CESEE. In doing so, we will 
try to answer questions such as: Does competition from the two large and growing emerging 
market economies constitute a drawback for CESEE? Or do opportunities prevail? 
Let me briefly address these questions by first comparing some key indicators for the three 
economic areas in question and then looking more closely at the economic impact of China 
and Russia on CESEE. 
Although we all have an idea about the actual size of these areas, let us look at the figures. 
Chart 1:  
Country size and population in 2010 
Source: OeNB calculations based on IMF data. 
 On this chart, we can see at first glance that the CESEE-10 – that is the group of CESEE EU 
Member States – are very small in terms of population and landmass compared to China and 
Russia. China stands out with its large population (almost 20% of world population) – which 
means, of course, that the country’s workforce is enormous. 
Chart 2:  
GDP per capita in 2010 
Source: OeNB calculations based on IMF data. 
Note: Figures in purchasing power standards. CESEE-10 figures 
are GDP-weighted averages. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Turning  to  GDP  per  capita,  we  see  a  different  picture.  While  the  CESEE-10  cover  a 
comparatively small area, in 2010 their GDP per capita in purchasing power standards was 
on average almost three times higher than that of China. As you can see, the income level in 
Russia was close to the GDP-weighted average in the CESEE-10. But does this mean that 
CESEE (and Russia) can lean back? 
No,  on  the  contrary:  China’s  impressive  growth  path  over  the  past  15  years  constitutes  a 
challenge to all other economies, including CESEE and Russia. Data on GDP growth show 
that China stands out with a remarkable real GDP growth of 309% over the period from 1995 
to  2010.  China  had  chosen  a  highly  controlled  opening-up  strategy.  The  Chinese  growth 
model relies upon a large pool of domestic savings and investment (which, to a large extent, 
comes from abroad), lower labor costs and thus labor-intensive exports. 
By contrast, in CESEE and Russia, central planning was overthrown in the late 1980s and 
early  1990s,  when  a  major  shift  in  economic,  political,  cultural  and  sociological  paradigms 
occurred  in  these  countries.  Russia’s  growth  model  has,  to  a  large  extent,  rested  on 
industrial  production  and,  increasingly,  on  energy  exports.  In  the  CESEE-10,  by  contrast, 
capital  inflows  –  mainly  from  Western  Europe  –  together  with  institutional  reforms  and  EU 
accession  have  spurred  export-led  growth.  Even  if  CESEE  and  Russia  started  out  from 
higher GDP per capita levels than China, their growth performance has still been remarkable. 
The  financial  crisis,  however,  has  challenged  the  current  growth  models  not  only  in  these 
regions.  
Chart 3:  
Real GDP growth 
Source: OeNB calculations based on IMF data. 
Note: 1995=100. 
 While China has weathered the financial crisis quite well,1 CESEE and Russia were directly 
hit.2  Despite  these  differences,  all  three  markets  face  common  challenges  both  in  the  real 
economy and on the financial market, such as rising external imbalances and decelerating 
                                                 
1  Despite a decline in real GDP growth  against precrisis  levels, China  nevertheless recorded positive  annual 
growth rates of between 9% and 10.5% over the period from 2009 to 2010 (IMF). Most recently, however, real 
GDP growth slowed down again from 9.5% in the second quarter to 9.1% in the third quarter of 2011. 
In 2009, GDP growth turned negative at –3.8% on average in CESEE and –7.8% in Russia. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
external  demand  for  goods,  particularly  in  the  face  of  downward-revised  GDP  growth 
forecasts in many export destinations. 
Tomorrow,  we  will  have  the  opportunity  to  look  at  possibilities  of  how  to  achieve  a 
sustainable catching-up process in these emerging market economies. In this context, let me 
just  point  out  that  the  speed  of  growth  and  the  quality  of  institutional  and  economic 
adjustment will determine who will be the leading economy in 20 to 30 years.  
Against  this  backdrop,  let  me  now  briefly  discuss  the  economic  impact  China  and  Russia 
might  have  on  CESEE.  In  doing  so,  I  will  mainly  focus  on  trade,  FDI  and  financial 
interlinkages. 
A closer look at the trade performance of the CESEE-10, China and Russia over the past 
15 years  shows  that  the  CESEE-10  have  doubled  their  share  in  world  exports,3  while 
Russia’s market share has increased only slightly – and has, to a large extent, been driven 
by the increase in world energy prices. China is expanding its role as an exporter not only of 
traditional labor-intensive products, but also of high-tech goods. 
Chart 4:  
Share of high-tech exports in total exports 
Source: OeNB calculations based on IMF and World Bank data. 
Note: CESEE-10 exports include intra-CESEE-10 trade. 
 On the one hand, internationally operating firms have relocated the final production stage not 
only of labor-intensive goods, but also of high-tech products from industrial countries, other 
Asian  tiger  economies  and  possibly  CESEE  to  China.  On  the  other  hand,  not  only  this 
relocation but also the production or final assembly of new technology-intensive products in 
China accounts for this strong rise in China’s export market share. 
Whether  this  development  will  cause  CESEE  export  market  shares  to  decrease  largely 
depends on whether the CESEE countries compete in similar product categories that have 
the  same  export  destinations.  This  afternoon,  we  will  discuss  this  question  and  related 
aspects at greater length. 
                                                 
3  CESEE doubled its market share from 1.9% in 1995 to 3.9% in 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5:  
Annual FDI inflows in % of GDP 
Source:  OeNB  calculations  based  on  UNCTAD,  IMF  and  national  statistical 
offices data. 
Note: CESEE-10 figures are GDP-weighted averages. 
 Let us now turn to a key term in this discussion: foreign direct investment (FDI). Particularly 
in  CESEE  and  in  China,  increasing  openness  to  FDI  has  contributed  largely  to  growth 
performance. Many empirical analyses have provided evidence on the relationship between 
FDI and growth. However, not only the fact that capital inflows take place, but in particular 
the way this capital is put to use plays a major role in achieving sustainable convergence.4 
Direct FDI linkages between CESEE, China and Russia are very small in terms of volume.5 
Our business panel discussion in the late afternoon will give us an opportunity to examine 
FDI from a practitioner’s perspective. 
At this point, let me draw a first conclusion. The relocation of production sites, catching-up in 
technology-intensive production and dynamic export growth in general are challenges to any 
economy. At the same time, they can be seen as opportunities to adapt institutional settings 
to promote sustainable, growth-enhancing development in the home markets. In this sense, 
the emergence of China and Russia as global economic players offers clear opportunities. 
China and Russia can become attractive target markets for exports – from CESEE as well as 
from  other  regions.  Not  only  is  China  expanding  its  role  as  a  supplier  of  goods,  but  both 
China  and  Russia  increasingly  demand  final  products  from  abroad.  Although  the  EU-15 
remain the major trading partner for CESEE, the region should make active use of China’s 
and  Russia’s  growing  demand  for  imported  goods  –  particularly  in  the  light  of  the  recent 
economic  and  financial  crisis.  Russia’s  forthcoming  accession  to  the  WTO  will  open  new 
possibilities to strengthen the linkages in the real economy via FDI and trade and to foster 
financial linkages as well. 
So far, the financial ties between Russia and CESEE have been closer than those between 
China and CESEE. Chinese banks have started to invest in CESEE only recently. Moreover, 
China’s increasing investment in several sectors in Europe proves that the financial linkages 
between these two economic areas will gain importance in the future. 
                                                 
4  See  e.g.  Firdmuc,  J.  and  M.  Reiner  (2011).  FDI,  Trade  and  Growth  in  CESEE  Countries.  In:  Focus  on 
European Economic Integration Q1/2011. OenB. 
5  China’s stock of FDI in CESEE is very small and has been decreasing since 2000. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In this context, I may add that only two weeks ago the OeNB and the People’s Bank of China 
took  a  further  step  in  strengthening  their  excellent  long-lasting  contacts  by  signing  an 
important agreement that enables the OeNB to invest in Renminbi-denominated assets via 
the Chinese central bank. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have tried to present a snapshot of recent economic developments of – and interlinkages 
between – CESEE, China and Russia. Of course, the relations among these three markets 
have  to  be  seen  in  a  much  broader  context  of  international  policy  cooperation  and 
coordination, such as the efforts by the G-20 to rebalance their economies. We also know 
that it will be necessary to find solutions for pressing problems at the European level in order 
to maintain financial stability and regain fiscal strength. 
But this is not enough.  
It is about time to adopt a broader perspective. And we will do so at this year’s CEEI, which 
is dedicated to European integration in a global economic setting. Governor Liikanen and I 
are looking forward to a fruitful exchange of views and ideas with academics, policymakers 
and financial experts and, of course, with the audience. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  now  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome,  once  again,  Governor  Erkki  Liikanen  from 
Suomen Pankki, who – if I may say that much – will also have a special announcement to 
make (CEEI 2012 in Helsinki). Erkki, the floor is yours. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
