Charles Bean: The economic outlook 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
to  the  Council  of  Mortgage  Lenders,  Mortgage  Industry  Conference  &  Exhibition,  London, 
3 November 2011. 
 Good morning and thank you for that kind introduction! 
In the very early part of this year, with the recovery from the 2008–9 recession seemingly 
becoming  more  solidly  based  and  inflation  running  at  double  our  2%  inflation  target,  the 
Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee, of which I am a member, was edging towards starting to 
withdraw some of the considerable monetary stimulus we had injected during the downturn. 
Indeed, as recently as our May meeting, a third of the Committee were voting to raise Bank 
Rate from its emergency level of 0.5 per cent. Although I did not join them in voting to raise 
Bank Rate, I did view the arguments for and against a tightening as being finely balanced. 
Now,  just  a  few  months  later,  the  Committee  has  unanimously  voted  to  re-start  its 
programme of asset purchases financed by the issuance of additional central bank reserves, 
also known as quantitative easing. In my address this morning, I thought I would say a few 
words about why the Committee’s view of the outlook has shifted so dramatically and what 
we can expect additional purchases to achieve. 
As I said, earlier this year the recovery seemed broadly on track. But, as time has passed, so 
it has seemed less secure. That is not so obvious in the figures for quarterly GDP growth 
(see left-hand panel of Chart 1), which have been buffeted by a  variety of special factors, 
such as: the bad weather late last year; the impact of the Tōhoku disaster on global supply 
chains;  and  the  extra  bank  holiday  for  the  royal  wedding.  These  last  two,  in  particular, 
provided  a  temporary  boost  to  the  third-quarter  growth  rate  of  0.5  per  cent  released  on 
Tuesday.  But  business  surveys  and  other  indicators  suggest  that  the  underlying  rate  of 
expansion has probably eased (see right-hand panel of Chart 1). Those same surveys point 
to only very moderate growth at best in the final quarter of this year. 
This slowing in growth is not confined to the United Kingdom. Growth has eased in the euro 
area and the business surveys are consistent with contraction in the second half of this year 
(see  Chart  2).  Though  output  growth  has  picked  up  in  the  United  States  according  to  the 
latest official data, the business surveys suggest this may prove ephemeral (also see Chart 
2). And there are signs that China and some other emerging economies have slowed too, 
though  in  their  case  the  slowing  was  partly  policy-induced  in  order  to  alleviate  inflationary 
pressures. 
I  would  highlight  two  primary  drivers  of  this  slowing.  The  first  is  the  heightened  tension  in 
financial  and  bank  funding  markets  associated  with  the  twin  euro-area  banking  and 
sovereign  debt  crises.  Stretched  fiscal  positions  have  raised  questions  about  the  ability  of 
several euro-area governments to support their banking systems. And the weak position of 
those  same  banking  systems  has  also  heightened  doubts  about  the  sovereigns’  fiscal 
sustainability (Chart 3). Though UK banks’ exposure to peripheral country debt is relatively 
modest, interlinkages with euro-area banks that are more heavily exposed have meant that 
UK  banks  have  also  experienced  heightened  funding  difficulties  in  recent  weeks.  Unless 
those conditions improve, our banking contacts indicate that the availability of credit to the 
real  economy  may  soon  begin  to  suffer.  Moreover,  the  heightened  tensions  in  financial 
markets  are  likely  to  have  raised  uncertainty  more  generally  and  further  depressed 
household and business confidence. Our regional Agents are already starting to tell us that 
some businesses are putting investment projects on hold as a result. 
In the early hours of last Thursday morning, European leaders agreed to take further steps: 
to  address  the  fiscal  sustainability  of  Greece  and  other  periphery  countries;  to  expand  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
firepower  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility;  and  to  buttress  the  resilience  of 
European banks through recapitalisation. While the major UK banks will not be required to 
raise capital, they would nevertheless be well advised to take advantage of any opportunity 
that  does  arise  to  further  strengthen  their  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,  thereby  putting 
themselves  in  a  better  position  to withstand  any  further  deterioration in  conditions,  without 
needing to constrain lending. Last Thursday’s agreement represents an important element of 
a satisfactory resolution to the euro area crisis, but there are still many details to be worked 
out.  Moreover,  the  announcement  by  the  Greek  government  that  it  plans  to  hold  a 
referendum on its package has injected additional uncertainty. And, even if the 27 October 
agreement is eventually implemented, the peripheral economies of the euro area will still be 
faced  with  substantial  adjustment  challenges,  including  the  need  to  rebalance  their 
economies and improve their competitiveness. So the strains in the euro area seem likely to 
continue for some while yet. 
The second factor behind the unexpected slowing in growth is the substantial rise in energy 
and  other  commodity  prices  during  the  latter  part  of  2010  and  first  part  of  this  year, 
associated  with  strong  growth  in  the  emerging  economies  as  well  as  interruptions  to  the 
supply of oil as a result of geopolitical developments in the Middle East and North Africa. UK 
inflation over the past year has consequently been around 1½ percentage points higher than 
the central view in our November 2010 Inflation Report, with the twelve-month rate reaching 
5.2%  in  September.  That  has  added  to  the  squeeze  on  real  household  incomes  already 
taking place as a result of earlier increases in energy and other import prices, together with 
the increase in the standard rate of VAT to 20 per cent. In the eight quarters since the trough 
of the recession in the middle of 2009, real household income has fallen 2½ per cent, as only 
modest wage growth has been more than offset by elevated inflation. And with higher utility 
prices pushing consumer prices up another 1¼ per cent since June, it is probable that real 
household disposable income will turn out to have fallen during the second half of this year 
too.  Against  that  background,  it  is  not  surprising  that  real  consumer  spending  growth  has 
been weak. 
Although  elevated  inflation  has  been  the  medium  through  which  some  of  this  squeeze  in 
living standards has been brought about, the squeeze reflects three deeper real economic 
forces that monetary policy can do little to negate. The first force is the aforesaid rise in the 
price of commodities, relative to the prices of global goods and services, associated with the 
confluence of strong demand growth in the emerging economies and commodity producers’ 
inability or unwillingness to increase supply to match the extra demand. 
The second force is the fall in the purchasing power of sterling. Before the financial crisis, the 
UK  was  operating  with  an  unsustainably  low  level  of  national  savings  and  an  associated 
current  account  deficit.  In  addition,  the  crisis  has  probably  led  to  a  long-lasting  hit  to  the 
demand  for  financial  services  exports.  Generating  an  expansion  in  net  exports  in  order  to 
counterbalance the necessary increase in savings and to offset any reduction in the demand 
for  financial  services  exports  then  requires  a  real  depreciation  of  the  currency.  This  was 
achieved by a fall of a quarter in the trade-weighted value of the nominal sterling exchange 
rate  between  the  start  of  the  crisis  and  the  end  of  20081.  Although  the  impact  of  this 
depreciation  on  net  exports  initially  seemed  rather  disappointing,  recent  revised  data  from 
the ONS now suggest that the impact on net exports has been roughly in line with that seen 
after previous large movements in the exchange rate (Chart 4).  
The third force is the loss in output and income associated with the financial crisis. Output 
presently lies almost 15 per cent below where it would have been if it had continued to grow 
in  line  with  its  pre-crisis  trend.  Even  if  that  shortfall  does  not  prove  to  be  permanent,  the 
                                                 
1  
It is worth emphasising that the bulk of this fall occurred before the MPC cut Bank Rate sharply in the wake of 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers and subsequently embarked on quantitative easing. It cannot therefore be 
attributed to lax monetary policy. Sterling has been broadly stable since the beginning of 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
experience after previous recessions following banking crises suggests that it is likely to be 
highly  persistent  (see  Chart  5,  which  shows  the  UK  experience  since  the  start  of  the 
recession, together with the range of analogous historical experiences). Initially, households 
and  businesses  were  protected  from  the  full  impact  of  this  downward  shift  in  prospective 
incomes by the previous Government’s decision to let the budget deficit temporarily take the 
strain. But the necessary subsequent fiscal consolidation has led inevitably to a higher tax 
burden and lower public spending growth. 
As already noted, inflation reached 5.2 per cent in September. But much of that reflects the 
combined  impact  of  higher  VAT  and  prices  for  energy  and  other  imports.  A  range  of 
estimates  of  the  impact  of  these  factors  is  provided  by  the  blue  swathe  in  Chart  6.  The 
remainder is attributable to domestically-generated inflation, estimates of which are provided 
by the green swathe in the same Chart. This appears to have been running well below the 
2 per cent target, reflecting in large part the unusually low rate of pay growth, which is in turn 
symptomatic of the slack in the economy. 
As we go into next year, so last January’s increase in VAT will drop out of the calculation, 
knocking around one percentage point off inflation. And commodity prices have started to fall 
back as the pace of global expansion has eased (Chart 7). So the contribution of energy and 
other commodity prices to inflation should fall back sharply as we go through the year. Of 
course,  we  cannot  assume  that  the  evolution  of  domestically-generated  inflation  is 
independent  of  these  factors.  Indeed,  some  countervailing  pickup  in  the  contribution  of 
domestically-generated  inflation  is  quite  possible  if  businesses  look  to  provide  their 
employees with some recompense for the past squeeze in living standards. Moreover, one 
cannot rule out further adverse external price shocks. But a sharp fall in inflation is the most 
likely outcome and that in turn should mean that the squeeze on real household incomes will 
ease, providing some support for consumer spending.  
Even so, real income growth will still only be moderate and high levels of indebtedness may 
weigh on the spending of some households. Moreover, the uncertainties associated with the 
euro area are likely to persist, retarding growth there. Not only will that weigh on our exports, 
but funding conditions may also remain difficult, while British businesses are likely to remain 
cautious about investing and hiring. 
At its October meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee agreed that the outlook for UK output 
growth  was  markedly  weaker  than  it  had  believed  earlier  in  the  year.  Without  action,  and 
despite the present excessive level of inflation, the extra margin of slack meant that inflation 
would consequently be more likely to undershoot, rather than overshoot, the 2% target in the 
medium  term.  So  it  was  against  that  background  that  we  decided  to  re-start  our  asset 
purchases, buying another £75 billion of gilts. 
As you will no doubt know, quantitative easing aims to depress a range of longer-term yields 
and raise asset prices, so boosting demand. Our analysis suggests that our first £200 billion 
of asset purchases reduced the yields on gilts and corporate bonds by around a percentage 
point2. Studies for the United States, using a similar methodology, find comparable effects 
from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  large-scale  asset  purchases,  which  is  comforting.  The  asset 
purchases also have the effect of boosting banks’ holdings of the most liquid asset, central 
bank reserves, which may be of particular value at the current juncture. While one cannot be 
confident about the impact of our earlier purchases on the real economy, our analysis points 
to a peak effect on output of 1½–2 per cent and of ¾–1½ percentage points on inflation. At 
this juncture at least, we have no reason to believe that, suitably pro-rated, the current phase 
of  purchases  will  be  greatly  different  in  their  effect  on  either  asset  markets  or  on  the  real 
economy. 
                                                 
2   For a summary of the evidence, including references to related studies, see Michael Joyce, Matthew Tong and 
Robert  Woods  (2011),  “The  United  Kingdom’s  Quantitative  Easing  Policy:  Design,  Operation  and  Impact” 
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 51(3), 200–212. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Several commentators have suggested that the effectiveness of quantitative easing could be 
enhanced by spending the newly created money on something other than government debt. 
Conceptually,  one  can  always  think  of  this  as  raising  extra  government  debt  to  finance 
whatever  is  bought,  combined  with  conventional  quantitative  easing  that  offsets  the  extra 
debt issued. In addition to highlighting the potential interest of the Treasury in the first leg of 
the intervention, splitting it up in this way can also help to clarify analytical issues. 
For instance, one idea that has been floated involves sending households a voucher, which 
could then be spent in the shops and redeemed for cash by the retailer. This may sound like 
a good idea, as it seems to get the money quickly into action in stimulating demand. Now, 
such a policy in effect combines an increase in borrowing to finance a temporary increase in 
income  tax  allowances  with  some  conventional  quantitative  easing  in  which  gilts  are 
exchanged for claims on the Bank of England3. But economic theory, as well as considerable 
empirical evidence, suggests that such a temporary increase in disposable income would be 
likely to be very largely saved4. Only households that wish to borrow, but presently cannot, 
would  be  likely  to  increase  their  spending  materially.  And  making  the  voucher  time-limited 
would do little to help, as households could always use the voucher instead of the cash they 
would  have  spent.  In  sum,  this  hardly  seems  the  most  effective  way  to  add  additional 
stimulus. 
Let  me  conclude  by  offering  you  a  comment  on  what  all  this  might  mean  for  the  housing 
market and the demand for mortgages. As my colleague, David Miles, argued in a speech to 
the Home Builders Federation earlier this year5, we are presently in a transition from a pre-
crisis world with compressed risk premia and in some cases imprudently generous loan-to-
value  and  loan-to-income  ratios,  to  a  more  sustainable  equilibrium  with  lower  ratios.  That 
implies  a  period  during  which  first-time  buyers  and  those  hoping  to  move  up  the  housing 
ladder  save  the  necessary  extra  equity,  low  transactions  and  a  fall  in  the  share  of  owner-
occupiers. That is pretty much what we have seen and the transition has been made harder 
by  the  squeeze  in  real  incomes.  The  prospective  moderation  in  the  squeeze  on  real 
household  incomes  should  help  those  saving  for  a  deposit  to  get  onto,  or  move  up,  the 
housing  ladder.  So,  as  well  as  supporting  consumer  spending,  it  should  also  help  support 
mortgage demand. That would, no doubt, be a most welcome development to you, as well as 
to the households themselves.  
On  that  note,  let  me  finish  by  hoping  that  the  rest  of  your  conference  today  proves  most 
stimulating and valuable. Thank you! 
                                                 
3  
In fact using the PAYE system would probably be the easiest way to implement such a scheme. Moreover, if 
the  Government  were  actually  to  send  out  vouchers  redeemable  into  cash  it  might  well  fall  foul  of  the 
prohibition on monetary finance contained in the Lisbon Treaty.  
4   Note that this only requires consumers to wish to smooth their spending over time, not that they internalise the 
implications for future taxes of more government borrowing (so-called “Ricardian equivalence”).  
5  David Miles (2011), “Mortgages and Housing in the Near and Long Term”, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech488.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The Economic Outlook
CML Mortgage Industry Conference
London
Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy
03 November 2011
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Chart 1: UK activity
Real GDP
PMI surveys
CIPS services ouput
CIPS manufacturing output
Index, 50 = no change
65
Percentage 
increase on a 
quarter earlier
2009 Q3 2010 Q1 2010 Q3 2011 Q1 2011 Q3
1.2
0.9
0.6
0.3
0
-0.3
-0.6
Jul 09
Jan 10
Jul 10
Jan 11
Jul 11
 Chart 2: International activity
Real GDP
Composite PMI surveys
US
Euro area
Percentage change 
on a quarter earlier
2009 Q3 2010 Q1 2010 Q3
2011 Q1
2011 Q3
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Index, 50 = no change
US
Euro area
Jul-09
Jan-10
Jul-10
Jan-11
Jul-11
60
55
50
45
65
60
55
50
45
40
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  6 
 Chart 3: Euro-area sovereign and banking risks
10-year government bond spreads
Percentage points
CDS-based bank default risk
Basis points
Portugal
Italy
France
Ireland
Spain
UK
Jan 10
Jul 10
Jan 11
Jul 11
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Austria, Belgium, France, 
Germany and Netherlands
Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Portugal and Spain
UK
US
Jan 10
Jul 10
Jan 11
Jul 11
  Chart 4: Change in net exports after big sterling moves
Percentage point contribution to GDP
1996 Q1 (22%) (inverted)
1992 Q2 (-14%)
2007 Q2 (-25%)
-6 -4 -2
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
Quarters before/after start of exchange rate movement
800
600
400
200
0
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 5: Output losses after banking crises
10th-90th percentile
Estimated mean path
Percent of pre-crisis trend; mean 
difference from year t = - 1
20
Interquartile range
UK
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
3
2
1
0
-1
7
Distance in years from the first year of crisis
* UK observation for year 3 based on Q1-Q3 data for 2011
4
5
6
 8 
 Chart 6: UK inflation
Per cent
Estimates of VAT, energy and 
import price contribution 
CPI 
inflation 
   CPI estimates excluding 
VAT, energy and import 
price contribution
2008
2009
2010
2011
 7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 7: Commodity prices
Index: Jan 2010 = 100
180
Oil
Metals
Agricultural
Jan 10
Jul 10
Jan 11
Jul 11
160
140
120
100
80
The Economic Outlook
CML Mortgage Industry Conference
London
Charlie Bean, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy
03 November 2011
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
