Vítor Constâncio: Contagion and the European debt crisis 
Keynote lecture by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Bocconi University/Intesa Sanpaolo conference on “Bank Competitiveness in the Post-crisis 
World”, Milan, 10 October 2011. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Philipp  Hartmann,  Carsten  Detken,  Benjamin  Sahel,  Gianni  Amisano,  Frank  Betz,  Tobias 
Linzert,  Roberto  de  Santis,  Bernd  Schwaab,  and  Isabel  Vansteenkiste,  for  important  contributions  to  the 
preparation of this keynote lecture. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  financial  and  economic  crisis  that  started  in  August  2007  is  a  clear  case  of  the 
materialisation  and  propagation  of  systemic  risk.  The  banking  crisis  reached  a  climax  in 
September  2008  with  the  demise  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  the  subsequent  support  to  the 
financial system. In spring 2010, it turned into a sovereign debt crisis. And we are now in a 
situation where widespread instabilities reach new heights.  
In my speech today, I would like to address the phenomenon which is at the very centre of 
what we are experiencing in the euro area, the phenomenon of contagion. 
Contagion is one of the mechanisms by which financial instability becomes widespread that a 
crisis  reaches  systemic  dimensions.  The  other  two  mechanisms  that  constitute  sources  of 
systemic risk are the unwinding of financial imbalances and the occurrence of severe macro 
shocks.1  I  will  argue  that  contagion  phenomena  play  a  crucial  role  in  exacerbating  the 
sovereign  debt  problems  in  the  euro  area.  As  a  consequence,  crisis  management  by  all 
competent  authorities  should  focus  on  the  policy  measures  that  are  able  to  contain  and 
mitigate contagion. Several of the ECB’s interventions have been motivated by the need to 
address contagion, which impairs our ability to maintain price stability in the euro area. By 
focusing on contagion today, I do not mean to say that other sources of systemic risk do not 
play  any  role  in  the  instabilities  we  are  currently  experiencing.  Quite  the  contrary.  An 
important  role  is  also  played  by  the  unravelling  of  widespread  financial  imbalances,  which 
contaminated fiscal balances.  
As I go along, I shall first look at contagion conceptually. I will discuss its meaning from a 
policy  maker’s  perspective  against  the  background  of  the  academic  literature.  I  shall  then 
dwell  in  some  depth  on  the  evidence  of  contagion  phenomena  and  risks  in  the  euro  area 
government  debt  crisis.  Next,  I  shall  look  at  some  historical  episodes  where  sovereign 
contagion  also  played  some  role  and  see  what  we  can  learn  from  them.  Finally,  before 
concluding  I  will  refer  to  the  ECB’s  policy  responses,  and  more  broadly  European  policy 
responses, to contagion. 
The phenomenon of contagion: from research to policy 
Broadly  speaking,  financial  contagion  refers  to  a  situation  whereby  instability  in  a  specific 
market or institution is transmitted to one or several other markets or institutions. There are 
two ideas underlying this definition. First, the wider spreading of instability would usually not 
happen  without  the  initial  shock.  Second,  the  transmission  of  the  initial  instability  goes 
beyond  what  could  be  expected  from  the  normal  relationships  between  markets  or 
intermediaries, for example in terms of its speed, strength or scope. 
                                                 
1   ECB, “The concept of systemic risk”, Financial Stability Review, December 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Contagion  is  crucial  for  policy-making.  This  is  in  particular  the  case  because  it  usually 
constitutes  an  externality,  in  the  economic  meaning  of  the  term.  The  actions  of  economic 
agent A adversely affect the situation of economic agent B. These effects are external to the 
economic agent A but the economic agent B cannot make A pay for them. Hence, the price 
mechanism  will  not  solve  the  problem.  There  is  a  market  failure  that  policy  should  try  to 
address. In particular in financial markets, where many agents interact at high frequency, it is 
difficult  for  economic  agents  to  get  together  and  negotiate  a  contractual  solution  to  the 
externality problem, as Nobel Laureate Ronald Coase has suggested in other contexts.2 In 
the heat of a financial crisis this will undoubtedly be impossible. 
Contagion  as  I  have  just  defined  it  is,  in  principle,  distinct  from  other  forms  of  systemic 
instability, notably the unravelling of widespread imbalances and aggregate shocks causing 
simultaneous failures or crashes. But if imbalances or aggregate shocks already weaken the 
system,  then  the  different  transmission  channels  can  interact  and  contagion  may  well 
become much stronger than in the absence of such additional vulnerabilities.3 This is likely to 
be  relevant  in  the  present  context,  where  many  financial  intermediaries  have  not  as  yet 
overcome their problems and fiscal deficits and debt levels are relatively high. 
It is probably fair to say that an inherent problem in the extant literature is that it is difficult to 
identify empirically the presence of pure forms of contagion. This identification problem is not 
unexpected,  as  there  are  so  many  factors  that  could  also  cause  the  follow-up  problems 
observed and it is so difficult to control for all of them. Criteria that have been used in the 
literature  to  identify  contagion  include:4  (i) the  transmission  is  in  excess  of  what  can  be 
explained  by  economic  fundamentals;5  (ii) the  transmission  is  different  from  regular 
adjustments observed in tranquil times;6 (iii) the events constituting contagion are negative 
extremes;7 and (iv) the transmission is sequential, for example in a causal sense. But there is 
no  agreement  about  which  ones  of  these  four  criteria  are  necessary  or  sufficient  to 
characterise a contagion event.  
Against  this  background,  ECB  staff  has  developed  and  is  using  a  series  of  start-of-the-art 
analytical tools to assess contagion risks. But these tools often face the same identification 
problem  as  the  previous  literature.  Nevertheless,  policy  makers  should  act  to  stem  pure 
contagion  risks  if  data  or  analytical  tools  show  sizeable  spillover  risks  and  there  is  no 
convincing  evidence  that  this  is  caused  primarily  by  economic  fundamentals  or  common 
shocks.  
                                                 
2   Coase, “The problem of social cost”, Journal of Law and Economics, 1960. 
3   For example, Chen, “Banking panics: The role of the first-come, first-served rule and information externalities, 
Journal of Political Economy, 1999, develops a model in which the presence of aggregate shocks makes bank 
contagion more likely. 
4   See Hartmann, Straetmans and de Vries, “Banking system stability: A cross-Atlantic perspective”, Carey and 
Stulz  (eds.),  The  Risks  of  Financial  Institutions,  NBER  and  Chicago  University  Press,  2006.  For  a  broader 
survey  of  the  contagion  literature  and  discussions  of  particular  channels  through  which  financial  contagion 
emerges,  see  de  Bandt  and  Hartmann,  “Systemic  risk:  A  survey”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  No.  35, 
November 2000; Pritsker, ''The channels for financial contagion,'' Claessens and Forbes (eds.), International 
Financial  Contagion,  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers,  2001;  ECB,  “Financial  market  contagion”,  Financial 
Stability  Review,  December  2005;  or  ECB,  “The  concept  of  systemic  risk”,  Financial  Stability  Review, 
December 2009. 
5   See  Eichengreen,  Rose  and  Wyplosz,  “Contagious  currency  crises:  First  tests”,  Scandinavian  Journal  of 
Economics, 1996, or Bekaert, Harvey and Ng, “Market Integration and Contagion”, Journal of Business, 2005. 
6   Forbes and Rigobon, “No contagion, only Interdependence: Measuring stock market comovements”, Journal 
of Finance, 2002, capture this through increased correlations during times of stress. 
7   See, for example, Longin and Solnik, “Extreme correlation of international equity markets”, Journal of Finance, 
2001, or Hartmann, Straetmans and de Vries, “Asset market linkages in crisis periods”, Review of Economics 
and Statistics, 2004. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Evidence of Contagion from the ongoing government debt crisis  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  evidence  from  the  ongoing  debt  crisis.  I  will  start  by  reviewing 
evidence of contagion across euro area government debt markets.  
Sovereign-sovereign contagion 
When Moody’s downgraded Portugal on 5 July, it cited, among other factors, developments 
in Greece.8 Moody’s believed that contagion from a default of Greece made it more likely that 
Portugal would require a second round of official financing. Moreover, referring to Greece as 
a precedent,9 Moody’s indicated that a second round of official financing would entail private 
sector participation also in Portugal. 
Unfortunately, this was not the end of the story. The downgrade of Portugal and, above all, 
the continuing fears of a Greek default apparently triggered a sell-off in Spanish and Italian 
government bonds. There had not been adverse data releases concerning the Spanish and 
Italian  economies  or  budgetary  situations  around  that  time.  By  18  July  Italian  government 
bond yields had increased by almost 100 basis points, while Spanish ones had increased by 
more than 80 basis points.10  
What  mechanism  triggered  these  market  moves?  I  believe  it  is  fair  to  say  that  contagion 
played a major role. The initial rises in bond yields can be largely explained by the concerns 
raised by the scope and possible extent of the “private sector involvement” in Greece, which 
was set as a condition for a second programme at the euro area summit of 21 July.11 Some 
investors may find it rational to start shortening sovereign debt and others simply to reduce 
their exposures to countries in the currency union since market concerns about government 
debt  sustainability  can  become  self-fulfilling  if  not  tackled.  Some  other  investors  may  also 
prefer to withdraw from some market segments in view of high volatility. Reduced demand 
leads  to  falling  prices,  which  in  turn  reduces  the  value  of  bonds  held  by  other  investors. 
Investors may prefer to reduce exposures while their positions are still in positive territory, or 
to take small losses early, so as not to be exposed to potentially large losses or high volatility 
later.  Markets  may  then  also  become  illiquid,  which  can  further  increase  the  downward 
pressure on bond prices. Falling bond prices translate into higher yields, which worsens debt 
sustainability  prospects  for  those  governments  which  have  significant  funding  needs,  thus 
validating investors’ expectations.12 
                                                 
8   According to Moody’s, “the growing risk that Portugal will require a second round of official financing before it 
can return to the private market, particularly if the country were to suffer contagion from a disorderly Greek 
default,  or  merely  from  the  growing  likelihood  of  a  default.  Such  contagion  would  meaningfully  change  the 
risks  for  investors  that  currently  hold  Portuguese  bonds  given  the  increasing  possibility  that  private  sector 
creditor participation will be required as a prerequisite for any further finance”. 
]Moody's noted that “European policymakers have grown increasingly concerned about the shifting of Greek 
debt  held  by  private  investors  onto  the  balance  sheets  of  the  official  sector.  Should  a  Greek  restructuring 
become necessary at some future date, a shift from private to public financing would imply that an increasingly 
large  share  of  the  cost  would  need  to  be  borne  by  public  sector  creditors.  To  offset  this  risk,  some 
policymakers have proposed that private sector participation should be a precondition for additional rounds of 
official lending to Greece.” 
9  
10   Negative  news  regarding  developments  within  the  Italian  government  surfaced  7  July  and  could  have 
contributed to the narrowing of the yield gap between Italy and Spain, but they could not have triggered the 
joint sell-off. 
11   Chen’s  model,  op.cit.,  explains  in  a  banking  context  how  a  combination  of  such  information  and  payment 
externalities can trigger contagious runs. 
12   Calvo, G (1988), Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations, American Economic Review, 1988. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This  is  merely  anecdotal  evidence  of  contagion.  I  therefore  would  now  like  to  use  some 
elements of the ECB staff’s analytical toolkit in order to take a more systematic look at the 
data.  
The  first  approach  estimates  the  extent  to  which  the  deterioration  (or  improvement)  in  the 
sovereign CDS spreads for the three countries with a stabilisation programme supported by 
the European Union and the International Monetary Fund – Greece, Ireland and Portugal – 
affected  the  CDS  spread  for  Italy  or  Spain.  The  spreads  are  estimated  in  two  steps  using 
multivariate frequency decompositions.13 First, the pattern of each CDS spread is ascribed to 
long-,  medium-  and  short-run  shocks.  Second,  the  long-  and  medium-run  shocks  (which 
produce lasting effects) for Greece, Ireland and Portugal are used as additional explanatory 
variables  in  the  models  of  the  CDS  spreads  of  Italy  and  Spain,  over  and  above  their 
respective  own  shocks.  If  this  addition  into  the  model  leads  to  a  statistically  significant 
improvement  in  the  forecast  accuracy  over  a  100-day  horizon,  I  will  denote  this  as  a 
contagion effect. 
In 2010 these contagion effects accounted for about 37% of the variability observed in the 
Italian CDS spread. The impact of contagion became more relevant in 2011. As of mid-April 
2011, the contagion effects acquired a trend-like shape, signalling that they were poised to 
be  long-lasting.  The  situation  deteriorated  further  in  July  2011.  The  model  thus  provides 
evidence that the observed deterioration in Italian and Spanish CDS markets, especially in 
July 2011, can be explained to a large extent by contagion effects from the three programme 
countries.  
Since  these  results  and  the  interpretation  I  just  gave  might  be  dependent  on  the  specific 
model  used,  let  me  consider  another,  very  different  approach.  In  this  model,  government 
bond yield spreads can switch between a low level – “normal regime” – and a high level – 
“crisis  regime”.14  The  likelihood  of  going  from  “normal”  times  to  a  “crisis”  or  vice  versa  is 
affected  by  three  determinants:  (i) markets’  perceptions  of  the  sustainability  of  a  country’s 
fiscal situation,  (ii) markets’  general  risk  aversion,  and  (iii) direct  cross-country  interactions, 
which I will denote as contagion effects. Estimating the model for Greece, Ireland, Portugal, 
Italy, Spain and France suggests for example that contagion effects to Italy are much more 
pronounced after the Lehman crisis than in the previous period. Until the beginning of 2008 
the cross-country interactions increase the crisis transition probabilities by at most 5 percent. 
From  2009  onwards,  the  contagion  effects  to  Italy  increase  to  more  than  20  percent 
according to this model.  
In the third model a country’s government bond spread vis-à-vis Germany is regressed on a 
measure  of  risk  aversion,  a  measure  of  own  sovereign  solvency  risk,  the  country’s  credit 
rating  and  the  spillover  effect  from  Greece,  captured  by  the  credit  ratings  on  the  Greek 
sovereign debt. Results confirm that besides general risk aversion and own credit risk also 
the  Greek  credit  rating  affected  other  euro  area  countries’  bond  spreads  in  a  statistically 
significant  way,  in  a  small  magnitude  for  some  countries  such  as  France  and  in  a  larger 
magnitude for other countries such as Ireland, Spain, Italy or Portugal.15 These “contagion” 
effects  are  more  pronounced  for  countries  with  comparatively  weak  fundamentals.  The 
findings are also consistent with the observation that CDS spreads of each euro area country 
have recently been higher, in some cases markedly, than the CDS spreads of other countries 
with the same ratings. 
                                                 
13   Based  on  Donati,  Modelling  spillovers  and  measuring  their  impact  and  persistence:  Application  to  CDS 
spreads during the euro area sovereign crisis, internal ECB´s unpublished manuscript, 2011. 
14   Amisano  and  Tristani,  Disentangling  fundamentals  and  contagion  in  euro  area  sovereign  bond  spreads, 
internal ECB´s unpublished manuscript, 2011. 
15   De Santis, R.A. The euro area’s sovereign debt crisis: Credit ratings agencies and the spread of the fever from 
Greece, Ireland and Portugal, internal ECB´s unpublished manuscript, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Sovereign-bank contagion 
Let me now turn to the evidence on contagion between government debt markets and banks. 
In  July  this  year  sovereign  tensions  spread  not  only  to  Italy  and  Spain,  but  also  to  banks 
exposed to the sovereign debt of these countries.  
The sovereign crisis has clearly affected funding availability and funding costs for individual 
banks in the euro area. The coincidence of the sovereign debt problems and banks’ funding 
problems  constitutes  only  anecdotal  evidence.  Additional  evidence  can  be  obtained  by 
applying the frequency decomposition model, the first one of the three models I described 
earlier,  to  bank  CDS  spreads.  This  shows  that  from  the  beginning  of  April  2011  onwards 
developments in the CDS spreads of Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Italy and France explain an 
increasing share of the variability in the CDS spreads of, for example, Société Générale and 
Crédit Agricole, whose CDS spreads doubled from early July up to mid-August. However, the 
two banks’ exposures to Greece or any other of the programme countries did not increase 
during  these  months.  In  other  words,  contagion  effects  from  government  debt  markets  to 
banks, as defined in the model, have become more important in recent months in the euro 
area.  
Overall,  there  seems  to  be  significant  evidence  of  actual  contagion  effects  during  the 
European  sovereign  debt  crisis,  despite  the  policies  aimed  at  containing  the  spreading  of 
instability.  Note,  however,  that  there  may  be  latent  contagion  risks  that  have  not  yet 
materialised. It is quite likely that if the various crisis management measures had not been 
taken, contagion would be much more severe than presently observed.  
Looking back in history 
Before I turn to the ongoing European policy responses to contagion I would like to look back 
and consider what one can learn from history.  
Fiscal stability in successful monetary unions 
A first step is to consider the relationship between fiscal developments across countries in 
monetary  unions  when  accompanied  by  political  integration,  although  differences  to  the 
present European situation are still large. Michael Bordo and co-authors observe a common 
pattern  in  the  experiences  of  the  United  States,  Canada,  Germany,  Argentina  and  Brazil 
during  the  19th  and  20th  centuries.16  Successful  fiscal  federalism  seems  to  have  been 
associated with “explicit or implicit no-bail-out clauses, constitutional restrictions and through 
discipline exercised by financial markets for government debt”.17 In the cases of the US and 
Canada, the adoption of fiscal federalism entailed a shift of state debt onto federal hands. 
For  the  US  this  was  achieved  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Revolutionary  War  through  a  plan 
developed  and  executed  by  Alexander  Hamilton.  Hamilton’s  plan  transferred  state  debts 
accumulated  during  the  Revolutionary  War  to  the  federal  budget.  In  addition,  it  also 
converted state debts into bonds and established a “sinking fund”, in which revenues were 
collected  to  finance  bond  purchases  on  the  open  market.  In  this  way  the  US  created  an 
efficient way to smooth fiscal revenues over time and managed to tap into the bond market at 
reasonable rates.  
Another interesting experience, albeit again different in terms of environment, is the Italian 
unification in 1861, when the Kingdom of Sardinia integrated various previously independent 
                                                 
16   Michael Bordo,, Lars Jonung and Agnieszka Markiewicz, “A Fiscal Union for the Euro: Some Lessons from 
History”, NBER working paper 17380, September 2011. 
17   Bordo et al., op.cit., p. 26. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
states.  One  of  the  first  decisions  of  the  newly  constituted  Finance  Ministry  of  the  Italian 
Kingdom was to underwrite all the outstanding debt of the integrated states. 
The  insight  that  may  be  gained  from  these  historical  examples  is  that  a  well  functioning 
monetary  union  requires  strong  and  innovative  approaches  to  deal  with  regional  fiscal 
problems. This includes appropriate incentives for keeping public deficits under control, also 
in a low-interest rate environment, and effective means for dissipating contagious sovereign 
solvency concerns. 
Let me utter a word of caution here. All of the historical cases I have just mentioned are ones 
in which the political union was in place at the time of the monetary union. This implies that 
changes to the fiscal framework were more straightforward in these cases. 
Central banks’ role in containing the spreading of instability  
Another  relevant  historical  episode  of  significant  contagion  risks  is  the  Russian  sovereign 
debt default of August 1998. This event started a dramatic chain reaction, which included the 
subsequent failure of the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management. As Russia defaulted 
and its currency collapsed so did its domestic banking system. The stress spread across the 
globe, and a number of international investors, in particular financial institutions, made large 
losses. Stock prices dropped sharply across emerging markets and the developed world. As 
security prices fell, the capital of investors and financial firms was eroded, liquidity withdrew 
from  markets,  volatility  increased,  and  credit  spreads  for  sovereign  debt  widened  globally, 
abruptly and simultaneously.  
The Russian crisis did not lead to a financial meltdown. First, central banks around the world 
provided  ample  liquidity  to  market  participants,  in  various  ways.  Second,  central  banks 
helped  in  coordinating  the  actions  of  market  participants,  such  as  the  eventual  bailout  of 
LTCM  by  the  private  sector.  Arguably,  central  banks’ action  in  the  fall 1998  prevented  the 
worst.  
Key euro area policy responses to contagion risks  
I now turn more specifically to policy actions in the euro area addressing the sources and 
propagation of the debt crisis. I start with the ECB and then move to the responsibilities of 
other public authorities.  
In  order  to  secure  the  working  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  which  is 
essential for the ability of the ECB to maintain price stability over the medium term, we drew 
on a number of non-standard monetary policy measures introduced over the course of the 
financial  crisis  had  that  started  in  the  summer  of  2007.  The  measures  taken  have  overall 
contributed to stabilizing financing conditions and the flow of credit to the economy, all with 
the view to maintaining price stability.  
Following the outbreak of the crisis in August 2007 and its dramatic worsening in September 
2008, the ECB provided liquidity in more varied ways and at longer terms in order to address 
dysfunctions in the money market. It also cooperated with other central banks to contribute to 
an international response to an international money market problem. The joint provision of 
US dollar liquidity by initially three central banks, including the ECB, and later by many more 
central banks, was labelled by some observers as the Plaza Accord for money markets.  
In the aftermath of the failure of Lehman Brothers, the ECB launched its policy of “enhanced 
credit support”, a series of measures to enhance the flow of credit above and beyond what 
could be achieved through policy interest rate reductions alone. These measures include the 
unlimited provision of liquidity through “fixed rate tenders with full allotment”; the provision of 
liquidity  at  lengthened  maturities  of  up  to  one  year;  and  the  provision  of  more  liquidity  in 
foreign currencies to euro area banks and of euro liquidity to other central banks for them to 
provide to their local banks; and a programme of purchases of covered bonds. As banks can 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
only  make  use  of  the  ECB  liquidity-providing  facilities  if  they  have  sufficient  collateral,  the 
ECB also extended the list of assets it accepts as collateral. As it had been the case in the 
years  before  the  crisis,  we  also  adjusted  collateral  eligibility  criteria  in  view  of  market 
developments in order to remedy evolving inconsistencies and avoid possible abuses. The 
total value of eligible collateral is very large. It equals about EUR 14 trillion,18 which amounts 
to about 150 percent of euro area GDP. From this total, the euro area banks have in their 
balance sheets about EUR 4 trillion with EUR 1.7 trillion already approved for utilization and 
creates the necessary room for manoeuvre in our liquidity provision that right now amounts 
to just EUR 570 million .  
Facing the repercussions of the euro area government debt crisis, the ECB established the 
Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP).  Under  the  SMP  the  Eurosystem  buys  securities  in 
dysfunctional  debt  market  segments  in  order  to  safeguard  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. 
This framework has enabled the ECB to quickly respond to the market tensions resurfacing 
over  the  summer  of  2011.  Let  me  briefly  recapitulate  the  most  recent  measures.  On 
10 August,  the  ECB  has  again  provided  liquidity  at  a  maturity  of  six  months.  On 
15 September, the ECB has announced three additional US dollar operations with a maturity 
of  about  three  months,  which  cover  the  end  of  the  year.  Importantly,  the  ECB  has,  in 
response to disorderly conditions in euro area debt securities markets, resumed the active 
implementation of the SMP on 8 August to buy sovereign debt securities. The SMP aims to 
create  a  better  functioning  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  to  all  parts  of  the 
monetary  union  and  is  in  full  compliance  with  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing.  The 
relative size of the programme, representing just 1.7% of the euro area GDP against 13.7% 
of GDP that has been bought by the Bank of England or the 11.4% purchased by the Federal 
Reserve, makes it easier to be fully sterilised.  
On the other hand, at the recent October 6 meeting, the ECB decided to conduct two further 
one-year  LTROs;  to  continue  to  apply  fixed  rate  full  allotment  procedures  in  all  monetary 
policy liquidity-providing operations for as long as needed and at least till the middle of 2012; 
and  to  conduct  a  second  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP2)  with  an  intended 
purchase amount of EUR 40 billion and over a period of one year starting in November 2011. 
All of these actions had clear positive impacts in line with their objectives. If we look at the 
past  experience,  the  ECB’s  measures  have  enabled  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism to continue operating relatively well at the level of the euro area, containing also 
contagion,  although  it  should  be  recognised  that  the  transmission  mechanism  remains 
severely disrupted in some euro area countries.  
ECB action was fast, targeted and decisive. But we cannot shoulder the burden of solving 
the problems alone. The euro area governments have to live up to their responsibilities. First, 
in the context of the recent agreements about improving the economic governance of the EU, 
governments need to adopt and implement ambitious medium-term fiscal consolidation plans 
and introduce structural reforms restoring the bases for competitiveness and growth of their 
economies. In this context, the ECB also welcomes the adoption of the so-called “six-pack” 
of  new  rules.  Looking  ahead,  we  however  need  to  remain  very  ambitious  in  reinforcing 
economic governance in the euro area. Moreover, obviously, EU/IMF programme countries 
need to stick particularly closely to the commitments made.  
Second, following the intensification of the euro area government debt crisis in May 2010, the 
euro area member states decided to create the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). 
The  EFSF  enables  financing  of  euro  area  member  states  in  difficulty,  where  financing  is 
subject to conditions negotiated with the Troika consisting of the EU Commission, the IMF, 
                                                 
18   ECB, Annual Report, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
and the ECB. The adjustment programme over time improves economic fundamentals and 
thus dissipates solvency concerns, which in turn enables the country to return to the markets. 
On 21 July, the euro area Heads of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment to 
ensure  the  financial  stability  of  the  whole  area  and  of  its  Member  States  and  decided  to 
improve  the  effectiveness  and  flexibility  of  the  EFSF,  particularly  with  regard  to  address 
contagion.19 The reform adopted at the summit enables the EFSF to act on the basis of a 
precautionary  programme;  finance  recapitalisation  of  financial  institutions  through  loans  to 
governments  also  in  non  programme  countries;  and  intervene  in  primary  and  secondary 
markets on the basis of an analysis of the ECB and mutual agreement of member states. 
Many countries have already ratified the agreements of 21 July and it is of utmost importance 
that the final ratifications are concluded and all elements are rigorously implemented.  
The ECB considers it essential that governments swiftly implement the new instruments of 
the EFSF in line with the decisions of the Heads of State or Government of the euro area on 
21 July. In this regard, it is, overall, absolutely crucial that the EFSF will have the capacity to 
fulfil its function for safeguarding financial stability in an effective manner. This implies that in 
order  to  maximize  its  efficiency,  the  EFSF´s  resources  should  be  dedicated  to  enhance 
sovereign  debt  new  issuance  of  securities,  thus  multiplying  their  effect.  It  would  be  less 
efficient to spend most of the funds available in the secondary market or in supporting bank’s 
capitalisation. Capitalisation of banks is of course important but what is at the moment more 
important for the EFSF to do is to provide support to new bond issuance by, for instance, 
Italy or Spain. 
At the same time, it is essential that the affected governments do not see the implementation 
of  the  new  stabilization  tools  as  incentives  to  weaken  their  efforts  of  strengthening  their 
financial positions. Rather it is crucial that all support measures – be it in the form of loans or 
security purchases – are subject to strict conditionality regarding fiscal budget measures and 
structural reforms to increase the economic growth rate that is so essential to stabilize the 
debt ratio.  
Conclusions 
Let me now conclude by reiterating a few main messages that I wanted to convey today.  
First, long historical experience suggests that central banks have an important role to play in 
contributing  to  financial  stability,  including  containing  contagion  risks.  They  can  do  so  by 
providing an anchor for stability through delivering on their primary objective of price stability, 
by providing as much liquidity as quickly and widely as needed, and by providing analysis 
and coordination to other policy makers and market participants.  
Second, in the context of its systemic risk surveillance the ECB spends significant resources 
in  identifying  and  assessing  contagion  risks.  No  matter  how  difficult  it  is  to  collect  all  the 
relevant information and to design the appropriate analytical tools, most pieces of evidence 
point to the existence of very significant financial and sovereign contagion risks in the euro 
area at the present juncture. 
Third,  containing  such  contagion  is  of  great  importance  for  overcoming  the  ongoing 
European  debt  crisis.  There  would  be  enormous  economic  and  social  damage  if  the  ECB 
and  other  competent  authorities  do  not  respond  appropriately  and  decisively  within  their 
respective mandates.  
Fourth, whilst the ECB’s action has been decisive and effective this alone is not enough. All 
parties need to live up to their responsibilities. It is of utmost importance that the agreements 
                                                 
19   Statement by the Heads of State or Governments of the euro area and EU institutions, Brussels, 21 July 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  the  heads  of  state  or  governments  of  the  euro  area  and  EU  institutions  of  21  July  are 
honoured and rigorously implemented. This concerns particularly the ratification of the reform 
of the EFSF by all member states that have not yet done so. Moreover, all countries should 
meet  their  fiscal  targets  and  introduce  structural  reforms  that  restore  competitiveness  and 
growth potential where they have been lost over the last decade. 
If all parties honour their commitments, I am sure that Europe will successfully weather these 
difficult times. Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer a few questions if 
you have any. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
