Andreas Dombret: Quo vadis euro area? Challenges facing monetary 
union 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to the CDU Economic Council, Berlin, 20 October 2011. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for your invitation – I am delighted to be able to speak to you today. 
For  more  than  four  years  now,  we  have  been  plagued  by  a  crisis  that  has  changed  its 
appearance on a number of occasions. It spread from the US property market to the global 
financial system, from there to the real economy, leading finally to a sovereign debt crisis in 
several euro area countries. A sovereign debt crisis – let me emphasise this explicitly – that 
is  a  severe  test  for  monetary  union,  but  is  not  a  crisis  of  the  euro.  The  euro  is  a  stable 
currency, both internally and externally. 
Politicians are at pains to resolve the crisis, yet a consistent approach has been lacking to 
date. Meanwhile, we are losing valuable time and, given the rapidly rising levels of sovereign 
debt,  politicians’  scope  for  action  is  steadily  shrinking.  At  the  same  time,  uncertainty  is 
growing on the markets around the globe and the confidence of the general public is at risk 
of  becoming  lost.  This  makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  find  a  consistent  approach  to 
resolving  the  crisis  in  order  to  restore  calm  to  the  markets  and  to  maintain  the  public’s 
confidence  in  the  single  currency.  In  looking  for  such  a  solution  approach,  one  that  will 
stabilise monetary union also in the long term, it is worth taking a brief look at the root causes 
of the current crisis. 
The causes of the sovereign debt crisis – a brief overview 
2 
It is generally known that there were unsound economic developments in a number of euro 
area  member  countries.  Above  all,  these  included  excessive  lending,  asset  price  bubbles 
and a loss of competitiveness. These structural shortcomings were the breeding ground for 
the sovereign debt crisis. 
However,  two  fundamental  problems  are  directly  responsible  for  the  sovereign  debt  crisis. 
First,  the  institutional  framework  of  monetary  union  was  obviously  too  weak  to  prevent 
excessive fiscal deficits. The Stability and Growth Pact lays down rules that are intended to 
restrict government deficits and sovereign debt. The political will to enforce these rules was 
lacking, however. Instead, they were circumvented and, in some cases, even actively bent. 
Sovereign debt in the euro area could not be contained as a result. 
Second, there were weaknesses in the financial system. This applies, on the one hand, to 
investors’  risk  awareness.  For  example,  before  the  crisis,  they  demanded  very  low  risk 
premiums  from  the  euro  area  countries  across  the  board.  Their  risk  awareness  did  not 
increase until the problems in Greece became apparent. On the other hand, this also applies 
to the possible spread of the sovereign debt crisis via vulnerable banking systems. It was this 
very problem of contagion that made rescue measures necessary in the first place. Up until 
now, aid to Greece has always been justified by the objective of ensuring financial stability 
throughout  the  euro  area.  The  bottom  line  is  that  public  finances  also  benefit  from  stable 
financial  systems,  because  they  produce  fewer  crises  that  might  necessitate  government 
rescue measures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Thus, in order to get the sovereign debt crisis under control and create a stable monetary 
union,  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  strengthened  and  the  institutional  framework  of 
European Monetary Union improved. 
A stable financial system for a stable monetary union 
3 
Of  course,  strengthening  the  financial  system  is  an  important  task,  irrespective  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis. Since the financial and economic crisis at the latest, creating a stable 
and  resilient  financial  system  is  a  matter  of  global  concern.  In  fact,  a  number  of 
improvements  have  already  been  made  in  this  context.  Basel  III  has  been  approved, 
entailing  extensive  new  rules  for  banks.  The  new  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  in 
particular will make the banking system more stable. What is important now is to implement 
these new rules at global and at European level. 
Yet even though much has already been achieved with Basel III, a great deal remains to be 
done. Problem areas at the moment include special rules for systemically important banks 
and  the  treatment  of  previously  unregulated  segments  of  the  financial  system,  namely  the 
shadow  banking  system.  Suggestions  have  been  made  in  the  meantime,  which  will  be 
discussed at the forthcoming G20 summit at the beginning of November. My impression of 
the meeting of the G20 in Paris last weekend is: on the whole, we are on the right path. 
And we should not use up our energy on projects that might divert us from that path. In my 
opinion, one such project is the financial transaction tax; for in terms of financial stability, the 
benefit of such a tax is less clear-cut than assumed, whilst the debate often fails to take the 
costs and side-effects into consideration. It is quite possible that a financial transaction tax 
may  heighten  rather  than  reduce  the  volatility  of  the  markets.  Moreover,  two  factors  cast 
doubt on the effectiveness of a financial transaction tax. First, profit expectations and the risk 
of  loss  are  so  high  in  times  of  crisis  that  not  even  a  tax  is  likely  to  curb  speculative 
transactions  very  much.  Second,  such  a  tax  would  only  really  be  effective  if  it  were 
introduced worldwide. We certainly cannot expect that to happen. Even if such a tax were 
introduced at EU level, which is more than unlikely, competition with countries outside the EU 
would be distorted as a result. The ensuing costs would then be borne not by the financial 
sector but by the real economy. 
Two paths to a stable monetary union 
4 
A stable financial system, then, is a cornerstone of a stable monetary union. Yet to get to the 
heart  of  the  problems,  European  Monetary  Union  itself  needs  to  be  reformed.  Essentially, 
there are two paths to a stable monetary union: the first is by strengthening the institutional 
framework  currently  in  place  –  a  strengthening  that  must  go  well  beyond  what  has  been 
achieved  to  date;  the  second  path  lies  in  centralising  fiscal  policy  –  in  other  words:  fiscal 
union. 
Strengthening the existing institutional framework 
4.1 
With regard to the first path, I do not share the frequently expressed fear that the present 
framework is unsuitable for a monetary union. Nevertheless, there is, of course, considerable 
need for adjustment. This is true of three points in particular. 
 
First,  the  no  bail-out  principle  has  to  be  expressly  reaffirmed.  Investors  in  the 
financial markets will sanction misguided fiscal policy in a timely fashion only if they 
stand to lose money if they do not. Of course, this presupposes that the regulation of 
the financial markets offers incentives for risk-conscious behaviour.  
Second, the Stability and Growth Pact must be given “teeth”. There needs to be a 
much  greater  automatism  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  for  imposing  sanctions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
  when the deficit and debt limits are breached. Yet this is precisely what is missing 
from the latest resolutions aimed at reforming the Pact. The automatism does not 
yet go far enough in my view – there are still too many exceptions and too much 
scope for political interference. To paraphrase Otmar Issing, sinners are still passing 
judgment on other sinners. In principle, the Pact has been given “more bite”, but it 
remains questionable whether politicians will let it off the leash when push comes to 
shove.  
Third,  monetary  union  needs  a  permanent  crisis  mechanism,  which  could  be 
brought into play in the event of a crisis that threatens financial stability throughout 
the euro area. However, three points are crucial in this context. Financial assistance 
for individual countries must be tied to strict economic and fiscal policy conditions; 
assistance must be made subject to appropriate interest rate premiums; and private 
creditors must be involved should the country in question default. Above all, a crisis 
mechanism  must  not  be  used  to  brush  aside  important  principles  under  the 
smokescreen  of  safeguarding 
include 
subsidiarity, individual countries’ responsibility for their own fiscal policy and the no 
bail-out principle I have just mentioned.  
financial  stability.  These  principles 
Against  this  backdrop,  a  critical  view  has  to  be  taken  of  at  least  some  elements  of  the 
decisions  taken  recently  by  the  euro  area’s  heads  of  state  or  government.  Allow  me  to 
mention three problems. 
 
therefore, 
The  first  problematic  aspect  is  that  conditions  for  granting  emergency  loans  were 
loosened. In the meantime, they are more favourable than those borne by some of 
the countries providing assistance when they tap the capital market. But the less a 
country  has  to  pay  for  assistance,  the  smaller,  of  course,  is  its  incentive  to 
consolidate  its  public  finances  and  return  to  the  capital  markets.  Adopting  these 
conditions  also  for  future  aid  programmes  or  even  for  the  permanent  crisis 
mechanism would perpetuate the problem. This cannot be our objective.  
A second problem is that government bonds may be purchased on the secondary 
market  through  the  crisis  mechanism  in  future.  If  bonds  of  countries  without  an 
assistance  programme  are  purchased,  it  is  unclear  how  consolidation  and  reform 
conditions  can  be  enforced.  Nor  is  it  clear  how  this  squares  with  the  requirement 
that assistance can only be granted if the stability of the entire euro area is under 
threat.  Ultimately, 
the  possibility  of  secondary  market  purchases 
undermines the incentives to pursue a sound budgetary policy. Moreover, one point 
is often overlooked: secondary market purchases are a very crude and, indeed, a 
rather  ineffective  instrument  for  stabilising  the  financial  markets  and  influencing 
countries’ funding conditions. Thus, much larger amounts will be needed to achieve 
a particular result. This increases the risk for the taxpayers of the countries providing 
assistance.  
A third problem is the topic currently under discussion, that of leveraging the crisis 
mechanism – which is to say, first of all, a leveraging of the EFSF. Proposals of this 
kind  are  closely  linked  to  the  topic  of  secondary  market  purchases;  for,  since  its 
recently  approved  extension,  the  EFSF  has  sufficient  funds  for  the  classical 
instruments  of  the  rescue  shield  –  direct  emergency  loans  to  individual  member 
states.  However,  all  the  parties  concerned  ought  to  realise  one  thing.  Leverage 
constructions increase the risk for the taxpayer – the relationship between leverage 
and risk is one of the first lessons from the financial crisis. What in any case must be 
rejected is a leveraging by granting the EFSF a banking licence, which would allow 
the  EFSF  to  engage  in  Eurosystem  refinancing  operations  –  in  other  words,  to 
borrow  directly  from  central  banks.  For  then,  the  Eurosystem  would  largely  be 
unable to shape monetary policy autonomously. Indeed, the EFSF would be able to 
generate  a  virtually  unlimited  flow  of  funds  to  the  capital  markets  and  shift  risks 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
around between member states by purchasing large quantities of sovereign bonds. 
With that, the ban on monetary state financing set forth in the EU treaties would be 
well and truly violated.  
Overall, the question that presents itself is: how is a sanction mechanism – no matter how 
severe – in the Stability and Growth Pact supposed to prevent unsound fiscal policy if threats 
of sanctions are made, yet favourable conditions are lavished on a country that continuously 
disregards the rules? 
This is a question of fundamental importance to monetary union. Whether the answer proves 
convincing will depend on what appear to be purely technical aspects of the solution, since 
they can have unexpected implications. One example concerns the choice of a triple-A rating 
for the bonds with which the EFSF rescue fund borrows money on the capital market for the 
assistance programmes. This top rating ought to remain intact as long as the borrowing by 
the  EFSF  does  not  exceed  the  guarantee  amount  of  the  liable  countries  that  are  triple-A 
rated.  Thus,  the  effective  lending  volume  currently  amounts  to  €440  billion.  In  connection 
with the call for additional funds for the EFSF, insistence on this top rating for EFSF bonds 
leads,  however,  to  the  problematic  leverage  proposals  I  mentioned  earlier.  On  the  other 
hand, abandoning the triple-A rating would also enable the EFSF to lift its lending volume. 
With  regard  to  the  EFSF  in  its  present  form,  it  was  reported  that  the  lending  volume  of 
around  €250  billion  could  have  been  increased  by  just  over  half  if  an  AA  rating  had  been 
accepted  instead  of  triple  A.  In  contrast  to  a  leveraging,  however,  the  risk  borne  by  the 
taxpayer  would  be  lower  if  the  top  rating  were  dispensed  with.  If  the  EFSF  bonds  had  a 
somewhat  lower  rating,  the  effect  would  be  to  raise  the  EFSF’s  funding  costs  somewhat. 
However,  these  costs  would  be  borne  by  the  countries  receiving  assistance.  This  would 
solve, at least in part, the problem entailed in loosening the conditions for emergency loans 
and raise the incentive for countries to return to the capital market under their own steam. 
To  sum  up:  in  my  view,  strengthening  the  existing  regulatory  framework  is  a  feasible  path 
towards stabilising monetary union. However, that will work only if the rules are designed in 
such a way that they do not leave the door wide open for misguided incentives. This applies 
in  particular  to  the  crisis  mechanism  –  both  at  the  conceptual  level  and  in  terms  of  the 
technical  implementation.  All  too  often,  the  devil  is  in  the  detail,  and  we  cannot  afford  to 
make any mistakes there. 
Creating a fiscal union 
4.2 
The alternative, second path towards a stable monetary union is by way of a fiscal union. 
This  would not  automatically  lead  to  a  completely  centralised  fiscal  policy.  But  it  would  be 
important to set, at EU level, strict deficit and debt limits for national budgets. These limits 
would  then  apply  at  all  national  levels.  In  Germany,  this  means  central,  state  and  local 
government and the social security systems. The European rules would have to be combined 
with  appropriate  powers  of  intervention,  as  only  then  can  the  rules  be  effectively 
implemented.  If  the  national  levels  breach  the  stipulated  deficit  and  borrowing  limits,  they 
would have to forfeit their fiscal sovereignty. The final decision-making powers over budgets 
would  then  no  longer  rest  with  the  national  parliaments  but  would  be  transferred  to  the 
European level. 
Ultimately,  fiscal  union  would  constitute  a  consistent  framework  for  the  single  currency, 
although to implement it would necessitate extensive changes to the European treaties and 
national constitutions. As you can imagine, this route would be a long one, and there is no 
telling whether the people of the euro area would support it. 
And to make one point quite clear: a fiscal union of this kind could, in principle, work without 
joint  liability.  Although  joint  liability  could  be  introduced  without  much  difficulty,  it  does  not 
have to be. On no account – this is my firm belief – should joint liability be introduced at this 
point in time in mere anticipation of fiscal union. This would be taking the second step before 
the first, and inevitably entail the risk of stumbling. Instead of offering a consistent solution, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this  would  mean  pursuing  a  middle  path  on  which  liability  would  be  increasingly 
communitised while fiscal policy remains a national responsibility. That path entails obvious 
contradictions;  for  this  reason,  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  recommends  we  shun  such  an 
approach. 
Conclusion 
5 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  find  ourselves  in  a  situation  in  which  difficult  and,  perhaps, 
uncomfortable decisions are unavoidable. This situation is aggravated by uncertainty in the 
markets and among the general public. This uncertainty has to be eliminated if we want to 
break  free  of  the  present  crisis.  Yet  this  uncertainty  cannot  be  eliminated  by  repeatedly 
topping  up  the  rescue  fund.  Instead,  what  we  need  are  decisions  which  address  the  root 
causes of the crisis. Besides a swift and ambitious fiscal consolidation, I would highlight three 
main points. 
 
We need clarity regarding Greece’s future. Greece must fulfil the conditions of the 
aid programme; if it does not, there is no basis for granting further support. A Greek 
default  –  which  most  certainly  no-one  wishes  to  see  –  cannot  therefore  be 
categorically ruled out.  
We need clarity regarding the banking sector’s resilience. It has to be strengthened 
where  it  is  too  low  in  order  to  prevent  contagion  effects.  This  explicitly  includes 
recapitalisations.  This  is  justified  even  though  the  banks  are  not  to  blame  for  the 
high level of sovereign debt in several European peripheral countries.  
And we need clarity regarding the future of the monetary union. I have outlined two 
different paths in my address. Which of the two paths is chosen is in the hands of 
our politicians. It is now up to them to decide quickly. We therefore expect clear and 
landmark decisions by the European Council this coming Sunday.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
