Jean-Claude Trichet: Tomorrow and the day after tomorrow – a vision for 
Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Humboldt University, Berlin, 24 October 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be invited to speak here at the Humboldt University this evening. One 
can only be honoured to be in the university of Hegel, Heinrich Heine and the Nobel prize-
winning physicists Albert Einstein and Max Planck – not to mention 27 other laureates. But it 
is with the ideas of the university’s founder – Wilhelm von Humboldt – that I would like to 
begin my remarks. 
As a Frenchman who has lived in Germany for the past eight years, I note with interest that 
the  mother  of  the  university’s  founder  –  Marie-Elisabeth  Colomb  –  came  from  a  French 
Huguenot  family  who  also  made  that  eastwards  move.  Her  family  had  emigrated  to  Berlin 
following  the  Revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes,  a  reminder  that  European  integration  is  a 
process that has been with us for centuries. 
Wilhelm von Humboldt himself was deeply engaged with the question of how to create the 
conditions  for  individuals  to  flourish  within  a  society.  His  answer  involved  removing  the 
conditions for mutual harm. 
In some ways, this speaks to the challenges of European integration. 
The  individual  Member  States  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  also  seek  to  flourish.  Their 
actions  are  interdependent  and  can  both  benefit  and  damage  each  other.  Removing  the 
potential for mutual harm is essential for collective prosperity. 
This  dialectic  between  the  individual  and  the  community  is  at  the  core  of  the  European 
project. It is the dialectic between the individual nation states and the community of nations. 
And it presents some of Europe’s most fundamental challenges. 
I would like to reflect today on how to address these challenges – to look forward and offer a 
perspective of where Europe could go. 
In particular, I would like to develop three propositions. 
First, while the reasons for European unity have often been presented as deriving from past 
conflicts and past divisions, forward-looking motivations are in my view decisive.  
The  unique  construction  of  Europe  –  with  strong  local  identities  and  large,  integrated 
markets  –  is  a  source  of  great  strength  in  the  new,  globalised  world  we  face.  It  allows 
Europeans to plant deep roots and build strong communities. At the same time, we can fully 
benefit from economies of scale and the free flow of trade and investment.  
For this reason, European integration is profoundly in the interests of all Member States and 
deeply connected to their future prosperity. 
Second, for Europe to realise fully its future potential, it needs the right rules and the right 
institutions.  
Europe requires a solid form of governance to ensure that the actions of individual countries 
are oriented towards the common good. Our current arrangements have not yet fully met this 
standard. They are now being improved. It is a continuous process which will call for Treaty 
changes if necessary. 
As this process will take time, we need to start planning today for the Europe of tomorrow 
and the Europe of the day after tomorrow. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Third, the underpinning of a more integrated Europe is the emergence of a true European 
public debate. 
As one would say in German, die Schaffung einer europäischen Öffentlichkeit. 
Europeans  today  are  highly  interconnected  via  economic  and  social  linkages.  Yet  our 
fragmented national public discourse does not necessarily permit citizens to understand fully 
these connections. 
A true European public debate would help us deepen our interest in each other, bridge our 
linguistic differences and care more about what is happening across our borders.  
These are the three main themes on which I will focus tonight.  
But before I talk about the Europe of the future, I would like to talk about the Europe of today. 
To reflect on the relationship between member countries and Europe. And to touch on the 
challenges we collectively face in tackling the crisis. 
Europe and Germany 
1. 
Building deeper union between France and Germany in the service of Europe has been an 
important theme of my own working life. In this time, I have been profoundly influenced by 
the German commitment to a stability culture. 
In  the  1980s,  I  was  seen  in  my  own  country  as  the  strongest  advocate  of  the  “franc  fort” 
policy.  This  policy  was  designed  to  be  part  of  the  modernisation  of  the  French  economy 
through a “competitive disinflation” policy. 
In the 1990s, I worked side-by-side with Hans Tietmeyer and Horst Köhler to contribute to 
the foundations of the euro in the Maastricht Treaty. This work was to ensure that, among 
other  things,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  would  be  based  on  the  principles  of 
independence and the pursuit of price stability. 
Then in 2003, I had the honour of moving to Frankfurt to become President of this institution.  
It  was  a  great  personal  satisfaction  to  join  an  institution  that  embodied  my  deep-seated 
beliefs in central bank independence, price stability and economic discipline. 
Over this period I have developed a strong admiration for Germany and its people, and also 
for the way that Germany conducts its economic policies. 
The German economy has often been thought of as the engine of the European economy. 
But  less  than  10  years  ago,  Germany  was  seen  by  some  observers  as  the  “sick  man  of 
Europe”.  
Let me cite some books and newspaper articles from that time: 
“Can  Germany  be  saved?”,  asked  one  of  this  country’s  most  well-known 
economists in 2003, noting that “Germany provides something of a case study of 
what not to do in designing a prosperous future”.  
“How  the  mighty  are  fallen”,  said  a  major  international  magazine  also  in  2003, 
well representing the mainstream economic analysis. “After the German economy 
was  seen  as  an  exemplary  model  of  successful  capitalism  for  decades,”  the 
magazine went on, “today it is Germany that economists point to with a mixture of 
contempt and alarm.” 
“Vom  Meister  zum  Mittelmaß”,  wrote  a  major  German  newspaper  in  2005, 
speaking  of  “absteigende  Staaten  wie  Deutschland,  die  in  ihrer  Bedeutung 
schrumpften und ihren Haushalt nicht in den Griff bekämen.” 
Thankfully, these gloomy forecasts proved mistaken, and today, Germany is in the lead in 
rebounding from the crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Since the trough of mid-2009, German real GDP has grown by 6.9% compared with the euro 
area  as  a  whole  by  3.8%.  Employment  in  Germany  has  increased  by  2.1%.  Exports  have 
grown  by  25.6%.  This  performance  is  no  accident.  Neither  is  it  based  on  cyclical, 
unsustainable  factors.  It  is  the  result  of  sound  fiscal  policies,  permanent  attention  to  unit 
labour  costs,  and  bold  reforms  that  have  been  rigorously  implemented  over  a  prolonged 
period. And it sets an example that is very important for the current situation. 
First,  it  demonstrates  how  sound  policies  can  lead  to  prosperity  within  economic  and 
monetary union. 
By  encouraging  industries  to  embrace  the  opportunities  of  globalisation.  By  maintaining 
technological  excellence.  By  prioritising  cost  and  price  competitiveness.  And  by  ensuring 
flexibility in the labour market.  
Second, it proves that it is possible to regain competitiveness within monetary union. 
Germany after the post-unification boom had a very serious competitiveness problem itself. It 
took a sustained effort to become competitive again. 
This  gives  encouragement  to  euro  area  countries  that  have  lost  competitiveness  and  now 
must regain it. It also underscores the fact that the adjustment effort must begin immediately.  
But there is also a third lesson from the German example. 
Would the German recovery have been possible without the euro and Germany being in the 
euro area? Without Germany benefiting from a vast single market of the size of the United 
States with a highly stable currency? 
The German recovery has taken place in the context of the best inflation record achieved by 
a major central bank for over 50 years. The ECB has delivered an average rate of inflation of 
2.0% since beginning operations in 1999. In Germany it is even lower with an average yearly 
inflation rate of 1.57%. 
Such a low rate of inflation over a comparable time period is actually the lowest in Germany 
for  over  50  years.  Moreover,  expectations  of  future  inflation  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line 
with our definition of price stability. 
Financial  markets  and  euro  area  citizens  expect  the  ECB  to  deliver  on  its  mandate.  The 
German public can rely on our steadfast commitment to do so. 
The euro has extended the zone of monetary stability to Germany’s main trading partners in 
the euro area. As more than 40% of Germany’s exports go to other euro area countries, this 
is very important for German prosperity. The stability of the euro has also helped German 
companies remain competitive vis-à-vis the rest of the world.  
Europe and the crisis 
2. 
Let me now turn directly to our current challenges. As you are all well aware, we continue to 
face the most serious economic and financial crisis since World War II. Tackling the crisis 
has required unprecedented action from public authorities to maintain economic and financial 
stability. 
Inevitably  this  has  produced  diverging  views.  This  is  not  surprising.  The  euro  area  is 
responding to events of historical importance and it naturally takes time to forge consensus 
on the right way ahead. 
But  it  is  very  important  that  people  do  not  misconstrue  these  debates.  They  are  about 
policies, not about principles, because in the euro area our principles do not change. 
Our principles are the foundations on which we rest. Stability. Responsibility. Independence.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But our policies must adapt. No two crises are the same. It is precisely because we want to 
defend  and  reinforce  the  principles  we  cherish,  that  we  have  to  shape  our  policies 
appropriately. 
I am fully aware that in this country people have genuine concerns about the single currency. 
They seek assurance that it remains a community of stability. That it is founded on rules and 
responsibilities. And that the rules are respected and the responsibilities are taken seriously. 
I  would  like  to  use  this  occasion  to  explain  the  way  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is 
deciding on monetary policy. 
Our standard measure for fulfilling our mandate of maintaining price stability – avoiding both 
inflation and deflation – is interest rate policy. But effective interest rate policy requires that 
our policy decisions are transmitted to the real economy. If that is not the case, our monetary 
policy cannot achieve its objective.  
In  this  transmission,  both  banks  and  financial  markets  play  an  important  role.  They  are 
crucial for the financing of the real economy – of firms and households. Yet the crisis has 
damaged banks and at times severely disrupted the functioning of financial markets.  
Addressing these problems needed to be done through non-standard measures. The ECB 
has decided such measures, for monetary policy reasons, since the very start of the global 
crisis.  It  has  been  offering  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  at  a  fixed  rate  and  with  full 
allotment. It has also provided this liquidity over an extended period of time, up to 12 months, 
so  that  the  euro  area  banking  sector,  Germany’s  banks  included,  could  continue  to  be  as 
correct as possible a vehicle for the transmission of our monetary policy.  
With additional liquidity demanded by the euro area banks, our balance sheet has expanded 
during the crisis. But we have been prudent. Our balance sheet has expanded by about 80% 
since the beginning of the crisis. Only for the sake of comparison the balance sheet of the 
Federal Reserve increased by about 230%, that of the Bank of England by 205%, and that of 
the Swiss National Bank by 235%. The crisis hit all of the economies concerned, but you can 
see that all our non-standard policies have been measured. 
Of all our non-standard measures, the policy of full liquidity allotment at fixed rates has been 
the most important one in my view. Yet it is the bond market interventions that have received 
the greatest attention, and the most scrutiny.  
But  just  as our  measures  of  enhanced  credit  support  have  been  necessary  to  ensure  that 
banks  continue  to  extend  credit  to  the  real  economy,  our  bond  market  interventions  have 
been  necessary  to  help  foster  a  more  appropriate  transmission  of  our  policies  to  the  real 
economy.  The  government  bond  markets  are  crucial  for  our  monetary  policy  transmission. 
They  largely  determine  the  prices  of  loans  and  mortgages  and  thus  affect,  indirectly,  the 
transmission of monetary policy to all firms and households.  
The  ECB’s  government  bond  market  interventions  are  not  inflationary.  Unlike  the  bond 
purchase programmes of other major central banks our aim is not to inject additional liquidity. 
We  actually  absorb  all  liquidity  injected  by  these  purchases  on  a  regular  basis  –  euro  for 
euro, week by week.  
There is no fuelling of money growth in the euro area. M3 growth is less than 3% currently 
and inflation expectations have remained firmly anchored by all standards.  
So let me emphasise this point. It is very important to understand that all the ECB’s policy 
decisions during the crisis have been made fully in line with our mandate to maintain price 
stability. 
They have been taken in full independence and we have established a solid track record for 
our  independent  decisions.  Both  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area 
demonstrate the value of independent deeds, not just words. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Last week in Frankfurt, at the occasion of my official farewell as President of the ECB, Prime 
Minster  Juncker,  the  longest-serving  prime  minister  in  Europe  and  chair  of  the  Eurogroup, 
said that discussions of government pressure on the ECB lacked any basis in fact, that such 
pressure  would  have  been  completely  futile  and  that  the  ECB  always  acts  completely 
independently.  
Europe and the future 
3. 
I have talked about where Europe has come from. Let me turn now to where Europe is going. 
When  people  seek  a  justification  for  European  integration,  there  is  a  tendency  to  look 
backwards. 
European integration has banished the spectre of war from our continent, is always stressed. 
European integration has delivered the longest period of peace and prosperity in European 
history. 
This perspective is entirely correct. But it is also incomplete. 
There are many more reasons for striving towards “ever closer union” in Europe today than 
there were in 1945. And these are entirely forward-looking. 
65 years ago the distribution of global GDP was such that Europe had only one role model 
for its single market: the United States of America.  
Today, Europe is faced with a new global economy, reconfigured by globalisation and by the 
emerging economies of Asia and Latin America. 
It is a world where economies of scale and networks of innovation matter more than ever. By 
2016 – that is, very soon – we can expect the euro area in terms of purchasing power parity 
to be below the GDP of China and over and above the GDP of India. Together, these two 
countries would represent around twice the GDP of the euro area.  
Over  a  longer  horizon,  the  entire  GDP  of  the  G7  countries  will  be  dwarfed  by  the  rapid 
development of the systemic emerging economies.  
Europe has to cope with a new geo-political landscape very profoundly reshaped by these 
emerging economies.  
And Europe is also faced with new global challenges, such as climate change and migration, 
where effective solutions are possible only at the European and international levels. 
In  this  new  global  constellation,  European  integration  –  both  economic  and  political  –  is 
central to achieving prosperity and influence. For an outward-looking, export-oriented country 
like Germany, this is profoundly in its interests.  
The  challenge  is  to  set  the  correct  path  for  European  integration.  Getting  this  right  is 
essential  to  realise  fully  our  continent’s  tremendous  potential.  Let  me  therefore  lay  out  a 
vision for the Europe of tomorrow. 
The Europe of tomorrow 
The creation of Europe’s economic and monetary union is unique in the history of sovereign 
states. The euro area constitutes a “society of states” of a completely new type. 
Like individuals in a society, euro area countries are both independent and interdependent. 
They can affect each other both positively and negatively. 
Good governance requires that both individual Member States and the institutions of the EU 
fulfil their responsibilities. 
First and foremost, every country in the euro area needs to keep its own house in order. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
This  means  responsible  economic  policies  on  behalf  of  governments  and  rigorous  mutual 
surveillance  of  those  policies  by  the  Commission  and  Member  States  –  going  beyond  the 
indispensable surveillance of fiscal policies to encompass all aspects of the economy.  
In a society, the institutions of law enforcement can ultimately compel a citizen to abide by 
the rules. In the euro area, our framework based on surveillance and sanctions depends on 
the willingness of offending states to comply. 
I am aware that many observers wonder what can be done if a Member State simply cannot 
deliver on its promises. 
That  is  why,  when  I  had  the  deep  honour  of  receiving  the  Karlspreis,  I  suggested  a  new 
approach to the policing of economic governance. 
For countries that lose market access, the current approach of providing aid against strong 
conditionality  is  justified.  Countries  deserve  an  opportunity  to  put  the  situation  right 
themselves and to restore stability. 
But  as  I  suggested  in  Aachen,  this  approach  should  have  clearly  defined  limits.  A  second 
stage should be envisaged for a country that persistently fails to meet its programme targets. 
Under  this  second  stage,  euro  area  authorities  would  gain  a  much  deeper  and  more 
authoritative role in the formulation of that country’s economic policies. 
This would move us away from the present concept where all decisions remain in the hands 
of  the  country  concerned.  Instead,  it  would  be  not  only  possible,  but  in  some  cases 
compulsory, for the European authorities to take direct decisions. 
Implementing this idea of the second stage would evidently require a Treaty change. It would 
also 
the  complex 
interdependence that exists between euro area countries. And it is ultimately in the interests 
of all citizens of the euro area. 
In my view, it was important to launch such reflections as soon as possible. I am very happy 
that  the  European  Council,  at  its  meeting  yesterday  in  Brussels,  has  indicated  in  its 
conclusions: “The European Council notes the intention of the Heads of State or Government 
of the euro area to reflect on further strengthening of economic convergence within the euro 
area, on improving fiscal discipline and deepening economic union, including exploring the 
possibility of limited Treaty changes.” 
imply  a  new  concept  of  sovereignty.  This 
is  necessary  given 
The Europe of the day after tomorrow 
Let me now look even further into the future. A vision that can stabilise expectations needs to 
address not just tomorrow, but also the day after tomorrow. And as it takes time to implement 
such a vision, we must start thinking about it today. 
It is my firm conviction that the Europe of the day after tomorrow will be of an original type – 
a new type of institutional framework. 
In Aachen, on a personal basis, I began to reflect on some elements of this new possible 
framework. 
I asked the question: with a single market, a single currency and a single central bank, would 
it be too bold to envisage a ministry of finance of the Union?  
This European finance ministry would, first, oversee the surveillance of both fiscal policies 
and  competitiveness  policies,  and  when  necessary,  have  responsibility  for  imposing  the 
“second stage” I just described. 
Second,  the  ministry  would  perform  the  typical  responsibilities  of  the  executive  branches 
regarding the supervision and regulation of the EU financial sector. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And third, the ministry would represent the euro area in international financial institutions. 
Since  my  Karlspreis  address,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  case  for  such  an  approach  has 
strengthened.  
I now hear leaders calling for a Treaty change to create stronger economic governance at 
the EU level. I hear euro area citizens calling for better supervision of the financial sector. 
And  I  know  that  our  partners  in  the  G20  look  to  Europe  as  a  whole  for  solutions,  not  to 
individual Member States. 
Increasingly,  it  seems  that  it  is  not  too  bold  to  consider  a  European  finance  ministry,  but 
rather too bold not to consider creating such an institution. 
This  finance  ministry  would  be  only  one  element  of  the  European  future  institutional 
framework. Exactly how these new institutions would eventually evolve one cannot say. As 
Jean  Monnet  once  wrote:  « Personne  ne  peut  encore  dire  aujourd’hui  la  forme  qu’aura 
l’Europe  que  nous  vivrons  demain,  car  le  changement  qui  naîtra  du  changement  est 
imprévisible ». 1 
We  have  several  federal  or  confederal  institutional  frameworks  in  today’s  world.  To  name 
only a few, the United States of America, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Swiss 
Confederation. The European Union is unique in its past history, in its present nature, in its 
future ambition. It will have to invent its own concept.  
But one could imagine that in the future European institutional framework, the Council might 
evolve  into  the  Senate  of  the  Union,  the  European  Parliament  into  the  lower  house,  the 
Commission into the executive and the European Court of Justice into the judiciary – each 
time for the part of sovereignty that is shared.  
And  I  have  no  doubt,  taking  into  account  the  long  and  proud  history  of  the  European 
countries,  that  “subsidiarity”  will  play  a  major  role  in  the  future  Europe  –  very  significantly 
more than in the present models of federation.  
As I said, these are personal remarks of a European citizen. The future of Europe is in the 
hands  of  its  democracies,  in  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Europe.  Our  fellow  citizens  will 
decide. They are the masters.  
In any case, whatever the future institutions of Europe will be, an essential element would be 
the emergence of a truly pan European public debate. As Europeans we connect deeply with 
our nations, traditions and histories. These are Europe’s roots. But we also need to extend 
our branches more widely. 
To do this, the Euro area needs media, in the broadest sense of that word, that allow citizens 
to  take  a  deeper  interest  each  other.  Media  that  provide  regular  information  on  events 
beyond national borders. Media that permit citizens to debate and exchange. And media that 
are not constrained by language barriers. All we need is a pan European public debate, a 
gemeinsamer öffentlicher Raum, a débat publique pan-Européen that allows Europeans to 
appreciate the wider community of which they are part – a community where their interests 
are increasingly shared and their lives more interdependent than ever before.  
 Let me draw to a close. 
Twenty  years  ago,  in  1991,  my  friend  Hans  Tietmeyer,  the  former  President  of  the 
Bundesbank, said that “monetary union is not just a technical matter. It is in itself, to some 
extent, a political union”. 
                                                 
1 
“Nobody  can  say  today  what  will  be  the  institutional  framework  of  Europe  tomorrow  because  the  future 
changes, which will be fostered by today’s changes, are unpredictable.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
This condition creates mutual responsibilities. 
We  see  that  a  challenge  in  one  country  can  become  a  challenge  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole. Addressing it requires strong responses from all Member States, including Germany, 
and from EU institutions. 
The global crisis has called into question the overall economic and financial strategy of major 
advanced economies. All have weaknesses in their economic systems. Not surprisingly, the 
main weakness for Europe was the nature of its institutional framework – in particular, that its 
economic  and  fiscal  governance  was  not  commensurate  with  the  interconnectedness  of 
economies sharing a single market and a single currency. 
The  question  is  how  to  confront  those  obstacles.  We  should  not  look  back.  We must  look 
forward – to the opportunities of Europe for our collective betterment; and to the potential for 
every country to be stronger and more prosperous in a well-functioning union. 
As far as the ECB is concerned, its Governing Council will continue to anchor solidly price 
stability and confidence in Europe – stability and confidence for 17 countries and 332 million 
fellow citizens who have decided to unite closely with a single market and a single currency. 
As  Konrad  Adenauer  said  in  Aachen  57  years  ago:  “Gerade  wird  man  die  Mahnung 
verstehen,  dass  Europa  uns  heute  Schicksalsgemeinschaft  ist.  Dieses  Schicksal  zu 
gestalten ist uns übergeben”. “Above all, people will understand the call: that Europe, for us 
today, is a community with a common destiny. It’s up to us to shape that destiny”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
