Guy Debelle: High frequency trading in foreign exchange markets 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the ACI High Frequency Trading Conference, Sydney, 12 October 2011. 
 Thanks  to  the  participants  of  the  BIS  Working  Group  who  all  made  significant  contributions  to  the  report,  and 
James O’Connor and James Whitelaw for helpful comments. 
High  Frequency  Trading  (HFT)  is  somewhat  of  the  bête  noire  of  financial  markets  at  the 
moment. It has been blamed for many adverse market developments in recent times, most 
famously the “flash crash” in equity markets on 6 May 2010.  
But  the  assessment  of  HFT  is  often  hampered  by  difficulties  in  identifying  it,  because  it  is 
hard to distinguish from other types of automated (but not high frequency) trading, generally 
known  as  algorithmic  or  algo  trading.  HFT  is  a  part  of  algo  trading  but  algo  trading  has  a 
many times greater presence in the market than HFT. It is therefore crucial to have a clearer 
understanding conceptually of what HFT is (and is not) and what it does (and does not do).  
My talk today is based on a report recently published by the Markets Committee of the BIS.1 
The report presents the results of a fact-finding exercise conducted by a study group that I 
chaired  consisting  of  FX  market  experts  from  14  central  banks.  One  of  the  primary 
motivations for the report was that much of the attention thus far has been on HFT in equity 
markets.  There  had  been  relatively  little  analysis  of  HFT  in  foreign  exchange,  despite  its 
large and growing presence in the market. As a result we felt it was useful to document some 
of  the  facts  and  issues  around  HFT  in  foreign  exchange.  The  exercise  in  itself  was 
invaluable. Beyond the information that we gathered, it helped to strengthen, and in some 
cases establish, contacts with a number of the main HFT players in the market.  
Furthermore,  given  the  different  nature,  structure  and  size  of  the  FX  market  compared  to 
equity markets, it is important to ensure that any conclusions about HFT in equities – as well 
as any regulatory responses – are not inappropriately generalised to HFT in FX.  
So how might we think about HFT? 
Is the very fact that it is too fast for human perception a major cause for concern?  
Let me answer that question with an analogy to another form of high frequency technology.  
A BMW is a High Frequency system. There are large numbers of electronic messages flying 
round a BMW at all times, much faster than you, the driver, can possibly comprehend. You 
are generally unaware of their presence.  
But that doesn’t cause you any great concern. 
Why?  Because  you  are  confident  about  the  engineering  and  you  are  confident  about  the 
monitoring  systems.  You  are  confident  that  this  High  Frequency  system  has  been 
appropriately stress-tested and that the systems are resilient to the stress.  
If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  stick  a  BMW  engine  in  a  Leyland  P76  and  let  it  loose  on  the 
autobahn, there would be a high probability it would crash, potentially taking out some of the 
surrounding cars with it.  
So speed per se is not the problem. The issue is the resilience of the HFT system and the 
adequacy of the monitoring. So it is useful to think about HFT in foreign exchange in terms of 
                                                 
1   Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2011),  “High-Frequency  Trading  in  the  Foreign  Exchange  Market”,  BIS 
Report submitted by a Study Group established by the Markets Committee, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
these  metrics.  On  resilience,  the  HFT  firm  itself  has  a  large  incentive  to  make  sure  the 
system being used is resilient. It is typically the firm’s own capital at stake. Moreover, there is 
generally not a lot of leverage involved with HFT. On the adequacy of the monitoring, that is 
a function of the trading platforms, and particularly the prime brokers. I will return to these 
issues shortly.  
So in my talk today, I will summarise some of the main findings of the Market Committee’s 
report. First, I will describe the topography of the HFT market in foreign exchange and the 
relationships  between  the  main  participants.  I  will  then  discuss  the  effect  of  HFT  on  price 
discovery and liquidity. I will briefly examine the behaviour of HFT in two recent episodes of 
volatile market conditions, namely the flash crash and the spike in the yen just prior to the 
intervention in March earlier this year. I will also highlight the key similarities and differences 
between HFT in FX and HFT in equities.  
Finally,  I  will  conclude  with  some  of  the  lessons  learned  so  far  and  highlight  some  of  the 
issues for further consideration.  
Market structure 
One can usefully think of a topography of the foreign exchange market which starts off at the 
top  with  electronic  trading  and  voice  trading.  The  former  completely  dominates  the 
marketplace  these  days.  Electronic  trading  can  then  be  divided  into  manual,  where 
instructions  are  executed  by  humans  on  an  electronic  trading  platform,  and  automated, 
where  instructions  are  executed  by  computer  algorithms  and  there  is  little  or  no  human 
intervention. The split here is about fifty-fifty. Mind you, the landscape is changing at a high 
frequency!  
In the FX market, segmenting types of traders is difficult; there is inevitably a lot of crossover 
in styles and blurring of boundaries. So for the purposes of our study, we split algorithmic 
(algo)  trading  into  two  categories:  algo  execution  and  algo  decision-making.  The  former  is 
when a trader uses an algo to execute an order, often used for large orders. The latter is 
where  a  model  is  used  to  initiate  a  trade  based  on  parameters  such  as  order  book 
imbalance, momentum, correlations and systematic responses to economic news. It is in the 
latter camp that HFT is located.  
HFT  firms  generate  their  revenues  from  doing  a  large  number  of  small-size,  small-profit 
trades. They operate with low latency and their risk-holding period is very short, frequently 
less than one second. As speed is of the essence, indeed the defining characteristic of HFT, 
co-location is important, that is locating the server that sends the order message as close as 
possible  to  the  servers  of  the  trading  venue.  However,  our  discussion  with  a  number  of 
participants in the market suggested that diminishing returns to speed have well and truly set 
in, such that the value of future gains may not be worth the investment cost. Indeed, there 
was  a  general  sense  that  HFT  was  reaching  a  mature  phase,  where  greater  returns  were 
more likely to be had from moving into new market segments rather than spending more on 
enhancing speed.2 
HFT participants in FX tend to be located in three cities: Chicago, New York and London, 
although the physical location of the server is more important than the physical location of 
the  office.  The  bulk  of  trading  volume  appears  to  be  accounted  for  by  several  large  firms. 
Most of the activity occurs on the inter-dealer electronic broking platforms (Reuters and EBS) 
and  the  multi-bank  electronic  communication  networks  (ECNs,  such  as  Currenex,  Hotspot 
and  FXall).  The  various  platforms  have  differing  technologies,  trading  rules  and  trading 
parameters. For example, there are varying restrictions on quote life and fill ratios.  
                                                 
2   This  assumes,  of  course,  that  technology  is  not  developed  to  let  one  trade  faster  than  the  speed  of  light! 
Here’s where we might get to in the future: “Trading firm hits speed of light”, Financial News, 1 April 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To  operate  in  the  market,  a  relationship  with  a  prime  broker  (PB)  is  required.  There  is  a 
handful of large PBs in the foreign exchange market, generally the large investment banks. 
Our  conversations  with  the  market  indicated  that  the  terms  of  access  varied  a  reasonable 
amount across PBs.  
As the PB provides the credit to the HFT firm, it needs the capacity to measure and monitor 
this credit. HFT firms tend to trade in small size and hold risk only for a very short period, so 
the outstanding credit at any point in time is likely to be small, particularly compared to other 
PB  clients.  But  the  high-speed  nature  of  HFT  can  mean  that  positions  can  accumulate 
rapidly, meaning that the PBs need to have rapid monitoring technology to manage their risk 
effectively. One reflection of this is the recent development of “kill switch” technology to cut 
off  clients’  access  to  multiple  markets  simultaneously  if  unacceptable  positions  are  being 
accumulated. Andy Haldane highlights the risk of this, given that trading is occurring faster 
than human comprehension.3 
One concern that the report highlights in this regard is whether PBs are adequately pricing 
the risk in the provision of their services. This risk not only relates to the credit risk but also 
the  potentially  detrimental  effect  the  PB  customer  may  have  on  other  parts  of  the  bank’s 
business,  either  through  spread  compression  or  through  reputational  risk  as  the  customer 
typically is trading in the PB’s name. Note that this issue applies to prime broking generally, 
not just to HFT in foreign exchange.  
How large a presence is HFT in the foreign exchange market?  
It  turns  out  this  is  a  difficult  question  to  answer.  Most  surveys  of  FX  turnover  data  do  not 
separately identify HFT activity. As many HFT firms access the market through their prime 
brokers, the dealers who report the turnover data will only record the trade as being with the 
broker, rather than the HFT firm. While Reuters and EBS cannot easily directly identify HFT, 
an estimate can be obtained by summing volumes of counterparties known to participate in 
HFT.  
Nevertheless,  the  BIS  Triennal  Survey  of  foreign  exchange  activity  provides  some  indirect 
evidence  on  the  increased  presence  of  HFT.4  Between  April  2007  and  April  2010,  daily 
average FX turnover grew by almost 20 per cent. Three-quarters of this growth was in spot 
turnover,  primarily  in  the  UK  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  the  US.  The  growth  in  the  UK  was 
principally on electronic broking platforms, while that in the US was mostly on ECNs. Given 
the electronic broking platforms Reuters and EBS are UK-based and the ECNs, mostly US-
based, this is consistent with HFT being a significant contributor to the increase in turnover, 
given their preference to trade in these marketplaces.  
In the report, we calculate an upper-bound estimate for HFT. This estimate is based on the 
fact that around 45 per cent of trading on EBS and Reuters (depending on the currency pair) 
is  automated.  Given  that  electronic  trading  itself  is  around  50 per cent  of  spot  foreign 
exchange trading, this would imply that HFT could be around 25–30 per cent of all foreign 
exchange turnover.5 
                                                 
3   Haldane  A  (2011),  “The  Race  to  Zero”,  Speech  at  the  International  Economic  Association  Sixteenth  World 
Congress, “Approaches to the Evolving World Economy”, Beijing, 8 July. 
4   See the 2010 BIS Triennial Survey on Foreign Exchange Market Activity and particularly M King and D Rime 
(2010), “The $4 Trillion Question: What Explains FX Growth Since the 2007 Survey?”, BIS Quarterly Review, 
December, pp 27–42. 
5   The increased market presence of HFT and the impact it is having on the market structure does, however, 
highlight the need to reassess the way that we are measuring foreign exchange turnover in the BIS survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Effect on price discovery and liquidity 
What has been the effect of HFT on the market? 
The most obvious impact is that spreads are tighter in normal times, particularly at the top of 
the book. There are questions about the quality of liquidity, however, with claims that liquidity 
has been impaired for larger orders. Moreover, as we note in the report, the quality of a bid 
or  ask  is  determined  by  more  than  just  its  price.  The  size  of  the  quote  and  its  longevity 
matters too.  
The  effect  of  spread  compression  and  depth  of  book,  however,  is  mostly  an  issue  of 
redistribution of profit around the marketplace. A number of complaints levelled at HFT firms 
often reflect the fact that they are taking margin from the party complaining. One example of 
this is the accusation of predatory pricing. This is sometimes mislabelled front-running. But 
front-running implies advance “insider” knowledge of a trade. HFT firms don’t have advanced 
knowledge of the trade as a whole. Rather they detect patterns in trading which are indicative 
of a large trade coming to market and take advantage of that piece of information (which is 
available  to  the  whole  marketplace).  In  doing  so,  they  are  taking  profit  at  the  expense  of 
another participant, but this should be best viewed primarily as redistribution.  
There are concerns, however, that while liquidity is improved in normal times, HFT is causing 
changes  in  the  ecology  of  the  market  which  result  in  a  worsening  of  liquidity  in  stressed 
circumstances. One of these changes is that some banks are internalising more transactions, 
which means that less trades are ultimately seeing the public marketplace. A related issue is 
that traditional market makers may pull back in the normal times as the business becomes 
less profitable meaning that there may be less liquidity available than in the past in stressed 
times.  
In that regard, we tried to gain some perspective on this issue by looking at the behaviour of 
the foreign exchange market around the time of the flash crash in equities in May 2010 and 
the sharp movements in the yen just prior to the coordinated intervention in March this year. 
The general sense of the evidence from May 2010 is that HFT participants were very active 
in the foreign exchange market before, during and after the time of the flash crash. However, 
while  they  were  present,  it  is  an  open  question  about  the  quality  of  the  liquidity  being 
provided.  This  episode  also  supports  the  proposition  that  while  not  necessarily  being  the 
initiator of the shock, HFT can propagate a shock brought on by a rogue or poorly specified 
(non-HFT) algorithm.  
In  the  case  of  the  yen  episode,  there  are  indications  that  HFT  players  withdrew  from  the 
market  around  that  time,  but  so  did  others,  including  traditional  market  makers.  Some  of 
those market makers who remained in the market widened their bid ask spreads dramatically 
thereby again calling into question the quality of the liquidity being provided. This is standard 
behaviour,  highlighting  the  point  that  no  participant  has  an  obligation  to  always  provide  a 
quote.  
Turning  to  the  issue  of  the  comparison  between  HFT  in  equities  and  HFT  in  foreign 
exchange, there are some significant differences between the two. An important difference is 
the  nature  of  the  underlying  demand  in  foreign  exchange  versus  equity.  There  is  wider 
diversity of participants in foreign exchange and arguably more underlying demand. But there 
are  also  signs  of  convergence,  with  the  foreign  exchange  market  becoming  more  order 
driven, rather than quote driven.  
Lessons learned and unresolved issues 
Having  covered  some  of  the  facts  about  HFT  in  foreign  exchange,  I  will  conclude  by 
summarising the lessons and issues that the report highlights:  
 
On market functioning: HFT has had a marked impact on the functioning of the FX 
market  in  ways  that  could  be  seen  as  beneficial  in  normal  times.  HFT  helps  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
        distribute liquidity across the decentralised FX market, improving efficiency, and has 
narrowed spreads, at least for smaller trade sizes. But liquidity for larger trade sizes 
may have become inferior.  
The introduction of HFT to the market has affected the ecology of the FX market in 
ways  that  are  not  yet  fully  understood.  Questions  remain  about  HFT  participants’ 
willingness  to  provide  liquidity  on  a  sustained  basis  under  different  market 
conditions. While HFT generates increased activity and narrower spreads in normal 
times, it may have reduced the resilience of the system as a whole in stressed times 
by reducing the activity of traditional market participants who may have otherwise 
been an important stabilising presence in volatile environments.  
That  said,  recent  experience  suggests  that  HFT  participants  are  not  necessarily 
flightier than traditional participants in times of market stress and may be quicker to 
re-enter the market as it stabilises.  
Furthermore, the market infrastructure itself, such as the various electronic trading 
platforms, is also changing in reaction to the growth of HFT and is likely to have a 
significant impact on how different market participants execute trades over time.  
For  example,  HFT  has  led  to  traditional  liquidity  providers  developing  proprietary 
liquidity pools through which to hedge their own risk. Banks are internalising more 
transactions in-house using the same technology that makes HFT viable. However, 
this takes liquidity out of the main markets such as Reuters and EBS. As a result, 
less information is flowing to the market on trading activity; a development that might 
detract from the price discovery process, at least for some market participants.  
On  HFT  and  Systemic  risks:  The  6  May  2010  flash  crash  in  equities  shows  that 
rather  than  HFT  per  se,  algorithmic  execution  more  generally  can  be  a  trigger  of 
systemic  risk.  Rather  than  being  an  initiator  of  such  shocks,  HFT  may  accelerate 
and propagate shocks initiated elsewhere.  
It is important to bear in mind that, while HFT is dependent on technology to function 
and  that  trade  positions  are  often  being  open  and  closed  faster  than  human 
comprehension, there still remains an important human element. The HFT models 
are continually monitored by human traders to ensure that they are performing as 
expected. In turbulent times, it is a human trader who makes the discretionary call 
as to whether to turn off the trading model if it has not already ceased trading.  
On  market  integrity  and  competition:  Many  of  the  “predatory”  or  “unfair”  practices 
attributed to HFT, in light of their technology-driven ability to detect orders and take 
advantage  of  latencies,  are  in  fact  not  new.  HFT  is  but  the  latest  high-tech,  high-
speed manifestation of them.  
Turning  to  regulation,  HFT  in  FX  is  subject  to  three  levels  of  self-regulation.  In 
addition to HFT firms’ own risk controls, there is also monitoring by prime brokers. 
One significant concern we document in the report is whether the prime brokers are 
technologically  capable  of  keeping  up  with  their  HFT  clients  or  have  the  financial 
incentives to do so appropriately. Furthermore, trading platforms also have rules to 
help foster an orderly and fair trading environment, but the nature and severity of 
such rules varies across platforms. Thirdly, the Foreign Exchange Committees in a 
number of jurisdictions are currently considering implementing enhanced codes of 
conduct  which  aim  to  address  the  market  integrity  issues  raised  by  the  increased 
presence of HFT.  
Finally, an interesting question to ask, but not addressed in the report, is whether HFT is a 
socially  efficient  use  of  resources.  One  can  ask  this  question  of  a  number  of  fields  which 
adopt cutting-edge technology, such as Formula 1 racing or America’s Cup sailing, where the 
social  benefits  are  not  always  immediately  apparent,  but  have  led  to  technological 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
improvements that have benefited society. It is not clear that the quest for trading speed, in 
and of itself, is socially beneficial. But perhaps the more pertinent way to pose the question is 
to  ask  instead,  whether  HFT  is  harmful.  One  of  the  purposes  of  the  Markets  Committee’s 
report has been to provide a set of facts with which one can try to answer that question.  
In  sum,  HFT  in  FX  is  a  rapidly  evolving  phenomenon.  It  is  having  a  notable  effect  on  the 
structure and functioning of the FX market. It is causing behavioural changes in other market 
participants that may have an impact on the resilience of the system as a whole.  
While it may be the case that the impact of HFT on market functioning is generally benign, 
HFT  does  require  ongoing  monitoring  to  ensure  this  remains  the  case.  The  monitoring 
currently is done predominantly by the prime brokers and the trading platforms. There is a 
concern that PB monitoring may be inadequate if the risk inherent in the services they are 
providing is not appropriately priced.  
Policymakers are endeavouring to keep abreast of the impact of HFT on the FX market by 
maintaining contact with the different and evolving market participants. In some cases, this is 
happening through the involvement of policymakers in the Foreign Exchange Committees in 
various jurisdictions. Industry bodies, such as the ACI, also have a role to play through their 
work on market codes of conduct.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
