Philipp Hildebrand: Global and Swiss economic outlook – overview for 
2011/12 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Berne, 15 December 2011. 
 The Swiss National Bank (SNB) reaffirms its commitment to the minimum exchange rate of 
CHF  1.20  per  euro.  It  will  continue  to  enforce  this  minimum  rate  with  the  utmost 
determination. It is prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities. The target range 
for the Libor remains at 0.0–0.25%, and the SNB continues to aim for a three-month Libor 
close to zero. Even at the current rate, the Swiss franc is still high and should continue to 
weaken  over  time.  The  SNB  stands  ready  to  take  further  measures  at  any  time  if  the 
economic outlook and the risk of deflation so require.  
In the third quarter, the global economy picked up again slightly, thanks to positive stimuli 
from  Japan,  the  US  and  China.  Growth  in  Europe,  however,  remained  weak  and  the 
economic outlook for the euro area deteriorated. In Switzerland, the pace of growth slowed 
considerably  in  the  third  quarter.  The  substantial  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  over  the 
summer is weighing heavily on the Swiss economy. For 2011 as a whole, real GDP growth of 
1.5–2.0% can be expected. This is only because of the favourable economic development in 
the  first  half  of  the  year.  For  2012,  the  SNB  is  expecting  economic  growth  in  the  order  of 
0.5%.  
The  international  outlook  continues  to  be  highly  uncertain.  A  further  escalation  of  the 
European sovereign debt crisis cannot be ruled out. This would have grave consequences 
for the international financial system. Moreover, given our country’s close relations with the 
euro  area,  Switzerland’s  economic  prospects  are  highly  dependent  on  how  the  crisis 
develops.  
Compared to the previous quarter, the SNB’s conditional inflation forecast has once again 
been adjusted downwards. In the short term, inflation will dip into negative territory sooner, 
owing  to  the  effects  of  the  earlier  currency  appreciation,  which  have  been  stronger  than 
expected.  In  the  longer  term,  the  worsening  of  the  growth  outlook  for  the  euro  area  is 
dampening  inflation.  The  forecast  for  2011  shows  an  inflation  rate  of  0.2%.  For  2012,  the 
SNB is expecting inflation of –0.3% and for 2013, of 0.4%. These forecasts are based on the 
assumption of a three-month Libor of 0% and a depreciating Swiss franc. In the foreseeable 
future,  there  is  no  risk  of  inflation  in  Switzerland.  If  foreign  demand  were  to  fall  off  more 
sharply than expected, downside risks to price stability would emerge. 
Global economic outlook 
Following  a  very  weak  second  quarter,  the  global  economy  picked  up  again slightly  in  the 
third quarter, benefiting from the resumption of production following the earthquake disaster 
in Japan. The decline in commodity prices during the third quarter also had a positive effect. 
In Japan, the US and China in particular, aggregate economic activity strengthened slightly. 
In the euro area, on the other hand, economic growth was weak.  
The  outlook  for  global  growth  is  nevertheless  subdued,  and  has,  if  anything,  deteriorated 
since the last monetary policy assessment. The most recent US economic data have been 
somewhat better than expected, but the escalation of the European debt crisis has clouded 
the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area.  Bond  yields  for  fiscally  weak  states  have  risen 
markedly. The growing unease among market participants is also reflected in the increased 
volatility on the financial markets. Mounting borrowing costs and the high level of uncertainty 
are contributing to a marked worsening of the business climate in the euro area.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The SNB has adjusted its growth assumptions for the euro area over the next three years 
substantially downwards. For the rest of the world, on the other hand, our forecasts remain 
essentially unchanged. Uncertainty about the future outlook for the global economy remains 
extremely  high.  In  particular,  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  poses  grave  risks  for  the 
international financial system and the real economy.  
Swiss economic outlook 
In  Switzerland,  the  pace  of  growth  slowed  considerably  in  the  third  quarter.  According  to 
preliminary  estimates,  annualised  real  GDP  increased  by  only  0.9%.  In  particular,  the 
substantial appreciation of the Swiss franc over the summer is weighing heavily on the Swiss 
economy. Exports fell sharply. At the same time, domestic final demand stagnated.  
The  economic  slowdown  was  accompanied  by  a  slight  decrease  in  technical  capacity 
utilisation.  In  manufacturing,  it  is  now  around  the  long-term  average.  In  the  construction 
industry, it has declined slightly, but remains at a very high level. Narrow profit margins and 
mounting  concerns  over  the  international  outlook  held  companies’  demand  for  labour  in 
check.  
The introduction of the minimum exchange rate has corrected the massive overvaluation of 
the Swiss franc and has given companies a sounder basis for their investment planning. This 
notwithstanding, the situation for a big part of the economy remains difficult. Waning global 
demand  will  continue  to  hold  back  export  growth.  Economic  uncertainty,  coupled  with  a 
difficult  earnings  situation  for  many  companies,  will  curb  corporate  investment.  Moreover, 
since  October,  the  seasonally  adjusted  unemployment  figure  has  risen  again  slightly.  The 
deterioration in the labour market should constrain both consumer spending and investment 
in residential construction.  
It is likely that the Swiss economy will stagnate in the fourth quarter. For 2011 as a whole, 
real  GDP  growth  of  1.5–2.0%  can  be  expected.  This  is  only  because  of  the  favourable 
economic development in the first half of the year. For 2012, the SNB is expecting economic 
growth in the order of 0.5%.  
Monetary and financial conditions 
In  October  and  November,  inflation  turned  negative,  a  development  largely  driven  by  the 
strong  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  during  the  summer.  Prices  for  a  large  number  of 
tradable goods fell markedly. Following the introduction of the minimum exchange rate, the 
SNB  is  expecting  temporarily  negative  inflation  rates,  but  not  a  sustained  decline  in  the 
general price level. Moreover, surveys also show that medium-term inflation expectations are 
still positive.  
As a result of the substantial expansion of liquidity to combat the strength of the Swiss franc 
in  August,  some  short-term  interest  rates  turned  negative.  They  have  been  close  to  zero 
since  the  previous  monetary  policy  assessment.  Long-term  interest  rates  also  declined 
further.  The  yield  on  ten-year  Confederation  bonds  reached  a  new  low.  The  expansionary 
effects  of  monetary  policy  are  also  evident  in  the  growth  of  the  money  supply  and  in  real 
interest rates, which have remained at a low level.  
Since the introduction of the minimum exchange rate on 6 September 2011, the Swiss franc 
exchange rate to the euro has been above CHF 1.20. Compared to August, the Swiss franc 
has even depreciated more against the US dollar than against the euro. Nevertheless, even 
at the current exchange rate, the Swiss franc is still high.  
In August, the SNB had substantially expanded Swiss franc liquidity, in order to weaken the 
heavily overvalued Swiss franc. Since then, banks’ sight deposits with the SNB have been at 
historically  high  levels.  The  SNB  will  continue  to  maintain  liquidity  at  exceptionally  high 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
levels,  but  has  decided  not  to  set  a  specific  target  level  for  sight  deposits  at  present.  My 
colleague Jean-Pierre Danthine will discuss the SNB’s liquidity measures and their effects in 
more detail.  
Both domestic mortgages and corporate lending in the real economy have continued to see 
robust growth. In the third quarter of 2011, lending standards and conditions for mortgages 
remained  largely  unchanged.  By  contrast,  banks  reported  a  slight  tightening  of  lending 
standards  and  conditions  for  corporate  loans  –  especially  loans  to  large  companies.  Low 
interest rates continue to have a favourable effect on the demand for loans. In addition, the 
robust  growth  in  real  estate  prices,  particularly  prices  for  owner-occupied  apartments, 
continued  unabated  in  the  third  quarter.  In  this  context,  the  SNB  welcomes  the  recent 
advances achieved in Switzerland with the introduction of macroprudential instruments. My 
colleague Thomas Jordan will report on developments in the area of financial stability and 
macroprudential policy.  
Chart of conditional inflation forecast 
The  (dashed)  red  curve  on  the  chart  represents  the  new  conditional  inflation  forecast.  It 
shows the future path of inflation, assuming that the three-month Libor remains unchanged at 
0% over the next twelve quarters, and it covers the period from the fourth quarter of 2011 to 
the third quarter of 2014. For purposes of comparison, the (dash-dotted) green curve shows 
the conditional inflation forecast published in the previous quarter, which was also based on 
the assumption of a three-month Libor of 0%.  
Until the second quarter of 2012, the SNB’s new conditional inflation forecast is below the 
previous quarter’s forecast. This is because the earlier Swiss franc appreciation impacted on 
prices more quickly than expected. From the third quarter of 2012, inflation rises above the 
previous forecast, because at this point the negative base effect of price declines since mid-
2011 disappears. The muted course of inflation from the end of 2012 stems from the marked 
deterioration  in  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area.  Overall,  despite  the  expansionary 
monetary policy, there are no signs of inflation risks over the forecast horizon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
