Charles I Plosser: Economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  Business  Leaders  Forum,  Villanova  School  of 
Business, of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 29 September 2011. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 
Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to be here at the Villanova School of Business 
to address this second annual Business Leaders Forum.  
As leaders engaged in our business community, you are all aware of the painfully protracted 
pace of our economic recovery. I have been saying for quite some time that this was going to 
be  a  long,  slow  recovery.  Moreover,  this  frustrating  state  of  affairs  continues  despite 
extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy.  
In my remarks today, I will discuss my outlook for the U.S. economy, as well as my views on 
the appropriate current and future monetary policy. As always, my remarks reflect my own 
views  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  or  my 
colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Economic outlook 
Let me begin with an update on the U.S. economy. Clearly, this year has not played out as 
almost anyone forecasted. Indeed, from the revisions to the government’s economic data in 
July, we now know that the recession was deeper and the recovery was weaker than we had 
previously thought. Some of this year’s weakness is understandable. We began the year with 
severe  snowstorms  in  the  East,  then  the  earthquake  and  ensuing  disasters  in  Japan, 
followed by the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa and the run-up in oil prices, and a 
lingering concern about sovereign debt in Europe. And all of that occurred before May. 
With the arrival of summer, we faced another round of problems with the worsening of the 
European  sovereign  debt  crisis,  as  well  as  our  own  fracas  on  fiscal  policy  and  the  debt 
ceiling debates in Washington. These events all weighed heavily on business and consumer 
confidence. 
While  many  of  these  factors  are  transitory,  and  each  will  wane  eventually,  the  cumulative 
effect has served to feed uncertainty and inhibit growth. 
Indeed,  growth  in  the  first  half  of  2011  was  much  weaker  than  anticipated.  In  light  of  this 
performance most forecasters have revised down their forecasts for overall growth in 2011. 
Indeed,  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  I  was  expecting  GDP  growth  in  2011  to  be  3  to 
3.5 percent. Now, I expect GDP growth to be less than 2 percent in 2011, but to gradually 
accelerate to around 3 percent in 2012.  
Although the downside risks around this forecast are significant, I do not believe the current 
data signal that we are on the precipice of a so-called double-dip recession. Indeed, many of 
my business contacts suggest that while growth is very sluggish and uneven, they do not see 
the precipitous declines that the news headlines suggest.  
Instead,  their  stories  are  consistent  with  a  slow  recovery  due  to  the  very  nature  of  the 
recession  from  which  we  have  emerged.  The  financial  crisis  was  a  severe  shock  that 
impacted  many  economies  around  the  world  and  led  to  a  recession  of  great  depth  and 
structural imbalances. Some sectors, such as financial services and construction, may never 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
return to their pre-recession shares of our economy. The aftermath of the financial stress and 
the weak housing sector will weigh on the pace of recovery for some time to come.  
Consumer and business spending 
One of the more striking aspects of this recession is the continued weakness in consumer 
spending. While there were modest increases last year, spending decelerated notably over 
the first half of the year. Partly this reflects the effect of higher oil prices we saw earlier in the 
year.  Partly  it  reflects  the  continued  deleveraging  of  the  household  balance  sheet,  as 
consumers  pay  down  debt  and  work  to  rebuild  their  net  worth.  Most  observers  agree  that 
weak income growth and falling house prices are restraining spending and we are unlikely to 
see strong consumer spending as long as we face a depressed housing market and a weak 
labor market.  
Another  way  to  view  weak  consumption  is  to  note  that  households  are  continuing  to 
restructure  their  balance  sheets  –  saving  more  and  consuming  less.  This  is  a  perfectly 
natural  and  rational  reaction  to  events.  Until  these  households  perceive  that  they  have 
restored  a  balance  to  their  long-run  consumption  and  saving  patterns  commensurate  with 
their earnings profile, they will not increase spending. Moreover, the more uncertain they are 
about their own earning power, the more reluctant households will be to increase spending 
and the more they will feel the need to build up their savings. 
A brighter spot has been business investment spending, which has been supported by solid 
growth  in  corporate  earnings.  Looking  through  the  month-to-month  volatility,  spending  on 
equipment and software has continued to expand.  
Indicators from business surveys, including the Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey 
of  manufacturers,  suggest  some  weakening  in  conditions,  although  it  is  too  soon  to  tell 
whether this will be persistent.  
Many have taken note of the weakness in our monthly survey, since it has proven to be a 
useful gauge for national trends in manufacturing. In August and September, the measures 
of current activity were negative. But our polling in August coincided with market volatility in 
the aftermath of Standard & Poor’s downgrade of U.S. debt. Measures of future activity have 
remained positive, and September was stronger than August, suggesting that firms expect 
activity to pick up over the next six months.  
Recent  volatility  in  financial  markets  has  contributed  to  sharp  declines  in  business  and 
consumer sentiment. But with a high degree of uncertainty over future taxes, regulations, and 
the  financial  ramifications  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  situation,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
sentiment is flagging and this decline poses added risk to the growth forecast. 
Labor markets 
Conditions in labor markets remain a serious challenge. Given the weak growth so far this 
year,  we  have  not  made  even  the  modest  progress  on  reducing  unemployment  rates  that 
forecasters anticipated. Most recently, nonfarm payroll employment was flat in August, and 
the unemployment rate remained at 9.1 percent. Private payrolls added just 17,000 jobs, far 
below what we will need to see just to keep pace with changes in the labor force. Ongoing 
budget pressures faced by state and local governments have led to cuts in public payrolls.  
These numbers are troubling, especially when more than 40 percent of the unemployed, or 
some 6 million people, have been out of work for 27 weeks or longer. This underscores that 
we should not expect any easy solution. Millions of unemployed workers may take longer to 
find  jobs  because  their  skills  have  depreciated  or  they  may  need  to  seek  employment  in 
other sectors. These structural issues will take time to resolve. Jobs and workers will need to 
be reallocated across the economy, which is a long and slow process.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Thus, while I expect a moderate recovery to continue and to strengthen over time, I expect to 
see only modest declines in the unemployment rate, with probably little change over the rest 
of this year, and then falling to a range of 8 to 8½ percent by the end of 2012. 
Inflation 
Let me now turn to my outlook for inflation. Just as growth has been weaker this year than 
many forecasters had anticipated, inflation has been higher than expected. Monthly changes 
in  inflation have  moderated  slightly  from  those  seen  earlier  in  the  year  when  the  prices  of 
many  commodities,  including  oil,  were  rising  sharply.  However,  measured  on  a  year-over-
year basis, both total inflation and core inflation continue to advance. I do anticipate that with 
many commodity prices now leveling off or falling, and inflation expectations relatively stable, 
inflation will moderate in the near term.  
However, we must continue to monitor this situation, particularly in this environment of very 
accommodative monetary policy. Indeed, it is good to remember that the current inflationary 
environment is quite different from the one we faced a year ago when we embarked on the 
so-called QE2 policy to purchase $600 billion of long-term U.S. Treasuries. At the time, there 
were concerns about deflation, whereas now inflation is running above our long-run goal. I 
would also note that unemployment was higher last fall than it is today. Thus, with inflation 
higher and unemployment lower, it is appropriate to ask what criteria we are using to justify 
further accommodation. In this environment, I think it is very important that we refrain from 
actions that risk fueling a steady rise in inflation or inflation expectations over the medium 
term. We must not become too sanguine that high unemployment will lead to low inflation. 
The  lesson  of  the  1970s  is  clear  –  high  unemployment  or  low  resource  utilization  is  not 
sufficient to prevent high rates of inflation. The current environment in the U.K. should also 
be  a  warning.  The  unemployment  rate  in  Britain  is  near  8  percent,  having  risen  sharply 
during its recession, yet inflation is now approaching 5 percent and has been steadily rising 
for nearly two years.  
Monetary policy 
This  brings  me  to  a  discussion  of  the  recent  policy  actions  the  Fed  has  taken,  why  I 
dissented  from  these  actions  in  August  and  September,  and  what  I  believe  should  be  the 
long-term view of monetary policy. 
As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, the economic conditions of the past few years 
have led to extraordinary monetary policy accommodation. To date, our actions have led to a 
level of the federal funds rate – the traditional instrument of monetary policy – that has been 
near zero for almost three years. The Fed’s balance sheet has grown more than threefold, 
from nearly $900 billion before the crisis to about $2.9 trillion today, and its asset composition 
has  shifted  significantly  from  mostly  short-  to  medium-term  Treasuries  to  longer-term 
Treasuries,  mortgage-backed  securities,  and  agency  debt.  This  extraordinary  degree  of 
monetary  accommodation  has  played  a  role  in  supporting  the  recovery  thus  far,  and  it 
continues to do so.  
In August, the FOMC changed its guidance about its expectations for the future path of the 
federal  funds  rate.  In  particular,  it  stated  that  economic  conditions  were  “likely  to  warrant 
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.” At its meeting 
last  week,  the  FOMC  announced  additional  accommodative  action.  In  an  effort  to  reduce 
long-term Treasury yields from already historically low levels, the FOMC intends to purchase 
$400 billion of longer-term Treasury securities and to sell an equal amount of shorter-term 
Treasuries  by  the  end  of  June  2012.  This  action  will  not  increase  the  size  of  the  Fed’s 
balance sheet, but it will lengthen the maturity of the Fed’s holdings. In addition, the FOMC 
will be reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
backed  securities  in  mortgage-backed  securities  rather  than  Treasuries.  This  action  was 
intended to help support mortgage markets. 
I dissented from these decisions because I believe that they will do little to improve the near-
term prospects for economic growth or employment and they do pose risks. Policy actions 
should never be considered free and should be evaluated based on the costs and benefits. 
Based  on  our  experience  with  Operation  Twist  in  the  1960s  and  with  last  year’s QE2,  the 
reduction in long-term rates is likely to be less than 20 basis points for the 10-year Treasury 
yield, which is currently only 2 percent. The pass-through to the rates at which consumers 
and businesses actually borrow is likely to be much less. Thus, I am skeptical that this will do 
much  to  spur  businesses  to  hire  or  consumers  to  spend,  given  the  ongoing  structural 
adjustments occurring in the economy and the uncertainties posed by the fiscal challenges 
both here and abroad.  
In addition to having little effect, the actions come with significant potential costs. We have 
provided  a  great  deal  of  monetary  accommodation  to  the  economy,  and  given  the 
stubbornness  of  the  unemployment  rate  in  responding  to  these  efforts,  we  should  be 
cautious and vigilant that our previous accommodative policies do not translate into a steady 
rise in inflation over the medium term even while the unemployment rate remains elevated. 
Creating an environment of stagflation, reminiscent of the 1970s, will not help businesses, 
the unemployed, or the consumer. It is an outcome we must carefully guard against.  
We also need to ensure that Fed policy remains credible. In my view, the actions taken in 
August and September tend to undermine the Fed’s credibility by giving the impression that 
we  think  such  policies  can  have  a  major  impact  on  the  speed  of  the  recovery.  It  is  my 
assessment that they will not. We should not take certain actions simply because we can. To 
address  our  economic  ills  we  must  apply  the  appropriate  remedies.  A  doctor  who 
misdiagnoses  a  disease  and  prescribes  the  wrong  medicine  can  make  the  patient  worse. 
The  ills  we  currently  face  are  not  readily  resolved  through  ever  more  accommodative 
monetary policy. If we act as if the Fed has the ability to solve all our economic problems, the 
credibility of the institution is undermined. The loss of that credibility and confidence could be 
costly to the economy because it will make it much harder for the Fed to implement effective 
monetary policy in the future. 
Credibility was also at the center of my opposition to changing the forward policy guidance in 
August. I was concerned that tying monetary policy to calendar time could be misinterpreted 
by  the  public  as  suggesting  that  monetary  policy  is  no  longer  contingent  on  how  the 
economic  outlook  evolves.  This  could  also  lead  to  a  loss  of  credibility  should  economic 
conditions develop in a way that requires the federal funds rate to be adjusted prior to mid-
2013. And in my view, given the outlook, economic conditions will likely warrant that the Fed 
begin to raise rates before that time. 
Finally,  the  actions  taken  at  our  last  meeting  will  make  our  exit  from  this  period  of 
extraordinary  accommodation  more  complicated.  We  will  have  more  long-term  Treasury 
securities and more mortgage-backed securities in our portfolio, which may extend the time it 
will take to withdraw from allocating credit to particular sectors of the economy and return to 
our stated goal of an all-Treasuries portfolio.  
This  does  not  mean  that  I  see  no  circumstances  in  which  further  monetary  policy  action 
should  be  taken.  Should  the  developments  in  the  euro  area  lead  to  significant  financial 
market  disruptions,  the  Fed  would  need  to  respond  in  its  role  of  lender  of  last  resort  to 
support financial stability and the payments system. Or if deflationary fears were to become a 
real threat again and we saw signs that the economy was moving to a sustained disinflation 
with  declining  inflation  rates  and  inflation  expectations,  then  we  would  need  to  consider 
further action to stabilize inflation expectations. I do not see either of these scenarios in my 
forecast, so I do not anticipate that further accommodative monetary policy actions will need 
to be taken. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
An explicit numerical objective for inflation 
The past three years have proven  to be challenging times for monetary policymakers. We 
entered unprecedented territory as we employed new policy tools to stem the financial crisis 
and  limit  the  damage  to  the  economy  from  the  severe  economic  recession.  There was  no 
established framework for making policy decisions in such an environment, and that added to 
the  difficulties  in  determining  appropriate  policy.  It  also  created  difficulties  for  the  Fed’s 
communications. In my view, a high priority for the Fed must be to strengthen our monetary 
policy  framework  and  articulate  that  framework  to  the  public  so  that  they  will  better 
understand the basis for our decisions and be better able to formulate expectations of future 
policy actions.  
An  important  first  step  in  that  direction  is  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  adopt  an  explicit 
numerical  objective  for  inflation.  The  explicit  inflation  goal  would  help  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations, raise policy transparency, and increase the central bank’s accountability for its 
actions. There is considerable evidence that countries that have adopted such an objective 
as  a  cornerstone  of  their  monetary  policy  decision-making  have  had  more  success  at 
achieving price stability without any deterioration in the stability of real activity. In the United 
States,  Congress  has  given  the  Fed  a  mandate  to  promote  the  goals  of  maximum 
employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. Price stability is the most 
effective way for monetary policy to promote the other two goals. Thus, by helping the Fed 
achieve and maintain price stability, an explicit inflation objective would help the Fed promote 
all three of the goals set forth by Congress. 
For  nearly  20  years,  I  have  advocated  that  the  Fed  make  explicit  its  commitment  to  a 
numerical inflation objective in support of its full mandate. I believe that now is an opportune 
time to do so.  
First, it will increase the credibility of our commitment to keeping prices stable even as we 
employ new, less familiar policy tools.  
Second, we are confronting an environment where some may be questioning the ability or 
resolve of the government to address our long-run fiscal problems. In such an atmosphere of 
uncertainty, being explicit about our inflation goal will underscore the Fed’s commitment not 
to  succumb  to  external  pressures  to  use  inflation  as  a  solution  to  the  country’s  long-run 
deficit  problem.  This  will  help  anchor  inflation  expectations,  which  is  critical  because  an 
undesirable rise or fall in inflationary expectations can generate a self-fulfilling mechanism. 
Should  inflation  expectations  become  unhinged,  it  would  be  difficult  and  costly  for  the 
monetary authority to re-establish price stability.  
Third, communicating an explicit inflation objective will clarify the Fed’s intentions regarding 
the  level  of  inflation  it  considers  consistent  with  its  mandate.  Some  economists  have 
suggested  that  raising  our  inflation  goal  above  2  percent  would  be  an  effective  tool  for 
lowering real interest rates. I am very wary of such a strategy because I don’t believe we can 
control  inflation  expectations  that  precisely.  It  is  at  least  questionable  whether  we  could 
credibly raise inflation expectations. And were we able to do so, how easily would we be able 
to  bring  them  back  down?  Trying  to  manipulate  the  public’s  expectations  may  risk 
undermining the Fed’s credibility and the public’s confidence in the institution. 
Fourth,  we  eventually  will  need  to  normalize  our  monetary  policy  and  exit  this  period  of 
extraordinary accommodation. Having an explicit inflation objective will help us maintain our 
commitment to price stability while we do that and increase the credibility of that commitment 
in the eyes of the public.  
As business leaders, you understand the importance of credibility in your own institutions. An 
institution's  reputation  is  built  on  its  credibility  for  fulfilling  its  commitments.  Once  that 
foundation  is  compromised,  it  is  very  difficult  to  rebuild.  The  Fed  must  do  all  it  can  to 
preserve its hard-earned credibility. I believe an explicit inflation goal can help us do that. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Conclusion 
In summary, the U.S. economic recovery will continue and gradually strengthen over time. I 
expect  annual  growth  of  less  than  2  percent  this  year  to  gradually  accelerate  to  around 
3 percent next year. As the economy strengthens, prospects for labor markets will continue 
to improve and the unemployment rate will gradually decline. 
As we move forward in this time of change, the Federal Reserve remains committed to its 
long-run statutory goals of price stability and maximum employment. We remain vigilant on 
inflation  and  committed  to  clear  communication  of  our  monetary  policy.  I  believe  that  this 
communication, and our accountability to the public, could be greatly enhanced were the Fed 
to adopt an explicit numerical inflation goal. Having such an objective in place would prove 
particularly useful in the current environment in which the Fed is providing monetary stimulus 
using new tools that are not as familiar to the public and the markets. It will also help at a 
time when some may view the fiscal situation as threatening the independence of monetary 
policy.  And  it  will  help  in  the  future,  during  the  eventual  exit  from  these  extraordinarily 
accommodative measures.  
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
