Ipumbu Shiimi: Enhancing access to finance in Namibia through an 
improved land tenure system 
Annual  address  by  Mr  Ipumbu  Shiimi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  Windhoek, 
27 October 2011.  
 Director of Ceremonies  
Honourable Dr Theo Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the National Assembly,  
Honourable Ministers and Members of Parliament  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps,  
Members of the Bank of Namibia Board  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Members of the Media Fraternity  
Good Evening  
Let me express my gratitude to you all for taking time to be with us this evening.  
The Annual Address has not only become one of the key highlights on the Bank’s calendar, 
but has also proven to be an important forum to share views on issues of national importance 
to our economy with our key stakeholders.  
At  last  year’s  address,  I  spoke  about  financial  inclusion  as  an  imperative  for  inclusive 
economic development. As the Bank, we put forward a four points’ agenda, in the areas of 
regulatory  intervention,  consumer  literacy  and  protection,  access  to  financial  and  payment 
services  and  local  ownership  of  commercial  banks  as  our  intervention  strategy  to  ensure 
enhanced access to finance to those currently excluded.  
Tonight, I would like to expound on the same issue, albeit from a different angle. That is, to 
share with you some thoughts on how an appropriate land tenure system in an economy like 
Namibia can be used as a conduit for improving access to finance. But before I do so, let me 
provide you with an update on what we promised to do at last year’s Annual Address.  
I am pleased to report to you that we have made considerable progress in that regard. The 
Namibian  Financial  Sector  Strategy  2011–2021,  which  was  endorsed  by  Cabinet  will  be 
launched before the end of December. Under the leadership of the Minister of Finance, the 
Bank of Namibia and NAMFISA, in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, have drafted 
this document in a manner that is reflective of the four points’ agenda.  
Furthermore, one chapter in the Financial Sector Strategy is dedicated to financial inclusion. 
In addition, a White Paper on local ownership of commercial banks has been drafted and the 
relevant stakeholders are being consulted to provide their comments.  
However,  we  have  realised  that  our  present  approach  to  improved  access  to  finance  and 
poverty reduction though meaningful, will only take us half way unless additional measures 
and reforms to improve access to finance in the communal areas are undertaken. It is for this 
reason that tonight, we chose this theme: “Enhancing Access to Finance in Namibia through 
an Improved Land Tenure System”.  
We  believe  this  reform  would  serve  as  a  key  conduit  for  the  poor  to  be  successfully 
integrated into the mainstream economy. The key question then is how should we enhance 
access to finance as a channel to eliminate the divide between the urban and rural areas, 
with the view to reduce poverty?  
Director  of  Ceremonies,  poverty  in  Namibia  is  more  acute  in  the  rural  areas,  and  this  is 
where  land  rights  cannot  be  used  to  produce  capital.  The  latest  Household  Income  and 
Expenditure Survey of 2003/04 shows that a high number of Namibian households remain 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
poor and poverty largely depends on where you live. The incidence of poverty amongst rural 
households is about 38 per cent compared to 12 per cent for urban households.  
In other words, our fellow Namibians in the rural areas are more than three times poor than 
their counterparts in the urban centres. Moreover, about 19 per cent of households in rural 
areas are severely poor compared to only 6 per cent in urban areas.  
This, Ladies and Gentlemen, clearly demonstrates that the disparity and level of exclusion of 
the majority of the people from the formal sector of the economy, especially the rural poor, 
remain a serious concern. Moreover, most farmers in the communal areas remain poor and 
depend largely on old age Government pension and remittances from family members.  
We strongly believe that in order to reduce poverty in the rural areas, we need to improve the 
productivity  of  the  land  in  these  areas  and  move  away  from  subsistence  farming  towards 
commercial activities.  
This  can  only  happen  if  those  who  want  to  transform  to  commercial  activities  are  able  to 
attract finance to modernise their farming practices by being able to buy farming equipment, 
fertilisers, livestock and labour, but also to engage in other economic activities. In this regard, 
the need to ponder and reflect on what could be done to ensure that the divide and level of 
exclusion  between  the  rural  and  urban  areas  are  minimised  and,  eventually,  eliminated 
becomes rather urgent.  
Director  of  Ceremonies,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  answer  lies  in  what  is  already  in  the 
possession of the poor. The answer is LAND. History has demonstrated time and again, that 
Land remains one of the most important conduits for access to finance. And, this is what I 
want to present to you this evening.  
By way of background, Namibia covers over 825 thousand square kilometres of land. About 
38  per  cent  of  this  land  falls  under  the  communal  land  tenure,  where  approximately  over 
50 per  cent  of  the  population  lives.  Virtually  all  the  land  rights  in  the  communal  areas  are 
customary rights, with their own registration system. This is unlike in the rest of the country 
where land rights are registered in a properly functioning Deeds Office.  
This  implies  that  over  50  per  cent  of  the  Namibian  population  does  not  have  secure  and 
tradable land rights. It further means that half of the Namibian people cannot use their land to 
raise capital. Consequently, it means that 38 per cent of Namibia’s land is what is termed as 
“dead capital”.  
Director of Ceremonies, this is another example of a dual Namibia, that is, one country, with 
a less formal tenure system for the communal areas and an advanced one that allows for 
security and tradability for the rest of the country.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  land  tenure  system  is  an  important  factor  in  explaining 
development or lack thereof. In his book titled “The Mystery of Capital”, Hernando De Soto, 
termed by the Time  magazine as one of the five leading Latin American innovators of the 
twentieth  century,  demonstrates  with  startling  research  findings  from  Asia,  Africa,  Latin 
America and the former socialist’ countries that a major problem in developing countries is 
their inability to use land rights to produce capital.  
According  to  De  Soto,  the  problem  is  in  the  fact  that  most  developing  countries’  residents 
hold  resources  in  defective  forms.  A  typical  example  of  this,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is,  a 
house built on land whose ownership rights are not adequately recorded and not tradable. In 
such  an  environment,  this  asset  cannot  be  turned  into  capital  and  cannot  be  used  as 
collateral.  
This situation is contrary to what is generally happening in advanced countries, where every 
building and every piece of land is legally documented, which essentially activates that asset 
as a resource to potentially participate in economic activities. By De Soto’s calculations, the 
total value of the real estates held in a defective form by  the poor of the Third World and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
former socialist nations is estimated to be around USD9.3 trillion. In Namibia, these assets 
could amount to N$20 billion representing about 23 per cent of GDP.  
Let’s imagine, Ladies and Gentleman, a situation where only 30 per cent of the communal 
land  is  turned  into  productive  capital.  This  may  potentially  unlock  a  sizable  investment 
equivalent to 7 per cent of GDP, almost equal to the current contribution of the mining sector 
to GDP. The question is; what will the impact be if it is not 30 per cent, but 80 per cent of the 
communal  land?  This  will  go  a  long  way  in  creating  the  much  needed  employment, 
stimulating growth and reducing poverty in rural areas.  
Director of Ceremonies, I believe the Ministry of Lands and Resettlements is making good 
progress  in improving  tenure  security  in  communal  areas and  they  must  be  applauded  for 
these  efforts.  The  Communal  Land  Reform  Act  was  promulgated  in  2002.  This  Act  has 
provided  clarity  on  the  administration  of  customary  and  leasehold  rights  in  the  communal 
areas.  Also,  in  accordance  with  this  Act,  regional  Land  Boards  have  been  established  to 
manage, together with traditional authorities, the registration of land rights  
I understand more reforms are envisaged in this regard. But what is important, is to make 
land rights in communal areas fully tradable like other properties in the rest of the country. 
Here, I am talking about tenure security and tradability, because it does not matter whether it 
is a freehold, or leasehold land rights; what is important is security and tradability.  
Ladies and Gentleman, I am mindful of the fact that reforming land rights is a costly exercise, 
because it involves surveying and mapping. I am also aware of the fact that in the rural areas 
it  can,  from  a  socio-political  perspective,  be  a  difficult  undertaking  and  it  may  even  have 
unintended consequences, such as people selling their properties for quick financial gains. 
While this is a legitimate fear, I think it is often somewhat overstated.  
I do believe there are ways to mitigate these risks in a manner that the benefits from these 
reforms  would  outweigh  the  costs.  Similar  concerns  were  also  present  when  today’s 
advanced economies were reforming their land tenure system at around the 16th century. But, 
they have managed to overcome these challenges.  
The lessons from history are that those countries which have made their land rights tradable 
have  made  progress  in  reducing  poverty.  For  instance,  Vietnamese  land  tenure  policy 
reforms  were  a  central  part  of  its  wider  economic  reforms  under  the  Doi  Moi  program  in 
1986. This has steered the country to transition well towards a market based economy.  
The  improved  land  tenure  security  is  cited  to  have  played  a  critical  role  in  accelerating 
agricultural  growth,  increasing  food  security,  and  reducing  poverty  throughout  the  country. 
The most impressive gain was the falling of the poverty rate from over 70 per cent in the mid-
80s to around 29 per cent of the population in 2002 and further down to 10 per cent in 2010. 
This is one of the sharpest declines in poverty to have ever been recorded.  
Director of Ceremonies, we need to proceed with a greater urgency and momentum to make 
land  rights  in  the  communal  areas  fully  tradable.  Going  forward,  we  are  proposing  that  a 
multi-disciplinary team be set-up to map out the road ahead. This team should be tasked to 
coordinate  all  actions  required.  For  instance,  some  of  the  current  land  laws  need  to  be 
amended  to  be  reflective  of  this  ideal.  The  revised  laws  also  need  to  strengthen  the 
management  of  the  land  that  is  used  by  all  in  the  communal  areas,  the  so-called 
commonages.  
This is one of the issues that need urgent attention. Further, there is need to educate the 
people in the communal areas of their rights and obligations that results from a secure and 
tradable land tenure. Education will ensure that the citizens fully benefit from the economic 
value of the land that has tradable land rights without falling prey to uninformed behaviour, 
which  can  lead  to  them  loosing  their  most  valuable  possession.  As  Namibians,  we  should 
strive to make land in the communal areas tradable within a period of 10 years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  conclusion,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  property  ownership  in  Namibia,  including  land 
ownership is a fundamental human right, which is enshrined in our Supreme law, Article 16 
of  the  Namibian  Constitution.  In  addition,  the  National  Land  Policy  of  1998  states  that  “all 
citizens  have  equal  rights,  opportunities  and  security  across  a  range  of  tenures  and 
management systems and several forms of land rights will be accorded equal status before 
the law”. We have not yet realised these aspirations, Director of Ceremonies.  
Our people in the communal areas have no land rights that are equal in status to those of 
their fellow citizens in the rest of the country. As a result, they lack the opportunities to turn 
their  land  into  productive  capital.  Let  us,  therefore,  do  what  is  required.  Let  us  fulfil  this 
human right, which will, in turn, enhance access to finance by the rural poor and unlock the 
concealed potential and destiny of our great country.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the destiny of a people, a Nation is not necessarily shaped by one big 
event. It is shaped a by a series of events, a series of decisions – both major and minor. Let 
us therefore do what is required to move from a communal land system to a tradable and 
secure land tenure system. Let us to move towards the chosen destiny of this great Nation!  
I thank you for your kind attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
