Anand Sinha: Financial reporting in the context of financial stability – a 
regulator’s view on some accounting issues 
Address  by  Mr  Anand  Sinha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  an  event 
organized  by  Muscat  Chapter  of  the  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  of  India  (ICAI), 
Muscat, Sultanate of Oman, 21 December 2011. 
 Inputs provided by P R Ravi Mohan and Amarvir Saran Das are gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Dr.  Ashraf  Nabhan  Al  Nabhani,  Dean,  College  of  Banking  and  Financial  Studies, 
Mr. Kishore  Rabi,  Chairman,  ICAI  Muscat  Chapter  and  other  delegates.  It  gives  me  great 
pleasure to address this august gathering organised by the Muscat Chapter of the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). I am given to understand that the Muscat Chapter, the 
19th overseas chapter of the ICAI is amongst the most active chapters of the ICAI and has 
been  engaging  in  capacity  building  for  Omani  accountants  and  imparting  professional 
education  in  the  Sultanate.  A  key  initiative  is  its  tie  up  with  the  College  of  Banking  and 
Financial Studies (CBFS) in assisting them with their accounting curriculum. This Chapter’s 
engagement with the College of Banking and Financial Studies is just one of the many ways 
in  which  the  banking  community  and  regulators  can  benefit  from  the  technical  knowledge 
base of the accounting community. 
2. 
The history of the Indian accounting profession can be traced back to the enactment 
of  the  Companies  Act  in  1857  that  introduced  for  the  first  time  the  concept  of  preparing 
balance sheet on a voluntary basis by companies. We have come a long way since then and 
the  ICAI,  established  in  1949  by  an  act  of  Parliament,  is  today  the  world’s  second  largest 
professional  accounting  body  after  the  American  Institute  of  Certified  Public  Accountants 
(AICPA), with over 180,000 members. Over the six decades of its existence, it has played a 
vital role in nation building through its services. 
3. 
In  line  with  its  motto  of  “Ya  Aeshu  Suptaeshu  Jagruti”  (a  person  who  is  awake 
amongst those that sleep) and its emblem of the Garuda, the “vahana” of Lord Vishnu, the 
Institute is playing a key role in keeping a watchful eye on financial statements, ensuring that 
they represent a true and fair view of the state of affairs. 
4. 
As regulators and supervisors of India’s banking system, the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI)  places  a  significant  amount  of  reliance  on  inputs  provided  to  us  by  your  profession 
through  the  statutory  audit  and  long  form  audit  reports  of  banks  as  well  as  our  annual 
interactions  with  the  statutory  auditors  of  commercial  banks.  We  also  have  periodic 
interactions with senior members of the Institute at various fora and take a keen interest in 
the latest developments in this field.  
5. 
RBI has closely worked with the Institute on accounting issues in the banking sector. 
In October 2001, the RBI set up a Working Group under the Chairmanship of Shri N D Gupta 
the then President of the Institute to identify gaps in compliance with accounting standards 
issued  by  ICAI  and  also  recommend  steps  to  eliminate  such  gaps.  Based  on  the 
recommendations  of  the  committee,  landmark  guidelines  on  compliance  with  accounting 
standards were issued to banks in March 2003 to ensure strict compliance with accounting 
standards and avoid qualifications in financial statements.  
6. 
RBI  had  formed  a  committee  in  2000  to  study  the  observance  of  international 
standards and codes in India in various individual areas of the overall financial system. With 
respect  to  Indian  accounting  and  auditing  standards,  it  was  found  that  there  were  several 
gaps  when  compared  to  the  international  standards  and  recommendations  were  made  to 
reduce  this  gap.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  ICAI  has  since  issued  many  accounting 
standards, which have substantially reduced this gap. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
While  on  the  subject  of  RBI’s  insistence  on  adherence  with  international  best 
7. 
practices and our ongoing benchmarking against these standards, I would like to draw your 
attention  to  the  Report  on  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes  (ROSC),  a  joint  initiative 
between the IMF and World Bank in 2004 which among others, reviewed the strengths and 
weaknesses of the corporate accounting and auditing practices in India. Some of the major 
recommendations  were  to  bridge  the  gaps  between  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRSs)  and  Indian  accounting  standards,  strengthening  the  monitoring  and 
enforcement mechanism, introducing practices to ensure compliance with code of ethics by 
auditors of public interest entities and taking steps for improving professional education and 
training arrangements.  
8. 
India also participated in the Financial Sector Self Assessment Programme (FSAP), 
a  joint  initiative  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  that  attempts  to 
assess the stability and resilience of financial systems in member countries. Based on India’s 
experience  in  the  FSAP  and  subsequent  self-assessments,  the  Government  of  India,  in 
consultation  with  the  Reserve  Bank,  constituted  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  (CFSA)  to  undertake  a  comprehensive  self  assessment  of  India’s  financial 
sector, the report of which was submitted in 2009. 
9. 
The CFSA made an assessment of Indian accounting and auditing standards and 
came  up  with  some  key  recommendations  that  proved  critical  for  the  Institute.  The  report, 
inter-alia, suggested convergence with IFRS at the earliest and creating awareness among 
auditors  and  others involved  in  the  process  to ensure  that systems  and  procedures  are in 
place  to  comply  with  the  IFRSs.  Another  important  recommendation  is  that  India  should 
contribute  significantly  in  the  agenda  setting  of  the  IASB  and  its  technical  output.  The 
challenge before the Institute is to take this up in right earnest by identifying persons with 
requisite  competence  to  participate  in  global  forums,  the  benefits  of  which  will  flow  to  the 
profession at large.  
The  global 
the  consequences 
financial  crisis  and 
Accounting issues in the context of the financial crisis 
10. 
thereof  exposed  some 
weaknesses in the accounting and auditing aspects. During the course of my presentation 
here I would like to place before you some issues relating to financial reporting in the context 
of financial stability. 
11. 
There was widespread criticism that certain accounting practices either contributed 
to or at the very least, exacerbated the severity of the crisis, in view of its failure to deal with 
illiquid  markets  and  distressed  sales.  The  G20  Working  Group  on  “Enhancing  Sound 
Regulation and Strengthening Transparency”, in which I had an occasion to work actively, 
recommended that accounting standard setters should strengthen accounting recognition of 
loan  loss  provisions  by  considering  alternative  approaches  for  recognizing  and  measuring 
loan  losses  that  incorporate  a  broader  range  of  available  credit  information.  Accounting 
standards  setters  and  prudential  supervisors  were  advised  to  work  together  to  identify 
solutions that are consistent with the complementary objectives of promoting the stability of 
the financial sector and of providing transparency of economic results in financial reports. 
12. 
G20 report also recommended that the IASB should enhance its efforts to facilitate 
the global convergence towards a single set of high-quality accounting standards and also 
opined that accounting standard setters should accelerate efforts to reduce the complexity of 
accounting standards for financial instruments and enhance presentation standards. These 
recommendations  together  with  the  recognition  within  the  accounting  and  audit  profession 
that  there  were  certain  drawbacks  in  the  current  standards  has  necessitated  large  scale 
revision of various standards especially those relating to financial instruments and Fair Value 
Accounting. During the global financial crisis, the International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB)  and  the  US  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  established  a  Financial 
Crisis  Advisory  Group  comprising  senior  leaders  with  broad  international  experience  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  address accounting issues emerging from the global crisis. The key issues identified by the 
FCAG involved:  
 
 
the difficulty of applying fair value (“mark to-market”) accounting in illiquid markets;  
the delayed recognition of losses associated with loans, structured credit products, 
and other financial instruments by banks, insurance companies and other financial 
institutions; 
issues  surrounding  the  broad  range  of  off-balance  sheet  financing  structures, 
especially in the US; and  
 the  extraordinary  complexity  of  accounting  standards  for  financial  instruments, 
including  multiple  approaches  to  recognizing  asset  impairment.  Some  of  these 
weaknesses  also  highlighted  areas  in  which  IFRS  and  US  generally  accepted 
accounting principles (US GAAP) diverged.  
13. 
While  these  aspects  were  identified  by  accounting  professionals,  regulators 
expressed  concerns  on  systemic  risk  arising  out  of  procyclicality  in  accounting  standards. 
Procyclicality  in  policy  making  refers  to  financial  developments  and  policies  that  add 
momentum to the economic cycle and have an amplifying effect on economic fluctuations. 
The procyclicality embodied in capital regulation and accounting standards was among the 
identified  causes  underlying  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  in-built  procyclicality  amplified 
business cycles, affecting both the degree of credit expansion in benign conditions and the 
degree of credit contraction in the downturn. 
14. 
The  requirement  to  use  fair  value  accounting  for  assets  and  liabilities  in  illiquid 
markets  has  serious  disadvantages  from  the  point  of  view  of  regulators,  and  of  systemic 
financial risk. A mark-to-market approach i.e. fair value accounting contributes to excessive 
leverage  during  boom  periods  and  leads  to  excessive  write-downs  in  busts.  Under  such 
accounting irrational exuberance in asset prices can feed through to high published profits 
and perhaps bonuses, encouraging more irrational exuberance in a self-reinforcing fashion: 
when  markets  turn  down,  it  can  equally  drive  irrational  despair.  If  all  market  participants 
attempt  simultaneously  to  liquidate  positions,  markets  which  were  previously  reasonably 
liquid will also become illiquid, and realisable values may, for all banks, be significantly lower 
than the published accounts suggested.  
15. 
accounting introduces volatility into financial statements through the following channels: 
 
Volatility on account of changes in underlying economic parameters. For instance if 
interest rates increase, the fair value of bonds reduces and vice versa. 
Volatility produced due to measurement errors and/ or changing views regarding the 
economic  prospects  through  the  business  cycle.  Fair  value  measures  generally 
represent  the  present  value  of  a  stream  of  expected  cash  flows.  Very  often  the 
determination of expected cash flows involves statistical techniques which may have 
some amount of estimation errors as well as other errors. 
Volatility arising on account of using a mixed measurement model i.e. one that uses 
fair value for some categories of assets and liabilities and amortised cost for others 
thereby reducing the netting effects that a full fair valuation of assets and liabilities 
would produce. 
16. 
Another  area  which  has  received  focus  is  the  delayed  recognition  of  impaired 
assets.  Accounting  standards  today  rely  more  on  an  “incurred  loss”  model  to  recognise 
losses where an event such as non-payment of dues for 90 days triggers the provisioning. 
Consequently, there is an overstatement of interest income in the early life of loan. When a 
series of defaults during a downturn trigger provisioning requirements, there is no stock of 
provisions  available  to  absorb  credit  losses.  These  losses  directly  impact  the  income 
Volatility  in  financial  statements  is  also  a  concern  for  the  regulator.  Fair  value 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
lending, 
further  bank 
thus  exacerbating 
the  bank  and  constrain 
the 
statement  of 
procyclicality. This cycle-neutral approach to provisioning failed to account for the excessive 
deterioration  in  loan  portfolio  associated  with  excessive  credit  growth.  There  is  broad 
international  agreement  on  the  need  to  have  provisioning  based  instead  on  an  “expected 
loss” basis where life time losses are recognised early, i.e. provisions are increased in good 
times  for  the  possibility  that  the  environment  may  deteriorate  in  future.  However,  the 
implementation  of  such  a  model  has  its  own  difficulties  with  regard  to  the  estimation  of 
expected  losses  and  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  and  the  US 
Federal  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  are  still  engaged  in  deliberations  on  the 
modalities of implementing such a model. 
17. 
The IASB has issued exposure drafts with an expected loss model which attempts 
to mitigate these shortcomings by recognizing losses and making provisions thereof earlier 
during  the  life  of  the  loan.  However,  presently,  IASB  and  FASB’s  deliberations  revolve 
around a three bucket approach to capture the pattern of deterioration in credit quality. Under 
this  model,  loans  are  classified  into  three  categories  depending  upon  the  possibility  of 
expected losses. Loans, where there are no events with a direct relation to possible future 
defaults,  are  placed  in  the  first  bucket.  The  second  and  third  buckets  are  used  for  loans 
affected  by  events  that  have  a  relationship  to  possible  future  defaults  such  as  a  drop  in 
housing prices i.e. a trigger event to which the default possibility of a loan/ portfolio of loans 
is sensitive to has occurred. In the second bucket, expected credit losses are not identifiable 
for  individual  loans  whereas  in  the  third  bucket  expected  credit  losses  are  individually 
identifiable.  The  provisioning  requirements  also  differ  according  to  the  bucket.  Whereas 
entities are expected to provide expected life time losses for the second and third buckets 
the  proposed  approach  for  the  first  bucket  is  to  make  provision  for  12  month  of  expected 
losses though this is yet to be agreed upon. Since there is no direct relationship to possible 
future defaults, lifetime expected losses are not required to be recognised for loans placed in 
the first bucket. Further, the criteria and guidelines for transfer between categories are still at 
the discussion stage. 
18. 
Let me dwell upon some of the proactive measures initiated by RBI to mitigate the 
effect  of  procylicality  in  the  Indian  context.  Recognising  the  procylicality  caused  by 
provisioning norms, the RBI has tried to build buffers through provisioning requirements. 
 
Firstly,  banks  are  required  to  maintain  provisions  on  assets  that  are  classified  as 
standard  and  are  not  showing  signs  of  impairment.  Sector  specific  provisions 
requiring banks to provide more for standard assets in certain sensitive sectors have 
also been prescribed. 
Secondly, banks are required to classify accounts as NPA where there are inherent 
weaknesses observed in the account even if there are few credits recorded before 
balance  sheet  date  to  avoid  NPA  classification.  Banks  are  also  required  to  put  in 
place appropriate internal systems to eliminate the tendency to delay or postpone 
the identification of NPAs, especially in respect of high value accounts. 
Thirdly,  in  2009,  observing  the  trend  in  profits  being  made  by  banks,  the 
Provisioning  Coverage  Ratio  (PCR)  requirement  for  banks  was  introduced  to 
address  apprehensions  about  asset  quality  due  to  exuberant  lending  during  the 
boom  phase.  Banks  were  required  to  build  up  a  PCR  of  70%  of  gross  NPAs  by 
September 2010. PCR was intended to be an interim measure and it was hoped that 
it would be replaced by a forward-looking counter-cyclical provisioning methodology 
being  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and 
IASB. Since this is taking time, RBI is working on a methodology similar to Spanish 
dynamic provisioning framework as an interim measure.  
19. 
As regards PCR, it was decided to freeze the PCR with reference to the gross NPA 
position  in  banks  as  on  September  30,  2010,  since  in  the  absence  of  a  calibrated 
methodology it would be difficult to allow banks to use the countercyclical provisions built up 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
under PCR freely and there were certain design issues too,. The buffer (surplus of provisions 
over specific provisions) will be allowed to be used by banks for making specific provisions 
for NPAs during periods of system wide downturn, with the prior approval of RBI. 
20. 
The  financial  crisis  also  led  to  heavy  criticism  of  accounting  rules  that  permitted 
certain structured/ special purpose entities and exposure to remain off-balance sheet. A key 
concern  with  such  instruments  and  vehicles  is  that  they  have  a  tendency  to  veil  the  risks 
off-balance sheet and a robust accounting framework that provides for the recognition and 
disclosure of these risks is a prerequisite to their introduction. The IASB has tried to rectify 
the situation by introducing IFRS 10 on Consolidated Financial Statements while the FASB 
has also worked towards toughening off-balance sheet accounting rules.  
21. 
In India, the RBI has always followed a cautious and gradualist approach towards 
complex exotic financial products and has taken steps to reduce and contain the regulatory 
arbitrage  between  the  banking  and  the  shadow  banking  sectors  (mainly  the  Non  Banking 
Financial Companies i.e. NBFCs) by considerably upgrading the prudential rules for NBFCs. 
22. 
Overall accounting for financial instruments had become highly complex and rules 
based in the period leading up to the crisis and IASB’s project to replace IAS 39 with IFRS 9 
is  a  welcome  initiative.  However,  delays  in  finalising  proposals  relating  to  impairment  and 
hedge accounting coupled with recent proposals to reopen classification and measurement 
of  financial  assets  are  a  cause  of  concern.  IASB’s  classification  requirements  for  assets 
revolve around the business model approach whereas FASB’s approach is based more on 
the characteristics of the instrument. Further, FASB’s approach may also entail more items in 
the balance sheet being carried at fair value. 
Implementation of IFRS in India 
23. 
The  convergence  to  IFRS  in  India  is  a  work-in-progress  and  I  would  like  to  dwell 
upon  the  implementation  issues  and  challenges  with  particular  reference  to  the  Indian 
banking system. 
24. 
As part of the G20’s efforts to evolve a single set of global high quality standards, 
the  Ministry  of  Corporate  Affairs  (MCA),  Government  of  India  released  a  roadmap  that 
provided for a gradual convergence to IFRS in a phased manner commencing from April 1, 
2011.  In  terms  of  the  road  map,  commercial  banks  in  India  are  required  to  converge  with 
IFRS with effect from accounting periods beginning April 1, 2013. While the MCA placed on 
its website thirty five IFRS converged Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) in 2011, it stated 
that the standards will be implemented after various issues including taxation are resolved.  
25. 
In  order  to  address  the  implementation  issues  and  facilitate  formulation  of 
operational guidelines to facilitate the IFRS convergence for the Indian banking system the 
RBI  has  formed  a  Working  Group.  Specific  issues  relating  to  (i)  classification  and 
measurement  of  financial  assets,  (ii)  classification  and  measurement  of  financial  liabilities 
and  hedge  accounting,  (iii)  amortised  cost  and  impairment,  (iv)fair  value  measurement, 
(v) presentation, disclosure and balance sheet formats and (vi) derecognition, consolidation 
and residuary issues are being dealt with by the Working Group.  
26. 
With respect to the financial sector in India, there are special issues and challenges 
in view of the large scale revision of standards pertaining to financial instruments (IAS 39) 
which are of central importance to the banking system. IASB had indicated that the period 
2009  to  2011  will  be  kept  as  a  stable  platform  by  them  to  facilitate  convergence  by  many 
countries  during  this  period.  However,  the  global  financial  turmoil  and  the  consequences 
thereof  in  the  accounting  scenario  necessitated  large  scale  revision  of  various  standards 
especially those relating to financial instruments and fair value accounting.  
27. 
As India attempts to transition to IFRS, the biggest challenge to the banking sector 
which is of equal concern to us as regulators, is the lack of clarity and uncertainty regarding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the  finalisation  of  IFRS  9:  Financial  Instruments  (scheduled  to  replace  IAS  39)  and  its 
convergence  with  US  GAAP.  One  of  the  intentions  behind  scheduling  banks  for  a  later 
convergence  was  to  avoid  having  them  first  apply  IAS  39  and  immediately  transition 
thereafter  to  its  replacement  viz.  IFRS  9.  Countries  like  Canada  which  have  recently 
converged  to  IFRS  found  it  easier  on  account  of  pre-existing  standards  being  fairly  well 
aligned  with  IAS  39,  which  is  not  the  case  in  India.  With  the  delay  and  uncertainty  in 
finalisation of IFRS 9, the convergence process has become almost equal to chasing a fast 
moving target. 
28. 
The finalisation of impairment provisions of IFRS 9 at an early date is a critical issue 
which needs to be addressed by the IASB and FASB. Our apprehensions are that the current 
proposals  contained  in  the  exposure  draft  or  the  three  bucket  model  for  provisioning  are 
difficult  to  implement  and  operationalise.  Further,  in  countries  like  India,  there  may  not  be 
enough data available to apply the highly quantitative and statistical techniques to implement 
a robust expected loss model to recognise impairment losses. Therefore, the Working Group 
has suggested through its comment letter to the IASB, the need for a practical expedient that 
allows for a simpler rule based model specified by the regulator at least in the initial years. 
We hope that the IASB will consider this while finalising the requirements on impairment. 
29. 
In a country like India, where financial markets are still developing and are not as 
deep  and  liquid  as  in  developed  countries  there  are  specific  concerns  regarding  the 
implementation of fair value accounting in the absence of quoted prices and illiquid markets 
for  several  instruments.  Consequently,  the  implementation  of  fair  value  accounting  would 
necessitate a dependence on valuation techniques using unobservable inputs which would 
also bring in a fair share of estimation errors. 
There are also some major technical issues arising for Indian banks in the course of 
30. 
convergence.  Differences  between 
IFRS  and  current  regulatory  guidelines  on 
classification  and  measurement  of  financial  assets,  focus  in  the  standard  on  the  business 
model followed by banks and the challenges for management in this area, lack of adequate 
number of skilled staff and modifications to IT systems and processes are some of the other 
challenges that may need to be tackled in due course. 
31. 
Apart from being preparers of financial statements, banks are also significant users 
of  financial  statements  and  base  their  lending  and  investment  decisions  on  the  financial 
statements  of  their  customers.  This  aspect  makes  skill  building  all  the  more  important  for 
Indian banks as IFRS implementation will not only impact their accounts and finance teams 
but will pervade to their credit and investment analysts and decision makers. The RBI has 
been proactive in facilitating skill building by conducting seminars and training programmes 
as well as providing faculty support to some institutions. I am glad to learn that the ICAI too 
has incorporated IFRS in its curriculum for students and has introduced a certificate course 
on IFRS for its members. There is also scope for the RBI, banking system and the ICAI to 
work together to build skills in this area. 
32. 
Let me conclude by stating that there are several areas of common interest between 
regulators,  bankers  and  accountants  and  frequent  interaction  and  interface  between  these 
groups would be of mutual benefit to all. I thank you for this opportunity to share a regulator’s 
perspective on some current accounting issues. 
the 
References  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Report of the Financial Crisis Advisory Group(2009)  
Report of the Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (2009)  
Fair Values and Financial Statement Volatility, Ms. Mary E Barth (2004)  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
