Erdem Başçi: The importance of commodity price movements 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Erdem  Başçi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, at the Conference on “Policy responses to commodity price movements”, Istanbul, 
6 April 2012. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Welcome  to  the  conference  on  the  “Policy  Responses  to  Commodity  Price  Movements” 
jointly  organized  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the  IMF  Economic  Review  and  the 
Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. As I will deliver another speech in the panel session 
on the second day of the conference, I will attempt to keep this inaugural speech as brief as 
possible. As you will recall, we hosted a conference on commodity price volatility in Istanbul 
last September within the context of G-20 program. These two conferences on similar topics 
in such a short time are clear indicators of how important the commodity price movements 
are for the global economy. 
Why are commodity prices so important? When we think of what is covered by “commodities” 
more closely, we also come up with how we should approach this issue. Usually, the term 
“commodity prices” represent energy prices (mainly the crude oil), food prices and the prices 
of some main industrial inputs. Energy prices are very closely monitored by economic units 
and policy makers, for it denotes the cost of one of the most significant inputs for the entire 
economy. Energy is one of the primary cost factors for firms. It is also a considerable item for 
households’  heating  and  transportation  expenditures.  On  the  other  hand,  due  to  its  high 
share  in  the  expenditures  of  especially  low-income  households  and  corresponding 
purchasing  power  effects,  food  prices  are  given  a  great  importance  by  policy  makers. 
Meanwhile,  the  metals,  such  as  iron  ore,  copper  and  aluminum,  are  among  the  most 
important raw materials for the industry and construction sector. 
The  reason  why  commodity  prices  have  been  frequently  attracting  attention  is  the  current 
fluctuations in commodity prices of a magnitude that has not been seen since 2007. Price of 
brent crude oil, which was USD 50 per barrel in early 2007, climbed to USD 145 within one 
and a half year. Then, parallel to the deepening global crisis in late 2008, crude oil prices 
went back to USD 35; and now it is hovering around USD 125. And the uncertainties about 
oil prices, resulting from demand and supply-side developments, and their potential effects 
keep the policymakers interest in commodity prices alive in the current economic outlook. 
As  they  are  among  the  risk  factors  that  affect  the  inflation  outlook,  we  directly  referred  to 
commodity prices, mostly to those of crude oil and food, in our latest inflation reports. As a 
matter  of  fact,  nearly  half  of  the  revisions  about  official  inflation  forecasts  published  in  our 
inflation reports in the last couple of years originated from the changes in our assumptions 
about food and commodity prices. This suggests that the rise in commodity prices may bring 
about  challenges  for  central  banks  not  only  in  terms  of  direct  pressures  on  inflation.  The 
uncertainties due to commodity price fluctuations also stand out as an important issue for the 
monetary policy communication and expectations management by the central banks.  
Structure of the commodity price dynamics is also of great importance for they constitute an 
input for the monetary policy decisions of the central banks. For example, the sources of the 
commodity  price  fluctuations  and  the  nature  of the  shocks are  extremely  influential  for  the 
determination of the policy responses to these fluctuations. Similarly, not only the level but 
also the volatility of commodity prices can have a significant effect on the macroeconomic 
activity.  For  example,  a  shock  affecting  the  level  of  crude  oil  prices  may  have  a  different 
effect on economy, if it is observed in a period where the volatility of prices is also higher.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Inflation 
IV 
I 
III 
II 
Growth 
 As I have briefly mentioned before, an increase in the commodity prices creates downward 
pressure  on  the  growth  prospects,  and  upward  pressure  on  inflation.  In  Turkey,  the 
investment  incentive  package  that  was  announced  yesterday  will  support  our  economic 
growth  through  the  supply  side,  and  the  tighter  monetary  policy  will  eliminate  the  inflation 
risks. 
The sessions on each day of the conference will provide platforms for studies which are of 
very rich content and great potential benefit for policymakers. For example, macroeconomic 
effects  of  the  commodity  price  dynamics  and possible  corresponding policy  responses  are 
among  the  main  themes  elaborated  during  the  conference.  Another  important  issue  to  be 
discussed  is  how  the  effects  of  commodity  prices  on  inflation,  economic  activity  and 
exchange  rates  differ  with  respect  to  different  monetary  policy  regimes.  Another  important 
issue  is  the  interaction  among  different  economic  policies  vis-a-vis  the  commodity  price 
fluctuations.  
Distinguished guests, 
Studies  included  in  the  program  will  substantially  contribute  to  the  understanding  of  the 
commodity price dynamics and the policy responses against the macroeconomic effects of 
these  dynamics.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organization  committee  for  their 
efforts for this conference program which gathers very interesting and enlightening studies. I 
also believe that the conference will provide a platform which will be highly beneficial for the 
exchange of views among participants. 
Thank you very much in advance to all participants for their contribution. Now, I would like to 
give 
to  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas,  professor  of  economics  at  California 
University-Berkeley and the chief editor of the IMF Economic Review journal to open the first 
session. 
floor 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
