William C Dudley: The national and regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Center for Economic Development, Syracuse, New York, 
12 April 2012. 
 Good  morning,  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  in  Syracuse  at  the  Center  for  Economic 
Development.  It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  speak  with  business  and  community  leaders 
because of the important role you play in helping to shape the economy of the region. I thank 
you all for inviting me here today.  
I try to get out of my office in New York City as much as I can to get a sense of regional 
economic conditions across the second Federal Reserve District. I was last here in Syracuse 
in 2010 and, more recently, I traveled to West Point and the Capital region and Long Island. 
These  visits  are  just  as  important  as  any  trip  I  might  take  to  Washington,  D.C.,  to  help 
formulate  monetary  policy,  or  to  Switzerland,  to  help  shape  international  bank  regulation. 
Each visit within the region helps me to deepen the relationships with the people I represent. 
I believe that the understanding of issues and concerns that I gain today will help ensure that 
the Fed’s policy decisions reflect the public interest. 
Today, I want to talk a bit about the Fed – what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll provide 
some thoughts about the economic outlook nationally and locally. After that, I’ll be happy to 
answer any questions you have about what the Fed does and why, and about the economic 
outlook. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. 
What the New York Fed does 
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what my colleagues and I do at the New York Fed 
on behalf of the Second District. 
I have the great fortune to serve as the vice chair of the FOMC that meets eight times a year 
in  Washington  to  set  interest  rates  and  make  other  decisions  about  monetary  policy.  The 
members  of  this  committee  all  strive  to  set  policy  to  advance  the  mandate  given  to  us  by 
Congress  to  promote  the  maximum  level  of  employment  consistent  with  price  stability. 
Sometimes  we  have  different  views  on  the  specific  policy  choice  at  hand,  and  you  should 
view  this  as  completely  appropriate:  these  are  hard  questions  –  particularly  during  difficult 
economic circumstances such as we face today. In fact, I think we make better decisions as 
a committee because we don’t all think alike. But we are united in our commitment to our 
dual mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential to the public interest. That 
independence  allows  us  to  make  tough  decisions  insulated  from  short-term  political 
pressures.  
At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region 
and  the  nation.  For  these  assessments,  we  consult  our  researchers  and  add  critical 
information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils, 
community leaders and other key stakeholders, such as you and others I’ll meet on this visit. 
For example, last month members of our small business advisory council told us that for the 
first time in several years, employees were leaving for other jobs and that they would need to 
replace those who left for better opportunities elsewhere. The fact that some people with jobs 
felt confident enough to seek and take other job opportunities was another signal to us that 
the job market may be improving – although, to be sure, we read such signals cautiously. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To  help  me  gather  more  information  about  the  region,  I  will  be  meeting  this  morning  with 
PathStone, a community development and human service organization serving farmers and 
low-income families and communities, then meeting with students and faculty at the Maxwell 
School at Syracuse University, and then having lunch with faculty of the Maxwell School and 
the university officials who manage the tech transfer process. This afternoon, I will drive to 
Skaneateles  Falls  to  tour  Welch  Allyn,  a  manufacturer  of  diagnostic  equipment,  and  meet 
with the president and CEO, Dr. Julie Shimer. Dr. Shimer also recently became the chair of 
the Empire State Development Corporation and I am looking forward to our discussion about 
the challenges and opportunities for economic development in Upstate New York. 
Tomorrow,  I  will  address  the  Buffalo-Niagara  Partnership  at  their  Movers  &  Shakers 
Breakfast, speak with staff of the Empire Justice Center, meet with Lt. Governor Bob Duffy, 
convene a meeting of our Upstate Advisory Board, whose members are major leaders in the 
upstate  economy,  and  visit  the  Roswell  Park  Cancer  Institute  to  learn  about  their  role  in 
economic development in western New York and in the broader world arena. 
My colleagues and I at the New York Fed continually track conditions in our District, and we 
have created a number of tools for that purpose. For example, my staff produces monthly 
indexes  of  economic  activity  for  New  York  City,  the  state  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey. 
These indexes are essentially measures of local output – similar to gross domestic product, 
or GDP, at the national level. The measures provide a more complete gauge of activity than 
the employment report, which is another important metric at the state and regional levels. We 
have also constructed a consumer credit panel to track local household credit conditions at 
the county and even the zip code level, including the amount and type of personal debt and 
whether payments are being made in a timely way. 
In  addition,  we  conduct  a  periodic  poll  about  the  credit  needs  of  small  businesses  in  the 
region, which are an important source of new jobs. We are just launching our latest poll that 
also includes questions about the skill needs of small businesses and whether the right kinds 
of  skilled  labor  are  available.  Almost  900  businesses  responded  to  our  last  poll,  some  of 
which  were  from  this  area.  If  you,  as  a  representative  of  a  small  business,  would  like  to 
participate  in  our  current  poll,  please  pass  your  card  to  my  colleagues,  who  are  in  the 
audience, or see me after the speech and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. 
Results from our prior polls stressed the problem of access to capital. In response we held 
two  workshops  at  the  Bank  in  December.  In  the  first  workshop,  senior  officers  from  the 
Export-Import  Bank,  the  Small  Business  Administration  and  the  Department  of  Commerce 
described the various loan programs available to small businesses from their agencies, as 
well  as  programs  to  help  identify  markets.  The  second  workshop  reviewed  the  business 
plans of 40 small businesses and matched them with potential lenders. We plan to hold a 
similar workshop in Upstate New York this year. 
As  you  know,  even  states  that  are  wealthier,  such  as  New  York,  have  large  pockets  of 
poverty. So, we target some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. 
We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates, although much 
remains  to  be  done.  We  have  provided  housing  advocates  with  the  latest  information  on 
mortgage  conditions,  via  mortgage  briefs,  roundtables,  presentations  and  newsletters.  We 
have  developed  an  interactive  online  tool  that shows  monthly  delinquency  and  foreclosure 
conditions,  which  we  believe  will  aid  the  work  of  housing  counselors  and  other  parties 
seeking  to  help  these  communities.  It  is  available  on  our  website  along  with  data  and 
information useful to policymakers, business people and the public.  
We  use  our  website  to  share  what  we  learn  about  our  diverse  District,  and  you  will  find 
extensive detailed information about the region at the site. I invite you to visit newyorkfed.org 
to explore our highly localized maps and information on small business, credit and housing 
conditions, and even the latest job openings at the New York Fed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  our 
colleagues  in  Washington,  D.C.,  and  at  other  agencies  to  help  put  the  nation’s  financial 
system  on  a  firmer  footing.  Our  supervisors  are  working  hard  to  ensure  that  our  District’s 
banks are operating safely and soundly. Although much has been done, we are not finished 
and are determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis 
business as usual – whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators 
like ourselves. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. 
National economic conditions 
Now  I’d  like  to  turn  to  the  national  and  regional  economy.  The  incoming  data  on  the  U.S. 
economy generally has been a bit more upbeat over the past few months, suggesting that 
the recovery may be finally establishing a somewhat firmer footing. Real GDP expanded at a 
3.0 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011, the fastest growth since the first half of 
2010.  The  average  monthly  job  gain  was  212,000  in  the  first  quarter  of  2012,  up  from 
164,000 in the fourth quarter. Sales of light-weight motor vehicles were about 14 ½ million at 
an  annual  rate  in  the  first  quarter,  the  best  quarter  in  four  years.  Survey  measures  of 
business activity have rebounded from their dips in the middle of last year and are now at 
levels that typically indicate solid overall growth. Even housing starts have firmed somewhat 
in the last few months, although they remain at depressed levels. 
While these developments are certainly encouraging, it is still too soon to conclude that we 
are out of the woods, as underlined by the March labor market release. To begin with, the 
economic data looked brighter at this point in 2010 and again in 2011, only to fade later in 
those years.  
Moreover, the United States experienced unusually mild weather over the first quarter, with 
the number of heating degree days more than 20 percent below the average of the preceding 
five years, which may have pulled forward some economic activity and hiring. 
In this regard, the somewhat softer March labor market report that was released last Friday 
may reflect the earlier positive influence of the mild weather on job creation in January and 
February, although other less sanguine interpretations are also plausible. We thus will need 
to  see  more  data  to  determine  the  extent  to  which  the  March  data  represent  a  transitory 
weather-related setback.  
Regardless of the importance of the mild winter in distorting the recent economic data, real 
economic activity has yet to be strong enough on a sustained basis to make a big dent in the 
overall amount of slack in the U.S. economy. While growth was stronger in the fourth quarter, 
most  of  it  was  due  to  inventory  accumulation.  Growth  of  final  sales  remained  quite  weak. 
Historically,  quarters  in  which  inventory  investment  makes  significant  growth  contributions 
are  typically  followed  by  quarters  in  which  that  growth  contribution  is  modest  or  even 
negative. That appears to be what is shaping up for the first quarter of this year.  
Based on available data, our current expectations are that real GDP will expand at around a 
2 ¼ percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2012. Even with the robust increase of light 
vehicle sales, overall consumer spending in the first quarter appears to be rising at a similar 
moderate rate. At the same time, real disposable income has been flat over the past three 
months, and the large increase of gasoline prices is likely further sapping consumers’ real 
purchasing power. And growth of business investment spending, which softened in the fourth 
quarter of 2011, may have been even a little softer in the first quarter of this year. 
To put the recent pace of growth into perspective, we believe that the economy’s long-run 
sustainable  growth  rate  –  what  economists  call  the  potential  growth  rate  –  is  around  a 
2 ¼ percent  annual  rate.  We  need  sustained  growth  above  that  rate  to  absorb  the  still 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
substantial amount of unused productive capacity. Thus, our recent growth rates are barely 
keeping up with our potential.  
Even though the unemployment rate has declined sharply from 9 percent last September to 
8.2 percent in March, it is still unacceptably high. In addition, many other measures of the 
labor  market  remain  weak.  The  labor  force  participation  rate,  the  percentage  of  people 
employed, and the total number of hours worked in the economy all dropped sharply during 
the recession and remain well below their pre-recession levels, even taking into account the 
impact of demographic shifts. Also, it appears that productivity growth has slumped recently. 
Although that means that a given amount of growth translates into bigger employment gains, 
it certainly is not an unmitigated positive development. 
Also, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the economy still faces significant headwinds and 
that  there  are  some  meaningful  downside  risks.  In  the  headwinds  department,  I  would 
include  the  run-up  in  gasoline  prices  mentioned  earlier  because  that  will  sap  purchasing 
power,  the  continued  impediments  to  a  strong  recovery  from  ongoing  weakness  in  the 
housing sector, and fiscal drag at the federal and state and local levels. In terms of downside 
risks, these include the risk that growth abroad disappoints and the risk of further disruptions 
to the supply of oil and higher oil prices. 
On the inflation front, the overall rate of increase of consumer prices, as measured by the 
12-month  change  of  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  slowed  to 
2.3 percent in February from a recent peak of 2.9 percent last September. Even though the 
recent  rise  of  gasoline  prices  mentioned  above  could  interrupt  this  pattern,  we  expect  this 
moderation of overall inflation to resume later this year. 
While the underlying core inflation rate, that strips out volatile food and energy prices, has 
been somewhat higher than expected a few months back, it appears that the annual rate of 
core  inflation1  has  peaked  and  we  expect  it  to  begin  to  decline  later  this  year.2  Finally, 
inflation  expectations,  which  play  an  important  role  in  the  inflation  process,  remain  well 
anchored.  By  this  I  mean  that  people  expect  that  the  rate  of  inflation  will  continue  to  be 
relatively low for some time to come. 
Regional economic conditions 
So how is the recovery proceeding in the state and region? As I mentioned, the New York 
Fed  produces  indexes  that  help  us  track  economic  activity  in  the  region.  Based  on  these 
measures, the economic recovery that began in New York State in late 2009 has continued 
through early 2012, and even gained some momentum. 
Across Upstate New York, broadly speaking, the cycle of recession and recovery has been 
much less pronounced than in the nation, and even the state as a whole. This pattern has 
been true in Syracuse, as well. Employment fell by a little over 4 percent during the downturn 
– a steep drop, to be sure – but only about two-thirds of the decline that occurred nationally. 
This is quite a change from the region’s past recessions, which have tended to be longer and 
deeper than the nation’s. 
One  reason  why  Upstate  New  York  weathered  the  economic  storm  a  bit  better  than  the 
nation is the resiliency of its housing markets. Like much of Upstate New York, Syracuse’s 
housing  market  has  been  relatively  stable  and  did  not  experience  a  boom-bust  cycle  like 
much of the rest of the nation. In fact, since the peak of the national housing market in early 
2006,  home  prices  in  Syracuse  have  increased  by  close  to  10  percent,  compared  with  a 
decline of more than 30 percent nationally. 
                                                 
1  As measured by the 12-month change in the core PCE deflator. 
2  See for instance, the behavior of the three- and six-month changes in the core PCE deflator.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As a result, the drop off in economic activity that is connected, directly and indirectly, to the 
performance  of  the  housing  sector  has  not  been  as  severe  here  as  it  was  in  many  other 
places. This stability is underscored by our latest quarterly consumer credit panel data, which 
shows that total household debt burdens have remained relatively low by national standards 
and that mortgage delinquency rates are lower in the Syracuse region than in other parts of 
the state and nation. 
However, while the national recovery has started to gain some momentum in recent months, 
job growth in Syracuse has remained somewhat weak. To date, the region has regained only 
about a third of the roughly 13,000 jobs that were lost during the downturn. So the recovery 
has been disappointing thus far. 
Despite the weak overall job growth, the region continues to undergo substantial economic 
restructuring.  And,  in  fact,  many  parts  of  the  economy  are  growing.  Most  prominently,  the 
business  services  sector  has  added  about  2,000  jobs  since  the  recession  ended,  and  the 
leisure and hospitality sector has also expanded. 
As a result of the economic restructuring in Syracuse, health and education are now among 
the most important industries in the region, employing roughly a fifth of all workers. While the 
“eds and meds” sector experienced some job losses last year, it is generally less susceptible 
to downturns than other sectors of the economy, and expanded before, during and after the 
Great Recession. No doubt, the area’s many local colleges and universities play an important 
role in this regard. 
Syracuse’s  colleges  and  universities  deserve  special  attention  because  they  are  important 
regional  assets  that  can  help  Syracuse  continue  to  actively  participate  in  the  knowledge 
economy.  Our  own  research  at  the  New  York  Fed  has  shown  that  higher-education 
institutions  can  help  to  build  their  local  area’s  skilled  workforce,  which  is  critical  to  the 
long-run economic success of any region. These institutions produce highly skilled labor and 
help  their  regions  innovate  by  creating  new  knowledge  and  inventions  through  academic 
research  and  development.  It  can  be  especially  beneficial  for  local  businesses  to  take 
advantage of the research facilities available at local colleges and universities. 
Partnerships  between  private  industry  and  higher-education  institutions  are  an  important 
ingredient  in  this  regard.  Going  forward,  I  believe  these  partnerships  will  become  more 
important  than  ever  –  particularly  for  places  like  Syracuse  that  continue  to  experience 
economic  restructuring.  Fortunately,  this  region  already  has  a  strong  higher  education 
industry in place.  
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  the  incoming  data  on  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  a  bit  more  upbeat  of  late, 
suggesting  that  the  recovery  may  be  getting  better  established.  But,  while  these 
developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the 
woods  in  terms  of  generating  a  strong,  sustainable  recovery.  On  the  inflation  front,  the 
year-over-year rate of consumer price inflation has slowed in recent months, and despite the 
recent rise of gasoline prices, we expect inflation to moderate further in 2012. 
Here in Syracuse, while the recovery to date has not been as strong as we would like, the 
region’s vibrant health and education sector provides a solid base for longer-term growth. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
