K C Chakrabarty: The first mile walk into financial inclusion – thinking 
differently  
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inaugural  session  of  the  Financial  Inclusion  Conference  2012  “The  first  mile  walk  into  the 
financial system”, organized by FICCI and Sa-Dhan, New Delhi, 7 August 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Smt.  Sushma  Vij  and  Shri  Bipin  Nair  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Mrs.  Naina  Lal  Kidwai,  Vice  President,  FICCI  and  Country  Head,  HSBC  India;  Dr.  Amiya 
Sharma, Chair, Sa-Dhan; Mr. Mathew Titus, Executive Director, Sa-Dhan, delegates to this 
Financial  Inclusion  Conference  organized  by  FICCI  and  Sa-Dhan,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I 
am pleased to be here with you all for the Financial Inclusion Conference 2012 that is being 
organized  jointly  by  Sa-Dhan  and  FICCI.  The  theme  this  year  “The  First  Mile  Walk  into 
Financial  Inclusion”  is  both  innovative  in  its  concept  and  significant  in  its  new  approach  to 
furthering Financial Inclusion. I was told that the objective of the conference is to deliberate 
upon the issues that the customer faces in his first walk to the financial system. Clearly, this 
is a customer centric approach and I congratulate the organizers for coming up with the idea. 
We are changing our thinking perspective from last mile (service provider perspective) to first 
mile  (customer  perspective).  This  change  in  thinking  needs  to  be  reflected  in  our  actions 
also. 
Financial  inclusion  efforts  are  not  new;  both  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  have 
been pursuing this goal over the last several decades through building the rural cooperative 
structure in the 1950s, the social contract with banks in the 1960s and the expansion of bank 
branch  networks  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  These  initiatives  have  paid  off  in  terms  of  a 
network  of  branches  across  the  country.  Yet,  the  extent  of  financial  exclusion  has  been 
staggering.  Out  of  the  600,000  habitations  in  the  country,  only  about  30,000  had  a 
commercial bank branch. Just about 40 per cent of the population across the country had 
bank accounts. The proportion of people having any kind of life insurance cover was as low 
as 10 per cent and proportion having non-life insurance was an abysmally low 0.6 per cent. 
People having debit cards comprise only 13 per cent and those having credit cards only a 
marginal 2 per cent. The National Sample Survey data revealed that nearly 51% of farmer 
households  in  the  country  did  not  seek  credit  from  either  institutional  or  non-institutional 
sources of any kind. 
These statistics, staggering as they are, do not convey the true extent of financial exclusion. 
Even  where  bank  accounts  are claimed  to  have  been  opened,  verification  has  shown  that 
these accounts are dormant. Few conduct any banking transactions and even fewer receive 
any  credit.  Millions  of  people  across  the  country  are  thereby  denied  the  opportunity  to 
harness 
to 
marginalization and poverty. 
A sound system of institutions and instruments of intermediation is essential for promoting an 
efficient system. Increasing access to credit for the poor has always remained at the core of 
Indian planning in its fight against poverty. Nationalisation of banks, massive expansion of 
branch network in rural areas, mandatory directed credit to priority sectors of the economy, 
subsidised  rates  of  interest  and  creation  of  RRBs  &  NABARD  are  some  of  the  notable 
measures  in  this  direction.  Though  these  measures  resulted  in  impressive  gains  in  rural 
outreach  and  volume  of  credit,  the  structure  built  up  was  “quantitatively  impressive  but 
qualitatively weak”. We still have a long way to go to fully realize the original objectives of 
inclusive growth. 
their  earning  capacity  and  entrepreneurial 
talent,  and  are  condemned 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Recognizing  this  dilemma,  the  evolution  of  financial  inclusion,  that  aims  to  broaden  and 
deepen access to development finance for all, of which microfinance is a subset, is timely. 
Ultimately, it is a well functioning and efficient financial market which can deal holistically with 
provision  of  financial  services  to  the  economy.  Building  financially  inclusive  system  is, 
therefore, an integral and core pillar of financial sector reforms. 
Over the years, there has been substantive development in the architecture and thinking on 
financial  inclusion.  While  there  is  no  “one-size-fits-all”  financial  inclusion  strategy  or 
approach, it is important to recognize few core or necessary and sufficient conditions that are 
needed to maximize the benefits derived from such a strategy. 
Financial inclusion should focus on 
• 
• 
• 
Holistic approach to provision of financial services not just credit or deposit alone;  
Meeting the needs of small firms,  
Segments of population excluded by gender or remoteness 
Role of microfinance in financial inclusion 
The  unique  aspect  of  micro  finance  in  India  is  that  it  is  delivered  through  a  variety  of 
channels. These include branches of commercial banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) 
directly dispensing micro credit and through their Business Correspondents (BCs), Self Help 
Groups  (SHGs)  linked  to  bank  branches,  cooperative  banks  and  primary  cooperative 
societies,  micro  finance  institutions  (MFIs)  as  NBFCs  and  in  other  forms,  obtaining  funds 
from a variety of sources, domestic and external. Ultimately, it is an issue of reaching out to 
low-income  families  in  a  cost-effective,  hassle-free  and  sustainable  manner,  particularly  to 
those who, otherwise, would not have had such access to financial services. 
Microfinance, as a model, facilitates financial inclusion. The logic and rationale of SHG based 
microfinance  has  been  established  firmly  enough  to  prove  that  microcredit  has  effectively 
graduated from an “experiment” to a widely-accepted paradigm of rural and developmental 
financing in India. This is no mean achievement. In fact, to the extent that People’s mindsets 
are  the  biggest roadblock  in the  success  of  an  innovation,  it  may  well  be  one  of the most 
important steps in the saga of microfinance. 
Microfinance  is  recognised  as  a  cost  effective  and  sustainable  way  of  taking  the  banking 
system to the rural poor. The broad principle behind microfinance initiatives is: (i) to act as a 
cost  effective  avenue  for  the  formal  financial  sector  to  expand  its  coverage  of  poor;  (ii)  to 
develop effective collateral substitutes; (iii) to emphasize on the poor masses, both rural and 
urban,  especially  women;  and  (iv)  to  focus  on  the  objectives  of  macro-economic  growth. 
Indirectly, microfinance improves schooling, health and women’s empowerment. Globally, in 
the  last  two  decades,  the  microfinance  sector  has  opened  up  considerably.  In  the  early 
1990s when it was realized that microcredit providers could recover loans to poor and low 
income people as well as cover their costs, focus was on a single product (credit) which was 
delivered by specialized microfinance institutions. Microcredit, subsequently, developed into 
microfinance  and  then,  into  the  concept  of  building  entire  financial  systems  for  the  poor, 
focusing on inclusive growth. 
Microfinance services, both by SHG model as  well as the retail  lending  model, have been 
contributing  to  this  agenda.  Microfinance  has  been  found  to  facilitate  three  main 
developmental outcomes: 
• 
• 
• 
It enables poor households to access services at the time of need  
It is associated with improvement in economic welfare of households 
By  supporting  women’s  economic  participation,  it  helps  to  improve  livelihood, 
empower women and promote gender equity  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Our approach to financial inclusion 
(a) 
• 
  Bank led model 
In India, we have adopted a bank- led model for financial inclusion, which seeks to 
leverage on technology. The FI initiatives would have to be ICT based and would 
ride  on  new  delivery  models  that  would  need  to  be  developed  by  the  market 
participants to best suit their requirements.  
Our  experience  shows  that  the goal  of financial  inclusion  is  better  served  through 
mainstream  banking  institutions  as  only  they  have  the  ability  to  offer  the  suite  of 
products required to bring in effective/meaningful financial inclusion. 
Other players such as mobile companies have been allowed to partner with banks in 
offering services collaboratively. 
Minimum bouquet of products and services 
(b)  
To  meet  the  criterion  of  availability  of  banking  services,  a  minimum  of four  basic  products 
must be offered to customers: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
a check-in account with emergency credit facility 
payment services and remittance facility 
a pure savings product such as a recurring deposit 
facility of entrepreneurial credit to deserving people 
Technology driven – but technology platform neutral 
(c)  
The  task  of  Financial  Inclusion  is  gigantic  and  cannot  be  done  without  actively  leveraging 
technology  and  without  the  involvement  of  society  as  a  whole.  The  Financial  Inclusion 
strategies  and  delivery  models  being  developed  by  banks  are  primarily  technology  driven. 
However,  we have consciously ensured that the models adopted by banks are technology 
neutral, which facilitates easy up-scaling and customization, as per individual requirements. 
Combination of branch and BC Structure 
(d)  
A combination of Brick and Mortar structure with Click and Mouse technology will be helpful 
in extending financial inclusion, especially in geographically dispersed areas. Banks need to 
make effective use of technology to provide banking services in remote areas through the BC 
model. The BC model allows banks to provide doorstep delivery of services, especially cash 
transactions. To ensure increased banking penetration and control over operations of BCs, 
more Brick and Mortar branches are needed. In April 2011, banks have been mandated to 
allocate at least 25 per cent of all new branches to unbanked rural areas. Banks have also 
been mandated to open intermediary brick and mortar structures between the base branch 
& customer  locations,  which  will  lead  to  efficiency  in  cash  management,  documentation, 
redressal of customer grievances and close supervision of BC operations. 
Structured, planned approach 
(e)  
We  have  a  structured  and  planned  approach  to  financial  inclusion  wherein  all  banks  have 
prepared  Board  approved  Financial  Inclusion  Plans  (FIPs)  with  a  three  year  horizon 
extending  up  to  2013,  containing  self-set  targets  which  are  congruent  with  their  business 
strategy and comparative advantage. The initial goal of providing access to banking services 
to all villages with population more than 2000 by March 2012 has been successfully met and 
we are on our way to ensure the same for all villages in a time bound manner. The focus has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
now  shifted  from  just  opening  of  accounts  to  the  volume  of  business  transacted  in  these 
accounts, which is the key for making the FI model a success. 
BC based delivery model  
Delivery  of  financial  services  through  the  BC  model  would  be  key  to  the  success  of  our 
financial inclusion initiatives. If the bank-led model is to succeed, it is imperative that it is able 
to leverage upon BCs to deliver efficient and cost effective access to services. However, our 
current  experience  is  that  the  BC  based  delivery  model  is  still  evolving.  While  banks  are 
experimenting  with  various  ideas  in  search  of  the  optimal  delivery  mechanism,  it  still 
continues to be the weakest link. The BC model has faced challenges from various sources 
such  as  viability  issues  resulting  from  delays  in  payment  of  remuneration  to  field  BCs, 
technology and connectivity issues, turnover of BCs and building up faith and acceptability of 
BCs among the targeted population. 
I  hope  that  major  players  in  this  segment  will  come  up  with  suggestions  to  overcome  the 
problems  currently  being  faced  by  the  industry  and  work  towards  making  it  a  success.  I 
would also like to congratulate the organisers of this conference as this important aspect is 
being deliberated upon for the first time. 
Where do non-mainstream institutions like MFIs fit in? 
Though, we are of the belief that sustainable financial inclusion is achievable only through 
mainstream financial institutions i.e. banks, as the penetrative reach of banks is low and they 
have  still  not  been  able  to  reach  a  large  number  of  villages  in  the  country,  other 
intermediaries,  which  have  the  ability  to  reach  the  excluded  segments  of  the  society  are 
required. Microfinance institutions fill this niche space and to that extent, play a critical role in 
financial  inclusion.  The  MFIs  have  served  the  underserved/un-served  populace  in  the  last 
few  years  and  have  improved  access  to  credit.  It  is  our  considered  view  that  in  the  next 
decade,  MFIs  will  help  in  financial  deepening  and  will  continue  to  remain  an  important 
segment of the Indian financial market keeping in view the present level of penetration of the 
banking system. 
The conceptual framework underlying MFIs, however, calls for a change. They must revisit 
their business model to support the income earning ability of the borrower. MFI’s will have to 
take  initiatives  to  retool  the  product  design  towards  garnering  new  customers  and  for 
acquiring more share of the market. MFI’s will have to re-engineer the customer responsive 
processes so as to create a favourable climate for doing business. They will have to revisit 
their mission and business strategy and reinvent the sector as a community relevant to public 
and policy support. In the long run, they have to arrive at a firm position on their existence by 
evolving, either as banks or BCs, or continuing as NBFCs in a niche market. 
In a nutshell, evidence suggests that poverty reduction strategies are successful in countries 
which  adopt  inclusive  policies.  Building  inclusive financial  systems  that  are  both financially 
and socially sustainable is a fundamental requirement of any poverty reduction strategy. Two 
basic issues that need to be understood while helping people walk the first mile into financial 
inclusion are: 
• 
Financial  Inclusion  programmes  should  be  implemented  on  commercial  lines  and 
not  on  a  charity  basis,  in  order  to  ensure  its  sustainability.  It  is  important  that 
banking with the poor is perceived and pursued as a viable business model. 
While  poor  need  not  be  subsidized,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  they  are  not 
exploited. The need is to ensure that poor people who deserve credit are provided 
access to timely and adequate credit in a non-exploitative manner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 4 
 I am aware of the good work that Sa-Dhan has done over the past many years. I appreciate 
the vast and diverse membership of the association and look forward to their contribution in 
enhancing financial inclusion. I especially look forward to the work of expanding in the poorer 
districts of India and those that are affected by natural and other disasters, which restrict the 
presence of banks. Given the paucity of financial literacy, I, particularly, am looking forward 
to  high  quality  awareness  building  program  which  will  enable  the  poor  households  to 
participate more actively in utilising financial services for their own benefit. 
I urge upon every stakeholder to contribute towards making our goal of financial inclusion a 
reality.  Some  of  the  important  areas  that  require  more  attention  are  timely  access  to 
affordable  financial  services  including  credit,  savings,  insurance,  pension  and  money 
transfer, responsible behaviour of the service providers, electronic modes of money handling, 
livelihood and enterprise creation, and a sound regulatory mechanism that oversees all the 
above.  This  requires  a  complementary  and  supportive  interplay  of  multiple  institutions, 
channels, models and experiments. 
I  hope  that  the  conference  would  deliberate  upon  the  above  issues  and  come  up  with 
definitive  strategies  on  the  way  ahead.  I  look  forward  to  the  continued  service  of  the 
microfinance  sector  and  its  collaboration  with  the  Government  and  RBI.  I  wish  the 
conference all the very best.  
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
