Mario Bergara: Financial stability nets – complementing and reinforcing 
micro and macro perspectives 
Speech by Mr Mario Bergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Uruguay, at the opening of the 
9th meeting  of  the  IADI  Latin  America  Regional  Committee  (LARC),  Punta  del  Este, 
21 March 2012. 
 The speech is based on an article prepared by Messrs Mario Bergara, Gerardo Licandro and Jorge Ponce for the 
Conference “Macroprudential policies to achieve financial stability”, hosted by the Central Bank of Uruguay and 
the International Monetary Fund, Punta del Este, 29 February – 2 March 2012. The views expressed herein are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the view of the Banco Central del Uruguay. 
Lessons from the crisis: What is new? 
1. 
The  aftermath  of  the  2008  global  financial  crisis  witnessed  a  surge  on  the  discussion  of 
financial  stability  issues.  In  some  countries  the  focus  of  the  debate  is  on  the  role  of  the 
shadow  financial  system,  its  relationship  with  banks,  and  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
failure to address the problem of regulatory arbitrage. In Europe, the main concerns lies on 
the lack of a European safety net, mainly due to the absence of a European lender of last 
resort. In emerging countries, however, the discussion is centered around the impact of the 
crisis  on  the  volatility  of  capital  flows  and  the  architecture  of  the  international  financial 
system.  Though  some  of  the  phenomena  underlying  the  origins  and  depth  of  the  financial 
crisis were  either new  or located in new instruments and markets, most of the issues that 
were raised during this episode can be traced back to the first financial crisis of the world. In 
the following lines, we develop the argument that even though financial stability concerns are 
as old as financial systems, and despite some of the main lessons of the recent crisis look 
pretty  much  alike  the  lessons  of  several  financial  episodes  of  the  past  (to  which  many 
jurisdictions  have  already  reacted),  there  are  good  reasons  to  heighten  our  concern  with 
financial stability. 
Financial stability arises as a main concern, despite the fact that the concept is neither new, 
nor the main explanation for the collapse the world experienced in 2008. The crisis revealed 
the existence of regulatory failures at different levels, as well as problems in the design of the 
financial safety nets both at the national and international level. In what appears to be nearly 
a  paradox,  regulatory  failure  has  remained  in  the  background  overshadowed  by  the 
concentration of policy making bodies in financial stability. 
Financial stability concerns have had an impact on the management of both macro and micro 
policies regarding financial stability for a long time now. Uruguay can give examples of that 
matter.  To  quote  one,  in  1998  when  facing  a  bullish  international  environment,  Uruguay 
increased  capital  requirements  on  banks  to  tame  the  seemingly  bubbling  behaviour  of 
domestic credit. For years now, Uruguay has worked on increasing the maturity of domestic 
public  debt  to  avoid  liquidity  pressures  on  fiscal  accounts  that  might  in  the  end  affect  the 
health of the banking sector. Another example is our country’s concern with real exchange 
appreciations. In the graph below it is possible to see that every financial crisis we had in the 
last  50  year  was  preceded  by  a  deep  and  gradual  appreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate 
followed by a sudden and sharp depreciation. That lesson has carved deep into the skins of 
the  Uruguayan  people,  who  see  the  appreciation  of  the  currency  as  a  sign  of  trouble  to 
come. As a reflection of that concern, macroeconomic policy has always been keen to keep 
an eye on the exchange rate market, trying to prevent the misalignment of the real exchange 
rate  with  respect  to  fundamentals.  Financial  stability  is  then  a  long  term  concern  in  both 
macro en micro economic policy design. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Despite  their  long  standing  tradition  on  caring  about  financial  stability,  emerging  countries 
like  Uruguay  are  paying  a  renewed  and  closer  attention  to  the  matter  because  the 
international  environment  has  changed.  The  G20  solution  to  the  financial  crisis  has  set 
clearly  the  boundaries  of  the  international  financial  safety  net,  which  were  previously 
unknown, and has left a legacy of medium term excess liquidity that has to be dealt with in 
emerging  economies.  The  sum  of  those  two  elements  implies  much  more  volatile 
international capital flows, in an international financial architecture in which each country is 
basically on its own. 
As a result, even though financial stability is nothing new to us, we are paying a much closer 
look  at  the  ways  to  complementing  and  reinforcing  efforts  to  enhance  the  stability  of  our 
financial system  and  its  contribution  to  the  whole  economy.  In  the  next  lines  we  would  go 
over the way we envisage financial stability in the new international context. 
Why is public intervention in financial markets necessary? 
2. 
Public  intervention  in  an  industry  is  commonly  justified  by  the  existence  of  market  failures 
and  externalities.  Market  failures  and  externalities  are  particularly  pregnant  in  financial 
markets.  Financial  markets  operate  in  an  environment  of  asymmetric  information  where 
adverse selection, moral hazard and costly state verification problems play a very important 
role. Moreover, the activities of the financial market players pose important spill-overs and 
externalities over other players in the industry, other industries, the domestic economy and 
even  spread  over  other  economies.  Many  examples  of  contagion,  externalities  and  other 
market failures may be identified on the recent global financial crisis. 
Some  aspects  that  are  specific  to  the  financial  industry  provide  a  rationale  for  public 
intervention in financial markets: 
Representing  and  protecting  small  claimholders.  Financial  institutions  (e.g.  banks)  finance 
risky investments (e.g. loans) through retail deposits and other liabilities. Retail depositors, 
as  well  as  other  claimholders,  are  relatively  small  (and  maybe  nonsophisticated)  agents. 
They  do  not  have  either  the  technical  capabilities  or  the  incentive  to  monitor  financial 
institutions.  Hence,  public  intervention  is  justified  in  order  to  cope  with  the  potential  moral 
hazard  problem.  In  particular,  a  public  entity  assumes  the  representation  of  small 
claimholders  of  financial  institutions  in  order  to  protect  them  (see  Dewatripont  and 
Tirole, 1994). 
Controlling systemic risk, financial and macroeconomic stability. One of the main functions of 
financial institutions is to manage risks. For this reason, financial institutions are inherently 
fragile, to the point that some authors refer to them as “risk machines” (see Bessis, 2010). 
Moreover,  troubles  in  one  institution  may  rapidly  amplify  and  spread  to  others  through 
balance sheet interlinks and financial contagion, and affect the payment systems and the real 
economy (see, for instance, Allen and Gale 2000, Diamond and Dybvig 1983, Freixas et al. 
2000.  Ponce  and  Tubio  2010  offer  a  review  of  the  literature).  In  addition  to  these 
externalities, amplification and spill-over effects, a situation of financial instability may be the 
result  of  the  materialization  of  a  macroeconomic  risk  which  is  common  to  all  financial 
institutions (see Rochet, 2004). Yet, financial institutions may face difficulties to coordinate 
actions  in  order  to  resolve  potentially  damaging  imbalances.  Rochet  and  Vives  (2004) 
demonstrate  in  a  formal  model  that  such  coordination  failure  may  determine  that  solvent 
financial  institutions  face  severe  liquidity  shortfalls.  Hence,  these  market  failures  and  the 
need 
financial  and 
to  preserve  public  goods  (e.g. the  payment  system  and 
macroeconomic stability) provide another rationale for public intervention. 
Protecting taxpayer’s money. Financial crises have demonstrated to impose large cleaning 
burdens to fiscal authorities. Hence, the protection of fiscal revenues is another rationale for 
prompt public intervention in order to reduce the frequency and the impact of crises, and to 
quickly and efficiently resolve them once they have materialized. 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Public intervention in financial markets commonly implies a series of functions that can be 
classified into the categories of prevention and resolution. Among the category of prevention 
one  can  mention  the  activities  of  monitoring  and  assessing  risks  (two  crucial  functions  of 
financial supervision), and the application of a regulatory policy. A regulatory policy implies 
the  use  of  rules  (i.e.  regulations)  but  also  of  preventive  action  (e.g.  to  enforce  rules),  and 
corrective action (e.g. to lean against imbalances). The resolution policy involves the use of 
rules,  which  are  important  to  guarantee  prompt  and  efficient  resolution  processes,  the 
resolution and cleaning of institutions in trouble, and the correction of imbalances. Many tools 
are  used  to  fulfil  the  objectives  of  public  intervention  in  financial  markets:  prudential 
regulation,  control  and  supervision  (i.e.  preventive  tools),  and  resolution  mechanisms  and 
emergency liquidity assistance (i.e. resolution tools). 
The set of all these functions and tools provides a financial safety net to the financial system. 
In  general,  the  functions  and  tools  of  the  financial  safety  net  are  allocated  to  different 
agencies. For example, it is generally the central bank which is responsible for the provision 
of  emergency 
like  prudential  regulation, 
supervision, and deposit insurance are allocated inside the central bank in some jurisdictions 
and outside in others. In order to determine the most efficient governance structure for the 
financial safety net policymakers should consider the agencies explicit conflict of objectives, 
the potential conflict of opinions about key issues (e.g. the intervention or the liquidation of a 
financial  institution,  the  provision  of  short  term  emergency  assistance,  the  authorization  of 
mergers  and  acquisitions),  and  the  need  for  coordination.  In  addition  to  this,  policymakers 
should consider the pros and cons of the unification versus the separation of financial safety 
net agencies on the grounds of their relative expertise, capabilities, reputation, credibility and 
institutional  strength.  Moreover,  the  financial  safety  net  affects  and  is  affected  by  other 
functions like the conduction of monetary policy and fiscal policy. These effects should also 
be considered when designing financial stability institutions. We come back to this point in 
Section 5. 
liquidity  assistance.  Other  responsibilities 
Micro- and macro-prudential perspectives 
3. 
Sound risk management are needed not only at individual institutions but also at the financial 
system as a whole. The severity of the recent global financial crisis can only be explained by 
the systemic risk factors that propagated the problems in individual institutions and markets 
to the entire global financial system. The close relationship between individual and systemic 
risks  provides  a  rationale  for  complementing  the  traditional  micro-prudential  perspective 
(focusing on individual risks) with a macroprudential perspective (assessing systemic risks). 
Most of the financial regulatory and supervisory apparatus focalizes on the microprudential 
perspective.  Some  exceptions  are  the  cases  of  Spain  and  Uruguay  which  have  been 
implementing mechanisms to control both the static and the dynamic dimensions of systemic 
risk (e.g. dynamic provisioning and limit to currency mismatches) during the last decade. The 
recent Basel III capital and liquidity accord makes advances in the consideration of systemic 
risk.  However,  most  of  the  current  financial  regulation  focuses  on  the  stability  of  each 
financial  institution  and  market  considered  in  isolation.  Hence,  it  largely  ignores  the 
externalities that one institution poses on the others, the systemic importance of individual 
institutions, and the risks that are generated endogenously to the financial system. Moreover, 
the  regulation  focusing  on  individual  institutions  may  open  possibilities  for  regulatory 
arbitrage, i.e. the possibility that financial institutions avoid regulations of certain activities by 
conducting them through other entities (or lines of business) which are subject to less severe 
regulations. 
The final objective of the macro-prudential perspective is to avoid the materialization of large 
social and economic costs due to financial instabilities. Hence, this perspective to financial 
stability considers the entire financial system and intends to protect their infrastructures (e.g. 
the  payment  system,  the  interbank  and  the  money  markets).  The  macro-prudential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
perspective  oversights  the  aggregate  risk  of  the  entire  financial  system  by  explicitly 
considering the exposition of individual institutions and market to common sources of risk, 
and the dynamic of risks that are generated endogenously. 
The  micro-  and  the  macro-prudential  perspectives  should  be  jointly  considered  in  order  to 
avoid  regulatory  arbitrage  and  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Both  perspectives  should 
complement and reinforce each other in order to protect small customers and the stability of 
the  entire  financial  system.  Hence,  their  contribution  should  be  transversal  to  the  financial 
safety net agencies rather than the responsibility of a specific, macroprudential authority. The 
following sections analyse the implications of jointly considering the micro- and the macro-
prudential perspectives on rules, institutions, governance and the design of macroeconomic 
policy. 
Micro- and macro prudential policies: A two-way road 
4. 
The following lines we argue that the function of financial stability implies a more articulated 
cooperation  between  institutions  concerned  with  macro  and  microeconomic  policy  making 
and regulation. 
4.1 
Implications of systemic risk on traditionally micro-prudential rules and 
institutions 
implies 
that  similar  risks 
The  consideration  of  systemic  risks  (e.g.  exposure  to  common  and  correlated  risks, 
interconnectedness, financial and real sector conglomerates, cross border issues, regulatory 
arbitrage,  new  kinds  of  risks  and  developments)  have  implications  on  traditionally  micro-
prudential rules and institutions. 
Risk-based  regulation.  Risk-based  regulation 
face  similar 
regulations regardless  the  financial  institution and  activity  that  generate  them.  This  kind  of 
regulation  is  a  direct  way  to  provide  safety  and  protection  to  claimholders  of  financial 
institutions  and  other  participants  to  the  financial  system.  Other  kind  of  regulation  (e.g. 
activity-based  and  institution-based)  may  imply  that  important  sources  of  risk  remain 
unregulated  and  foster  regulatory  arbitrage.  Moreover,  they  may  ignore  the  important 
synergies,  interlinks  and  externalities  among  different  activities  and  financial  institutions 
(which  are  particularly  relevant  under  financial  conglomerates)  that  contribute  to  systemic 
risk.  To  anticipate  and  control  excessive  risk  taking  is  a  direct  mechanism  to  mitigate  the 
negative effects that the materialization of risks impose to the stability of the financial system. 
A  risk-based  regulation  acts  directly  over  the  incentives  to  take  risks,  and  reduces  the 
possibility  of  regulatory  gaps  whereby  important  activities  that  should be  regulated  escape 
regulation. 
Dynamic  regulatory  perimeter.  Financial  institutions  are  special  not  only  because  they  are 
specialized  on  risk  management  but  also  because  they  have  shown  to  be  creative  and 
efficient on the development of new products. Financial innovation may contribute to social 
welfare  but  it  also  may  serve  as  a  device  to  arbitrate  regulation  and  thereby  to  increase 
individual and aggregate risk. The capacity to innovate of financial institutions, the potential 
for regulatory arbitrage, and their potentially dangerous effects to the whole financial system 
provide  a  rationale  for  allowing  the  agencies  on  the  financial  safety  net  to  expand  and 
contract  the  regulatory  perimeter  (i.e.  to  select  what  institutions  and  activities  should  be 
regulated) in order to promptly react to new kinds of risks as market develop. 
The possibility to dynamically adjust the regulatory perimeter is also justified by the trend of 
financial institutions to form groups and conglomerates where a stockholding company (even 
a non-financial one) owns financial institutions. Moreover, state-owned and privately-owned 
financial  institutions  managing  similar  risks  should  be  in  the  same  side  of  the  regulatory 
perimeter and then subject to the same kind of regulations and controls. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Uruguay represents a particular case in Latin America where the Law gives powers to the 
financial sector regulator and supervisor to adjust the regulatory perimeter in order to fulfil its 
mandate of preserving the stability of the financial system.  
Centralized  regulation.  The  regulation  of  financial  institutions  should  be  centralized  in  a 
unique  regulator.  The  existence  of  many  agencies  regulating  the  same  financial  institution 
(e.g. in an activity-based regulatory framework) may imply important overlaps in regulatory 
requirements or important gaps where important activities that should be regulated escape 
regulation. Moreover,  financial  markets  are  naturally  dynamic  and  financial  institutions  and 
markets (e.g. banks and other intermediaries, pension funds, insurance and capital markets) 
show  important  interlinks  which  justify  the  need  for  a  large  level  of  consistency  thought 
different regulations. 
More centralization of financial regulation may imply lower bureaucratic costs, economies of 
scale  and  scope,  the  use  of  a  conglomerates  logic  and  lower  regulatory  arbitrage.  These 
advantages  from  concentrating  financial  regulation  may  be  traded  off  the  potential 
advantages  from  a  less  concentrated  financial  regulation  (e.g.  efficiency  gains  due  to 
specialization). 
The  rules  and  tools  used  by  the  centralized  regulator  should  consider  micro-  and 
macroprudential risks. Otherwise stated, the financial regulator should take both prudential 
perspectives 
tools  and 
instruments. Hence, the financial regulator should receive as a clear and explicit mandate not 
only to ensure the stability of individual institutions and markets, but also to guarantee the 
stability of the whole financial system. Other aspects that are related to the governance of 
the financial regulator and its relationship with other agencies are analysed in Section 5. 
into  consideration  when  writing  rules  and  using  regulatory 
Implications of micro-prudential concerns on macroeconomic polices 
4.2 
Micro prudential policy has a direct impact on macroeconomic policy, but experience shows 
that the reciprocal is also true. 
Changes in regulation and supervision affect the power, reach and timing of macro policies. 
Leaving aside the obvious effects in crisis times, it is well known the impact of regulation and 
supervision  on  the  development  of  financial  markets  and  credit.  Changes  on  the 
development  of  financial  markets  have  a  direct  effect  on  the  power  of  monetary  policy. 
Changes in credit affect might affect consumption and therefore fiscal revenues. The recent 
crisis  has  highlighted  the  potential  effect  of  failure  in  regulation  and  supervision  on  the 
creation of asset price bubbles. If we add those “normal time” effects to the ones generated 
during times of stress, we have a clear case why both monetary and fiscal policy should be 
concerned with financial stability.  
Nevertheless,  since  many  financial  crisis  can  be  traced  back  to  problems  in  policy  at  the 
macro  level,  there  is  a  clear  case  of  a  reciprocal  concern  on  macro  policy  design  coming 
from  the  authorities  of  the  financial  safety  net.  Particularly  in  the  case  of  emerging 
economies,  threats  to  financial  stability  come  from  the  macro  environment,  and  depend 
largely on the way macroeconomic policy is conducted. Reinhardt and Rogoff illustrate that 
financial crisis tend to cluster in history, and are related to the volatility of capital inflows and 
commodity  prices.  The  literature  on  early  warning  systems  suggest  that  the  most  basic 
features that currency and banking crisis seem to share are unsustainable appreciations of 
the domestic currency and fiscal problems. In the case of Uruguay, the three cases depicted 
in  the  figure  portrayed  in  section  I can  be  explained  by  (or  cannot  be understood without) 
problems  on  the  design  of  macroeconomic  policy.  Since  most  financial  crisis  events  have 
macroeconomic  factors  that  either  caused  or  amplified  them,  financial  stability  concerns 
should affect the design of macroeconomic policies. 
The impact of macroeconomic policies on financial stability justifies the presence of macro 
policy makers in the discussion of financial stability issues not only as the ones that pay the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
bill  once  the  crisis  has  started,  but  also  as  key  actors  in  the  prevention  of  episodes  of 
financial  instability.  A  direct  result  of  the  line  of  reasoning  that  this  paper  develops  is  that 
financial  stability  is  a  two  way  road,  in  which  all  the  actors  involved  have  some  milage  to 
cover in order to ensure financial stability. 
Financial stability committees: from safety to stability nets 
5. 
The final outcome in terms of financial stability depends on the policies conducted by several 
of the agencies that are involved on macroeconomic policy design and the financial safety 
net: prudential regulation and supervision, emergency liquidity assistance, deposit insurance, 
etc.  All  the  agencies  that  may  contribute  to  the  stability  of  a  financial  system  “own”  policy 
instruments and tools, and are responsible for their use. The challenges are that all these 
agencies  should  internalize  the  effects  of  their  policies  on  financial  stability;  that  all  these 
agencies  should  complement  each  other  on  the  identification  and  the  assessment  of  risks 
and vulnerabilities; and that policy instruments and tools should be used and calibrated by 
considering both the micro- and the macro-prudential perspectives to financial stability. 
Operationally independent agencies should receive clear mandates and remain accountable 
for the outcome of their policies. Hence, safety net agencies should receive the mandate of 
contributing  to  the  stability  of  the  whole  financial  system  in  addition  to  their  specific 
mandates. Yet, agencies may have conflicting opinions on crucial decisions which may end 
in  situations  of  financial  instability.  Financial  stability  committees  appear  as  a  response  to 
align  incentives,  coordinate  efforts,  and  contribute  for  all  agencies  to  comply  with  their 
respective  mandates.  Financial  stability  committees  also  add  to  the  financial  safety  net  by 
helping  the  micro-  and  the  macroprudential  perspectives  to  complement  and  to  reinforce 
each other. Financial stability committees are a step toward financial stability nets. Uruguay, 
like other Latin American countries, has recently created a committee with the objectives of 
sharing information and coordinating actions among the financial safety net agencies. 
Financial stability committees serve as a framework to share information and to coordinate 
actions.  They  also  help  to  improve  the  identification  and  the  assessment  of  risks,  and  the 
accountability of the stability net agencies. Hence, they help safety net agencies to comply 
with  their  mandates.  The  specific  mandates  of  safety  net  agencies  and  the  operational 
constraints  that  they  face  imply  that  each  of  them  specializes  on  the  oversight  of  specific 
dimensions  of  financial  risks.  To  share,  combine  and  analyse  the  different  pieces  of 
information under the leadership of a financial stability committee improves the efficiency of 
risk  assessment  not  only  by  profiting  from  the  specialization  of  safety  nets  agencies  on 
assessing  specific  risks,  but  also  by  having  a  more  comprehensive  approach  to  risks,  by 
considering  the  interlinks  between  them,  and  by  anticipating  new  risks.  To  get  information 
from  different  safety  net  agencies  also  has  the  benefit  for  the  financial  stability  committee 
(and  the  social  welfare)  of  reducing  the  potential  that  the  industry  “captures”  safety  net 
agencies  (see  Boyer  and  Ponce,  2011).  Moreover,  the  sharing  of  information,  the  insights 
provided by different safety net agencies, and the explicit consideration of different point of 
view  on  crucial  decisions  imply  the  generation  of  observable  (and  verifiable)  information 
which may improve the accountability of the agencies. 
References 
Allen,  F.,  Gale,  D.,  2000.  Financial  contagion.  The  Journal  of  Political  Economy  108  (1), 
1–33. 
Bergara,  M.,  Licandro,  J.,  2000.  Hacia  la  explicitación  de  un  fondo  de  garantía  para  el 
sistema bancario uruguayo. En: Bergara, M., Tansini, R. (Eds.), La banca uruguaya en los 
noventa: Estudios microeconómicos. pp. 203–229. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Bergara,  M.,  Licandro,  J.,  2002.  Regulación  prudencial  y  ciclos  de  crédito:  un  enfoque 
microeconómico. Monetaria, 141–160. 
Bergara, M., Licandro, J., 2004. Las reformas necesarias en la red de seguridad del sistema 
bancario.  En:  Licandro,  G.,  Licandro,  J.  (Eds.),  Una  agenda  de  reformas  para  el  sistema 
financiero uruguayo, pp. 19–53. 
Bessis, J., 2010. Risk Management in Banking. John Wiley & Sons. 
Blinder, A. 2010. It’s broke, let’s fix it: Rethinking financial regulation. International Journal of 
Central Banking 6(4), pp.277–330. 
Borio,  C.,  2003.  Towards  a  macroprudential  framework  for  financial  supervision  and 
regulation? BIS Working Paper 128. 
Boyer,  P.C.  y  Ponce,  J.,  2011.  Regulatory  capture  and  banking  supervision  reform. 
Forthcoming in Journal of Financial Stability. 
Dewatripont, M., Tirole, J., 1994. The Prudential Regulation of Banks. The MIT Press. 
Diamond, D. W., Dybvig, P. H., 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal of 
Political Economy 91 (3), 401–419. 
Freixas,  X.,  Parigi,  B.,  Rochet,  J.-C.,  2000.  Systemic  risk,  interbank  relations  and  liquidity 
provision by the central bank. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32 (3), 611–638. 
Levine, R., 2010. An autopsy of the U.S. financial system. NBER working paper 15956. 
Ponce, J., Tubio, M., 2010. Estabilidad financiera: conceptos básicos. Documento de trabajo 
del Banco Central del Uruguay. 
Rochet, J.-C., 2004. Macroeconomics shocks and banking supervision. Journal of Financial 
Stability 1, 93–110. 
Rochet,  J.-C.,  Vives,  X.,  2004.  Coordination  failures  and  the  lender  of  last  resort:  was 
Bagehot right after all? Journal of the European Economic Association 6 (2), 1116–1147. 
Rochet,  J.-C.,  2009.  Regulating  systemic  institutions.  Finnish  Economic  Papers  22  (2),  
35–46. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
