Patrick Honohan: Recapitalisation of failed banks – some lessons from 
the Irish experience 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 44th Annual 
Money, Macro and Finance Conference, Trinity College, Dublin, 7 September 2012. 
 When and how to recapitalise 
Several  countries  have  faced  difficult  bank  recapitalisation  challenges  during  the  crisis. 
Textbook  advice  has  not  always  proved  easy  to  implement.  That  advice  has  been  to 
recognise losses early and ensure prompt recapitalisation, ideally from the market. Where a 
bank  has  lost  all  of  its  capital  it  needs  to  be  resolved,  with  shareholders  losing  their 
investment  and  debt-holders  (apart  from  insured  depositors)  also  assuming  losses  as 
necessary following the normal priority of claims. Where uncertainty continues to prevail, for 
example in a systemic crisis, over-capitalisation of banks which have lost the confidence of 
the market should be arranged.  
In  practice,  loss  recognition  in  the  2007–12  crisis  has  been  slow,  partly  reflecting  the 
complexity of some of the banking relationships (as in structured finance products in the US 
and  large  global  banks  2007–8),  but  also  the  exceptionally  severe  depth  of  the  recession 
which has made it exceedingly difficult to narrow the uncertainty of the estimated range of 
potential loan losses. Furthermore the systemic nature of the crisis and the fact that it has 
occurred  in  countries  whose  banking  systems  are  large  in  relation  to  the  economy’s  fiscal 
capacity has entangled the financial stress of the banks and that of the sovereign, not least 
because of the reluctance of public authorities in most advanced economies in these years to 
see  sizable  losses  imposed  on  bank  creditors  –  only  Iceland  has  imposed  any  losses  on 
senior bank creditors (of sizable banks) since September 2008.1 
Decisions on recapitalisation are needed along three main axes.  
(a) 
Transparency: should the basis of capital adequacy calculations be disclosed and 
crystallised promptly and extensively to the market or is there a case for delay and 
opacity?  
Depth: should the recapitalisation be over-sized, or “just enough” to meet regulatory 
minima?  
Socialisation: should burden-sharing with the private sector go beyond shareholders 
to  cover  subordinated  and  even  senior  creditors,  or  should  there  be  extensive 
socialisation of the banking losses?  
(b) 
(c) 
In this scheme, the bulk of the professional literature would favour transparency and depth, 
but not socialisation.  
Ironically, whereas a tough approach to requiring high capital is normally seen as protective 
for the taxpayer and contrary to the interests of the bank shareholders, the scale of public 
capital injections in this crisis has tended to turn public opinion against high capital. These 
needed  injections  would  have  been  lower  had  there  been  less  socialisation  of  losses  – 
though it does seem that final losses in some countries will be less than was feared at the 
outset.  
Not  all  practitioners  would  agree  with  the  textbook  view  on  the  answer  to  the  questions. 
Furthermore, operational and practical difficulties can hamper policy implementation. Indeed, 
                                                
1  Cross-border spillovers from burden-sharing are especially relevant in the euro area, complicating the political 
economy of this problem. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
many  of  the  recapitalisation  measures  adopted  around  the  World  since  September  2008 
have not seemed consistent with these textbook principles.  
The  Irish  case,  involving  proportionately  the  largest fiscal  costs  of  recapitalisation  incurred 
anywhere in the current crisis, provides some important practical lessons.  
Bank recapitalisation and the Irish public finances 
Although  the  Irish  Government’s  decision,  in  the  turbulent  days  of  September  2008,  to 
legislate for a blanket guarantee of the liabilities of the main Irish retail banks, was taken on 
the basis of advice that the banks faced liquidity and not solvency difficulties, it soon became 
generally accepted that bank capital should be boosted. The demonstration effect of action 
by British and US authorities will have been influential in this regard, but there was also the 
continued steady fall in property prices, the deepening recession, and a growing realisation 
that the banks’ exposure to property developer and residential mortgage lending in particular 
had created a large and hard-to-quantify risk of loan-losses.  
In  December  2008,  the Government  announced  its  intention to  inject  capital  into  the  three 
largest  banks.  Thus  began  a  series  of  estimates  and  announcements  over  the  following 
years as the Irish authorities ramped up efforts to refine estimates of future losses and the 
resulting  capital  requirements  and  eventually  to  balance  the  need  to  ensure  adequate 
capitalisation  against  a  background  of  increasingly  stressed  public  finances  and  a  lack  of 
investor interest in the Irish banks.  
Although  the  range  of  uncertainty  in  bank  loan-loss  estimates  is  expected  to  be  rather 
narrow,  reflecting  adequate  risk-control  measures,  systematic  loan  underwriting  errors  of 
Irish banks over a number of years into a massively over-heated property market opened-up 
an extraordinarily wide range of uncertainty. The slowness of bank management to face up 
to  the  scale  of  losses,  the  inadequacy  of  management  information  and  the  inherent 
uncertainties  –  not  yet  fully  resolved  –  about  the  ability  of  debtors  to  service  loans  where 
collateral values fell well below loan amounts (negative equity) complicated the challenge of 
getting reliable estimates. At best a range of estimates under progressively more extreme but 
plausible scenarios could be aimed for.  
The Government went into the crisis with a low level of public debt. But with the emergence 
already in 2008 of budgetary overruns, the sharp deterioration in public finances (reflecting 
the exceptional degree to which revenue had become dependent on boom-time sources, as 
well as the operation of automatic stabilisers into the deep recession), the Government was 
poorly placed to absorb the sudden additional burden of filling the growing capital hole in the 
banks.  Short  of  defaulting  on  the  formal  guarantees  it  had  provided  to  the  depositors  and 
bondholders, however, the Government had to acknowledge a large additional bank-related 
debt. To be sure, the repayments of exiting bondholders and depositors (especially during 
early  2009  and  late  2010)  were  financed  by  central  bank  liquidity  support,  but  this  merely 
changed the identity of the banks’ creditors. Had market confidence remained, allowing the 
Government  to  borrow  at  the  low  interest  rates  prevailing  for  highly-rated  Sovereigns,  the 
situation could have been manageable. However, by November 2010 the yield spreads for 
Ireland  had  deteriorated  to  the  point  where  debt  sustainability  could  no  longer  be  assured 
and the Irish Government sought the assistance of the IMF and the new European Financial 
Stability Facility. The Programme agreed with these official lenders did not envisage any loss 
sharing  with  senior  bank  creditors  (even  those  which  were  no  longer  Government-
guaranteed),  so  the  Government  had  to  use  a  sizable  slice  of  the  resources  of  the 
Programme  to  continue  the  process  of  strengthening  bank  capital.  The  result  was  a  very 
delicate balance established in 2011 between ensuring adequate bank capital and retaining 
Government debt sustainability.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Phase 1: the initial capital injection 
The  initial  Government capital  injection  announced  in  December  2008 was  €2  billion  each 
into AIB and Bank of Ireland (plus a commitment to underwrite a further €1 billion each in 
new  equity  to  be  issued),  and  €1.5  billion  into  Anglo  taking  a  75  per  cent  stake  in  that 
company.  
Events  overtook  this  announcement.  First,  in  the  face  of  continuing  outflows,  Anglo  Irish 
Bank  was  nationalised  on  Friday  January  16,  2009  and  the  capital  injection  decision 
deferred.  For  AIB  and  Bank  of  Ireland,  the  scale  of  these  initial  recapitalisations  was 
increased  before  they  were  actually  concluded.  Their  public  offerings  were  shelved  in  the 
face of the further sharp decline in bank share prices following the nationalisation of Anglo; 
instead, with a view to strengthening market perceptions of the capital adequacy of the two 
main banks the Government injected €3.5 billion each in cash into AIB and Bank of Ireland in 
February  2009  in  return  for  preference  shares.  Anglo  itself  received  €4  billion  in  capital  in 
June 2009 as the scale of prospective loan losses began to become more evident. By end-
year  2009  Anglo  was  again  heading  for  an  undercapitalised  situation;  this  was  closed 
through a written commitment from the Minister for Finance to fill the gap with an instrument 
approved by the Competition Directorate General of the European Commission (DGCOMP). 
The  instrument  duly  materialised  with  the  issuance  of  the  first  Promissory  Note  (for 
€8.3 billion) at end March 2010.  
Phase 2A: PCAR2010 – NAMA first tranche and rest of portfolio for the going concern 
banks 
the 
Loss rates 
The  initial  focus  on  prospective  losses  was  on  the  large  loans  that  had  been  made  to 
property developers. The Government’s approach to these loans, announced in April 2009 
and legislated for in December of that year, was to create an asset management company 
NAMA  to  purchase  the  large  property  loans  at  “long-term  economic  value”,  thereby 
crystallising prospective losses. The rest of the banks’ portfolio was also becoming evidently 
stressed, not least the residential mortgages. Sooner or later, these losses would have to be 
provided for.  
By the autumn of 2009 there was a growing recognition that prospective losses on developer 
loans  were  likely  to  be  very  high,  and  that  these  losses  would  crystallise  when  NAMA 
purchases  occurred.  In  order  to  comply  with  the  specific  requirements  of  DGCOMP,  the 
NAMA purchases had to be based on detailed valuations and it was decided that they would 
therefore necessarily occur in a sequence of tranches, beginning with the largest loans. As 
soon  as 
to  crystallise  and 
recapitalisation could not be deferred. But how much additional capital would be required? 
An  indicative  percentage  haircut  had  been  mentioned  by  the  Minister  for  Finance  in  a 
September  2009  statement,  but  there  was  no  assurance  that  this  would  be  accurate,  and 
indeed  it  proved  to  be  a  considerable  underestimate  of  the  severity  of  the  shortfall.  As  it 
became clear that, for operational reasons, final NAMA prices would not be available all at 
once,  the  choreography  of  determining  needed  capital  and  requiring  capital  injections 
became problematic.  
If, as seemed plausible, the larger property developer exposures, which were to be valued 
first, were likely to generate a higher percentage loss than the smaller exposures, the first 
NAMA haircuts might not be too optimistic an estimate. Indeed, all of the banks felt this was 
going to be the case and they argued against being required to put up sufficient capital to 
meet an overall NAMA loss ratio equal to that of the first tranche. In response, the Central 
Bank  undertook  to  review  the  capital  requirement  on  June  30,  2010  and  to  relax  it  if 
subsequent NAMA tranches proved by then to have lower haircuts. Would that it had been 
so!  
tranche  was  purchased, 
losses  would  begin 
first 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Non-NAMA  loss  projections  also  needed  to  be  made.  Here  the  question  was  different.  At 
least  NAMA  purchases  would  crystallise  the  banks’  losses;  furthermore,  NAMA  was 
mandated  to  value  the  loans  it  purchased  on  the  basis  of  the  market  prices  for  land  and 
property prevailing when the legislation was being enacted in November 2009. (To be clear, 
the loans were not themselves valued at mark-to-market prices, but the property prices input 
into  the  long-term  economic  value  calculations  that  were  made  were  based  on  that  fixed 
date.) Accordingly, future property price and macroeconomic developments would not play a 
central  role  in  these  valuations.  But  for  the  non-NAMA  loans,  their  recoverability  would 
depend  on  future  economic  conditions  of  firms  and  households,  on  the  banks’  ability  to 
recover on distressed loans, and not simply on current collateral values.  
The banks had made their own unpublished estimates for these, but the Central Bank made 
an independent top-down estimate of loan-losses over a three-year horizon for a base and 
stress  case.  These  estimates  were  considerably  higher  than  those  of  the  banks,  and  the 
latter strongly contested them. The estimates drew on the experience of the Central Bank’s 
in-house  credit  specialists  –  many  of  them  hired  within  the  previous  year  or  so.  Analysts’ 
estimates  published  by  rating  agency  and  other  sources  were  factored-in,  especially  in 
relation to the banks’ non-Irish exposures. Separate loan-loss ratios were assigned to each 
bank for 12 different loan categories.2 The challenge was to choose loss rates, all of which 
were sure to lie well beyond all local experience. The projected loss rates that were chosen 
varied  widely  across  the  different  categories  (for  example  the  stress-loss  rate  on  Irish 
commercial  development  property  non-NAMA  for  Bank  of  Ireland  was  60%;  for  Irish  retail 
mortgages it was 5.6%), and to a lesser extent across the banks. These were all well above 
the banks’ own published estimates and far in excess of provisions taken.  
The limitations of stress-testing as an exercise across the globe are pretty well appreciated. 
Both the choice of stress scenarios in terms of macroeconomic and other external factors, 
and  the  mapping  from  those  factors  to  default  probabilities  and  to  loss-given-default  are 
always subject to uncertainty. Variances are high. This is all the more so when the economy 
moves  outside  of the  previously  experienced  range. Given  the  steepness  of  the  decline  in 
economic activity (between the peak quarter in late 2007 and the trough in late 2009, real 
GDP fell by 11.5%; GNP by 13.9%) and employment and the steady decline in house prices 
both actual and forecast, there was very little in historical experience – either in Ireland or in 
other  advanced  economies  with  large  financial  sectors  –  to  guide  those  attempting  to 
estimate the range of plausible outcomes for a bank lending portfolio which had clearly been 
inadequately  underwritten.  Loan  losses  were  certain  to  be  beyond  almost  all  previous 
experience not just in Ireland, but in advanced economies: just how far beyond was clouded 
in uncertainty.3 
From loss rates to capital requirements 
The Central Bank’s March 2010 projection for non-NAMA loss rates, combined with the first 
tranche haircut grossed up to apply to all NAMA loans, were employed  with projections of 
capital and income generation from the rest of the banks’ activities over a three-year horizon, 
and a small buffer, to arrive at a needed capital amount by end-2012 that would ensure that 
the bank would satisfy the Central Bank’s chosen core capital adequacy thresholds. These 
thresholds were higher than current international standards, reflecting evolving international 
discussions.  They  were  set  at  8  per  cent  Core  Tier  1  on  Basel  2  basis  in  a  base  case 
                                                
2  For ROI and UK separately: retail mortgages, retail other, investment property, development property, non-
property commercial. For “capital markets” lending: investment property, commercial property, non-property. 
3  Projecting macroeconomic variables following such a deep decline was already a challenge, but even if they 
could be known, attempting to map macro forecasts into loan-losses brought any existing models (the banks 
had  some)  well  beyond  the  range  within  which  they  could  be  relied  upon.  In  practice,  macroeconomic 
projections had little practical impact on the PCAR2010 loan losses estimates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
scenario, (of which at least 7 per cent to be in the form of common equity); and at 4 per cent 
Core Tier 1 in the stress case.  
The  outcome  (known  as  PCAR2010)  of  these  calculations  for  three  banks  BOI,  AIB  and 
EBS, imposing the equivalent of €11 billion of new capital on these banks, was published at 
end-March  2010.4  The  future  of  Anglo  and  INBS  as  going  concerns  being  in  question,  no 
specific new forward-looking capital requirements (beyond standard Basel 2) were imposed 
on them by PCAR2010.  
However, the NAMA read-across and preliminary indications for their non-NAMA book were 
officially stated to imply further future losses of over €20 billion for those two banks, which 
were  also  immediately  capitalised  to  meet  crystallised  losses.  The  PCAR2010  exercise, 
implying, as it did, a total of almost €31 billion in additional capital, was the largest capital 
deficiency announcement during the period 2008–12.  
Too much or too little? 
Given the scale of needed recapitalisation and the fact that much of it would have to come 
from the State, the decision on precisely how much capital to require as of the first transfer of 
developer loans to NAMA presented risks in both directions. Insist on much too much capital 
–  more than  seemed  likely  to  be  needed  –  and  the  ability  of the  State to  retain  access to 
market finance could be immediately and unnecessarily be lost; on the other hand, fixing an 
amount  of  required  capital  that  subsequently  proved  inadequate  would  have  reputational 
consequences.  
Put another way, the market clearly desires certainty and was not going to welcome repeated 
revisions in projected loan losses. But the only way of ensuring a one-bite capital increase in 
the face of gradually emerging information would have been to overcapitalise the banks by 
an amount sufficient to cover any potential eventuality.5 Given the degree of uncertainty that 
then existed – albeit some of which would crystallise quite soon, as successive tranches of 
NAMA valuations were determined – that would have required a much larger capital injection 
than was decided upon in March 2010. To insist on overcapitalising to that extent would have 
pushed  all  of  the  banks  into  majority  State  ownership  even  if  there  was  no  need  or  clear 
justification for this. Above all, a sufficient overcapitalisation to cover any eventuality (or even 
to  meet  the  much  higher  ratio  subsequently  adopted  as  a  standard  in  2011)  would  have 
undermined the State’s already precarious finances and tipped it into an immediate need for 
a programme of assistance from the IMF and EU partners.  
Accordingly, having been assured by NAMA that there was no basis for assuming that the 
first  NAMA  tranche  was  unrepresentative  of  haircuts  that  would  come  in  subsequent 
tranches, the Central Bank decided to apply this first-tranche haircut across the board to the 
whole  portfolio  of  developer  loans. There  was  no  realistic  alternative,  despite  the  risk  of a 
confidence-reducing sequence of upward revisions in required capital.  
In  the  event,  that  is  what  actually  happened:  as  became  clear  in  August,  the  later  NAMA 
haircuts would be uniformly higher than those of the first tranche that had been announced in 
March  2010.  It  remains  somewhat  puzzling  why  the  later  tranches  should  have  been 
systematically worse than the first lot. After all, these were generally smaller exposures and  
                                                
4  http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Documents/30%20March%202010%20Prudential%20 
Capital%20Assessment%20Review.pdf 
5  Only if NAMA were allowed to make a global purchase on the basis of a less detailed and time-consuming 
loan-by-loan evaluation could the uncertainty be removed. But this was ruled out by DGCOMP – and indeed 
could have been inconsistent with the Government’s intent not to bail-out the banks’ shareholders.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
–  all  other  things  being  equal  –  that  alone  would,  if  anything,  tend  to  predict  lower  loss 
rates).6 
Phase 2B: adjustment for full NAMA sample and for Anglo wind-down 
By end-August 2010, then, higher than anticipated losses on later NAMA tranches began to 
eat into the buffers that had been provided for in March. In early September, the latest NAMA 
tranche information, together with indicative but reasonably firm estimates for the remaining 
NAMA  tranches,  made  it  unavoidable  that  additional  capital  of  about  €3  billion  would  be 
needed for AIB.7 The buffer for Bank of Ireland was, however, sufficient.  
The increasing haircuts for the NAMA loans being transferred by Anglo8 and INBS were even 
larger. Accordingly, the Government decided to abandon the plan to build a new business 
bank  out  of  Anglo  and  to  proceed  to  a  dismantling  of  that  bank.9  Following  this 
announcement,  Anglo  management  were  asked  to  provide  a  firm  assessment  of  their 
prospective losses under the new structure. This estimate implied higher non-NAMA losses 
than had been envisaged under the previous plan. Together with the higher NAMA haircuts, 
this gave rise to the announcement that Anglo’s future losses over its remaining life-time in 
wind-down mode could imply a need for capital over €12 billion higher than had previously 
been pencilled in.10 The figure for INBS was almost €3 billion higher than at March 2010.  
These figures were all announced11 on September 30, 2010, just after the expiry of the 2008 
guarantee, an event which had been preceded by substantial maturities of bank paper and 
non-renewal of deposits, giving rise to a surge in the need for ELA funding from the Central 
Bank of Ireland.  
Three  factors  have  been  mentioned  as  contributing  to  the  surge  in  the  spread  of  Irish 
Government  bonds  in  October  and  November  of  2010  leading  to  Ireland’s  application  for 
financial support from the EU and IMF.  
 
First:  the  market’s  revised  perception  of  the  scale  of  banking  losses  following  the 
announcement of September 30, 2010.  
                                                
6  For one thing, smaller loan projects should be easier for the lender to value. Also, positive lender valuation 
errors will tend to increase approved loan size, while negative errors will reduce size. 
7  The announcement of an additional capital need for AIB was highly significant in a European context also, as 
this  was a  bank  which  had  been subjected  to  the  CEBS  stress  test  in  July  2010.  In  fact,  AIB  and  Bank  of 
Ireland  had  been  subjected  to  a  more  aggressive  stress  than  the  minimum  set  by  CEBS  in  that  the  first 
tranche NAMA loss rates were applied to the full developer portfolio in place of the lower minimum loss rates 
specified  in  the  CEBS  rules.  Thus,  even  though  it  resulted  simply  from  the  time-consuming  nature  of  the 
NAMA valuation procedures (mandated by the European Commission DGCOM), the need to revise the CEBS 
result so soon was seen as a negative reputation event both for the Irish and European authorities. 
8  As  Anglo’s  losses  crystallised,  the  amount  of  the  Promissory  Note  provided  by  the  Minister  for  Finance  to 
meet Basel 2 regulatory capital requirements increased: by €2.0 billion on 28 May, €8.6 billion on 23 August 
and €6.4 billion on 31 December 2010 giving a total of €25.3 billion. INBS likewise received a promissory note 
whose value had increased to €5.3 billion at end-2010. Anglo and INBS were merged in July 2011 to form 
IBRC. 
It  was  decided  that  Anglo  would  be  split  into  a  Funding  Bank  (containing  the  deposits  and  central  bank 
funding, with eligible and Government-guaranteed assets) and a Recovery Bank (containing the rest). 
9 
10  This reflects losses under the management’s “stress” case; their base case losses were €5 billion lower. The 
non-NAMA  losses  envisaged in  these  scenarios  were  considerably  higher  than  provided  as  late  as  August 
2010 when Anglo management still envisaged it continuing as a going concern. 
11  http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Pages/STATEMENTONIMPLEMENTATIONOF 
PRUDENTIALCAPITALASSESSMENTREVIEWEQUIREMENTSFORIRISHBANKS.aspx; 
http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Pages/StatementonAngloIrishBank 
restructuringcapitalcosts.aspx.  This  included  a  requirement  for  ILP,  which,  as  a  non-NAMA  bank,  had  not 
been included in the March exercise. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Second: growing market awareness of the scale of ELA that had been provided to 
the banks, calling into question their future viability.  
Third:  the  Deauville  Agreement  of  October  18,  according  to  which  private  sector 
lenders  to  Governments  seeking  financial  assistance  from  the  new  EFSF  facility 
would have to experience losses on their holdings. All three factors were no doubt 
relevant.  
Although the scale of the additional capital requirements announced at end-September was 
not  in  itself  sufficient  to  undermine  radically  the  manageability  of  the  public  finances,  the 
market  had  not focused  on  the  fact  that  the  end-March  2010  announcement  left  open  the 
possibility of downside risk on the later NAMA tranches and did not itself purport to account 
for  Anglo’s  prospective  non-NAMA  losses.  As  a  result,  the  market  was  unpleasantly 
surprised  that  a  further  capital  announcement  was  needed  so  soon.  Still,  market  spreads 
actually declined in the days after the announcement and only started to widen again after 
Deauville.  
The growing ELA, and overall reliance of the Irish banks on Eurosystem funding was also a 
matter  of  evident  concern  to  the  ECB,  and this concern  clearly  communicated  itself to the 
markets in these weeks.  
Inasmuch  as  the  unaided  public  finances  were  at  the  limit  of  their  capacity,  making 
unavailable the option of over-capitalisation of the banks, a major objective, especially of the 
funders, in the EU-IMF Programme of Financial Support was to remove this constraint and 
provide  sufficient funding to  allow  whatever  capital  needs  were  going  to  be  identified  by  a 
new and more in-depth stress test, lifting capital of the banks to a new threshold (10.5% risk-
weighted), and also providing for the additional costs of deleveraging the banks so that their 
reliance  on  central  bank  funding,  especially  ELA,  would  be  reduced.  The  nexus  between 
Government  and  banking  system  was  not,  however,  reduced  in  that  the  additional  capital 
was  not  injected  directly,  but  added  to  the  Government  debt.  Furthermore,  overall 
eurosystem  policy  dictated  that  senior  bondholders  –  even  those  that  were  no  longer 
Government-guaranteed – should not be required to share the burden of the losses.  
It should not be thought, however, that all of the additional capital mandated by PCAR2010 
was  obtained  from  the  Government.  Instead  some  was  secured  through  sale  of  assets  at 
above  book  value  (which  both  generated  additional  book  capital  and  reduced  the  risk-
weighted asset base on which the capital requirements were calculated), and some through 
burden-sharing offers to subordinated debt-holders.12 There was also an underwritten rights 
issue by Bank of Ireland.  
Phase 3: PCAR 2011: higher ratio; deleveraging costs; bottom-up estimates  
To meet the Programme requirements, the PCAR2011 exercise13 was prepared on a more 
granular basis employing an extensive list of external consultants, among which BlackRock 
Solutions were the leading player, steering the loan-loss estimation. A more systematic, and 
formal (and very expensive!) approach was adopted. Loan-by-loan information was collected 
from each of the banks and a systematic process of data verification provided assurance that 
the  underlying  data  being  used  was  sufficiently  robust.  At  the  heart  of  the  exercise  was  a 
bottom-up multi-year loan-loss forecasting exercise carried out by BlackRock using Central 
Bank  base  and  stress  projections  about  GDP,  house  prices  and  other  macroeconomic 
variables, and applying parameters estimated from emerging patterns of loan delinquency. It 
                                                
12  Shareholder  writedowns  for  the  Irish  banks  covered  in  this  note  exceeded  €29  billion;  burden-sharing  with 
subordinated creditors totalled almost €14 billion. 
13  http://www.centralbank.ie/press-area/press-releases/Pages/CapitalandLiquidityResultsPublishedfor 
BankingSector.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
is important to realise that, although arrears were mounting steadily, and the inevitability of 
sizable losses in the non-NAMA portfolio was recognised by all, even at this stage banks had 
recognised relatively few write-downs.  
As already noted, the forecasting exercise was being conducted in circumstances that were 
largely out of the range of historical experience: absent that, it is of interest to explain the 
assumptions that were made (at the instance of BlackRock) to underpin a data-based loss 
projection.  
Thus, for residential mortgages, BlackRock – extrapolating from UK experience – assumed 
that, in the end, bank forbearance on delinquent loans would not be successful in avoiding 
foreclosures, and they modelled negative equity as the major driver of delinquencies. Thus, 
in  effect,  a  significant  proportion  of  negative  equity  loans  was  assumed  to  default  in  each 
quarter, and little of the unsecured portion of the loan would be recovered.14 Since the house 
price forecasts entailed a large fraction of the mortgage book remaining in negative equity 
throughout  the  horizon  of  the  exercise,  this  produced  a  higher  estimate  of  life-time  losses 
than had been envisaged in the top-down exercise of the previous year.  
For  commercial  property  loans,  the  ability  of  the  debtor  to  secure  rental  renewals  was 
assumed to be low, so that for this segment too BlackRock’s lifetime loan-loss assumptions 
were heavily driven by loan-to-value ratios.  
In  choosing  parameters,  BlackRock  also  made  subjective  judgments  about  the  banks’ 
operational ability to make effective loan recovery.  
Mapping the BlackRock loan losses into capital requirements for PCAR2011 entailed some 
judgment  as  to  how  much  of  future  prospective  losses  to  provide  for  in  the  banks’  capital 
right away. Here there was some tension between accounting and economic approaches. It 
was deemed, from the accounting point of view, unnecessary to insist that the banks hold 
sufficient capital immediately to meet all of the lifetime projected loan losses. On the other 
hand, holding enough to meet projected three year losses (and still end after 3 years with 
10.5%  Core  Tier  1  capital  in  the  base  case  and  6%  in  the  stress  case)  was  deemed 
insufficient  from  the  perspective  of  the  underlying  economics  of  the  situation.15  A  sizable 
buffer  over  three  year  losses  was  therefore  included  in  the  required  capital  announced  in 
March 2011. In addition, some of the banks’ non-core assets were slated for deleveraging: 
projected  realisations  for  these  entailed  further  losses  which  could  have  been  avoided  if 
funding had been available to hold these to maturity.  
The combination of the four factors: (i) higher percentage capital ratios; (ii) higher projected 
3-year loan losses per BlackRock methodology; (iii) buffer for post-three years loan-losses; 
and (iv) deleveraging costs, combined with projections for the evolution of net income and 
risk-weighted assets, gave the March 2011 required capital figures. A breakdown is shown in 
                                                
14  In essence, BlackRock’s methodology began by estimating the influence of each loan’s LTV and seasoning 
(and the borrower’s interest-to-initial-income ratio) and macroeconomic variables on the probability of that loan 
being  in  arrears  status  (defined  as  nonperforming  for  at  least  90  days).  This  estimate  was  based  on  a  
24-month panel (subsample) of individual loans. Then it was assumed that a given fraction of each month’s 
loans  in  arrears  will  default,  the  fraction  being  based  on  UK  experience.  Finally,  arrears  percentages  were 
projected  forward  for  a  couple  of  decades  using  the  estimated  and  assumed  parameters,  together  with 
projected  house  price  and  other  macroeconomic  variables.  Central  Bank  staff  shadowed  this  exercise  and 
explored alternative assumptions, drawing on estimates of monthly migration of delinquent loans into higher 
arrears categories, based on actual Irish experience 2009-10 calculated from the new loan-by-loan data. In 
several instances this produced somewhat higher projections of loan cure, but only the BlackRock loan-loss 
estimates were used to calculate the new capital requirements. 
15  Another complication in assessing needed capital was the extraordinary term and credit risk premia prevailing 
in  banking  and  sovereign  debt  markets  during  2010  to  2012.  The  net  present  value  of  a  long  stream  of 
payments differed widely depending on which of several market-relevant discount factors were employed. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Figure 1.16 This time an additional €24 billion was being called for, well within the €36 billion 
pencilled into the Programme financing envelope by the Troika.  
Table  1  shows  the  requirements  bank-by-bank.  Figure  2  shows  the  cumulative  additional 
capital  requirements  reached  in  the  crisis.  The  bank  with  the  largest  cumulative  amount 
(€29.3  billion)  is  Anglo  (and,  this  bank  being  in  a  wind-down  mode,  that  figure  does  not 
include  an  additional  €5  billion  of  announced  potential  losses  in  a  stress  case).  Although 
AIB’s cumulative requirements are not far behind at €27.2 billion, this does reflect the higher 
target  capital  ratio  set  for  going  concern  banks  in  a  stress  scenario;  furthermore,  Anglo’s 
reported  pre-crisis  total  assets  stood  at  €96.7  billion:  much  lower  than  the  €177.8  billion 
reported by AIB. As such, Anglo’s overall loss experience  was much worse than AIB. The 
other  large  going  concern  entity  Bank  of  Ireland  loss  rate  had  to  meet  €11.4  billion  of 
additional  capital  requirements,  which  may  be  compared  with  its  pre-crisis  total  assets  of 
€197.4 billion.  
Towards PCAR2013 
In  all  banking  systems  around  the  world,  evolving  international  standards  has  tended  to 
increase required capital levels (especially for core capital – those elements that can absorb 
losses while the bank continues to be a going concern). Growth of the business also means 
a  need  for  more  capital.  In  normal  circumstances,  the  additional  capital  can  be  generated 
through retained earnings or by issuing new equity in the market. When conditions return to 
normal,  this  will  be  the  case  for  Irish  banks  too.  But  for  the  present,  their  profitability  and 
access to additional equity has been limited. There is also the question of keeping track of 
and  responding  to  any  deviations  in  the  actual  and  prospective  loan-loss  situation  by 
comparison with what has been assumed in PCAR 2011.  
PCAR2013, employing a further refinement of methodology, embodying recent work on loan 
arrears migration and the results of a micro-data survey of indebted households, will allow 
capital  requirements  to  be  updated  on  a  more  secure  basis.  An  emphasis  on  the 
effectiveness of bank loan recovery and the management of mortgage and SME arrears will 
also  become  more  central.  The  more  effective  the  banks  are  proving  to  be  in  managing 
problem loans, the less the required capital is likely to be. The likely enactment during 2012 
of  new  personal  insolvency  legislation  could  affect  behaviour  in  relevant  ways,  behaviours 
that should be taken into account in the loan-loss models.  
The passage of time will also help to narrow the remaining range of uncertainty somewhat, 
although  the  deterioration  in  global  economic  conditions  since  PCAR2011  and  waves  of 
increased market uncertainty in the euro area and worldwide continue to present challenges 
to accurate loan-loss forecasting. Furthermore, the continuing dislocation – to date – in the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  throughout  the  euro  area  presents  banks  in  stressed 
countries like Ireland with profitability challenges, especially in respect of tracker mortgages 
(whose running yield is tied to the ECB policy rate). Since March 2011, economic conditions 
(both  in  Ireland  and  in  Ireland’s  main  international  trading  partners)  have  generally  been 
worse than the base case employed in PCAR2011, but rather better than the stress case.  
Of course in the coming years the implementation of Basel 3 will also lead to higher capital 
ratios. The aim must be to have the banks return to sufficient profitability in a stable overall 
                                                
16  The deleveraging losses are the highest component. Partly this reflects the unavoidable discount that would 
be incurred by a seller of opaque loan contracts (even if “firesale” conditions do not prevail), partly reflecting 
the informational disadvantage of likely purchasers. Note, however, that this figure should be interpreted with 
caution inasmuch as prospective hold-to-maturity losses on the assets to be deleveraged were not separately 
evaluated. As such the loss shown on deleverage overstates the cost actually incurred by having to dispose of 
assets rather than holding to maturity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
environment so that additional needed capital in future years can come from investors other 
than the State.  
Instruments used 
Just  as  with  the  previous  capital  increases,  the  going  concern  banks  worked  to  reach  the 
objectives as far as they could by liability management exercises and the sale of non-core 
assets. In the case of Bank of Ireland, some new cash was raised from issuance of equity.  
When a Government recapitalises a bank, it generally provides an asset to the bank in return 
for  the  acquisition  of  a  capital  claim  on  the  bank.  As  things  have  worked  out,  to  a  first 
approximation, the  Irish Government’s  practice  has  been  to  inject  cash  into going  concern 
banks  (AIB,  Bank  of  Ireland,  ILP),  and  non-marketable  Promissory  Notes  into  the  entities 
now  being  wound  down  (IBRC,  formed  from  the  former  Anglo  and  INBS).  The  cash  was 
sourced  either  from  the  National  Pension  Reserve  Fund,  a  Sovereign  Wealth  Fund 
established by the Irish Government in the late 1990s at a time of fiscal strength, or directly 
from  the  Exchequer.  The  Promissory  Notes  represented  a  bespoke  contract  to  pay  a 
constant sum annually for about 13 years, with the fair value at issue equal to the needed 
capital amount. This represented a compromise between the State’s desire to postpone the 
need  for  cash  and  the  bank’s  preference  not  to  have  too  much  maturity  mismatch  in  its 
portfolio. The Irish Government’s credit rating was AA when the first Promissory Note was 
issued; subsequent rating downgrades would have undermined the recipient banks’ market 
access, but by September 2010 both Anglo and INBS were in wind-down (“gone concern”) 
mode.  Nevertheless,  they  retained  their  banking  license  and  satisfied  regulatory  capital 
minima, remaining eligible for ELA from the Central Bank.  
Concluding remarks: practical difficulties 
Prompt,  transparent  over-capitalisation17  in  a  systemic  crisis  should  remain  the  preferred 
option for dealing with failing banks that it is deemed necessary to save. Losses should be 
shared by both junior and senior creditors where necessary (unless the amounts involved are 
small) in cases where the banks are put into resolution. Experience shows, however, that this 
may be a counsel of perfection not always achievable.  
Where did the Irish recapitalisation exercise lie along the three dimensions of transparency, 
depth and socialisation identified above? The answer is not altogether straightforward.  
a. 
The  process  was  arguably  quite  transparent.  So  much  so  that  the  immediate 
crystallisation of losses on transfer to NAMA was criticised by some observers who 
contrasted  it  with  the  approach  adopted  in  Germany,  where  problem  loans  were 
transferred  to  defeasance  vehicles  at  or  close  to  book  value,  leaving  any  future 
losses to be clawed back from the transferring bank in future years. My own view is 
to the contrary, indeed, in retrospect a more granular disclosure of the basis for the 
PCAR2010  projections  for  non-NAMA  losses  could  have  been  more  effective  in 
allowing the market to infer how uncertain future loan losses remained.  
On depth of the recapitalisation, some (for example shareholders of ILP) vigorously 
contested the  capital  requirements  imposed  in  March  2011  as  entailing  excessive 
dilution. Previously, though, the discovery in September 2010 that AIB’s losses on 
the property developer loans transferred to NAMA were going to be €3 billion more 
than  had  been  implied  by  the  haircuts  on  the  first  tranche  of  NAMA  transfers 
re-opened  a  capital  deficiency  in  that  bank  and  highlighted  the  “just  enough” 
capitalisation approach that had been used in March 2010.  
b. 
                                                
17  Along the lines delivered by the US TARP in late 2008. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
c. 
The  extensive  socialisation  of  losses  –  initially  through  the  September  2008 
guarantee  and  subsequently  when  the  Troika  refused  to  countenance  burden 
sharing  with  the  unguaranteed  senior  bondholders  –  has  been  rightly18  subject  to 
extensive  criticism.  On 
the  achieved  burden-sharing  with 
subordinated debt-holders (eventually totalling over 10 per cent of GNP) was also 
subject to litigation by aggrieved creditors.  
the  other  hand, 
On a balanced overall view, it seems fair to say that transparency of the process was high in 
Ireland, but that it proved hard to generate reliable and precise information quickly. Clearly it 
would have been better if comprehensive accurate estimates of future loan-losses had been 
available from the outset. However, despite best efforts, accurate information emerged only 
slowly. Given the early decision to socialise the losses by guaranteeing all senior debt and 
some subordinated debt for two years, the scope for over-capitalisation was very limited in 
Ireland because the Government’s finances quickly became over-stressed.  
By removing the possibility of more extensive burden-sharing with private creditors, the initial 
guarantee narrowed the options available to Irish policymakers and pushed public debt levels 
to the limits of sustainability. Not only was over-capitalisation no longer a serious option and 
the  chance  of  deeper  burden-sharing  with  bank  creditors  shut-off,  but  in  addition  some 
resolution  actions  had  to  be  deferred  lest  they  trigger  an  immediate  cash  call  on  the 
guarantee. Likewise, the absence at the outset of comprehensive specific legislation to deal 
with bank resolution exposed the authorities to litigation risks that slowed action.  
To be sure, it is very doubtful that, absent the guarantee, European official partners would 
have  countenanced  the  imposition  of  losses  on  senior  bank  creditors  at  any  stage  during 
2008–11, so it is probably wrong to over-emphasise the guarantee: some form of guarantee 
or de facto cover would probably have been insisted upon. Because that propelled Ireland to 
a  very  stressed  level  of  public  indebtedness,  it  seems  implausible  that  any  subsequent 
decisions  on  recapitalisation  modalities  could  have  materially  improved  the  eventual 
outcome.  
                                                
18  It would have been better had Anglo and INBS been put into resolution as soon as it became clear that their 
capital was going to be wiped-out by unavoidable losses on developer loans. This should have been evident 
before September 2008, but was not, leading the Government of the day to include these two failed entities in 
its blanket guarantee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Increasing recapitalisation requirements for Irish banks, 2009–11 
Table 1 
 Figure 1 
 Components of Phase 3 (PCAR2011) recapitalisation (€ billion) 
 Figure 2 
 Cumulative recapitalisation requirements on Irish-owned banks  
by announcements date 2009–11 (€ billion) 
12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
