Charles I Plosser: Economic outlook 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  to  the  Rotary  Club  of  Wilmington,  Wilmington,  Delaware, 
29 March 2012. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to the Rotary Club of Wilmington. In planning for today, I 
learned that Wilmington’s business and community leaders have been gathering under your 
auspices at this location since 1914, longer than any other Rotary Club in the world. From 
one organization that is almost a century old to another, that is quite an achievement. 
Since the Federal Reserve is nearing its centennial in December 2013, I thought I would give 
you a little background on our nation’s central bank before I talk about my economic outlook. 
While many Americans hear about the Fed in the news every day, not everyone knows how 
we work or how we are structured. 
Congress created the Federal Reserve System in 1913. To balance political, economic, and 
geographic  interests,  the  System  was  designed  with  12  independently  chartered  regional 
Reserve Banks throughout the country, overseen by a Board of Governors in Washington, 
D.C.  The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  serves  the  Third  District,  which  includes 
Delaware, the southern half of New Jersey, and the eastern two-thirds of Pennsylvania. The 
Reserve  Banks  distribute  currency,  act  as  a  banker’s  bank,  and  generally  perform  the 
functions of a central bank, including serving as the federal government’s fiscal agent. 
A  central  bank  also  guides  the  country’s  monetary  policy.  In  the  U.S.,  the  body  within  the 
Federal  Reserve  that  makes  monetary  policy  decisions  is  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee,  or  the  FOMC.  The  Committee  includes  the  seven  members  of  the  Board  of 
Governors in Washington – there are currently two open posts – and five of the 12 Reserve 
Bank presidents: the president of the New York Fed and four other presidents, who serve 
one-year terms on a rotating basis. This structure ensures that our national monetary policy 
has its roots not just in Washington or on Wall Street, but also on Main Street and across our 
diverse nation. 
Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate 
in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy 
options.  Each  of  us  prepares  for  the  meetings  by  gathering  information  throughout  our 
Districts,  around  the  nation,  and,  in  some  cases,  internationally.  This  occurs  through 
meetings  with  our  boards  of  directors  and  advisory  councils,  conversations  with  local  and 
international business leaders, as well as briefings on economic conditions by our Research 
staffs. All this helps contribute to a rich and comprehensive mosaic of the national economy. 
In this way, we are able to make the best informed decisions possible to achieve the goals of 
monetary  policy  that  Congress  has  set  for  us  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Act.  Specifically, 
Congress mandates that the Fed should conduct policy to “promote effectively the goals of 
maximum  employment,  stable  prices,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates”.  Since 
moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable, it is often said that 
Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. 
I  believe  the  diversity  of  opinion  around  the  FOMC  table  is  one  of  its  great  strengths  and 
serves  to  improve  the  quality  of  our  decision-making.  As  the  famous  American  journalist 
Walter Lippmann once said, “Where all men think alike, no one thinks very much”. But that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
diversity  of  views  also  requires  me  to  note  that  I  speak  for  myself  and  not  the  Federal 
Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
Economic outlook 
Now let me turn to the state of our economy. We have now seen 10 quarters of real GDP 
growth since mid 2009, when the Great Recession officially ended. However, growth has not 
been  particularly  robust  or  smooth.  To  many,  it  occasionally  feels  like  we  take  two  steps 
forward  only  to  take  one  step  back.  We  finished  2011  with  real  GDP  at  1.6  percent, 
compared  to  3.1  percent  in  the  prior  year.  There  were  some  perfectly  understandable 
reasons for the weakness last year, given the unexpected shocks we experienced early in 
the year. Yet, the economy persevered. We saw growth accelerate across each of the four 
quarters, from less than half of a percent in the first quarter to 3 percent in the fourth quarter. 
I anticipate that we will continue to see moderate growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 
2013.  That  outlook  puts  me  in  a  slightly  more  optimistic  camp  than  some  forecasters.  For 
instance,  the  Philadelphia  Fed’s  first-quarter  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters  reported 
average estimates of real GDP growing 2.3 percent in 2012 and 2.7 percent in 2013. 
Business  spending,  especially  investment  in  equipment  and  software,  remained  relatively 
healthy last year, buoyed by solid growth in corporate earnings. 
Results  from  the  Philadelphia  Fed’s  monthly  Business  Outlook  Survey  of  manufacturers, 
which  are  widely  viewed  as  a  useful  barometer  of  national  trends  in  manufacturing,  have 
continued to improve since last summer’s lull. In March, regional manufacturers reported that 
their current activity continued to expand at a moderate pace, the sixth consecutive month of 
positive  numbers.  The  survey’s  indicators  of  general  activity,  new  orders,  shipments,  and 
employment all remained positive. The survey’s measures of future activity showed that our 
respondents expect activity to continue to pick up over the next six months. 
Consumer  spending,  which  accounts  for  about  70  percent  of  the  nation’s  GDP,  also 
continues to improve. While personal consumer expenditures were steady through January, 
retail  sales in  February  grew  1.1  percent.  While  not  exactly  robust  growth,  retail sales  are 
more than 6 percent higher than a year ago. 
On  the  housing  front,  I  expect  to  see  stabilization  and  maybe  some  slight  improvement  in 
2012. We entered the Great Recession over-invested in residential real estate, and we are 
not  likely  to  see  a  strong  housing  recovery  until  the  surplus  inventory  of  foreclosed  and 
distressed properties declines. 
Even  as  the  economy  rebalances,  housing  and  related  sectors  are  not  likely  to  return  to 
those  pre-recession  highs,  nor  should  we  expect  them  to  do  so.  Those  highs  were 
unsustainable,  and  the  housing  crash  that  ensued  destroyed  a  great  deal  of  wealth  for 
consumers and the economy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe 
for  many  individuals  and  many  businesses.  Moreover,  monetary  policy  cannot  paper  over 
these losses, nor should it try to do so. 
Nevertheless, households and businesses continue to make progress on restoring the health 
of their balance sheets by paying down debt and increasing savings. That is a healthy trend, 
and most economists, including me, believe that this trend will continue into 2012. 
On  the  labor  front,  I  continue  to  be  encouraged  by  recent  employment  reports,  although 
everyone would agree that there are still too many people unemployed in our region and in 
the nation. The February employment report showed a net gain of 227,000 jobs, giving us 
the third month in a row with job growth of more than 200,000. We also continued to see a 
trend of upward revisions in prior months, adding another 60,000 jobs to payrolls. 
The  unemployment  rate  was  8.3  percent  in  February,  as  it  was  in  January,  but  the 
unemployment rate has been moving down steadily for six months, and it is now at its lowest 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
levels in three years. As growth continues and strengthens, I expect further gradual declines 
in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling below 8 percent by the end of 2012. 
At the regional level, the latest unemployment rates for January also showed improvement. 
New  Jersey’s  rate,  at  about  9  percent,  was  still  higher  than  the  national  average,  but 
Delaware’s  rate  of  7.0  percent  and  Pennsylvania’s  rate  of  7.6  percent  were  below  the 
national average. Our Research Department is forecasting no change in the unemployment 
rates for Pennsylvania and New Jersey and a decline in Delaware’s unemployment rate in 
February. The data are scheduled for release tomorrow. 
We are also seeing continued improvement in the employment index in our monthly survey 
of manufacturers, which suggests more employers are adding to payrolls than cutting back. 
As  we  continue  down  the  road  to  recovery,  there  will  undoubtedly  be  some  bumps  and 
setbacks along the way, but I am generally optimistic. Of course, any forecast is subject to 
some risks. The most significant and identifiable risk on the horizon is the potential effects of 
the continuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe. In recent months, I have come to believe that 
the  European  governments  and  their  economies  will  work  through  their  challenges. 
Nonetheless, the economic slowdown in the euro zone will likely exert a small drag on U.S. 
exports. And while European financial institutions have so far endured through the financial 
market turmoil in Europe, we must continue to monitor events to ensure that these troubles 
do  not  spill  over  to  U.S.  financial  institutions.  Of  course,  regardless  of  how  the  European 
situation plays out, it has already imposed considerable uncertainty on growth prospects for 
the global economy. Hopefully, some of that uncertainty is beginning to wane. Moreover, our 
own nation’s fiscal challenges contribute additional uncertainty to the economic landscape. 
Until the economic environment becomes clearer, firms and consumers are likely to exercise 
some restraint in their spending and hiring decisions, thus limiting the pace of recovery, even 
while economic fundamentals in the U.S. continue to improve. 
On the inflation front, there are risks and we must monitor the trends with care. The rate of 
inflation,  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index,  was  2.9  percent  for  the  12  months 
through February. Another common measure called the personal consumption expenditures 
price index was 2.4 percent through January. Thus, inflation is higher than the Fed’s long-
term target of 2 percent. Some of the increased inflation over the past year was driven by 
sharp increases in energy prices. During the late summer, oil prices did decline somewhat, 
slowing price increases, but unfortunately, they have been rising again and crude oil prices 
are now over $100 a barrel and gasoline prices are rising. 
Oil  prices  have  added  a  great  deal  of  volatility  to  the  overall  price  index.  At  times,  sharp 
spikes in oil prices raise overall inflation, which is then reversed when those prices increases 
moderate.  Yet,  since  early  2009,  when  oil  prices  fell  to  about  $60  a  barrel,  the  trend  has 
been upward. Moreover, inflation rates that remove the effects of energy and food have been 
drifting upward as well from their lows of 1 percent or less in late 2010 to about 2 percent or 
a little higher today, depending on the particular index. Thus, we must monitor these inflation 
trends with some care and be prepared to take appropriate actions as necessary. 
The  public  has  the  right  to  expect  the  central  bank  to  keep  inflation  near  its  target  of 
2 percent over the medium to longer term. Inflation often develops gradually, and if monetary 
policy waits too long to respond, it can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as 
the unemployment rate are often thought to prevent inflation from rising. But the lessons of 
the  1970s  show  that  is  not  the  case.  As  you  may  recall,  we  ended  up  with  both  high 
unemployment and high inflation, which became known as the misery index. That is not a 
place we want to find ourselves again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Monetary policy 
Before discussing where monetary policy might go in relation to economic conditions, it might 
be helpful to review just how much accommodation we currently have in place. As you know, 
the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to support the 
recovery.  We  have  also  conducted  two  rounds  of  asset  purchases  that  have  more  than 
tripled  the  size  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  and  changed  its  composition  from  short-term 
Treasuries  to  longer-term  Treasuries  and  housing-related  securities,  mostly  mortgage-
backed securities. 
Many of these actions were taken at the height of the financial crisis and the ensuing deep 
recession. Yet, since then, as I have indicated, the economy has been healing, if somewhat 
more slowly than we would like, and the financial crisis has substantially abated. Of course, 
problems remain, but things are not nearly as bad or as gloomy as they were in 2009 and 
early 2010. At its latest meeting in March, the Federal Open Market Committee continued to 
hold to its statement that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels 
for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  least  through  late  2014”.  That  follows  a  structure  for  forward 
guidance that the Committee first began last August, when it said conditions were likely to 
warrant  exceptionally  low  rates  through  mid  2013.  Then  in  January,  it  pushed  back  that 
calendar date another 18 months. 
The  FOMC  has  also  announced  that  the  Fed  intends  to  continue  the  maturity  extension 
program, or “operation twist”, first launched last September and set to end in June. In this 
program,  the  Fed  is  buying  $400  billion  of  longer-term  Treasuries  and  selling  an  equal 
amount  of  shorter-term  Treasuries,  in  an  effort  to  reduce  long-term  yields  from  already 
historically low levels. The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its 
holdings of agency debt and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. 
You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September, because 
it  was  not  clear  to  me  that  further  monetary  policy  accommodation  was  appropriate  then. 
After all, inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year, as 
we have been discussing. Monetary policy should be responsive to economic conditions, and 
since  that  time,  unemployment  has  decreased,  and  inflation  is  above  target.  I  believe 
monetary  accommodation  is  still  called  for,  but  I  do  not  believe  it  should  be  as 
accommodative or aggressive as it was at the height of the crisis, when unemployment was 
over 10 percent and inflation was just 1 percent. Now that unemployment is at 8.3 percent 
and falling and inflation is over 2 percent and drifting up, we should not anticipate additional 
accommodation.  Indeed,  in  the  absence  of  some  shock  that  derails  the  recovery,  we  may 
well need to raise rates before the end of 2014. 
Nevertheless,  monetary  policy  should  be  responsive  to  economic  conditions.  In  my  view, 
current conditions do not warrant further accommodation. Yet, should economic conditions 
significantly deteriorate or the upside risks to inflation I have stressed fall and significant risk 
of deflation emerge, we should rethink our policy stance. But neither of these events seems 
likely to me at this juncture. 
I  believe  further  accommodation  at  this  stage  of  the  business  cycle  could  lead  us  down  a 
very treacherous path – one that would be ever more difficult for us to navigate and one that 
would  increase  the  already  substantial  risk  of  higher  inflation.  Yet,  the  problem  is  not  just 
inflation  risk  down  the  road.  Prolonged  efforts  to  hold  interest  rates  near  zero  can  lead  to 
financial market distortions and the misallocation of resources that could lead to more, not 
less, economic instability. 
Conclusion 
In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual 
growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the 
unemployment  rate  falling  gradually  over  time.  I  believe  inflation  expectations  will  be 
relatively stable and inflation will remain at moderate levels in the near term. However, with 
the very accommodative stance of monetary policy that has now been in place for more than 
three years, we must guard against the medium- and longer-term risks of inflation and further 
distortions such accommodation can create. 
Monetary policy should be determined by economic conditions and not by a calendar date. 
And we should resist any notion that we can solve all of our economic challenges simply by 
an ever more accommodative monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
