Andrew G Haldane: Financial arms races 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
the Institute for New Economic Thinking, Berlin, 14 April 2012. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches 
 Elephant  seals  have  got  too  big  for  their  beaches.  A  large  specimen  might  weigh  over 
8000 lbs (3700 kg).1 Their size has a simple evolutionary explanation. Large males fight for 
the right to mate with a whole beach full of females. For elephant seals it is, quite literally, 
winner-takes-all.  And  the  key  to  winning  is  simple  –  size. No-one  is  going  to  argue  with  a 
male  swinging  around  his  proboscis  on  the  beach.  In  that  way,  size  has  become  the 
dominant gene in the evolutionary trajectory of the elephant seal. 
But size is not costless for the elephant seal. It makes them easy prey on land. At times in 
the past, this has threatened their very existence. In the 18th century, their main land predator 
– man – hunted elephant seals for their blubber and fur. In the 19th century, their numbers fell 
rapidly  to  below  100  and  for  a  time  they  were  believed  to  be  extinct.2  Just  in  time, 
governments  intervened  to  place  restrictions  on  hunting,  nationally  and  internationally. 
Today, elephant seal numbers have swelled to above 800,000. The hand of government has 
protected them from man – and from themselves. 
The pattern is found throughout the animal world, in features as conspicuous as over-sized 
antlers  and  over-elaborate  plumage.3  In  many  cases,  these  physiological  features  have 
evolved  as  a  response  to  a  competitive  sexual  race,  a  Darwinian  tournament.  Matthew 
Ridley calls this the Red Queen Race from the Alice in Wonderland scene in which “however 
fast they went, they never seemed to pass anything.4 As elephant seals, deer and peacocks 
can attest, it is a race in which, in their quest to win, the species as a whole may end up as 
loser.  
So nature can deliver an evolutionary equilibrium which is sub-optimal for its participants, a 
market  failure.  The  more  intense  the  competitive  race,  the  greater  this  market  failure  or 
co-ordination  problem.  Elephant seals  would  prefer  to  co-ordinate  on  a  lower-blubber 
equilibrium,  deer  on  a  shorter-antler  equilibrium,  peacocks  on  a  smaller-tail  equilibrium. 
Competition  prevents  them  from  doing  so.  If  there  were  a  benign,  enlightened  zoological 
planner, able to compel less-conspicuous features, this would benefit not only each animal 
but the species as a whole. Unfortunately, there is not. 
 These inefficient Darwinian equilibria are as common in social as in natural systems. Garrett 
Hardin’s 1968 classic Tragedy of the Commons uses the metaphor of individual herdsmen 
grazing their cattle on common land. “Each man is locked into a system that compels him to 
increase his herd without limit – in a world that is limited. Ruin is the destination to which all 
men rush, each pursuing his own best interest in a society that believes in the freedom of the 
                                                 
1  Byatt et al (2001). 
2  Science News (1983). 
3  Frank (2011). 
4  Ridley (1993). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
commons”.5  Therein  lies  the  tragedy,  the  market  failure.  This  situation  is  made  more,  not 
less, tragic by unbridled competition.  
The tragedy of the commons is one example of an age-old problem of military arms races. 
The  incentives  of  individual  players,  and  outcomes  for  society,  are  much  the  same  as  in 
commons tragedies. Individual country incentives are to increase military might, to leapfrog 
opponents to improve national security. But this game of leapfrog is a Red Queen Race. The 
quest for national safety results in a steady rise in military spending and a steady fall in both 
societal and national security. The common good is jeopardised.  
These arms-race dynamics, and commons tragedies, have a history in economics too. It is 
not  just  plumage  that  is  conspicuous.  As  Thorstein  Veblen  set  out  at  the  end  of  the 
19th century, so too is consumption.6 Some goods serve as a signal of social standing: they 
are positional. Not everyone can have the apartment which is closest to the sea. As in other 
arms  races,  the  equilibrium  is  a  sub-optimal  one  –  a  competitive  shopping  war  in  which 
everyone conspicuously over-spends.  
And so it is with economic behaviour more generally. Surveys indicate that relative income 
and  wealth  are  crucial  to  perceptions  of  happiness.7  Economic  theories  of  wages,  asset 
prices, employment and consumption often embed concerns about relative standing.8 When 
making many of life’s choices, it appears to be important to “keep up with the Jones’s”, to 
earn and spend with reference to one’s neighbour. This concern with relative standing sows 
the seeds of arms-race behaviour.  
Finance  is  far  from  immune  to  these  pressures.  Indeed,  some  structural  features  of  the 
financial  system  make  it  particularly  prone  to  arms-race  behaviour.  One  such  structural 
feature  is  information  asymmetry.  Imperfections  in  information  generate  risk.  Finance 
provides  an  information  bridge  between  end-savers  and  investors,  thereby  prospectively 
reducing risk. Success in finance means forming that bridge at least cost and risk to those 
travelling across it.  
But  judging how  much  risk is  really  being  taken,  and  whether  it  is  being  managed  well,  is 
rarely  easy  for  either  end-savers  or  end-borrowers.  Risk  shows  its  true  face  perhaps  only 
once in a generation. So as much as investors might wish to risk-adjust their returns, this is a 
daunting  informational  task.  Facing  this  problem,  many  participants  in  the  financial  system 
(investors,  managers,  trustees,  remuneration  committees,  pay  consultants  etc.)  have 
resorted to simpler, indirect metrics to gauge skill in navigating risk.  
Ranking is one such performance metric. It provides a simple way of ordering the apples, the 
oranges – and in particular the lemons. Indeed, in the face of acute uncertainty, ranking can 
be  the  optimal  inference  strategy.9  This  explains  the  ubiquity  of  league  tables  across  the 
financial  sector  when 
financial 
deal-making. But ranking has an unfortunate side-effect. By hard-wiring relative standing, it 
builds in arms-race behaviour among financial participants. 
A second structural feature of finance, which generates similar incentive effects, is maturity 
transformation. Banking involves borrowing short in a capital-certain instrument to lend long 
through  a  capital-uncertain  instrument.  When  doubts  creep  in  about  this  balance  sheet 
structure, investors run on the bank knowing it is first-come, first-served. They are engaging 
investment  performance 
judging  everything 
from 
to 
                                                 
5  Hardin (1968). 
6  Veblen (1899). 
7  For example, Layard (2005). 
8  For example, Dusenberry (1949). 
9  Lazear and Rosen (1981). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  a  liquidity  arms  race,  penalising  those  behind  them  in  the  queue.  These  actions  are 
individually rational but collectively self-defeating if the bank goes bust.10  
A  third  structural  feature  is  that  some  markets  for  financial  services  are  winner-takes-all 
tournaments, like elephant seals seeking mates on the beach. Whether it is making markets 
in financial instruments, lead underwriting a debt or equity issue or advising on a merger or 
takeover,  there  is  typically  only  one  winner.  They  take  all.  Tournaments  like  these  lead  to 
arms-race  behaviour  as  firms  seek  to  leapfrog  one  another  in  their  competitive  quest  for 
top-dog status. In finance, this can lead to the winner being “cursed” and to everyone else 
over-competing by under-pricing risk.  
Financial  arms  races  are  scarcely  a  new  phenomenon.  How  different  history  might  have 
been had Chuck Prince heeded JP Morgan’s words from a century earlier: “I made a fortune 
getting out too soon”. Although not new, the liberalisation of financial services over the past 
30  years,  and  the  accompanying  increase  in  financial  scale,  has  probably  increased 
arms-race pressures. As banks have piled on the pounds, their fights on the beaches have 
intensified. The stronger those competitive forces, the quicker an arms race escalates.  
In what follows, I discuss three examples of modern-day arms races in the financial sector: 
races  in  return,  races  in  speed;  and  races  for  safety.  These  are  examples  from  the  past, 
present and future respectively. In each, a competitive battle for relative dominance results in 
an evolutionary equilibrium which is sub-optimal, individually and socially. They are latter-day 
tragedies of the financial commons.  
 By  any  historical  metric,  the  pre-crisis  period  was  an  extra-ordinary  one  for  the  financial 
sector. This is no better illustrated than in the returns to financial sector labour and capital. 
Between 1989 and 2007, the nominal gross value added of UK financial intermediaries rose 
more  than  threefold,  or  by  about  8%  on  average  per  year.  Over  the  same  period, 
value-added of the non-financial corporate sector rose by about 5½% per year. 
More commonly-used performance measures in banking are returns on equity and executive 
compensation.  These  rose  even  more  dramatically  over  the  period.  Returns  on  equity  for 
UK banks  rose  from  on  average  1%  in  1989  to  38%  by  2007.  This  pattern  was  mirrored 
among  other  major  global  banks  where  returns  rose  from  8%  to  22%  (Chart  1).  The  only 
even broadly comparable period in banking history was in the early part of the 20th century 
when UK banks’ return on equity averaged 13% (Chart 2).  
Measures  of  executive  compensation  rose  even  more  dramatically.  UK  bank  CEO 
compensation rose by 13% per year on average between 1989 and 2007, from $0.5 million 
to $4.3 million. US bank CEO compensation rose from $2.8 million to $26 million, also by 
13% per year (Chart 3). Over the same period, compensation in the non-financial sector rose 
by around 4% per year in the United States.  
As Thomas Phillipon and Ariell Reschef have shown, that Himalayan rise in bank executive 
salaries  made  the  financial  sector  salary  boom  of  even  the  1920s  look  like  a  foothill.11  In 
1980,  a  similarly-skilled  individual  earned  about  the  same  in  investment  banking  as  in  the 
non-financial sector. By 2005, that same person would be benefitting from a salary four times 
that of their non-financial sector counterpart.  
What explains this extra-ordinary period of high returns in finance? Arithmetically, the answer 
is simple – leverage. The pre-crisis rise in returns on bank equity can be explained almost 
                                                 
10  Diamond and Dybvig (1983), Brunnermeier and Oehmke (2010). 
11  Phillipon and Reschef (2009) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
fully by higher bank leverage.12 Equity returns inflated in line with bank balance sheets. So 
too  did  bank  CEO  salaries.  The  increase  in  pre-crisis  bank  CEO  salaries  can  be  fully 
explained,  arithmetically,  by  high  and  rising  returns  on  bank  equity.13  Javier  Gabaix  and 
Augustin Landier have shown that levels of CEO pay generally are well-explained by their 
market capitalisation – the bigger the market cap, the bigger the bonus.14  
But what drove those behaviours in the first place? It was a classic financial arms race, a 
case  not  so  much  of  “keeping  up  with  the  Jones’s”  as  “keeping  up  with  the  Goldmans”.15 
From the early 1990s onwards, league-leading firms began posting high returns on equity. 
Those firms with lower relative returns, who languished in the league, found themselves with 
sand kicked in their face. They felt obliged not just to keep pace but to leapfrog, to shake 
their tail feathers. The lower their rank, the greater these market pressures.16 
Facing these competitive pressures, the best-response strategy for languishing banks was 
simple – gear-up. They added to their waistlines to compete with the dominant male in the 
pack.  Like  Hardin’s  cattle  herdsmen,  they  multiplied  their  numbers.  Leverage  delivered  an 
instant leapfrog in returns on equity, a conspicous display of rich plumage.  
High  equity  returns  also  added  fuel  to  the  parallel  race  in  financial  sector  pay.  With 
equity-based  remuneration  contracts  increasingly  dominant,  high  equity  returns  added 
directly to pay packets. And with remuneration committees and pay consultants using relative 
pay as a reference, an arms race in remuneration took hold. As wages and equity returns 
ascended, the races in pay and returns joined forces. 
That spiral defined the pre-crisis arms race in financial returns. It generated an equilibrium of 
synchronously high returns and pay, as banks unilaterally militarised as defence against their 
competitors. But as in military arms races, the resulting outcome was a sub-optimally risky 
one.  High  equity  returns  came  through  risky  leverage.  And  high  pay,  especially  in 
equity-based forms, further encouraged risk-taking.17 The resulting high-leverage equilibrium 
sowed the seeds of the financial crisis.  
With hindsight, it was easy to spot this market failure, the co-ordination problem. Banks and 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole  would  have  been  better  off  had  there  been  a  benign, 
enlightened  regulatory  planner,  able  to  co-ordinate  banks  on  a  lower  return  equilibrium. 
Unfortunately, there was not. 
 Over  the  past  decade,  trading  in  financial  markets  has  undergone  a  technological 
revolution.18  The  frontier  of  this  revolution  is  defined  by  speed.  A  decade  ago,  trade 
execution  times  were  measured  in  seconds.  A  few  years  ago,  they  were  measured  in 
milliseconds. Today, they are measured in microseconds. Tomorrow, it will be nano-seconds 
or  pico-seconds.  For  technologists,  this  is  a  “race  to  zero”  –  the  promised  land  of  zero 
                                                 
12  Haldane (2011a). 
13  Haldane (2011a). 
14  Gabaix and Landier (2008). 
15  Aikman, Haldane and Nelson (2010) provide a formal, multiple equilibrium model of this phenomenon. 
16  McLean and Nocera (2010). 
17  Cheng et al (2010), Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2009). 
18  See, for example, Foresight (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
latency where execution times converge on the speed of light.19 For social scientists, this is a 
financial arms race, a sub-second game of leapfrog. 
In their quest for speed, a number of firms are also engaged in a positional race. The shorter 
the cable to the trading exchange, the faster a trade can be executed. This has encouraged 
some  firms  to  begin  relocating  their  servers  as  close  as  physically  possible  to  the  trading 
exchange – so-called “co-location”. This is the financial equivalent of seeking the apartment 
closest  to  the  sea.  It,  too,  fuels  arms-race  behaviour:  “however  fast  they  went,  they  never 
seemed to pass anything”.  
Accompanying this shift in speed has been a dramatic change in the composition of trading 
and market-making. During this decade, so-called High Frequency Trading (HFT) has come 
to  dominate.  It  now  accounts  for  anywhere  between  a  half  and  three-quarters  of  trading 
volume on the world’s major equity markets and a rising share of futures and other derivative 
markets.20  In  some  markets,  HFT  firms  have  become  the  de-facto  liquidity  providers  or 
market-makers.21  Historically,  designated  market-makers  were  often  granted  privileges  in 
return for agreeing to ensure trade and price continuity. No longer: the sleek have inherited 
the earth. 
This emerging topology of trading has had some clear benefits. This is manifest in narrower, 
sometimes  dramatically  narrower,  bid-ask  spreads  for  trading.22  For  equity  markets,  these 
have  fallen  by  an  order  of  magnitude  since  2004.  This  is  typically  taken  as  evidence  of 
improved market liquidity and price efficiency.  
But  this  dominant  role  for  HFT,  in  their  race  to  zero,  has  also  had  some  potentially  less 
benign  side-effects.  Take  order  cancellations.  All  market  participants  cancel  some  of  the 
orders  they  place  before  they  are  executed.  HFT  firms  have  taken  this  to  new  levels, 
submitting many  (many)  more  order  messages  than  they  are  willing  to  execute.  A  decade 
ago, ten orders might be cancelled for every  one executed. Today, that order cancellation 
ratio can be closer to 60 (Chart 4).  
There are some good reasons for order cancellation, including the arrival of price news after 
an order has been placed. But there are, too, some potentially jarring side-effects. With HFT 
firms serving as de-facto market-makers, but with the vast majority of their orders cancelled, 
many on-screen quotes may not actually be executable. This creates a potentially misleading 
picture of market resilience, a mirage of liquidity.  
Second, because bandwidth is finite, submitting multiple quotes may slow down activity by 
competitor  traders.  This  practice  of  clogging  competitors’  screens  is  known,  accurately  if 
inelegantly, as “quote stuffing”.23 It is a classic congestion externality or commons tragedy.  
These  externalities  are  not  hypothetical.  They  have  already  shown  their  face  in  the 
extra-ordinary  dynamics  in  market  prices  for  an  hour  on  6  May  2010,  the  “Flash  Crash”. 
Market dynamics during that period are yet to be given a fully-convincing explanation. But 
some aspects are documented. One is the disappearance of liquidity and market-making by 
HFT firms for a period during the Flash Crash. The mirage of liquidity proved just that. That 
evaporation  appears  to  have  played  a  key  role  in  propagating  stress  during  the  Flash 
Crash.24  
                                                 
19  “Latency” refers to the time it takes from sending an order to it being executed.  
20  Haldane (2011b), Mackenzie (2011). 
21  Menkveld (2012). 
22  Angel et al (2010). 
23  Egginton et al (2012). 
24  CFTC-SEC (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
So  too  did  message  traffic  congestion.  One  side-effect  was  to  slow-down  price  discovery 
across exchanges. Many traders firms found themselves observing stale prices. As a result, 
identical  stocks  traded  at  different  prices  across  exchanges  (Chart  5).  In  principle,  this 
represented an arbitrage opportunity. In practice, arbitrage relies on costless trading and, at 
that time, trades could not have been executed at any price. 
The Flash Crash was short-lived. Some have argued the lessons have been learned. Yet it 
appears to have been anything but a flash in the pan. In the period since, researchers have 
identified  a  large  number  of  “mini-Flash  Crashes”,  with  temporary  dislocations  in  prices  in 
markets  as  varied  as  Japanese  yen  and  cocoa  futures.25  As  with  the  Flash  Crash,  there 
appears to be no convincing explanation for these gyrations.  
The  uncertainties  and  externalities  associated  with  the  race  to  zero  are  one  candidate 
explanation.  Liquidity  mirages  and  message  traffic  congestion  are  nibbling  away  at  the 
common good of market stability. The competitive quest for individual speed risks a fragile 
evolutionary  equilibrium.  If  there  were  a  benign,  enlightened  regulatory  planner,  able  to 
co-ordinate the actions of traders on a lower-velocity equilibrium, the Flash Crash might have 
been forestalled. Unfortunately, there was not. 
 The pre-crisis quest for return has, over the past few years, been replaced by a quest for 
safety.  Return  on  capital  is  no  longer  investors’  priority.  Return  of  capital  is.  That 
risk-aversion is manifest in high risk premia on a wide range of risky assets and abnormally 
low yields on a range of risk-free assets. It is also evident in investors’ desire for financial 
instruments  which  are  secured  on  high-quality  collateral.  Investors  are  taking  literally  the 
notion of a security. 
That  desire  for  security  has  had  a  particularly  pronounced  impact  on  banks,  which  are 
refinancing  large  legacy  asset  portfolios.  The  cost  of  refinancing  those  portfolios  has 
increased  dramatically  since  the  crisis,  particularly  for  instruments  lower-down  the  creditor 
hierarchy.  The  cost  of  unsecured  borrowing  by  European  banks  has  increased  roughly 
27-fold since 2007, while the cost of borrowing against high quality assets has risen “only” 
16-fold.  
These relative price effects have shaped importantly banks’ financing choices. A large and 
rising fraction of global banks’ refinancing has taken place on secured terms. In 2007, the 
majority of term refinancing of European banks’ debt was on an unsecured basis. By 2011, 
secured  and  unsecured  refinancing  were  roughly  balanced.  In  2012,  secured  financing  is 
likely to take the lead (Chart 6).  
For example, euro-area banks have roughly €1.1 trillion to refinance in 2012, 80% of which is 
unsecured funding coming due. So far during 2012, only 20% has been rolled on unsecured 
terms, with the lion’s share on a secured basis (Chart 7). Central bank financing has played 
its part in this shift. Of the €600 billion raised on secured terms by euro-area banks so far in 
2012, 80% has been associated with the ECB’s long-term refinancing operations.  
Gauging levels of secured financing by commercial banks is difficult. Technically, the fraction 
of  banks’  liabilities  that  are  secured  against  their  assets  is  often  called  encumbrance.  But 
data on banks’ encumbrance levels are thin on the ground. Where data exist, they are rarely 
on  a  consistent  basis  across  banks.  Some  recent  studies  have  suggested  that  the 
encumbrance ratios of banking systems within Europe may lie anywhere between 3% and 
40% of their liabilities.26 
                                                 
25  Johnson et al (2012). 
26  For example, Barclays Capital (2012). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
That  is  the  arithmetic.  But  what  explains  this  behaviour?  This,  too,  appears  to  have  an 
arms-race  element.  Consider  an  unsecured  creditor  about  to  refinance.  The  larger  the 
existing fraction of secured financing, and the greater the uncertainty about this fraction, the 
greater will be their incentive to seek security. Not to do so runs the risk of other creditors 
leapfrogging ahead of them in the seniority queue. Creditors’ incentives are very similar to 
those during a bank run, except with investors now seeking security rather than immediacy.27 
As with a bank run, this dynamic risks becoming self-fulfilling. The greater the level of, and 
risk  around,  encumbrance  levels,  the  higher  the  return  unsecured  creditors  will  demand 
given  the  risks  of  subordination.  And  the  higher  this  cost,  the  greater  banks’  incentives  to 
finance instead on secured terms. Both banks and their individual investors have incentives 
to encumber the balance sheet by progressively – and self-fulfillingly – larger amounts. There 
is an arms race spiral. 
Yet the equilibrium of this seniority game is unlikely to be an optimal one, either for individual 
investors  or  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  To  queue-jump  is  ultimately  futile  for 
creditors; it is another Red Queen Race. Not everyone can be at the front of the seniority 
queue. Indeed, at high levels of encumbrance, the financial system as a whole may even be 
riskier,  as  it  is  more  susceptible  to  pro-cyclical  swings  in  the  underlying  value  of  banks’ 
assets. The quest for individual security generates system-wide instability. 
So under an arms race to safety, the like of which may be currently underway, the outcome 
for  the  financial  system  could  be  both  socially  and  individually  inefficient.  If  there  were  a 
benign, enlightened regulatory planner, able collectively to co-ordinate investors and banks 
on a lower-encumbrance equilibrium, this race for safety could be forestalled. Unfortunately, 
there is not. 
 What public policy lessons might be drawn from these financial arms races? First, because 
they  generate  sub-optimal  outcomes,  policy  intervention  can  be  justified.  This  policy 
intervention ought to act like a self-denying ordinance for financial firms, a protection against 
themselves. It ought not to be a tug-of-war between regulator and regulated. Rather, it aims 
to defuse a competitive tug-of-war among regulated firms. 
Second,  to  be  effective  this  intervention  needs  to  constrain  behaviour  across  the  financial 
system as a whole; it requires multilateral disarmament. Acting to constrain only those at the 
top of the league (those bearing most risk, trading at greatest speed, seeking greatest safety) 
will  do  nothing  to  defuse  competitive  pressures  lower  down  the  pecking  order.  Indeed,  it 
might  even  conceivably  intensify  the  competitive  scramble.  In  the  language  of  financial 
regulation,  policy  needs  to  have  a  macro-prudential,  as  distinct  from  micro-prudential, 
perspective.28 
The need for a system-wide perspective to preserve the public good of the commons was 
recognised  by  Garret  Hardin  almost  50  years  ago.  It  has  been  increasingly  recognised  by 
financial regulators over the past five years. Over that period, we have seen the emergence 
of explicitly macro-prudential agencies charged with safeguarding systemic risk in a number 
of countries. In the United States we now have a multi-agency Financial Stability Oversight 
Council (FSOC), in Europe the multi-country European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and in 
the UK the Financial Policy Committee (FPC).  
                                                 
27  Gai and Shin (2004) develop a model of a race to the exit, with investors seeking progressively to shorten the 
maturity of their investment to reduce risk. 
28  Bank of England (2011a). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Third, what tools might such agencies bring to bear in tackling financial arms races in return, 
speed and safety? With hindsight, it is not difficult to identify instruments which might have 
slowed  the  pre-crisis  race  for  excessive  returns  in  banking.  The  most  direct  and  effective 
would have been to place tighter constraints on banks’ leverage. This would have defused 
the  return  on  equity  race  at  source.  The  FPC  has  prioritised  the  leverage  ratio  as  a 
macro-prudential instrument in its recommendations to date.29  
A complementary approach would have been to require banks to adopt performance metrics 
which did a better job of adjusting for risk. At the end of last year, the FPC raised concerns 
about the use of return on equity metrics by banks which generate incentives to shrink equity 
to  hit  return  targets.30  Some  institutional  investors  have  raised  similar  concerns  –  and  are 
showing encouraging signs of acting on those concerns. After all, it is not difficult to devise 
performance metrics which would do a better job of adjusting for risk, such as return on bank 
assets.  
There is some evidence recently of return on equity targets having become a less important 
determinant  of  some  banks’  portfolio  allocation  and  executive  pay  decisions.  But  equity 
returns remain hardwired into both to some degree. Moreover, many global banks continue 
to  publish  return  on  equity  targets.  This  continuing  attachment  to  counter-productive 
performance  metrics  is  a  puzzle  –  and  a  worry.  As  long  as  it  remains  the  case,  it  raises 
questions about whether the lessons from the crisis have truly been learned. 
Races in financial sector pay can also be tackled, albeit indirectly, by placing restrictions on 
leverage  and  by  avoiding  linking  remuneration  to  return  on  equity  targets.  Restrictions  on 
cash  distributions  by  banks  to  shareholders  and  staff  can  also  help.  This  has  been  a 
favoured  recommendation  of  the  FPC  over  the  past  six  months,  as  a  means  of  bolstering 
UK banks’  capital  defences  against  risks  in  the  euro-area.  In  response,  there  is  some 
evidence of UK banks having modestly reduced cash distributions to staff in 2011.  
A more direct approach to tackling pay races would be to set remuneration codes. This can 
be  justified  as  a  regulatory  means  of  leaning  against  excessive  risk-taking  incentives 
– incentives which might be fanned by remunerating in equity.31 These have already been 
developed by the Financial Stability Board internationally and by the FSA in the UK. They 
specify,  for  example,  maximum  ratios  of  cash  distribution  and  minimum  periods  of  pay 
deferral.  Yet  whether  these  codes  go  far  enough  in  aligning  pay  and  performance,  in 
equating risk and return, is an open question.  
For  example,  consider  the  issue  of  pay  horizons.  Bonuses  are  typically  set  on  an  annual 
cycle, with deferral or claw-back for maybe three or four years if guidelines are followed. But 
this  return  cycle  is  materially  shorter  than  the  typical  risk  cycle.  The  risk  cycle  might  last 
perhaps  20  years.  This  duration  mismatch  means  it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  risk  and 
reward may get out of kilter in the financial sector. The current environment is evidence of 
such a mismatch: while bank performance has fallen off a cliff, executive pay remains close 
to pre-crisis Himalayan heights.  
Lengthening  deferral  or  claw-back  periods,  say  to  10  years  or  more  on  an  internationally 
co-ordinated basis, would help close this gap in horizons, between risk and return. It would 
elongate the period of liability bank managers face when they take on risk. This would better 
align firm-level risk-taking incentives with the societal optimum. Avoiding relative benchmarks 
in the setting of remuneration would also reduce the risk of an upwards-only pay escalator.  
                                                 
29  Bank of England (2012). 
30  Bank of England (2011b). 
31  Bebchuk and Fried (2003). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
There  is  scope,  too,  for  a  reconsideration  of  the  instruments  used  for  remuneration.  The 
focus  to  date  has  been  on  non-cash  distributions,  often  in  equity.  But  paying  in  equity 
appears  in  some  pre-crisis  cases  to  have  exacerbated  risk-taking  incentives,  acting  as  a 
disincentive to raising new equity and encouraging gambles for resurrection. Remunerating 
in  long-maturity  debt,  or  contingent  capital  instruments,  may  do  a  better  job  of  aligning 
risk-taking incentives with the public good than either cash or equity.32 
Speed  races  in  financial  markets  potentially  generate  societal  sub-optimality,  for  example 
due  to  message  traffic  congestion.  As  with  road  traffic  congestion,  one  way  to  tackle  that 
would be to place direct restrictions on excessive message traffic – for example, by setting 
maximum order cancellation ratios. The US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) are 
considering  this  option.  So  too  are  the  authorities  in  Europe  under  the  draft  proposals 
contained in MiFID II. These are welcome moves. 
New trading topologies also run the risk of turning the miracle of higher liquidity into a mirage 
in  situations  of  stress.  One  potential  response  would  be  to  strengthen  market-making 
commitments. The past few years have seen a dilution of some of those commitments. For 
example, in 2008 the New York Stock Exchange relaxed its market-making commitments on 
maximum bid-ask spreads. One upshot was that, during the Flash Crash, the prices of some 
stocks hit zero and others $9999.99 – so-called “stub quotes”.  
Following  the  Flash  Crash,  the  SEC  moved  swiftly  to  ban  stub  quotes.  This  effectively 
re-introduced a requirement for market-makers to ensure price continuity. It has also been 
considering enhanced  market-making  obligations  or  incentives  to  improve  the  resilience  of 
market  liquidity  in  situations  of  stress.  In  Europe,  MiFID  II  is  looking  at  the  scope  for 
strengthening  market-maker  commitments  for  similar  reasons.  This  would  be  a  welcome 
turning-back of the trading clock – a clock otherwise at risk of running too fast.  
Strengthening  circuit-breakers  across  exchanges  can  also  help  to  restore  market  order  in 
situations of stress. They are means of automatically, if temporarily, halting the trading race if 
it  gets  out  of  hand  –  a  multilateral  disarmament  device.  Following  the  Flash  Crash,  the 
US authorities  altered  circuit-breaking  rules  so  that  they  applied  on  an  across-exchange 
basis to prevent stress simply migrating between exchanges. It would be useful if the revised 
trading proposals in Europe under MiFID II contained similar provisions. 
Finally, safety races by bank investors are being explored by financial regulators. Over the 
past six months, the FPC has paid increasing attention to the systemic risk posed by rising 
levels  of  bank  encumbrance.  The  FSA  recently  undertook  a  survey  of  UK  banks’  level  of 
encumbrance which the FPC will consider later this year.33 The issue is also being looked at 
internationally.  
There  are  a  variety  of  policy  options  to  forestall  self-fulfilling  safety  races.  One  would  be 
greater  transparency  about  levels  of  encumbrance.  Lack  of  transparency  creates  an 
uncertainty  premium  in  unsecured  borrowing  rates,  encourages  further  secured  financing 
and  thereby  speeds  up  the  seniority  race.  Reducing  that  premium  through  greater 
transparency would tend to slow the race, if not stall it. An option for stalling the race would 
be to place maximum limits on levels of bank asset encumbrance. These would be similar in 
principle to prudential limits on bank leverage and large exposures. 
Systems, both social and natural, are characterised by a survival of the fittest. But for both, 
that competitive race can at times generate unhealthy outcomes for the system as a whole. 
                                                  
32  Haldane (2011), Mehran and Mollineaux (2012). 
33  Bank of England (2012), Bank of England (2011b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
In finance, these tragedies of the commons are, if anything, more likely than in other fields 
(seas,  beaches  and  forests).  The  financial  crisis  attests  to  that.  If  there  were  a  benign, 
enlightened regulatory planner, able to redirect competitive forces, this could potentially avert 
future tragedies of the financial commons. Fortunately, there is.  
References 
at 
at 
2012”, 
available 
Aikman,  D,  Haldane,  A  G  and  Nelson,  B  (2010),  “Curbing  the  Credit  Cycle”,  available  at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2010/speech463.pdf. 
Angel J, Harris L and Spatt C (2010), “Equity Trading in the 21st Century”, Marshall School 
of Business working paper. 
Bank  of  England  (2012),  “Record  of  the  interim  Financial  Policy  Committee  Meeting, 
16 March 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Documents/records/fpc/pdf/2012/record1203.pdf. 
Bank  of  England  (2011a),  “Instruments  of  Macroprudential  Policy  –  A  Discussion  Paper”, 
available 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/other/ 
financialstability/discussionpaper111220.pdf. 
Bank  of  England  (2011b),  “Record  of  the  interim  Financial  Policy  Committee  Meeting, 
23 November  2011”,  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/ 
records/fpc/pdf/2011/record1112.pdf. 
Barclays Capital (2012), “Over Promising? Encumbrance at European Banks”, 8 March. 
Byatt,  A,  Fothergill,  A  and  Holmes,  M  (2001),  “The  Blue  Planet:  A  Natural  History  of  the 
Oceans”, British Broadcasting Corporation. 
Bebchuk,  L  A  and  Fried,  J  M  (2003),  “Executive  Compensation  as  an  Agency  Problem”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17(3), pages 71–92.  
Brunnermeier,  M  K  and  Oehmke,  M  (2010),  “The  Maturity  Rat  Race”,  National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, Working Paper 16607.  
Cheng,  I  H,  Hong,  H  and  Scheinkman,  J  (2010),  “Yesterday’s  Heroes:  Compensation  and 
Creative Risk-Taking”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 16176.  
Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission (2010), 
“Findings regarding the market events of May 6, 2010”, Report of the Staffs of the CFTC and 
SEC to the Joint Advisory Committee on Emerging Regulatory Issues, September 30. 
Diamond, D W and Dybvig, P H (1983), “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity”, Journal 
of Political Economy 91(3), pages 401–19. 
Dusenberry, J S (1949), “Income, Saving and the Theory of Consumer Behavior”, Harvard 
University Press. 
Egginton, J, Van Ness, B and Van Ness R (2012), “Quote Stuffing”, University of Mississippi, 
Working Paper Series.  
Fahlenbrach, R and Stulz, R M (2010), “Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis”, Journal 
of Financial Economics, Vol. 99 (1), pages 11–26.  
Foresight  Project  (2011),  “The  Future  of  Computer  Trading  in  Financial  Markets”, 
Government Office for Science Working Paper.  
Frank,  R  H  (2011),  “The  Darwin  Economy:  Liberty,  Competition,  and  the  Common  Good”, 
Princeton University Press.  
Gabaix, X and Landier, A (2008), “Why has CEO pay increased so much”, Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 123 (1), pages 49–100. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A 
A 
G 
G 
at 
at 
at 
to 
race 
(and 
“The 
rights 
zero”, 
A  G 
“Capital 
“Control 
(2011b), 
(2011c), 
available 
available 
wrongs)”, 
Gai, P and Shin, H S (2004), “Debt Maturity Structure with Pre-emptive Creditors”, Economic 
Letters, 85(2), pages 195–200.  
Haldane, 
available 
(2011a), 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech525.pdf. 
Haldane, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech509.pdf. 
Haldane, 
Discipline”, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2011/speech484.pdf. 
Hardin, G (1968), “The Tragedy of the Commons”, Science, New Series, Vol. 162, No. 3859, 
pages 1243–1248. 
Johnson, N, Zhao, G, Hunsader, E, Meng, J, Ravindar, A, Carran, S and Tivnan, B (2012), 
“Financial black swans driven by ultrafast machine ecology”, arXiv Working Paper.  
Layard, R (2005), “Happiness: Lessons from A New Science”, Allen Lane.  
Lazear, E P and Rosen, S (1981), “Rank-order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts”, 
Journal of Political Economy 89 (5), pages 841–864. 
Mackenzie, D (2011), “How to Make Money in Microseconds”, London Review of Books. 
Mehran,  H  and  Mollineaux,  L  (2012),  “Corporate  Governance  of  Financial  Institutions”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 539.  
McLean,  B  and  Nocera,  J  (2010),  “All  the  Devils  are  Here:  The  Hidden  History  of  the 
Financial Crisis”, Portfolio.  
Menkveld,  A  J 
(2012), 
EFA 2011 Paper; AFA 2012 Paper.  
Philippon, T and Reshef, A (2009), “Wages and Human Capital in the US Financial Industry: 
1909–2006”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 14644. 
Ridley, M (1993), “The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature”, Harper Collins.  
Science News (1983), “Elephant seals rise from near extinction”,  Science News, Vol. 123, 
Issue 9.  
Veblen,  T  (1899),  “The  Theory  of  the  Leisure  Class:  An  Economic  Study  of  Institutions”, 
Macmillan and Company, New York.  
“High  Frequency  Trading  and 
the  New-Market  Makers”,  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  Chart 1: 
Return on equity for global banks 
Source: Capital IQ, published accounts and Bank calculations. 
Chart 2: 
Return on equity for UK banks 
  Source:  Capie  and  Webber  (1985),  Billings  and  Capie  (2011),  British 
Bankers’ Association, Megabank and Bank calculations. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 3:  
Global banks’ CEO compensation 
Source: Published accounts and Bank calculations. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
Chart 4: 
Order cancellation ratios 
Source: Angel et al (2010), Nanex and Bank calculations. 
Notes: Data before 2010 are for the Nasdaq exchange only and refer to 
the ratio of cancellations to transactions. Data for 2010 onwards refer to 
all US exchanges and are the ratios of quotes to transactions. 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5: 
Flash crash dynamics 
Price difference ($)
0.40
0.30
Dow Jones (RHS)
0.20
0.10
Index
11,000
10,800
10,600
10,400
10,200
10,000
Difference in max and 
min price of GE 
shares (LHS)
0.00
14:20
14:30
14:40
15:00
9,800
15:10
14:50
Time
 Source: Bloomberg, NANEX and Bank calculations. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
Composition of European banks’ term debt issuance 
Chart 6: 
Source: Dealogic and Bank calculations. 
Chart 7: 
Euro-area banks’ refinancing challenge, 2012 
  Source: Dealogic, CPWare, Crane, SNL Financial, National Central Banks and Bank 
calculations. 
(a)  Senior unsecured funding issued in public markets with a maturity greater than 18 
months. 
(b)  Covered bond issuance and net take up of central bank repo funding as part of the  
two ECB 3-year LTRO operations. 
(c)  Commercial paper issuance and exposures to US money market funds.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 16 
 