K C Chakrabarty: BCSBI, customer service and consumer 
protection – issues and challenges 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
The Annual Conference of Principal Code Compliance Officers, Mumbai, 24 February 2012. 
 Assistance provided by Shri D G Kale in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  A.C.Mahajan,  Chairman  BCSBI,  Shri  M.M.  Chitale,  Shri  H.N.Sinor,  Shri  C.  Krishnan, 
members  of  the  Governing  Council  of  BCSBI,  Shri  N  Raja  CEO,  BCSBI,  delegates  to  the 
Conference, Ladies and Gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today and 
share with you some of my thoughts concerning quality of customer care and service in our 
banking industry. 
The BCSBI has been in existence for six years now and has done a commendable job in this 
short span of time. Two codes have already been put out and have been / will be reviewed 
from  time  to  time.  The  question  that  has  always  cropped  up  in  my  mind  is  about  the 
standards  of  customer  service.  If  we  were  to  go  by  the  spirit  of  the  Codes  issued  by  the 
BCSBI,  adherence  to  the  Codes  is  the  minimum  acceptable  benchmark  for  quality  of 
customer care. If that is so how far are we from achieving excellence in this area? As we 
expect our children to do better in every exam and are absolutely ruthless or unhappy if the 
child  has  secured  the  minimum  marks  required  to  be  declared  successful,  in  the  same 
analogy mere adherence to the Code does not mean we are doing everything right to make 
the grade. The question therefore is what is it that we need to do going beyond the Code, 
especially  this  being  a  voluntary  effort  which  many  banks  have  willingly  decided  to 
undertake. The BCSBI codes do have a requirement for banks to act “fairly and reasonably” 
towards  customers,  but  in  a  majority  of  the  cases  it  appears  to  amount  to  little  more  than 
sticking  to  the  contracts  and  agreements  customers  effectively  sign  up  to  when  opening 
accounts or taking a loan. There are certain areas where a tougher more explicit code would 
be worth considering. I will be touching on some of these areas as we go ahead. 
The first and foremost issue that springs to my mind is that of attitude. The key to a prompt, 
effective and courteous customer service emanates from having the right attitude. There are 
many institutions that declare the famous quote by Mahatma Gandhi that customer is king 
and  the  very  reason  for  the  existence  of  the  enterprise.  But  is  it  reflected  in  employee 
behaviour  at  the  ground  level.  Does  the  Board/  Top  Management  have  the  right  attitude 
towards  customers.  Do  the  banks  have  a  policy  of  assigning  a  unique  identity  to  all 
customers? If not, can we accurately say how many customers a bank has? Most of the time, 
the figures given are that of the number of accounts. But by doing so, essentially we are not 
differentiating  between  a  ledger  page  and  a  customer.  So,  in  my  opinion,  a  radical 
transformation of attitude right from Top Management to ground level employees is the first 
step towards improving customer service. The challenge for all of us in the banking industry 
is  to  develop  the  right  kind  of  attitude  to  render  service.  Can  we  define  the  standards  of 
behaviour? Perhaps it may be easier to identify the elements of unacceptable behaviour and 
try to redress and improve the situation. The behaviour standards especially of the front-line 
managers are implicit in the acceptance of the codes by the banks. 
Communication is at the root of effective customer care in a service industry especially like 
banking, where the documents, terms and conditions, practices & precedents are all heavily 
loaded  against  the  customer.  How  do  you  communicate  with  the  customers  when  a 
complaint  is  lodged?  Do  you  inform  him  how  soon  it  will  be  resolved  and  give  him  a 
complaint number? How effective and timely is your customer grievance redressal system? 
Do you have a system of analysing the average time taken to resolve complaints and monitor 
the consumer complaints? In an arrangement that is based on terms of agreement that are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that 
they  are 
reasonable.  And 
the  pricing  must  be 
unequal, enforceability of contracts poses a major challenge. Introduction of Most Important 
Terms  and  Conditions  (MITC)  for  all  major  products  and  services  offered  by  banks  is 
expected to help the consumers analyze the suitability of a product from their perspective. 
Many bank customers walk into a branch with a rough sketch of what they want. We must 
understand  the  customer’s  needs  and  sell  him  what  he  /  she  needs.  The  MITCs  must  be 
distinguishable from marketing or promotional material. Web based information is becoming 
an  extensive  source  of  communication  with  bank  customers.  How  many  banks  can  give  a 
commitment that they will promptly update their web sites to reflect any and every change in 
pricing of their products / services, MITCs governing important products / services, change in 
working hours, change in key personnel etc.? 
Compensation  policies  –  The  banks  have  framed  and  placed  in  public  domain  their 
compensation policies for customers for any lapses or loss that may be caused by a mistake 
on the bank’s part. The question that arises is, in how many cases have the banks paid such 
compensation on realizing their mistake and without the customer begging for it? An example 
in point can be the case of cheques vanishing from the drop boxes in which they have been 
deposited  by  the  customers.  Can  the  banks  come  forward  and  commit  that  it  is  their 
responsibility to ensure safety of instruments in the drop boxes? When a customer complains 
about such things he / she is made to run from pillar to post to gather evidence to establish 
the fact that the cheque was indeed dropped by him / her in the box meant for the purpose. 
Should the banks not compensate him/her on the principle of reciprocity?  
In  many  fields  and  in  different  countries  regulators  determine  the  price.  But,  the  financial 
sector regulator in India does not do so. Therefore whatever charges are levied it is expected 
that 
transparent  and 
non-discriminatory. Globally, regulators are expected to usher in much stricter regulations in 
the area of fair treatment to customers. 
Coverage  of  special  category  customers  –  As  we  move  towards  introducing  global  best 
practices in banking, an important element in the area of customer care is the special focus 
which  students,  senior  citizens,  physically  challenged  persons,  vulnerable  sections  of  the 
population  must  get  from  the  financial  services  industry.  These  initiatives  too  need  to  be 
codified and their implementation monitored by the code compliance officers. 
Lending responsibility – At a time when all banks are in a hurry to be one up on the other, at 
least  in  the  matter  of  advertising  speedier  sanction  of  loans,  responsible  lending  is  worth 
considering. I agree that people should take responsibility for their borrowing and anything 
that could limit people’s economic freedom should be considered with caution. But the code 
currently  side-steps  the  issue  by  leaving  the  test  for  responsible  lending  as  whatever  the 
banks “believe” the borrower can pay back. 
To err is human, to confess is divine – I would be happy to see the banks revisiting the cases 
of  customers  who  had  been  wronged  but  there  was  no  restitution  in  their  favour  because 
they did not complain either to the bank or to the Banking Ombudsman. Why is it that the 
regulator  should  be  forced  to  look  at  class  action?  The  BCSBI  may  like  to  examine  the 
possibility  of  incorporating  such  a  provision  in  the  Bank’s  Code  of  Commitment  to 
Customers. 
Disclosures – Bank staff do not tell customers when they are trying to sell a credit card or an 
insurance policy or a mutual fund that they may be incentivized through some compensation 
schemes. At the very least setting out the terms of incentive schemes in a customer brochure 
may  be  acceptable.  There  are  instances  where  the  pricing  and  operational  freedom 
conferred on banks is by means of general guidelines that may become a subject matter of 
interpretation. How many banks are willing to go an extra mile and interpret the guidelines in 
favour of customers? The discriminatory practices that banks adopt while sanctioning loans 
on a floating interest rate basis to new borrowers is possibly the best example in this regard. 
A factor which impedes easy comparison of rates among banks is differences in processing 
charges/ documentation fee/ renewal fee / compounding periods, etc. One of the measures 
fair, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  rise  and  are 
transactions,  card  banking  are  on 
which is globally adopted is to announce an Annualised Effective Rate taking into account all 
types of charges over and above the interest rate. The same can be done with deposit rate. 
This will be great enabler for easy comparison. 
Family law proceedings / succession issues – No matter what the terms and conditions of a 
joint account or nomination facility are, bankers still get fixated on the legal provisions that 
were  never  a  part  of  the  account  opening  process,  while  settling  claims  of  deceased 
depositors or transferring the amounts to the nominees. The practices in this regards not only 
differ  from  one  bank  to  another  but  within  the  same  bank  there  are  diametrically  opposite 
view  points  at  two  different  branches  on  such  matters.  Nobody  is  keen  on  following  the 
model  policy  evolved  by  the  IBA  for  the  purpose.  Can  the  BCSBI’s  codes  be  made  more 
effective to address these issues faced by the common persons? There are problems faced 
by  couples  busy  in  divorce  proceedings,  when  it  comes  to  transfer  of  title  deeds  of 
immoveable properties where a home loan may have been jointly taken in the name of the 
husband and wife. These are the new realities of a fast changing world and we must address 
these as a part of our commitment to the bank customers. 
There are a couple of areas which deserves our attention from a customer protection point of 
view. The first is that of electronic banking/card banking. Electronic funds transfers, internet 
based  banking 
throwing  up 
issues / challenges one might not have anticipated. The banking agreement is so worded as 
to afford no right to the customer and is extremely lopsided. Banks are not responsible for 
any  unauthorized  transactions  even  if  by  their  employees.  In  fact,  given  an  institutions 
resources,  the  onus  should  be  on  banks  to  prove  that  the  individual  customer  has 
compromised his userid/password. Making networks safe and sound is the responsibility of 
banks,  there  must  be  in  place  a  code  of  conduct  for  addressing  issues  in  the 
non-face - to - face transactions domain. This code could help evaluate the preparedness of 
individual  banks  that  are  willing  to  offer  such  services.  This  code  could  cover  networking 
arrangements, audit trails, complaint investigation and resolution procedure, liability in case 
of system or equipment malfunction, liability for unauthorized transactions etc. The second is 
when 
rehabilitation  of  sick  units,  or  when  small 
borrowers/ farmers are in distress. While banks do advertise that they have good framework 
for rehabilitation of sick units, but a look at the percent of sick units being nursed back tells a 
different story. There is a need to improve the number of units that are successfully nursed 
back.  Lastly,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  issue  of  selling  third  party  products  such  as 
insurance,  capital  markets  etc.  which  is  becoming  increasingly  relevant  from  a  customer 
protection point of view. Whether the customers especially those small and poor understand 
what is being sold to them. 
Electronic  funds  transfers,  internet  based  banking  transactions  are  on  the  rise  and  are 
throwing up issues / challenges one might not have anticipated. Making networks safe and 
sound is the responsibility of banks, there must be in place a code of conduct for addressing 
issues  in  the  non-face  -  to  -  face  transactions  domain.  This  code  could  help  evaluate  the 
preparedness  of  individual  banks  that  are  willing  to  offer  such  services.  This  code  could 
cover  networking  arrangements,  audit 
investigation  and  resolution 
procedure,  liability  in  case  of  system  or  equipment  malfunction,  liability  for  unauthorized 
transactions etc. 
Review of the Codes – The BCSBI has reviewed one of the two codes issued by it and the 
other one is in the process of being updated. Do we have a mechanism of an independent 
review  of  the  codes  with  feedback  from  all  the  stakeholders  who  are  interested  in  the 
subject?  Australia,  for  example,  mandatorily  undertakes  a  review  of  its  Code  of  Banking 
Practices every three years. Can we have some such arrangement in place? 
The two sets of codes having been issued by the BCSBI and taken up for implementation by 
banks, there is a case for examining the need for lengthy documents that banks still insist on 
getting executed especially in relation to loan products. Can we really and seriously make an 
trails,  complaint 
the  customer 
in  distress- 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
effort to rationalize and simplify the documents and documentation process and publish it as 
our commitment to the customers? 
There are new avenues of taking banking to the people. One important challenge in this area 
is  the  success  of  the  BC  led  banking  /  financial  inclusion  model.  The  code  of  bank’s 
commitments  to  customers’  needs  to  articulate  the  actions  to  be  taken  by  the  bank  while 
selecting  a  BC  and  the  training  that  he  /  she  will  be  provided  to  undertake  or  execute 
financial transactions on behalf of the bank. “Financial Inclusion” is high on the agenda of the 
Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  Can  we  evolve  a  code  for  development  and 
implementation of financial inclusion plans and place them in the public domain as a part of 
our corporate social responsibility? 
Credit information bureaus are of very recent origin in India. Many individuals are not aware 
of  the  existence  of  such  institutions  and  are  shocked  to  find  their  names  appearing  in  the 
defaulters list making it difficult for them to access the banking system for their credit needs. 
The  banks  need  to  take  up  customer  education  in  this  regard  as  a  part  of  their  code  of 
commitments. The reporting methodology, implications of reporting, rectification mechanism, 
and remedy for wrong reporting must be properly communicated to all the customers. 
Financial  literacy  and  education  are  becoming  increasingly  important.  The  inputs  in  this 
regard could be made available in different formats including large print, Braille, DVD, audio 
etc. 
The  RBI  had  set  up  a  Committee,  under  the  Chairmanship  of  former  SEBI  Chairman 
Shri M Damodaran,  to  look  into  the  entire  gamut  of  customer  service  related  issues  in  the 
banking industry including a review of the Banking Ombudsman Scheme. The total number 
of  recommendations  made  by  the  Committee  in  its  report  was  232.  Of  these  total 
recommendations,  22  are  to  be  examined  by  the  RBI  /  Government.  The  remaining 
210 recommendations  have  to  be  examined  for  acceptance  and  implementation  by  the 
banking  industry.  The  IBA  has  already  issued  operational  guidelines  in  respect  of 
88 recommendations. In respect of 38 other recommendations the IBA initially had said no 
comments. “No comments” according to me is an acceptance of these recommendations and 
it  should  not  be  difficult  for  the  IBA  to  issue  clear  guidelines  in  regard  to  these 
recommendations. There remain a few other recommendations on which the banks and the 
IBA had earlier expressed strong reservations. At a meeting held with the leading bankers on 
December 16, 201, I have urged my banker friends to revisit the important issues in the light 
of  international  best  practices,  the  need  for  protecting  our  consumers  against  fraud,  the 
availability of insurance products to protect individuals from such frauds and finally a clearly 
spelt  out  compensation  policy  that  is  communicated  to  the  customers  upfront.  The  major 
areas  of  concern  are  internet  banking  related  misuse  /  abuse,  ATM  related  service 
deficiencies, loss of credit / debit cards and extent of card holders’ liability in such an event, 
penalty for not adhering to the AQB discipline etc. An important recommendation made by 
the Damodaran Committee was about banks appointing an Internal Ombudsman. This idea 
needs to be followed up and implemented proactively in the interest of consumer protection 
and impartial / transparent dealings. 
The common problems faced by customers very frequently pertain to ATM issues, pensions, 
levy  of  service  charges  without  prior  intimation,  credit  card  related  issues,  loans  and 
advances etc. It puzzles me that the total number of credit card users is less than 10% of the 
total  bank  customers’  base  but  still  this  area  accounted  for  24%  of  the  total  number  of 
complaints handled by the B O Offices during 2010 – 11. Similarly, a proper enforcement of 
the  BCSBI  Codes  should  necessarily  result  in  the  banks  intimating  their  customers  about 
changes in interest rates and service charges at least 30 days in advance. Here again the 
number of complaints highlight the gaps in implementation of the Codes at the branch level. 
Pensioners are senior or very senior citizens and in a majority of the cases this is their only 
source of livelihood. We need to be empathetic and humane while dealing with pensioners. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The best way to minimize the incidence of these complaints is to educate the customers and 
bank staff alike:-. 
Global initiatives in consumer protection 
The global financial crisis brought to the fore gaps in consumer protection measures in the 
financial services industry worldwide. Many countries that were affected by the crisis have 
standards and codes in place to set the minimum benchmarks for customer care. The failure 
of  voluntary  /  industry  led  initiatives  to  protect  the  financial  sector  consumers  and  the 
backlash  created  by  a  public  resentment  against  bankers  and  banking  has  forced  many 
governments  to  come  up  with  statutory  measures  aimed  at  financial  consumer  care  and 
protection.  When  service  standards  are  defined  as  a  part  of  the  statute  any  breach  or 
violation of law attracts penalty. Are we moving in that direction? This may not happen in the 
near  future  but  even  in  the  Indian  context  the  day  may  not  be  far  when  we  may  have  a 
proper legislation specifically to look at issues affecting the financial sector consumers. Once 
this initiative becomes a statute, the voluntary option would cease to exist. 
The fair practices code adopted by banks / financial institutions is mostly unilateral in nature. 
Hence, the enforceability of fair practices is more in breach than in practice. With growing 
complexities  of  the  financial  transactions  and  financial  markets,  there  is  need  to  clearly 
define  the  role  and  responsibility  of  financial  services  providers,  especially  in  relation  to 
consumer protection. To promote consumer awareness of the obligations of banks / financial 
institutions and to foster consumer understanding of financial services and related issues, it 
is felt that, the Financial Consumer Protection Law should be enacted to cover: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  suggestion  is  in  the  backdrop  of  global  developments.  Countries  like  the  USA  and 
UK have enacted legislations specifically providing for financial consumers’ protection. Once 
every action of a bank vis-à-vis its customers is codified as a statute, the lapses if any would 
also  be  punishable  as  an  offence.  This  may  mostly  come  as  a  monetary  penalty  on  the 
employee at fault. Hence, I urge all of you to sensitize your staff on effective implementation 
of  BCSBI  codes.  The  mental  block  many  bank  employees  have  is  in  owning  up  their 
mistakes  leading  to  clash  of  egos  and  escalation  of  complaints  right  up  to  the  level  of 
President of India. All of us must be cost and time conscious when it comes to grievances 
redressal.  Based  on  data  published  in  the  annual  report  on  the  Banking  Ombudsman 
Scheme for the year 2010 – 11 the RBI is incurring a cost of Rs. 3619 /– for every complaint 
handled by it through the Banking Ombudsman Scheme. If you add to this the cost involved 
at the banks’ end, the total cost for the banking system of handling a single grievance may 
roughly work out as high as Rs. 15000/–. Can we not do a cost - benefit analysis in terms of 
compensating  the  customer  for  any  loss  /  lapses,  than  merely  spending  our  time  and 
resources on defending actions that were patently wrong? 
Grievance Redressal Schemes,  
Compensation Schemes,  
Financial Ombudsman Schemes, 
Consumer education and awareness initiatives, 
Consultation with consumer bodies before evolving policies, 
Responsible lending and marketing practices, 
Card products, 
Consumer privacy and data protection, 
Defining mis-selling and cross selling. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Management system 
Customer satisfaction,  
Management focus,  
Brand improvement, 
Credibility,  
Customer confidence  
Improved Efficiency 
Better relationship 
Continual improvement 
Transparent system 
Auditable system 
Synchronisation 
The  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  has  evolved  ISO  10002:2004  standard  for  reviewing  the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the complaints handling process. Adherence to this particular 
standard focuses on conferring the following benefits viz.,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The standards has eight clauses, the first three are scope, normative reference and terms 
and definitions. The other five are:  
 
 
 
 
 
It is gathered from the Bureau of Indian Standards that only two banks in the country (private 
sector banks) have so far adopted this standard. I urge the governing council of BCSBI to 
examine  if  adoption  of  an  ISO  standard  for  grievance  redressal  could  be  considered  for 
inclusion  in  the  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  customers.  The  banks  may  on  their  own 
explore the possibility of adopting the ISO standards. 
The Office of Fair Trading, United Kingdom has carried out several case studies to evaluate 
consumer  credit  intervention  strategies.  The  case  studies  highlight  the  fact  that  vulnerable 
groups  are  particularly  exposed  to  the  risks  of being  misled  by  advertising.  Such  action  is 
treated as “non-compliance” with statutory provisions. We also need to look at some such 
robust provisions in our codes / statutes. 
The global financial crisis of 2008 had demonstrated that credit markets are fragile and not 
only  because  of  the  risk  of  political  meddling;  borrowers  also  have  tended  to  exhibit 
systematic vulnerabilities which compromise their financial decision – making capability. For 
many governments round the globe, the question is no longer “to protect or not to protect the 
financial sector consumer?” it is “when and how”. 
The  global  practices  /  regulatory  measures  for  borrowers  protection  fall  into  three 
conventional  categories;  disclosures,  product  based  and  provider  based  regulation.  The 
current  global  trend  is  towards  making  disclosure  regulation  more  stringent  and  robust.  In 
particular, these regulations focus on prescribing the manner in which the interest rate and 
other  charges  must  be  calculated  and  disclosed.  It  may  be  the  Annual  Percentage  Rate 
(APR) as is favoured in the USA, which may also be easy to understand, or it may be the 
Guiding principles 
Complaints Handling framework 
Planning and design 
Operations of the complaints handling process 
Maintenance and improvement 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Total  Cost  of  Credit  (TCC),  the  concept  that  is  widely  used  in  South  Africa.  The  product 
based regulation focuses on common elements such as right to cancel, prohibited behaviour 
and right of grievances redressal. We need to pick up the good aspects of these emerging 
global trends to strengthen our own codes and commitments to the customers. 
Consumers’  lack  of  financial  literacy  –  Financial  literacy  includes  knowledge  of  financial 
concepts  and  sound  practices  such  as  budgeting,  but  also  the  contractual  rights  and 
recourse procedures open to consumers. Internationally, financial education, awareness and 
financial literacy are being accorded the highest priority in the scheme of financial consumer 
protection. Where are we placed in this regard? The efforts like setting up of FLCCs are only 
a small measure considering the gigantic task we have at hand. Whether or not mentioned in 
the BCSBI’s codes, can we bankers not make a commitment to put financial education and 
awareness on a mission mode and promise to deliver on our commitments? 
Conclusion 
As we go forward, a major challenge is how to strike a balance between the twin objectives 
of  increasing  financial  access/  banking  penetration  vis-a-vis  improving  the  quality  of 
customer service and customer protection. While in the long run it will converge, in the short 
run,  the  dilemma  and  the  tradeoff  underlying  the  debate  between  financial  access  and 
financial consumer protection may be very real to the Governments and policy makers. After 
all,  developed  countries  have  both  high  levels  of  access  to  formal  financial  sector,  and 
relatively elaborate financial consumer protection measures after four decades of evolution. 
The  financial  consumer  protection  regimes  in  countries  like  India  are  still  evolving.  BCSBI 
needs  to  persuade  banks  to  achieve  convergence  in  an  effective  manner  by  adopting  a 
voluntary  and  self-regulatory  approach.  It  will  be  a  great  service  to  the  society  if  BCSBI, 
banks and all of us collectively are able to achieve this. 
Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
