Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana,  25  April 
2012. 
 In its meeting of 25 April 2012, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved the quarterly Monetary Policy Report.  
Based on the analysis of Albania’s latest economic and monetary developments and 
following  discussions  on  their  performance  outlook,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the 
Bank  of  Albania  decided  to  keep  the  key  interest  rate  unchanged  at  4.25%.  This 
decision  reflects  the  balance  of  inflationary  pressures  and  the  need  to  maintain  the 
macroeconomic  stimulus  to  the  economy,  under  the  conditions  of  a  more  prudent  fiscal 
policy during the in the course of the year.  
(Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  economic  developments  and  main  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting.)  
During the first quarter of 2012, the Albanian economy continued to maintain the parameters 
of macroeconomic stability even in the context of the ongoing global crisis.  
International  financial  markets  are  characterised  by  high  risk  premiums  and,  despite 
measures taken to solve the public debt crisis in the euro area, signals for a normal progress 
of in the short run are absent. These developments, as expected, have provided a reining 
impact  on  our  economy,  which  is  mainly  expressed  in  the  continuation  of  below-potential 
economic growth.  
Annual inflation slowed down significantly in the first quarter of the year. On average, it was 
1.1% in this period, dropping 1.8 percentage points from the previous quarter.  
The rapid decline of annual inflation rates, which has started in the third quarter of the past 
year, is driven mainly by the slowdown of price rise in food items during this period, as well 
as the stability of prices of other consumer goods.  
Inflation performance has reflected the simultaneous action of supply and demand factors. 
On the supply side, slowdown of commodity prices in international markets and of inflation in 
our trade partners, combined with the stable exchange rate, have transmitted lower imported 
inflation rates to our economy. Likewise, contribution of administered prices has been lower.  
Inflation expectations have been anchored and production cost pressures contained. 
On the demand side, pressures remain low, conditioned by the continuation of the negative 
output gap.  
Reduction of factual inflation rates, shifting of the inflationary pressures balance to the down 
side  and  the  increase  of  aggregate  demand  below  its  potential,  under  the  conditions  of  a 
controlled  fiscal  policy,  have  created  the  space  for  further  increase  of  the  monetary 
stimulus  to  the  economy  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has 
lowered  the  key  interest  rate  twice,  bringing  it  down  to  the  historic  low  of  4.25%.  Such  a 
decision, besides being in line with maintaining price stability over the medium term, provides 
the appropriate conditions for boosting private demand at home.  
According to recent data from INSTAT, the Albanian economy accelerated the growth rate 
in the fourth quarter of the previous year, posting 3.8% annual growth. The economic activity 
upturn  was  driven  mainly  by  output  increase  in  the  services  sector.  Value  added  of  this 
sector  surged  7.5%  in  annual  terms,  with  a  higher  contribution  by  the  branch  of  trade, 
transport  and  other  services.  Similarly,  the  construction  and  agriculture  sectors  posted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
positive but low annual growth rates, 1.2% and 1.9%, respectively. Positive contribution to 
economic  growth  was  also  provided  by  the  branches  of  extractive  industry  and  the 
processing  industry,  but  they  did  not  manage  to  balance  the  significant  contraction  in  the 
branch of “Electrical energy, water and gas”, which has resulted in negative contribution by 
the industry sector to the domestic product growth.  
From  the  perspective  of  aggregate  demand  components,  economic  growth  in  Albania 
continued  to  be  driven  by  foreign  demand  also  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  past  year. 
Notwithstanding unfavourable developments in the global economy, net exports in real terms 
have  shown  higher  growth  rates  in  this  period.  In  addition  to  foreign  demand,  the  public 
sector demand provided a high contribution, in the fourth quarter of the past year, in the form 
of  increased  capital  expenditure.  In  turn,  private  consumption  and  investments,  while 
showing signals of recovery, were assessed as slow during the fourth quarter of 2011.  
Statistics on the real economy for the first quarter of 2012 are only partially available. Indirect 
data suggest that aggregate demand has carried forward positive growth rates, but growth 
remains significantly below the potential of the Albanian economy.  
Macroeconomic  factors  determining  private  consumption  and  investments,  and  a  prudent 
fiscal policy sustain the assessment for contained growth of the domestic demand in the first 
quarter  of  the  year.  Moreover,  in  the  absence  of  complete  data  and  in  real  terms  on 
developments  in  the  external  sector  of  the  economy,  assessments  suggest  that  the 
contribution of foreign demand to economic growth will be lower than in the past year.  
Fiscal policy was subject to a consolidation nature over the first quarter of 2012, in line with 
its objectives to keep budget deficit and public debt in check. The contained fiscal approach 
has  been  reflected  in  minimum  public  expenditure  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  with  an 
annualised  rate  of  0.7%.  Furthermore,  low  growth  rates  of  fiscal  revenues  continued  their 
trend, settling at 1.2% in this quarter.  
The budget deficit was ALL 11.5 billion, or about 2.5% down compared with the first quarter 
of a year earlier.  
Developments in foreign trade over the first two-month period of the year point to contracted 
trade  exchange  in  annual  terms.  Value  of  exports  in  these  two  months  dipped  by 
20.5% against the corresponding period of a year earlier, reflecting the moderation of foreign 
demand and price developments in global markets. On the imports side, their growth rates 
were significantly decelerated, reaching a nominal annual growth of 1.8% during this period.  
These developments were reflected in the widening of the trade deficit in the first two months 
of the year by the annualised rate of 21.9%. This deficit is determined mostly by electrical 
energy trade exchanges. Excluding this effect, imports of goods would be lower from a year 
earlier and the trade deficit would be down by about 9.2% in annual terms.   
The  monetary  analysis  reveals  the  existence  of  contained  monetary  pressures  on  the 
economy. The underlying pace of monetary expansion is assessed as being in line with the 
demand of economic agents for real money. The annual growth of M3 was 9.1% in February, 
unchanged  from  the  end  of  the  previous  year.  Money  expansion  in  the  economy  was 
supported more by the foreign currency component, whereas domestic demand for money 
slowed  down.  The  public  sector  showed  lower  demand  for  funding,  in  line  with  fiscal 
developments in the first quarter of the year.  
Furthermore, private sector demand for money increased at moderate rates, as evidenced by 
the slow growth rates of loans to the private sector, 9.2% as at end-February.  
Crediting slowdown has also reflected a low demand by households and businesses for bank 
loans and higher prudence by banks in lending, which was materialised in tightened credit 
conditions.  Notwithstanding  this  performance,  supply-side  determining  factors  on  lending 
performance  provide  the  appropriate  conditions  for  further  credit  growth.  The  Albanian 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banking system remains well capitalised and liquid, capable to satisfy the credit demand by 
the private sector.  
Financial markets in the first quarter of 2012 were serene, reflecting relatively low premiums 
of liquidity and inflation risks. The interest rate in the interbank money market has followed 
swiftly the recent key interest cuts.  
The transmission of eased monetary policy signals is also observable in the deposits market, 
while it is expected to be transmitted in the future also in other market segments, conform to 
the  time  lag  of  the  transmission  mechanism.  In  the  primary  market,  government  security 
yields  showed  upward  trend  reflecting  developments  in  relevant  structural  factors  of  the 
demand and supply, without signalling added risk or inflation premiums.  
Verified developments insofar, change the basic projections for economic developments in 
the  future.  Year  2012  is  expected  to  be  influenced  by  unfavourable  developments  in  the 
global  economy,  which  may  affect  the  Albanian  economy  as  well.  Foreign  demand  is 
expected to provide lower contribution over the course of the year, impacted by economic 
slowdown in our trade partners.  
Fiscal policy orientation towards further consolidation of fiscal parameters limits the space for 
a  substantial  fiscal  stimulus  to  foster  the  economic  activity.  Under  these  circumstances, 
private domestic demand remains determinant for aggregate demand increase in the future. 
Overall, analyses suggest a better performance of private consumption and spending, helped 
also by the eased monetary policy stimulus.  
Estimates  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  suggest  that,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  demand  growth 
below the potential of the economy will continue to exercise low inflationary pressures from 
the  demand  side.  At  the  same  time,  the  balance  of  inflationary  pressures  generated  by 
supply-side  factors  is  assessed  as  contained,  given  the  reduced  imported  inflation  and 
anchored inflation expectations.  
Taking  into  account  the  insofar  developments  and  expectations  for  the  future,  Bank  of 
Albania  projections  show  that,  with  90%  probability,  consumer  price  inflation  for  2012  will 
range within the 0.7%–2.8% band. Materialisation of this baseline scenario will be reflected in 
retaining the stimulating nature of the monetary policy in the course of the year. Moreover, 
the  Bank  of  Albania  remains  heedful  to  future  developments  and  ready  to  respond  in  the 
appropriate time and extent in order to comply with its target on inflation.  
Based on the analysis of the information set out above, the Supervisory Council holds 
that  pressures  on  consumer  prices  at  home  remain  low  over  the  monetary  policy 
relevant horizon; they have been, however, on the down side over the recent months. 
On  the  demand  side,  below-potential  economic  growth  will  continue  to  generate  low 
inflationary pressures, while shocks from the supply side are expected to be moderate.  
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key 
interest rate unchanged at 4.25%. This decision aims to establish the appropriate monetary 
conditions to comply with the inflation target in the medium run. Given these conditions, we 
deem  that  the  monetary  policy  provides  the  necessary  support  to  stimulate  the  aggregate 
demand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
