Timothy Lane: Transport and logistics – connecting Canada to the global 
economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chartered 
Institute of Logistics and Transport North America, Ottawa, Ontario, 30 April 2012. 
 Good  morning.  It’s  a  pleasure  to  be  with  you  as  you  reflect  on  the  challenges  facing  the 
North American transport and logistics industries in the current global economic environment. 
Your industries are inextricably linked with the wider economy: they enable other economic 
activity by connecting producers with their suppliers and markets elsewhere in Canada and 
around the world. 
Throughout Canadian history, transport has played a critical role in the development of our 
nation,  knitting  together  the  economy  over  vast  distances  and  forging  strong  trade  links 
around the world. So as I speak to you today, I would first like to think back to the last great 
wave  of  globalization,  a  century  ago.  One  of  the  giants  of  that  time  was  Charles  Melville 
Hays, whom Sir Wilfrid Laurier described as “the greatest railroad genius in Canada.” Hays, 
President of the Grand Trunk Railway, had a vision: to build a second transcontinental rail 
line across Canada with Prince Rupert as its western terminus, establishing a gateway to the 
Pacific. 
Hays did not live to see his vision realized. One hundred years ago this month, after carefully 
seeing  his  wife  and  daughter  onto  a  lifeboat  and  bidding  them  goodbye,  Hays  went  down 
along  with  more  than  1,500  other  souls  on  the  Titanic.  Canada  lost  Hays’s  drive  and 
leadership  as  well  as  the  financing  he  had  just  secured  in  London  to  make  his  plans  for 
Prince Rupert a reality. 
But his broader vision of building transport to make connections with expanding markets—
including those beyond our Pacific shores – remains relevant today as we consider the future 
of transport and logistics in the Canadian economy. It is also a reminder of the long-range 
thinking and strong leadership that are needed to build for that future. 
For  the  past  few  decades,  globalization  has  been  a  central  force  shaping  transport  and 
logistics – and indeed, Canada’s economy as a whole. Canada is taking part in a worldwide 
transformation that has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and created the 
potential  for  millions  more  to  share this  destiny.  Never  in  history  has  economic  integration 
involved so many people, such a variety of goods, and so much capital. Between 1980 and 
2005,  merchandise  exports  grew  to  20  per  cent  of  global  GDP,  more  than  twice  the  level 
reached  at  the  height  of  that  last  great  wave  of  globalization  a  century  ago.1  Advances  in 
transport and supply chain management have played, and will continue to play, a central role 
in enabling that expansion. 
Today I would like to focus on two main themes. First, I would like to talk about economic 
prospects for Canada in the current global environment. Second, I would like to touch on the 
longer-term implications of that global environment for Canada’s trade and transport. 
The crisis, trade and transportation 
During the past five years, your industries have faced serious challenges. As a result of the 
global financial crisis and the Great Recession that followed, Canadian GDP declined by 4½ 
                                                 
1  M. Carney, “Rebalancing the Global Economy” (speech to the International Economic Forum of the Americas 
Conference of Montreal, 11 June 2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
per cent but our exports plunged more than 16 per cent. As a result, transport experienced a 
7 per cent drop in activity from peak to trough (Chart 1). For example, there was a severe 
decline  in  cargo  volumes  through  ports  and  marine  terminals:  a  drop  of  20  per  cent  in 
domestic cargo and a cumulative drop of 10 per cent in international cargo in 2008–09. 
 
Canada’s  economy  is  now  in  an  expansion  phase:  economic  activity  and  employment 
passed  their  pre-crisis  levels  in  the  fall  of  2010  and  have  continued  to  grow  since  then. 
Canada’s transport industry has shared in this recovery. However, a major challenge – both 
to  transport  and  to  the  economy  as  a  whole  –  has  come  from  exports,  which  are 
experiencing their weakest recovery since World War II (Chart 2). 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The  sluggish  recovery  of  Canada’s  exports,  in  turn,  reflects  a  combination  of  current 
macroeconomic  conditions  and  longer-term  trends.  First,  it  reflects  the  weakness  of  the 
recovery  in  other  advanced  countries  –  notably  the  United  States,  still  by  far  our  largest 
trading partner. But Canada’s share of global exports has been declining since the turn of the 
millennium  as  we  have  lost  competitiveness  and  market  share  to  China  and  other  export 
economies  (Chart  3).  Canada’s  diminishing  competitiveness  is  the  result  of  disappointing 
productivity growth together with the considerable strengthening of the Canadian dollar over 
this period. 
 The shift of global growth from advanced economies to emerging economies is tectonic in its 
scope.  While  it  began  a  few  decades  ago  –  stemming  from  the  economic  transformation 
taking  place  in  China  and  other  emerging-market  economies  –  it  has  become  even  more 
pronounced  as  growth  in  the  United  States  and  other  advanced  economies  has  been 
dampened  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  Since  the  recession,  emerging-market 
economies have accounted for two-thirds of global economic growth – up from just one-third 
at the turn of the millennium. Emerging market economies also account for one-half of the 
growth in global imports. Compare this with the United States where the economy is now well 
below  its  pre-crisis  path  and  is  likely  to  remain  so  even  once  the  economy  recovers  its 
cyclical losses2 (Chart 4). Clearly, exporters need to refocus their efforts to the fast-growing 
economies. 
 
                                                 
2  M.  Carney,  “Exporting  in  a  Post-Crisis  World”  (speech  to  the  Greater  Kitchener-  Waterloo  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Waterloo, Ontario, 2 April 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Current outlook: where we are today 
The  global  economy  continues  to  face  significant  challenges.  In  the  major  advanced 
economies,  especially  the  United  States  and  Europe,  deleveraging  by  households  and 
financial  institutions  and  fiscal  consolidation  continue  to  weigh  on  growth.  In  the  United 
States, the protracted dislocation of the housing market has been a drag on the recovery, 
despite some recent improvement. The debt crisis in the euro area, which intensified late last 
year, triggered a recession there and has had negative spillovers to many other countries, 
including  the  United  States.  In  emerging  market  economies  such  as  China,  growth  is 
moderating  from  the  rapid  pace  of  recent  years,  as  exports  to  Europe  have  fallen  off  and 
domestic  demand  has  also  cooled.  However,  economic  growth  is  expected  to  gain 
momentum over 2013–14, as exports to advanced economies recover. 
Despite  these  challenges,  the  profile  for  global  economic  growth  has  improved  since  the 
beginning  of  this  year.3  In  particular,  economic  conditions  in  the  United  States  have 
improved, with employment gains and better consumer and business confidence. The euro 
area, however, is still in recession, and is projected to show only a modest recovery later this 
year, although the risks around this projection are high. Overall, global economic growth is 
now projected to moderate in 2012 to 3.2 per cent and to recover to 3.4 per cent in 2013 and 
3.8 per cent in 2014. 
Here  in  Canada,  economic  momentum  is  slightly  firmer  than  a  few  months  ago.  Since 
Canada’s economic growth has also turned out stronger than expected in recent quarters, 
we  estimate  that  there  is  now  less  slack  in  the  Canadian  economy  than  previously 
anticipated (Chart 5). 
 
 
                                                 
3  The discussion in this section is based on the Bank of Canada’s April 2012 Monetary Policy Report. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
In addition, growth is expected to continue in the period ahead – at 2.4 per cent in 2012 and 
2013, easing to 2.2 per cent in 2014. These growth rates may seem relatively modest, but 
over the 2012 to 2013 period, they are somewhat above the rate at which the potential of the 
economy is expanding, estimated at 2 per cent in 2012 and 2.1 per cent in 2013. As a result, 
we expect the Canadian economy to return to full capacity by early next year (Chart 6). 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Most of the growth in the period ahead is expected to come from private domestic demand. 
In  particular,  that  growth  relies  on  continued  spending  by  Canadian  households  on 
consumption and housing. It also reflects a continued strong rise in investment spending as 
Canadian firms seek to expand, replace, and modernize their capacity. 
On  the  other  hand,  we  are  still  seeing  weak  growth  in  Canada’s  net  exports.  That  in  turn 
reflects factors I mentioned earlier: notably the protracted recovery of demand in the United 
States,  Canada’s  major  trading  partner,  and  Canada’s  weak  competitiveness.  The  Bank 
forecasts that Canada’s exports will regain their pre-recession peak only at the end of 2013. 
In contrast, the level of imports has already regained its pre-recession peak. This divergence 
has contributed to a decline in Canada’s current account balance, which has dropped from a 
pre-recession  surplus  to  a  deficit  of  approximately  2  per  cent  of  GDP  –  a  trend  that  is 
projected to persist (Chart 7). 
 
  
Oil prices are one important factor underlying the economic outlook for Canada – and here is 
a story in which transport has been playing an  important role. Canada as a whole usually 
benefits when oil prices rise. As a net oil exporter, Canada gains from higher incomes in the 
industry, higher production and investment and the resulting spillovers to other parts of the 
economy. Those benefits typically outweigh the effects of more expensive gasoline on the 
cost of living and the effects on production costs. In recent months, this balance of costs and 
benefits  has  shifted  because  of  an  unprecedented  spread  between  the  price  of  oil  that 
Canada imports and the price of oil that Canada exports – a spread that peaked at about 
$50 a barrel earlier this year (Chart 8). 
There  are  many  reasons  for  this,  some  of  which  are  temporary.  Growing  global  demand  
– especially from emerging-market economies – together with supply disruptions and rising 
political tensions in the Middle East have driven up the world price of oil that Canada imports. 
At the same time, shale-oil development in the United States, together with other factors, has 
led to ample supply at Cushing, Oklahoma, where the North American price for West Texas 
Intermediate (WTI) is set. The Canadian price for Western Canada Select (WCS) has been 
driven  down  further  by  outages  in  some  pipelines  and  refineries  equipped  to  handle 
Canadian oil. Underlying these divergences is a basic fact: the transport system determines 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  ability  of  Canadian  producers  to  move  goods  such  as  oil  to  those  markets  where  it 
commands a higher price, and thus to benefit from participating in a global market. 
 
 
The various aspects of the macroeconomic outlook I have been describing come together in 
the outlook for inflation. Because there is less slack in the economy and gasoline prices are 
also higher, the profile for inflation is expected to be somewhat firmer than anticipated by the 
Bank in January. Both overall inflation and underlying inflation are expected to remain close 
to 2 per cent through to the end of 2014 (Chart 9). 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank has decided to maintain the target for the overnight 
rate at 1 per cent. In light of the reduced slack in the economy and firmer underlying inflation, 
some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy stimulus may become 
appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. 
The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against domestic and 
global economic developments. 
Opportunities for transport and logistics 
I  would  now  like  to  touch  on  the  longer-term  trends  in  the  global  economy  and  what  they 
mean  for  your  industries.  In  1902,  Charles  Melville  Hays  saw  opportunity  in  the  waves  of 
immigrants  pouring  into  the  West.  Prairie  agriculture  was  expanding  rapidly.  Mining  and 
forestry camps were springing up in the North. The rate of growth was fast and it was clear 
that  success  depended  on  moving  people  and  goods  across  this  vast  land  quickly  and 
efficiently. 
Today, we can look across the Pacific Ocean where Asia is urbanizing at a breakneck pace. 
China  and  India  are  housing  the  equivalent  of  the  entire  population  of  Canada  every 
18 months. A massive middle class is being formed, growing by 70 million people each year 
–  people  who  represent  a  rapidly-rising  share of  global  demand  for  all  types  of  goods.  By 
shifting  trade  from  slow-growing  economies  to  fast-growing  ones,  Canada  can  participate 
more fully in the global economic transformation that we are living through. That’s where the 
strongest potential import markets are. The opportunities are vast. In view of the scope of 
these changes and the speed with which they are taking place, it will be critical to anticipate 
change and make the long-term investments needed to prepare for it. Transport and logistics 
will be an integral part of all of these efforts. 
I started by mentioning the critical role transportation played historically, in bonding Canada 
together as a country spanning great distances. It must continue to play that role now and in 
the  future,  creating  and  supporting  an  integral,  efficient  Canadian  economy.  Our  domestic 
transport systems must evolve to make it easier to move goods within Canada. We will need 
to pick up our game domestically to remain competitive in a challenging global environment. 
The forces of globalization together with advances in technology necessarily drive important 
innovations 
logistics  activities,  which  have  become  more  global,  complex,  and 
sophisticated. To an increasing extent, Canadian businesses are part of supply chains that 
frequently  cross  and  re-cross  national  boundaries.  Such  activities  are  also  interconnected 
across  various  sectors,  such  as  natural  resources,  manufacturing  and  services.4  Through 
these developments, globalization has progressively become a more pervasive feature of the 
production process. The increasing complexity of supply chains also means that Canadian 
businesses  can  benefit  from  trade  with  India  and  China,  not  only  by  selling  their  final 
products there, but by supplying and adding value to firms here at home that do. 
For  transport  and  logistics,  opportunities  to  contribute  abound  and  these  will  change  as 
technology  advances  and  businesses  invest  in  plant,  equipment  and  information  and 
communication  technologies,  establish  new  facilities  and  develop  new  processes.  These 
areas  are  now  so  strongly  knowledge-based  that  developing  the  requisite  skills  and 
technologies is critical to success. This is why all sectors of the economy must continue to 
invest in Canada’s greatest resource – our people. 
in 
                                                 
4 
Industry Canada, “Global Business Strategy and Innovation: A Canadian Logistics Perspective” (2011). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
As  I  said  at  the  outset,  the  transport  industry  was  of  fundamental  importance  in  building 
Canada  and  connecting  it  with  the  world  beyond.  So,  too,  is  your  sector  vital  to  the 
re-building  of  Canada’s  economy  in  the  post-crisis  world.  Your  institute  provides  scope  to 
introduce  state-of-the  art  analytical  tools  to  shape  the  transport  and  logistics  of  tomorrow. 
Conferences such as this one provide opportunities for professionals from your industries to 
discuss and explore options for the future. 
Trade and transport have been integral to the nature of Canada, long before the arrival of 
Europeans and after. It will be forever thus, so I encourage you to think big and bold and 
continue to guide us into the future. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
