Duvvuri Subbarao: Basel III in international and Indian contexts – ten 
questions we should know the answers for 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Annual FICCI – IBA Banking Conference, Mumbai, 4 September 2012. 
 1. 
For the fourth year on a trot, you have extended me the privilege of inaugurating this 
annual FICCI-IBA conference. Involving as it does leaders from the corporate and banking 
sectors,  this  conference  has  emerged  as  an  important  forum  for  discussing  major  policy 
issues.  Naturally,  I  attach  a  lot  of  value  to  speaking from this  platform.  Thank  you for  this 
opportunity. 
2. 
Later  this  month,  we  will  be  marking  the  fourth  anniversary  of  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers which, in popular perception, was the trigger for the biggest financial crisis 
of our generation. Four years on, the crisis is still with us – only the geography and the main 
actors have changed a bit. What has not changed is that virtually every country in the world 
remains affected, and the toll on global growth and welfare continues. 
3.  
Banks  and  bankers  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the  crisis.  Quite  understandably, 
enhancing  the  banking  sector’s  safety  and  stability  has  been  the  thrust  of  the  post-crisis 
policy reforms. Even as much of this reform is still work in progress, one segment of reforms 
that has taken a final shape is the Basel III framework for bank capital regulation. The final 
package was approved by the G-20 and the roll out has begun. We in India issued the Basel 
III  guidelines  on  capital  regulations  in  May  2012  after  extensive  consultations  with  all 
stakeholders. 
4.  
I  recall  that  two  years  ago,  in  2010,  I  spoke  at  this  conference  on  the  Basel  III 
package from an Indian perspective. Basel III was then still in the making. Now that we are 
shortly going to get into the implementation mode, I thought the best way I could add value to 
this conference would be to revisit the issue, and speak about some of the conceptual and 
implementation issues underlying Basel III. In particular, I will raise ten questions and attempt 
to answer them.  
This question does not admit of a binary answer. If I were to give a short answer, I 
1st Question: There is a view that it was actually the risk sensitive framework of 
Basel II that caused the crisis. Is that view valid? 
5.  
would say that the view is valid, but only partly so. Let me explain. 
6.  
What was the paradigm shift from Basel I to Basel II? The paradigm shift was that 
while  Basel  I  had  a  “one-size-fits-all”  approach,  Basel  II  introduced  risk  sensitive  capital 
regulation.  The  main  charge  against  Basel  II  is  that  it  is  precisely  this  risk  sensitivity  that 
made it blatantly procyclical. In good times, when banks are doing well,  and the market is 
willing  to  invest  capital  in  them,  Basel  II  does  not  impose  significant  additional  capital 
requirement on banks. On the other hand, in stressed times, when banks require additional 
capital  and  markets  are  wary  of  supplying  that  capital,  Basel  II  requires  banks  to  bring  in 
more  of  it.  As  we  saw  during  the  crisis,  it  was  the  failure  to  bring  in  capital  when  under 
pressure that forced major international banks into a vicious cycle of deleveraging, thereby 
hurtling global financial markets into seizure and economies around the world into recession. 
7.  
The  second  charge  against  Basel  II  was  that  even  as  it  made  capital  regulation 
more  risk  sensitive,  it  did  not  bring  in  corresponding  changes  in  the  definition  and 
composition of regulatory capital to reflect the changing market dynamics. The market risk 
models  failed,  in  particular,  to  factor  in  the  risk  from  the  complex  derivative  products  that 
were coming on to the market in a big way. These models demanded less capital against 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
trading book exposures on the premise that trading book exposures could be readily sold, 
and  positions  rapidly  unwound.  This  gave  a  perverse  incentive  for  banks  to  park  banking 
book exposures in the trading book to optimize capital. And as we now know, much of the 
toxic  assets  and  their  securitized  derivatives,  which  were  the  epicenter  of  the  crisis  were 
parked in the trading book. 
8.  
So,  the  second  charge  against  Basel  II  was  that  even  as  it  was  supposedly  risk 
sensitive, it failed to promote modelling frameworks for accurate measurement of risk and to 
demand sufficient loss absorbing capital to mitigate that risk.  
9.  
The third charge against Basel II concerns leverage. Note that Basel II did not have 
any explicit regulation governing leverage. It assumed that its risk based capital requirement 
would automatically mitigate the risk of excessive leverage. This assumption, as it turned out, 
was  flawed  as  excessive  leverage  of  banks  was  one  of  the  prime  causes  of  the  crisis. 
Similarly, Basel II did not explicitly cover liquidity risk. Since liquidity risk, if left unaddressed, 
could cascade into a solvency risk, this proved to be the undoing of virtually every bank that 
came under stress in the depth of the crisis.  
10.  
Finally,  Basel  II  was  also  seen  to  be  guilty  of  focusing  exclusively  on  individual 
financial  institutions,  ignoring  the  systemic  risk  arising  from  the  interconnectedness  across 
institutions  which,  as  we  now  know  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  was  the  culprit  for 
ferociously spreading the crisis across financial markets.  
11.  
Is all this criticism against Basel II valid? As I said before, only partly valid. Note that 
Basel II, which became operational in June 2006, was still largely work in progress as the 
crisis  began  unfolding  in  August  2007.  It  is  possible  that  the  failure  of  the  market  risk 
framework  underlying  Basel  II  may  have  abetted  the  crisis,  but  to  claim  that  the  risk 
sensitivity of Basel II caused the crisis would be extreme.  
2nd Question: How is Basel III an improvement over Basel II? 
12.  
Basel III represents an effort to fix the gaps and lacunae in Basel II that came to light 
during the crisis as also to reflect other lessons of the crisis. What is important though is that 
Basel III does not jettison Basel II; on the contrary, it builds on the essence of Basel II – the 
link  between  the  risk  profiles  and  capital  requirements  of  individual  banks.  In  that  sense, 
Basel III is not a negation, but an enhancement of Basel II.  
13.  
The  enhancements  of  Basel  III  over  Basel  II  come  primarily  in  four  areas: 
(i) augmentation  in  the  level  and  quality  of  capital;  (ii)  introduction  of  liquidity  standards; 
(iii) modifications in provisioning norms; and (iv) better and more comprehensive disclosures. 
Let me discuss each of these briefly. 
Higher capital requirement 
14.  
As can be seen from the comparative data in Table 1, Basel III requires higher and 
better  quality  capital.  The  minimum  total  capital  remains  unchanged  at  8  per  cent  of  risk 
weighted  assets  (RWA).  However,  Basel  III  introduces  a  capital  conservation  buffer  of 
2.5 per  cent  of  RWA  over  and  above  the  minimum  capital  requirement,  raising  the  total 
capital  requirement  to  10.5  per  cent  against  8.0  per  cent  under  Basel  II.  This  buffer  is 
intended  to  ensure  that  banks  are  able  to  absorb  losses  without  breaching  the  minimum 
capital  requirement,  and  are  able  to  carry  on  business  even  in  a  downturn  without 
deleveraging.  This  buffer  is  not  part  of  the  regulatory  minimum;  however,  the  level  of  the 
buffer will determine the dividend distributed to shareholders and the bonus paid to staff. 
15.  
There  are  also  other  prescriptions  regarding  the  quality  of  capital  within  the 
minimum total so that capital is able to absorb losses, and calling upon taxpayers to bear the 
burden of bail out becomes absolutely the last resort.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
16.  
In  addition  to  the  capital  conservation  buffer,  Basel  III  introduces  another  capital 
buffer  –  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  –  in  the  range  of  0–2.5  per  cent  of  RWA  which 
could be imposed on banks during periods of excess credit growth. Also, there is a provision 
for a higher capital surcharge on systemically important banks.  
17.  
To mitigate the risk of banks building up excess leverage as happened under Basel 
II,  Basel  III  institutes  a  leverage ratio  as  a  backstop to  the  risk  based  capital  requirement. 
The  Basel  Committee  is  contemplating  a  minimum  Tier  1  leverage  ratio  of  3  per  cent 
(33.3 times) which will eventually become a Pillar 1 requirement as of January 1, 2018.  
18.  
As  we  noted  earlier,  Basel  II failed  to  demand  adequate  loss  absorbing  capital  to 
cover  market  risk.  To  remedy  this,  Basel  III  strengthens  the  counterparty  credit  risk 
framework in market risk instruments. This includes the use of stressed input parameters to 
determine the capital requirement for counterparty credit default risk. Besides, there is a new 
capital requirement known as CVA (credit valuation adjustment) risk capital charge for OTC 
derivatives  to  protect  banks  against  the  risk  of  decline  in  the  credit  quality  of  the 
counterparty.   
19.  
To mitigate liquidity risk, Basel III addresses both potential short-term liquidity stress 
and longer-term structural liquidity mismatches in banks’ balance sheets (Table 2). To cover 
short-term  liquidity  stress,  banks  will  be  required  to  maintain  sufficient  high-quality 
unencumbered  liquid  assets  to  withstand  any  stressed  funding  scenario  over  a  30-day 
horizon as measured by the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). To mitigate liquidity mismatches 
in the longer term, banks will be mandated to maintain a net stable funding ratio (NSFR). The 
NSFR  mandates  a  minimum  amount  of  stable  sources  of  funding  relative  to  the  liquidity 
profile of the assets, as well as the potential for contingent liquidity needs arising from off-
balance  sheet  commitments  over  a  one-year  horizon.  In  essence,  the  NSFR  is  aimed  at 
encouraging banks to exploit stable sources of funding.  
Provisioning norms 
20.  
The Basel Committee is supporting the proposal for adoption of an “expected loss” 
based measure of provisioning which captures actual losses more transparently and is also 
less  procyclical  than  the  current “incurred  loss” approach. The  expected  loss  approach for 
provisioning  will  make  financial  reporting  more  useful  for  all  stakeholders,  including 
regulators and supervisors. 
Disclosure requirements  
21.  
The  disclosures  made  by  banks  are  important  for  market  participants  to  make 
informed decisions. One of the lessons of the crisis is that the disclosures made by banks on 
their  risky  exposures  and  on  regulatory  capital  were  neither  appropriate  nor  sufficiently 
transparent to afford any comparative analysis. To remedy this, Basel III requires banks to 
disclose  all  relevant  details, 
including  any  regulatory  adjustments,  as  regards  the 
composition of the regulatory capital of the bank.  
3rd Question: What is the additional capital that Indian banks have to mobilize to 
conform to Basel III? What are the options for, and challenges in, raising this size of 
capital? 
22.  
Admittedly, Indian banks already meet the minimum capital requirements of Basel III 
at an aggregate level, even though some individual banks may have to top up. But capital 
adequacy today does not mean capital adequacy going forward. Currently, the bank credit – 
GDP ratio in India is around 55 per cent. If we want growth to accelerate, this ratio will have 
to go up as a necessary pre-condition. Besides, as our economy goes through a structural 
transformation, as it should, the share of the industry sector will increase and the credit-GDP 
ratio will rise even further. What this means is that Indian banks would have been required to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
raise  additional  capital  even  in  the  absence  of  Basel  III.  In  estimating  the  net  additional 
burden on account of Basel III, we have to take this factor into account.  
23.  
What is the size of the additional capital required to be raised by Indian banks? It 
depends  on  the  assumption  made,  and  there  are  various  estimates  floating  around.  The 
Reserve  bank  has  made  some  quick  estimates  based  on  the  following  two  conservative 
assumptions  covering  the  period  to  March  31,  2018:  (i)  risk  weighted  assets  of  individual 
banks will increase by 20 per cent per annum; and (ii) internal accruals will be of the order of 
1 per cent of risk weighted assets.  
24.  
Reserve Bank’s estimates project an additional capital requirement of  5 trillion, of 
which non-equity capital will be of the order of  3.25 trillion while equity capital will be of the 
order of  1.75 trillion (Table 3). 
The  additional  equity  capital  requirement  of  the  order  of  1.75  trillion  raises  two 
25.  
questions. First, can the market provide capital of this size? Second, what will be the burden 
on the Government in capitalizing public sector banks (PSBs) and what are its options? 
26.  
Let us turn to the first question, whether the market will be able to provide equity 
capital of this size. The amount the market will have to provide will depend on how much of 
the recapitalization burden of PSBs the Government will meet. Data in Table 3 indicate that 
the amount that the market will have to provide will be in the range of  700 billion– 1 trillion 
depending on how much the Government will provide. Over the last five years, banks have 
revised  equity  capital  to  the  tune  of  520  billion  through  the  primary  markets.  Raising  an 
additional  700 billion– 1 trillion over the next five years from the market should therefore not 
be an insurmountable problem. The extended period of full Basel III implementation spread 
over five years gives sufficient time to banks to plan the time-table of their capital rising over 
this period.  
27.  
Moving  on  to  the  second  question  of  the  burden  on  the  Government  which  owns 
70 per cent of the banking system. If the Government opts to maintain its shareholding at the 
current level, the burden of recapitalization will be of the order of  900 billion; on the other 
hand, if it decides to reduce its shareholding in every bank to a minimum of 51 per cent, the 
burden reduces to under  700 billion.  
Clearly,  providing  equity  capital  of  this  size  in  the  face  of  fiscal  constraints  poses 
28.  
significant  challenges.  A 
issue 
recapitalization  bonds  against  common  equity  infusion.  But  this  will  militate  against  fiscal 
transparency. In the alternative, would the Government be open to reducing its shareholding 
in PSBs to below 51 per cent? If the Government decides to pursue this option, an additional 
consideration is whether it will amend the statute to protect its majority voting rights.  
the  Government  would  be 
tempting  option 
for 
to 
4th Question: Will Basel III hurt growth? 
29.  
One major criticism against Basel III has been that it will hurt growth. Even though 
we do not have a precise quantitative estimate of the impact on growth, the main concern is 
that the higher capital requirements under Basel III will kick in at a time when credit demand 
in the economy will be on the rise.  
30.  
In a structurally transforming economy with rapid upward mobility, credit demand will 
expand faster than GDP for several reasons. First, India will shift increasingly from services 
to manufactures, and the credit intensity of manufacturing is higher per unit of GDP than that 
for services. Second, we need to at least double our investment in infrastructure which will 
place enormous demands on credit. Finally, financial inclusion, which both the Government 
and  the  Reserve  Bank  are  driving,  will  bring  millions  of  low  income  households  into  the 
formal financial system with almost all of them needing credit.  
31.  
What  all  this  means  is  that  we  are  going  to  have  to  impose  higher  capital 
requirements  on  banks  as  per  Basel  III  at  a  time  when  credit  demand  is  going  to  expand 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rapidly. A crucial question is this. Will this raise the cost of credit and hence militate against 
growth? Put differently, how much growth are we willing to sacrifice in order to buy insurance 
against  financial  instability?  At  its  core,  this  boils  down  to  the  tension  between  short-term 
compulsions  and  long  term  growth  prospects.  Comfortingly,  empirical  research  by  BIS 
economists  shows  that  even  if  Basel  III  may  impose  some  costs  in  the  short-term,  it  will 
secure medium to long term growth prospects.  
5th  Question:  How  will  Basel  III  affect  the  profitability  of  banks?  Will  it  alter  their 
incentive structure? 
32.  
Let me attempt an answer. As we noted, Basel III requires higher and better quality 
capital. Admittedly, the cost of equity capital is high. It is also likely that the loss absorbency 
requirements on the non-equity regulatory capital will increase its cost.  
33.  
The average Return on Equity (RoE) of the Indian banking system for the last three 
years has been approximately 15 per cent. Implementation of Basel III is expected to result 
in a decline in Indian banks’ RoE in the short-term. However, the expected benefits arising 
out of a more stable and stronger banking system will largely offset the negative impact of a 
lower RoE in the medium to long term. It is also fair to assume that investors will perceive the 
benefits of having less risky and more stable banks, and will therefore be willing to trade in 
higher returns for lower risks.  
34.  
A  related  question  is  whether  banks  will  bear  the  increased  cost  of  capital 
themselves or pass it to their depositors and borrowers. This trade off has to be assessed in 
the  context  of  the relatively  higher  level  of  net  interest  margins  (NIMs) of  Indian  banks,  of 
approximately 3 per cent. This higher NIM suggests that there is scope for banks to improve 
their efficiency, bring down the cost of intermediation and ensure that returns are not overly 
compromised even as the cost of capital may increase.  
35.  
Having  dealt  with  capital  requirements,  let  us  now  turn  to  the  Liquidity  Standards 
under Basel III. Will the mandate to maintain a higher quantum of liquid assets encourage 
banks  to  resort  to  the  passive  option  of  lending  to  the  Government,  thereby  crowding  out 
credit to the private sector? Hopefully, this question will resolve itself as the savings rate of 
the economy improves and the fiscal deficit comes down.  
36.  
A related question is about the extent banks’ holding of government securities that 
should be taken into account for assessing compliance with liquidity standards. One view is 
that since the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) securities are required to be held on an ongoing 
basis, they should not be reckoned for calculating liquidity requirements under Basel III. An 
alternate view is that since the Reserve Bank is expected to provide liquidity against these 
securities under stressed conditions as part of its lender of last resort (LoLR) obligation, at 
least a pre-specified portion of these securities should be taken into account for assessing 
compliance with Basel III’s Liquidity Standards. The Reserve Bank will take a view on this in 
due course.  
37.  
So,  the  answer  to  the  question  of  whether  Basel  III  will  affect  the  profitability  of 
banks  and  alter  their  incentive  structure  is  that  the  competitive  dimensions  of  our  banking 
sector should ensure that banks are able to deliver efficient financial intermediation without 
compromising the interests of depositors and borrowers.  
6th Question: Does India really need Basel III? Don’t the costs outweigh the benefits? 
38.  
The  last  three  questions,  if  you  noticed,  dealt  with  the  putative  negative 
consequence of Basel III – the burden of raising additional capital and the costs of complying 
with the new liquidity standards, their impact on banks’ profitability, and on the overall growth 
prospects of the economy. 
39.  
One view, although not explicitly spelt out in that form, is that India need not adopt 
Basel III, or should adopt only a diluted version of it, so as to balance the benefits against the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
putative costs. To buttress this view, it is argued that Basel III is designed as a corrective for 
advanced economy banks which had gone astray, oftentimes taking advantage of regulatory 
gaps  and  regulatory  looseness,  and  that  Indian  banks  which  remained  sound  through  the 
crisis should not be burdened with the “onerous” obligations of Basel III.  
40.  
The Reserve Bank does not agree with this view. Our position is that India should 
transit to Basel III because of several reasons. By far the most important reason is that as 
India integrates with the rest of the world, as increasingly Indian banks go abroad and foreign 
banks come on to our shores, we cannot afford to have a regulatory deviation from global 
standards. Any deviation will hurt us both by way of perception and also in actual practice.  
41.  
The  “perception”  of  a  lower  standard  regulatory  regime  will  put  Indian  banks  at  a 
disadvantage  in  global  competition,  especially  because  the  implementation  of  Basel  III  is 
subject to a “peer group” review whose findings will be in the public domain.  
42.  
Deviation  from  Basel  III will  also  hurt  us  in  actual  practice. We  have  to recognize 
that Basel III provides for improved risk management systems in banks. It is important that 
Indian  banks  have  the  cushion  afforded  by  these  risk  management  systems  to  withstand 
shocks from external systems, especially as they deepen their links with the global financial 
system going forward.  
43.  
I  must  also  add,  as  I  complete  my  answer  to  this  question,  that  some  of  the 
prescriptions  of  Basel  III  have  already  been  in  existence  in  India,  and  the  net  additional 
burden will be lower than we tend to imagine.  
7th Question: The Reserve Bank has already rolled out the implementation of Basel III 
even as many countries are yet to do so. Why did you have to front run and why are 
some of your regulations more onerous than required under Basel III? 
44.  
The Reserve Bank issued final guidelines on Basel III capital regulation in May 2012 
to be implemented from January 1, 2013 to March 31, 2018 even as many other jurisdictions 
have yet to do so. We have been criticized for being unduly proactive in this regard. Let me 
respond to this criticism.  
First,  on  the  start  and  end  dates.  We  have  not  advanced  the  start  date.  It  is  the 
45.  
same as the internationally agreed date of January 1, 2013. However, we have advanced the 
end  date  from  the  internationally  agreed  date  of  December  31,  2018  by  nine  months  to 
March 31, 2018. We did this to align our date with the close of the Indian fiscal year, which is 
March  31.  We  could  have  gone  up  to  March  31,  2019,  but  that  would  have  overshot  the 
Basel  III  prescription  by  three  months  and  would  have  attracted  adverse  notice.  Our 
assessment is that the cost of that adverse notice will far exceed the marginal burden of a 
slightly earlier close date. So, we settled for March 31, 2018.  
46.  
Third,  major  global  banks  often  engage  themselves  in  the  Basel  Committee’s 
consultative process which is not the case with Indian banks. We moved early since we had 
completed the consultative process, and thought that we must give our banks a head start in 
transiting to Basel III.  
47.  
Let  me  then  move  to  the  more  weighty  question  of  why  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
prescribed higher capital and leverage norms for Indian banks than the Basel III minimum. 
Table  4  summarises  the  Basel  III  (international)  prescriptions  alongside  the  current 
requirements in India under Basel II, and as required under Basel III when fully implemented. 
48.  
What is the rationale for our more “onerous” capital standards? Note that banks in 
India follow the Standardised Approaches under Basel II. The higher prescription is intended 
to address any judgemental error in capital adequacy viz. wrong application of standardised 
risk weights, misclassification of asset quality etc. Also, while advanced approaches under 
Basel  II  have  been  strengthened,  the  calibration  of  standardised  risk  weights  is  yet  to  be 
comprehensively  effected.  And  more  importantly,  Indian  banks  have  not  so  far  been 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
subjected  to  Pillar  2  capital  requirement  under  Basel  II.  Thus,  the  higher  prescription 
addresses any potential concerns relating to undercapitalisation of risky exposures. It should 
also be noted in this context that even under the Basel I and Basel II regimes, the Reserve 
Bank’s  prescriptions  were  a  percentage  point  higher  than  the  international  norms. 
Experience shows that this prudence on our part had been helpful and was positive on the 
cost-benefit calculus.  
49.  
Please  note  that  India  has  not  been  an  outlier  in  prescribing  higher  capital 
standards.  Several  other  jurisdictions,  particularly  Asian  countries,  have  proposed  higher 
capital adequacy ratios under Basel III as may be seen from Table 5 below. 
50.  
Similarly,  a  question  has  been  raised  about  why  the  Reserve  Bank  prescribed  a 
higher leverage ratio, 4.5 per cent, against the Basel III norm of 3 per cent. It is a matter of 
supervisory  comfort  that  the  Indian  banking  system  is  only  moderately  leveraged  on  an 
aggregate basis (22 times of Tier 1 capital approximately). We thought it prudent not to dilute 
this  “comfortable”  position  during  the  parallel  run  period  of  the  leverage  ratio.  The  Basel 
Committee  is  monitoring  and  analysing  the  potential  impact  of  the  leverage  ratio.  As 
indicated in our Basel III framework, we will finalize the leverage ratio requirement taking into 
account the final proposal of the Basel Committee. 
8th Question: What are the potential challenges in implementing the countercyclical 
capital buffer? 
51.  
As  we  noted  earlier,  a  critical  component  of  the  Basel  III  package  is  a 
countercyclical capital buffer which mandates banks to build up a higher level of capital in 
good times that could be run down in times of economic contraction, consistent with safety 
and  soundness  considerations.  This  is  conceptually  neat,  but  is  challenging  in  operational 
terms,  as  indeed  evidenced  by  Spain’s  recent  experience.  The  foremost  challenge  is 
identifying the  inflexion  point  in  an  economic  cycle  which  should  trigger  the  release  of  the 
buffer.  It  is  quite  evident  that  both  tightening  too  early  or  too  late  can  be  costly  in 
macroeconomic terms. The identification of the inflexion point therefore needs to be based 
on objective and observable criteria. It also needs long series data on economic cycles. So, 
what  we  need  is  both  a  better  database  and  more  refined  statistical  skills  in  analyzing 
economic cycles.  
52.  
The countercyclical capital buffer as prescribed in Basel III was initially based on the 
credit / GDP metric. Is this a good economic indicator from the Indian perspective? A study 
undertaken by the Reserve Bank shows that the credit to GDP ratio has not historically been 
a good indicator of build up of systemic risk in our banking system.  
53.  
Furthermore,  some  economic  sectors  such  as  real  estate,  housing,  micro  finance 
and  consumer  credit  are  relatively  new  in  India,  and  banks  have  only  recently  begun 
financing them in a big way. The risk build up in such sectors cannot accurately be captured 
by the aggregate credit to GDP ratio. The Reserve Bank has so far calibrated countercyclical 
policies at the sectoral level, and I believe we need to continue to use that approach. The 
Basel  Committee  also  has  now  recognized  that  no  single  variable  can  fully  capture  the 
dynamics  of  the  economic  cycle.  Appropriate  calibration  of  the  buffer  requires  country 
specific  judgement  backed  by  a  broad  range  of  other  simple  indicators  used  in  financial 
stability assessments.  
9th Question: What are D-SIBs? Will any Indian bank be classified as a D-SIB? 
54.  
The  moral  hazard  relating  to  too-big-to-fail  institutions  which  encourages  risky 
behaviour by larger banks has been a huge issue on the post-crisis reform agenda. Basel III 
seeks to mitigate this externality by identifying global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) 
and mandating them to maintain a higher level of capital dependent on their level of systemic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
importance. The list of G-SIBs is to be reviewed annually. Currently, no Indian bank appears 
in the list of G-SIBs.  
55.  
Separately,  the  Basel  Committee  is  working  on  establishing  a  minimum  set  of 
principles  for  domestic  systemically  important  banks  (D-SIBs),  and  also  on  the  norms  for 
prescribing  higher  loss  absorbency  (HLA)  capital  standards  for  them.  Besides,  it  is  also 
necessary to evolve a sound resolution mechanism for D-SIBs.  
56.  
The moral hazard issue of too big to fail and the regulatory endeavour to address 
that  raise  a  question  about  the  optimal  size  of  a  G-SIB,  and  the  optimal  size  of  a  D-SIB 
relative to the size of the economy. Admittedly, larger banks offer certain benefits such as 
economies of scale in operation and capacity to finance large infrastructure projects which 
are typically considered more risky. In India, we also need large banks with potential capacity 
to  become  significant  global  players.  Nevertheless,  we  have  to  balance  the  benefits  that 
large banks extend with the moral hazard costs they entail.  
There are no two views about the need for building capacity within the banks, and 
10th Question: What sort of capacity building is required in the implementation of 
Basel III, especially in the area of risk management? What should banks do and what 
should the Reserve Bank do in this regard? 
57.  
also in the Reserve Bank which is the regulator, to efficiently implement Basel III. 
58.  
By far the most important reform is that there should be a radical change in banks’ 
approach  to  risk management.  Banks  in  India  are  currently  operating  on  the  Standardized 
Approaches  of  Basel  II.  The  larger  banks  need  to  migrate  to  the  Advanced  Approaches, 
especially as they expand their overseas presence. The adoption of advanced approaches to 
risk management will enable banks to manage their capital more efficiently and improve their 
profitability.  
59.  
This  graduation  to  Advanced  Approaches  requires  three  things.  First  and  most 
importantly, a change in perception from looking upon the capital framework as a compliance 
function  to  seeing  it  as  a  necessary  pre-requisite  for  keeping  the  bank  sound,  stable,  and 
therefore  profitable;  second,  deeper  and  more  broad  based  capacity  in  risk  management; 
and finally adequate and good quality data.  
Conclusion 
60.  
That brings me to the close of my list of ten questions and answers. Even as I have 
tried  to  be  comprehensive,  I  am  conscious  that  the  list  of  questions  I  have  raised  is  not 
exhaustive;  neither  are  my  answers  complete.  Under  the  circumstances,  I  believe  I  would 
have done a good job if this speech raises more questions in your minds, and sets you off on 
finding answers. 
61. There may be many unanswered questions. What I am certain of though is that effective 
implementation of Basel III is going to make Indian banks more strong, stable and sound so 
that they can deliver value to the real sectors of the economy. 
62.  
India’s banks in furthering our national aspiration of double digit growth. 
On that note, I wish this conference every success as it deliberates on the role of 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2  Basel II does not explicitly prescribe a minimum common equity Tier 1 capital. It is generally accepted 
that common equity should be the predominant part of Tier 1 capital i.e. 50 per cent. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
3  On top of internal accruals. 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
4  There is no direct prescription for minimum common equity. However, non-common equity elements in Tier 1 
are restricted to a maximum 40% of Tier 1 capital. Accordingly, indirectly minimum common equity is considered 
as 3.6% of Tier 1 capital. 
5  During the period of parallel run for Tier 1 leverage ratio beginning from January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2017, 
banks should strive to maintain the existing level of leverage ratio but, in no case it should fall below 4.5%. Banks 
having leverage ratio below 4.5% strive to achieve the target as early as possible. Under Basel III, the minimum 
Tier 1 leverage should be 3% during the parallel run period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
