Njuguna Ndung’u: Strengthening the mortgage market in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the official 
launch of the Housing Finance Current Account, Nairobi, 20 March 2012. 
 Mr. Steve Mainda, HFCK Chairman;  
Mr. Frank Ireri, Managing Director, HFCK;  
Board Management of Housing Finance here present;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I  am  very  delighted  to  join  you  this  evening  for  the  official  launch  of  the  Housing  Finance 
Current  Account.  The  provision  of  current  account  is  one  of  the  institution’s  key  planks 
towards its long term vision of offering a broad range of services to its customers.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow  me  first  to  commend  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of 
Housing Finance for the introduction of this new product that will go a long way in enabling 
the institution access affordable funds. It is noteworthy that since its incorporation in 1965, 
the institution has progressively grown in this very specialized market to 11 branches. I also 
note  that  as  at  January  2012,  the  institution  had  an  impressive  mortgage  portfolio  of 
Ksh.26 billion and customer deposits of Ksh.19 billion, supported by a strong capital base of 
Ksh.3.7 billion. In addition, the number of mortgage accounts stood at 5,143, accounting for 
about 31% of the total banking sector mortgage accounts. This indeed shows great effort put 
in by the Board and staff of Housing Finance. This is the direction we need to strengthen our 
mortgage market.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  product  being  launched  today  is  as  a  result  of  the  policy 
proposals  made  by  the  Central  Bank  in  Year  2010  that  resulted  in  the  Banking  Act  being 
amended  to  allow  mortgage  finance  companies  to  operate  current  accounts.  This initiative 
was meant to facilitate attraction of large amounts of low cost customer deposits that would 
in  turn  allow  such  institutions  to  increase  their  lending  capacity  and  expand  operations  to 
meet the growing demand for housing.  
The Central Bank, jointly with the World Bank in June 2010, conducted a baseline survey on 
mortgage  finance  in  Kenya  with  the  aim  of  assessing  the  size  and  obstacles  to  the 
development  of  the  mortgage  finance  market.  The  results  of  the  survey  showed  that  the 
country’s  mortgage  finance  market  has  more  than  tripled  over  the  last  five  years,  from 
Ksh.19 billion in 2006 to Ksh.61 billion in 2010, while the number mortgages in the banking 
sector grew from 7,580 to 13,803 over the same period, demonstrating great potential in this 
sector. However, Kenya’s mortgage debt to GDP ratio at about 2.5% is still low compared to 
the international standards such as US Market where the ratio is over 70%.  
The  survey  also  identified  key  constraints  to  the  mortgage  market  in  Kenya  such  as  low 
levels  of  income,  access  to  long  term  funds,  credit  risk  due  to  absence  of  historical 
information,  relatively  high  interest  rates,  difficulties  with  property  registration  and  high 
incidental  costs  of  borrowing.  However,  various  initiatives  are  under  way  to  tackle  these 
obstacles. These initiatives include issuance of corporate/housing bonds by institutions with 
the aim of mobilizing long term resources to match the long-term nature of mortgages and 
the  roll-out  of  the  credit  information  sharing  mechanism  to  enable  financial  institutions 
enhance their credit risk management processes.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, Kenya has seen rapid urbanization over the last decade with the 
proportion of the Kenyan population living in urban areas forecast to reach 60% by the year 
2030  from  about  20%  in  2005.  Expanding  cities  are  good  for  productivity  and  growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
However, the Kenyan housing sector is currently characterized by inadequacy of affordable 
and decent housing and low-level of urban home ownership.  
Despite  the  challenges,  the  Housing  Sector  plays  a  critical  role  in  the  achievement  of  key 
goals  envisaged  by  Vision  2030.  Housing  construction,  being  labour  intensive  and  having 
strong  linkages  with  other  sectors  of  the  economy  remains  one  of  the  principal  levers  for 
creating jobs and driving economic activity. Mortgage market development will be required to 
support  the  expanding  cities  with  the  accompanying  productivity  gains;  but  also  has  to  be 
accompanied by infrastructure to decongest the cities and create more space for housing.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Central Bank of Kenya in partnership with the banking sector is 
currently  focusing  on  initiatives  aimed  at  reducing  costs  of  doing  business  for  financial 
institutions  with  the  main  aim  of  bringing  down  costs  of  financial  services.  In  addition  to 
developing innovative products, the other major initiative towards cost reduction and financial 
inclusion has been the introduction of Agent Banking. The CBK has so far licensed eleven 
banks to carry out agent banking business and approved 10,335 specific agents since the 
roll out in May 2010. The rollout of the agent banking model is mainly aimed at addressing 
the challenges of high transaction costs arising from the lack of proximity to financial services 
and  putting  up  brick  and  mortar  branches  where  they  may  not  be  economical  in  all  the 
corners where customers are to be found. I am delighted to note that Housing Finance has 
also obtained approval for agent network from CBK and will in due course be rolling out the 
model.  
Finally, let me reiterate that the Central Bank will continue to facilitate an environment that 
allows for a diverse range of financial service providers to thrive and compete in the Kenyan 
market.  Specifically,  the  Central  Bank  remains  committed  to  working  with  the  relevant 
stakeholders  to  create an  enabling  environment  for  the  mortgage  sector  to  play  its  rightful 
role in achieving the aspirations of the country’s blueprint, the Vision 2030, which includes 
providing  the  country’s  population  with  adequate  and  decent  housing  in  a  sustainable 
environment. Further, it will pursue better regulation as opposed to more regulation so as to 
create  room  for  more  innovations  by  financial  institutions  and  also  be  ready  with  effective 
tools to deal with any system vulnerabilities and emerging risks. We are happy and proud to 
be  associated  closely  with  the  developments  Housing  Finance  has  introduced  and  the 
growth success they have achieved so far.  
With these few remarks ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and privilege to declare 
the  Housing  Finance  Current  Account  officially  launched  and  we  look  forward  to  seeing 
better  results  and  innovations  from  them  in  the  market  place  with  increased  capacity  and 
financial strength due to this launch.  
Thank You 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
