Arnór Sighvatsson: Iceland’s future monetary and exchange rate regime 
Speech  by  Mr  Arnór  Sighvatsson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  a 
meeting of the Icelandic Federation of Labour, Reykjavík, 10 January 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen:  
In  the  wake  of  severe  financial  and  monetary  instability,  it  is  appropriate  for  the  Icelandic 
authorities  to  conduct  a  comprehensive  review  of  Iceland’s  exchange  rate  and  monetary 
policy regime. The re-assessment must be based on an accurate diagnosis. The authorities 
should not only review the experience of recent years, but also grapple with the fundamental 
questions of why Iceland’s monetary policy track record has been so dismal, over nearly a 
century, that the Icelandic króna has depreciated by 99.95% against the Danish krone since 
the two currencies were uncoupled in 1920.  
Monetary policy generally faces two conflicting roles of the currency exchange rate: to be an 
anchor of monetary policy, on the one hand, and a tool for adjustment, on the other. During 
the Icelandic króna’s lifetime as an independent currency, exchange rate policy has moved 
along  the  axis  between  fixing  and  floating,  but  without  managing  to  stop  the  virtually 
uninterrupted erosion of the króna’s purchasing power except for short periods of time.  
There could be four potential types of explanations for Iceland’s poor performance in the field 
of monetary policy, and corresponding types of measures for improving the performance: 
1. 
First  of  all,  the  source  of  the  problem  might  be  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy  or  its  framework.  The  framework  has  been  strengthened  in  various  ways 
since  the  turn  of  the  century;  for  example,  by  enhancing  the  Central  Bank’s 
independence,  adopting  an  inflation  target,  and  appointing  a  Monetary  Policy 
Committee.  Even  though  performance  over  most  of  the  period  under  scrutiny  has 
fallen short of set objectives and has been poor in comparison with other countries, 
inflation has declined more rapidly in the wake of the recent financial and balance of 
payments  crisis  than  after  the  inflation  episodes  of  the  20th  century,  when  it  often 
proved extremely persistent, partly because interest rates were held abnormally low. 
The monetary framework might be strengthened further, however, by providing the 
Central  Bank  with  supplemental  tools,  in  addition  to  its  interest  rates,  that  could 
boost the efficiency of monetary policy.1 Applying macroprudential tools effectively 
and  strengthening  the  regulatory  framework  governing  the  financial  activities  that 
have caused the recent instability could possibly improve performance.  
Second, economic policy, more generally, might explain the poor track record. Fiscal 
dominance and an employment policy that placed too heavy a burden on monetary 
policy probably contributed significantly to high inflation in past decades. Enhanced 
Central Bank independence and the prohibition on direct Treasury borrowing from 
the Bank have reduced fiscal dominance. This has been beneficial, as is indicated 
by  the  fact  that  the  inflation  episodes  in  the  first  decade  of  the  21st  century  have 
been  shorter-lived  than  those  in  the  latter  half  of  the  20th.  Even  in  this  century, 
however,  there  has  been  a  conflict  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  –  that  is, 
fiscal policy has not supported monetary policy sufficiently, as it would if fiscal policy 
were anchored on a nominal expenditure plan several years ahead. This has proven 
difficult to carry out.2 It is hard to apply such a rule if exchange rate volatility causes 
2. 
                                                 
1 
2  An attempt to adopt such a rule was made in connection with the Government-IMF economic programme, but 
In recent years, the Central Bank has presented proposals for such reforms in two reports to the authorities.  
it appears to have been abandoned when put to the test.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
3. 
4. 
instability  in  Treasury  expenditures  (and  revenues).  Furthermore,  Iceland  lacks  a 
proper institutional framework – either a domestic agency (such as an independent 
financial council) or a foreign body – to support such policy and exercise a measure 
of surveillance and discipline over fiscal authorities.  
In  the  third  place,  the  source  of  poor  performance  may  lie  in  Iceland’s  economic 
structure,  e.g.  its  volatile  export  sectors  and  relatively  undiversified  economy.  The 
structure  of  the  Icelandic  economy  is  not  that  different  from  other  developed 
countries, however. Public and private services constitute the largest sectors of the 
economy.  Although  commodity-based  exports  could  be  a  source  of  instability, 
Iceland  is  far  from  being  the  only  developed  country  in  such  a  position.  Other 
developed commodity exporters – Norway, New Zealand, and Australia – have been 
much more successful at achieving price stability than Iceland has. Reform of the 
fisheries management system and technological developments in the fishing sector, 
together with increased diversification, have made the economy less vulnerable to 
the  vicissitudes  of  nature.3  I  doubt  the  structure  of  the  economy  is  a  major  factor 
here, but it could be possible to enhance diversity by, for example, facilitating foreign 
investment in new sectors.  
Given  that  performance  has  been  poor  throughout  a  very  long  period  over  which 
various  exchange  rate  regimes  have  been  in  place,  it  is  natural  to  consider  the 
currency itself and the small size of the currency area. Iceland is unique as regards 
both  the  size  of  its  currency  area  and  the  volatility  of  private  consumption,  even 
when  its  small  size  is  taken  into  account.  It  appears  obvious  that  fluctuation  in 
private consumption is driven primarily by exchange rate volatility, as Chart 1 shows. 
It  is  difficult  to  reduce  fluctuations  in  private  consumption  unless  exchange  rate 
volatility is reduced. Although it can be argued from a theoretical standpoint that a 
floating  currency  should  be  a  shock  absorber,  recent  research  suggests  that 
fluctuations in the exchange rate may actually be a source of shock, at least in very 
small economies. Not only is exchange rate volatility greater, but the adjustment of 
the  exchange  rate  returns  less  than  no  benefit  in  the  form  of  a  more  stable  real 
economy.4  
All  four  of  these  explanations  probably  have  some  validity,  but  there  is  good  reason  to 
examine  the  fourth  of  these  more  closely.  Why  is  exchange  rate  adjustment  not  a  shock 
absorber in small countries, as in the textbook example, but rather a source of shock? There 
could be a number of explanations for this.  
1. 
The  tendency  of  exchange  rates  to  fluctuate  in  excess  of  what  appears  to  be 
warranted by fundamentals could be a contributing factor. In a sense, the exchange 
rate of a currency is an asset price and, as such, is determined by expectations vis-
à-vis  an  uncertain  future.  Expectations  can  swing  from  euphoria  concerning  the 
expected future stream of foreign currency revenue from investment that will support 
a  currency  to  despair  and,  in  extreme  cases,  serious  lack  of  confidence  over  a 
protracted  period.  Exchange  rate  movements  have  a  more  profound  effect  on  the 
economy  than  do  other  asset  prices,  however.  In  addition  to  storing  value,  a 
currency is a unit of account and a medium of exchange. Fluctuations in currency 
exchange  rates  induces  volatility  of  relative  prices  throughout  the  economy, 
particularly in small, dollarised economies, and elevate the risk of doing business.  
                                                 
3 
Increased aluminium production has also reduced the impact of commodity market volatility on the domestic 
employment level.  
4  See  Francis  Breedon,  Thórarinn  G.  Pétursson,  and  Andrew  Rose:  Exchange  Rate  Policy  in  Small  Rich 
Economies, Central Bank of Iceland, Working Paper no. 53. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The  tendency  of  currencies  to  fluctuate  beyond  what  can  be  justified  by 
fundamentals  has  much  wider  implications  in  small  currency  areas  than  in  large 
ones, as small currency areas are more dependent on foreign markets. When the 
exchange  rate  falls,  the  price  level  rises,  relative  prices  change,  and  ultimately, 
wage  levels  are  affected.  Asymmetrical  wage  and  price  formation  reduces  the 
likelihood that the currency will recover in nominal terms; that is, nominal wage and 
price increases tend to reverse only partially as the currency recovers, making it less 
likely  that  the  preceding  depreciation  will  reverse  in  full.  The  result  is  high  and 
unstable inflation, and inflation expectations that fail to be anchored to a low inflation 
target. Shallow markets and a limited number of participants make it difficult for firms 
to hedge against foreign exchange risk except for a very short period.  
A private sector that is highly leveraged – largely in terms of foreign currency loans 
or  CPI-indexed  loans  –  exacerbates  the  problem  associated  with  exchange  rate 
instability.  It  exaggerates  the  procyclical  tendency  of  the  exchange  rate;  that  is,  it 
stimulates  demand  during  upswings,  when  currency  appreciation  eases  the  debt 
burden, and deepens the contraction of demand during the downward cycle, as is 
evidenced by the contraction in the wake of the recent financial crisis. Overshooting 
of the exchange rate has caused enormous burning of assets and redistribution of 
wealth,  more  or  less  arbitrarily.  The  consequences  of  overadjustment  of  this 
magnitude can hardly be called “creative destruction”, to use Schumpeter’s turn of 
phrase. It is simply destruction that reduces the potential output of the economy.  
According to textbook economics, exports should be stimulated when the domestic 
currency depreciates; hence relative wages become more competitive and domestic 
demand contracts. In theory, external shocks should therefore have a lesser impact 
on the domestic employment level than they would under a fixed rate regime. This 
probably  applies  to  Iceland  as  well,  to  a  certain  extent.  But  there  is  reason  to 
assume  that  the  positive  effect  of  currency  depreciation  on  exports  is  less 
pronounced  in  very  small  countries,  particularly  those  whose  exports  are  of  the 
same  type  as  Iceland’s.  Iceland’s  chief  export  sectors  –  marine  products  and 
aluminium  –  cannot  easily  step  up  production  for  obvious  reasons,  irrespective  of 
wage  competitiveness.  Iceland’s  export  companies  are  generally  specialised  for 
exportation. Only a tiny share of their production is destined for the domestic market. 
As a result, they cannot easily step up exports simply by shifting a larger share of 
their  production  to  overseas  markets.  The  domestic  market  is  simply  too  small  to 
absorb a significant share of the production of a domestic firm that has achieved full 
economy of scale. In order to boost exports, Iceland’s exporters must increase their 
production capacity through new investment, often with a long gestation period. A 
comparison  with  European  countries  that  fared  poorly  as  a  result  of  the  financial 
crisis  shows  that  Iceland’s  exports  have  not  grown  more  than  those  of  euro  area 
countries or those with fixed exchange rates. Actually, excluding seasonal effects, 
some of the fixed-rate countries have experienced greater export growth (Chart 2).  
Actually, if exchange rate volatility is excessive and exporters are heavily leveraged 
in foreign currency, a large currency depreciation could conceivably have a negative 
impact  on  exports.  Even  though  the  depreciation  has  a  positive  effect  on  an 
exporter’s cash flow, the balance sheet effects could make the company technically 
insolvent.  This  complicates  access  to  credit,  which  may  be  a  prerequisite  for  the 
expansion of exports in a small economy with specialised export production.  
According to the above, my preliminary diagnosis is that the erosion of the value of the króna 
since  its  launch  as  an  independent  currency  in  1920  can  be  traced  to  an  inadequate 
monetary framework (particularly in the early years), general lack of discipline in economic 
policy-making,  and  the  interaction  of  those  problems  with  problems  of  running  the  world’s 
smallest independently floating currency. In order to maximise the chance of recovery, all of 
these underlying weaknesses must be treated simultaneously, including the instability of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
currency,  as  some  of  the  prescribed  medications  for  long-term  reduction  of  exchange  rate 
volatility  are  difficult  to administer  unless  exchange  rate  volatility  is  reduced  first. Although 
the  Central  Bank  has  announced  its  intention  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market 
more actively than it has in the past in preparation for lean times, such intervention should 
not be expected to have a profound or lasting impact on the exchange rate.5 Other ways to 
reduce harmful exchange rate fluctuations should therefore be considered. 
Negotiations  are  currently  underway  concerning  Iceland’s  possible  accession  to  the 
European  Union  and  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  upon  fulfilment  of  the 
Maastricht criteria. If there is no advantage to a floating exchange rate – or even less than no 
advantage  –  then  there  is  clearly  no  benefit  in  delaying  membership  of  the  European 
Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  (ERM  II),  which  precedes  full  membership,  provided  that  EU 
membership is approved in a national referendum and by member states.  
How quickly Iceland fulfils the Maastricht criteria is primarily in the hands of the authorities 
and the social partners. In my view, the timing of membership will be determined primarily by 
how  quickly  the  general  government  debt  ratio  can  be  lowered  towards  the  Maastricht 
criteria. According to the formal requirements, general government debt must be less than 
60%  of  GDP  or  fall  quickly  enough  towards  that  target.  Belgium,  Italy,  and  Greece  were 
admitted to the EMU with general government debt in excess of 100% of GDP – a decision 
now  rued  by  many.  Iceland  will  probably  be  subjected  to  more  stringent  requirements,  for 
which I am tempted to be grateful.  
On the other hand, there is no reason to despair over the task of reducing public sector debt 
to 60% of GDP. The target Iceland has set for itself in any case, partly by aiming for a fiscal 
surplus,  which  is  stricter  than  the  3%  deficit  set  forth  in  the  Maastricht  criteria.  Although 
Iceland’s gross public sector debt will be close to 100% of GDP as of end-2011, net debt is 
only  about  40%  of  GDP.  A  large  share  of  gross  debt  is  due  to  large  temporary  foreign 
exchange reserves.  
Once  uncertainty  about  the  removal  of  capital  controls  is  behind  us,  the  sovereign  credit 
rating improves, and the refinancing risk related to foreign debt diminishes, the need for large 
foreign  exchange  reserves  will  diminish  as  well.  Furthermore,  as  a  member  of  a  currency 
union,  a  small  country  needs  smaller  foreign  currency  reserves  than  it  needs  to  run  an 
independent currency, which it must be prepared to defend, and possibly provide domestic 
financial  institutions  with  foreign  currency  liquidity  during  times  of  distress.  Participation  in 
ERM  II,  which  entails  reciprocal  responsibility  for  exchange  rate  stability,  would  reduce 
somewhat  the  need  for  large  foreign  exchange  reserves  relative  to  a  unilateral  fixed  rate 
regime.  In  addition,  the  Government  owns  substantial  assets  that  it  could  sell  in  order  to 
speed up the reduction of gross debt, including its stake in the banks.6 
How Iceland would stand vis-à-vis the other Maastricht criteria, such as those pertaining to 
inflation, interest rate differential, and ERM II membership (for two years prior to accession) 
is  also  largely  in  the  hands  of  the  authorities.  Through  fiscal  restraint,  they  could  also 
contribute to the convergence of long-term interest rates. The social partners could promote 
low  inflation  by  exercising  restraint  in  wage  settlements.  Finally,  the  shorter  end  of  the 
interest  rate  spectrum  is  determined  by  the  market’s  self-fulfilling  expectations  concerning 
membership itself and by the decisions of the Central Bank.  
Although a number of arguments indicate that currency union membership would suit Iceland 
well, it is not certain that a majority of the electorate will vote in favour of European Union 
membership in a national referendum. The fact that a number of EU member countries are in 
                                                 
5 
Intervention would normally be sterilised in order to prevent undesirable effects on money supply. Hence the 
impact on the exchange rate is unlikely to be large or lasting. 
6  According to current targets, the authorities aim to reduce gross public sector debt to 70% of GDP by 2015.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  distress,  not  least  those  permitted  to  join  the  EMU  through  rather  liberal 
interpretation of the Maastricht criteria, does not increase the likelihood that the referendum 
would pass. Although the performance of a currency union should be evaluated rather in the 
light  of  price  stability,  which  is  the  principal  task  of  the  area’s  central  banks  (and  where 
performance  has  been  strong),  than  in  the  light  of  fiscal  performance,  which  is  the 
responsibility of individual member states, or financial stability, which – unfortunately – is still 
largely the province of individual member states, it is not unlikely that the problems facing the 
euro area will affect voters’ choices. The looming financial and sovereign debt crisis in the 
periphery of the euro area poses a problem for the conduct of the common monetary policy 
that must be solved.  
In the event that membership is rejected, it would be appropriate to consider other options. 
The measures I mentioned earlier could improve performance without radical changes. How 
successful they are will be determined to a large extent by the strength of political support for 
the reforms. For example, will those who consider the decisions of the independent Monetary 
Policy Committee “crazy” agree to place further tools at the disposal of the Central Bank or 
an  independent  financial  stability  committee?  The  combination  of  short-sightedness  and 
populism  that  has  long  characterised  economic  and  monetary  discourse  in  Iceland  is  a 
roadblock  to  enhanced  stability.  Consequently,  I  am  not  optimistic  that  a  modified  fixed 
exchange  rate  regime,  such  as  that  pursued  in  Iceland  before  the  inflation  target  was 
adopted in 2001, will be successful.7  
In the event that currency union membership is not an option, the question arises whether it 
would still be desirable to remove the temptation and source of instability represented by a 
flexible  or  floating  exchange  rate,  either  through  a  currency  board  or  through  unilateral 
adoption  of  another  currency.  The  preconditions  for  such  radical  steps  to  be  sensible  are 
much farther off on the horizon, however, than EMU membership, should that option become 
available. There are two primary reasons for this.  
First  of  all, recent  experience  has demonstrated  that  the  provision  of central  bank  liquidity 
can  determine  whether  a  country’s  banking  system  survives  a  period  of  extreme  stress.  It 
failed  to  prevent  the  collapse  of  the  Icelandic  banking  system,  but  many  relatively  healthy 
banks in Europe and elsewhere would probably have failed as well in the autumn of 2008, 
with all the economic and social cost implied, if their national central banks had not provided 
them  with  liquidity  during  the  turmoil  and  were  it  not  for  cross-border  co-operation  among 
central banks. Therefore, I am of the view that unilateral adoption of a foreign currency or a 
currency board could only be considered prudent if all of Iceland’s largest banks were owned 
by a strong foreign bank with the financial strength to provide them with liquidity during times 
of distress.  
Second, unilateral adoption of another currency is a solution that is hardly worth considering 
unless  EMU  membership  has  been  ruled  out  for  the  foreseeable  future,  as  it  entails  extra 
cost  of  purchase  of  new  base  money  for  the  banking  system  (generally  in  the  range  of  
70–100  b.kr.  in  recent  years)  and  larger  precautionary  foreign  exchange  reserves 
(particularly if the banks are not foreign-owned). It would be pointless to pay that price for a 
few years’ benefit, plus the seigniorage that would revert permanently to the ECB.  
Currencies  other 
the 
characteristics required of such a currency, there is no other that comes close to being as 
beneficial for Iceland as the euro is. The most important characteristics of such a currency 
are the following: 
the  euro  have  also  been  mentioned.  But  considering 
than 
                                                 
7  Such  a  policy  has  proven  successful  in  Denmark,  but  Denmark  has  a  stronger  economic  framework  than 
Iceland and enjoys ECB support through ERM II membership.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
1. 
2. 
3. 
The share of the currency area in  Iceland’s external trade should be greater than 
that of other currencies and, preferably, Iceland should have a free trade agreement 
with the area in question that would contribute to economic integration with it.  
The  currency  should  be  an  international  reserve  currency,  and  the  market  for  it 
should be deep enough to facilitate hedging against foreign exchange risk.  
The  currency  area  should  be  characterised  by  price  stability  and  have  a  sound 
monetary policy framework.  
Considering  those  characteristics,  adopting  any  currency  other  than  the  euro  would  have 
serious drawbacks.8 Therefore, reforming the current regime appears preferable to a radical 
change should EMU membership be unattainable, at least for the next decade. The fact that 
the  vast  majority  of  small  countries  either  use  another  country’s  currency  or  pursue  some 
type of rigid fixed exchange rate policy could indicate, however, that a floating currency may 
face difficulties over the long haul (Chart 3).  
Ladies and gentlemen:  
No monetary framework or choice of currency will solve Iceland’s economic problems once 
and  for  all.  The  set  of  solutions  labelled  “cure-for-all-ills”  is  an  empty  set.  Protracted 
discussions  of  the  contents  of  an  empty  set  are  not  only  empty  in  themselves;  they  are 
absolutely  pointless.  Irrespective  of  the  framework,  economic  policy  must  be  pursued  with 
greater  discipline  than  has  been  the  case  to  date.  However,  imposing  a  framework  that 
forces the authorities to adopt more long-term oriented policies could improve performance. 
One way to do this is to join a currency union. The experience of Greece and other countries 
on the periphery of the EMU shows, however, that if economic policies remain short-sighted 
and  solving  imminent  fiscal  problems  is  delayed  for  too  long,  the  imposed  discipline  is 
anything but palatable. I think Iceland’s experience of its collaboration with the IMF indicates, 
however,  that  it  would  flourish  under  such  discipline.  But  if  EMU  membership  is  not  an 
option, that discipline must come from within. The reforms proposed by the Central Bank in 
two  recent  reports  are  designed  to  foster  such  discipline.  In  many  instances,  the  same 
measures  could  contribute  to  stability  and  sustainable  output  growth  as  a  member  of  a 
currency union and, in some respects, could be easier to implement from within it.  
Thank you. 
                                                 
8  The most viable option would perhaps be the Danish krone, provided that the authorities were willing to bet on 
its continued stability vis-à-vis the euro. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Below are the slides shown during the speech:  
Chart 1  
Chart 2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 3 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
