Norman T L Chan: Hong Kong – an offshore renminbi business centre 
Speeking  points  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  on 
to  Renminbi  Risk 
Management Limit and Net Open Position, Hong Kong, 17 January 2012. 
the  Regulatory  Requirements 
the  Adjustments 
for 
 The development of Hong Kong as an offshore RMB business centre achieved encouraging 
results in the past year. Trade settlement using RMB reached RMB2 trillion; RMB deposits 
almost doubled; and total issuance of dim sum bonds exceeded RMB100 billion. I am very 
confident that the trend of solid development will continue in 2012. 
With the continued growth in both turnover and depth of the offshore RMB (CNH) market in 
Hong Kong, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) considers that conditions are now 
ripe to appropriately relax certain regulatory requirements on the RMB business of banks in 
Hong Kong. 
First, on the regulatory requirements of the RMB net open position, the HKMA has decided to 
raise the limit for RMB net open position, from not exceeding 10% to not exceeding 20% of 
the bank’s total RMB assets or liabilities.  
Second, currently the HKMA requires each Participating AI to maintain the sum of RMB cash 
or balances with the RMB Clearing Bank and the People’s Bank of China, Shenzhen branch, 
at no less than 25% of its total RMB customer deposits (referred as RMB risk management 
limit). The HKMA has now decided that Participating AIs can include two more types of RMB 
assets, namely “RMB sovereign bonds issued in Hong Kong by the Ministry of Finance of 
China”  and  “RMB  bond  investment  through  the  Mainland  interbank  bond  market”,  in  the 
calculation of this limit.  
The  above  two  relaxations  take  effect  today.  I  believe  they  will  help  expand  the  scope  of 
development  for  offshore  RMB  business  in  Hong  Kong  and  provide  banks  with  a  greater 
flexibility in RMB asset management, which will be conducive to further development of the 
market. 
Third, the HKMA has imposed some restrictive arrangements on the inclusion of RMB assets 
as liquid assets in calculating the statutory liquidity ratio of AIs. As the offshore RMB market 
in  Hong  Kong  becomes  more  mature,  I  believe  there  is  room  for  suitably  relaxing  these 
restrictions. Since the adjustments to be made in the calculation are more complicated and 
technical, we shall announce the details later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
