Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Banking reform and its impact on the Nigerian 
economy 
Lecture  by  Mr  Sanusi  Lamido  Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria,  at  the 
University of Warwick’s Economic Summit, Warwick, 17 February 2012. 
 Protocol 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  be  invited  to  address  the  Warwick  Economic  Summit,  which  has 
become one of the largest academic conferences in Europe. I wish to commend the entire 
students and staff of the University of Warwick for inviting me to share my experiences at the 
Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  (CBN).  I  am  highly  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  summit  where  top 
policymakers, professionals and technocrats around the world meet to debate and exchange 
views  on  contemporary  economic  issues.  The  outcomes  of  the  Summit  had  continued  to 
inspire policymakers in designing proactive micro and macroeconomic management policies 
for solving emerging economic problems in both developed and developing countries. It is 
against this backdrop that I urge you to sustain the Annual Summit. My address today will 
focus on “Banking Reforms in Nigeria and Its Impact on the Economy”. As you may all 
be aware, the banking sector in Nigeria has recently witnessed significant reforms and hard 
choices  have  had  to  be  made  to  tackle  the  lingering  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis, 
which  culminated  in  the  contraction  of  some  banks’  balance  sheets  with  the  attendant 
economic losses. I am pleased to note that these problems have been surmounted through 
series of reforms undertaken by the Central Bank of Nigeria.  
Introduction  
Generally,  the  financial  system  is  more  than  just  institutions  that  facilitate  payments  and 
extend credit. It encompasses all functions that direct real resources to their ultimate user. It 
is the central nervous system of a market economy and contains a number of separate, yet 
co-dependent, components all of which are essential to its effective and efficient functioning. 
These components include financial intermediaries such as banks and insurance companies 
which  act  as  principal  agents  for  assuming  liabilities  and  acquiring  claims.  The  second 
component  is  the  markets  in  which  financial  assets  are  exchanged,  while  the  third  is  the 
infrastructural component, which is necessary for the effective interaction of intermediaries 
and markets.  
The 
intertwined.  Banks  need  payments  system 
infrastructure to exchange claims securely and markets in which to hedge the risks arising 
from their intermediation activities. The banking system therefore functions more efficiently 
and  effectively  when  there  is  a  robust  and  efficient  payments  systems  infrastructure. 
Moreover the concern to ensure a sound banking system by the Central Bank is underscored 
by the critical role of banks in national economic development. Banks for instance, mobilizes 
savings for investment purposes which further generates growth and employment. The real 
sector, which is the productive sector of the economy, relies heavily on the banking sector for 
credit.  Government  also  raises 
its 
developmental programmes and strategic objectives. It is in view of these strategic roles of 
the  banking  system  to  national  economic  development  that  the  issue  of  a  sound  banking 
system, through proactive reforms becomes imperative.  
three  components  are 
the  banking  system 
inextricably 
through 
finance 
funds 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Rationale for banking reforms in Nigeria  
Conceptually,  economic  reforms  are  undertaken  to  ensure  that  every  part  of  the  economy 
functions  efficiently  in  order  to  ensure  the  achievement  of  macroeconomic  goals  of  price 
stability, full employment, high economic growth and internal and external balances. Thus, 
banking reform in Nigeria is an integral part of the country-wide reform program undertaken 
to  reposition  the  Nigerian  economy  to  achieve  the  objective  of  becoming  one  of  the 
20 largest economies by the year 2020. As part of the vision, the banking sector is expected 
to  effectively  play  its  actual  role  in  intermediation  and  for  the  banks  to  be  among  global 
players in the international financial markets.  
As I will explore later, the various reforms we undertook in Nigeria were targeted at making 
the  system  more  effective  and  strengthening  its  growth  potentials.  In  view  of  the  fact  that 
banks take deposits from the public, there is a need for periodic reforms in order to foster 
financial stability and confidence in the system.  
The  recent  experience  from  the  global  financial  crisis  has  further  underscored  the 
imperatives  of  countries  to  embark  on  banking  reforms  on  a  regular  basis.  As  you  are  all 
aware,  the  world  economy  was  hit  by  an  unprecedented  financial  and  economic  crisis  in 
2007–2009 that resulted in a global recession. This crisis led to the collapse of many world-
renowned financial institutions and even caused an entire nation to be rendered bankrupt.  
In Nigeria, the economy faltered and was hit by the second round effect of the crisis as the 
stock  market  collapsed  by  70  per  cent  in  2008–2009  and  many  Nigerian  banks  sustained 
huge losses, particularly as a result of their exposure to the capital market and downstream 
oil  and  gas  sector.  Therefore,  the  CBN  had  to  rescue  8  of  the  banks  through  capital  and 
liquidity injections, as well as removal of their top executives and consequent prosecution of 
those  who  committed  some  infractions.  These  actions  became  necessary  to  restore 
confidence and sanity in the banking system. 
A  holistic  investigation  into  what  went  wrong  in  Nigeria  leading  up  to  the  banking  crisis  in 
2008  found  eight  interrelated  factors  responsible.  These  were  macroeconomic  instability 
caused by large and sudden capital inflows, major failures in corporate governance at banks, 
lack of investor and consumer sophistication, inadequate disclosure and transparency about 
the  financial  position  of  banks,  critical  gaps  in  the  regulatory  framework  and  regulations, 
uneven supervision and enforcement, unstructured governance & management processes at 
the CBN/ and weaknesses in the business environment. Each of these factors is serious in 
its own right. Acted together they brought the entire Nigerian financial system to the brink of 
collapse.  
We all know that a well-functioning financial system matters to everyone and to the economy 
at large. The Nigerian economy has huge potential for growth. To realize this potential, it is 
imperative that we learn lessons from the crisis and take steps to not only fix the problems, 
but  to  also  introduce  measures  to  establish  financial  stability,  a  healthy  evolution  of  the 
financial  sector  and  ensure  the  banking  sector  contributes  to  the  development  of  the  real 
economy.  
As  a  result,  the  Nigerian  banking  system  has  steadily  evolved,  following  wide  and  far-
reaching reforms embarked upon by the regulatory authorities. Following the banking crisis 
of 2008, the Central Bank of Nigeria articulated a blue print known as “The Project Alpha 
Initiative” for reforming the Nigerian financial system in general and the banking sector in 
particular. The reforms aimed at removing the inherent weaknesses and fragmentation of the 
financial system, integrating the various ad-hoc and piecemeal reforms and unleashing of the 
huge potential of the economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Critical elements of banking reform in Nigeria  
The  current  reforms  which  began  in  2004  with  the  consolidation  programme  were 
necessitated by the need to strengthen the banks. The policy thrust at inception, was to grow 
the banks and position them to play pivotal roles in driving development across the sectors of 
the economy. As a result, banks were consolidated through mergers and acquisitions, raising 
the capital base from N2 billion to a minimum of N25 billion, which reduced the number of 
banks from 89 to 25 in 2005, and later to 24.  
Beyond  the  need  to  recapitalize  the  banks,  the  regulatory  reforms  also  focused  on  the 
following:  
 
 
Risk-focused and rule-based regulatory framework;  
Zero  tolerance  in  regulatory  framework  in  data/information  rendition/reporting  and 
infractions;  
Strict enforcement of corporate governance principles in banking;  
Expeditious process for rendition of returns by banks and other financial institutions 
through e-FASS;  
Revision  and  updating  of  relevant  laws  for  effective  corporate  governance  and 
ensuring greater transparency and accountability in the implementation of banking 
laws and regulations, as well as;  
The introduction of a flexible interest rate based framework that made the monetary 
policy  rate  the  operating  target.  The  new  framework  has  enabled  the  bank  to  be 
proactive  in  countering  inflationary  pressures.  The  corridor  regime  has  helped  to 
check  wide  fluctuations  in  the  interbank  rates  and  also  engendered  orderly 
development of the money market segment and payments system reforms, among 
others.  
   The  Bank  has  over  the  years  identified  key  priority  sectors  and  developed  tailored 
interventions to support and promote their growth. Some of the key interventions in the real 
sector include:  
 
 
 
 
 
N200 Billion Refinancing/Restructuring of SME/Manufacturing Fund  
N300 billion for long term funding of Power and Aviation  
Commercial Agricultural Credit Scheme (CACS)  
The Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) Credit Guarantee Scheme (SMECGS)  
In  addition  the  Nigerian  Incentive-Based  Risk  Sharing  System  for  Agricultural 
Lending  (NIRSAL)  was  established.  The  programme  is  a  demand-driven  credit 
facility  that  would  build  the  capacity  of  banks  to  engage  and  deliver  loans  to 
agriculture by providing technical assistance and reducing counterparty risks facing 
banks.  It  also  seeks  to  pool  the  current  resources  under  the  CBN  agricultural 
financing schemes into different components of the programme.  
Furthermore, the Bank has been collaborating with the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC)  and  the  Nigerian  Stock  Exchange  (NSE),  to  reduce  the  cost  of  transactions, 
particularly  bond  issues,  so  as  to  diversify  funding  sources  away  from  banks  as  well  as 
attract more foreign portfolio investors into the sector.  
In 2010, the Asset Management Corporation of Nigeria (AMCON) was established following 
the promulgation of its enabling Act by the National Assembly. It is a special purpose vehicle 
aimed at addressing the problem of non-performing loans in the Nigerian banking industry, 
among  others.  In  line  with  its  mandate,  AMCON  recently  acquired  the  non-performing 
risk  assets  of  some  banks  worth  over  N1.7  trillion,  which  is  expected  to  boost  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
liquidity as well as enhance their safety and soundness. With the intervention of AMCON, 
the banking industry ratio of non-performing loans to total credit has significantly reduced 
from 34.4 per cent in November 2010 to 4.95 per cent as at December 2011.  
In order to ensure that AMCON achieves its mandate, the CBN and all the deposit money 
banks  have  signed  an  MOU  on  the  financing  of  AMCON.  The  CBN  shall  contribute  N50 
billion annually to AMCON, while each of the participating banks shall contribute an amount 
equivalent to 0.3 per cent of its total assets annually into a sinking fund as at the date of their 
audited financial statement for the immediate preceding financial year. Therefore, the cost of 
the resolution to the Nigerian taxpayer is significantly minimized.  
To  further  engender  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  enhance  customer 
protection, the CBN established the Consumer and Financial Protection Division to provide a 
platform  through  which  consumers  can  seek  redress.  In  the  first  three  months  of  its 
operation, the Division received over 600 consumer complaints, which was a manifestation of 
the absence of an effective consumer complaints resolution mechanism in the banks. The 
CBN has also issued a directive to banks to establish Customer Help Desks at their head 
offices and branches.  
In addition, the CBN has commenced a comprehensive review of the Guide to Bank Charges 
with a view to making the charges realistic and consumer friendly.  
The  CBN  has  taken  steps  to  integrate  the  banking  system  into  global  best  practice  in 
financial  reporting  and  disclosure  through  the  adoption  of  the  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) in the Nigerian banking sector by end-2010. This should help to 
enhance  market  discipline,  and  reduce  uncertainties,  which  limit  the  risk  of  unwarranted 
contagion.  
The Universal Banking (UB) model adopted in 2001, allowed banks to diversify into non-bank 
financial  businesses.  Following  the  consolidation  programme,  banks  became  awash  with 
capital.  Some  operators  abused  the  laudable  objectives  of  the  UB  Model  with  banks 
operating  as  private  equity  and  venture  capital  funds  to  the  detriment  of  core  banking 
practices. To address the observed challenges, the CBN reviewed the UB Model with a view 
to  directing  banks  to  focus  on  their  core  banking  business  only.  Under  the  new  model, 
licensed banks will be authorized to carry the following types of business:  
 
 
 
Commercial banking (with either regional, national and international authorization);  
Merchant (investment) banking;  
Specialized  banking  (microfinance,  mortgage,  non-interest  banking  (regional  and 
national); and  
Development finance institutions.  
 
The introduction of the non-interest banking in Nigeria is expected to herald the entry of new 
markets  and  institutional  players  thus  deepening  the  nation’s  financial  markets  and  further 
the quest for financial inclusion. In fact, the first fully licensed non-interest bank in the country 
(Jaiz Bank Plc.) started business on Friday, January 6, 2012.  
Similarly, the importance of Microfinance in a growing economy cannot be over-emphasized, 
given  its  potential  in  addressing  the  challenges  of  excluding  a  large  population  from  full 
participation  in  economic  activities.  As  at  December  2011  there  were  24  deposit  money 
banks with 5,789 branches and 816 microfinance banks bringing the total bank branches to 
6,605. The ratio of bank branch to total population is 24,224 persons, indicating a high level 
of  financial  exclusion.  This  is  further  substantiated  by  the  2010  Enhancing  Financial 
Innovation  and  Access  (EFInA)  survey,  which  observed  that  46.3  per  cent  of  Nigeria’s 
population  is  still  financially  excluded  compared  to  South  Africa,  Kenya,  Botswana  with 
26.0 per  cent,  32.7  per  cent  and  33.0  per  cent,  respectively.  Thus,  in  2012  the  Bank  is 
looking to establish a Microfinance Development Fund (MDF) aimed at improving access to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
affordable  and  sustainable  sources  of  finance  by  Microfinance  Institutions  (MFIs)  and 
Microfinance  Banks  (MFBs).  It  would  have  both  commercial  and  social  components.  This 
would enhance their operations and outreach and support the capacity building activities of 
the MFBs/MFIs.  
The  Bankers’  Committee  has  declared  2012  the  year  of  “Women  Empowerment”  in  the 
banking  industry.  A  sub-committee  on  Women  Empowerment  has  been  formed,  with  the 
CEO  of  Standard  Chartered  Bank  Nigeria  as  Chairperson.  The  CBN  is  working  on 
establishing  a  special  fund  by  the  end  of  the  year  that  would  provide  credit  facilities  to 
women at a single digit interest rate. The CBN is also working with banks to ensure that a 
certain percentage of senior management and board seats are reserved for women.  
The Bank recently introduced a new policy “Cash less Policy” as part of ongoing reforms to 
address  currency  management  challenges  in  Nigeria,  as  well  as  enhance  the  national 
payments system. As  may be aware the Nigerian economy is heavily cash-oriented in the 
transaction  of  goods  and  services.  This  huge  cash  transaction  increases  the  operational 
costs of the banking sector, which is passed on to the customers in the form of higher service 
charges and high lending rates. These operational costs are significant due to the high cost 
incurred  in  cash  management,  currency  sorting,  cash  movements  and  frequent  printing  of 
currency notes.  
The direct cost of cash management to the banking industry is estimated to be about N192 
billion  by  2012.  Research  has  shown  that  about  90  per  cent  of  withdrawals  by  bank 
customers’ are typically below N150,000 whereas, only 10 per cent of bank customers who 
withdraw  over  N150,000  were  responsible  for  the  rise  in  cost  of  cash  management  being 
incurred  by  the  generality  of  bank  customers.  There  are  also  risks  involved  in  keeping  or 
moving large amounts of cash, namely the high incidence of robberies, encouraging corrupt 
practices and the public’s propensity to abuse and mishandle currency notes.  
The  CBN,  in  collaboration  with  the  Bankers’  Committee,  aims  to  achieve  an  environment 
where  a  higher  and  increasing  proportion  of  transactions  are  carried  out  through  cheques 
and  electronic  payments  in  line  with  global  trends.  The  enforcement  of  the  T+2  cheque 
clearing  cycle  is  being  stepped  up  and  efforts  are  on-going  to  reduce  the  cycle  to  T+1. 
Anybody can now make payments of up to N10 million through the clearing system with a 
cheque.  
The  CBN  recognizes  the  need  to  balance  the  objectives  of  meeting  genuine  currency 
transaction demand and combating speculative market behavior that may negatively affect 
economic  growth  and  stabilization  measures.  The  new  cash  withdrawal  policy  will  ensure 
that  a  larger  proportion  of  currency  in  circulation  is  captured  within  the  banking  system, 
thereby  enhancing  the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy  operations  and  economic  stabilization 
measures.  
The  policy  does  NOT  in  any  way  stop  account  holders  from  withdrawing  any  amount  of 
money  they  desire  from  their  accounts.  The  policy  simply  recognizes  that  banking  is  a 
business and, as with any business, there are costs that are sometimes shared between the 
business and the customers. The policy stipulates that to withdraw more than N150,000 (for 
individual account holders) and more than N1,000,000 (for corporate account holders), there 
will be a transaction cost.  
The various measures notwithstanding, there was need for some intervened banks to merge 
in order to strengthen their capital base and to remain competitive in the market. Accordingly, 
five Transactions Implementation Agreements (TIAs) were signed among the banks, and the 
CBN issued a letter of no objection to the banks being acquired to proceed with the merger 
of  the  entities.  The  signing  of  legally  binding  TIAs  for  the  five  (5)  banks  and  the  full 
capitalization  of  the  3  new  banks  by  AMCON  had  resolved  the  issue  of  the  combined 
negative asset value of the eight CBN intervened banks. Similarly, the recapitalization of all 
the five banks that signed TIAs was completed in 2011.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Impact of the reform  
The current banking reforms have yielded the following results among others:  
i.  
The reforms have brought about a new mindset to the industry as banks are putting 
in place best practices in the areas of corporate governance and risk management. 
Transparency and public disclosure of transactions have remarkably improved.  
A  number  of  banks  have  returned  to  the  profit-making  path  and  improved  their 
balance sheets, as the recent results of their financial statements have shown.  
Banks  are  gradually  resuming  lending  to  the  private  sector  with  the  additional 
liquidity  of  more  than  N1.7  trillion  injected  into  the  banking  system  through  the 
issuance  of  AMCON  bonds,  and  significant  progress  in  re-directing  credit  to  the 
power sector and SMEs at single digit interest rates. These initiatives have saved 
and helped create thousands of jobs in the economy.  
A  new  code  of  corporate  governance  has  been  issued  by  the  Bank.  The  CEO  of 
banks shall serve a maximum tenure of 10 years. Furthermore, all CEOs who would 
have served for 10 years by July 31, 2010 ceased to function in that capacity and 
have handed over to their successors.  
Nigerian Banks are now key players in the global financial market with many of them 
falling within the Top 20 banks in Africa and among Top 1000 banks in the world.  
The  reform  has  culminated  in  moderating  the  spread  between  the  lending  and 
deposit rates to 9.7 per cent as at end-December 2011, from 12.2 per cent in 2010. 
This  has  contributed  to  the  existing  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  economy  with 
inflation moderating to 10.3 per cent as at end-December 2011.  
The hitherto volatility in the exchange rate witnessed in the foreign exchange market 
has been brought under control. The premium is within the international standard of 
5.0 per cent.  
 
There is greater cooperation between the monetary authority and the banks through 
regular meetings and collaboration on policy issues.  
The reforms have brought about greater confidence in the banking system with the 
removal of distress banks and the adoption of a strict code of corporate governance.  
Increased widespread use of e-payment services among Nigerians.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
ii.  
iii.  
iv.  
v.  
vi.  
vii.  
viii.  
ix.  
x.  
6 
 Challenges to the banking reforms  
The  Nigerian  banking  reform,  despite  its  laudable  achievements  is  confronted  with  certain 
challenges.  First  and  foremost  is  the  wrong  perception  of  the  intent  of  the  reform.  The 
introduction of the new banking model, especially specialized banking (non-interest banking), 
is intended to broaden the scope of financial services offered by banks in Nigeria. However, 
this has been given a religious connotation. The wrong perception and stiff resistance to the 
policy could potentially deter prospective investors in the banking industry.  
Second, the reluctance of Nigerians to accept positive changes in global dynamics is another 
challenge.  There  is  incontrovertible  evidence  that  the  excessive  liquidity  in  the  system 
measured  by  broad  money  (M2),  narrow  money  (M1)  and  currency  in  circulation  is  partly 
attributable  to  the  high  cash  transactions  for  economic  activities,  which  has  continued  to 
undermine the efforts to achieve price stability. Yet the cashless policy has faced significant 
resistance, despite its prospect for economic growth and development and the global trend in 
the intensity of usage of e-payments.  
Third,  the  cost  of  doing  business  in  Nigeria  is  still  high  when  compared  with  developed 
economies  or  some  emerging  and  developing  countries  owing  to  the  poor  state  of 
infrastructure.  
Another challenge is that the high growth rates recorded in the last five years have not been 
inclusive, implying that this has not transcended into sustainable development. This situation 
is responsible for the high unemployment and poverty levels, which inevitably affect the low 
banking habit in the country.  
Another key challenge is the quality of manpower: real strategic change can only take place 
with  competent  and  committed  workforce  that  is  constantly  exposed  to  training  and 
development.  The  competitive  financial  sector  environment  requires  a  highly  skilled 
workforce  that  would  effectively  contribute  to  value  creation  within  financial  institutions. 
Hitherto,  employee  recruitment  was  merely  to  comply  with  regulatory  requirements,  while 
training was viewed as a non-revenue function that was costly and unnecessary.  
Conclusion  
The  banking  sector  occupies  a  vital  position  in  the  economy  and  must  be  subject  to 
continuous  reforms  for  it  to  function  efficiently.  The  modest  achievements  recorded  so  far 
have  been  largely  due  to  greater  collaboration  and  commitment  of  purpose  among  key 
stakeholders. Thus, the CBN in its efforts to develop a sound and vibrant banking system will 
strive to ensure that democratization of policy is sustained. It will also continue to ensure that 
the banks abide strictly with the code of corporate governance for efficient functioning of the 
banking industry.  
Thank you for listening.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
