Norman T L Chan: Hong Kong as a private banking hub – a regulator’s 
vision 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the  HKAB  –  HKIB  Distinguished  Speaker  Series  and  HKIB  Fellowship  Conferment 
Ceremony, Hong Kong, 12 June 2012. 
 Peter  (Wong),  Anita  (Fung),  Patrick  (Fung),  Julia  (Leung),  Ashley  (Alder),  distinguished 
guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
Good  afternoon.  I  am  most  honoured  to  be  conferred  a  Fellowship  by  the  Hong  Kong 
Institute of Bankers (HKIB) and would  like to thank HKIB for recognising my contributions, 
which are in effect contributions of the HKMA, to the banking sector.  
The  achievements  of  Hong  Kong’s  banking  industry  are  attributable  to the  efforts  of  many 
stakeholders. Among them is HKIB, which has been providing quality education and training 
to the banking industry for decades. Many industry practitioners, and the banking industry as 
a whole, have benefited from the good work of HKIB. 
On  this  special  occasion,  I  am  also  honoured  to  be  invited  to  speak  in  HKAB-HKIB 
Distinguished Speaker Series. I will be speaking on “Hong Kong as a private banking hub – 
A regulator’s vision”. I have chosen this topic because over the past few months, the Hong 
Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA),  together  with  the  Securities  and  Futures  Commission 
(SFC) and the Financial Services and the Treasury Bureau, has been working very closely 
with the Hong Kong Association of Banks (HKAB) on what Hong Kong should do to take the 
private banking industry to the next higher platform. I would like to take this opportunity to 
share with you my views on the steps Hong Kong needs to take to develop as the premier 
private  banking  hub  in  Asia.  To  start  with,  I  want  to  talk  about  some  facts  relevant  to 
Hong Kong’s realisation of this aspiration.  
Hong Kong’s strengths to be a leading private banking centre 
Wealth  in  Asia-Pacific  is  growing  exponentially.  According  to  industry  research,  the  region 
accounted for half of the growth in global wealth from 2010 onwards. In particular, China was 
the second top contributor to the growth in global wealth after the US.1 In 2011, there were 
about  30  million  millionaires  worldwide.  Among  these,  about  20%  were  from  Asia-Pacific.1 
This  trend  is  likely  to  continue.  It  is  estimated  that  global  wealth  will  rise  50%  further  by 
2016.1  This  is  hardly  surprising  in  that  the  International  Monetary  Fund  forecasts  that, 
emerging Asia, led by China, will contribute almost 60% of the world’s GDP growth by 2016. 
By 2020, the estimated number of millionaires in Mainland China and Hong Kong together 
will be 3.7 million, with an accumulated wealth of US$14 trillion.2 
So it is beyond doubt that the expanding affluent population in China and the rest of Asia will 
generate ever increasing demand for private banking services for high-net-worth individuals. 
While  it  is  clear  that there  will  be  increasing  number  of  wealthy  people  in  Asia  looking for 
private  banking  services,  the question  we  need  to  ask  is:  “Will  they  choose  Hong  Kong?”. 
This begs the question on what Hong Kong can offer over and above the other centres that 
are  equally  keen  to  gain  market  share  as  a  private  banking  hub.  In  this  regard,  there  are 
                                                
1  Global Wealth report 2011, Credit Suisse Research Institute 
2  Deloitte and Oxford Economics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
several  fundamental  attributes  that  make  Hong  Kong  exceptionally  well  placed  to  become 
the leading private banking hub in Asia: 
• 
Hong  Kong  has  a  robust  legal  framework  with  an  independent  judiciary  that 
safeguards property rights. We have a simple, low and predictable tax system. Only 
profits and income derived in Hong Kong are subject to Hong Kong tax. There are 
no withholding tax, estate duty, and tax on capital gains, dividends, interests and so 
on.  We  have  well  established  laws  to  protect  the  confidentiality  of  customer 
information. These advantages not only facilitate the creation and accumulation of 
wealth in Hong Kong but also make Hong Kong a very attractive place for people 
outside of Hong Kong to park and manage their wealth in Hong Kong. 
Hong Kong is also a leading IPO centre, ranked Number One globally for the third 
consecutive  year.  In  2011,  there  were  more  than  100  newly  listed  companies  in 
Hong  Kong,  which  together  raised  a  total  of  US$36  billion  equity  funds.  IPO 
activities help the private banking industry to flourish in at least two ways. Apart from 
providing opportunities for private banking clients to invest in promising businesses, 
IPO activities also create wealth for entrepreneurs who will then become important 
clients of the industry.  
What  is  more,  Hong  Kong  benefits  from  being  the  most  important  gateway  for 
capital flows into and out of China. Hong Kong has always been the largest source 
of Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) into China since the beginning of the Reform 
and  Opening  Programme  in  1979.  And  in  the  last  few  years,  Mainland  investors 
have been using Hong Kong as their main platform for Overseas Direct Investments 
(ODIs) to reach out to the world. This clearly demonstrates that Hong Kong, under 
the  “One  Country,  Two  Systems”  framework,  is  serving  the  needs  of  Mainland 
customers for offshore financial services.  
  It  is  therefore  natural  to  see  the  rapid  growth  of  Hong  Kong’s  private  banking  business  in 
recent years. From mid-2010, 7 new private banks have been set up in Hong Kong, taking 
the total number of private banks to 39. Further, the HKMA is seeking to modify the licensing 
requirements for banks so as to facilitate a broader range of financial institutions, including 
those specialised in private banking, to establish an operation in Hong Kong.  
What kind of regulatory framework Hong Kong needs to support the sustainable 
development of private banking? 
While  Hong  Kong  is  fortunate  enough  to  be  endowed  with  many  underlying  competitive 
advantages,  these  advantages  are  not  enough,  in  my  view,  to  sustain  the  healthy 
development  of  our  private  banking  industry  in  the  long  run.  Hong  Kong  also  needs  a 
regulatory framework that is user friendly to private banking clients and yet sufficiently robust 
to provide appropriate investor protection.  
The regulatory framework in Hong Kong is basically a disclosure-based regime, supported by 
suitability  assessment  by  intermediaries  at  the  point  of  sale.  In  a  nutshell,  product  issuers 
have  to  make  adequate  disclosure  in  product  documents  about  the  features  and  risks  of 
investment  products.  Intermediaries,  when  making  a  recommendation  or  solicitation  in 
respect  of  an  investment  product, must  assess  the  product  suitability  for  individual  clients, 
and clearly explain to clients the key product features and risks. 
A  proper  suitability  assessment  starts  with  a  robust  Know-Your-Client  (KYC)  process  and 
client  risk  profiling.  These  processes  not  only  help  to  fight  money  laundering  and  the 
financing of terrorism, but also enable private banks to obtain relevant information to better 
understand their clients, including their background and, most importantly, their risk appetite 
and investment needs. By doing so, private banks can agree on an investment strategy with 
clients and provide suitable products and services that fit their needs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As we all know, private banking clients cover a wide spectrum of individuals. At one end of 
the spectrum there are clients who are highly seasoned investors, at the other end there may 
be unsophisticated clients with only very basic investment knowledge, notwithstanding that 
they  have  substantial  wealth.  While  our  regulatory  framework  is  aimed  at  providing 
appropriate investor protection to all clients, regardless of the size of their wealth, it does not 
mean  all  investors  have  to  be  treated  in  exactly  the  same  way  in  the  process  of  making 
investments. In other words, the HKMA agrees that private banking and retail banking clients 
can and should be treated differently in the investment process. 
This  being  the  case,  we  need  to  have  a  clear  and  practical  definition  of  “Private  Banking 
Customer”. After consulting the industry and the SFC, the HKMA is minded to agree that a 
“Private  Banking  Customer”  can  be  defined  as  a  customer  with  either  (a)  at  least 
US$1 million of assets under the management (AUM) with the bank concerned or (b) total 
investable  assets  of  at  least  US$3  million.  This  is  an  expanded  definition  to  cater  for  the 
operational  needs  of  private  banks.  Once  we  have  defined  who  qualifies  as  a  “Private 
Banking  Customer”,  the  next  step  is  to  consider  specific  measures  that  would  help  make 
private  banking  more  “user  friendly”  without  compromising  the  need  to  accord  appropriate 
protection to private banking customers. 
First of all, let’s talk about suitability assessment. The HKMA agrees that private banks need 
not mechanically match their client’s overall risk tolerance level to product risk level. This is 
because  in  private  banking,  customers  often  look  to  their  private  bankers  for  investment 
advice  on  a  continuous  basis  having  regard  to  the  customers’  entire  portfolios  or  balance 
sheets.  This  is  quite  different  from  the  retail  end  of  the  market  in  which  one-off  sales 
transactions  are  common.  We  therefore  consider  that  suitability  assessment  for  private 
banking customers can be conducted on a holistic or portfolio basis, taking into account all 
the relevant circumstances of the customers. For example, as long as the portfolio allocation 
and the overall risk level agreed with the client is adhered to, a low or medium risk tolerance 
client buying high risk products that only constitute a minor proportion of his portfolio is not 
necessarily a “mismatch”. The same principle applies to some other aspects like investment 
tenor  and  concentration  risk  of  AUM  with  any  individual  private  bank  because  the  entire 
portfolio of the customer will be taken into account. Also, we agree that the documentation of 
rationale for recommendations need not be on a per transaction basis. It can be done on a 
portfolio level at the outset, subject to some conditions being met. These conditions include 
the  preparation  of  an  Investment  Mandate  stipulating  the  types,  risks  and  allocation  of 
investments after taking into account all relevant circumstances of the client. The Investment 
Mandate should be explained to and agreed by the client, and a copy of the Mandate should 
be provided to and acknowledged by the client. The Investment Mandate should of course be 
reviewed  and,  if  necessary,  modified  whenever  there  are material  changes to  the  relevant 
circumstances of the private banking customer. 
Usually the review of client risk profile is expected to be conducted at least once every two 
years. However, we appreciate that private banks need to minimise demand on the time of 
customers and have regard to the fact that private banking services are normally conducted 
on a continuous basis. As a result, the HKMA agrees that private banking clients need not go 
through  the  biennial  reviews  if  they  can  confirm  that  there  is  no  material  change  in  their 
circumstances that warrants updating or modification of the Investment Mandate. Moreover, 
private banks may choose to document the rationale for recommendations in writing instead 
of audio-recording a face-to-face interview with the clients. 
I am pleased to say that the above-mentioned measures, which are aimed at making private 
banking more user friendly, will be promulgated in an HKMA Circular to be issued later today. 
While I believe these measures would be welcomed by the private banks and their clients as 
they offer greater convenience and flexibility, I must remind everybody that the core objective 
of  our  regulatory  framework  continues  to  be  investor  protection.  So  private  banks  must 
ensure that they have in place the necessary systems and internal controls to implement the 
portfolio based approach and other related measures to facilitate the investment process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  this  regard,  it  is  hard  to  overstate  the  importance  for  private  banks  to  have  proper 
documentation.  Proper  documentation  helps  bank  management  monitor  staff’s  sales 
practices  and  detect  deficiencies.  Proper  documentation  also  provides  audit  trail  and 
evidence on the sales process. A bank with proper documentation will be in a much better 
position to demonstrate that it has properly discharged its duties to its clients in the event of a 
dispute or complaint.  
Enhancing competency of industry practitioners 
Let  me  move  to  another  pillar  that  is  necessary  to  support  the  continued  success  of 
Hong Kong’s  private  banking  industry:  namely  the  availability  of  professional  talents. 
Institutions can only be as strong as the people that make them up. How the world perceives 
the standard of our financial services depends crucially on the quality of the people delivering 
such  services.  Private  banking  clients  now  demand  quality  and  efficient  services  that  are 
tailored  to  their  specific  investment  needs.  Meanwhile,  the  financial  markets  have  become 
more  complex  and  volatile.  To  create  value  for  their  clients  in  this  challenging  business 
environment, private banks need strong teams of professional staff, from the front end to the 
back office. 
Both  technical  competency  and  ethical  standard  form  the  basic  components  of  the 
professionalism of our industry practitioners. The HKMA encourages the industry to promote 
a competency framework for new entrants and on-going professional training. The financial 
market is very dynamic and rapidly changing. The industry therefore should ensure that staff 
are  well-equipped  with  the  necessary  technical  and  market  knowledge  and  skills  in 
performing their jobs. It is also fundamental for private banks to act in the best interests of 
clients  at  all  times.  The  HKMA  therefore  encourages  the  industry  to  promulgate  a  set  of 
professional  and  ethical  standards  that  are  designed  specifically  for  the  private  banking 
practitioners. 
I  know  that  the  industry  is  moving  towards  this  direction.  HKIB  has  been  providing 
professional  qualifications  like  Certified  Financial  Management  Planner.  In  2011,  the 
Hong Kong  Securities  Institute  (HKSI)  also  introduced  the  Certified  International  Wealth 
Manager programme. These are well-organised programmes that help enhance the technical 
competency  of  industry  practitioners.  On  a  separate  front,  we  very  much  welcome  the 
industry’s  proposal  to  set  up  a  new  industry  body  called  “Private  Wealth  Management 
Association”.  I  also  support  the  initiative  to  further  upgrade  the  professional  standards  of 
industry practitioners by developing a new competency framework for wealth management. I 
envisage  that,  under  this  framework,  industry  practitioners  can  take  different  courses 
provided  by  professional  bodies  such  as  HKIB,  HKSI,  Treasury  Markets  Association  and 
other  tertiary  institutions,  and  ultimately  acquire  a  professional  qualification  that  is  widely 
recognised and accredited in Hong Kong and beyond. We in the HKMA will be pleased to 
work with the private banking industry and other stakeholders to ensure that Hong Kong has 
a large pool of talents with world class technical competence and professionalism.  
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  conclude my  remarks today  by  posing the following 
three  questions.  First,  what  are  the  prospects  for  Hong  Kong  to  develop  into  the  premier 
private banking hub in Asia? The answer is clear. As Hong Kong possesses key and unique 
competitive advantages in serving rapidly increasing number of wealthy population in China 
and the rest of Asia, there will be exceptionally huge business opportunities and potential for 
our private banking industry. 
Second, does Hong Kong presently have an appropriate regulatory framework that can help 
sustain a healthy development of the private banking industry in the long run? The answer is 
“yes”,  but  I  need  to  qualify  the  answer  because  I  am  acutely  aware  that  no  regulatory 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
framework  is  perfect  and  can  afford  to  remain  static,  bearing  in  mind  the  ever  changing 
market  conditions  and  evolving  expectations  of  the  society  on  investor  protection.  Having 
said that, you may rest assured that the HKMA is committed to continue its collaboration with 
the  SFC  and  the  industry  to  make  sure  that  our  regulatory  framework  and  rules  remain 
friendly to users without compromising investor protection as we go forward in the months 
and years ahead. 
The  third  and  final  question  is:  are  private  banks  fully  equipped  and  ready  to  capture  the 
rapidly  growing  business  opportunities?  The  answer  to  this,  I  would  say,  is  again  “yes” 
followed by a “but”. This is because much more needs to be done by the industry if it wishes 
to  realise  Hong  Kong’s  full  potential  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  As  I  said  earlier,  the 
adoption of a portfolio approach in private banking would be a move  welcomed by private 
banks and their customers, but private banks must ensure they have the proper systems and 
controls in place. A portfolio based approach cannot be taken as an excuse to compromise 
investor protection. For instance, when more Mainland clients open private banking accounts 
in Hong Kong, our banks must have in place sufficient number of account managers who are 
professionally competent and linguistically proficient. It is hard to imagine that quality service 
can  be  provided  to  a  Mainland  customer  who  does  not speak  English  or  Cantonese  if the 
account manager  cannot  communicate  in  Putonghua.  Moreover,  it  would  also  be  helpful if 
important contracts or documents are written in bilingual forms so that Mainland customers 
find it easier to understand what they have signed or bought. Lastly, private bankers must 
also bear in mind that there is a very wide range of sophistication and investment experience 
among private banking clients from Mainland China. So private banks must ensure that their 
account managers take extra care in offering investment advice and marketing investment 
products to the less sophisticated clients. 
Ladies and gentlemen, private banking is just a special type of banking: it is all about trust 
and service. It takes a private bank many, many decades to build up trust, but such trust can 
be  destroyed  overnight.  My  vision,  which  I  am  sure  is  shared  by  many  of  you,  is  that 
Hong Kong will become the most competitive and dynamic private banking hub in the region 
in  the  years  to  come.  This  is  a  highly  achievable  aspiration  if  both  the  industry  and  the 
regulators work closely together to develop, nurture and protect the reputation of the private 
banking industry as well as the professionalism and ethical standards of its practitioners. 
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
