Mario  Draghi:  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 9 July 2012. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a pleasure to be back here in Parliament and in front of your Committee for our regular 
exchange of views. 
Today, I will explain the decisions of the Governing Council of the ECB last week. I will then 
consider the actions taken by central banks around the world in response to the crisis. I will 
also  discuss  the  economic  adjustment  programmes  in  euro  area  member  countries,  and 
close with some remarks on the longer term vision for EMU. 
Economic and monetary developments 
1. 
Last Thursday, the ECB’s Governing Council unanimously decided to lower key interest rates 
by 25 basis points. This has brought the main refinancing rate to 0.75% and the deposit rate 
to zero. The policy decision took account of further dampening of inflationary pressures, as 
some of the previously identified downside risks to economic activity materialised.  
On  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  the  Governing  Council  decided  in  June  to 
continue  conducting  all  refinancing  operations  as  fixed-rate  tender  procedures  with  full 
allotment, at least until mid-January 2013. Measures were also taken to improve access of 
the banking sector to these operations by enhancing collateral availability.  
Our measures, both standard and non-standard, support the transmission of monetary policy 
and  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  real  economy.  They  safeguard  price  stability  in  the  euro 
area.  And  they  help  to  reduce  financing  costs,  supporting  renewed  confidence  and 
sustainable growth.  
The ECB remains committed to delivering on its mandate – and retains full capacity to act in 
a firm and timely manner. 
Indicators  for  the  second  quarter  of  2012  point  to  a  weakening  of  growth  and  heightened 
uncertainty.  But  looking  ahead,  we  continue  to  expect  the  euro  area  economy  to  recover 
gradually, albeit with dampened momentum.  
Euro  area  annual  inflation  was  2.4%  in  June  2012,  unchanged  from  May.  Inflation  should 
decline in the course of 2012 and be below 2% in 2013. In an environment of modest growth 
and  well-anchored 
inflation  expectations,  underlying  price  pressures  should  remain 
moderate. This will restore purchasing power of wages and salaries. 
Risks  to  this  outlook  are  broadly  balanced  over  the  medium  term:  on  the  downside,  they 
relate  to  weaker  than  expected  euro  area  growth;  on  the  upside,  risks  could  stem  from 
further increases in indirect taxes and higher than expected energy prices.  
Our monetary analysis gives a picture consistent with price stability over the medium term. In 
particular, the underlying pace of monetary expansion remains subdued. Weak loan growth 
largely  reflects  the  current  cyclical  situation,  heightened  risk  aversion  and  balance  sheet 
adjustments by households and firms, which weigh on credit demand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Central banks’ response to the crisis 
2. 
Let me now turn to the first topic you asked me to address, the measures taken by central 
banks  around  the  world  in  response  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  In  a  nutshell,  I  consider 
those  actions  to  have  been  bold,  forward-looking  yet  historically  informed,  drawing 
appropriate lessons from financial crises of the 20th century.  
Central  banks  have  cooperated  very  closely  during  the  crisis:  through  an  important 
coordinated interest rate cut in October 2008; provision of swap lines; continuous information 
exchange;  and  overall  actions  that  have  been  mutually  consistent.  In  particular,  the 
overriding objective of medium-term price stability has never been lost from sight.  
Both  interest  rate  policy  and  non-standard  measures  have  taken  account  of  the  prevailing 
specific circumstances: first, the financial and economic structure of each economy; second, 
the  magnitude  and  specificity  of  shocks;  third,  the  different  operational  frameworks  of 
different central banks; and fourth, the different institutional settings in which they operate.  
For these four reasons, comparisons across constituencies have their limits. What’s more, 
comparison of the size of central banks’ balance sheets may give a distorted picture of the 
extent  of  policy  action.  For  example,  in  the  Eurosystem,  a  significant  part  of  the  balance 
sheet is not related to monetary policy but to gold and foreign exchange reserves.  
Therefore,  the  appropriate  way  to  measure  a  central  bank’s  actions  is  to  do  so  in  its  own 
institutional and economic setting and against its own objectives.  
For the ECB, those actions have been, and will continue to be, geared towards maintaining 
price stability in the euro area. This is our mandate, and our track record speaks for itself. 
The ECB’s role in adjustment programmes 
3. 
Effective crisis resolution needs bold actions by central banks but it also needs bold actions 
by  other  policy  actors,  notably  governments.  This  brings  me  to  the  other  topic  that  you 
proposed: economic adjustment programmes and the role of the ECB.  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  a  number  of  EU  and  euro  area  countries  have  requested 
financial assistance because of their challenged access to capital markets. At the same time, 
they have committed to implementing the reforms necessary to secure full market access in 
the future.  
Since  financial  assistance  can  only  be  temporary,  the  quality  of  the  reforms  and  their 
implementation  are  absolutely  essential.  It  is  this  quality  that  ultimately  determines  the 
success of a programme.  
The design and monitoring of programmes in the euro area is done jointly by the European 
Commission, the ECB and the IMF. The ECB provides input through its expertise, not least 
with  respect  to  the  financial  sector  but  also  with  regard  to  country  surveillance.  Our 
experience with this set-up has been very good, and the cooperation with the Commission 
and the IMF has been excellent.  
Today’s  economic  environment  obliges  all  countries  to  take  a  very  critical  look  at  their 
past – and it obliges all to take a very objective view of their future.  
It  is  only  against  the  background  of  the  past  that  the  adjustment  programmes  currently 
underway  in  several  euro  area  countries  can  be  understood.  It  was  past  economic 
developments and policies that led to excessive imbalances in a number of countries. And it 
was those imbalances – fiscal, macroeconomic and external – that were neither healthy nor 
sustainable.  
Unsustainable imbalances provide the objective need for adjustment programmes – and the 
degree  of  the  adjustment  is  directly  related  to  the  extent  to  which  past  policies  were 
misguided.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Policy adjustment in the euro area takes place under market pressures, but less so than for 
countries  outside  the  euro  area  because  being  part  of  monetary  union  shelters  countries 
against some pressures, notably on the exchange rate. 
But this does not mean that the degree of policy adjustment can be lower. The schedule of 
regaining full market access within a few years applies here too. Therefore, perseverance in 
bold and necessary reforms is crucial.  
A critical success factor is ownership of the programmes by governments, parliaments and 
ultimately the citizens of the countries concerned. An essential precondition for ownership is 
that  policy-makers  communicate  clearly  about  the  economic  rationale  for  adjustment.  As  I 
have suggested, this means taking a critical view of the past and an objective view of the 
future.  
This  process  has  started.  Increasingly,  national  policy-makers  make  the  case  for  reform 
strongly. They point to past developments in explaining the background of adjustment and 
now  highlight  the  many  beneficial  elements  of  reforms.  Some  of  these  reforms  improve 
fairness by combating tax evasion or rent-seeking by vested interests, and they improve the 
efficiency of the public sector. 
National  policy-makers  are  now  increasingly  making  a  central  part  of  their  objective  the 
overall aim of EMU: to sustain economic well-being in the absence of major imbalances, and 
to generate sustainable growth in a competitive environment.  
In my view, a great deal of progress is underway in this respect.  
For  example,  the  Irish  authorities  have  maintained  a  strong  track  record  for  maintaining 
reform  momentum  throughout  their  programme.  They  have  also  taken  important  steps 
towards restoring the stability of the financial system. 
In  Portugal,  programme  implementation  remains  good  and  important  progress  has  been 
made  in  such  areas  as  the  labour  market,  the  housing  market,  the  general  competition 
framework, the judicial system and the transport sector. The Portuguese authorities remain 
fully committed to achieving this year’s fiscal target. 
The Spanish authorities too have shown that they remain fully committed to accelerating the 
structural reform agenda and putting the financial sector on a sound footing. They are also 
committed to improving external competitiveness to lay the foundations for more sustainable 
prosperity.  
Even  without  programmes,  many  policy-makers  are  bold  in  reform.  In  Italy,  for  example, 
reforms  to  increase  competition,  reduce  the  administrative  burden  and  increase  labour 
market flexibility have been important measures. The country’s spending review will help to 
achieve the fiscal targets.  
Virtually all other countries are undertaking measures to improve fiscal solidity and the basis 
for  sustainable  growth  without  excessive  imbalances.  So  despite  the  current  challenges, 
countries’ progress is strong and the fundamentals of the euro area as a whole are sound. 
The euro area’s fiscal deficit is declining towards 3% of GDP; price stability is ensured; and 
the  external  accounts  have  remained  close  to  balance.  All  these  are  reasons  to  pursue 
reforms with a strong degree of confidence.  
A longer-term vision for EMU 
4. 
Why then do we still have tensions in a number of market segments? Let me first stress that 
a lot has been done at country as well as euro area level in terms of economic reforms and 
governance. But we need full implementation. We have to make clear that EMU is a union 
based on stability at national and aggregate levels.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Stability  at  national  level  means  completing  reforms  to  ensure  sustainable  growth  without 
major  imbalances.  Stability  at  aggregate  level  means  implementing  the  vision  recently 
presented at the summit.  
The central message of that vision is this: the euro is here to stay – and the euro area will 
take the necessary steps to ensure that.  
In my view, the core of the report submitted by President Van Rompuy is the identification of 
four building blocks: 
First, a financial market union that elevates responsibility for supervision of banks to the euro 
area level. 
Second, a fiscal union that reinforces oversight of budgetary policies at the euro area level 
and also provides some fiscal capacity to support the functioning of the currency area. 
Third, an economic union with sufficient mechanisms to ensure that countries can achieve 
sustained prosperity without excessive imbalances. 
And finally a political union that strengthens the legitimacy of EMU among euro area citizens 
and deepens its political foundations. 
These four building blocks are mutually consistent and coherent, and should be pursued in 
parallel. I am looking forward to the work on a roadmap that has started. In my view, three 
issues deserve particular attention:  
First, we need to move towards a further sharing of sovereignty in the fiscal, financial and 
economic domains. There can be no shortcuts in establishing a sound and stable EMU.  
Second, EMU is an integral part of the Treaty. This calls on all relevant bodies and actors to 
engage  constructively  on  improving  its  functioning,  not  only  at  Union  but  also  at  national 
level. To call for an impeccable application of the Treaty and at the same time refuse closer 
union mentioned in Article 1 of the Treaty is inconsistent, to say the least.  
Third,  we  need  to  accompany  deeper  euro  area  integration  with  significant  progress  on 
democratic 
that  you  and  your 
colleagues – the members of the European Parliament, the directly elected representatives 
of the citizens of Europe – will continue to play a central role in the steps towards political 
union.  
Thank you for your attention. 
legitimacy  and  accountability.  There 
is  no  doubt 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
