Njuguna Ndung’u: Promoting financial integrity and financial inclusion – 
lessons from the Kenyan experience 
Opening  remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  a 
convening  co-hosted  by  the  Bill  &  Melinda  Gates  Foundation,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya, 
and the Financial Services Volunteer Corps, Nairobi, 30 January 2012. 
 Mr. Joseph Kinyua, CBS, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance;  
Mr. Andrew Spindler, President and CEO, Financial Services Volunteer Corps;  
Ms. Claire Alexandre, Senior Program Officer, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; 
Distinguished Guests and Colleagues;  
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
1. 
I  am  happy  to  participate  at  this  important  conference,  as  one  of  the  organizers, 
jointly  with  Financial  Services  Volunteer  Corps  (FSVC)  and  the  Bill  and  Melinda 
Gates Foundation.  
But this morning I have a simple task, to welcome our Chief Guest, the Permanent 
Secretary,  Ministry  of  Finance  to make  the  keynote  address  and  to officially  open 
the  conference.  But  before  I  ask  him  to  come  to  the  podium,  let  me  make  a  few 
remarks.  
Let me begin by extending a very warm welcome to all the conference participants. 
To the participants who are drawn from beyond our borders, it is my sincere hope 
that your stay with us shall be enjoyable and that you will carry with you pleasant 
memories of Kenya when you return to your respective countries.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  The  theme  of  this  conference;  “Promoting  Financial 
Integrity  and  Financial  Inclusion:  Lessons  from  the  Kenyan  Experience”  is 
quite timely. It touches upon issues that are key to the mandate of the Central Bank 
of Kenya of ensuring financial access, and the stability and integrity of the financial 
system.  
This conference has been organized to further the FSVC’s objective of developing 
sound  financial  systems  in  emerging  economies.  The  FSVC  recently  launched  a 
program to support the development of an Anti-Money Laundering and Combating 
the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT)  regime  in  Kenya  that  is  both  effective  and 
compatible  with  the  objectives  of  financial  inclusion.  Under  this  program,  it  is 
envisaged  that  the  FSVC  will  undertake  AML/CFT  training  and  capacity  building 
programs  in  consultation  with  the  Central  Bank,  Ministry  of  Finance  and  other 
players in the financial sector.  
Financial inclusion 
6. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  in  recognition  of  the  critical 
role that financial inclusion plays in fighting poverty, promoting savings-investment 
cycles  and  economic  development,  has  been  at  the  fore-front  of  pushing  the 
financial inclusion agenda. The support we have received from the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation and AFI has been enormous on these initiatives.  
The  critical  mandate  of  the  Central  Bank  is  to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  is 
stable, efficient and accessible. In this regard, the Central Bank of Kenya, jointly with 
other  players,  has  undertaken  several  initiatives  and  reforms  aimed  at  boosting 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
8. 
financial  inclusion  through  an  appropriate  financial  infrastructure  that  includes: 
licensing  of  deposit  taking  microfinance  institutions  (DTMs)  and  credit  reference 
bureaus (CRBs); mobile phone financial services and the agency banking model.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  these  initiatives  and  reforms  have  led  to  notable 
improvements  in  the  levels,  reach  and  depth  of  access  to  financial  services 
especially among the lower population segments. The results in terms of numbers 
are  astounding  with  deposit  accounts  growing  tremendously  over  the  years.  But 
such  a  vibrant  sector  requires  to  be  safeguarded;  that  is  why  financial  integrity 
becomes important.  
Financial integrity 
9. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; success in financial inclusion has to go hand in hand with 
financial  integrity.  The  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  continually  seeks  to  enhance  the 
regulation and supervision of the financial system in order to improve its integrity. As 
part  of  our  efforts  in  ensuring  appropriate  and  effective  oversight,  we  first  issued 
AML Guidelines in 2000. These Guidelines were revised in 2006 and are currently in 
the process of being reviewed to reflect the prevailing international best practice and 
to  align  them  with  the  Proceeds  of  Crime  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act,  2009 
(POCAMLA).  
Over the last 2 years, the Central Bank has issued regular AML/CFT guidelines to 
financial  institutions  to  further  support  and  enhance  the  implementation  of  the 
Proceeds  of  Crime  and  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act,  2009  (POCAMLA).  The 
guidelines  have  covered  the  operationalization  of  the  AML  Act,  Suspicious 
Transaction  Reporting,  and  measures  to  be  adopted  by  financial  institutions  to 
combat  the  financing  of  terrorism.  The  Central  Bank  has  also  revised  the  Forex 
Bureau  Guidelines  so  as  to  align  these  guidelines  to  the  AML  Act.  We  are  also 
working on Hawala system to formalize and issued guidelines. On the microfinance 
front,  the  Microfinance  Regulations  and  the  Agency  Guidelines  require  Deposit 
Taking Microfinance Institutions and their agents to implement AML/CFT measures.  
These measures demonstrate that as we push the frontiers of financial inclusion, we 
are also taking the requisite steps to ensure that the measures put in place take into 
account the need to safeguard the integrity of the financial system.  
In November 2011, Parliament enacted the National Payments System Act. This Act 
provides  CBK  with  oversight  of  the  national  payments  system.  It  aims  to  bring  all 
payment service providers including mobile phone service providers offering money 
transfer services, within one regulatory framework. Going forward, the inclusion of 
these mobile phone service providers within the supervisory and regulatory scope of 
CBK will no doubt enhance the country’s AML/CFT measures.  
It is my hope therefore, that this conference and the initiative being launched by the 
Financial Services Volunteer Corps will contribute to a greater understanding of the 
subject  and  will  generate  frontier  ideas  of  enforcing  and  enhancing  AML/CFT 
measures.  
It is now my pleasure to invite the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Bw. 
Joseph Kinyua, to officially open this conference.  
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
THANK YOU 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
