Matthew Elderfield: Mortgage arrears resolution – where next? 
Speech  by  Mr  Matthew  Elderfield,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the 
Harvard Business School Alumni Club of Ireland, Dublin, 2 March 2012. 
 The mortgage arrears problem is one of the biggest remaining challenges for Ireland from 
the financial crisis, raising difficult consumer protection and prudential banking issues. There 
has been much work to develop the policy response to this problem and since I last spoke on 
this  issue  in  October  we  have  seen  an  important  announcement  on  the  bankruptcy  law 
framework  –  but  also  concerning  new  data  on  arrears  cases  have  been  published.  At  the 
Central  Bank  we  have  during  this  period  been  working  with  the  banks  on  their  Mortgage 
Arrears Resolution Strategies, which we received towards the end of last year. I want to take 
this opportunity today to share our first impressions of these strategies and to explain “where 
next” on the mortgage arrears resolution process. 
The mortgage arrears picture 
The  economic  context  for  resolving  the  mortgage  arrears  problem  is  clearly  very  difficult. 
House  prices  have  experienced  a  48.2%  fall  from  the  peak  according  to  the  most  recent 
CSO transactions data. Indeed, the asking price data collected by Daft shows an even higher 
average fall of 52%. Prices are continuing to fall, new lending is down 94% from the peak 
(with fewer active lenders in the market) and unemployment remains high at 14.5%.  
The latest mortgage arrears data, published a couple of weeks ago, is a source of concern. 
For owner occupier mortgages, the proportion of loans 90-plus days past due stood at 9.2% 
at the end of 2011, up from 8.1% in the third-quarter of 2011. On a balance basis, the same 
arrears rate was 12.3% at the end of 2011, up from 10.8% in the previous quarter.  
Our view is that mortgage arrears are likely to continue to rise throughout 2012. Also, as I will 
explain, it will likely take some time before the stock of arrears cases in the unsustainable 
category  are  resolved  through  loan  modification,  bankruptcy  or  non-judicial  settlement 
mechanisms. This is not a problem susceptible to quick fixes or silver bullets but is going to 
take more time before the exact scale of the problem becomes clearer and certainly many 
years before it is resolved. 
While  the  number  of  arrears  and  restructured  cases  is  growing,  the  vast  majority  of 
customers are still meeting their mortgage obligations. This is in spite of the fact that many of 
them  are  in  fact  in  negative  equity:  40%  of  owner  occupier  homeowners  are  in  negative 
equity  but  about  93%  of  negative  equity  borrowers  are  not  in  fact  in  arrears.  This  is  an 
important point: negative equity does not equal arrears. Affordability is the key factor, at least 
at  present.  This  is  important  from  a  policy  perspective:  frankly  the  Irish  taxpayer  does  not 
have the financial resources to somehow eliminate or reduce negative equity in the mortgage 
market, either directly or through the banking system, but it does not need to do so in order 
to tackle arrears. Negative equity will I fear remain an unpleasant reality for many borrowers 
for years to come, but it is encouraging that in the vast majority of cases where customers 
can still afford to pay their mortgage that they are doing so. The biggest practical problem for 
home-owners with negative equity comes when they need to move house; as I will explain 
shortly, the Central Bank intends to take action to make it easier to obtain so-called negative 
equity  mortgages,  to  help  those  who  may  need  to  move  and  can  afford  to  but  who  are  in 
negative equity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The capital question 
The continuing uncertainty around the trend in arrears makes establishing the requisite level 
of capital for the banks a challenging and inherently imprecise exercise. This led the Central 
Bank to bring in assistance from BlackRock for the Prudential Capital Assessment Review or 
PCAR  stress  test  last  March.  We  adopted  a  high  degree  of  transparency  around  this 
exercise, so you can see the lifetime and three year, stress and base, loan loss estimates 
from BlackRock for the mortgage portfolio. BlackRock’s results were more conservative than 
those of the banks and their modelling approach was inherently more conservative. This is 
because, in very simple terms, the primary driver of losses in their model was in fact negative 
equity (and therefore the future shape of housing prices), rather than (as I have explained is 
the  case  so  far)  the  question  of  affordability  (and  therefore  projections  about  income  and 
employment). In addition, the Central Bank required a buffer for additional losses beyond the 
3 year stress period. 
This exercise has led to a very significant capital injection for the Irish banks. Their current 
capital levels (Core Tier 1 ratio) are above the minimum 10.5% required by the Central Bank 
at  16.98%  for  AIB,  14.3%  for  Bank  of  Ireland  and  19.08%  for  ILP.  The  recent  European 
Banking Authority capital raising exercise did not require further injections for the Irish banks. 
The  banks  therefore  have  a  substantial  capital buffer  with which  to  absorb  losses  on  their 
mortgage portfolios. The Central Bank believes it is time to do just that and is encouraging a 
more realistic approach to provisioning and, as I will explain below, we would like to see a 
determined effort to identify unsustainable mortgages requiring loan modification. 
Where does that leave the banks’ capital position for the future? We already know that over 
the  medium  term,  in  the  period  leading  up  to  implementation  of  Basel  3  in  2019,  that  the 
banks will likely require more capital. At the two pillar banks, the elimination of deferred tax 
assets in the order of about €5 billion will have to be met through utilisation of taxable profits, 
or,  to  the  extent  that  profits  are  not  available,  through  additional  capital.  Therefore,  the 
sooner  the  banks  can  be  restored  to  profitability  then  the  better  they  will  be  able  to  meet 
these medium term targets, ideally from market sources. 
For the mortgage portfolios, the BlackRock loan loss estimates provide a very large buffer. 
Still,  house  prices  have  trended  closer  to  the  stress  scenario  and  there  are  considerable 
uncertainties  regarding  the  impact  of  the  forthcoming  bankruptcy  law  reform  on  borrower 
behaviour, of the economic and employment outlook and therefore of future arrears trends. 
The banks are also struggling to return to profitability as their Basel 3 requirements loom and 
will  start  to  feed  into  future  stress  tests.  There  is  also  uncertainty  about  the  size  of  the 
unsustainable  mortgages  group,  how  many  of  these  can  be  resolved  through  loan 
modification and at what cost, and how many instead are likely to be subject to repossession 
or  voluntary  surrender.  This  is  an  area  where  we  want  the  banks  to  make  substantial 
progress during the course of the year. The greater clarity we can have about the levels of 
loan  modification  based  on  a  more  refined  analysis  of  the  different  cohorts  of  mortgage 
customer,  then  we  will  be  in  a  stronger  position  for  recalculating  and  updating  the  stress 
capital position of the banks. By conducting the 2012 PCAR in the autumn there is more time 
to do this analysis. 
The policy framework for addressing mortgage arrears 
Before I talk about what we have seen in the banks’ most recent mortgage arrears resolution 
strategies and explain “where next”, let me take a little time to remind you of the measures 
that are already in place to assist consumers with the mortgage arrears problem. 
In February 2009 the Central Bank issued a statutory Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears. 
We updated this Code in 2011 to add in recommendations made in the final report issued by 
the Mortgage Arrears and Personal Debt Group (also known as the Cooney Group) and to 
take account of our own experience of operating the Code. In place since the start of last 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
year, the revised Code provides important protections to consumers facing mortgage arrears 
and  it  requires  banks  to  deal  with  their  customers  in  a  sympathetic  manner.  The  Code 
applies to all mortgage lenders not only banks. 
I  would  like  to  outline  some  key  features  of  the  revised  Code:  each  customer’s  mortgage 
arrears  case  is  unique  and  must  be  considered  on  its  own  merits.  Each  borrower’s  full 
circumstances  must  be  assessed  based  on  the  information  in  the  Standard  Financial 
Statement (SFS) required under the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process or MARP which I 
will  outline  a  little  later.  All  cases  must  be  handled  sympathetically  and  positively  by  the 
lender  and  contact  with  customers  must  be  proportionate  and  not  excessive  so  that 
customers are not being harassed in an already stressful situation. It is clearly in the interests 
of the parties to address financial difficulties as speedily and as effectively as possible.  
The Mortgage Arrears Resolution Process I referred to earlier is the framework all mortgage 
lenders  must  follow  when  dealing  with  customers  facing  difficulty  meeting  their  mortgage 
repayments. One of its key elements is the Standard Financial Statement that lenders must 
use when gathering information about the financial position of a borrower. We expect lenders 
to take a holistic approach with their customers who are in difficulty and the SFS facilitates 
this  approach  because  it  looks  at  the  borrower’s  circumstances  in  the  round,  all  of  their 
income, expenditure and other debts and therefore helps lenders arrive at revised repayment 
plans  that  are  appropriate  to  the  individual  circumstances  of  their  borrowers.  The  Central 
Bank  is  carrying  out  its  own  analysis  on  affordability  and  sustainability  based  on  the 
information in the SFS, this will be published in due course. 
Other  important  protections  for  borrowers  in  the  Code  include  rules  of  engagement  for 
lenders  which  require  that  the  level  of  contact  and  communications  with  customers  is 
proportionate  and  not  excessive.  It  includes  restrictions  on  the  imposition  of  surcharge 
interest and arrears charges and moving consumers off tracker rates when entering revised 
repayment arrangements when in the MARP. Lenders must also set up an internal Appeals 
process to examine appeals by borrowers. To ensure mortgage holders are fully aware of the 
protections  they  are  entitled  to,  we  published  a  consumer  guide  to  new  Code  in 
February 2011 – you can download it from our website. A guide to completing a Standard 
Financial Statement is also available from our website. 
We  plan  to keep  the  Code  under  review  and  make  adjustments  as  necessary. We  will  be 
reviewing  compliance  by  the  banks  later  in  the  year.  But  generally  speaking,  the  Code 
provides a strong framework for handling arrears cases and appears to be facilitating what 
might  be  called  standard  forbearance  techniques.  These  are  approaches  like  maturity 
extensions, switches to interest only mortgages and interest holidays which work where the 
borrower needs temporary help and has a reasonable prospect of ultimately repaying their 
mortgage.  However,  there  are  some  customers  where  these  approaches  will  not  work 
because  the  problem  of  affordability  is  so  severe.  In  these  unsustainable  mortgages, 
repossession  or  voluntary  surrender  of  the  house  might  be  necessary  but  the  public 
authorities are determined to explore other mechanisms that might keep the customer in their 
home. This was at the heart of the deliberations which led to the Keane report. 
In September 2011 an Inter-Departmental Mortgage Arrears Working Group (also known as 
the Keane Group) reported its recommendations. The group acknowledged that a case by 
case  approach  for  dealing  with  mortgage  arrears  was  important  and  stated  that  industry 
should extend the range of alternative solutions to address the issue. It recommended that 
specific proposals be developed by mortgage lenders, including a mortgage to rent scheme, 
split mortgages and trade down mortgages.  
And  the  Keane  Group  stated  that  rapid  progress  in  the  reform  of  personal  insolvency 
legislation was a central element in the resolution of the mortgage arrears problem. 
Following  the  Keane  report,  the  most  recent  development  on  the  policy  front  has  indeed 
been the Government’s announcement of the legal framework for reform of bankruptcy law 
and the introduction of non-judicial debt settlement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
At the end of January the Government published the heads of the Personal Insolvency Bill. 
This Bill is aimed at reforming personal insolvency law by introducing three new non-judicial 
debt settlement systems and reforming the Bankruptcy Act 1988. The three new non-judicial 
systems involve a Debt Relief Certificate; a Debt Settlement Arrangement, and, a Personal 
Insolvency Arrangement.  
Access  for  debtors  to  each  of  these  systems  is  subject  to  a  number  of  conditions.  The 
conditions  for  a  Debt  Relief  Certificate,  which  is  aimed  at  allowing  people  to  resolve  their 
unmanageable  unsecured  debt,  include  that  the  debtor’s  net  monthly  disposable  income 
after provision for reasonable living expenses must be €60 or less and that their assets be 
€400 or less. Under a Debt Settlement Arrangement debtors who have income, assets and 
unsecured  debts  above  these  thresholds  can  apply  for  a  Protective  Certificate  which  will 
provide a standstill period of 30 days in which the creditors cannot take action against the 
debtor  but  will  consider  a  repayment  plan  put  forward  by  a  personal  insolvency  trustee.  If 
creditors representing 65% of the value of the debt agree to this plan it will become binding 
on  all  creditors  and  a  Debt  Settlement  Agreement  will  be  registered  by  the  Insolvency 
Service. When the payments agreed under the Debt Settlement Agreement are successfully 
concluded, the balance of unsecured debt remaining will then be written off. 
A Personal Insolvency Arrangement will cover situations where debtors have both secured 
and unsecured debts above €20,000 but below €3 million. It will apply where a debtor is cash 
flow insolvent – or unable to pay their debts in full as they fall due – and is unlikely to become 
solvent  in  the  foreseeable  future.  It  involves  a  Personal  Insolvency  Trustee  advising  the 
debtor, proposing a repayment plan to creditors and, if accepted, administering this Personal 
Insolvency  Arrangement  for  its  duration.  This  Arrangement,  which  will  normally  run  for 
six years,  must  be  supported  by  at  least  65  %  of  creditors  and  at  least  75%  of  secured 
creditors and 55% of unsecured creditors in value terms.  
There are also a number of reforms of the Bankruptcy Act proposed, including changes to 
the automatic discharge period. 
While the actual legislation is not likely to come in force for a little while yet, having clarity on 
the  policy  framework  for  bankruptcy  and  debt  settlement  is  extremely  important  and  very 
welcome.  There  is  now  more  certainty  for  borrowers  and  lenders  alike  about  the 
consequences of non-payment and failure to reach agreement under the mortgage arrears 
resolution process. 
Mortgage arrears resolution strategies 
The  Code,  the  Keane  report  and  bankruptcy  law  reforms  provide  the  policy  framework  for 
addressing the mortgage arrears problem. But towards the end of last year, the Central Bank 
was  increasingly  concerned  over  the  progress  that  the  banks  were  making  on  working 
through their arrears cases in terms of their operational capacity but also more fundamentally 
the approach that they were taking to unsustainable mortgages. That prompted the Central 
Bank to write to all 21 mortgage lenders in the Irish market to invite them to send me their 
Board-approved mortgage arrears resolution strategy and implementation plan.  
Let me pause momentarily to note that at about the same time the Central Bank generated 
considerable  public  debate  over  the  level  of  standard  variable  rate  mortgages  at  some 
banks. The central issue is not, in fact, whether all monetary policy rates are automatically 
passed through to customers in full, as it is clear that the cost of funding is impacted by other 
factors  such  as  the  high  costs  of  deposits  and  the  Government  guarantee.  However,  we 
expressed concern that some outlier banks imposed variable rates considerably above their 
peers  and  that  this  could  affect  arrears  levels.  It  is  encouraging  to  see  that  following  this 
debate some steps have been taken to revise rates by those banks at the top of the market. 
But it would seem that there is still scope for further progress. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Returning to resolution strategies, we asked the lenders to set out their plans across a wide 
range  of  areas.  These  included  overall  strategy,  project  governance,  resources  and 
infrastructure, controls and monitoring (for example of Code compliance), their approach to 
pre-arrears, their strategy for Buy to Let customers, their decision trees and procedures for 
resolution decision-making and, especially, their approach to unsustainable mortgages and 
loan modification. 
Since receiving the strategies, we have reverted to the seven leading banks with feedback in 
the  form  of  key  deliverables  and  dates  in  addition  to  specific  actions  we  want  individual 
mortgage lenders to take. Also I have recently met with the CEOs of the big seven banks to 
discuss our findings. 
What are our findings? On the positive side, we evidenced a high level of engagement with 
the mortgage arrears issue by the lenders at Board and senior management level. There is 
also clearly a strong commitment to ensure compliance with the Code and there is a major 
gearing up of resources by the banks to ensure they have the operational capacity to tackle 
the problem.  
Also  positively,  all  the  major  lenders  had  projects  to  scope  the  size  of  their  unsustainable 
mortgage portfolio and to develop loan modification options.  
While I would have hoped that the banks would be further along with the execution of their 
plans, it is clear that such a big problem as mortgage arrears will take time to resolve. That is 
clearly  a  lesson  from  the  United  States,  where  it  has  involved  a  lot  of  time  and  effort  to 
develop  the  systems,  resources  and  operational  capacity  to  address  the  problem.  I  am 
however  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  the  senior  management  of  the  leading  lenders  have 
committed to the Central Bank to have completed a portfolio segment analysis which more 
precisely  identifies  their  unsustainable  mortgage  group  and  to  have  developed  their  loan 
modification techniques by the summer. They have also agreed to conclude pilot exercises of 
their loan modification approaches by early autumn. Loan modification would then start to be 
implemented,  where  appropriate,  from  quarter  four  of  this  year.  This  is  welcome  as  the 
unsustainable mortgage issue is a key area of concern. 
Unsustainable mortgages 
I  have  mentioned  unsustainable  mortgages  a  lot  –  why  are  they  so  important?  For  a  few 
reasons,  I  think.  Let  me  start  with  consumer  fairness.  If  a  homeowner  has  a  massive  gap 
between  their  mortgage  payments,  even  on  an  interest  only  basis,  and  what  they  can 
actually afford currently or prospectively, after taking a realistic assessment of future income 
and employment, then I am concerned that the very limited or transitory relief provided by 
standard  forbearance  techniques  could  just  be  putting  that  person  deeper  in  debt.  The 
homeowner may be building up a bigger and bigger shortfall, for example through interest 
capitalisation, which will eventually be owed when ownership of the home is ultimately lost. In 
other words, kicking the can down the road in the most difficult cases – where families are 
borderline insolvent – is unfair by adding to debt if there is in fact no realistic prospect that 
the standard forbearance is ultimately going to work. 
Then  from  a  prudential  perspective,  as  I  have  mentioned  already,  it  is  important  to  have 
better understanding of the actual losses in the banks’ books: that involves facing up to the 
unsustainable  mortgages  problem.  And  from  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  having  clarity 
about  the  size  of  this  group,  how  many  will  be  able  to  stay  in  their  home  through  loan 
modification and how many will go through bankruptcy or debt settlement is important for the 
recovery of the housing market and the economy more generally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  The Central Bank has therefore advised the leading lenders that it would like to see these 
actions as follow up to the first iteration of the mortgage arrears resolution strategies: 
– 
the  development  of  a  clearer  operational  definition  of  unsustainable  mortgage 
arrangements,  leading  to  a  quantification  of  the  size  of  this  segment  of  their 
mortgage portfolio;  
the development and piloting of specific loan modification techniques;  
modeling of the capital implications of applying the latter techniques to the former 
population;  
developing  operational  targets  and  key  performance  indicators  (KPIs)  for  the 
resolution of the unsustainable mortgage population; and  
execution of these targets with adequate resources.  
– 
To  be  fair  to  the  main  lenders,  all  of  the  strategies  generally  acknowledged  the  need  to 
address the unsustainable mortgage group and to develop loan modification techniques. But 
our feedback is that this work needs to be accelerated.  
The  Keane  report  provides  the  high  level  menu  of  loan  modification  options  and  we  are 
encouraging  the  principal  lenders  to  develop  their  own  modification  techniques.  Some  of 
these, designed mainly  for lower income households, involve the use of public money. An 
example would be Keane’s “mortgage to rent” scheme. It may well prove infeasible to apply 
such approaches on a large scale. Of  wider application, I suspect would be some form of 
what the Keane group called “split mortgage” and/or “shared equity” a similar concept. There 
will be different variants of these, which can be calibrated in different ways, which will have 
different degrees of capital cost to the banks (and for the covered banks, to the taxpayer).  
For the borderline insolvent homeowner, loan modification will have consequences, perhaps 
such  as  partial  loss  of  ownership  or  remaining  liability  for  the  warehoused  component. 
Certainly  there  will  have  to  be  a  commitment  to  stick  to  a  very  tight  budget  and  to  make 
significant  adjustments  to  living  standards.  And  it  is  important  to  be  clear  that  there  is  no 
legal  obligation  on  banks  to  modify  loans  in  all cases  and in  some  cases  repossession  or 
voluntary surrender will take place. In particular, delinquent borrowers who refuse to engage 
realistically with the lenders to reach and comply with an affordable modified payment plan 
can expect those consequences. Quite clearly this is not a question of mean-spirited lenders. 
The capital injected by the Government into the banks is to cover loan losses that cannot be 
avoided. It has not been calculated to provide for relief in respect of loans that borrowers are 
able to service.  
To date, the lenders’ strategies have been largely lacking sufficient operational targets or key 
performance  indicators.  That  is  something  one  would  have  expected  for  such  a  centrally 
important project for each of the banks. This is an area where we will be pressing the banks 
to refine and improve their strategies. We are following up with the principal lenders to ask 
them  to  supplement  their  strategies  on  just  this  point.  We  would  like  to  see  KPIs  for  the 
resolution of unsustainable mortgages generally (for example tracking the size of the portfolio 
and the number of modifications versus repossessions or other actions) but we would also 
expect to see KPIs for other aspects of the implementation of their strategies. Indeed, this is 
something  we  would  expect  that  Boards  and  senior  management  themselves  would  be 
seeking. We hope to build up a picture of initial, provisional KPIs and operational targets and 
be able to feed back to the lenders our observations as these are finalised. We will then be 
able  to  track  progress  alongside  the  banks’  own  boards  and  provide  feedback  on 
performance against their peers. 
Pushing forward on the unsustainable mortgages issue is an important priority that requires 
urgency. The Central Bank does acknowledge the need to be careful in the design of loan 
modification techniques and for modelling of the capital implications of any plans in this area 
before targets are set. But it is important that this piloting and modelling is done in time to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
feed into the next PCAR process to develop an updated picture on mortgage portfolio loan 
losses.  The  banks  then  need  to  as  soon  as  possible  thereafter  to  start  implementing  their 
loan modification programmes in earnest. 
Buy to let strategies 
We requested that all of the lenders develop a specific strategy for dealing with arrears in 
their buy to let book. The material we received at the end of last year set out the banks plans 
to do this but these strategies have not in fact yet been completed. As our second priority 
area with the banks, we will be pressing for this to happen as a matter of urgency so that we 
can assess the detail of the plans and provide feedback on good and bad practices. This is 
an important area for progress where arrears trends are a matter of concern.  
This  is  another  area  where  we  would  like  to  see  faster  progress  on  working  through  the 
problem.  Here  too  more  careful  segmentation  and  analysis  of  the  book  is  required  and  is 
something  that  we  will  be  expecting  to  see.  Each  segment  should  have  a  clear  approach 
identified  and  the  lenders  need  to  articulate  the  mix  of  resolution  approaches  that  will  be 
applied. 
It is important to be clear that the public policy issues and regulatory framework that applies 
to buy-to-let is very different from that applicable to owner occupier mortgages. Clearly, the 
family home is not at stake for the borrower, so the consumer protection issues that arise for 
owner occupier mortgages do not apply. For example, in general, the Code of Conduct of 
Mortgage Arrears does not apply to buy to let mortgages and it is not our intention to do so. 
As a result, the moratorium on repossessions does not apply.  
There appears to be a reticence from some lenders in tackling even the most hopeless of 
buy to let arrears cases. We would like to see more effort to work out the problems in the buy 
to  let  book  more  swiftly,  with  a  greater  sense  of  realism  here  too  about  the  prospects  of 
eventual repayment. 
Negative equity mortgages 
Most  of  these  initiatives  and  the  ground  covered  by  the  banks’  strategies  are  directed  at 
those who are actually in arrears. However, one issue that is a priority will be relevant for 
some  of  those  homeowners  who  are  making  their  payments  but  are  in  negative  equity, 
namely the concept of negative equity mortgages.  
Simply  put,  a  negative  equity  mortgage  is  a  new  mortgage  to  allow  a  customer  to  move 
home where the homeowner is currently in negative equity. It might be provided to facilitate a 
move to a different part of the country to change jobs or to move up to a larger property in 
case of a growing family. It recognises that important distinction between negative equity and 
affordability. A home owner may be in negative equity but may have the income to service 
not only their current mortgage but possibly a new, larger one. 
Negative equity mortgages do pose consumer protection issues, as they may involve a home 
owner  trading  up  to  a  larger  home  and  taking  on  increased  debt.  The  Central  Bank  was 
approached by two lenders at the end of 2010 about launching negative equity mortgages. 
We  agreed  that  these  could  be  developed  on  a  pilot  basis,  involving  guidelines  on 
affordability and the ability to service debt as well as restrictions on marketing. In light of the 
very  limited  take  up  of  these  mortgages  under  the  framework  that  was  agreed  and  of  the 
potential  benefits  for  facilitating  moves  and  generating  transactions  in  the  housing  market, 
the  Central  Bank  has  decided  to  adapt  its  approach  to  make  provision  of  negative  equity 
mortgages easier.  
For  that  reason  we  have  set  out  for  lenders  general  criteria  under  which  we  will  consider 
allowing  the  provision  of  such  mortgages.  We  will  not  set  prescriptive  standards  in  these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
areas but will look to see that lenders are taking a reasonable and controlled approach. All 
such  sales  must  also  comply  with  the  affordability  and  suitability  provisions  set  out  in  the 
Consumer Protection Code.  
Mortgage arrears resolution strategies: looking further ahead 
Unsustainable  mortgages,  buy  to  let  and  negative  equity  mortgages,  along  with  enhanced 
resources  and  infrastructure,  are  our  immediate  priorities  in  the  follow  up  work  with  the 
banks. Frankly, with such a difficult and complex issue there is a capacity constraint in the 
banks  and  we  are  wary  about  pressing  to  improve  all  the  aspects  of  the  banks  strategies 
simultaneously  for  fear  of  not  making  sustainable  progress  on  any  as  a  consequence. 
However, looking further ahead we will plan to examine more closely the banks pre-arrears 
strategies, for example, and will, as I said earlier be both reviewing the effectiveness of the 
Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears and assessing banks’ compliance with it.  
As  part  of  the  Central  Bank’s  on-going  research  on  the  mortgage  market,  a  Household 
Income Survey is being conducted. The Survey will provide a more accurate picture of the 
financial position of a representative sample of mortgaged households. It is due to be in the 
field very shortly, with results and analysis being published later in the year. 
The immediate focus of our efforts has been on the seven largest lenders that account for 
nearly 90% of the mortgage market (by value) and three quarters of arrears over 90 days. 
However, we will be following up with the other lenders who have sent in strategies to give 
them feedback and to press for improvements as needed. 
We  are  also  in  parallel  undertaking  some  consumer  research  to  inform  our  work.  In 
conjunction with the Household Income Survey I just mentioned, our Consumer Protection 
Division  is  conducting  a  survey  on  a  subsample  of  borrowers  who  are  in  pre-arrears  and 
arrears  and  are  in  the  Mortgage  Arrears  Resolution  Process.  The  research  will  involve 
borrowers  who  have  mortgages  with  four  mainstream  lenders  and  are  in  the  MARP  since 
1 January  2011,  when  the  revised  Code  came  into  effect.  We  want  to  understand  the 
borrower’s experience and treatment when in the MARP. The research will focus on areas of 
the MARP which would not be easily learned from a client file during an inspection such as 
whether  the  information  received  by  the  customer  was  explained  clearly  and  the  type  of 
support the customer received from the lender when going through the MARP. Our findings 
will feed into the review of the CCMA planned for later this year.  
We  will  also  be  gearing  up  for  the  next  PCAR  stress  test  of  the  banks  in  the  autumn, 
developing our methodology. We will again be using a third party to assist in an independent 
assessment  of  the  banks’  loan  losses.  Following  a  public  tender  process,  BlackRock 
Solutions has been awarded the contract for this exercise. 
Over time then, the Central Bank will be able to use the strategies (and the lenders further 
refinement of those) as a mechanism to build up a better picture of progress on the arrears 
issue, to provide feedback on good and bad practice, to track operational progress against 
strategy  targets  and,  as  I  promised  last  autumn,  to  breath  down  the  necks  of  the  banks 
where necessary to do a better job. 
Conclusion 
There are a lot of different factors that will come together to determine the ultimate resolution 
of the mortgage arrears problem – economic, policy and social – not all of which are within 
the influence of the Central Bank. Now that the public policy framework for mortgage arrears 
is  mostly  settled,  the  Central  Bank  is  pressing  hard  for  operational  improvements  at  the 
banks so that arrears cases are handled in a way that meets consumer protection concerns 
and  faces  up  to  the  unsustainable  mortgage  problem,  but  also  prudently  husbands  the 
capital that has often come from the taxpayer. I hope I have given you a clear picture of the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
immediate priorities of this work – unsustainable mortgages, buy to let arrears, operational 
capacity and negative equity mortgages – and a sense of what is coming in the future. And, 
as I have explained, the next stress test in the autumn will provide an updated view on the 
capital adequacy position of the banks – and therefore the financial stability position of the 
country – arising from the developing mortgage arrears situation.  
The  link  between  the  mortgage  arrears  problem  and  the  prospects  of  overall  financial 
recovery and stability are obvious. It means that the borderline insolvent homeowners who 
genuinely can’t afford to pay back all their mortgage should get help. But it also means that 
those who can afford to pay continue to do so. And it means that those who can afford to pay 
but won’t – thereby unfairly adding to the costs to the taxpayer by taking advantage of the 
current situation – they need to face up to their responsibilities. It is important that borrowers 
engage with their banks early in an open and honest way. This is a difficult problem and it will 
take many years to resolve it. It is important that everyone plays their part.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
