Christian Noyer: Interview in Le Point 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, in Le Point, 9 August 2012. 
 integration  and  governance  within 
Markets  were  hoping  that  Mario  Draghi  and  the  ECB  Governing  Council  would  take 
strong action to give Spain and Italy a little breathing space ... The ECB has chosen to 
do nothing! Why? Are you saving your ammunition for later? 
We  haven’t  heard  the  same  thing!  The  Governing  Council  recently  announced  its 
intention  to  intervene  on  the  bond  market  to  allow  a  smooth  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. The  objective  is  to  counter  the  emergence  of  excessive  risk  premiums  on  certain 
sovereign debts. Naturally, this only makes sense if  governments themselves decide to act 
and  to  activate  the  solidarity  and  support  mechanisms  of  fiscal  consolidation  they  have 
established.  Our  operations  will  be  on  a  sufficient  scale  to  have  a  strong  impact  on  the 
markets. We should be prepared to respond very rapidly, by focusing on short-term bonds. 
Have  no  doubts  about the Governing Council’s determination and its ability to act within its 
mandate. 
One  gets  the  impression  in  this  crisis  that  everyone  is  watching  the  boat  sink 
without doing anything. To start with the ECB ... 
That  is  incorrect!  And  unfair!  It  is  the  markets  that  are  reacting  in  this  way.  European 
authorities  have  been  responding  to  countless  issues  since  the  start  of  the  crisis.  They 
have  launched  a  number  of  major,  extremely  technical  projects  which,  ultimately,  will 
reinforce  monetary 
the  European  Union.  Much 
progress  has  been made  over  the  past  five  years  to  strengthen  Europe  and  clarify  the 
rules  on  which  no  one  really  wanted  to  make  headway.  Markets  would  like  to  have 
everything  settled  within  five minutes.  But  there  are  17  democracies  in  the  euro  area  and 
27 democracies in the European Union. The time perspective of the markets is not that of 
democracies. Like Jean Monnet, I believe that Europe will be forged in crises. 
The  only  question  that  markets  are  asking  is  straightforward:  are  euro  area 
countries prepared to support each other financially? They want a yes or a no ... 
It’s  more  complex  than  that.  Markets  lend  money  to  governments  and  want  to  know 
whether  they  will  be  reimbursed.  They  want  to  be  able  to  count,  if  necessary,  on  the 
intervention  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  [programme  intended  to  provide 
financial assistance to governments in difficulty, editor’s note]. As creditors, they especially 
want  to  ascertain  the  credibility  of  the  entity  to  which  they  are  lending  money.  Hence  the 
need  for  consolidation  efforts  in  most  countries.  Besides,  solidarity  itself  implies  that 
everyone  make  as  much  effort  as  possible,  because  should  this  aid  not  be  reimbursed, 
additional taxes would have to be raised in all countries. 
After  all, the  credibility  of the  ECB is  intact ...  Why  not  use the instruments  at  your 
disposal to appease the markets’ doubts? Is Germany imposing its conditions on the 
rest of Europe? 
The  ECB  has  a  range  of  tools  to  ensure  price  stability  and  the  proper  functioning  of  the 
market.  It  can  remedy  market  disruptions.  It  has  done  so  several  times  in  recent  years  to 
avoid a “credit crunch” by greatly increasing its provision of liquidity to the banking system 
and by lengthening  the maturity  of refinancing  operations.  Still  within  our  mandate,  we  are 
able  to  take  quite  significant  non-standard  measures  and  we  have  done  this  on  several 
occasions.  The mandate  of  the  ECB  is  also  to  ensure  the  solidity  of  the  euro.  But  the 
ECB  cannot  replace governments,  nor  spare  them  from  making  the  necessary  efforts  to 
control  their  debt  and  restore  the  competitiveness  of  their  economy.  The  credibility  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
governments  cannot  rest  on the  central  bank.  And  yet,  the  former  must  demonstrate  their 
determination to improve their fiscal position. 
But  under  Germany’s  pressure,  the  ECB  is  not  using  all  the  instruments  at  its 
disposal. How is this justifiable when huge efforts are required of Spain and Italy? 
The ECB is being unfairly accused. No central bank in the world – neither the Fed nor the 
Bank of England – directly funds governments or purchases sovereign debt on the primary 
market  to  finance  their  deficits.  However,  it  is  possible  on  the  secondary  market.  We 
have  done  so  in  the  past.  There  are  no  differences  of  opinion  between  the  French,  the 
Germans and the  European  Commission.  All  say  the  same  thing:  we  are  not  against  ECB 
intervention  to correct market anomalies. But it only makes sense if the economic and fiscal 
policies pursued aim at correcting imbalances and restoring balanced public finances. 
Some  people  are  now  expecting  Greece  and  Spain  to  leave  the  euro.  Are  you 
preparing for such a scenario? 
We  are  not  contemplating  a  Greek  departure  from  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  such  a 
scenario  is  not  provided  for  by  the  Treaty.  There  is  therefore  no  plan  to  prepare  a 
country’s exit  from the  euro.  Besides,  comparing  Spain  to  Greece  makes  little  sense.  The 
two situations are completely dissimilar. Spain is competitive. Paradoxically, with the crisis, 
it  is  even  more competitive  than  a  year  ago  as  the  growth  of  its  exports  shows.  It  has 
serious  problems  to manage  such  as  the  situation  of  its  banks,  of  its  property  developers 
and  the  indebtedness  of  its  autonomous  regions.  But  Spain  is  taking  the  necessary 
measures:  it  is  pushing  through impressive reforms and reinventing its growth model. 
In your opinion, how did the euro area get into this situation? 
The euro area is not simply confronted with a financial crisis. It is facing a challenge: it must 
complete its construction. During the setting up of the euro area and subsequently during its 
first  years  of  existence,  governments  acted  with  an  inadequate  sense  of  responsibility.  Its 
construction  was  incomplete.  Fiscal  rules  were  not  sufficiently  strict  and,  moreover,  they 
were  often  ignored.  There  was  a  form  of  cowardliness.  Governments  preferred  to  close 
their  eyes rather than to consolidate the edifice. None of the Member States listened to the 
warning  bells  that  were  regularly  sounded,  notably  by  the  ECB.  At  the  same  time,  the 
markets also closed their eyes to the widening gaps within the euro area. Once the single 
currency  was  in  place,  everyone  found  it  convenient  to  disregard  the  area’s  economic 
divergences and differences in competitiveness. The result is that today we have a monetary 
union zone, but the heterogeneity of its different economies has increased. 
What a mea culpa ! 
It is not a mea culpa. The ECB and the Governing Council, of which I am a member, have 
never  contributed  to  this  indifference.  On  the  contrary,  over  the  last  ten  years  we  have 
signalled  and  highlighted  these  risks.  However,  neither  markets  nor  governments  took 
any notice. Everyone benefited from  what I would describe as an “incredible” decade, with 
interest  rates  decreasing  for  everyone  across  the  board  and  certain  countries  posting 
exceptionally  dynamic  growth  rates  in  an  essentially  inflation  free  environment.  In  that 
context, everyone got access to cheap debt financing relatively easily. The wake-up call is 
all the  more  painful  today  as  a  result.  The  financial  crisis  obliges  us  to  completely  rethink 
the European social model that is substantially state-financed. 
Was Europe ready for the single currency? 
The  founding  fathers  of  the  euro,  and  particularly  François  Mitterrand  and  Helmut  Kohl, 
imagined  the  euro  as  a  major  stimulus  for  greater  European  integration.  They  knew  that 
it  would  require stronger  European governance and  the implementation of  euro-area fiscal 
discipline … But governments chose to side-step their responsibilities in this respect. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In 2003, France and Germany, the two most powerful States in the euro area, breached 
the famous Maastricht criteria…  Are they not partly responsible for the subsequent 
crisis? 
Each  Member  States  carries  a  share  of  the  blame.  The  ECB  however  is  not  to  blame. 
There were strict fiscal rules. If governments had respected these rules we would not have 
had  this  chain  reaction  leading  to  the  current  crisis.  In  2007,  2008  and  2009,  we  had  to 
prevent  the  financial  crisis  from  deepening  and  limit  the  consequences  for  the  real 
economy.  The  ECB and States did what was expected of them by supporting the banking 
systems.  However,  after 2009,  the  markets  started  looking  at  the  accounting  situations 
of  each  Member  State  and started doubting the capacity of certain States to honour their 
financial  liabilities.  The  markets  also  remembered  that  behind  the  governments’  bank 
rescue  plans  there  were  States  and  with  no  single  or  common  signature  and  that  the 
banking  system  was  not  sufficiently  uniform  at the  European  level.  Each  State  therefore 
found  itself  with  its  own  financial  credibility  and  its own specific debt financing conditions, 
depending on its individual fiscal situation. 
And  in  this  respect,  what  is  your  opinion  of  the  policy  orientations  adopted  by 
François Hollande, his government and the new majority? 
I am pleased to see that the objective of a return to fiscal equilibrium within five years is one 
of  the  new  government’s  priorities.  The  President  of  the  Republic  has  undertaken  to 
achieve balanced public accounts by the end of his mandate. This is a necessary target. So 
far, the  tax  increases  have  allowed  the  financing  of  additional  spending  and  the  reduction 
of  the deficit. I  am  waiting  to  see  the  2013  budget  proposal  to  measure  exactly  by  how 
much the State’s spending will be reduced. 
In concrete terms, what exactly would you like to see? 
The  Cour  des  comptes  (court  of  auditors)  has  compiled  a  list  of  the  different  potential 
savings  that  the  government  should  examine.  I  agree  with  its  analysis.  It  is  indeed  a 
colossal and ambitious project. Alongside the reduction of public expenditure, we must also 
encourage  investment,  entrepreneurship  and  restore  confidence  for  those  who  wish  to 
start  a  business. We therefore need structural reforms and a reform  of our labour laws to 
allow greater flexibility  with the objective of restoring and improving the competitiveness of 
our economy. We must change our social model because it is no longer coherent with global 
competition.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
