Jens Weidmann: Everything flows? The future role of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  2012  ZEW 
Economic Forum, Mannheim, 12 June 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Franz, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be able to speak to you here today at the ZEW Economic Forum. Professor 
Franz, thank you very much for the invitation. 
At first glance, the title may have left a few of you slightly puzzled. “Everything flows? The 
future role of monetary policy” conjures up a number of associations. 
The  title  could  be  alluding  to  the  massive  increase  in  liquidity  as  a  result  of  non-standard 
measures taken by many central banks. 
Some  of  you  may  also  have  thought  of  the  pre-Socratic  philosopher,  Heraclitus,  who  is 
known for his dictum of constant flow and the passing of all things. “Everything flows” thus 
also refers to changes in the role and general conditions of monetary policy. 
Both  associations  are  correct  and  are  inter-connected.  The  central  banks’  contribution  to 
combating the crisis is one of the reasons why the current role of monetary policy is being 
debated so intensely. This is true across the globe, but especially in the euro area with its 
specific set-up and the unique situation posed by the sovereign debt crisis. 
There is no doubt that the crisis has delivered important findings for monetary policy and for 
monetary union. However, my key message today is to make clear that the paradigms that 
have been valid to date have by no means suddenly lost their validity. On the contrary, given 
the challenges that we are facing today, we should not recklessly throw long-held principles 
overboard and turn our backs on the lessons from the past. 
Ultimately, monetary union in its current institutional form was created as a result of lessons 
learned from past errors. And by that, I do not so much mean German hyperinflation at the 
beginning of the 1920s, as is all too often assumed by foreign observers. Instead I mean the 
monetary  policy  experience  gained 
the  extremely 
heterogeneous  development  of  inflation  in  Europe.  Countries  with  politically  independent 
central banks and a clear primary objective of price stability, such as Germany, had much 
lower inflation rates than countries in which central banks were obliged to follow politicians’ 
instructions  and  were  additionally  called  upon  to  pursue  fiscal  and  economic  policy  goals. 
This is one of the reasons why the Bundesbank, with its culture of stability, was chosen as a 
founding model for the Eurosystem. 
An independent central bank is necessary for stable prices, but more than that is needed. 
Price  stability  is  also  jeopardised  by  unsound  public  finances.  If  public  finances  get  out  of 
hand,  the  central  bank  can  come  under  overwhelming  pressure  to  jump  to  fiscal  policy’s 
rescue and, in so doing, can undermine its primary objective of price stability.  
This lesson is not just derived from theoretical models, it has been evidenced time and time 
again  in  the  past.  A  particularly  good  example  from  history  is  the  Latin  monetary  union 
comprising Italy, France, Belgium, Switzerland and Greece. Even before the treaty of union 
came  into  force,  Italy’s  debt  exploded  owing  to  the  war  with  Austria.  On  1 May  1866,  the 
government  took  out  a  loan  with  the  Banca  Nazionale  to  finance  this  debt  for  which  Italy 
departed  from  the  bimetallic  standard  and  imposed  an  enforced  rate  of  exchange  for  its 
the  1970s  and  1980s  with 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
banknotes. This enforced monetary financing of war debts triggered the first severe crisis of 
the Latin monetary union and fuelled a permanent mistrust between the member states. 
The  recent  past  –  notably  the  financial  crisis  –  also  has  important  lessons  for  monetary 
policy.  One  example 
is  asymmetrical  monetary  policy,  which  provides  strong 
counter-measures  when  speculative  bubbles  burst.  This  can  inflate  the  risks  for  financial 
stability. In an environment where market participants can pocket the full return on a risky 
investment if it is successful but only have to bear part of the costs if it is unsuccessful, risk 
appetite can take on a harmful dimension for the economy. 
When considering the future role of monetary policy and its relation to other policy areas, we 
do not have to go back to the drawing board but can draw on a wealth of experience and 
economically  proven  evidence.  This  we  can  do,  and  this  we  should  do.  Although  the 
outstanding  political  significance  of  the  monetary  union  was  –  and  still  is  –  undisputed,  a 
political  project  must  also  be  economically  sustainable;  in  the  long  term,  it  cannot  be 
enforced  against  economic  conditions.  Economic  mechanisms,  such  as  the  risk  of  moral 
hazard, may not be laws of nature; however, they are relevant constraints which politicians 
cannot ignore forever. 
Thus, in order to overcome the crisis and to prevent it from happening again, it is essential to 
apply  a  coherent  approach:  the  short-term  emergency  measures  and  institutional  changes 
must not stand in the way of the long-term stability objective. And the interaction between 
monetary  policy,  financial  stability  measures  and  fiscal  policy  must  be  compatible  with  the 
special conditions of monetary union.  
This coherence is currently not given. However, I do not see the deficits so much in the area 
of monetary policy. Its commitment to the primary objective of price stability has proven its 
worth  and  must  therefore  be  upheld,  especially  in  view  of  the  increasing  efforts  for  the 
mandate to be expanded. Nevertheless, a deep rift has developed in the fiscal and economic 
policy foundation of monetary union. This foundation emphasises member states’ individual 
national responsibility and sovereignty, which is, however, being increasingly undermined as 
a result of the progressive communitisation of risks. It is here that I see a need for adjustment 
and the need for Europe to make a pivotal decision, which can no longer be delayed. 
It is for this reason that the topics of fiscal union, deeper integration and political union are 
currently  on  everyone’s  lips.  In  the  following,  I  will  therefore  be  focusing  on  the  fiscal  and 
economic policy foundation of the euro area in particular. But first, I would like to begin by 
taking a short look at monetary policy and financial stability policy. 
Core function of monetary policy in relation to financial stability 
2. 
There  is  currently  no  lack  of  suggestions  with  regard  to  adjusting  the  pre-crisis  monetary 
policy  consensus  to  the  supposedly  new  circumstances.  The  bottom  line  of  much  of  the 
advice directed at central banks is that they should raise their inflation target. Although the 
benefit of low inflation rates is not being questioned as such, it is suggested that, given that 
other policy areas have been pushed to their limit, monetary policy, too, ought to contribute 
to reducing debt and the imbalances in the crisis countries by means of higher inflation rates. 
To cut a long story short: such an approach is completely unsuitable as a solution of these 
problems. Besides, the price to pay would be far too high, namely the loss of credibility of 
monetary policy as the precondition for price stability. Placing confidence in central banks is 
the solution to the time inconsistency problem of monetary policy, and this confidence is like 
confidence in general: it takes a great deal of time and effort to build up and from a certain 
point can be easily squandered. However, it is this confidence that forms the basis for public 
acceptance  of  monetary  union.  Discussions  on  the  benefit  of  higher  inflation  targets  or 
expanding the monetary policy mandate – as fruitless as they may be – put this confidence 
at grave risk.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The commitment of monetary policy to the primary objective of price stability is a historical 
achievement and it must not be compromised. Instead, monetary policy must combat future 
upside inflationary risks with tenacity. The steps necessary to achieve this objective must not 
be impeded or delayed by other considerations that are irrelevant to monetary policy. This 
applies also, and especially, with regard to ensuring financial stability. 
An unstable financial system impairs the transmission of monetary policy and can jeopardise 
price  stability  without  these  dangers  being  reflected  in  inflation  expectations  or  measured 
inflation in good time. But as important as financial stability is, what are the implications for 
monetary policy? 
I am convinced that the decisive contribution by monetary policy to financial stability is and 
remains  price  stability,  whereby  a  longer-term  outlook  has  become  even  more  important. 
Monetary policy must look beyond the cycle. It must not succumb to a purely short-term crisis 
logic and thus create new risks to the stability of prices and the financial system. 
Conversely, financial stability policy requires its own macro-prudential instruments. Previous 
unsound  developments  in  individual  countries  of  the  monetary  union  show  that  these 
macro-prudential measures must also be applicable at the national level – regardless of their 
compatibility with Europe as a whole. Central banks will play an important institutional role in 
this area in future. This means specifically that there will be no renationalisation of monetary 
policy.  Instead,  a  successful  financial  stability  policy  takes  the  burden  off  monetary  policy, 
allowing it to focus on maintaining price stability. 
In view of the extent of the risks and the contagion effects in the crisis, there have been loud 
calls for integration of financial stability policy in Europe to the point of a common deposit 
insurance and resolution system as well as a banking union. The question is essentially this: 
if  we  are  all  in  the  same  boat  with regard  to  bearing  the  burden,  would  it  not  be better  to 
jointly monitor the risks and to properly regulate the issue of joint liability in advance? 
Given the cross-border banking structures and contagion effects, it is essentially a good idea 
to  Europeanise  financial  supervision,  and  this  is  already  taking  place  –  two  of  many 
examples are the European supervisory authority EBA, which has already taken up its work, 
and  the  recent  Proposal  for  a  Directive  made  by  the  European  Commission  for  designing 
restructuring and resolution regimes. There is more to a banking union than that, however. 
The aim is not only a better prevention of crises, but also the ability to cope with crises in 
fiscal  terms,  which  means  money  –  and  not  a  small  amount  at  that.  The  degree  of 
Europeanisation of financial stability policy is closely linked to the Europeanisation of fiscal 
control and intervention rights in this connection, if not inseperable. This is where I see the 
greatest challenges – for monetary policy and the entire monetary union alike. 
On the financial and economic foundation of monetary union 
3. 
The  crisis  has  exposed  the  weaknesses  of  monetary  union.  Some  member  states 
experienced severe unsound developments in their financial system, their national financial 
policies  or  their  economic  structures  –  unsound  developments,  which  the  institutional 
framework both failed to prevent and underestimated in terms of their impact. The foundation 
of  monetary  policy  proved  to  be  too  weak.  For  this  reason,  the  foundation  must  be 
strengthened  and  deepened  in  order  for  the  euro  area  to  remain  a  stability  union  and  to 
regain confidence. 
This requires clarity as to what the objective of monetary union should be and how to achieve 
it. Clarity especially in terms of the depth of integration we are aiming at and any transfer of 
responsibilities  from  the  national  to  the  European  level  that  this  entails.  We  must  find  a 
framework  that  is  coherent  in  itself  and  that  clearly  allocates  responsibilities.  Clarity  and 
confidence require political consensus which must, above all, be borne by the approval of the 
public and the design of the treaties and constitutions. This is the only way in which a solid 
foundation can be created, upon which a stability union can then be based. If the foundation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
is incomplete, brittle or threatens to be undermined, confidence is destroyed. Policies can of 
course try to mend the cracks in the building or support those parts in danger of collapsing. 
However, nobody will feel safe inside such a building anymore. 
In  principle,  there  are  two  approaches  to  achieving  a  stable  monetary  union.  First,  the 
member  states  could  return  to  the  principles  stipulated  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  their 
current  constitutions,  where  emphasis  must  be  put  on  both  sides  of 
individual  
responsibility – making their own decisions and bearing the consequences themselves. The 
guiding principles here are national sovereignty and subsidiarity. Fiscal and economic policy 
thus  remains  chiefly  a national  responsibility,  as  does  the  stability  of national  banking  and 
financial  systems.  A  strict  framework  and  interest  rate  premiums  to  be  paid  on  the  capital 
markets  ensure  that  incentives  are  in  place  for  member  states  to  pursue  stability-oriented 
policies. There is no place in such a scenario for far-reaching joint liability. 
In  this  approach,  the  current  framework  can  also  be  strengthened  by  intensifying  crisis 
prevention  measures.  This  comprises, 
in  particular,  a  macroeconomic  surveillance 
procedure,  as  is  currently  envisaged,  and  tighter  restrictions  for  fiscal  policy,  including 
improved monitoring and implementation. The aim of lowering deficit and debt quotas has to 
leave the page and become a reality. This is the only way that public finances can absorb 
macroeconomic shocks without endangering a state’s solvency. Furthermore, it is essential 
to make the financial and banking system significantly more robust in order to limit contagion 
despite ever closer financial ties. This necessitates further improvements to regulation and 
financial system supervision, and a much greater resilience to crises. If properly designed, a 
crisis resolution instrument, such as the ESM, can provide a vital contribution to stabilisation. 
All in all, I do, however, currently see the danger that joint liability is being extended, with the 
result  that  the  existing  institutional  framework  is  being  clearly  stretched,  but  with  the 
possibilities  for  control  and  intervention  lagging  behind.  This  poses  an  acute  threat  to  the 
balance  between  liability  and  control.  Whereas,  for  instance,  the  fiscal  compact  aims  to 
ensure  more  stringent  prevention  measures,  the  clear  wish  to  forego  risk  premiums  if  aid 
programmes are made use of significantly weakens the incentives for sound public finances. 
The  alternative  to  a  “return  to  Maastricht”  is  the  transition  to  a  true  fiscal  union,  which  is 
currently the subject of intense debate. This idea is nothing new. This issue was a topic of 
debate at the Bundesbank long before monetary union was even established, and this issue 
was again raised during the financial crisis. 
Allow me to make one preliminary remark before I move on to discuss the individual aspects 
of a possible fiscal union in greater detail. “Fiscal union” is a difficult term to pin down and 
can take a number of forms. Provided it is adequately structured, a fiscal union can prove to 
be the cornerstone of a coherent institutional framework for the monetary union. However, 
even such an ambitious project as a fiscal union can by no means solve the problems that 
many countries are facing today: high unemployment and a lack of competitiveness are not 
going to disappear overnight. The need for adjustment would still exist and given the strong 
interdependencies,  it  would  probably  require  an  even  closer  oversight  with  regard  to  the 
macroeconomic  imbalances  in  the  member  states.  Above  all,  however,  the  transition  to  a 
fiscal union would by no means guarantee a stability union. The crucial point here, in addition 
to an adequate structure, would be that a common European stability structure be developed 
and actually implemented. 
Irrespective of all the changes to the regulatory framework, in a fiscal union, those countries 
which are experiencing macroeconomic or financial imbalances would consequently have to 
implement structural reforms to put their public finances in order to get the economy back on 
its feet. Depending on the form that it takes, a fiscal union could contain substantial transfer 
components. I am, however, convinced that most of the euro-area public would not accept 
simply  glossing  over  the  structural  problems  in  individual  countries  by  means  of  transfer 
payments,  especially  as  it  is  more  likely  that  the  problems  would  just  become  further 
entrenched. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The focus of the debate has quite legitimately been the issue surrounding joint liability. The 
idea  that  the  introduction  of  such  a  measure  alone  will  be  the  solution  to  all  the  current 
problems is just as delusional as the belief that the introduction of a single currency is an 
automatic  guarantee  for  economic  prosperity  in  the  individual  member  states.  Such 
measures may well help to cover up unsound economic developments for somewhat longer, 
yet  the  underlying  economic  issues  cannot  be  rectified  in  this  way.  On  the  contrary,  an 
expansion  of  joint  liability  is  therefore  not  the  answer  to  the  spectre  of  reform  fatigue  in 
Europe. The disciplining effect on the financial markets would consequently be undermined 
and the incentive for reform would diminish in countries where there is need for adjustment. 
This would do away with an important corrective for national economic policy, and would be 
a severe blow to Europe’s economic outlook in a globalised world and to a stability-oriented 
monetary  policy.  Furthermore,  the  creditworthiness  of  the  countries  providing  assistance 
would also be put at risk. In addition, political acceptance would be lost in these countries as 
a  result  of  perceived  excessive  demands  and  excessive  advantages.  The  monetary  union 
would  consequently  lose  its  anchor  and  thus  its  basis  for  any  kind  of  stability.  These 
medium-term risks must not be brushed aside in favour of a short-term easing of the acute 
and fragile economic situation. 
Joint liability can therefore only be introduced at the end of the integration process of a fiscal 
union and not at the beginning. Rather, it must also succeed, especially in a fiscal union, in 
maintaining  and  strengthening  the  incentives  for  necessary  economic  reforms  and  fiscal 
consolidation. And this can also succeed if, as I have already mentioned, liability and control 
are brought back into line and a fiscal union is structured in a manner than is compatible with 
stability. 
Not surprisingly, it is precisely in those countries which face acute financing problems and a 
severe  loss  of  confidence  in  their  own  fiscal  policies  that  the  cries  for  joint  liability are  the 
loudest and the most emphatic. The support we are seeing from the European institutions, 
which, by their very nature, advocate greater centralisation at the European level, is just as 
understandable. 
It  is,  however,  worth  noting  that  the  advocates  of  joint  liability  are  often  in  those  countries 
which are the most opposed to surrendering their national sovereignty with regard to financial 
policy  decisions.  It  is  clear  that  joint  liability  holds  the  promise  delivering  benefits  and 
extending  a  country’s  scope  for  action,  whereas  fiscal  union  could  restrict  the  scope  for 
action  at  the  national  level.  As  understandable  as  such  a  stance  may  be,  a  stable  union 
cannot be founded on this basis. My impression is that Germany is much more open with 
regard to the issue of surrendering national sovereignty than many partner countries. 
In order to establish a stability-oriented fiscal union, it is my firm belief that it is imperative for 
the euro-area countries to summon up two things 
 
First, the willingness to submit themselves in a binding manner to strict budgetary 
rules. 
Second, the willingness to hand over sovereignty in some areas to a central level 
that effectively monitors compliance with the rules and, above all, can enforce them. 
Consequently,  although  not  necessary,  it  would  be  acceptable  to  bear  risks  to  a  certain 
extent jointly. In this context, the sequence in which the steps are taken is crucial. If we were 
to reverse the order, there would be a risk – if not, in fact, a strong probability – of the second 
step never being taken or, at least, not being taken properly. 
But how might a stability-oriented fiscal union be structured? There are, of course, a large 
number  of  options  for  this,  all  depending  on  how  far  competencies  are  shifted  to  the 
European  level,  revenue  and  spending  powers  are  centralised  and  transfer  elements  are 
extended. I wish to assume the status quo; in other words, as much subsidiarity as possible 
in the form of national fiscal responsibility and the fiscal objectives, as set out, for example, in 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the Stability and Growth Pact and in the fiscal compact. And it is on this basis that I would 
like to outline a number of minimum requirements for a stability-oriented fiscal union. 
This minimal approach has the advantage that it allows a broader range of economic policy 
cultures in the member states, since the further integration advances, the less room there will 
be for differences in the concept of statehood, the social security systems or pay negotiation 
structures. Let us not be under any illusions: there still exist major differences in that respect, 
even between Germany and France. In Germany, government spending is 46% of nominal 
GDP,  whereas  the  figure  for  France  is  56%.  And  while  Germany  has  responded  to  the 
demographic  challenges  with  a  phased  increase  of  the  retirement  age  to  67,  a  recent 
increase in the retirement age from 60 to 62 in France is to be reversed again in some cases. 
The core element of such a fiscal union which is limited to the absolute essentials consists in 
strict  and  effective  budgetary  rules  that  set  a  binding  ceiling  on  national  borrowing.  Given 
experience of the past few years, this would not be monitored by the European Commission 
or the Ecofin Council, but ideally by a new, independent euro-area institution. In the event of 
a  country  not  abiding  by  the  budgetary  rules,  national  sovereignty  would  be  automatically 
transferred to the European level on a scale that can ensure compliance with the objectives. 
In a speech at the Petersen Institute, Jean-Claude Trichet, the former President of the ECB, 
described this aptly as “federalism by exception”. One option, for example, could be the right 
to  make  tax  increases  or  proportional  cuts  in  expenditure  –  and  not  just  the  possibility  of 
calling  for  them.  In  effect,  national  sovereignty  would  be  largely  retained  and  fiscal  policy 
decision-making  capabilities  and  room  for  manoeuvre  would  be  preserved  as  long  as  a 
country in question complies with the limits on borrowing and debt. In that kind of framework, 
consolidation paths would be safeguarded at the European level even if no majorities were to 
be found in the relevant national parliament. 
Along  with  the  credible  establishment  of  such  a  framework  which  reliably  safeguards 
compliance  with  the  fiscal  rules,  a  joint  liability  of  the  euro-area  member  states  could  be 
introduced,  say,  by  issuing  jointly  guaranteed  or  partially  guaranteed  bonds  or  by  a  bank 
union that comprises key elements of a joint liability. 
A stringent fiscal union on these lines is fundamentally suited to placing monetary union on a 
strong, enduring foundation. As time goes on, this union also has to be lived as a stability 
union. Before arriving at the goal, however, two obstacles, to which I alluded earlier, have to 
be overcome. 
First,  a  fiscal  union  has  to  be  equipped  with  comprehensive  democratic  legitimacy.  It  is  a 
matter of a quantum leap. European integration would be noticeably extended, and national 
sovereignty and self-determination would be handed over. What is crucial for this to happen 
is democratic legitimacy given by a clear manifestation of the will of the general public in all 
of the affected member states. This is the only way to create the confidence that the new 
framework has popular acceptance and backing and will therefore endure. 
The second obstacle, which is linked to the first one, is the far-reaching amendment of the 
European treaties and national constitutions. This is necessary because fiscal union is not 
envisaged  or  is  expressly  forbidden  in  the  existing  legal  framework.  The  aim  of  the 
amendments is to create a reliable and stable structure that cannot simply be changed yet 
again in the short term. An established and respected legal framework is a key precondition 
for the stronger integration of very different nations. This process requires a certain amount 
of time, but is indispensable. This is because a fiscal union which lacks transparency, which 
is  introduced  by  circumventing  existing  regulations  and  standards,  or  which  is  left  to  the 
whims  of  everyday  politics  would  be  built  on  sand  and  not  be  a  sustainable  basis  for  a 
stability union. 
Democratic  legitimacy  based  on  broad  public  support  and  amendments  to  the  legal 
framework are closely linked. While joint liability, for example, is irreversible, changes to the 
EU  fiscal  rules  might  be  put  up  for  negotiation  at  any  time.  Examples  of  this  are  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
experiences in dealing with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact as well as the concrete 
design of the fiscal compact, which has fallen short of the goals that were originally set. 
Above all, Germany will have a perceptible stability contribution to make given a further step 
in  integration.  The  recent  past  has  shown,  however,  that,  in  monetary  union,  Germany’s 
interests are protected by existing treaties and a German veto. From a German perspective, 
it  is  therefore  crucial  that  there  is  a  consensus  in  adopting  the  cornerstones  of  a 
stability-oriented fiscal union and that, once they are agreed, they are secured in such a way 
that they endure and cannot be changed yet again by majority decision. 
By outlining these caveats, I am by no means arguing against deeper integration, quite the 
opposite.  But  just  as  the  existing  decentralised  framework  of  the  euro  area  has  had  its 
shortcomings,  deeper  integration  by  itself  is  not  a  guarantee  of  a  stable  monetary 
union – especially not if you take the second step before the first. A stable monetary union 
does  not  depend  on  the  “United  States  of  Europe”,  but  without  a  stable  currency  and  a 
matching fiscal framework there will be no permanent stable political union. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I have covered a broad range of topics in the past half-hour. 
The  role  of  monetary  policy  is  changing,  but  it  is  far  removed  from  having  to  change 
fundamentally. It is more the case that it has to resist stronger encroachment – the guiding 
principle  is  “course  correction,  not  going  into  reverse”.  The  fiscal  and  economic  policy 
framework of monetary union requires far more amendments. Europe is faced with a pivotal 
decision on how a stability union is to be preserved, and has to engage in a public debate on 
precisely the politically unpleasant questions. As in monetary policy, responsible action also 
means  heeding  the  lessons  of  the  past  and  not  repeating  earlier  mistakes  –  especially  in 
times of upheaval. 
This  message  may  appear  simple,  perhaps  even  dull.  I  nevertheless  find  it  helpful  and 
important. If everything flows, as in the current situation, you should not simply let yourself be 
carried along by events. It is precisely in times like these that it becomes even clearer what 
gives support and what has permanent value. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
