Masaaki Shirakawa: Demographic changes and macroeconomic 
performance – Japanese experiences 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  2012 
BOJ-IMES Conference, hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, at the 
Bank of Japan, Tokyo, 30 May 2012. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good  morning.  I  am  very  pleased  to  have  a  lot  of  participants  from  central  banks, 
international organizations, and academia in  this year’s annual BOJ-IMES Conference. On 
behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  am  privileged  to  welcome  you  all  here  in 
Tokyo. 
The  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  is  “demographic  changes  and  macroeconomic 
performance.” On the theme, I am sure that Japan is the most notable case that provides a 
basis  for  discussion.  Japan’s  population  and  the  working-age  population  –  that  is,  the 
population aged between 15 and 64 years – came to decline after their peak-years in 2007 
and in 1995 respectively. The share of the population aged 65 years or older rose rapidly to 
23%  in  2010  from  12%  in  1990  (Chart  1).  In  the  meantime,  Japan’s  economic  growth 
gradually slowed during the past two decades mainly for two reasons. In the former half of 
the  period,  the  Japanese  economy  was  hobbled  by  the  crippling  effect  of  the  burst  of  the 
bubble.  In  the  latter  half,  the  rapid  population  aging  hampered  the  Japanese  economy 
through  a  variety  of  channels.  In  an  attempt  to  illustrate  that,  I  frequently  rely  on  the 
cross-country  comparison  of  growth  rates  including  Japan.  Among  G-7  countries,  the 
Japanese  GDP  growth  rate  per  working-age  population  –  an  indicator  least  affected  by 
demographic  changes  in  the  short  run  –  was  the  highest.  By  contrast,  the  Japanese  per 
capita GDP growth rate was almost the same as the average, and the Japanese GDP growth 
rate, which is subject to the decreases in the total population, was below average (Chart 2). 
Neoclassical  growth  theories  normally  do  not  distinguish  the  overall  population  from  the 
working-age population due to analytical simplicity. However, without taking into account the 
distinction  between  the  two  variables  explicitly,  the  very  challenges  that  Japan  is  currently 
faced with will be outside the scope of analysis.  
In  the  macroeconomic  policy  discussions  in  other  economies,  Japan’s  experiences  are 
frequently cited, and a lot of lessons are drawn over the past decade. However, a general 
conclusion  obtained  in  such  policy  discussions  without  considering  the  differences  in  the 
demographic factors between Japan and other economies could sometimes be misleading. 
Various  challenges  posed  by  demographic  changes  have  been  and  will  be  among  the 
paramount issues lying ahead for a broad group of countries including Japan. For example, 
growth rate of the Chinese working-age population has slowed since the late 1980s, and is 
projected  to  turn  negative  by  2020  (Chart  3).  Other  Asian  economies  will  also  find 
themselves in the midst of population aging in due course. It is a must-face reality which is 
just  yet-to-come.  Looking  at  Europe,  in  the  Euro-area  peripheral  countries,  immigration 
contributed  to  the  expansion  of  the  populations  until  2007.  Conversely,  after  the  global 
financial  crisis,  the  immigration  momentum  was  lost  and  some  countries  in  the  region  are 
now faced with even some emigration while suffering from lower economic growth owing to 
the lower population growth or even because of the declining population. 
Rather  than  trying  to  cover  all  of  the  relevant  topics  under  the  theme  of  demographic 
changes and macroeconomic performance in my remark, I focus on Japan’s experience of 
population  aging  that,  I  hope,  will  help  ensuing  discussions  in  this  conference,  because 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Japan  can  be  addressed  an  “advanced  country”  in  a  sense  that  it  has  been  faced  with 
various  challenges  that  stem  from  population  aging  ahead  of  other  countries.  I  begin  by 
explaining demographic changes in Japan briefly, and then move on to identifying the issues 
related  with  macroeconomic  performance.  Finally,  I  will  touch  on  the  policy  implications  of 
demographic changes.  
Demographic Changes in Japan  
II. 
I begin by pointing out four relevant facts in order to consider the linkage between Japanese 
demographic changes and macroeconomic performance. 
First,  in  former  times,  the  Japanese  population  growth  rate  was  high,  and  the  Japanese 
working-age  population  was  remarkably  large.  Today,  this  may  sound  way  beyond  our 
imagination.  However,  in  the  aftermath  of  World  War  II,  overpopulation  was  considered  a 
challenge to cope with. For example, Japanese emigration to Brazil by sea was restarted in 
1952 and continued until 1973. It is usually understood that Japan’s period of high-growth 
began  in  the  mid-1950s  and  ended  in  the  early  1970s.  The  expansion  of  the  working-age 
population, in tandem with the free trade regime, provided strong grounds for rapid growth. A 
comparison of the Japanese population by age group between the beginning and the end of 
the high-growth era clearly points to a rapid increase in the Japanese working-age population 
taking place during the period as confirmed by Chart 4 showing a blip moving upward in the 
population pyramid. For your reference, the average growth rate of the total population and 
the  growth  rate  of  the  working-age  population  from  1955  to  1975  were  1.3  percent  and 
1.9 percent,  respectively.  A  quick  cross-country  comparison  can  confirm  that  Japan’s 
population and the growth rate of the working-age population in those days were relatively 
high, or sometimes even the highest, among the advanced countries. 
Second, the rapid pace of decrease in the growth rate of the Japanese population and that of 
the working-age population were globally unprecedented. The trend of a population depends 
crucially  on  the  birth  rate  and  the  death  rate  (Chart  5).  The  Japanese  total  fertility  rate 
declined substantially after the 1950s, and reached 1.39 in 2010, a lower level compared to 
that in other advanced countries. The Japanese death rate also declined substantially after 
World War II and reached 6.0 (per thousand persons) in 1979. Then it increased gradually 
and reached 9.5 in 2010.  
Third, interestingly, the recurrent declines in the total fertility rate have long been regarded as 
a  one-off  aberration  for  each  point  in  time.  Such  mis-recognition  led  to  the  recurrent 
overestimation in the official projection of the fertility rate every five years, which has been 
used in the actuarial valuations for the Japanese public pension system, since the year 1976 
(Chart 6). In the official projections, the long-run fertility rate have even been assumed to rise 
to two in due course until 1992 when the projection was revised downward well below two for 
the first time. 
Fourth,  in  addition  to  the  delay  in  recognition  of  the  ongoing  demographic  changes, 
comprehension  of  the  far-reaching  implications  of  the  changes  was  even  more  delayed. 
Consequently, it took further time for Japanese people to take the measures to respond to 
the expected demographic changes. Incidentally, if you look back at 1992, the White Paper 
on the National Life Style published by the government that year was titled, “The Advent of 
Society with Low Birth Rates: Its Effect and Response.” With hindsight, Japan around that 
time was painfully looking for ways to recover in the aftermath of the bubble economy. At that 
stage, I recall that most Japanese people along with economists did not grasp the gravity of 
population aging coupled with a low birth rate for Japan’s economy as properly as we later 
came to realize. In that regard, for example, a database on Japanese news paper articles 
indicates that articles on population aging or a low birth rate started increasing in the 1990s. 
However, it was only until in the middle of the 2000s, articles on population aging or a low 
birth rate outnumbered those on asset price bubbles or non-performing loans (Chart 7). Up 
until around that time, the working-age population had declined for about ten years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
III. Effects of Demographic Change on Japanese Economy 
In the light of Japan’s experience, I will elaborate on three aspects, first, the economic growth 
rate, second, inflation and, third, the current account balance, of the impact of demographic 
changes from the viewpoint of macroeconomic performance.  
Economic growth rate  
At the outset, I pick up the most paramount consequence of demographic changes for the 
Japanese economy, among others, that is, the economic growth rate. 
The  economic  growth  model  supposes  that  everyone  works  at  a  given  intensity.  With  a 
labor-augmenting  technological  change,  in  the  long  run  steady  state,  per  capita  variables 
grow at the rate of technological change, and aggregate variables grow at the rate equal to 
the  sum  of  population  growth  and  technological  change.  In  aging  economies,  including 
Japan,  where  the  working-age  population  has  started  decreasing,  the  labor  force  also 
declines,  given  the  participation  rate  being  held  constant.  Because  the  scarce  labor  force 
imposes  a  natural  constraint  on  labor  supply,  the  marginal  product  of  capital  declines 
accordingly. As a result, macroeconomic growth would be impeded. With this idea in mind, 
the  Japanese  economic  data  in  the  past  decade  indicates  that  the  workforce  declined  by 
0.3 percent point, labor productivity increased by 0.8 percent point, and they add up to real 
GDP growth rate increase by 0.6 percent1 (Chart 8). Having said that, while such an analysis 
would provide a useful first-order approximation to consider the effects of population aging 
and  the  declining  population,  for  the  sake  of  policy  consideration,  we  need  slightly  more 
realistic approaches that incorporate other factors.  
The  first  factor  is  the  possibility  that  labor  participation  may  adjust  to  the  demographic 
changes in the long run. For example, the labor participation rate of Japanese females was 
notably lower than that in other advanced countries. In particular, Japanese females in their 
30s  participate  in  the  labor  market  noticeably  less,  which  was  creating  a  stark  M-shaped 
curve in the participation ratio over ages in the past and in the present as well. However, the 
gap between Japan and other advanced countries in the depth of a dip on the M-shape is 
dissipating in recent years (Chart 9).  
The second effect comes from the gap between the per capita growth rate and the growth 
rate  per  working-age  population.  The  economic  growth  model  by  Solow  supposes  that  a 
nation’s population coincides with that nation’s labor force. In practice, as population aging 
advances, the gap between the population and the labor force grows larger. In the process of 
an increase in the share of the old non-working population, the per capita growth rate would 
be lower than the growth rate per working-age population. The growth rate per working-age 
population is important from a viewpoint of the supply capacity; however, the growth rate per 
capita  is  a  more  important  indicator  when  we  think  about  the  income  level  of  an  average 
consumer  who  supports  aggregate demand  for  goods  and  services  in  the  macroeconomy. 
Even if the growth rate per working-age population is high, as long as the per capita growth 
rate is decreasing, downward pressure to demand could impede macroeconomic growth.  
Third,  we  may  need  to  consider  the  so-called  “spending  wave”  hypothesis  (Chart  10).  For 
one reason, the Japanese asset price bubble was caused by Japanese baby boomers who 
experienced their peak spending years, particularly, for mortgages. During the bubble period, 
they indeed actively purchased their homes. Likewise, demographic changes, among other 
factors, were highly responsible for the decrease in domestic car sales after the late 1990s. 
On the other hand, the progress in population aging means that the elderly increase demand 
for services, such as medical and nursing care. Currently, the population aged 60 years or 
older  accounts  for  around  40%  of  Japanese  consumption.  Their  shares  in  the  Japanese 
                                                 
1  The contributions do not add up to the total GDP growth rate (0.6 percent) because of the rounding errors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
consumption  are  projected  to  increase  further.  If  Japanese  firms  change  their  products  in 
responding to such increase in the potential demand, their efforts should slow the reductions 
in the potential growth rate.  
The  fourth  factor  arising  from  demographic  changes  could  come  into  play  through  fiscal 
balance  (Chart  11).  Rapid  population  aging  is  the  dominant  factor  in  increasing  a  fiscal 
deficit.  Obviously,  the  continued  population  aging  increase  a  fiscal  deficit  through  the 
decrease in the growth rate of tax revenues reflecting the decrease in the economic growth 
rate  and  through  the  increase  in  the  social  security  related  expenditure,  such  as  medical 
services,  nursing  services  and  public  pension. If  the  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  fiscal 
balance  increased,  that  could  restrain  the  consumption  by  working-age  generations. 
Demographic changes also affect fiscal balance through a political process. Population aging 
will  necessarily  mean  the  aging  of  voters.  If  the  elderly  have  a  higher  voting  percentage 
compared  with  the  young,  and  if  the  elderly  have  a  stronger  preference  for  sustaining  the 
current social security system, then a fiscal deficit tends to increase reflecting the elderly’s 
preference.  
Fifth,  demographic  changes  may  affect  the  portfolio  selection  of  households  (Chart  12). 
Especially, we need to examine the effects of an increase in the number of elderly people on 
the selection of households’ financial assets, from a viewpoint of who and how to supply risk 
money, which is an indispensible engine for economic growth. However, the determinants of 
households’ financial asset portfolio include not only age, but also labor income. Moreover, 
households choose their asset portfolio while making decisions on their housing purchases 
simultaneously. We do not have empirical studies based on Japanese micro-data enough to 
answer  the  following  questions,  such  as,  all  else  being  equal,  whether  the  elderly  prefer 
stocks  or  whether  they  tend  to  sell  their  stocks  and  buy  into  the  bond  market  for  safer 
assets.2 Looking ahead, further studies on that area are much awaited.  
So  far,  my  analyses  focus  on  the  effects  of  demographic  changes  on  macroeconomic 
performance of the Japanese economy as a whole. In practice, demographic changes, such 
as population aging or a low birth rate, advance unevenly across regions. For example, the 
population  growth  rate,  the  working-age  population  and  the  share  of  the  population  aged 
65 years or older vary substantially from region to region (Chart 13). Behind the dispersion in 
prefectural growth rates, regional fiscal balances and the strategies of financial institutions lie 
uneven developments in demographic changes across prefectures.  
Rate of price increase 
Next,  I  elaborate  on  the  linkage  between  demographic  changes  and  deflation  from  a 
viewpoint  of  macroeconomic  performance.  Seemingly,  there  would  be  no  linkage  between 
demography and deflation. But it may not be the case. A cross-country comparison among 
advanced  economies  reveals  intriguing  evidence:  Over  the  decade  of  the  2000s,  the 
population  growth  rate  and  inflation  correlate  positively  across  24  advanced  economies 
(Chart 14).3 That finding shows a sharp contrast with the recently waning correlation between 
money growth and inflation (Chart 15).4 How could we square those facts with each other?  
To  some  extent,  the  correlation  between  population  growth  and  inflation  could  in  part  be 
explained by the co-movement caused by business cycles. In some advanced economies in 
Europe  and  North  America,  it  could  be  the  case  that  the  fluctuations  in  economic  activity 
would  vary  the  size  of  an  output  gap,  creating  pressure  up  or  down  on  inflation  while 
                                                 
2  See Fujiki, Hirakata and Shioji [2012]. 
3  Another cross-country inspection based on a broader sample, including developing countries, does not detect 
positive correlation between inflation and population growth in the 2000s and in earlier periods likewise. 
4  See Kimura, Shimatani, Sakura, and Nishida [2010]. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
immigration 
that  amplifies  variations 
in  population.  That 
attracting  or  discouraging 
hypothesis, however, appears to be impertinent in some countries including Japan where the 
impact of immigration on the total population is extremely small and thus can be disregarded. 
On  that  ground,  business  cycle  fluctuations  have  had  a  minimal  impact  on  demographic 
changes.  A  closer  look  at  the  case  of  Japan  confirms  the  increasingly  positive  correlation 
between inflation and population growth since the 1990s (Chart 16). That would reflect the 
momentum towards real income creation being undermined by population aging.  
As  I  have  discussed,  repercussions  of  the  bubble-burst,  the  rapid  aging  and  stagnation  of 
productivity have been underway in Japan. Against the backdrop, the real per capita GDP 
growth rate has remarkably declined from somewhere around four percent back in the 1980s 
to almost one percent these days (Chart 17). With the yet-to-accelerate population aging well 
envisaged  for  the  foreseeable  future,  the  decline  in  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  could 
undermine the medium- to long-term expectations for potential growth, giving rise to a lower 
permanent income of households.  
The decrease in potential growth, which effectively means a stagnant supply capacity, gives 
rise  to  a  lower  permanent  income.  On  the  flip  side,  the  corresponding  contraction  in 
aggregate supply would offset such decline in aggregate demand. Simultaneous changes in 
aggregate demand and aggregate supply keep the price level unchanged. I reemphasize the 
fact,  however,  that  the  public  had  long  remained  by  and  large  unaware  of  the  dangers 
created by demographic changes but, over time, the awareness has slowly been phased in. 
Along  with  such  gradually  phased-in  public  awareness,  yet-to-materialize  declines  in  GDP 
growth have also been factored in, precipitating today’s decrease in aggregate demand and 
all the forward-looking responses have come into play behind Japan’s deflation.5 
In  the  meantime,  the  real  per  capita  GDP  growth  rate  in  most  of  American  and  European 
advanced economies has declined to Japan’s neighborhood range (Chart 17).  
Looking ahead, aging and the declining working-age population are expected to continue in 
those American and European countries. I cannot entirely rule out the looming menace that 
may unveil itself into downward pressure on inflation rates if such demographic changes are 
to undermine the momentum toward income creation in the economy. 
Current account 
The final issue that I am taking up from a viewpoint of macroeconomic performance and the 
demographic changes is the current account. Some argue that, as signaled by the swing to a 
deficit  of  the  Japanese  trade  balance  in  fiscal  year  2011,  the  current  account  balance  will 
also turn into deficit over time (Chart 18). I disagree with such views.  
The swing to a deficit in the trade balance reflected the declines in exports and increases in 
imports, both of which are driven by temporary factors: Exports subsided resulting from the 
disruption to the supply chains due to the Great East Japan Earthquake. The sharp increase 
in imports of liquefied natural gas and other fossil fuels was needed to meet the increased 
demand from thermal power plants, which substituted nuclear power lost by the accident. 
In  general,  the  current  account  broadly  reflects  the  savings-investment  balance  of  the 
economy.  On  one  hand,  as  for  savings,  a  higher  elderly  population  share  in  the  economy 
would reduce the aggregate savings rate as a life-cycle model indicates. On the other hand, 
population aging affects investment at least through two channels. First, if a decrease in the 
labor force substitutes for capital, domestic investment could increase. Second, a decrease 
in  domestic  demand  due  to  the  declining  population  reduces  domestic  investment.  If 
population aging shifts consumption towards the service industry where firms find it hard to 
                                                 
5  See Katagiri [2012] for a mechanism that a series of unexpected revisions in the forecasts for the Japanese 
population could lead to protracted deflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
substitute  labor  for  capital,  the  second  effect  will  dominate  the  first  effect.  Anyway,  the 
Japanese  income  balance  recorded  12.4  trillion  yen,  or  2.5  percent  of  nominal  GDP  on 
average  from  the  year  2002  to  year  2011,  which  reflects  the  net  international  investment 
position of 253 trillion yen as of the end of 2011, or more than 50% of nominal GDP. Those 
figures suggest that the Japanese current account surplus will continue for the time being.  
Can Japan Respond to Demographic Changes?  
IV. 
Demographic  changes  have  affected  the  Japanese  economy  slowly  but  steadily  and 
profoundly.  Downward  pressure  on  the  Japanese  economic  growth  rate  resulting  from 
various  channels  reflecting  the  continuing  population  aging  will  persist  in  the  foreseeable 
future. With the pressure underway, should we live with the dwindling economy and quietly 
accept  it  as  the  fate  that  we  cannot  escape?  My  answer  is  definitely  no.  The  effects  of 
population  aging  on  an  economy  can  vary,  depending  on  the  flexibility  of  that  nation’s 
economy and society. The current difficulties come not from the continued population aging 
itself,  but  from  the  delayed  response  to  it.  On  that  ground,  I  emphasize  that,  if  society 
correctly recognizes the challenges coming from demographic changes, and if society judges 
that  changes  in  the  systems  are  needed,  we  should  find  remedies  in  our  hands.  I  offer  a 
couple of options for possible changes if Japanese people are determined to take action. 
The first option is to make various efforts to increase the labor force. Setting aside the issues 
that go beyond the mandate of a central bank governor, for example, whether to accept more 
foreign  workers,  we  can  increase  the  labor  force  by  raising  the  birth  rate  and/or  the  labor 
participation rate. Interestingly, labor participation of female workers and the birth rate have a 
positive  relationship,  according  to  a  cross-country  data  analysis.  Among  47  Japanese 
prefectures,  labor  participation  of  females  aged  from  30  to  44  and  the  birth  rate  have  a 
positive relationship (Chart 19). Recently, labor participation of Japanese female and elderly 
workers increased steadily. Efforts to increase the labor force have already started and some 
progress has been made (Chart 20).  
The second option is to adjust the supply-side structure with the ongoing changes in line with 
the  demand  pattern.  Typical  examples  on  the  domestic  front  include  the  response  to  the 
potential demand from the elderly, such as medical and nursing services (Chart 21). In the 
last decade, the population of aged 65 or over increased 33 percent in Japan and 16 percent 
in  the  U.S.  During  the  same  period,  spending  on  medical  and  nursing  services  increased 
11 percent  in  Japan  and  74  percent  in  the  U.S.  Those  figures  suggest  the  large  potential 
demand  not  only  in  the  market  of  medical  and  nursing  services  but  also  in  medical 
equipment and other related investments in Japan.  
Third, businesses should respond to the growing demand overseas by making the most of 
the  momentum  towards  globalization.  If  the  Japanese  economy  is  a  “closed  economy,” 
Japan will not be able to avoid all the repercussions of the decreasing population. However, 
Japanese businesses can grow by meeting the demand overseas, especially in economies 
with  higher  population growth  or  in  fast-growing  emerging  economies.  One  option  to  meet 
the  foreign  demand  is  exports,  while  other  options  may  include,  for  example,  bolstering 
foreign  direct  investment  by  Japanese  businesses  in  pursuit  of  higher  profitability  which 
would  result  in  a  surplus  in  the  income  balance.  The  real  GDP  increased  by  0.6  percent 
annually  on  average  in  the  2000s  while,  the  real  GNI  excluding  the  terms  of  trade 
gains/losses,  an  indicator  comparable  to  the  real  GDP,  grew  more  rapidly  by  0.7  percent 
(Chart  22).  Of  related  matters,  the  ratio  of  Japanese  foreign  direct  investment  is  notably 
lower  than  that  in  other  advanced  countries.  Room  for  increasing  the  ratio  would  be 
substantial (Chart 23). Increases in the income balance surplus may require a renewed focus 
on GNI, which summarizes the income earned by Japanese people. Finally, businesses can 
better  reallocate  their  capital  in  line  with  the  aforementioned  three  options  to  raise 
productivity. I have already referred to the growth rate of Japanese labor productivity, and 
now  I  point  out  that  the  level  of  labor  productivity  is  lower  than  that  in  other  advanced 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
countries  (Chart  24).  Put  differently,  per  capita  income  could  increase  substantially  if 
businesses reallocate their capital to be better aligned with the efficient allocations. 
Concluding Remarks  
V. 
I have explained how demographic changes affect the Japanese economy through various 
channels.  In  retrospect,  up  until  the  global  credit  bubble-burst,  both  academics  and  policy 
makers did not fully appreciate the significance of a bubble-burst. The Japanese experience 
of  a  bubble-burst  tended  to  be  underestimated  as  an  idiosyncratic  episode.  Likewise, 
bystanders’ apprehension about the ongoing demographic changes in Japan may, I fear, be 
falling  short  of  the  mark.  My  sense  is  that  full  apprehension  of  the  consequences  of  rapid 
population aging, coupled with the low birth rate, is yet to be seen in light of the importance 
of  the  issue.  Economics  has  dealt  with  the  issue  of  population,  not  to  mention  a  few 
examples  such  as,  Petty’s  Political  Arithmetic  or  Malthus’s  An  Essay  on  the  Principle  of 
Population.  For  the  sake  of  economic  policy  formulation,  basic  research  on  demographic 
changes and their policy implications is indispensable. I hope that this conference would help 
contribute to the accumulation of such research. Thank you.  
References 
Fujiki,  Hiroshi,  Naohisa  Hirakata  and  Etsuro  Shioji,  “Aging  and  Household  Stockholdings: 
Evidence from Japanese Household Survey Data,” paper presented in this conference.  
Katagiri,  Mitsuru,  “Economic  Consequences  of  Population  Aging  in  Japan:  Effects  through 
Changes in Demand Structure,” Discussion Paper Series 2012-E-3, Bank of Japan, Institute 
for Monetary and Economic Studies, 2012.  
Kimura,  Takeshi,  Takeshi  Shimatani,  Kenichi  Sakura,  and  Tomoaki  Nishida,  “The  Role  of 
Money and Growth Expectations in Price Determination Mechanism,” Bank of Japan Working 
Paper No.10-E-11, Bank of Japan, 2010. 
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Globalization  and  Population  Aging:  Challenges  Facing  Japan,” 
Speech  to  the  Board  of  Councillors  of  Nippon  Keidanren  (Japan  Business  Federation)  in 
Tokyo, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   17
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   19
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 