Paul Tucker: Credit conditions for firms – stability and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
to the Association of Corporate Treasurers’ Annual Conference, Liverpool, 18 April 2012. 
 It is quite a few years since I last spoke to an ACT gathering and it is very good of you to ask 
me back.  
Since then, many of you have been close to the front line of the financial crisis that overtook 
us nearly five years ago.  
Bridging the financial economy to the real economy, you have had to navigate a demanding 
obstacle  course  while  the  real  economy  “rebalances”.  That  means  that  businesses  –  the 
productive part of the economy on which our prosperity depends – are having to adjust after 
years,  preceding  the  crisis,  when  spending  was  loaded  too  much  towards  household  and 
government consumption, the country’s income from net trade was too weak, and investment 
was too heavily weighted towards commercial real-estate construction.  
That rebalancing has some way to go. While many of the planned tax increases are already 
in  place,  government  consumption  will  continue  to  be  scaled  back  for  the  next  few  years. 
There is also a risk that households will spend less than expected in order to rebuild their 
balance sheets, holding higher liquid savings than previously as a precautionary buffer.  
On the supply side, as the world economy recovers, the balance of production will continue 
gradually  to  shift  towards  exporters  and  towards  firms  which,  given  sterling’s  large 
depreciation since mid-2007, can now compete somewhat more readily against importers.  
For sectors primarily serving domestic markets, the adjustment is more challenging. Some 
face  both  higher  costs  for  imported  inputs  to  production  and  weaker  demand  –  not  just 
temporarily but persistently – for their final output. On the ugly side of this rebalancing, there 
has already been an increase in vacant properties on the high street, which is also facing 
structural  change  due  to  on-line  shopping.  Some  of  those  properties  will  no  doubt  be 
converted to other uses over time, but I know it will not be easy for the firms affected or for 
their employees. Company insolvencies have ticked up, and will likely continue to do so for a 
while.  
Credit supply and the corporate sector 
Recovery  will  come,  and  the  necessary  adjustments  will  occur,  over  time.  But  it  is  made 
harder for you by the problems in the financial system. You have faced first tightening, then 
in late 2008 frozen, and now a prolonged period of tight credit conditions. Many of you must 
have worried at times about the safety of your cash balances and other liquid investments. 
You  will  have  wondered  about  the  soundness  of  the  counterparties  you  use  in  the  capital 
markets. And, for the past couple of years, you and your representatives at the ACT have 
also  had  to  grapple  with  the  array  of  regulatory  reforms  reshaping  the  financial  system, 
internationally and domestically. 
It is clear that credit conditions prior to the crisis were unsustainably loose – reliant upon a 
financial  system  whose  net  worth  was  too  low  and  which  was  overly  dependent  on  flighty 
short-term  wholesale  funding.  Banks  of  all  kinds  are  themselves  having  to  repair  their 
balance  sheets  and  adjust  their  business  models.  They  face  headwinds  in  doing so.  First, 
legacy portfolios – bad and impaired loans – act as a drag on profitability. In the UK, that 
particularly affects the two big banks directly rescued by the government. That matters a lot 
because they were particularly significant in UK business banking before the crisis, holding 
just  under  half  of  the  stock  of  such  loans.  Second,  the  lingering  threat  of  some  kind  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
implosion  in  the  euro  area  has  led  to  elevated  funding  costs  for  banks.  The  longer  that 
persists, the more it will be passed on to bank customers. In the UK, the government has 
introduced  a  scheme  to  reduce  bank  funding  costs  provided  they  are  passed  on  to  SME 
borrowers. And on the Continent, where the position is more precarious, the ECB’s long-term 
repo  operations  have  broadly  similar  effects,  giving  banks  there  time  to  restructure  their 
liabilities and so leaning against the risk of a sharp contraction in the supply of credit.  
This environment is affecting firms in very different ways. Some companies find themselves 
with little need for external funds, and so are relatively insulated from tight credit conditions. 
Indeed, the corporate sector as a whole is currently running an unusually large cash surplus, 
despite  challenging  demand  conditions.  A  notable  example  is  energy  extraction.  UK  oil 
companies have run a large cash surplus – amounting to 1-2% of GDP – for much of the 
past  decade.  This  accounts  for  around  half  of  the  overall  corporate  cash  surplus  over  the 
period. But it’s not just oil companies. The manufacturing sector as a whole is currently a net 
lender to the UK banking sector: it has more  cash on deposit than funds borrowed. Other 
sectors  look  to  have  less  healthy  cashflow  positions  in  aggregate  –  construction  and  real 
estate, hotels and restaurants amongst them.  
For many companies, therefore, external finance remains important.  
For  large  companies,  the  bond  markets  are  an  option.  Some  of  you  have  switched  the 
balance of your financing from the banking system to the bond markets. Over the past three 
years, the Chief Financial Officers of large companies have consistently rated bond finance 
more attractive than bank borrowing. Such firms seem, on the whole, to have made smaller 
cuts to investment and employment.  
Large  companies  with  good  access  to  the  capital  markets  and  healthy  cash-flow  positions 
may,  for  the  moment,  be  well  placed  to  support  the  financing  of  smaller  firms.  Either  via 
vendor financing, where a company allows a customer to purchase a product or service on 
credit. Or by extending credit directly to some of their suppliers. Or by supporting their supply 
chain  indirectly  by  setting  up  programmes  to  allow  suppliers  to  borrow  against  unpaid 
invoices. ACT data suggest that so-called “buyer driven receivable programmes” have been 
growing in recent years. And there is some anecdotal evidence from the Bank’s network of 
Agents that larger firms are helping out smaller firms a bit.  
But it is fanciful to entertain the notion that anyone other than the banking system can be the 
main backstop for working-capital finance – for small and large companies alike. Banks are 
unique  in  that  their  deposits  comprise  the  money  we  all  use  for  day-to-day  purchases,  so 
they and they alone can provide liquidity insurance (provided they are financially sound).  
For much of our history, the Bank of England worked with the grain of that by lending against 
bankers’ acceptances in our monetary operations: the famous Bill on London. The bill market 
atrophied in the mid-1990s, and withered away completely a few years later. But during the 
crisis I have wondered more than once whether a revival would be useful – although it was a 
market that relied upon guarantees from banks whose names were close to undoubted. That 
is for you, as corporate treasurers, and bankers to pursue if you wish to. 
The Bank of England did try to help a couple of years ago via its Secured Commercial Paper 
Facility, on which my Markets colleagues engaged actively with the ACT. Suppliers were to 
be  financed  by  banks,  against  a  claim  on  their  large-firm  customers.  By  bundling  together 
portfolios of such claims into securities, the lending bank was able to “discount” the resulting 
paper at the Bank, thereby obtaining off-market funding. In effect, the scheme offered banks 
providing invoice-financing a way to fund the lending involved. There has been an increase in 
invoice-based financing by banks, but take up of the Bank’s facility has been very limited. It 
remains open should there be further interest.  
However  they  are  delivered,  improvements  in  working-capital  finance,  while  important,  are 
insufficient. For longer-term finance, I hope that businesses and the City can work together to 
broaden access to the corporate bond markets. Since the onset of the crisis, there has been 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
a marked pick up in the number of UK companies successfully raising funds from the sterling 
bond markets for the first time. Here, I do think the Bank acting as a de facto market maker 
of last resort in corporate paper helped revive the market in 2009, by alleviating the inventory 
risk faced by cash- and capital-strapped dealers in those markets. And the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s  quantitative  easing  has  helped,  by  encouraging  longer-term  investors  out  of 
gilts  and  into  the  bond  market.  But  the  number  of  smaller  companies  tapping  the  sterling 
markets remains low. More needs to be done by the industry.  
A number of initiatives are underway. For some while now, the London Stock Exchange has 
been supporting the involvement of retail investors in the corporate bond market. The recent 
Breedon Review made a number of suggestions intended to help open the door to non-bank 
sources of finance for SMEs. And the Government is entering into a scheme to co-invest with 
the private sector in managed funds that will lend to SMEs.  
Dare I say it, but securitisation might even play a role. Nearly £1bn of long-term financing 
was  recently  raised  in  the  London  markets  by  offering  investors  a  first  claim  on  a  £1.5bn 
portfolio of loans to small businesses with a typical turnover of under £2 million per annum. 
The funds were raised at a lower cost than many bank issuers would face in their own name. 
A few other banks are thought to be exploring similar deals. It is important, though, that the 
lessons  from  badly  designed  securitisations  in  the  past  should  be  learnt.  Almost  the  most 
important lesson is that to be healthy the securitization market, like any other capital market, 
needs  a  bedrock  of  real,  unlevered  investors.  Holders  and  traders  who  have  borrowed  to 
make their purchases have a tendency to sell when the weather deteriorates. We have seen 
where that can lead. 
If one thing is clear from that brief and incomplete survey, it is that, sadly, the repair of the 
credit system will take time. 
Stopping this happening again: the Financial Policy Committee 
So will the even broader task of putting in place better “rules of the game” for the financial 
system. 
For  all  the  measures  in  train  internationally  on  banks’  capital,  resolution  regimes, 
over-the-counter derivative markets, central counterparties, shadow banking and so on, they 
will  I  fear  eventually  be  found  wanting.  Conditions  change.  One  generation’s  reforms  are 
eventually overtaken by the evolution of the structure of the financial system or by temporary 
bursts of misplaced exuberance.  
At  its  simplest,  that  is  why  the  government  has  established  the  Bank  of  England’s  new 
Financial  Policy  Committee  –  to  ensure  that  the  moment  when  the  financial  system’s 
resilience is critically impaired does not get overlooked; that it is anticipated and appropriate 
action is taken. A standing body, meeting regularly, transparently, and backed by powers to 
take  decisions  on  regulatory  measures  –  the  FPC  is  the  body  charged  with  being  on  the 
case. It won’t be perfect, but it can be much better than the pre-crisis regulatory regime.  
The  initiative  to  create  the  FPC  is  necessary,  because  both  macroeconomic  policymakers 
and financial regulators have had to learn some tough lessons. On the one hand, we all need 
to  be  attentive  to  the  effects  that  easy  monetary  policy  globally  can  have  on  risk-taking 
behaviour. On the other hand, financial regulators cannot afford to focus exclusively on the 
health  of  individual  banks  and  dealers  as  though  they  were  isolated  atoms.  The  financial 
sector  is  a  system  that  hangs  or  falls  together.  Moreover,  it  is  swings  of  exuberance  and 
caution that drive excessive fluctuations in the supply of credit to firms and households. The 
FPC  is  about  filling  the  space  between  monetary  policy  and  microregulation  –  in  an 
admittedly inelegant phrase, “macroprudential” policy: policy that is focused on the resilience 
of the system as a whole.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The FPC will not be a talking shop. It will have powers. At times, this will affect you directly. 
We  have  advised  the  government  that,  alongside  controls  over  banks’  leverage  and 
risk-weighted  capital  requirements,  the  FPC  should  have  the  power  to  make  the  banking 
sector (and other financial intermediaries) hold more capital temporarily against exposures to 
sectors going through a dangerous boom. Sometimes that will be within the financial sector, 
as the run up to the latest crisis illustrates. On other occasions, it could be part of the real 
economy. History points to commercial real estate as an obvious example. Property-related 
borrowing  booms  have  often  driven  financial  stress.  In  those  circumstances,  simply 
increasing the headline capital requirement might prompt banks to cut lending to sectors of 
the  economy  that  were  not  overly  exuberant  while  maintaining  lending  into  the  booming 
sector that seemed to offer wonderful returns. That would be perverse. Better, sometimes, to 
try to address a bubble at its source. This could be unpopular, but such is the job of taking 
away the punchbowl. We will explain our decisions.  
I  cannot  emphasise  enough  that  the  FPC  will  not  indulge  in  attempts  to  micromanage  the 
banking  system  or  the  allocation  of  credit.  Nor  will  we  be  excessively  activist,  trying  to 
fine-tune credit policy. This is about stability, which is an absolute precondition for steady 
improvements  in  economic  activity  and  employment.  The  goal  is  to  make  the  financial 
system resilient, to contain destructive “busts”, and to do so without impairing the contribution 
that the financial sector makes to the economy’s medium-term growth.  
Can the FPC help right now? 
The benefits of the new regime for stability will take time to come through. That might leave 
you asking what the FPC could do to help right now. Indeed, with credit conditions so tight, it 
has been asked whether the FPC should be easing regulatory constraints on banks. The aim 
would  be  to  encourage  them  to  loosen  lending  conditions,  helping  recovery.  And,  it  is 
suggested, that would be consistent with the FPC’s remit because it could reduce threats to 
stability from the risk of borrowers defaulting.  
At  its  September  2011  meeting,  the  FPC  concluded  that  such  a  step  would  in  fact  be 
counterproductive  –  endangering  stability  and  jeopardising  recovery.  Given  the  precarious 
starting  position  of  UK  banks  when  the  crisis  broke,  their  capital  adequacy  is  still  being 
rebuilt. And banks are still operating in an extraordinarily risky international environment. It 
would  not  be  sensible  to  relax  capital  requirements  when  the  unusual  hazards  persist. 
Today, gradually strengthening capital adequacy, and so building resilience, is best not only 
for stability but also for sustaining the recovery through what might lie ahead.  
Monetary policy 
With government needing to set fiscal policy in order to repair the public finances, that means 
that the burden of stimulating our economic recovery falls mainly to monetary policy. Bank 
Rate  is  at,  effectively,  zero.  And  the  Bank  has  provided  further  stimulus,  via  quantitative 
easing, in order to underpin demand, and so guard against inflation being persistently below 
our 2% target further down the road.  
For the economy as a whole, that has bought time to smooth the adjustment. For firms, it has 
reduced the cost of capital and the weight of debt burdens. The equity prices of leveraged 
firms have generally risen more than the market as a whole. Easy monetary conditions no 
doubt go some way to explain why more firms haven’t failed; and why the Bank has received 
few approaches, under what is still known as the London Approach, to help banks and firms 
keep talking when a co-operative solution is within reach.  
In all this, the Monetary Policy Committee faces a delicate and unavoidable balancing act.  
As I have said before, easily the Committee’s biggest judgment in recent years has been that 
inflation will gradually fall back to the 2% target – initially as the effects of higher VAT, energy 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  import  prices  diminish;  and  then  as  slack  in  the  economy  bears  down  on  wages  and 
prices. Though it has fallen significantly over the past six months, from over 5% to 3.5% on 
yesterday’s  reading,  it  remains  uncomfortably  above  target.  The  MPC  will  guide  inflation 
back  to  target  in  the  medium  term,  but  in  the  near  term  there  is  considerable  uncertainty 
about the path that it will follow.  
In its February forecasts on the outlook for growth and inflation, the MPC saw a gradual pick-
up  in  activity  as  the  headwinds  from  weakness  in  the  world  economy  and  tight  credit 
conditions receded and as the squeeze on household incomes is ameliorated through lower 
inflation.  
Big picture, that view on the growth outlook still looks broadly on track, but it is not always 
going to seem like that over the next few weeks and months as the ONS data for the first half 
of the year are published.  
Two temporary factors look likely to muddy the waters, leaving the headline ONS figures for 
GDP growth well short of what has been suggested by surveys.  
First, data for construction output over the turn of the year were extremely weak. That looks 
likely  to  be  a  substantial  drag  on  recorded  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  possibly 
leaving the headline figure for activity close to flat. But surveys point to much more modest 
falls  in  construction  output.  And  growth  in  the  sector  is  estimated  by  the  ONS  to  have 
resumed in February. Also, construction was very weak in the first quarter of 2011, only to 
bounce  back  on  the  ONS  measure  in  Q2.  Mismeasurement,  in  what  is  still  a  fairly  new 
monthly statistical series, can’t be ruled out. Those straws in the wind suggest that the drag 
on  growth  may  prove  to  be  temporary,  so  long  as  the  global  environment  does  not 
deteriorate.  
Second, the additional bank holiday for the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee in June will reduce the 
number  of  days  worked.  Taken  together,  all  this  means  that  you  will  probably  see  weak 
headline ONS numbers for growth in the first two quarters.  
The  MPC  will  be  focused  mainly  not  on  headline  growth  but  rather  on  indicators  of 
underlying activity. Surveys of UK companies’ output have, in fact, continued to tick up, with 
the most recent CIPS readings, taken as a whole, at the highest level for over a year. Survey 
measures of private sector employment have begun to edge up too. Overall, surveys point to 
growth in underlying activity over the first half of 2012 – not stellar growth, indeed modest 
growth, but growth nonetheless.  
But if the overall story of recovery in underlying growth still looks broadly intact, there has 
been bad news on the inflation front.  
The  recent  inflation  data,  particularly  for  goods  prices,  has  come  in  a  little  stronger  than 
expected.  Sterling  oil  prices  and  wholesale  gas  prices  have  risen  by  more  than  5%  since 
February. Together with duty changes announced in the March Budget, that seems likely to 
leave the short-term outlook for inflation on a path a little higher than incorporated into the 
central  projection  described  in  the  MPC’s  February  Inflation  Report.  I  think  inflation  might 
remain above 3% throughout the second quarter of this year, and possibly into the second 
half of the year.  
Already in February, there was a risk that inflation might fall back towards target less quickly 
than  incorporated  into  our  “most  likely”  central  outlook.  Not  only  was  there  a  prospect  of 
supply  disruptions  to  oil  production,  there  was  also  a  possibility  that  firms  might  seek  to 
rebuild  margins  faster  than  assumed  as  and  when  economic  recovery  becomes  more 
secure.  
So  one  possibility  is  that  companies  have  begun  to  rebuild  or  protect  their  profit  margins 
more quickly than expected. According to the latest ONS data, by the end of last year the 
profits of mainstream businesses (excluding oil and finance) had fallen to their lowest share 
of GDP for a couple of decades. Companies’ willingness to tolerate a further squeeze, in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
face  of  rising  import  prices,  might  be  limited.  We  need,  therefore,  to  assess  the  extent  to 
which spare capacity is dragging down on prices. In this particular context, we can take some 
comfort  from  the  growth  of  earnings  (wages  and  staff  bonuses  etc)  being  subdued,  below 
2%. But with productivity growth having been incredibly low for a while now, it is possible that 
the rate of earnings growth consistent with achieving the 2% inflation target has been below 
the 4–4.5% we typically used as a rough benchmark in more normal conditions before the 
financial crisis and subsequent recession. How and when businesses in aggregate will again 
generate productivity improvements will be at the heart of the Committee’s deliberations.  
To be clear, this is about the path inflation takes back to target, not whether it will return to 
target.  The  MPC  will  ensure  that  it  does  return  to  target  and  that  medium-term  inflation 
expectations are anchored to the target.  
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  UK  companies  are  having  to  adjust  to  a  different  pattern  of  demand,  to 
profound  shifts  in  world  trade  and  prices,  and  you  are  having  to  cope  with  this  while  the 
financial  system  both  recovers  itself  and  adapts  to  new  “rules  of  the  game”.  Given  some 
threats  to  stability  linger,  the  Financial  Policy  Committee’s  primary  focus  has  to  be  on 
encouraging  continued  progress  in  building  resilience  in  the  banking  sector.  That  will  pay 
dividends in the longer run. 
I hope that that time can also be used, by bankers working with your community of corporate 
treasurers, to richen the options for working-capital finance and longer-term funding available 
across the business community. Such has been the call during similar periods in the past, 
going back more than a century. But it also offers opportunities. Innovation, which we must 
not make a dirty word, might help. 
Meanwhile,  monetary  policy  will  underpin  the  recovery  so  long  as  that  remains  consistent 
with  anchoring  inflation expectations  in  line  with  achieving  the  2%  target  over  the  medium 
run. We shall not let that slip. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
