Yandraduth Googoolye: Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act 
– developments in Mauritius 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius,  at  the  launch  of  the  Foreign  Account  Tax  Compliance  Act  Survey  by  KPMG, 
Ebène, 5 September 2012. 
 Distinguished guests, a very good morning to you all. It is a great honour to be here today to 
address you on the launch of the KPMG Mauritius FATCA Survey. 
A few months ago, the Governor had addressed a similar audience on the Foreign Account 
Tax  Compliance  Act1  (FATCA).  Today,  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  main 
developments about the FATCA for us to assess the depth and magnitude of this emerging 
regulatory issue. Although the FATCA was enacted in 2010, surprisingly, there are still a few 
countries which are blissfully unaware that such a law as the FATCA even exists and which 
are far from realizing the impact that this law will have on them. Seeing the number gathered 
here today, I am happy to note that Mauritius is not one of those countries and I commend 
KPMG for organizing such forums where we can all come together and take stock of where 
we are heading in this area. 
For a long time, there were those who were happy to brush aside the FATCA. Why would 
foreigners agree to act as Inland Revenue Service (IRS) agents? Surely, the US would soon 
realise that those who hailed the FACTA as “an atomic bomb to kill a fly” were right. They 
would  wake  up  to  reality,  repeal  this  “breath-takingly  arrogant  law”  (i.e.  FATCA),  and  all 
would be well again. 
There were also those – the smaller countries – who were happy to sit back and think that 
the  “big  guys”  would  take  care  of  the  FATCA.  Enough  pressure  would  be  exerted  on  the 
US and they would back-peddle on their US-centric law. 
Not many  would have predicted the turn of events that followed.  UK, France, Italy, Spain 
and  Germany  have  seen  in  the  FATCA  a  new  opportunity.  They  have  agreed  to  the 
FATCA-principle  and  are  entering  into  agreements  with  the  US  to  not  only  implement  the 
FATCA  but  to  improve  offshore  tax  compliance.  The  communiqué  issued  jointly  by  the 
US and the 5 European countries – the “FATCA Partners” as they are called – is revealing 
and I quote: “For many years France, Germany, Italy, Spain, UK and US, have been partners 
in  countering  offshore  tax  evasion  and  improving  international  tax  compliance  so  that  all 
citizens pay their fair share of taxes due under the law.” 
On  26  July  2012,  the  US  Treasury  released  a  model  intergovernmental  agreement  for 
implementing the FATCA. Two versions of the model agreement – a reciprocal version and a 
non-reciprocal version – were issued. Both versions establish a framework for reporting by 
financial institutions of certain financial account information to their respective tax authorities, 
followed by automatic exchange of such information under existing bilateral tax treaties or tax 
information exchange agreements. Both versions of the model agreement also address the 
legal  issues  that  had  been  raised  in  connection  with  the  FATCA,  and  simplify  its 
implementation for financial institutions. 
                                                
1  The Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) was enacted, by the United States, on 18 March 2010 as 
part of the Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment (HIRE) Act in an effort by the United States to combat tax 
evasion  by  U.S.  persons  holding  investments  in  offshore  accounts.  FATCA  will  require  foreign  financial 
institutions (FFIs), among others, to enter into a special agreement with the IRS by 30 June 2013 and report 
directly  to  the  US  Government  certain  information  about  financial  accounts  held  by  U.S.  taxpayers,  or  by 
foreign entities in which U.S. taxpayers hold a substantial ownership interest.  The FFIs would otherwise be 
subject to withholding on certain types of payments relating to U.S. investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  reciprocal  version  of  the  model  also  provides  for  the  U.S.  to  exchange  information 
currently  collected  on  accounts  held  in  U.S.  financial  institutions  by  residents  of  partner 
countries,  and  includes  a  policy  commitment  to  pursue  regulations  and  support  legislation 
that would provide for equivalent levels of exchange by the U.S. 
The  OECD  has  welcomed  the  conclusion  of  negotiations  between  the  U.S.  and  the 
5 European countries. The Secretary General of the OECD has in fact expressed the intent 
of  the  OECD  to  work  closely  with  interested  countries  and  stakeholders  to  design  global 
solutions to global problems for the benefit of governments and businesses around the world. 
Where  does  this  leave  Mauritius?  I  believe  that  we  also  ought  to  be  seeking  to  enter  into 
Intergovernmental Agreements of the model types proposed by the U.S. 
We  are  on  the  OECD  “White  List”  as  a  jurisdiction  with  acceptable  tax  standards  in 
compliance  with  OECD  norms  and  best-practice  principles  and  adhere  to  international 
standards  on  transparency  and  exchange  of  information  set  by  the  OECD.  We  are  also 
recognised by the World Bank, the IMF and the FATF as a clean and transparent jurisdiction 
with a sound legal, regulatory and supervisory framework. 
Information  exchange  in  tax  matters,  indeed,  ranks  high  on  our  agenda.  With  36  Double 
Taxation  Avoidance  Agreements  (DTAA)  in  force,  nine  others  awaiting  ratification  and 
12 DTAAs under negotiation as well as half a dozen Tax Information Exchange Agreements 
(TIEA) in place and others in the pipeline, Mauritius has demonstrated that it is committed to 
the  concepts  of  transparency  and  effective  exchange  of  information.  In  fact,  to  further 
improve the effectiveness of our exchange of information mechanism and allow us to provide 
assistance to our partners in the collection of foreign taxes, Mauritius proposes to become a 
party to the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters which has been 
jointly developed by the OECD and the Council of Europe. Mauritius is definitely a jurisdiction 
of  substance  and  has  in  place  the  necessary  mechanisms  for  effective  exchange  of 
information in tax matters. 
Importantly, as at present, however, we do not have in place any income tax treaty or Tax 
Information  Exchange  Agreement  with 
into 
Intergovernmental Agreements of the model types proposed by the US. Mauritius has never 
refused to sign an exchange of information agreement. We should, therefore, endeavour to 
pursue  negotiations  in  this  area  with  the  US.  However,  even  if  an  agreement  were  to  be 
entered,  when  would  it  be  reached?  Would  this  leave  us  with  sufficient  time  to  meet  the 
looming FATCA–deadline? Or would the OECD succeed in negotiating a third type of model 
agreement  with  the  U.S.  for  those  countries  that  do  not  have  in  place  such  treaties  or 
agreements? 
Such questions touch upon issues well beyond the remit of the Bank. It is for this reason that 
at the level of the Bank, we have urged Government to consider setting up a collaborative 
platform  comprising  relevant  stakeholders  to  reflect  on  the  implications  of  the  FATCA  in 
Mauritius and take a concerted view regarding its implementation. I am very pleased that the 
collaborative  platform  has  been  constituted.  A  Joint  Working  Group  comprising 
representatives of the Mauritius Bankers’ Association (MBA) and the Bank has also been set 
up to evaluate the impact of FATCA on banks in Mauritius and I am very appreciative of the 
contribution from the MBA in this endeavour. Rest assured that the authorities are taking this 
matter seriously. 
What is certain at this stage is that we will have to comply with the FATCA. In some way or 
another. Yes, there are costs. Yes, it is cumbersome. And yes, the challenges are numerous. 
Yet, we have no choice but to comply. 
FATCA is here to stay. It would be a bad idea to ignore it. And an even worse idea not to 
comply with it. Instead of looking at the FATCA as the insurmountable monster, we should be 
considering how to use it to our advantage – just as the FATCA Partners have done. With 
these Intergovernmental Agreements, these jurisdictions can hope to gather information on 
the  US,  –  a  prerequisite 
to  enter 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
their  own  citizens  and  claim  taxes  back. They  have  been  far  sighted  and  have  turned  the 
FATCA  threat  into  an  opportunity.  We  should  do  the  same.  Let  us  seize  this  opportunity 
before it is too late. 
The  first  step  would  be  to  see  how  best  to  comply  with  the  FATCA.  The  sooner  this  is 
achieved,  the  better  it  would  be  for  us.  We  could  then  start  selling  our  jurisdiction  as  a 
FATCA- compliant one. Our FATCA-compliant status should be used to attract investors to 
our  jurisdiction.  The  so-called  murder  weapon  (i.e.  the  FATCA)  should  be  used  to  entice 
those who have clean money and are not running away from paying their fair share of taxes, 
to  invest  in  Mauritius.  Financial  intermediation  which  has  over  the  years  consolidated  its 
position  as  an  emerging  sector  of  the  economy  now  contributes  nearly  10  per  cent  to  the 
GDP.  We  should  capitalise  on  the  fact  that  Mauritius  offers  the  best  doing  business 
environment in Africa. While the World Bank’s 2012 Doing Business Report ranks Mauritius 
23rd globally out of 183 economies, we rank 13th in terms of “protecting Investors” and 11th 
in  terms  of  “Paying  Taxes”.  According  to  the  Global  Competitiveness  Report  2012–13, 
Mauritius ranks 13th in terms of “strength of investor protection”. Opportunities to boost the 
financial  intermediation  sector’s  potential,  therefore,  cannot  be  ignored.  As  I  have  said 
repeatedly,  Mauritius  is  not  a  tax  haven  and  the  FATCA  provides  us  with  yet  another 
opportunity to show this to the world. 
FATCA forces us to think differently – just as the threat of the Indian General Anti-Avoidance 
Rules (GAAR) does. The current economic climate has demonstrated more than ever that 
we need to be ready to meet the challenges that are thrown our way. We cannot keep doing 
things the way we used to. We need to change and adapt. We need to find new avenues, to 
innovate. While the financial intermediation sector grows on average by 5 per cent annually, 
we seem to have stagnated in terms of new products. The Global Competitiveness Report 
2012–13  ranks  Mauritius  47th  in  terms  of  “availability  of  financial  services”.  We  lag  well 
behind  in  terms  of  “capacity  to  innovate”,  be  it  in  our  global  rank  or  regional  rank.  Such 
metrics confirm that we need to broaden the spectrum of our financial services. 
I hope that this seminar will address many of the queries that we have on the FATCA and its 
compliance. 
I once again commend the organisers for providing the relevant stakeholders with a platform 
where views can be exchanged and I hope that more ideas emerge on how we can give a 
positive spin to the FATCA. One final advice, if I may: Turn Challenges into Opportunities! 
Think differently! 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
