Ravi Menon: Regional safety nets to complement global safety nets 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  ASEAN+3  Macroeconomic  Research  Office 
(AMRO), Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 31 January 2012. 
 Director, AMRO, Wei Benhua, 
Counselor, AMRO, Yoichi Nemoto, 
Head, Civil Service and Permanent Secretary (Finance) Peter Ong, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
Good morning. 
Twelve years ago, we took the first steps in a momentous journey that has led us 
Genesis of the Chiang Mai Initiative 
1. 
here today. 
2. 
It was the aftermath of the Asian Financial Crisis. The Crisis had ravaged several 
economies in the region and was a wake-up call to all of us. Rapid economic growth was not 
enough. To sustain growth and foster stability, sound macroeconomics and strong financial 
supervision mattered. Asian economies had to get their domestic acts together. And they did, 
with painstaking reforms over the last 15 years. So, when the Global Financial Crisis hit Asia 
in 2008/2009, Asian economies were shaken, but did not keel over. 
3. 
The Crisis taught us another lesson: had the region better harnessed the resources 
it had available, it might have been in a stronger position to deal with the crisis. It was this 
conviction  that  provided  the  impetus  for  the  first  proposals  for  a  regional  financing 
arrangement.  
4. 
And so, in May 2000, the Finance Ministers of ASEAN+3 gathered in the idyllic city 
of  Chiang  Mai  in  the  highlands  of  northern  Thailand,  to  discuss  the  establishment  of  a 
network of bilateral swap agreements. Thus was born the Chiang Mai Initiative. By October 
2003, thirteen bilateral swap agreements had been successfully concluded, with a combined 
total size of roughly US$35 billion. 
5. 
In  May  2007,  ASEAN+3  Finance  Ministers  agreed  to  transform  these  bilateral 
agreements  into  a  multilateral  agreement  that  would  also  provide  a  platform  for  mutual 
surveillance and dialogue. The Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation, or CMIM, thus came 
into  being  in  March  2010,  with  a  war  chest  of  US$120  billion.  The  CMIM  operates  as  a 
common  US  dollar  liquidity  pool.  A  member  state  facing  balance-of-payments  or  external 
liquidity problems can swap its local currency for US dollars from this pool. The size of the 
swap can be up to a fixed multiple of its contribution. 
Today  marks  another  important  milestone  in  that  journey  –  the  opening  of  the 
6. 
ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office, or AMRO. AMRO is not just any research outfit. 
It  is  a  critical  component  of  the  emerging  regional  architecture,  based  on  mutual 
co-operation,  surveillance  and  solidarity.  Singapore  is  delighted  and  honoured  to  host 
AMRO. 
7. 
safety nets, and how they complement global safety nets. 
But before I say more about AMRO, I want to touch briefly on the role of regional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Why regional financial safety nets matter 
8. 
That we live in an increasingly connected world is well known and understood. I will 
not  bore  you  with  statistics  on  the  growing  linkages  in  trade  and  finance  that  bind  our 
countries  together.  Economic  and  financial  integration  in  Asia  has  produced  significant 
benefits for our economies. But increased connectedness also means greater potential for 
contagion – for the transmission of economic and financial shocks across countries within the 
region. 
This does not mean we should roll back the tide and become more insular. But it 
9. 
does mean that we have to watch closely developments in one another’s economies, assess 
potential spillover effects, exchange views on policy responses, and, at times of stress, pool 
our resources to restore confidence in our markets. 
10. 
In an environment of increased uncertainty and volatility, it is incumbent on each of 
our economies to build strong buffers. This includes financial buffers in the form of a healthy 
foreign reserve position and a well-capitalised banking sector. It also includes policy buffers 
in the form of prudent monetary and fiscal stance in good times that gives scope for a more 
accommodative posture during times of slack or crisis.  
11. 
But sometimes we cannot do it alone, despite having good fundamentals. At times 
of crisis, markets may be slow in discerning progress made in national policies. This is where 
external validation and resources can help build credibility and restore confidence. While the 
role  of  the  IMF  and  multilateral  organisations  remains  critical  in  this  regard,  regional 
arrangements can be a useful complement.  
12. 
Take for example, the European experience. In 2009, when countries in Central and 
Eastern  Europe  came  under  stress,  neighbouring  economies  contributed  to  financing 
schemes together with the IMF. This helped to stabilise the situation, showing how regional 
cooperation  has  a  role  to  play  alongside  countries’  own  national  buffers  and  international 
financing mechanisms. More recently, in 2010, the European Financial Stability Facility, or 
EFSF, was set up in response to an intensifying sovereign debt crisis. The EFSF may not 
have worked as well as it could, but it has helped to prevent the crisis from escalating. The 
Europeans  are  now  developing  plans  for  a  stronger,  permanent  facility  in  the  form  of  the 
European Stability Mechanism. 
13. 
Regional safety net mechanisms – like the CMIM – will provide added assurance to 
markets  that  governments  have  the  tools  and  resources  to  deal  with  the  economic  or 
financial  challenges  at  hand.  They  can  be  more  focused  in  surveillance,  more  timely  in 
execution,  and  more  contextual  in  policy  prescription,  providing  balance  to  the  multilateral 
approach. 
But regional safety nets do not obviate the need for global ones. Let me offer two 
Why regional financial safety nets alone are not enough 
14. 
reasons why. 
15. 
First,  where  a  crisis  is  largely  regional  in  nature,  contagion  can  be  rapid  and  the 
capacity  of  a  regional  safety  net  can  be  diminished.  Again,  consider  the  European 
experience. Earlier this month, ratings agency Standard and Poor’s downgraded the credit 
ratings  of  nine  Eurozone  countries.  One  key  consequence  was  that  the  EFSF  itself  was 
downgraded,  since  the  EFSF  ultimately  derives  its  rating  from  the  countries  that  fund  it. 
Global safety nets may well be necessary as a complement in situations like these. 
16. 
Second,  Asian  countries  will  play  an  increasingly  prominent  role  in  international 
financial institutions like the IMF as the centre of economic gravity moves eastwards. Asia 
will over time make contributions to the IMF commensurate with its larger role in the global 
economy. It is therefore in the interest of Asian countries to have the IMF continuing to play 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
an active role in the region, and to effectively complement regional financing arrangements 
like the CMIM. 
17. 
Indeed, in today’s precarious situation, it is in Asia’s interest that the resources of 
the IMF are enhanced. Asia will not be immune to an escalation of the sovereign debt crisis 
and any ensuing protracted slowdown in Europe. In such a scenario, a well-resourced IMF 
will reassure markets, by helping to dampen any spillover effects and mitigating the risk of an 
excessive contraction in economic activity. 
18. 
 
 
In short, a robust response to crisis can entail three concentric layers of defence: 
a first layer of credible economic policies backed by national resources; 
a  middle  layer  of  regional  mechanisms  to  provide  added  credibility,  minimise 
spillovers, and foster regional stability; and  
a third layer of multilateral support through the IMF. 
 
19. 
All three layers – national, regional and global – must complement and reinforce one 
another. Well-designed, they can operate as a package, offering a comprehensive suite of 
financial options to countries in need. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  AMRO,  the  emerging  focal  point  for  regional  surveillance 
to conduct surveillance and contribute to the early detection of risks in the region; 
to facilitate the implementation of remedial action; and 
to inform the decision making of the CMIM. 
These functions help to ensure that any activation of the CMIM mechanisms will be 
AMRO – The focal point of regional surveillance 
20. 
underpinning the CMIM. AMRO was set up to perform three important functions:  
 
 
 
21. 
predicated on informed and independent judgement. 
22. 
AMRO will give ASEAN+3 authorities a new and vital perspective as it considers the 
impact of global developments on ASEAN+3 as a region. AMRO’s surveillance toolkit will be 
based  on  its  own  in-house  capabilities,  access  to  policymakers  in  ASEAN+3,  and  regular 
dialogue  and  exchange  of  information  with  the  IMF  and  other  international  financial 
institutions.  We  envision  AMRO  emerging  over  time  as  an  authoritative  interpreter  of 
economic and financial developments in the Asian region.  
23. 
AMRO’s  progress  since  its  establishment  in  May  2010  has  been  remarkable.  It 
commenced operations just a year later, in May 2011. It has since conducted a number of 
surveillance  visits  in  the  region.  Last  month,  AMRO  presented  its  first  set  of  Economic 
Review  and  Policy  Dialogue  reports  at  a  meeting  of  ASEAN+3  Finance  and  Central  Bank 
Deputies. AMRO’s ability to deliver such comprehensive reports within such a short time of 
becoming operational speaks well of the quality of its leadership and staff. 
24. 
Singapore is very pleased to serve as the base for AMRO’s operations. We are fully 
committed  to  supporting  AMRO  –  in  matters  both  financial  and  administrative.  As  AMRO 
expands  over  the  next  few  years  and  builds  up  its  capabilities,  we  look  forward  to  active 
engagement and collaboration. 
To be effective, AMRO must be independent and objective in its assessments, and candid 
about risks and vulnerabilities. I am happy to note that, in its surveillance reports, AMRO has 
sought to clearly identify policy risks and areas for improvement in the ASEAN+3 economies. 
It  is  critical  that  AMRO  sustains  this  effort  and  develops  an  effective  consultation  process 
with ASEAN+3 economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Conclusion 
25. 
The journey of regionalism as represented by the CMIM is an ongoing one. Today’s 
official opening of AMRO is an important milestone in that journey that we can all take pride 
in.  On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  in  ASEAN+3,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  AMRO  and  its 
director,  Mr  Wei  Benhua,  on  your  strong  start  and  wish  you  every  success.  Let  me  also 
extend  our  warm  wishes  and  full  support  to  Mr  Yoichi  Nemoto,  who  will  take  over  from 
Mr Wei as AMRO director later this year. 
Ensuring AMRO’s success is a shared responsibility. Let us work together to make 
26. 
AMRO  a  strong  and  credible  institution,  reputed  around  the  world  for  its  expertise  in  the 
economic affairs of our region. 
27. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
