Yaseen Anwar: Mobile banking in Pakistan 
Keynote  address  by  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
5th International Conference on “Mobile banking in Pakistan”, Karachi, 15 March 2012. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I feel privileged to be here today at the 5th International Conference on Mobile Commerce in 
Pakistan and share my thoughts on the development of Mobile banking. 
At the outset, let me congratulate the organizers for bringing together relevant stakeholders 
to this very innovative value-creation opportunity ushered by the mobile commerce era. The 
State Bank sees this as a great opportunity for safe, faster, and efficient provision of financial 
services  to  the  un-served  segments  of  the  society  through  mobile  technology  and  agent 
banking. 
First I would like to briefly talk about the significance of Mobile Commerce and then move on 
to the subject of mobile banking for promoting financial inclusion. 
From  the  business  perspective,  the  M-Commerce  encompasses  technologies,  applications 
and  services  that  involve  several  stakeholders  like  infrastructure  equipment  vendors, 
software  vendors,  content  providers  (including  advertisers),  content  aggregators,  Mobile 
Network  Operators,  mobile  device  manufacturers  and  of  course  financial  institutions. 
Therefore, Mobile Commerce is generally characterized by a variety of business partnerships 
often  involving  a  large  number  of  organizations,  from  content  providers  to  financial 
institutions to mobile network operators. 
Over  the  past  few  years,  Mobile  Commerce  has  been  used  as  an  alternative  channel  for 
delivery  of  various  services  in  developed  countries,  whereas  in  the  developing  countries 
attempts  are  being  made  to  leapfrog  and  use  M-commerce  as  a  main  channel  due  to  the 
limited outreach through conventional channels. I firmly believe that usage of innovative and 
unconventional  channels  will  overshadow  the  conventional  means  of  business  and 
communication.  To  substantiate  my  optimism,  currently  the  growth  in  number  of  mobile 
phones  is  far  greater  than  the  growth  in  the  number  of  Fixed  Lines  across  the  globe, 
particularly  in  developing  countries.  Global  mobile  phone  subscriptions  have  reached  6 
billion, almost equivalent to 90 percent of the world’s population. In Pakistan, the number of 
mobile phone subscribers has reached 112 million and growth continues apace. The current 
subscription  rate  is  as  high  as  100  million  which  roughly  is  around  62  percent  of  the  total 
population. We should acknowledge the role played by the Government, PTA and the Mobile 
Operators  for  achieving  this  high  level  of  penetration,  especially  under  our  existing  socio-
economic conditions. 
Turning  now  to  the  use  of  mobile  technology  to  promote  financial  access,  there  is  an 
emerging consensus amongst policy makers around the world to improve access to financial 
services  for  poor  people,  through  supporting  the  safe  and  sound  spread  of  new  modes  of 
financial service delivery capable of reaching the poor. G-20 leaders in their last summit in 
Toronto  in  2011  adopted  9  Principles  for  Innovative  Financial  Inclusion  which  includes 
promoting technological and institutional innovation as a means to expand financial system 
access and usage, including by addressing infrastructure weaknesses. These principles aim 
to  help  create  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory  environment  for  innovative  financial 
inclusion. The enabling environment will critically determine the speed at which the financial 
services access gap will close for the more than two billion people currently excluded. They 
are  the  financially  excluded  in  a  world  where  access  to  financial  services  can  mean  the 
difference between surviving or thriving. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Innovative  modes  of  financial  services  delivery  can  have  a  transformative  effect  on  poor 
households. We know how greater access to even small amounts of credit can dramatically 
improve welfare – such as women being able to buy a sewing machine and establish a small 
business. Awareness is growing that access to a wider set of financial services provides poor 
people  with  capacity  to  increase  or  stabilize  their  income,  build  assets  and  have  much 
greater  resilience  to  economic  shocks.  Appropriate  and  affordable  savings  products, 
payment and money transfer services (both domestic and international) as well as insurance 
are all important. 
At the same time, One billion people with mobile phones in the world do not have even a 
basic bank account. As the cost of information and communications technology shrink, the 
time  is  ripe  for  using  technology  to  address  financial  exclusion.  Technological  innovation 
changes the cost and access equation – making it economically viable for financial service 
providers,  often  in  partnership,  to  reach  poor  people,  with  a  wider  range  of  products  and 
services. 
Innovation  also  extends  to  new  institutional  approaches.  Increasing  numbers  of  countries 
with large unbanked populations are pioneering policy and regulatory innovations that open 
space for “banking beyond branches” and similar new approaches to the delivery of formal 
financial  services.  This  is  allowing  previously  excluded  customers  access  to  an  increasing 
range of basic financial services. 
Pakistan has one of the lowest financial penetration levels in the world with 56% of the adult 
population  totally  excluded,  and  another  32%  informally  served.  We  are  a  country  with  a 
population  of  180  million  living  in  geographically  diverse  areas.  Mobile  phone  subscription 
has seen explosive growth in Pakistan – total subscription now reaches 112 million across 
customers  in  all  income  segments,  and  growth  continues  rapidly.  In  contrast,  banking 
accounts are owned by approximately 25 million customers largely belonging to high income 
segments. And there are about 7 million borrowers. With a network of 10,000 bank branches, 
Pakistan has the highest number of people per bank branch in the region. 
Until  now,  the  lack  of  a  sizable  distribution  network  had  been  a  major  challenge  in 
broadening  access  to  financial  services.  As  a  result,  a  large  segment  of  the  population, 
particularly  those  living  in  rural  and  remote  areas  have  remained  deprived  of  banking 
services. An important implication of this exclusion is that this large proportion of population 
has been overwhelmingly reliant on cashbased transactions, thus causing a negative impact 
on documentation of the economy, the tax-base, efficiency of economic transactions, etc. 
Developing bricks and mortar branches is a costly proposition. To encourage FIs to develop 
alternative delivery channels, SBP in 2008, introduced Branchless Banking (BB) Regulations. 
The  Regulations  are  applicable  to  all  Commercial  Banks,  Islamic  Banks  and  Microfinance 
Banks in Pakistan. 
These  Regulations  have  actually  catalyzed  a  number  of  branchless  banking  deployments 
with dual advantages: First, there is enormous scope for expanding outreach, especially to 
hard-to-reach  rural  areas.  The  emerging  models  relying  on  “banking  agents”  will  greatly 
extend the distribution of financial services to the poor and marginalized segments. Second, 
alternative delivery channels promise significant cost reduction to institutions. Due to these 
benefits, the expansion in the retail network of microfinance has arisen overwhelmingly from 
agents and mobile phone channels. 
Mobile  phone  banking  is  now  the  new  market  niche  for  both  banks  and  Mobile  Network 
Operators (MNOs), and many of them are preparing to enter in this exciting market in a big 
way. In almost 2 years, the branchless banking deployments with 22,500 agents offering low-
cost services all over the country, including in the hitherto neglected areas, have surpassed 
the 10,000 branch network of banks. The fast mobile penetration and its continuing strong 
growth  fuels  expectations  that  transformational  branchless  banking  models  would  prove  a 
game-changer in improving access to finance in Pakistan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
two 
fully 
far  around  80  million  Branchless  Banking 
The State Bank of Pakistan always welcomes innovative products and desires to work with 
development  partners  in  the  promotion  of  such  products  that  offer  choices  for  Banking  or 
Payment  Services  in  terms  of  cost,  risk,  and  convenience.  Certainly,  benefits  of  such 
initiatives for the economy are overwhelming. 
I  strongly  believe  that  where  conventional  banking  has  its  limitations,  the  Electronic 
Payments and Mobile Banking products should fill the Gap. In particular, the challenge is to 
extend these services to “Unbanked” or the  Underserved  segments of the population, that 
mostly reside in far flung rural areas. In this respect a small Retail Store in a remote part of 
the  country could  serve  as  an  Agent  to  help  solve  everyday  problems  of  a  farmer,  who  is 
generally required to travel long distances and incurs high costs for utilizing the necessary 
financial services. 
As  a  forward-looking  regulator  of  the  Banking  Industry,  the  State  Bank  has  played  an 
effective role in providing an enabling regulatory environment for the banks to leverage their 
full  potential  of  technology,  mobile  operators’  penetration,  and  other  available  delivery 
channels to provide financial services to all segments of the population. Until recently, banks 
were  largely  focusing  on  conventional  banking,  but  with  the  introduction  of  Branchless 
Banking Regulations in 2008, banks are now getting fast into action by exploiting Information 
and  Communication  Technologies  (ICT)  to  offer  more  innovative  products  and  services. 
These  Regulations  have  now  enabled  our  banks  to  diversify  their  geographic  footprint  in 
areas where conventional branch banking was either inadequate or totally absent. 
Today,  we  have 
functional  Branchless  Banking  deployments  with  over 
22,000 Access  Points  with  a  geographic  dispersion  in  over  600  cities  across  the  country. 
These deployments are serving more than 1 million accountholders and millions of Over-the-
Counter  customers.  So 
transactions  of 
Rs.300 billion have been executed in Pakistan. In addition to the above, a number of banks 
are already in the Pilot Phase with others approaching SBP to initiate Branchless Banking 
business.  It  also  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  share  that  one  of  the  largest  mobile 
operators in the country and the largest private sector banks is already flexing its muscles to 
enter into the Branchless Banking arena. With the influx of new entrants, I am expecting a 
surge in the number of Access Points to over 50,000 very soon. 
Our  achievements  in  the  Branchless  Banking  Services  have  put  Pakistan  at  the  Global 
Centre  Stage  of  Financial  Inclusion  and  innovation.  CGAP,  in  its  recent  study  has  also 
recognized Pakistan as one of the fastest developing markets for Branchless Banking. 
According to the recent data from SBP’s Branchless Banking Newsletter, a large segment of 
the  previously  unbanked  population  has  started  entering  into  a  new  arena  of  branchless 
banking (BB). 
Total volume (number) of transactions has jumped to 20.6 million during the Oct-Dec 2011 
quarter.  Thus,  the  average  daily  transactions  have  increased  to  228,855.  Value  of 
transactions during the last quarter reached Rs 79,410 million. Total number of branchless 
banking  accounts  have  increased  to  929,184.  Branchless  banking  deposits  have  grown  to 
Rs 503 million. 
The average size of branchless banking transactions is Rs 3,855 (US$ 43) which shows that 
mobile phone technology and agentbased banking are helping access to financial services 
by the hitherto unbanked poor. 
Early uptake of mobile banking is also beset with challenges. The existing agents network 
needs  to  be  further  capacitated  to  generate  new  demand;  handle  and  service  even  larger 
volumes of transactions to establish the business viability of BB operations. Going forward, 
SBP  will  be  initiating  actionable  research  on  the  supply  and  demand  side  in  collaboration 
with the Branchless Banking ecosystem for further development of such services in Pakistan. 
The study will focus on opportunities such as: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
Estimation  and  Development  of  a  Retail  Payments  System  Strategy:  The  initial 
BB business  is  based  on  handling  large  volumes  of  transactions.  Therefore 
payments services such as bulk G2P, B2B, B2P payments and retail P2P payments 
are a necessity for survival in its infancy phase. Identification and preparation of a 
matrix  of  these  payments  will  be  helpful  in  highlighting  the  volumes  in  payments 
services and opportunities for future development and partnerships for establishing 
the business case/viability and promotion of branchless banking in Pakistan. 
Research  into  agents’  economics  and  business  case  and  identification  of  key 
bottlenecks including public policy issues such as taxation of BB services etc. 
Research  into  agents’  selection  and  management  for  identification  of  challenges, 
particularly  in  the  management  of  liquidity  at  agents’  outlets,  quality  of  service  for 
maintaining  minimum  service  standards,  Security  systems  &  controls  for  fraud 
prevention  and  detection,  complaint  handling  and  redress  mechanism,  and  Agent 
disqualification  and  delisting  mechanism  etc.  Interventions  will  be  launched  to 
enhance the agent’s credibility. 
Research on BB Technologies: there is a need for understanding of BB technologies 
for adoption of common standards and platforms for promotion of financial inclusion 
on a massive scale. Therefore, a study on BB technologies would be conducted for 
understanding  existing  technologies  along  with  development  of  some  common 
standards. These will also be helpful in getting one step nearer to the interoperability 
of the technological solutions and agent networks. 
Likewise demand side field research into the experience of current users and non-
users  of  branchless  banking  will  be  conducted.  The  survey  would  help  in 
identification and understanding the top financing needs of the low income clients 
and  help  BB  providers  tailor  their  products  to  satisfy  the  unmet  demand  for  such 
services.  Similarly  the  survey  will  also  provide  insights  on  financial  literacy  and 
consumer protection issues. 
Branchless  Banking  has  also  proved  to  be  an  effective  instrument  for  channelizing  the 
Government to Persons (G2P) Payments in trying times like serving the Internally Displaced 
Persons  (IDPs),  during  the  devastating  floods  over  the  last  three  years.  Further,  BISP 
beneficiaries are also being served very effectively through the same mechanism as well. In 
the coming days, this channel is expected to continue playing an important role towards the 
promotion  of  financial  inclusion  and  the  management  of  Government  to  Person  (G2P) 
Programs like Salaries Disbursements, Pensions, BISP, Watan Cards, Pakistan Cards and 
Tax  Collections  Services,  etc.  We  are  confident  that  the  Branchless  Banking  deployments 
can  cater  to  the  needs  of  over  10  million  potential  beneficiaries  of  G2P  Payments  in 
Pakistan. 
The State Bank will continue to play its role in promoting an environment which is conducive 
for financial innovation. At the macro level, we will continue to work with the industry and the 
other  regulators  to  promote  a  sound,  safe,  efficient  and  inclusive  Mobile  Commerce 
Ecosystem. 
Our aim is to provide at least basic Banking Services to every adult and bankable citizen. 
Today, as a large portion of our populations has access to mobile phones, we feel that if a 
workable partnership between the Banking and Telecom Sectors continue, we shall see our 
dreams  come 
front,  we  are  already  working  closely  with  Pakistan 
Telecommunication Authority and have also signed an MOU for enabling the Interoperability 
Framework where all banks and telcos can join hands to serve the customers. We are also in 
the final stages of formulating the Regulatory Framework for Interoperable Mobile Banking 
System.  Interoperable  systems  are  essential  to  mass  adoption  of  mobile  commerce.  At 
present,  financial  institutions  and  telcos  can  choose  whatever  business  model  suits  their 
needs  i.e.  One-to-One  or  One-to-Many;  however,  I  can  foresee  that  in  future,  only 
interoperable solutions shall fasten both scalability and viability. Here, let me assure that all 
true.  On 
this 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the existing and the prospective One-to-One or One-to-Many arrangements between banks 
and the Telcos would not be affected with the proposed regulatory framework. 
I must acknowledge the efforts and initiatives adopted by Ministry of Information Technology 
and the PTA towards the promotion and development of Mobile Banking in the country. It is 
heartening to see that PTA is playing an important role by encouraging its regulatees to play 
their due part in the provision of smooth and efficient Branchless Banking Services. 
For banking and telecom industries, it should be a matter of great comfort and satisfaction 
that their regulators i.e. SBP and PTA share the vision and are working in tandem to provide 
an  enabling  regulatory  environment  for  the  provision  of  Mobile  Banking  Services.  This 
cooperation between the regulators; will create much desired synergy in both the banking as 
well as telecom industries. 
Going forward, much still needs to be done. SBP is keen to work with different stakeholders, 
including  but  not  limited  to  financial  institutions,  different  regulators,  private  sector, 
application  developers  and  telcos  to  provide  an  enabling  environment  for  the  creation  of 
Mobile Commerce Ecosystem in the country. We have only seen the start of it but the rest is 
yet  to  come.  However,  the  common  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  all  banking  transactions, 
irrespective of the technology platform, are cost effective, efficient, and pose a lowest risk for 
the  consumers.  This  requires  close  coordination  among  the  stakeholders  in  the  area  of 
regulations  especially  monitoring,  licensing,  provision  of  technological  infrastructure  and 
ensuring maximum benefits for consumers. 
I  trust  today’s  conference  will  help us  understand  the  issues  relating  to  Mobile  Commerce 
and the importance of Mobile Banking in the development of an inclusive Mobile Commerce 
Ecosystem. This conference will help to increase the General Awareness among participants 
about  Mobile  Commerce  and  the  evolving  trends  in  Mobile  Banking  for  which  Total 
Communications deserves to be applauded. 
Thank you all for being part of this forum and I look forward to your productive participation in 
today’s event. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
