José de Gregorio: What does society expect from the financial sector? 
Panel  discussion  remarks  by  Mr  José  de  Gregorio,  Universidad  de  Chile  and  former 
Governor of the Central Bank of Chile following the Per Jacobsson Lecture by Dr YV Reddy, 
24 June 2012, Basel, Switzerland. 
 I would like to thank the BIS for the invitation to participate in this panel, which makes us look 
at financial markets from a new perspective.  
As  policymakers,  we  are  used  to  talking  about  how  the  financial  system  must  operate  in 
order  to  fulfill  its  goals  without  threatening  financial  stability  or  imposing  costs  at  the 
aggregate  level.  In  recent  years,  the  discussion  has  focused  on  how  to  avoid  excessive 
procyclicality, contagion, moral hazard, and other important policy concerns. 
As economists, we have been trying to explain the misbehavior of financial systems, and we 
are still searching for answers. Although we may have some ideas, the policy implications 
are not straightforward, but the answers cannot wait. Policy design needs answers as soon 
as possible, and delays may cause well intentioned policies to be poorly implemented. 
But what society really demands from financial systems is quite difficult to define. Society is a 
collection of actors, with different interests and different needs. People want access to the 
financial system at fair conditions. Therefore it is useful to think of society as everyone who is 
not related directly to the financial industry or policymaking. 
Starting from here, we can say that society is demanding safer and fairer financial systems. 
The  view  that  financial  markets  were  big  casinos,  where  the  betting  was  done  with  other 
people’s money and gamblers walked away unpunished, is quite common around the world. 
Public opinion has been dominated by that sentiment, which has also affected policymaking. 
On financial development 
Let me start by stressing that financial intermediation is good, and with the backlash from the 
crisis  it  should  be  repeated  that  a  well  functioning  financial  system  is  key  to  prosperity.  It 
promotes  economic  growth  by  channeling  investment  funds  from  savers  to  borrowers 
(Levine,  2006).  It  is  central  to  promoting  entrepreneurship  and  to  facilitating  investment, 
including human capital accumulation. It provides financing to households in order to smooth 
consumption,  and  provides  insurance.  It  provides  safe  and  cheap means  of  payment. The 
difficulties  faced  by  households  and  firms  in  many  emerging  market  economies  due  to 
underdeveloped financial institutions and markets should be a clear reminder of this positive 
role. But financial depth may also be a source of great problems. As in many situations, more 
is not always better. 
There  is  plenty  of  research  concluding  that  economies  with  deep  financial  systems  grow 
more.  However,  studying  this  issue  in  Latin  America  many  years  ago  I  came  to  the 
conclusion that in Latin America growth during the eighties was lower in countries with more 
developed financial systems, since the collapse of their economies during the debt crisis was 
larger (De Gregorio and Guidotti, 1995). Indeed, it was Carlos Diaz-Alejandro, by the mid-
eighties,  who  eloquently  said  “good-bye  financial  repression,  hello  financial  crash”  (Diaz-
Alejandro,  1985).  Some  recent  research  also  points  in  the  same  direction,  as  reviewed  in 
Dr. Reddy’s  lecture  –  beyond  a  certain  level,  financial  depth  has  marginal  contributions  to 
growth (Arcand et al., 2012; Cecchetti and Kharroubi, 2012). 
In  Chile  we  had  a  great  financial  crisis  in  the  early  eighties  which  led  to  an  overhaul  of 
financial regulation. The country followed the prudent route, allowing only activities that could 
be handled appropriately by financial intermediaries, but above all that could be understood 
  1 
and  monitored  well  by  market  participants  and  financial  regulators.  Since  the  country  was 
emerging  from  a  deep  financial  crisis,  the  macro  view  of  the  financial  system  and  its 
regulation were a central part of the design. 
But this seems not to have been the case in advanced economies. 
The global financial crisis has revealed the perils of financial deepening. It has shown that 
advanced economies are not different. This is not new in emerging markets, but is something 
less common and more dramatic in advanced economies. Long ago we learned that when an 
economic downturn comes with a financial crisis the costs are extremely high. 
What went wrong? 
It is important to recall that the crisis had its origins in a noble cause: providing housing to 
low-income  families.  This  was  perhaps  the  response  to  rising  income  inequality,  as 
emphasized by Rajan (2010), and the lack of other policies to correct this problem in a fast 
and  efficient  way.  Ironically,  the  crisis  affected  more  intensely  precisely  those  that  were 
supposed to benefit from “financial inclusion.” 
There  are  many  other  cases  in  which  well  intentioned  developments  are  implemented 
through weak policies. Take the case of interest rate ceilings. In order to promote fairness, 
many countries introduce limits on the interest rate on loans. This policy attempts principally 
to protect people with disadvantages and allow them to participate in the financial system. If 
this ceiling is set low enough, it may end up generating exclusion rather than lower financial 
costs for households, who may end up paying much higher interest rates in informal credit 
markets. 
This  is  not  the  place  to  analyze  all  the  causes  and  culprits  of  the  crisis,  but  it  is  worth 
discussing certain aspects that are frequently singled out by the general public.  
First  and  foremost,  the  crisis  was  caused  by  the  irresponsible  behavior  of  the  financial 
industry.  The  structure  of  incentives  was  unsuitable.  It  led  to  excessive  risk-taking  without 
proper  risk  management.  Compensation  was  heavily  biased 
towards  deal-making, 
regardless  of  the  quality  of  the  deals.  Commissions  and  fees  were  a  very  important 
component  of the  compensation  scheme.  In  the  end,  all  that  mattered  was  granting  credit 
indiscriminately, maximizing packaging and selling securities, etc. This was at the foundation 
of the originate-and-distribute model of financial services, and served to increase leverage to 
unsustainable levels. We know that linking compensation to productivity is efficient, but the 
devil is in the details. 
Second, the regulation-making process, as very well discussed in Dr. Reddy’s lecture, was 
also distorted by comprehensive capture by the financial industry. As he explains, this was 
not only capture of the regulators, but also capture of public policy relating to the financial 
system.  With  a  little  bit  of  moral  hazard,  which  is  exacerbated  by  regulatory  and  policy 
capture, the result was the creation of a very vulnerable financial system. 
Finally, there was indifference in policy circles. None of us saw it coming, at least not with the 
intensity with which it arrived, which still persists. Indeed, it was difficult for those of us from 
emerging markets to think that this could happen in the advanced world. Whenever we had 
raised a concern we had been told that “these are developed countries,” as an argument that 
“this  time  is  different”.  There  were,  of  course,  calls  for  prudence,  in  particular  from  this 
institution,  but  we  never  thought  that  the  consequences  would  be  so  dramatic.  Markets 
should  provide  enough  discipline  to  balance  risk  and  return,  but  that  was  not  exactly  the 
case.  The  market  functioned  poorly.  In  addition,  we  had  a  sense  of  security  given  the 
“decoupling” that took place in the 2000s, in part due to good macroeconomic management, 
and which became a recoupling by mid-2008 (Dooley and Hutchison, 2009; Korinek et al., 
2010). 
2 
  It is easy to put the blame on the behavior of the financial industry, but the policy implications 
are  not  straightforward.  But  from  the  three  points  I  have  raised  –  misbehavior  of  market 
participants, comprehensive capture, and policymakers’ indifference – there are three simple 
conclusions:  we  need  tight  regulation,  transparency  and  disclosure  of  conflicts  of  interest, 
and permanent monitoring of financial stability. 
What else may go wrong? 
Financial  systems  in  emerging  markets  escaped  from  the  crisis  due  to  some  extent  to 
prudent regulation, built on a history of recurrent crises. But perhaps it was also due to the 
fact that we are somewhat slow to adapt to financial innovation. Indeed, many issues, such 
as the use of derivatives by the banking industry, were being discussed in emerging markets 
on  the  eve  of  the  crisis.  Of  course,  we  are  much  more  aware  of  the  risks  of  financial 
innovation. It is particularly important to understand innovations – something that I think very 
few  understood  before  the  crisis.  A  simple  rule  for  policymaking  is  that  if  you  cannot 
understand what is really being proposed and you do not see the benefits, it is better steer 
clear. We used this simple dictum at the Central Bank of Chile. 
Not everything is bright in emerging markets. There are many challenges. One issue that has 
not  been  a  problem  so  far,  but  presents  potential  risks,  is  the  role  of  public  banks.  Some 
research  has  shown  that  in  Latin  America  public  banks  are  less  procyclical  than  private 
banks (Micco and Panizza, 2006), but this could be for good or bad reasons. If public banks 
are prudent and avoid jumping on the bandwagon of optimism during the upturn this is good 
– they may even soften credit constraints during the downturn. However, public banks may 
also be an instrument to pay back supporters of politicians, and certainly this is unfair and 
inefficient. Public banks may also be subject to capture by the electoral cycle (Micco et al., 
2007),  or  used  as  an  instrument  to  implement  industrial  policy.  Given  the  lack  of  other 
instruments,  providing  credit  for  selected  economic  activities  may  be  a  way  to  promote 
specific  sectors.  There  are  certainly  better  tools  for  promoting  specific  sectors,  especially 
from efficiency, fiscal, transparency and accountability points of view.  
An  issue  that  has  been  on  the  agenda  in  most  countries  is  financial  consumer  protection. 
This  is,  of  course,  a  welcome  development,  and  is  a  clear  demand  from  society. 
Transparency  in  financial  charges  and  the  nature  of  the  contracts,  the  ability  to  change 
across  financial  agents,  assigning  clear  responsibilities  in  this  area  to  regulators,  and 
improving financial literacy are among the issues being discussed. It is important, however, 
for  consumer  protection  to  form  an  integral  part  of  the  regulatory  infrastructure  in  order  to 
avoid inconsistencies among agencies and risks to depositors and overall financial stability in 
the  name  of  protecting  consumers.  Consumer  protection  also  has  a  high  risk  of  being 
captured  by  the  political  cycle.  This  could  be  specially  damaging  in  the financial  system  – 
and  therefore  every  effort  should  be  made  to  make  the  institutions  safeguarding  financial 
consumers autonomous and technical. 
For  macroeconomists  and  financial  economists,  today  it  is  difficult  to  focus  on  something 
other  than  the  European  crisis.  The  health  of  the  global  economy  depends  on  a  good 
resolution  to  this  crisis.  However,  we  cannot  forget  the  duty  of  building  a  safer  and  fairer 
financial system. Today we have the opportunity to tackle this task, but we also have to avoid 
shortcuts that may end up rebuilding a weaker financial system. 
  3 
References 
Arcand,  Jean-Louis,  Enrico  Berkes  and  Ugo  Panizza  (2012),  “Too  Much  Finance?,” 
International Monetary Fund Working Paper, WP/12/161. 
Cecchetti,  Stephen  and  Enisse  Kharroubi  (2012),  “Reassessing  the  Impact  of  Finance  on 
Growth,” mimeo, BIS. 
De  Gregorio,  José  and  Pablo  Guidotti  (1995),  “Financial  Development  and  Economic 
Growth,” World Development, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 433–448. 
Diaz-Alejandro,  Carlos  (1985),  “Good-bye  Financial  Repression,  Hello  Financial  Crash,” 
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 19, Issues 1–2, pp. 1–24. 
Dooley,  Michael  P. and  Michael  M.  Hutchison (2009), “Transmission of the U.S. Subprime 
Crisis  to  Emerging  Markets:  Evidence  on  the  Decoupling-Recoupling  Hypothesis,”  NBER 
Working Paper 15120.  
Korinek, Anton, Agustin Roitman and Carlos A. Vegh (2010), “Decoupling and Recoupling,” 
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, pp. 393–397. 
Levine, Ross (2006), “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” in Philippe Aghion and 
Steven  Durlauf  (eds.)  Handbook  of  Economic  Growth,  pp.  865–934,  New  York:  Elsevier 
North-Holland. 
Micco,  Alejandro  and  Ugo  Panizza  (2006),  “Bank  Ownership  and  Lending  Behavior,” 
Economic Letters, Vol. 93, Issue 2, pp. 248–254. 
Micco,  Alejandro,  Ugo  Panizza  and  Monica  Yanez  (2007)  “Bank  Ownership  and 
Performance.  Does  Politics  Matter?,”  Journal  of  Banking  and  Finance,  Vol.  31,  No.  1,  pp. 
219–241. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  (2010),  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World 
Economy, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Reddy, Y.V. (2012), “Society, Economic Policies and the Financial Sector,” Per-Jacobsson 
Lecture, BIS. www.bis.org/events/agm2012/sp120624.htm. 
4 
  