Jean Boivin: Aging gracefully – Canada’s inevitable demographic shift 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean  Boivin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  presented  to  the 
Economic Club of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 4 April 2012. 
 Thank you for having me here today. 
I’m here to talk about something inevitable and mostly dreaded: aging. Every day – if we’re 
lucky – we get older. But don’t worry, I’m not here to give a motivational talk about personal 
growth and aging – I’m not the most qualified person to do that. What I would like to discuss 
is the aging of Canada’s population as a whole and its implications. And in this case, luck 
has nothing to do with it. 
One of our gracefully aging Canadians, Leonard Cohen, once wrote, “Reality is one of the 
possibilities I cannot afford to ignore.” I won’t get into whether “reality” is just a “possibility” – 
I’m an economist, not a philosopher – but there is no doubt aging is a reality, and it is one we 
simply cannot afford to ignore. 
Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  we  are  getting  older  as  a  society.  The  prospect  of  an  aging 
population  has  been  with  us  for  a  long  time.  Long  before  I  was  born,  the  United  Nations 
published the first of several studies on the issue.1 At the Bank of Canada, the importance of 
addressing this challenge has been raised many times and in many places.2  
Not  only  has  this  prospect  been  with  us  for  a  long  time,  but  it  has  also  been  entirely 
predictable (Chart 1). 
Aging  in  Canada  has  evolved  almost  exactly  as  projected  10  years  ago  and  the  outlook 
remains the same. Let me tell you: when compared with the typical economic phenomena 
that central banks work with, forecasting aging is a piece of cake. 
What  is  much  less  easy  to  predict,  however,  is  how  society  will  adjust  to  aging,  and  the 
flexibility it will have to do so. Ten years ago, we didn’t know the world would be facing the 
greatest  financial  crisis  since  the Great  Depression  which  has  resulted  in  vast  amounts  of 
lost wealth and higher debt levels for governments and individuals. What that means is that 
today in advanced economies we still face the problem of an aging population – it has not 
gone away – but with less room to manoeuvre. This is a situation that should give us cause 
for more than a few worry lines. 
But no matter how we adjust, one thing is for sure: aging will change the Canadian economic 
landscape. We have started to see the impact of this process and it will intensify. This will 
                                                 
1   The topic of population aging in developed countries was brought to the attention of a broad audience by the 
first  of  many  UN  studies  in  1956  in  “The  Aging  of  Populations  and  its  Economic  and  Social  Implications, 
Population Studies”, No. 26 (United Nations publication, Sales No. 1956. XIII.6). By 1982, the global relevance 
of the topic was acknowledged in the First World Assembly on Aging in Vienna, and a call for action was put 
forward. 
2   See David Dodge, “Past Adjustments and Future Trends in the Canadian Economy,” (remarks to the London 
Chamber of Commerce, London, Ontario, 8 December 2003); “Canada’s Competitiveness: The Importance of 
Investing  in  Skills”  (remarks  to  the  Humber  College  Institute  of Technology  &  Advanced  Learning,  Toronto, 
Ontario,  30  March  2005);  “Demographics,  Labour  Input,  and  Economic  Potential:  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy” (remarks to the St. John’s Board of Trade, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, 13 June 2007). 
See  also  Mark  Carney,  “The  Coming  Thaw”  (remarks  to  the  Winnipeg  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, 4 February 2010); “The Virtue of Productivity in a Wicked World” (remarks to the Ottawa Economics 
Association, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 March 2010); “Growth in the Age of Deleveraging” (remarks to the Empire 
Club of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 12 December 2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have broad implications, including for monetary policy. This is what I would like to discuss 
today. 
Current demographic situation 
Let’s first quickly remind ourselves of the facts. 
When we think of population aging, we immediately think of the baby boomers who are just 
starting  to  retire.  Canada  did  indeed  have  the  most  sizable  baby  boom  among  the  G-7 
countries, and it is certainly an important demographic phenomenon (Chart 2). 
But as someone who has come of age in the shadow of the baby boom, let me say this: baby 
boomers, this is not just about you. 
Although the post-WWII baby boom is speeding up the transition toward an older population, 
it  is  neither  the  cause  nor  the  main  driver.  The  aging  of  Canada’s  population  would  have 
occurred, with or without the baby boom. 
There are two much more important and persistent drivers at play: first, a decrease in total 
fertility below the replacement rate of 2.1 children per woman and second, a considerable 
increase in life expectancy. 
We can trace the beginning of this shift to northern European countries as far back as the 
1870s,  where  fertility  rates  have  been  on  a  downward  trend  (Chart  3).  In  Canada,  total 
fertility rates peaked in the early 1960s, during the baby boom, and then plummeted to where 
they are today. For 40 years now Canada’s total fertility rate has been below 2.1. 
At roughly the same time in the 1870s that fertility rates dropped, we saw large declines in 
mortality, mostly of children. As the once commonplace death of a child is thankfully far in the 
past,  at  least  in  advanced  economies,  the  big  change  we  see  now  is  in  the  significant 
increase  in  life  expectancy.  Consider  this:  Canadians  born  in  2000  could  expect  to  live 
almost three decades longer than those born in 1900 (Chart 4). 
More people living longer swells the ranks of the non-working population and changes the 
ratio  of  older  non-working  people  relative  to  working-age  people.  This  ratio  is  commonly 
referred to as the “old-age dependency ratio.” 
Looking at the expected evolution of this ratio, an important conclusion is that the aging of 
the population has begun and it will soon accelerate. The crunch will be unprecedented in 
history, both in scope and size (Chart 5). In Canada, by 2031 about one in four people will be 
over 65.3 As for those over 80, they are the fastest-growing segment of the older population, 
a group that, relative to 2000, will have nearly doubled by 2026 and quadrupled by 2051.4  
Canada  is  not  the  only  nation  getting  older  (Chart  6).  Population  aging  is  common  across 
advanced economies. All G-7 countries have seen a drop in the Total Fertility Rate and an 
increase  in  life  expectancy.  Canada’s  situation  is  more  favourable  than  that  of  other  G-7 
countries  such  as  Japan.  We  are  not  aging  as  early  or  as  fast.  Two  reasons  for  this 
difference are that more Canadian women are in the labour force and we have much higher 
rates of immigration.5  
                                                 
3   F.T.  Denton,  C.H.  Feaver,  and  B.G.  Spencer  2005  as  cited  by  Charles  M.  Beach  in  “Canada’s  Aging 
Workforce: Participation, Productivity, and Living Standards,” in A Festschrift in Honour of David Dodge, Bank 
of Canada, November 2008. 
4   “The  Demographic  Time  Bomb:  Mitigating  the  Effects  of  Demographic  Change  in  Canada.”  Report  of  the 
Standing Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, June 2006. 
5   Charles  M.  Beach,  “Canada’s  Aging  Workforce:  Participation,  Productivity,  and  Living  Standards,”  in  A 
Festschrift in Honour of David Dodge, Bank of Canada, November 2008. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  fact  that  aging  is  a  phenomenon  shared  by  advanced  economies  is  no  coincidence. 
Historically,  increased  life  expectancy  and  low  fertility  rates  are  common  to  societies  with 
higher  standards  of  living.  With  a  higher  standard  of  living  we  are  more  likely  to  get  old. 
Babies  don’t  die  at  birth;  they  may  grow  to  become  octogenarians.  This  is  a  cause  for 
celebration, not dismay. 
Population aging is in large part the result of positive forces as economies develop. The task 
ahead is to figure out how to make the right adjustments. 
Ignoring reality 
So what are the economic consequences of aging? 
Ultimately, if we ignore the reality of aging and make no adjustments, the consequence will 
be  a  lower  standard  of  living.  An  aging  population  implies  a  smaller  proportion  of  working 
people  relative  to  people  not  working.  That  means  a  pie  growing  more  slowly  than  the 
number of eaters – less for everyone. 
The  stakes  are  high:  Bank  of  Canada  calculations  show  that  in  the  absence  of  any 
adjustments, the average incomes of Canadians could be as much as 20 per cent lower in 
20 years than they would otherwise be without aging (Chart 7). Such numbers need to be 
interpreted carefully and let me be clear: this is not a forecast of what is likely to happen. 
Although they are hard to predict, there will be adjustments that will mitigate the impact of 
aging. But this number does show that the implications of aging, by itself, are major and the 
size of the needed adjustments is considerable. 
As  Canadians  age,  several  pressure  points  will  emerge,  singly  or  in  conjunction.  The 
consequences will affect the labour market, private and public bottom lines, the structure of 
the economy, and income inequality. 
Let me say a few words about these various pressure points. 
Aging will put pressure on the labour market. As workers retire and there are fewer people to 
replace them, there will be upward pressure on wages and adjustments on the composition 
and  the  nature  of  the  labour  force.  For  firms,  attracting  talent,  while  retaining  relevant 
expertise and institutional knowledge, will be more challenging. The Bank of Canada is no 
exception, and we compete with many of you to recruit the brightest and the best talent. 
Aging will put pressure on public finances. A smaller fraction of the population will be working 
and contributing to public revenues, and more people will be depending on their pensions, 
either public or private, to maintain their standard of living. Further, citizens require increased 
health care as they grow older, which will also place pressure on the public purse – fewer 
resources, more demand (Chart 8). 
Aging will put pressure on private savings. As the proportion of prime-age savers – age 35 to 
retirement  –  declines,  this  will  act  as  a  drag  on  aggregate  savings.  Moreover,  at  the 
individual level, as Canadians live longer in retirement, they will need to change their savings 
behaviour and to plan over a longer horizon. The high levels of household debt in Canada 
make the need for such adjustment even more crucial (Chart 9). 
Aging will also put pressure on the redistribution of wealth across generations. The less we 
adjust, the larger the burden the next generations will inherit. 
Accepting reality 
These pressure points show that change is upon us no matter what we do. To avoid drastic 
declines in our living standards or shifting too great a burden on the next generations, there 
are only three options: more work, greater productivity and higher savings. These options will 
require action from all Canadians. Policy measures can help foster the needed adjustments 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and this is the objective of some of the measures put forward, for instance, in last week’s 
federal budget. 
Since  the  problem  starts  with  shrinking  labour input,  a  natural  place  to  look is  for  ways  to 
counteract this decline. There are various options to contemplate. Individuals might decide to 
stay  longer  in  the  work  force.  This  can  be  facilitated  by  the  fact  that  Canadians  are,  on 
average,  healthier  than  previous  generations  and  today  more  jobs  are  knowledge-based. 
Businesses  could  offer  more  flexible  working  arrangements.  Technological  change  and 
corporate  policies  can  provide  more  flexibility  for  workers,  such  as  teleworking,  part-time 
work, job-sharing, off-site consulting, and other innovations. 
Another option is immigration, and it is very important to Canada: without it, the population 
would  be  expected  to  shrink  over  the  next  50  years  (Chart  10).  A  key  challenge  with 
immigration is to remove the various barriers that keep educated and skilled immigrants from 
contributing to their full potential. 
But making the best of the aging process is not only a question of fighting labour shortages, it 
is also a question of finding ways to do more with fewer workers. 
Investing  in  capital  is  one  way  to  do  it:  with  more  machinery  and  equipment,  workers  can 
produce more. Strategic investments can lead to innovation and technological progress that 
make machines and processes more efficient. Better organization can also play an important 
role.  Firms  can  use  the  pool  of  workers  more  effectively,  and  workers  and  managers  can 
improve their performance through education and training. 
With  populations  aging  in  advanced  economies,  the  relative  importance  of  various 
economies  will  change  and  so  will  the  tastes  and  needs  of  an  aging  population.  This  will 
require  structural  adjustments.  Successful  businesses  will  look  ahead  and  see  where  new 
markets  are  developing  –  both  at  home  and  abroad  –  and  where  gaps  are  in  terms  of 
products and services.6 Workers will need to adapt to the changing demands for their skills 
and gain the qualifications necessary to thrive in a new economy. 
Ultimately,  this  is  about  being  more  productive  –  also  a  recurring  theme  for  the  Bank  of 
Canada  and  others.7  Finding  the  elusive  cure  for  Canada’s  lagging  productivity  remains  a 
pressing  concern,  and  the  demographic  challenge  makes  it  even  more  imperative.  To  put 
things in perspective, as much as two-thirds of the average income loss due to the absence 
of  adjustment  to  aging  –  the  20  per  cent  figure  I  mentioned  earlier  –  could  be  regained  if 
productivity  grew  at  a  rate  close  to  its  average  over  the  past  50  years,  instead  of  at  the 
anaemic rate experienced over the past decade. 
But investing more, to increase capital or to boost productivity, will require other adjustments 
as well. More resources will need to be put aside to finance these investments. As individuals 
and families understand the challenges of aging, they may realize how much more savings 
they  will  need  to  maintain  their  standard  of  living  throughout  retirement.  In  this  regard, 
improving  financial  literacy  can  help  promote  these  adjustments,  through  a  better 
understanding of financial products and the important role of private savings. It will also be 
crucial to ensure that pension funds, and the financial system more generally, channel these 
savings into long-term productive investments. 
                                                 
6   Mark  Carney,  “Exporting  in  a  Post-Crisis  World”  (speech  to  the  Greater  Kitchener-Waterloo  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Waterloo, Ontario, 2 April 2012). 
7   For a literature review, see B. Fay and R. Dion, “Understanding Productivity: A Review of Recent Technical 
Research,”  Discussion  Paper  No.  2008-3,  Bank  of  Canada,  2008.See  also  M.  Carney,  “The  Virtue  of 
Productivity  in  a  Wicked  World”  (speech  to  the  Ottawa  Economics  Association,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  24  March 
2010). See also T. Macklem, “Canada’s Competitive Imperative: Investing in Productivity Gains” (speech to 
Productivity Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 1 February 2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some of the adjustments will happen naturally. For instance, shrinking labour input will put 
upward  pressure  on  wages.  Higher  wages  might  provide  greater  incentives  for  workers  to 
acquire more education and training. Scarcity of labour and lower costs of capital might offer 
greater incentives for firms to invest and increase productivity. 
But none of these challenges will be resolved magically by themselves and something will 
definitely have to give. 
Implications for monetary policy 
It is not the Bank of Canada’s role to determine the extent of adjustments needed from each 
of  us  –  government  or  private  sector,  households  or  businesses,  current  or  future 
generations. This depends on our values and goals as a society and this is something that 
Canadians will have to decide on collectively. 
So what is the Bank’s role here? 
Monetary policy cannot, of course, directly influence the aging process or its impact on the 
Canadian economy. But monetary policy can facilitate the necessary adjustments to aging by 
contributing to a stable and predictable economic and financial environment. 
In this regard, one of the Bank of Canada’s main contributions is to deliver low, stable and 
predictable  inflation.  This  promotes  growth,  mitigates  economic  cycles  and  protects  the 
purchasing  power  of  money.  It  makes  it  easier  for  consumers  and  businesses  to  manage 
their finances and to plan ahead. 
The stability of the financial system is also essential. As the painful lessons of other countries 
have demonstrated in recent years, price stability is no guarantee of financial stability, and a 
financial crisis can significantly hamper a country’s ability to deal with challenges such as an 
aging population. This is why the Bank is contributing to and supporting the G-20 agenda for 
financial  reform.  This  is  also  why  Canadian  authorities,  including  the  Bank,  will  need  to 
remain  as  vigilant  as  they  have  been  in  the  past  to  the  possibility  of  financial  imbalances 
developing. 
To  maintain  price  stability  and  support  the  adjustments  to  aging  across  the  economy  over 
time, the Bank itself will also have to adjust. That is because demographics affect the way in 
which  we  seek  to  achieve  our  objectives,  most  directly  in  influencing  the  potential  of  the 
economy  –  the  level  of  activity  at  which  the  economy  can  operate  without  creating 
inflationary  pressures.  Monetary  policy  cannot  influence  this  long-run  speed  limit.  It  must 
obey it. 
This  is  why  the  Bank  needs  to  assess,  through  analysis  and  research,  the  implication  of 
aging on potential output.8 This task is complicated by the fact that it depends not only on the 
evolution of labour input, but also on how the economy adjusts to the demographic changes, 
for  instance  through  productivity.  Our  assessment  on  the  evolution  of  potential  output  is 
reflected in our outlook for the Canadian economy.9 According to our latest estimate, from 
the October 2011 Monetary Policy Report, the growth of potential output in 2014 is expected 
to  be  2.2  per  cent.  Without  the  decline  in  the  working  age  population  it  would  be 
0.2 percentage points higher. Aging is projected to continue to subtract from potential output 
growth until the end of the current decade (Chart 11). 
                                                 
8   See  R.  Barnett,  “Trend  Labour  Supply  in  Canada:  Implications  of  Demographic  Shifts  and  the  Increasing 
Labour  Force  Attachment  of  Women,”  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Summer  2007).  See  also  Alexander 
Ueberfeldt, “Canada’s retirement system: Prepared for an aging population?” Bank of Canada, 2009. 
9   See the Bank of Canada’s October 2011 Monetary Policy Report, page 19. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Aging  is  thus  already  one  of  many  factors  influencing  the  setting  of  monetary  policy.  As 
Governor  Carney  said  this  week,  taking  all  relevant  factors  into  account,  including  recent 
developments, the Bank will take whatever action is appropriate to achieve the 2 per cent 
CPI inflation target over the medium term. This is our contribution to ensuring that Canadians 
can save and invest with confidence. 
But the implications of aging for monetary policy go beyond the horizon that is relevant for 
the current setting of monetary policy. As I hope I have made clear today, the most important 
demographic  changes  are  yet  to  come  and  these  will  bring  about  sweeping  adjustments. 
Eventually, the landscape in which monetary policy is operating will be altered. 
For instance, the aging population in advanced economies may in time have implications for 
the level of global interest rates. Taken in isolation, the scarcity of labour relative to capital 
would lead to higher wages and lower returns on capital, which could eventually contribute to 
persistently  lower  interest  rates.  If  that  materialized,  it  would  lead  to  a  higher  risk  of 
approaching the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates with all of its implications.10 But 
many  forces  affect  global  interest  rates  and  adjustments  to  aging,  such  as  improved 
productivity, would offset these downward pressures on global interest rates. 
Also,  household  saving  and  consumption  behaviours  will  change  and  so  will  expenditure 
patterns. This could alter the way in which monetary policy affects the economy. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Canada made it through the financial crisis better than most G-7 countries. 
It was a shock from outside our borders that was sudden and unexpected. The future can 
deliver surprises. But the challenges of demographic change will not be a surprise. We’ve 
known about them for a long time. They are coming our way. 
As our society ages, we can either accept a lower standard of living or we can be proactive 
and adjust. The stakes are high and we cannot afford to ignore them. There is no free lunch; 
somebody will have to pick up the tab. The least we can do is accept this fact and ensure 
that the bill remains small and that the burden is shared fairly. 
The decisions we all make are largely influenced by what we think the future will bring, if we 
are  aware  and  pay  attention  to  it.  Acceptance  of  the  demographic  challenges  before  us 
should lead the way to proper planning. 
Part of aging gracefully is accepting the inevitable and making the best of it. Getting older 
should be about getting better – it’s about being wiser and more thoughtful about the future 
and  what  lies  ahead.  There  are  various  options  available  to  individuals  and  families, 
businesses, and policy-makers to ensure that we continue to improve our standard of living. 
Whatever  we  decide,  our  reality  will  change.  That  is  why  we,  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  will 
continue to pay close attention to how this situation evolves. 
Thank you very much. 
                                                 
10   Mark  Carney,  “Living  with  Low  for  Long”  (speech  to  the  Economic  Club  of  Canada,  Toronto,  Ontario,13 
December 2010) and Alexander Ueberfeldt, “Canada’s retirement system: Prepared for an aging population?” 
Bank of Canada, 2009. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
