Thomas Jordan: 2012 – Swiss monetary policy in uncertain times 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Acting Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  Swiss-American  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Geneva,  7  February 
2012. 
 The speaker would like to thank Claudia Strub and Till Ebner for their valuable support in preparing this speech. 
He would also like to thank Enzo Rossi and Peter Kuster for their helpful comments. 
Introduction 
Since last summer, Switzerland has been suffering the effects of the negative developments 
in  the  global  economy,  and  particularly  the  escalating  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  The 
uncertainty over the debt crisis led to a massive appreciation of the Swiss franc during the 
summer months. In their search for safe financial assets, investors drove the Swiss franc to 
an all-time high against the euro in early August, which posed an acute threat to the Swiss 
economy and carried the risk of deflationary developments. In response, the Swiss National 
Bank (SNB) set a minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro in early September of last 
year,  which  corrected  the  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc  to  some  extent.  Thanks  to  this 
decision,  investment  planning  for  export-oriented  companies  has  been  facilitated,  and  the 
risk of both deflation and severe structural damage to the Swiss economy has been reduced. 
Without this policy measure, the extreme overvaluation of the Swiss franc and its volatility 
would probably have persisted. 
However, the situation remains challenging for large sections of the economy – even at the 
current exchange rate, the Swiss franc is still very strong. We expect it to weaken over time, 
and  fall  back  to  a  level  more  in  line  with  its  economic  fundamentals.  As  the  data  show, 
economic activity in Switzerland slowed significantly in  Q3  2011. Exports, in particular, fell 
noticeably.  In  addition  to  the  strong  Swiss  franc,  the  general  global  economic  outlook  has 
deteriorated  and  downside  risks  prevail.  Given  this  difficult  environment,  we  remain  firmly 
committed to defending the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. This commitment 
applies  at  any  time,  from  the  moment  the  market  opens  in  Sydney  on  Monday  to  when  it 
closes in New York on Friday. We will not tolerate any trading below the minimum rate in the 
relevant interbank market. To enforce this policy, we are prepared to buy foreign currency in 
unlimited quantities if necessary. Moreover, we stand ready to take further measures if the 
economic outlook and the risk of deflation so require.  
To  explain  the  rationale  behind  the  SNB’s  current  monetary  policy  in  more  detail,  let  me 
briefly outline our assessment of the global economic situation, as well as the risks for the 
Swiss economy. 
Subdued global economic outlook and substantial downside risks 
In our global baseline scenario, the outlook remains – overall – subdued. Economic growth 
will continue to be driven by emerging markets. However, we expect growth rates in China 
and India – the most important countries in emerging Asia in economic terms – to remain 
below potential in the near term, due to prior monetary policy tightening, high inflation, and 
sluggish  external  demand.  Looking  at  the  US,  recent  data  suggest  that  the  situation  has 
improved slightly. However, this should not hide the fact that economic growth in the US is 
likely  to  remain  sluggish.  As  you  may  know,  unemployment  is  still  high  and  the  fiscal 
environment  remains  contractionary.  For  the  euro  area  –  Switzerland’s  most  important 
trading partner by far – the economic outlook has deteriorated since last autumn. Uncertainty 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
about an escalation of the sovereign debt crisis is undiminished. As a result, the euro area is 
likely to face a mild recession in early 2012.  
This  short  overview  shows  quite  plainly:  we  still  live  in  a  world  with  substantial  downside 
risks. Thus, the global economic situation might turn out to be worse than described above. 
One possible risk is a more pronounced slowdown in emerging market growth. This would 
reinforce the downturn in European countries. Another risk is that fiscal consolidation in the 
US may exert a greater drag on growth than projected today. But the main risk is – without 
doubt – a further escalation of the European debt crisis. Were such a risk to materialize, the 
consequences  for  the  international  financial  and  banking  system  –  and  in  turn  for  global 
activity – would be severe.  
Swiss economic outlook 
What does the economic outlook for Switzerland look like, given a baseline scenario with a 
world economy on a weak growth path as described above?  
After two years of fairly robust recovery, we expect the Swiss economy to slow considerably 
in 2012. The situation remains very challenging for Switzerland. On the one hand, the still 
very  strong  Swiss  franc  is  weighing  on  export  performance.  Firms  are  suffering  from 
compressed  margins.  If  the  difficult  exchange  rate  situation  persists,  companies  may 
consider relocating production capacity to other regions. On the other hand, the slowdown in 
external demand, as expected in our global baseline scenario, will likely weigh on investment 
spending  and  labor  demand  in  the  quarters  to  come.  Although  some  recently  released 
indicators point to a slight stabilization, we project the Swiss economy to grow only weakly 
over the next few quarters.  
Moreover,  as  mentioned  before,  there  is  a  very  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  the 
global  outlook.  This  is  also  true  for  the  Swiss  economy,  which  depends  particularly  on 
economic conditions in the euro area. If the risk scenario of a further escalation of the debt 
crisis  were  to  materialize,  economic  activity  in  Switzerland  would  suffer  a  much  more 
pronounced slowdown than just described. Such a development would lead to a severe risk 
of deflation.  
Current Swiss monetary policy 
Given this highly uncertain outlook, the SNB is – more than ever – committed to enforcing 
the minimum exchange rate with the utmost determination at any time. We cannot allow the 
Swiss  franc  to  appreciate  further.  Hence,  we  must  continue  with  our  current  policy,  in 
particular as interest rates are already around zero. To enforce this policy, we are prepared 
to  buy  foreign  currency  in  unlimited  quantities,  if  necessary.  Moreover,  we  stand  ready  to 
take further measures if the economic outlook and the risk of deflation so require. By setting 
a minimum exchange rate, we have opted for a simple and clear policy, to which we are fully 
committed.  For  precisely  these  reasons,  this  policy  has  been  absolutely  credible  to  the 
markets.  
Before concluding, let me elaborate on two potential side effects which are often discussed in 
the context of our current monetary policy.  
On the one hand, it is argued that the significant increase in liquidity since August 2011 may 
trigger  inflation  risks  in  the  longer  term.  Given  the  current  economic  situation,  however, 
expanding  the  supply  of  liquidity  was  a  necessary  monetary  policy  response.  There  is 
currently absolutely no risk of inflation in Switzerland. First, headline inflation turned negative 
in October 2011 and continued to decline through the end of the year. It is assumed to fall 
even  further  in  early  2012.  Second,  neither  our  inflation  forecasts  nor  the  medium-term 
inflation  expectations  from  our  surveys  of  households  and  companies  show  any  signs  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation  risks.  Consequently,  there  is  no  necessity  whatsoever  for  the  SNB  to  reduce  the 
level of liquidity for the time being. 
On the other hand, a long period of very low interest rates may lead to imbalances in the 
domestic credit and real estate markets, which may pose serious risks for financial stability. 
We are well aware of these risks and are analyzing them very carefully. However, due to the 
exceptional monetary policy situation, interest rates cannot readily be increased to address 
such threats. In other words, at the current juncture, monetary policy cannot react to these 
imbalances  with  conventional  monetary  policy 
the  Swiss 
Government  is  due  to  decide  soon  upon  the  introduction  of  so-called  macroprudential 
instruments that can be used – if necessary – to mitigate potential credit and housing market 
distortions.  
instruments.  Therefore, 
Conclusion 
The  outlook  for  the  global  economy  remains  subdued.  This,  together  with  the  persistently 
strong  Swiss  franc,  is  weighing  on  economic  activity  in  Switzerland.  Although  some 
indicators have pointed to a slight stabilization recently, we project that the Swiss economy 
will  grow  only  weakly  over  the  next  few  quarters.  The  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  the 
growth  outlook  remains  unusually  high,  also  by  historical  standards.  Downside  risks  –  in 
particular stemming from a further escalation of the European debt crisis – are substantial. If 
these  were  to  materialize,  economic  activity  in  Switzerland  would  suffer  a  much  more 
pronounced slowdown than just described.  
Despite this rather gloomy overall picture, we should not overlook the potential for a more 
optimistic development. For instance, if the European authorities were to credibly commit to a 
sustainable  solution  soon,  existing  uncertainties  would  be  reduced  substantially.  In  such  a 
scenario, demand for perceived safe financial assets would fall in general, and for the Swiss 
franc in particular.  
However, as downside risks are currently far more likely to materialize, the SNB will enforce 
the  minimum  exchange  rate  with  the  utmost  determination.  Under  these  exceptional 
circumstances, it is a necessary measure to fulfill our mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
