Sebastián Claro: Chinese challenges facing Chile and Latin America 
Speech  by  Mr  Sebastián  Claro,  Board  Member  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the  2012 
Latin  American  Cities  Conferences  “Chile  on  the  path  to  development”,  organized  by  the 
Americas Society/Council of the Americas, Santiago, 30 August 2012. 
 I would like to thank Consuelo Edwards and Yan Carrière-Swallow for their help in translating this speech from 
the original Spanish. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  event  that  for  several  years  now  has  been  gradually 
positioning itself – both in Chile and in the rest of Latin America – as a seminar dealing with 
key issues for the region’s economic development. On this occasion, and at the organizers’ 
suggestion, I would like to share with you some thoughts on the economic development of 
China and its implications for Latin America. Rather than focusing on aspects of the Chinese 
economy – which I will come back to at the end of the presentation –, I would like to focus on 
those dimensions in which China’s spectacular growth affects the region directly. 
Let me begin by recalling a widespread debate in the region in the early 2000s. While Europe 
was  boastfully  launching  its  new  single  currency,  Latin  America  was  struggling  to  leave 
behind the havoc of successive crises that had hit the region, starting with Mexico in 1994. 
The meager growth of the late 1990s and early 2000s, plus the accumulation of large current 
account deficits during the 1990s, caused the region to begin the new century with relatively 
high levels of debt-to-GDP. 
For  example,  at  the  end  of  2002  Brazil’s  government  debt  reached  80%  of  GDP  while  its 
external debt was close to 55% of GDP. In every other country in Latin America – with the 
exception of Chile –, the debt of the general government exceeded 40% of GDP. Moreover, 
large  current  account  deficits  persisted  throughout  the  region.  Take  the  year  2002,  when 
Mexico and Peru – as well as Bolivia and Costa Rica – had accumulated 5 years of current 
account deficits of over 2% of GDP.1 
Doubts  about  the  sustainability  of  national  debts  across  the  region  fueled  an  academic 
debate as to identifying the highest level of debt that could be tolerated. In a 2003 paper by 
Carmen  Reinhart,  Miguel  Savastano  and  Kenneth  Rogoff  –  which  has  been  part  of  a 
successful research program on the history of debt crises –, the authors examined the history 
of defaults around the world, and concluded that relatively low  levels of debt-to-GDP  were 
enough  to  trigger  credit  restructuring  events.2  In  particular,  the  paper  found  that  several 
countries in the region had debt levels above the limits of what could be deemed “tolerable”. 
The authors  also  provided  evidence  of  how  countries  –  in  Latin  America  and  elsewhere  – 
have historically used deleveraging to regain a sustainable path for their external debt. Their 
conclusion is clear: “For debt-intolerant countries, sustaining access to capital markets can 
be problematic unless debt ratios are quickly brought down to safer levels. To assess how 
such ‘deleveraging’ might be accomplished, we examine how, historically, emerging market 
economies  with  substantial  external  debts  have  managed  to  work  them  down.  To  our 
knowledge, this is a phenomenon that has previously received very little, if any, attention. We 
analyze  episodes  of  large  debt  reversals,  where  countries’  external  debt fell  by more  than 
25 percentage points of GNP over a three-year period. Of the twenty-two such reversals that 
we  identify  for  a  broad  group  of  middle-income  countries  since  1970,  two-thirds  involved 
some form of default or restructuring. Only in one case – Swaziland in 1985 – was a country 
                                                
1   Sources: World Bank, Moody’s and IMF (WEO, April 2012). 
2   Reinhart,  C.,  M. Savastano  and  K.  Rogoff,  (2003),  “Debt  Intolerance”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
able  to  bring  down  a  high  ratio  of  external  debt  to  GNP  solely as  a  result  of  rapid  output 
growth.” Thus, in the early 2000s, there were widespread expectations that a default would 
occur. 
Overall,  the  history of  Latin  America  in  the  2000s  did  not  go  as  expected.  During  the first 
decade  of  the  twenty-first  century,  Latin  American  countries  succeeded  in  lowering  their 
levels of external debt by nearly 20 percent of GDP. The current-account balance, which had 
exhibited a secular deficit during the 1980s and 1990s, posted a surplus of nearly 2% of GDP 
during the 2000s. A review of the fiscal ledgers yields similar numbers. 
What happened? What was the miracle? In a word: China. China’s strong growth began to 
permeate  international  commodity  markets  early  in  the  decade,  leading  to  an  enormous 
increase in the region’s terms of trade beginning around 2004. This major increase in income 
enabled  the  economies  to  deleverage  without  having  to  make  large  adjustments  to 
expenditure or output. Also, the real exchange rate appreciated by almost 20% with respect 
to trading partners during the 2000s, which contrasts with the greater stability of the 1990s. 
Of  course,  better  macroeconomic  policies  contributed  markedly  to  this  success.  Whereas 
previous  income  booms  had  been  accompanied  by  strongly pro-cyclical  economic  policies 
that  incubated  problems,  this  time  greater  efforts  at  fiscal  saving,  more  exchange  rate 
flexibility  and  better  banking  supervision  helped  the  countries  take  advantage  of  the  high 
commodity prices. But for a large part of the region, the seed of the success  of the 2000s 
was sown by China. 
Today our objective is to look ahead, not to dwell on thoughts about the region during the 
past decade. The strength of the Chinese economy leads one to think that this phenomenon 
of high terms of trade will go on for some time, posing a number of challenges to economic 
development in the region. 
At  the  risk  of  oversimplifying  these  challenges,  let  me  group  them  into  three  categories: 
(i) challenges  to  macroeconomic  management,  (ii) structural  challenges,  and  (iii) cyclical 
challenges.  The  first  two  depend  essentially on  us,  while  the  third  refers  to  the  short-term 
trajectory of the Chinese economy and its possible impact on developing countries. 
Macroeconomic challenges 
A  first  issue  worth  noting  is  that  commodity  prices  have  experienced  successive  cycles 
throughout history, and there is a permanent risk of mistaking a temporary phenomenon for a 
permanent  one.  This  time  is  no  different.  There  is  a  valid  argument  that  the  Chinese 
economy can sustain its recent dynamism for many years to come. While there are reasons 
to believe that the Chinese economy should converge to growth rates around 7% within the 
next few years, and that 9% growth rates are very difficult to sustain, this does not imply a 
substantial  deterioration  in  Chinese  demand  for  commodities.3  In  the  case  of  Chile,  the 
experts  surveyed  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  have  raised  their  estimates  for  the  long-term 
copper  price  on  repeated  occasions  on  the  grounds  of  both  supply-  and  demand-side 
considerations.4 
However, economic cycles do exist and the response of supply – which has not been fully 
perceived  so  far  –  will  tend  to  drive  prices  to  their  trend  values,  which  are  below  current 
levels. Clarity on this point is not only fundamental to determine a fiscal policy consistent with 
medium-term  income,  but  also  to  guide  private  spending  and  investment  decisions  on  the 
basis  of  sustainable  future  earnings.  For  macroeconomic  policies,  there  is  an  important 
 3   Claro, Sebastián. Presented at the V Chile-China Entrepreneurial Meeting, Centro Cultural de Carabineros, 
Santiago, 10 June 2011. For transcript, see Central Bank of Chile website: www.bcentral.cl. 
4   See Ministry of Finance of Chile website: www.hacienda.gov.cl. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
challenge  in  facing  a  period  of  temporarily high  terms  of  trade,  and  the  improved  external 
financing  conditions  that  become  available  as  a  result.  The  experience  of  many  countries 
shows that the best policy mix is sound fiscal discipline, prudent financial regulation, and a 
monetary policy framework that combines price stability and flexible exchange rates. 
A  sound  fiscal  policy  not  only  smoothes  the  business  cycle  and  helps  minimize  foreign 
exchange fluctuations, but also avoids commitments to spending on outlays that depend on 
uncertain future income. Fiscal policy in Chile has been moving in that direction for decades, 
the importance  of which  cannot  be overemphasized.  Sound  banking supervision  is  key for 
several  reasons,  among  others  because  the  intermediation  of  large  capital  inflows  –  in  a 
context  of  upward  pressures  on  asset  prices  –  may  lead  to  excessive  risk  taking.  The 
reversal of these conditions has hit particularly hard in previous financial crises, where risk- 
taking by financial institutions prompted aggressive deleveraging, with strong implications for 
credit  and  output.  For  this  reason,  in  circumstances  like  these  it  is  extremely  important  to 
closely monitor the prices of key assets and risk-taking patterns in the financial system. 
Finally,  regarding  monetary  policy  two  issues  are  worth  noting.  On  one  hand,  a  monetary 
policy  that  favors  sound  domestic  price  stability  is  consistent  with  macro  stability  in  the 
medium term. This  is  a  much  sought-after  objective  in  many economies  of  the  region  and 
must be protected. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  policy  is  the  best  framework  for  dealing  the 
situation we face. The reasons are twofold: first, in a context of high commodity prices and 
good external financing conditions, a floating exchange rate helps prevent the incubation of 
macroeconomic  imbalances,5  as  Chile  can  attest  from  past  experience.  There  are  many 
examples of countries facing favorable external conditions, in which foreign exchange rigidity 
resulted not only in higher inflation but also in large current account deficits, causing major 
imbalances in the external accounts. 
Second, foreign exchange adjustments allow the economy to adjust to fluctuations in external 
conditions, such as those that have been so prevalent in the past several years. Volatility of 
the terms of trade and external credit conditions generates a constant need to adjust relative 
prices,  which  is  more  easily  accomplished  through  flexible  exchange  rates.6  Current 
developments in Europe are providing further evidence for this view. 
The  benefits  of  flexible  exchange  rates  are  accompanied  by  costs,  primarily  due  to  the 
possibility  of  an  increase  in  exchange  rate  volatility.  This  introduces  further  difficulties  for 
making business and investment decisions. The trade-off has been present in the academic 
and  economic  policy  debate  for  many  decades  and,  although  opinions  differ  in  terms  of 
acknowledging  the  difficulties  caused  by  exchange  rate  volatility,  the  benefits  of  a  floating 
exchange rate to safeguard macroeconomic stability are perceived to trump these difficulties. 
For one thing, over the past decade the credible Chilean policy of flexible exchange rates has 
brought about a nearly total elimination of currency mismatches in the corporate sector that 
had hindered monetary policy making for so many years. 
Structural challenges 
In a context of good commodity prices and favorable access to  credit, the phenomenon of 
real  exchange  rate  appreciation  poses  structural  challenges  to  economies  in  the  region.  I 
would  like  to focus  on three  issues that  have  been  widely discussed  in  business,  political, 
and academic circles. 
                                                
5   Dornbusch,  R.,  (1983),  “Real  Interest  Rates,  Home  Goods,  and  Optimal  External  Borrowing”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy 91(1). 
6   Calvo,  G.,  A.  Izquierdo  and  E.  Talvi,  (2003),  “Sudden  Stops,  the  Real  Exchange  Rate  and  Fiscal 
Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” NBER Working Paper 9828. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
First, it is worth emphasizing that part of the appreciation of the real exchange rate reflects 
the  proceeds  from  the  higher  prices  of  our  main  exports.  The  resulting  increases  in 
expenditure  and  investment  push  up  the  price  of  services  and  wages,  which  is  the 
counterpart of exchange rate appreciation. 
The  impulse  to  demand  from  these  conditions  does  not  depend  essentially  on  monetary 
policy, which can primarily affect the trade-off between fluctuations in the nominal exchange 
rate  and  domestic inflation.  Although monetary policy does  have  a toolkit  to  smooth  short-
term  exchange  rate  fluctuations  without  jeopardizing  price  stability  –  which  under  some 
circumstances could justify intervening the foreign exchange market –, the underlying trends 
of the real exchange rate cannot be dealt with using monetary policy. 
The second  issue  has  to  do  with  recognizing  that  this  phenomenon  has  an  impact  on  the 
competitiveness of certain export-oriented industries whose prices do not increase in dollars 
and  whose  domestic  costs  rise  due  to  pressure  on  wages.  Here  we  need  to  distinguish  a 
couple of elements. 
For one thing, essentially the same phenomenon that is holding the copper price above its 
long-term level is causing high prices of other commodities, such as foodstuffs. This is why 
Chinese  growth  offers  such  enormous  opportunities  to  countries  with  agricultural  and 
agribusiness potential, such as Chile. 
In  turn,  Chile’s  capacity  to  diversify  its  exports  and  avoid  specializing  in  a  handful  of  raw 
materials requires a substantial effort to promote competitiveness, which is the most critical 
tool to foster growth and diversification. Support for and training of human capital, increased 
market competition and flexible labor markets all stand out as important measures to improve 
competitiveness. 
All  these  dimensions  point  to  the  fundamental  source  of  productivity  gains,  which  is  the 
creation and development of new enterprises. International experience shows that countries’ 
export growth is driven mainly by new firms – in existing product categories and to existing 
destinations – with a stronger capacity for growth than existing exporters. 7 As some authors 
have pointed out, taking advantage of this growth potential requires fostering factor mobility 
across  firms  of  different  productivity  levels.  This  process  generates  a  major  portion  of  the 
gains from economic openness, such that policies that hinder workers crossing over to other 
firms  or  that  raise  the  cost  of  adjusting  the  scale  of  production  weaken  capacity  for 
innovation.8 
Finally,  and  in  the same token,  it  is clear that the opportunities that  China’s  strong growth 
generates for the region must be well used. For this to take place, not only will greater saving 
be required, but also more productive investment. In other words, one significant challenge 
facing the  economies of the region – and  Chile  in particular – is to take advantage of this 
momentary  boom  in  the  terms  of  trade  by  promoting  saving  and  investment,  thus  making 
sure that it does not simply translate into an unsustainable spending spree. 
To that end, fiscal policy plays a key role by setting up well evaluated investment programs, 
while maintaining the incentives that promote the accumulation of scarce physical and human 
capital among private agents. Policies that distort these incentives inevitable end up lowering 
the rate of saving and investment. 
                                                
7   See  Eaton,  J.,  M.  Eslava,  M.  Kugler  and  J.  Tybout  (2008),  “The  Margins  of  Entry  into  Export  Markets: 
Evidence  from  Colombia,”  in  E.  Helpman,  D.  Marin,  and  T.  Verdier,  eds.,  The  Organization  of  Firms  in  a 
Global Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; and Blum, B., S. Claro and I. Horstmann (2012), 
“New Exporter Dynamics and Capital Adjustment Costs,” Mimeo, University of Toronto, Central Bank of Chile 
and Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. 
8   Melitz,  M.,  and  D.  Trefler  (2012),  “Gains  From  Trade  When  Firms  Matter”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 26(2). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Challenges facing China 
I would like to end by referring to China’s challenges in the short run, and the impact that 
current developments may have on the economies of the region. Already in the mid-2000s 
the Chinese economy was in a transition to becoming less dependent on the external sector 
and  investment  demand,  and  thus  trying  to  promote  domestic  consumption.  There  were 
obvious  signs  of  investment  exhaustion  in  some  sectors,  together  with  doubts  about  the 
capacity to sustain such high rates of export growth. 
The  reforms  adopted  in  the  middle  of  the  past  decade  to  enhance  the  operation  of  the 
financial system and thus attain a more efficient allocation of credit – to offset the natural fall 
in the savings rate – came to a halt during the crisis of 2008–2009 due to the great boost in 
government expenditure and public credit. 
This  boost,  which  allowed  the  Chinese  economy to  deal  quite  successfully  with  the  global 
financial crisis, brought about significant indebtedness of local governments, high exposure 
of the financial system to projects of dubious quality, and substantial over-investment. 
The  need  to  put  a  stop  to  this  impulse  in  order  to  safeguard  macroeconomic  stability has 
defined  China’s  economic  policy  decisions  since  2010.  Accordingly,  the  contractions  in 
investment  projects  and  credit  availability  have  been  the  main  stabilization  tools  used  in 
China. 
However, this process coincided with the aggravation of problems in Europe, which resulted 
in a very sharp reduction of external demand for the Chinese economy, among other things. 
The fall in exports, together with the need to withdraw the stimulus that had been given to 
investment  over  the  past  few  years,  has  put  significant  pressure  on  China’s  growth.  Its 
capacity to offset the drop in demand with increased domestic consumption is limited in the 
short run, especially since the necessary conditions to promote lower savings rates, such as 
changes  to  social  security  and  health-care  plans,  a  deepening  of  the  household  credit 
market, and changes in relative prices – such as a real exchange rate appreciation –, are 
often slow to implement. 
Until  now  the  Chinese  economy has  continued  to  decelerate,  and  somewhat  more  rapidly 
than was foreseen  a few  quarters ago.  In my view,  China has the necessary tools to deal 
with this deceleration, and to deal with a possible worsening of problems in Europe. But at 
the  same  time,  the  programs  implemented  in  2008–2009  have  lost  their  efficacy,  and  the 
authorities are taking a more cautionary stance. 
Today, China needs to rearrange its economy, and although events in Europe have caught 
China flatfooted with respect to its economic reforms, part of the adjustment to slower short-
term  growth  is  necessary  and  partly  inevitable.  A  significant  impulse  to  public  expenditure 
and  investment  will  only  be  observed  if  there  is  a  significant  deterioration  of  external 
conditions. 
Overall,  the  Chinese  economy  faces  important  challenges  in  the  short  run.  These  could 
introduce  fluctuations  in  commodity  prices  that  threaten  to  expose  the  weaknesses  of 
countries  in  the  region  whose  recent  growth  has  come  almost  exclusively  from  increased 
expenditure  financed  by  the  Chinese  boom.  In  particular,  it  is  especially  important  at  this 
point that the region work hard to maintain the health of its fiscal and external accounts. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
