Masaaki Shirakawa: Society, economy and the central bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Foreign  Policy 
Association, New York, 18 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
Even  as  the  world  is  practically  getting  smaller,  with  the  remarkable  advances  in 
transportation  and  communications  technologies,  and  with  all  the  resulting  increases  in 
interaction among peoples and economies, foreign policy is, unfortunately, something that is 
all  too  often  put  on  the  back  burner  by  people  busy  with  their  daily  lives.  This  is  why  the 
activities of the Foreign Policy Association are so invaluable. Since its foundation in 1918, for 
nearly  a  century,  the  Association  has  served  as  a  catalyst  for  developing  awareness, 
understanding of, and providing informed opinions on global issues. I am honored, therefore, 
this evening, to receive the FPA Medal, whose past recipients include many people I respect 
very much. 
Today, I will offer my views on the recent Global Financial Crisis, which, from the viewpoint of 
central  banks,  was  the  most  important  international  development  of  the  past  few years.  In 
doing so, I will not comment on the Crisis itself, on which a lot of ink has been spilt already, 
but on the issues that the Crisis has raised concerning the role of central banks in relation to 
the well-being of the society at large. As the Crisis is bound to leave indelible marks on the 
global economy, it would probably affect how central banks would conduct their business in 
the future. 
In  this  Crisis,  as  I  will  later  explain,  central  banks  have  succeeded  in  deflecting  the 
destructive forces in the acute phase, by injecting unprecedented amounts of liquidity into the 
financial system and by rolling out massive monetary easing. Now, the Crisis has moved into 
the chronic phase, characterized by low growth and persistent unemployment. In this regard, 
many more challenges certainly lie ahead, before we can even take back the lost ground and 
make further advances from there. 
One reminder that prosperity is quite fragile can be found in The Economic Consequences of 
the Peace, by John Maynard Keynes.1 I believe it is rather fitting to quote his writing today, 
considering  that  FPA  was  founded  to  promote  the  “Just  Peace,”  advocated  by  President 
Wilson,  who  led  the  U.S.  delegation  to  Versailles,  and  that  the  collective  failure  of  the 
international community to achieve that goal at Versailles prompted Lord Keynes to write the 
book. Lord Keynes describes the world before the First World War as “economic Eldorado” 
or “economic Utopia,” where a middle-class Londoner could easily “order by telephone...the 
various product of the whole earth,” “adventure his wealth...in any quarter of the world,” and 
“secure...cheap and comfortable means of transit to any country.” Furthermore, this state of 
affairs  was  regarded  “as  normal,  certain  and  permanent,  except  in  the  direction  of  further 
improvement.”  Whenever  I  read  this  passage,  I  am  always  struck  by  the  power  of 
globalization  in  bringing  about  economic  prosperity,  the  ephemeral  quality  of  such 
achievement in the light of the two World Wars, and the parallel with our experiences leading 
to the Great Financial Crisis. 
                                                 
1   Keynes, John Maynard, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, 1919. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The changing economy and central banking 
I. 
In  our  current  discourse  on  economic  policy,  or  more  broadly  the  whole  economy,  no  one 
would  doubt  the  critical  stabilizing  role  played  by  central  banks.  Nevertheless,  economic 
history after the Second World War reveals that such a view is quite a recent product. The 
enhanced role of central banks came into being on the back of three important changes. 
Firstly,  there  is  now  a  clear  division  of  labor  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  To  our 
eyes,  such  an  arrangement  seems  too  obvious,  but  during  the  War,  in  many  countries 
including  the  United  States  and  Japan,  monetary  policy  was  subordinated  to  fiscal  policy. 
Central banks were doing all they could to finance the war effort, and there was no room for 
independent monetary policy. In fact, monetary policy continued to be constrained for some 
time after the War. For example, in the United States, the Fed was freed, in 1951, from the 
obligation to maintain long-term interest rates below a level set by the Treasury, after arriving 
at the so-called “Accord” between the Treasury and the Fed.2 
Secondly,  there  is  no  longer  any  doubt  about  the  role  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  widely 
accepted  that  monetary  policy  should  be  an  important  stabilizing  force  for  the  macro-
economy.  During  the  1960s  and  as  late  as  the  first  half  of  1970s,  an  influential  school  of 
thought, now more or less discredited, held that a slightly higher inflation was a necessary 
evil  for  achieving  stronger  growth  and  fuller  employment.  As  monetary  conditions  were 
relaxed  and  tightened  discretionarily  with  such  a  bias  over  a  number  of  business  cycles, 
inflation,  both  actual  and  expected,  began  to  creep  up  quite  noticeably.  It  became  evident 
that higher inflation was not contributing to higher growth or employment. Furthermore, the 
distortions  in  the  savings  and  investment  decisions  of  economic  agents  and  in  resource 
allocation resulting from higher inflation became a drag on growth. This was how stagflation 
of  the  late  1970s  came  into  being.  This  unpleasant  experience  taught  us  that  economic 
growth could only be sustained with price stability, and price stability should be the goal of 
monetary policy. 
Finally, against the backdrop of the first two changes, central banks are nowadays granted 
formal  independence.  If  central  banks  are  to  pursue  price  stability,  they  should  be  able  to 
conduct  monetary  policy  from  a  medium  to  long-term  perspective,  away  from  short-term 
concerns.  This  is  legally  secured  by  recognizing  the  independence  of  central  banks  in 
national  laws.  Looking  back,  there  were  not  many  central  banks  that  had  statutory 
independence in the 1980s. The situation changed markedly during the 1990s, when many 
countries, including Japan, revised their central bank laws. The new laws clearly stipulated 
the independence of the central banks in conducting monetary policy. 
These changes were the basis of the new institutional framework for the conduct of monetary 
policy, which emerged from the second half of 1980s and into 1990s. At the core of the new 
framework was the linkage between independence and the mandate to ensure price stability. 
In other words, central banks are held strongly accountable for achieving price stability, in 
return for being granted independence. The increasing adoption of inflation targeting from the 
second  half  of  1980s  and  into  1990s  symbolizes  this  development.  In  the  context  of  this 
transformation,  there  was  also  a  slight  shift  in  the  traditional  mandate  granted  to  central 
banks regarding the regulation and supervision of financial institutions. Under the view that 
price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  two  distinct  objectives,  and  in  order  to  avoid 
concentrating too much power in one institution, at some central banks, for example at the 
Bank  of  England,  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions  were  carved  out  and  transferred  to 
another organization, thereby letting central banks to focus solely on monetary policy. 
                                                 
2   Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  “Lecture  2:  The  Federal  Reserve  after  World  War  II,”  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
Financial Crisis, Chairman Bernanke’s College Lecture Series, March 22, 2012, http://www.federalreserve.gov 
/newsevents/lectures/about.htm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  this  new  framework  of  monetary  policy  was  being  accepted  over  the  1990s,  many 
developed  economies  experienced  a  prolonged  period  of  both  relatively  high  growth  and 
stable prices. The age of Great Moderation had come. The phrase, which seemed to have 
appeared  shortly  after  the  turn  of  the  century,  quickly  gained  popularity,  capturing  the 
optimistic  mood  of  the  times,  and  central  banks  were  praised  for  their  substantial  role  in 
bringing about prosperity. In a sense, the 1990s and 2000s, up until the Crisis, were, in fact, 
the heyday of central banking. 
One  exception,  however,  was  Japan,  which  experienced  a  prolonged  period  of  sub-par 
growth  and  modest  but  persistent  deflation.  Actually,  Japan  was  experiencing  profound 
changes  in  the  economy  ahead  of  other  developed  economies.  While  Japan  had  suffered 
severe  stagflation  at  the  time  of  the  first  Oil  Crisis  of  the  1970s,  its  subsequent  economic 
performance was superior compared with other developed economies, reflecting the restraint 
in wage increases and appropriate monetary policy. The bubble years of the second half of 
1980s were, in this vein, the culmination of all that was good about the Japanese economy. 
The bubble burst in the 1990s, and Japan has since been suffering from its lingering effects. 
It is quite remarkable that economies in North America and Europe are now experiencing the 
same changes that Japan has experienced from the 1990s onwards. Since 2006, the United 
States  has  experienced  a  drawn-out  period  of  declining  house  prices.  This  was  only  the 
beginning.  Financial  strains  quickly  spread  around  the  world  engulfing  many  venerable 
names both in the United States and Europe, and leading to, but not ending with the demise 
of Lehman Brothers. As governments and central banks intervened aggressively, the global 
financial  system  and  the  economy  subsequently  gained  a  respite,  but  it  was  short-lived. 
Beginning  from  the  spring  of  2010,  cascading  problems  within  the  euro  area  weighed  on 
global  economic  activity  and  heightened  uncertainties.  Consequently,  output  in  the 
developed economies is only 4 percent above the pre-crisis peak, and average growth since 
2007 is a paltry 0.8 percent. 
What  went  wrong?  What  can  central  banks  do  to  prevent  the  development  of  another 
disruptive bubble? Policy makers are certainly in the midst of soul-searching, regarding the 
conduct of monetary policy and the regulation and supervision of financial institutions in the 
years leading to and during the crisis. Today, I will just stress one point, considering that I 
have already explained my thinking on another occasion.3 The key issue is that price stability 
and financial stability are intricately intertwined. In an environment of price stability, economic 
agents may come to expect ever more strongly that a prolonged period of low interest rates 
would  be  sustained.  This  could  exacerbate  financial  imbalances,  such  as  increasing  asset 
prices or leverage. Taken too far,  such imbalances would destabilize the financial system, 
which  would  then  lead  to  unacceptably  large  fluctuations  of  real  economic  activity  and 
ultimately prices. In this vein, monetary policy must take account not only of inflation but also 
of financial imbalances, and it must attempt to look beyond the conventionally accepted time 
horizon. At the same time, it has also become clear that it is not appropriate to purge non-
monetary policy functions from central banks, and that central banks must maintain at least 
some regulatory and supervisory functions over financial institutions. 
                                                 
3   For lessons of asset bubbles and financial crisis, see the following. 
  Masaaki Shirakawa, “Revisiting the Philosophy behind Central Bank Policy,” Speech at the Economic Club of 
New York, April 22, 2010, http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2010/ko1004e.htm. 
  Masaaki Shirakawa, “Deleveraging and Growth: Is the Developed World Following Japan’s Long and Winding 
Road?” Lecture at the London School of Economics and Political Science (Co-hosted by the Asia Research 
Centre  and  STICERD,  LSE),  January  10,  2012,  http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/ 
ko120111a.htm. 
  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  “Central  Banking:  Before,  During,  and  After  the  Crisis,”  Remarks  at  A  Conference 
Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the International Journal of Central Banking, March 24, 2012, 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2012/ko120326a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Apart from these somewhat abstract challenges of tomorrow, today,  central banks are still 
confronted  with  numerous  challenges,  resulting  from  the  recent  global  economic  and 
financial turmoil. What can central banks do in this difficult environment? The answers are 
inevitably unique to each central bank, but let me identify some common emerging themes. 
Central banking today 
II. 
Currently, many central banks are implementing measures that were unthinkable only a few 
years  ago.  As  interest  rates  are  cut  to  almost  zero,  there  is  no  longer  any  room  for 
conducting  monetary  policy  in  the  traditional  sense.  Consequently,  central  banks  are  now 
conducting  so-called  unconventional  monetary  policy.  This  fact  is  reflected  in  the  most 
significant increases in the size of central bank balance sheets. The composition of balance 
sheets has also changed considerably. In the case of the Bank of Japan, over the last ten 
years,  it  has  purchased  commercial  paper  (CPs),  corporate  bonds,  equities,  exchange-
traded funds (ETFs), and real estate investment trusts (REITs). Looking at the Fed, it has 
purchased various risk assets, such as mortgage-backed securities. Meanwhile, at the end of 
last year and in February this year, the European Central Bank (ECB) supplied an unlimited 
amount of three-year loans to banks. Furthermore, on interest rate developments, the Bank 
of  Japan  has  made  clear  its  commitment  and  the  Fed  has  announced  its  guidance. 
Unfortunately,  notwithstanding  these  efforts,  growth  in  the  developed  economies  remains 
anemic, as I noted a few minutes ago. 
When conducting monetary policy in such an environment, central banks must be aware of 
three socioeconomic trends. 
Firstly,  in  many  developed  economies,  there  are  heightened  expectations  on  what  central 
banks could deliver.4 In this regard, one of the most symbolic discussions touched upon the 
measures that could be unleashed by the ECB in the context of the euro-area financial crisis. 
As an analogy to the lender of the last resort function to banks, which is an important and 
established function of central banks, some have forcefully argued for increasing the Bank’s 
supply  of  liquidity  through  a  novel  and  untested  function  –  a  lender  of  last  resort  to 
governments. 
There  are  probably  several  reasons  for  the  elevated  expectations.  Probably,  the  most 
important one is the prolonged period of low growth and high unemployment. Another factor 
is  the  increasing  constraints  on  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy,  reflecting  the  dire  straits  of 
government  finances  in  most  developed  economies.  In  fact,  the  outstanding  amount  of 
government  debt  relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy  in  G7  countries  is  fast  approaching 
levels not seen since the end of the Second World War.5 Furthermore, one could also point 
out  that  central  banks  can  act  quickly  –  they  can  put  up  a  huge  wall  of  money  almost 
instantaneously. This could be most relevant given the differences in the speed demanded 
by markets for results and the amount of time that is necessary for the democratic process to 
agree on and implement fiscal and structural policies. 
However one interprets what is happening now, there is a potentially toxic mix of heightened 
expectations regarding central banks on the one hand and what central banks could actually 
deliver on the other. If central banks cannot deliver, public confidence in the institution will be 
eroded. This, to which I will come back later, will impact the efficacy of central bank policies. 
Turning  to  the  second  issue,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  blurring  of  the  line 
between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  As  I  have  just  explained,  unconventional  monetary 
                                                 
4   See  Hannoun,  H.,  “Monetary  Policy  in  the  Crisis:  Testing  the  Limits  of  Monetary  Policy,”  Speech  at  the 
47th SEACEN Governors’ Conference, 13–14 February 2012. 
5   See Haldane, Andrew G., “Risk Off,” August 18, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
policy  of  central  banks  involves  the  purchases  of  substantial  amounts  of  long-term 
government bonds and/or risk assets. The value of these assets, in the long run, may fall, 
and  when  that  happens,  losses  incurred  by  the  central  bank  will  have  to  be  passed  on  to 
taxpayers in the form of reduced profit distribution from the central bank to the government. 
Additionally,  these  purchases  will  inevitably  influence  micro-level  resource  allocation.  In 
these respects, unconventional monetary policy is getting closer to fiscal policy. Considering 
that, in a democracy, the delegation of the power to issue unlimited amounts of legal tender 
to an independent central bank can only be justified by the tacit understanding that it will not 
overstep into the realm of fiscal policy, the adoption of measures bordering on fiscal policy 
could ultimately undermine the legitimacy of central bank independence and public trust in 
the institution. 
The third and final issue is a corollary to the first two issues. Reflecting the fact that central 
banks are introducing heretofore untested measures, public opinion is beginning to diverge 
widely on the desirable course of action by central banks. One example is the policy proposal 
for ECB that I have noted a few minutes ago. In the United States, monetary easing by the 
Fed  is  criticized  by  those  who  fear  the  consequence  of  inflation,  while  there  are  many 
economists who believe additional easing is warranted in view of the slightly falling but still 
stubbornly  high  unemployment.  Also  in  Japan,  there  is  a  heated  discussion  on  monetary 
policy and fiscal consolidation. 
The capacity and limits of central banking 
III. 
Up  till  now,  I  have  explained  the  significant  economic  and  social  changes  evident  in  the 
operating  environment  for  central  banks.  The  role  of  central  banks,  whether  it  should  or 
should not change, needs to be carefully deliberated in the context of these changes. If I may 
jump to the conclusions first, it is dangerous to both over- and underestimate what central 
banks could achieve. Central banks must act correctly. 
What central banks can do 
One thing that central banks can always do is to stamp out inflation. No matter how severe 
inflation  is,  conceptually,  it  can  be  contained  by  monetary  tightening.  In  the  history  of 
mankind, severe inflation has never been defeated without tightening. Nevertheless, it should 
also  be  noted  that  conceptual  possibility  and  practicality  is  not  the  same.  Statutory 
independence  is  not  sufficient.  Timely  and  appropriate  policy  requires  something  more. 
Central banks should not waver in the face of unpopularity and the society at large must be 
ready to acquiesce. 
Another  important  thing  that  central  banks  can  achieve  is  to  prevent  the  meltdown  of  the 
financial  system  through  its  lender  of  the  last  resort  function  to  banks.  This  is  the  most 
important  role  in  view  of  preventing  the  economy  from  falling  into  a  severe  deflation. 
Reflecting on the Japan’s financial crisis of the late 1990s and the recent Financial Crisis, 
missteps in policy could have resulted in a much worse outcome, perhaps akin to the Great 
Depression  of  1930s.  The  most  important  difference  was  that  central  banks  acted  as  the 
lenders  of  the  last  resort.  Shocks  could  be  dampened  through  central  bank  actions  that 
mitigated  the  loss  of  trust  among  private  economic  agents,  which  hindered  the  use  and 
acceptance of privately created money. The central bank could stand between two private 
counterparties and provide its money, which would be unconditionally accepted. The central 
bank is the only institution that could play this important role in a financial crisis. Furthermore, 
in a crisis environment, it also becomes imperative to maintain the efficient and uninterrupted 
functioning  of  the  systems  and  arrangements  through  which  money  and  other  financial 
instruments flow.  The  working  of  what  one  might  call  the  plumbing  of  the  financial  system 
requires constant attention, and central banks have, over the last two decades, made various 
efforts to improve its resilience, for example, promoting real-time gross settlement (RTGS), 
ensuring  delivery  versus  payment  of  securities  (DVP),  and  introducing  simultaneous 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
settlement of foreign exchange claims. Such exercises are not glamorous but central bank 
veterans  are  pleased  to  reflect  on  their  achievements,  which  probably  contributed 
considerably in preventing chaos after the recent collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
What central banks cannot deliver 
While central banks can achieve a lot, we should not have the illusion that there are no limits 
to the power of central banks. Central banks cannot reasonably deliver solutions to structural 
issues. 
Let me take the current problems in the euro area as an example. The situation in the euro 
area, whose troubles became evident around the end of 2009, significantly deteriorated since 
the  summer  of  last  year.  The  fire  sales  in  the  government  bond  markets  of  the  so-called 
periphery countries led to a vicious cycle of worsening fiscal balance, increasing tensions in 
the  domestic  banking  system,  and  dampening  of  real  economic  activity.  With  a  view  to 
arresting  and  hopefully  reversing  this  destructive  momentum,  ECB  has  conducted  two 
operations, once at the end of last year and another at the end of this February, supplying an 
unlimited  amount  of  three-year  funds.  The  subsequent  return  of  relative  calm  to  global 
financial markets demonstrates that central bank liquidity can play an important role. At the 
same time, it must also be impressed that liquidity provision has only bought time. One must 
not  lose  sight  of  the  fundamental  issues,  one  of  which  is  the  current  account  imbalances 
within the euro area. When the euro was introduced in 1999, interest rates for all member 
economies converged on one low level. This led to credit expansion in the periphery, which, 
at  the  same  time,  lost  competitiveness  because  of  increases  in  wages  and  prices.  Now, 
policies must be put in place to address the root causes of the problem. Structural reforms 
must be implemented within the breathing space provided by the provision of central bank 
liquidity. If complacency sets in because of the improvements in market sentiment, we could 
be headed for a worse outcome. Time bought can equally be usefully spent or wasted. 
Structural issues are everywhere in the developed economies. Japan is no exception. The 
Japanese  economy  has  stagnated  and  the  rate  of  growth  is  sub-par  among  the  major 
economies. Given that the ten-year average per capita GDP growth is comparable to other 
developed economies and per worker growth is the highest among its peers, the challenges 
facing Japan is not demography per se, but adapting to the rapidly changing demography, 
which  no  other  country  has  so  far  experienced.  The  low  aggregate  growth  and  the  huge 
fiscal hole are both largely the symptoms of the failure to adapt to the demographic reality. 
The  modest  deflation  is,  in  turn,  largely  attributable  to  the  lower  growth  outlook  impacting 
expected future income and hence current spending. 
Monetary  policy  influences  economic  activity  and  hence  prices  in  two  stages.  Firstly,  the 
central  bank  influences  the  financial  conditions,  and  secondly,  the  resulting  financial 
conditions  influence  the  spending  decisions  of  firms  and  households.  Considering  that  the 
Japanese  financial  conditions  are  probably  the  most  expansionary  among  developed 
economies, the failure of Japan to shake off modest deflation can mostly be explained by its 
deteriorating  growth  potential.  In  this  sense,  if  the  Japanese  economy  is  to  extricate  itself 
from deflation and return to a path of sustainable growth under price stability, it requires both 
policies aimed at enhancing growth potential and supporting monetary stimuli. This is why 
the Bank of Japan is fully committed to continuing powerful monetary easing through various 
measures,  including  maintaining  the  policy  interest  rate  at  practically  zero  and  purchasing 
financial assets, until the current goal of year on year CPI inflation at 1 percent is deemed to 
be achievable. 
Realizing the full potential of central banking 
IV. 
The  ultimate  objective  for  central  banks  is  to  realize  stable  and  sustainable  growth. 
Operationally,  this  is  going  to  be  achieved  through  the  stability  of  prices  and  the  financial 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system. Having said that, it must also be stressed that this goal is not pursued in a vacuum. 
Such growth can only materialize through the intricate interaction among various economic 
agents  –  households,  firms,  financial  institutions  and  the  government  –  each  dynamically 
pursuing their own goals. While the central bank is probably the actor most responsible for 
ensuing price stability in a steadily expanding economy, some conditions must be met before 
the central bank could make the most of its potential. Those conditions have not always been 
appreciated, but our experiences after the recent global financial turmoil have brought them 
back in focus. 
The first condition is ensuring the sustainability of public finances.6 When doubts arise over 
fiscal sustainability, serious efforts are required to regain confidence. If this is unsuccessful, 
the  only  plausibly  available  options  are  either  inflation  or  outright  default.  The  operational 
objectives of the central bank, price stability in the first instance and financial stability in the 
second will be compromised, with dire consequences for economic activity and the welfare of 
the people. In this sense, the sustainability of public finances is an essential condition for the 
central bank to realize its ultimate objective. 
The  second  condition  is  maintaining  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank  among  the  general 
public. Economic agents can be savers or borrowers, exporters or importers, and while some 
may benefit from the actions of the central bank, others may lose out. The pain in the short 
term  could  be  considerable.  As  a  result,  it  is  most  important  that  the  general  public  truly 
believes that the central bank is acting to maximize the medium- to long-term potential of the 
whole economy. To begin with, if the central bank is not credible, it may even end up not 
being able to implement measures that it deems necessary. Furthermore, the effectiveness 
of  the  measures  heavily  depends  on  expectations  formed  against  the  background  of 
credibility. The time-honored reluctance of central banks to enter into quasi-fiscal measures 
is based on the deference of neutrality, i.e., the need to be seen as not meddling with the 
allocation of scarce resources, which is crucial for maintaining independence. In this context, 
the unconventional policies currently implemented by central banks of the major developed 
economies  will  truly  be  tested  when  central  banks  deem  that  the  policies  are  no  longer 
necessary. The appropriateness of the policies will inevitably be judged by how quickly and 
smoothly such policies could be unwound. The tricky issue is that expectations and credibility 
are not necessarily malleable or may not behave predictably. While central banks must be 
bold in times of crisis, they need to be most vigilant at the same time. 
The third condition is upholding the public support for the market economy. While this goes 
beyond  central  bank  policies,  it  is  most  relevant  because  all  the  policies  adopted  by  the 
central bank presuppose the existence of a competitive market economy. Such support can 
easily  be  eroded  when  the  public  at  large  comes  to  believe  that  the  decks  are  stacked 
against  them.  The  increase  in  unemployment  following  the  recent  financial  crisis,  the 
widening  of  the  wage  gap  between  skilled  and  unskilled  workers  due  to  deepening 
globalization,  and  the  antipathy  against  banks  and  bankers  rescued  by  taxpayer  money, 
could all result in the weakening of support for a competitive market economy. In the long 
run, this could pave the way for the adoption of policies that are detrimental to the efficient 
functioning of the economy. One of the lessons learned from the interwar years in the first 
half of the twentieth century was that crisis response begets the next crisis, then epitomized 
by  the  spread  of  protectionism  and  beggar-thy-neighbor  competitive  devaluation.  Policy 
makers, including central bankers must not forget such lessons of history. 
                                                 
6   See Masaaki Shirakawa, “Sustainability of government debt: preconditions for stability in the financial system 
and prices,” Banque de France, Financial Stability Review, No. 16, April 2012, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Concluding remarks 
V. 
In  his  recent  book,  the  influential  author  Robert  Shiller  notes  that  “Central  banks  are  an 
invention that served its purpose at a certain time in history, in a certain kind of environment,” 
and goes on to say that their time may have passed.7 Central banks could not prevent the 
bubble and the following Crisis. Nevertheless, as I have explained today, the role of central 
banks  has evolved  over  the  years and  that  process  is  continuing  or has  even  accelerated 
after the Great Financial Crisis. 
Our economic system, while bringing us unprecedented prosperity, is an inherently unstable 
creature  because  of  its  dynamism.  If  the  peoples  of  the  world  are  to  maintain,  let  alone 
further improve, their current lifestyles, policy makers, including central banks, must not let 
the various currents unleashed by the Crisis threaten the foundations of an affluent society. 
In an ideal world, if we could understand and model why you decided to have latte instead of 
espresso this morning, it could be possible to design an automatic stabilizing mechanism for 
the economy, and central banks would become only a chapter in economic history books. 
Nevertheless,  being  a  complex  system  that  involves  people  and  their  emotions,  managing 
the economy will probably remain an art rather than a science, where human actors, who can 
learn from the past and adapt accordingly, have to play a leading role. Automatic stabilizers 
and  mechanical  rules  would  not  work.  Continuing  this  process  of  learning  and  adapting,  I 
believe, is at the core of the challenges facing central banks at this juncture, and if central 
banks  can  meet  those  challenges,  central  banks  will  still  be  able  to  fully  serve  the  good 
society. 
Thank you very much. 
                                                 
7   See Shiller, Robert J., Finance and the Good Society, Princeton University Press, 2012. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
