William C Dudley: Conducting monetary policy – rules, learning and risk 
management 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the C Peter McColough Series on International Economics, 
Council on Foreign Relations, New York, 24 May 2012. 
 It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. My remarks will focus on 
how I think about monetary policy in today’s challenging economic environment. As part of 
this,  I  will  discuss  how  simple  policy  rules  might  appropriately  be  used  as  a  guide  to 
decisionmaking. I do this not because policy rules play a dominant role in my own thinking, 
but  because  the  use  of  these  tools  is  widespread,  with  many  framing  their  arguments  this 
way. To start with the punch line, although I believe simple policy rules can provide useful 
input  into  the  policymaking  process,  it  would  be  unwise  to  rely  on  them  mechanically.  As 
always,  what  I  have  to  say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
Policy  must  strive  to  promote  the  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and 
price stability given to the Federal Reserve by Congress. I believe that this should be done in 
a transparent and systematic manner because this will help us to achieve our objectives. In 
particular, a well-articulated framework for policy that explains our goals and how we use our 
tools to promote these goals helps market participants, businesses, and workers to anticipate 
how the Federal Reserve will respond under different circumstances and plan accordingly.1  
This helps to anchor private sector expectations in ways that make it easier to achieve the 
dual mandate objectives. In contrast, if we acted in an unpredictable way, policy would be 
ineffective at anchoring expectations and this shortcoming would disrupt the transmission of 
the monetary policy impulse to the real economy. 
Over the years, this logic has led the Federal Reserve to become increasingly transparent 
and systematic in its decisionmaking.2 In January, the Federal Open Market Committee took 
another important step in this direction, endorsing a public statement of longer-run goals and 
monetary  policy  strategy.  This  document  articulated  a  2  percent  inflation  objective  and 
committed the FOMC to a “balanced approach” with respect to promoting the dual mandate 
objectives. 
For  me,  the  key  issue  is  how  to  interpret  these  principles  and  put  them  into  practice.  I 
interpret  the  strategy  document  as  expressing  a  relatively  straightforward  proposition:  The 
Fed  should  seek  the  policy  setting  that  generates  the  best  achievable  path  back  to  full 
employment  and  price  stability  following  shocks  that  push  us  away  from  either  of  our 
objectives. 
I  regard  the  policymaking  process  as  a  systematic  effort  to  investigate  what  policy  setting 
would  deliver  the  best achievable set  of  economic  outcomes,3  taking  into  consideration  all 
available information, including risks not fully summarized in the base case point forecasts. 
Our  approach  is  not  greatly  different  from  those  of  central  banks  that  operate  inflation 
                                                 
1  But,  of  course,  predictability  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  A  policy  could  be  completely  predictable,  but  also 
incompatible with the central bank’s goals. 
2  The policy response to the extreme shock of the financial crisis was predictably vigorous, even if its detail was 
hard to specify in advance, and the knowledge that the Federal Reserve would act “as needed” to promote the 
dual mandate anchored inflation expectations and helped to avoid a deflation outcome. 
In formal terms, this approach would be described as a target-rule or forecast-targeting rule. 
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
inflation  objective  and 
level  of  potential  output  consistent  with 
targeting  regimes,  but  in  our  case  we  explicitly  seek  to  promote  both  aspects  of  our  dual 
mandate.4  
The  basic  question  is  how  the  FOMC  should  implement  monetary  policy  to  best  push  the 
economy back to its dual objectives. Prescriptions from simple policy rules such as Taylor 
Rules,  named  after  Stanford  economist  John  Taylor,  have  a  legitimate  role  to  play  in  this 
evaluation as do more complex simulations such as optimal control rules. In a Taylor Rule, 
the nominal federal funds rate depends on the equilibrium or neutral real short-term rate of 
interest, the deviation of the level of economic activity from estimates of the level of activity 
that would be consistent with long-run price stability, and the deviation of inflation from the 
central bank’s target.5  
The Taylor Rule formulation has a number of characteristics that make it a useful input into 
the  policy-setting  process.  First,  it  very  explicitly  focuses  on  the  two  parameters  –  the 
long-term 
that  
objective  –  that  map  directly  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  dual  mandate  objectives.  Second, 
standard Taylor Rules are self-equilibrating. They respond to economic shocks and forecast 
errors in a way that pushes the economy back toward the central bank’s objectives. Third, 
academic  research shows  that  Taylor-type  rules  typically  perform  quite  well  across  a  wide 
range of economic models. This is important because we want rules that are robust; that is, 
not overly sensitive to model-specific assumptions about how the economy performs or how 
households and businesses alter their expectations and behavior in response to changes in 
monetary policy.  
Fourth,  with  respect  to  the  United  States,  the  most  popular  versions  of  the  Taylor  Rule 
approximate  how  policy  has  evolved  since  the late  1980s –  a  period  in  which  the  Federal 
Reserve  has  been  successful  in  keeping  inflation  in  check  (Figure  1).  This  suggests  that 
policymakers,  faced  with  the  economic  conditions  of  that  period,  weighted  deviations  from 
their goals in a manner similar to the weights used in these versions of the Taylor Rule.  
Despite these attractive features, I do not believe that simple policy rules can take the place 
of  in-depth  analysis  of  economic  conditions,  evaluation  of  alternative  policy  plans,  and 
ultimately  policy  judgment.  While  simple  policy  rules  provide  useful  information  to 
policymakers, their very virtue – simplicity – means they cannot capture all information that is 
relevant  for  policymaking.  For  example,  such  rules  cannot  easily  incorporate  asymmetric 
risks or financial stability issues.  
Moreover,  the  usefulness  of  simple  policy  rules  depends  critically  on  the  stability  of  the 
relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  economic  outcomes.  If  the  relationship  between 
                                                 
4 
In  practice,  so-called  inflation-targeting  central  banks  also  tend  to  take  into  account  employment  and  other 
aspects of the real economy; hence, their approach is often referred to as “flexible inflation targeting.” 
FFR = r* + π + a(π-π*) + b[100(Y-Y*)/Y*] 
FFR = federal funds rate  
r* = neutral real federal funds rate  
5   More formally, a Taylor Rule can be represented as: 
 
  where: 
 
 
  π = rate of inflation 
  π* = target inflation rate  
  Y = output 
  Y* = output at full employment 
a = weight put on inflation gap 
 
 
b = weight put on output gap 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary  policy  and  the  real  economy  were  stable  over  time,  following  a  relatively  simple 
and unchanging policy rule would likely generate acceptable results. However, if the linkage 
between monetary policy and the real economy is more variable, as I believe it is, then an 
approach  that  is  more  pragmatic  and  updates  the  policy  setting  in  a  clear  and  systematic 
manner based upon what the FOMC learns over time will be more effective. 
In particular, a simple policy rule can generate poor macroeconomic outcomes when either 
the structure of the economy or the transmission mechanism of monetary policy changes in a 
significant way (whether the change is temporary or permanent). If private sector economic 
agents  –  workers,  businesses,  investors  –  thought  we  would  implement  a  particular  policy 
rule regardless of changes of these kinds, policy would not be effective at stabilizing private 
sector  expectations  in  ways  that  promote  the  dual  mandate  objectives.  This  is  particularly 
relevant in the unusual environment that we find ourselves in – the aftermath of a housing 
bust and a financial crisis. 
In the current context, there is an additional complication that is extremely important. Simple 
policy  rules  implicitly  assume  that  monetary  policy  is  unconstrained  and  that  the  Fed  can 
always achieve the federal funds rate policy setting the rule proposes – even if it is negative. 
By extension, they also assume that it is as easy to ease policy as it is to tighten policy if 
certain  risks  materialize.  In  practice  this  is  not  the  case.  Because  our  traditional  tool,  the 
federal  funds  rate,  is  already  at  its  effective  zero  lower  bound,  we  may  want  to  react 
differently  to  a  given  economic  outlook  and  set  of  risks  than  we  would  if  policy  were 
unconstrained. We are certainly not completely constrained: we have additional tools such as 
the  balance  sheet  and  forward  policy  guidance  that  we  can  use  to  provide  additional 
monetary policy stimulus. But these tools have costs as well as benefits. Moreover, we can 
only imperfectly translate the impact of these policy instruments into interest rate equivalents 
for the purposes of evaluation using simple rules. 
So for many reasons, I focus my attention primarily on how we are progressing and expect to 
progress relative to our dual mandate objectives. In this context, simple policy rules are an 
input,  but  my  judgment  also  is  informed  by  the  economic  environment  and  what  we  learn 
about the responsiveness of the economy to monetary policy.  
Nevertheless, it is possible to translate my assessments into a language that would be more 
familiar to those who think in terms of a Taylor-type rule.  
Recall that in a Taylor Rule framework, five major parameters can be adjusted: 
 
 
The inflation objective and the estimated output gap.  
Different weights can be placed on deviations of output relative to its potential and 
inflation relative to the Fed’s objective.  
The estimate for the neutral real short-term rate of interest.  
 
Thus, while the Taylor Rule generally is viewed as a fixed formula, its underlying framework 
is  sufficiently  flexible  that  such  a  rule  could  be  modified  to  reflect  certain  types  of  new 
information.  
What values should we use? In the United States, the inflation objective is well specified – a 
2 percent annual rate for the personal consumption expenditures deflator.6 The FOMC has 
formally committed itself to this objective.  
In  contrast,  there  is  disagreement  among  FOMC  participants  about  how  far  the  U.S. 
economy  is  operating  from  potential.  Our  staff  forecast  at  the  New  York  Federal  Reserve 
estimates that the long-term unemployment rate is about 5 percent. The central tendency in 
                                                 
6  Over  the  past  25  years,  CPI  inflation  has  averaged  about  30  basis  points  to  50  basis  points  above  PCE 
inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  most  recent  Summary  of  Economic  Projections  is  a  bit  higher  at  5.2  percent  to 
6.0 percent, but the degree of dispersion is not particularly wide.  
More difficult is the judgment about what weights to put on deviations of output from potential 
versus deviations in expected inflation from the Fed’s inflation target. This will differ among 
policymakers based on their views about the costs of deviations from the dual objectives and 
the  structure  of  the  economy.  This  debate  can  be  summed  up  by  looking  at the  two  most 
well-known versions of the Taylor Rule – the original version put forward by Mr. Taylor, which 
is commonly referred to as Taylor 1993, and a later version updated by other economists that 
Mr. Taylor has discussed but does not endorse, which is referred to as Taylor 1999.7 Taylor 
1999 puts more weight on deviations of output from potential than Taylor 1993. Thus, Taylor 
1999  would  lead  to  a  later  liftoff  of  the  federal  funds  rate  as  the  economy  returns  to  full 
employment. 
Which set of weights is better is a matter of judgment. John Taylor prefers Taylor 1993. My 
own thinking, when translated into Taylor Rule terms, favors the weights in the Taylor 1999 
formulation.  I  believe  that  Taylor  1999  is  likely  to  perform  better  in  achieving  the  Federal 
Reserve’s dual mandate objectives. Compared with Taylor 1993 it can achieve significantly 
greater  stability  in  employment  without  sacrificing  the  medium-term  inflation  objective  or 
significantly increasing the variability of inflation outcomes.  
Finally,  the  remaining  parameter  in  the  Taylor  Rule  is  the  neutral,  real  short-term  interest 
rate.  This  is  the  interest  rate  adjusted  for  inflation  that  neither  stimulates  nor  slows  the 
economy. It is typically set at 2 percent. Although there is no reason why the neutral real rate 
cannot change over time, the 2 percent rate is typically plugged in without further attention. 
Whether this is appropriate is a critical question in today’s economic environment that I will 
return to a bit later. 
Let  me  now  discuss  the  economic  outlook,  and  examine  some  of  the  implications  for 
monetary policy. In doing so I will look at results obtained by applying some variants of the 
Taylor  Rule,  and  explain  some  of  my  concerns  about  using  simple  policy  rules  in  a 
mechanical way for setting monetary policy.  
As  I  see  it,  the  U.S.  economy  is  continuing  to  slowly  recover  from  the  after-effects  of  the 
housing  boom  and  bust  and  the  financial  crisis.  But  the  recovery  has  been  disappointing. 
Indeed, when we look back at economic forecasts made over the past three or four years it is 
notable  that  growth  has  systematically  fallen  short  of  both  the  Federal  Reserve  and 
private-sector forecasts.  
Despite what has been an unusually accommodative monetary policy by historical standards, 
the economy has grown at only a 2.1 percent pace over the last four quarters and the Blue 
Chip consensus forecast only anticipates a modest acceleration to a 2.4 percent rate over 
the next four quarters (Figure 2). 
The  headwinds  retarding  recovery  are  well  known.  Consumers  have  been  deleveraging  in 
response to the large losses in wealth generated in large part by the collapse in home prices. 
Housing  activity  remains  depressed  for  many  reasons.  These  include  the  large  shadow 
inventory  making  its  way  through  the  foreclosure  pipeline,  tight  underwriting  standards  for 
new mortgage origination, and the sharp slowdown in household formation.  
                                                 
7  For Taylor 1993, the output gap and inflation gap parameters are both 0.5. For the Taylor 1999 version, which 
updates  the  original  formulation  to  take  into  account  data  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  the  output  gap 
parameter is 1.0: 
Taylor 1993 FFR=2% + π + 0.5(π-2%) + 0.5[100(Y-Y*)/Y*]  
Taylor 1999 FFR=2% + π +0.5(π-2%) + 1.0[100(Y-Y*)/Y*] 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although the corporate sector as a whole is now reasonably healthy, there still is a significant 
constraint on the availability of credit to small business. Fiscal policy has become restrictive 
as state and local governments have cut expenditures in response to revenue shortfalls; and 
the  uncertainty  about  how  Congress  and  the  Administration  will  address  the  2013  federal 
“fiscal cliff” is likely to inhibit hiring and investment by business. Global economic growth has 
slowed as European activity has stagnated and this is capping the demand for U.S. exports.  
On the brighter side, some of these headwinds appear to be subsiding. Employment growth 
has  picked  up  somewhat  (Figure  3),  which  should  eventually  lead  to  faster  household 
formation and more demand for housing. U.S. banks are healthier so that credit conditions, 
while  still  tight,  are  gradually  easing.  And,  households  appear  quite  far  along  in  the 
deleveraging  process  by  a  number  of  important  measures.  For  example,  the  ratio  of 
household  debt  service  relative  to  income  is  back  to  levels  last  seen  in  early  1990s 
(Figure 4). 
For  these  reasons,  I  expect  that  growth  will  gradually  strengthen  over  the  next  few  years. 
Nevertheless, significant downside risks remain, especially those related to the challenges in 
Europe and how the potential “fiscal cliff” in the United States will be resolved after the fall 
elections. Even if these risks do not materialize, I anticipate only slow progress toward full 
employment. 
On the inflation side, in recent years our forecasts have been noticeably more accurate than 
on the growth side, and we have succeeded in delivering inflation very close to our 2 percent 
price  stability  objective.  Through  March,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures  deflator,  overall  consumer  prices  have  risen  2.1  percent  over  the  past 
12 months, and prices excluding food and energy have risen 2.0 percent (Figure 5). 
But  price  trends  have  been  a  bit  stickier  than  one  might  have  anticipated  given  the  large 
amount of slack in the economy. To some degree, this likely reflects the anchoring exerted 
by stable inflation expectations. But some of the price pressures can be attributed to other, 
more temporary, factors: 
 
Higher oil and gasoline prices and their pass-through into the costs of other goods 
and services.  
Upward pressure on imputed homeowners rents due to increased demand for rental 
housing.  
Higher import prices for goods, such as apparel. This reflects many factors including 
commodity prices pressures and higher wage inflation in countries such as China.  
  Some  of  these  upward  pressures on  inflation appear  to  be  fading.  Oil  and  gasoline  prices 
have fallen in recent months. Apparel price inflation should gradually ease, given the sharp 
drop  seen  in  cotton  prices.  Owners’  equivalent  rent  should  also  eventually  stabilize  as 
multi-family  construction  picks  up  and  programs  that  shift  real  estate  owned  by  banks  to 
investors so they can be rented gear up.  
More  generally,  there  are  several  reasons  to  think  that  inflation  will  remain  moderate  and 
close  to  our  objective.  First,  and  most  obviously,  the  economy  continues  to  operate  with 
significant  slack.  Second,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  show  little  upward  pressure.  In 
fact, one – the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Underlying Inflation Gauge – is turning 
down.  This  measure  uses  a  very  wide  set  of  variables  to  forecast  the  underlying  inflation 
trend (Figure 6). Third, it is hard to be very concerned about inflation risks when the growth 
rate  of  nominal  labor  compensation  is  so  low  and  stable.  It  is  noteworthy  to  me  that  the 
employment cost index has risen only 2.1 percent over the past four quarters and has shown 
no acceleration (Figure 7). Fourth, inflation expectations remain well-anchored (Figure 8). 
This  is  critically  important  because  inflation  expectations  are  an  important  driver  of  actual 
inflation  outcomes.  Taking  into  account  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy,  I  anticipate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
that inflation will decline to slightly below our 2 percent long-run objective over the next few 
years. 
So  what  does  this  all  imply  for  monetary  policy?  I  currently  anticipate  that  the  Federal 
Reserve’s federal funds rate target will remain exceptionally low – that is at the current level 
– at least through late 2014. 
This  policy  setting  is  more  accommodative  than  the  setting  prescribed  by  the  Taylor  1999 
rule discussed earlier.8 Using the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s current staff forecast, 
the Taylor 1999 rule – unadjusted for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actions  – implies 
liftoff in 2014.9  
But  this  is  incomplete  because  it  does  not  incorporate  any  adjustment  for  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  balance  sheet  actions.  I  estimate  that  the  current  balance  sheet  provides  the 
equivalent of roughly 150 to 200 additional basis points of federal funds rate easing.10 But as 
time  passes,  we  will  come  closer  to  the  date  when  the  balance  sheet  will  begin  to  be 
normalized.  This  implies  that  the  amount  of  stimulus  from  the  balance  sheet  will gradually 
lessen over time. Putting these adjustments into the Taylor 1999 formulation would pull the 
liftoff date to 2013 (Figure 9). 
So,  why  do  I  believe  the  policy  that  promotes  the  best  achievable  path  back  to  our  dual 
mandate  objectives 
implied  by  
Taylor 1999 – adjusted or unadjusted? Taylor 1999, like other simple rules, does not take 
into account two key considerations: 
 
The likelihood that the relationship between monetary policy and the economy has 
changed significantly following the financial crisis.  
 
The need to apply a risk-management framework to policymaking at the zero bound.  
I don’t believe that the standard Taylor 1999 formulation is a good guide for policy right now 
because the neutral real rate assumption embedded in this rule of 2 percent simply doesn’t 
look plausible. This is important because the degree of stimulus depends not on the current 
policy  setting  but  on  the  difference  between  the  current  level  and  the  neutral  level.  For 
example, a short-term rate that appears highly stimulative under standard assumptions may 
in fact be much less so under alternative estimates of the neutral real rate. If the neutral real 
should  be  more  accommodative 
than 
that 
                                                 
8 
In contrast, optimal control simulations using FRBUS put the federal funds rate liftoff in 2015; see Vice Chair 
Yellen’s speech of April 12 (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20120411a.htm). 
9  For  more  details  on 
this 
forecast,  go 
to:  http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2012/05/ 
just-released-the-new-york-fed-staff-forecast-may-2012.html. 
 10  This estimate should be considered very imprecise. To generate this estimate we first need to estimate how 
much  long-term  rates  have  been  pushed  down  because  of  the  Federal  Reserve  balance  sheet  programs. 
Although there is considerable uncertainty, New York Fed staff has estimated that the Fed’s programs have 
pushed down the term premium by about 50 basis points.  
The question then becomes how much would the federal funds rate have to fall to generate the same result? 
That  depends  on  how  changes  in  the  federal  funds  rate  pass  through  to  longer-term  interest  rates.  If 
reductions in the federal funds rate were viewed as permanent, then the pass-through would presumably be 
1 to  1.  However,  if  the  federal  funds  rate  reductions  were  viewed  as  fully  transitory,  then  there  would  be 
virtually no pass-through. Econometric estimates indicate a value of about 4 to 1, a four basis points reduction 
in the federal funds rate would lead to a one basis point reduction in long-term rates. However, this degree of 
pass-through seems too low in the current environment in which the reductions in the federal funds rate have 
been in place for some time and are expected to continue for several more years. If one assumes a parameter 
value of 3 to 4 and uses 50 basis points as the estimate of the balance sheet impact on longer-term rates, 
then this implies that these actions have been equivalent to a 150 to 200 basis point reduction in the federal 
funds rate currently.  
  As  the  onset  of  balance  sheet  normalization  comes  closer  over  time,  the  effect  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
balance sheet actions  on the term premium  will  gradually  diminish. This means that the size  of the federal 
funds rate adjustment should also diminish over time. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rate has fallen, as I believe it has, then the entire trajectory of short-term rates implied by 
Taylor  1999  shifts  down  and  this  pushes  back  the  liftoff  date  implied  by  Taylor  1999 
significantly.  
So how strong is the evidence that the neutral real rate has fallen significantly at least in the 
short term? First, and most importantly, if the neutral real rate were really 2 percent, then the 
U.S.  economy  should  be  growing  faster11 as  monetary  policy  would  be  extraordinarily 
stimulative right now. But, if that is the case, then why do we see such a lackluster economic 
performance? Thomas Laubach and John Williams have devised a means of estimating how 
the equilibrium real interest rate varies over time based on how the economy has actually 
performed.  The  estimate  generated  by  their  model  for  the  first  quarter  of  2012  is 
0.3 percent.12  
Second, we can identify good reasons why the neutral real rate is depressed currently. The 
channels  through  which  monetary  policy  stimulates  the  economy  are  weaker  than  normal 
right now.13  
Monetary  policy  works  through  its  effect  on  financial  conditions  that  influence  economic 
activity. Thus, the linkage between the policy setting and the economy can be affected by 
changes  in  the  relationships  between  policy  and  financial  conditions  or  between  financial 
conditions and the economy.  
Let’s consider the linkage between the policy setting and financial conditions first. In my view, 
the major components of financial conditions include: 1) the value of the equity market; 2) the 
level  of  real  interest  rates  across  the  yield  curve;  3)  the  level  of  credit  spreads;  4)  the 
availability of credit; and 5) the exchange value of the dollar. There are certainly others, but 
these are probably the most important ones. If we look at these financial indicators as a set, 
financial conditions do not appear to be unusually tight or easy in aggregate:  
 
 
For the equity market, the evidence is mixed (Figure 10).  
On one hand, the equity risk premium actually appears to be quite elevated relative 
to  historical  levels  and  price/earnings  ratios  based  on  current  year  expected 
earnings are not unusually high. On the other hand, based on valuation measures 
using  trailing  10-year  earnings,  the  U.S.  stock  market  valuation  may  be  more 
stretched. 
For  interest  rates,  conditions  are  accommodative.  Real  rates  are  unusually  low 
(Figure 11).  
For credit spreads, the level is well within normal ranges – neither as narrow as in 
2005 or 2006 nor as wide as during 2008 and 2009 (Figure 12).  
Although credit availability is improving, the sharp tightening that occurred in 2008 
and 2009 has not fully reversed (Figure 13).  
Credit  availability  remains  unusually  tight  for  certain  sectors  such  as  housing  and 
small business.  
The  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  remains  in  the  middle  of  a  long-run  channel 
showing a gentle decline (Figure 14).  
                                                      
11  Or, if we were wrong about spare capacity, inflation should be higher. 
12  See Thomas Laubach and John Williams, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics and 
is: 
Statistics,  November 
http://www.frbsf.org/economics/economists/jwilliams/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xls. 
pp.1063-1070. 
estimates 
updated 
2003, 
The 
link 
the 
to 
13  Impairment to the transmission mechanism implies that the neutral rate that neither stimulates nor slows the 
economy will be lower than it would otherwise be. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the  neutral 
Similarly,  there  is  evidence  that  the  linkage  between  financial  conditions  and  economic 
activity is attenuated as well. The most obvious example of this is the housing sector. But the 
subdued overall rate of credit expansion for both households and the business sector is also 
noteworthy. This has occurred despite a monetary policy that would be judged on its face as 
one of the most stimulative in history.  
Finally,  market  expectations  suggest  that  the  equilibrium  real  rate  of  interest  will  remain 
depressed. To  me,  it  is  particularly  noteworthy  that  the  real  forward  interest  rate  expected 
5 to 10 years in the future is currently only 0.3 percent. It has been moving lower recently 
and  is  far  lower  than  at  any  time  in  recent  memory  (Figure  15).  While  this  pattern  likely 
reflects in part a very low term premium, it may also be driven by an assessment that the 
equilibrium real rate has fallen and will remain unusually low for years. 
This  evidence  implies  that  current  circumstances  warrant  the  use  of  a  significantly  lower 
neutral  real  short-term  rate  in  the  Taylor  Rule  formulations.  As  economic  conditions 
normalize,  supported  by  accommodative  monetary  policy, 
interest  rate 
presumably  would  gradually  rise  back  toward  its  long  run  level  over  time.  For  example, 
adjusting Taylor 1999 for a zero percent neutral real rate that gradually normalizes over time 
would push liftoff beyond 2014 (Figure 16). 
Risk management considerations also suggest that a more stimulative monetary policy than 
prescribed by Taylor 1999 is appropriate. In particular, simple policy rules implicitly treat the 
welfare  losses  generated  by  deviations  from  the  central  forecast  path  symmetrically.  But  I 
don’t believe that the potential losses are currently symmetric. In my view, the distribution of 
potential  outcomes  is  currently  skewed  to  the  downside,  reflecting  risks  posed  by 
developments in Europe and the impending U.S. fiscal cliff.  
Moreover, the costs associated with such downside outcomes are likely to be considerably 
higher  than  the  costs  of  realizing  upside  surprises.  For  example,  consider  two  alternative 
scenarios:  an  economy  that  grows  very  quickly,  but  starting  with  some  genuine  spare 
capacity,  versus  an  economy  operating  way  below  potential  that  stagnates,  pushing  the 
United States into a liquidity trap.  
In the first case, we have good tools with which to respond. As the economy moved closer to 
full employment, we could raise short-term interest rates and subsequently sell assets from 
our  portfolio.  By  doing  this,  we  would  tighten  financial  conditions,  slow  the  economy  and 
ensure  it  remained  on  a  path  consistent  with  our  dual  mandate  objectives.  The  losses  to 
society from this scenario should not be very large, provided we act in a manner that keeps 
medium-term inflation expectations in check.  
But the losses to society may be very high in the second case. That is because – as Japan 
has discovered over the past two decades – once in a liquidity trap it is not easy to return to 
full employment and price stability. Pinned at the lower bound, we don’t have as good a set 
of  tools  as  we  would  ordinarily  have  to  push  the  economy  back  toward  our  dual  mandate 
objectives. As a result of this asymmetry, we should give somewhat more weight to avoiding 
the liquidity trap outcome.  
Embedded within the traditional Taylor Rule formulations is the implicit return path back to 
full  employment  and  price  stability  that  the  FOMC  achieved  in  the  past  when  faced  with 
shocks that pushed economic activity below its potential level.14  
                                                 
14  Obviously, there is a cost to those who are unemployed longer than necessary with no offsetting gain in terms 
of greater price stability. But there also is another potential long-run cost. Those who have been unemployed 
for a long period of time may lose their job skills and become less employable in the future. This can push up 
the non-inflationary rate of unemployment (NAIRU). Not only is this bad for those who are unemployed due to 
the loss of their job skills, it is bad for the nation as a whole because the rise in the NAIRU lowers the effective 
productive capacity of the economy and, with it, the capacity of the country to service its debts. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  the  current  economic  cycle,  I  think  it  is  apparent  that  the  path  back  to  the  Fed’s  dual 
mandate objectives has been much slower than the one that the FOMC found acceptable in 
the past. Growth has consistently been disappointing relative to both our own and consensus 
forecasts. Recent performance and forecasts relative to the dual mandate objectives suggest 
that  standard  rules  calibrated  in  earlier  times  understate  the  degree  of  accommodation 
required to achieve the desired return path to the dual mandate objectives. 
We should focus on how fast we are moving toward our employment and inflation objectives, 
and  be  wary  of  the  risks  that  we  see  around  that  path.  If  progress  toward  the  mandate 
objectives is slower than desired, then this is telling us that monetary policy needs to be kept 
at  a  more  accommodative  setting  for  a  longer  time  period  than  a  standard  rule  would 
suggest.  As  downside  risks  continue  to  be  present,  the  case  for  accommodation  is  even 
stronger. 
Given our forecast of stable prices and a still slow path back to full employment, there is an 
argument for easing further. But, unfortunately, our tools have costs associated with them as 
well as benefits. Thus, we must weigh these costs against the benefits of further action. 
As  long  as  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  grow  sufficiently  fast  to  cut  into  the  nation’s 
unused economic resources at a meaningful pace, I think the benefits from further action are 
unlikely  to  exceed  the  costs.  But  if  the  economy  were  to  slow  so  that  we  were  no  longer 
making  material  progress  toward  full  employment,  the  downside  risks  to  growth  were  to 
increase  sharply,  or  if  deflation  risks  were  to  climb  materially,  then  the  benefits  of  further 
accommodation  would  increase  in  my  estimation  and  this  could  tilt  the  balance  toward 
additional easing.  
Under  such  circumstances,  further  balance  sheet  action  might  be  called  for.  We  could 
choose between further extension of the duration of the Federal Reserve’s existing Treasury 
portfolio  and  another  large-scale  asset  purchase  program  of  Treasuries  or  agency 
mortgage-backed securities.  
Conversely,  I  would  be  willing  to  consider  tightening  policy  at  a  somewhat  earlier  stage  if 
growth  strengthened  sufficiently  to  materially  improve  the  medium-term  outlook  and 
substantially reduce tail risks, or if there was evidence of a genuine threat to medium-term 
inflation, including a rise in inflation expectations. In such a case, I would anticipate that the 
first step would be to bring in the late 2014 date of the policy guidance. This would effectively 
tighten  financial  conditions  not  only  by  changing  the  expected  path  of  short-term  interest 
rates, but also by bringing forward the expected start of balance sheet normalization.  
To sum up, I see substantial advantages in behaving in as systematic fashion as possible in 
setting  monetary  policy.  But  that  should  be  done  in  a  way  that  fully  accounts  for  any 
constraints  on  policy  imposed  by  the  economic  environment,  the  presence  of  asymmetric 
risks, and allows us to learn as we go. The fact is that the economy is recovering after an 
unusually deep recession and a severe financial crisis. We don’t have much experience with 
this type of episode and how the economy is likely to perform. What we need to focus on is 
not  what  interest  rate  a  given  rule  generates,  but  what  policy  setting  can  be  expected  to 
deliver the appropriate return path to the dual mandate objectives – the type of return path 
that standard Taylor Rule formulations achieved in different economic circumstances in the 
past. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 17
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 19
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 21
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 23
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 25
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 