Pentti Hakkarainen: The growth outlook and the challenge of financial 
stability 
Presentation  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the 
Financial Times Group’s Investment Series 2012, Helsinki, 26 April 2012. 
 Dear friends and colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
I want to thank the organizers for giving me this opportunity to speak to you on what I think is 
one  of  the  most  important  issues  in  the  European  and  the  global  economy  today,  the 
question of debt and deleveraging, and its relationship to growth. 
The question is how the economies of Europe and the other advanced countries can revive 
and start growing again, when they are still suffering from high debt levels, extreme hoarding 
of liquidity, and an extraordinary degree of risk aversion. 
How do we get out of the problems we are in? The economic situation of today reminds me 
of a tourist who on his trip to Ireland stopped a local old man to ask for the way. How do I get 
to Galway, he asked. The Irishman replied: Well, sir, if I was going to Galway I would not 
start from here! 
But we have to start from where we are, and the obstacles on the way must be analyzed and 
overcome. I will argue that the present mood in the markets is partly an overreaction, a sort 
of mirror image of the irrational exuberance of the first years of the 21st century. 
The tasks of financial consolidation and reregulation are real and unavoidable. However, we 
need growth too, and growth will require something else as well: a revival of confidence in 
real  productive  investment  and  a  reversal  of  the  negative  psychology  which  has  been 
perpetuating the state of gloom. 
Recent experience 
(slide 2) 
The  global  economic  outlook  continues  to  be  dominated  by  shadows  of  the  2008–2009 
economic  crisis.  Recovery  from  the  “Great  Recession”  has  been  much  slower  than  was 
expected  and  there  have  been  repeated  disappointments.  This  has  to  do  with  debt. 
Economic  history  shows  that  economic  recoveries  are  especially  slow  after  slumps  which 
have involved financial crises. This is precisely because financial crises leave the economy 
burdened with high levels of debt, and it has often taken a long time to digest that debt. 
One recent disappointment on the way to normal was experienced towards the end of last 
year, when economic activity suddenly turned down, especially in Europe and Japan. There 
were several reasons, but the difficult debt situation of the Southern European countries was 
a  key  trigger.  Not  only  the  so-called  peripheral  economies  were  hit,  but  the  disturbances 
were felt globally as well. The interbank markets also reacted, so that money market spreads 
increased dramatically, in Europe to highest levels since 2009. 
(slide 3) 
In the euro area as a whole, there was a clear risk of an actual credit crunch. The increasing 
pressures on banks’ funding and their capital could have led to a dangerous scaling-back of 
bank lending to the private sector. The result could have been a vicious circle involving low 
economic activity, even more funding stress for banks, and a further reduction in lending. If 
that development had taken hold, a danger of deflation would have been imminent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In early December, the ECB announced a set of powerful monetary policy measures to deal 
with this threat. The most significant were two long-term refinancing operations (LTROs) with 
an  exceptional  maturity  of  3  years.  The  ECB  also  allowed  the  national  central  banks  to 
accept a wider range of collateral than previously. The reaction of financial markets was very 
positive. 
The  confidence  of  the  markets  improved  during  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  and  the 
ECB policy measures announced in December contributed a lot to that. 
Of course, monetary policy is no substitute for fiscal measures which are needed to ensure 
that  budget  deficits  of  all  euro  area  countries  are  under  control.  The  improvement  in  the 
market situation was also helped by the progress made by euro area governments towards 
instituting more binding common fiscal rules and strengthening the financial firewalls EFSF 
and ESM and by the progress in fiscal consolidation and economic reform in many countries. 
The  improvement  of  the  first  months  of  this  year  showed  up  particularly  in  the  rebound  of 
equity  prices,  and  a  decline  in  risk  spreads  in  the  bond  markets.  The  expectation 
strengthened that Europe would follow in the tailwater of the US, where promising signs of 
economic recovery have already been observed. 
The uncertainties 
However, as you are aware, the last couple of weeks have again demonstrated the fragility of 
the situation. At the turn of the second quarter of 2012, doubts arose once more about the 
viability  of  the  southern  European  fiscal  programmes.  The  markets  reacted  again,  risk 
aversion  took  hold  once  more  and  also  the  growth  outlook  weakened  –  judging  from  the 
nervous reaction of stock indexes and bond prices. 
(slide 4) 
In spite of those jitters, there are continued signs of stabilization in the global economy, and 
also  in  the  euro  area,  although  at  a  low  level.  We  are  still  expecting  growth  to  pick  up  in 
Europe during the latter half of this year. This cautiously positive outlook is highly conditional, 
however, and there are a number of risks and uncertainties. 
We  face  a  complex  web  of  many  uncertainties.  In  the  US,  the  big  issues  of  housing, 
unemployment and the federal deficit are still unsolved. There is a threat of overheating in 
China, with all sorts of adverse consequences. Japan has experienced about two decades of 
low growth, if any, and this seems to continue. What poses a downside risk to all economies, 
however, is the European situation. It is still very fragile and even minor adverse surprises 
can trigger a vicious downward spiral. 
Let  me  propose  two  uncertain  factors  in  particular  which  have  to  be  taken  seriously  into 
account. 
One  is  how  the  financially  weakest  European  countries  succeed  in  following  their  fiscal 
consolidation  programmes.  The  watchword  here  is  consistency.  The  situation  is  still  very 
fragile,  and  so  it  is  very  important  that  governments  avoid  creating  any  uncertainty  about 
their fiscal plans. There is a lot at stake: disruptions in the government bond markets might 
spill over to the real economy and harm activity again, also in other countries. 
The second important challenge is how to avoid a prolonged economic stagnation in Europe. 
There is a risk we end up following the Japanese scenario where growth is hampered, banks 
are not lending and the government debt continues to accumulate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The uniqueness of the present 
To begin with, there is the debt situation itself. The debt ratios in the advanced economies 
are at the post-World War II level, and even higher in some countries. But in addition to that, 
the financial landscape has some other remarkable features too. 
There is an unprecedented amount of liquidity in the system. This is seen in the record high 
central bank deposits of banks, and also the cash holdings of corporations are at very high 
levels. In a sense this liquidity is a consequence of the central banks’ monetary operations, 
but it is important to underline that the central banks have merely made this liquidity available 
against collateral; they have not in any way “pumped” money into the system in excess of 
what is demanded by banks. 
What  we  see  is  an  exceptionally  high  demand  for  assets  of  high  liquidity,  as  opposed  to 
demand  for  earning  assets.  This  is  a  symptom  of  deep  distrust  prevailing  in  the  financial 
markets, and a malfunctioning interbank market, which, if left unattended, could have led to a 
dangerous and unwanted credit squeeze. 
However, I  must emphasize that the ECB’s ability to control liquidity and to maintain price 
stability  remains  intact:  we  will  have  the  possibility  to  adjust  the  interest  rates  and,  if 
necessary, we have at our disposal a range of tools to actively absorb the excess liquidity 
when needed. 
Another unusual feature of the present situation is the prevailing extreme risk aversion (see 
slide 5). Spreads between “sure” and uncertain returns have exploded to very high levels and 
the valuation of productive assets reflects the reluctance to invest in anything perceived as 
risky.  For  example,  the  stock  market  has  shown  surprisingly  little  confidence  despite  of 
relatively low P/E ratios in many sectors. 
the  continuation  of  a 
Overreaction? 
(slide 6) 
All in all, the present situation marks a spectacular reversal of the behavior which was seen 
before  the  crisis.  Then,  liquidity  preference  was  low  as  it  was  believed  that  most  
assets  –  bonds  or  stocks  –  could  be  easily  converted  to  cash  at  any  time  in  deep  and 
continuously open markets. Risk premiums were also very low, because investors believed 
in 
favorable  macroeconomic  environment  –  dubbed  great  
moderation  –  and  because  they  trusted  in  the  optimistic  assessments  dished  out  by  the 
credit rating agencies. 
Then  it  turned  out  that  the  great  moderation  was  actually  based  on  an  unsustainable 
borrowing by American households and European governments and many others, on a too 
highly  leveraged  financial  system,  and  that  the  optimistic  credit  ratings  of  many  borrowers 
and structured debt instruments were actually based on faulty assumptions. 
The markets have a tendency to be carried away by the prevailing sentiment. In the years of 
prosperity  which  preceded  the  current  crisis,  the  markets  were  exuberant,  as  Alan 
Greenspan  famously  said,  and  now  they  seem  to  be  stricken  with  almost  incurable 
pessimism and doubt. 
It is also in the nature of the market economy that the market sentiment is to a large extent 
self-fulfilling  –  in  the  short  term  at  least.  So,  negative  expectations  can  lead  to  lack  of 
investment and a rush to quality which in turn harms the real economy and that again feeds 
back to the markets. 
It may well be – I think it is likely – that the present skepticism is an overreaction just as the 
exuberance of the years leading to 2008 was an overreaction. There seems to be a lot of 
momentum which is independent of the deepest fundamentals in these swings of mood. The 
negative psychology shows now in the exceptional level of risk aversion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Policy is not innocent of this. The various policy measures which have been taken in order to 
contain the crisis, have often been pushing financial problems to the future without solving 
them  permanently,  so  that  now  there  is  a  backlog  of  cumulated  problems  which 
understandably  keeps  investors  worried  as  long  as  the  markets  are  dependent  on  public 
support. 
Paradoxically,  the  government  interventions  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  market  may 
have become a sign of alarm to the markets and can even increase risk aversion. 
But if liquidity is ample, and if risk aversion is at a historical peak as it seems, there is a also 
lot  of  financial  potential  available  for  new  investment  and  economic  recovery  once  the 
necessary  business  confidence  is  restored.  In  the  last  instance,  it  is  the  perceived 
opportunities in the real sector, profitability of real investment, and economic transformation 
which  can  return  the  world  economy  and  also  the  European  economy  to  a  more  healthy 
state. 
Deleveraging as a problem? 
(slide 7) 
However,  in  the  medium  term,  forces  of  growth  will  be  weighed  down  by  the  burden  of  
debt – the excessive leverage – which still troubles the European economy in particular. The 
recession has further aggravated the problem, because of the downward revision of income 
prospects and the expected capacity for debt service. However, it is unavoidable that there 
has to be a lot of effort put to debt reduction. 
At  the  same  time,  this  may  have  adverse  consequences  for  growth  in  the  short  run.  The 
excess leverage is difficult to get rid of, and the impression of being overindebted even more 
so. Debt has become like an undesirable bucket that every firm, every government and every 
sector tries to pass on to the next. 
This competition between sectors for financial health will slow down the growth prospects in 
the  near  term.  Just  last  week,  the  IMF  drew  attention  to  the  dangers  that  a  contraction  of 
bank lending would pose to the European economy, in particular. 
In  the  European  context,  the  ECB  has  consistently  stressed  the  priority  of  reducing  the 
budget deficits, while at the same time seeking to prevent the reduction in bank lending. In 
today’s  situation,  the  necessary  improvement  of  bank  balance  sheets  should  preferably 
happen  through  increasing  banks’  equity  capital  rather  than  reduction  of  lending.  The 
financial supervision authorities have urged banks to follow this course. 
Some deleveraging, and the difficulties going with it, is however unavoidable. In particular, 
ensuring  the  sustainability  of  government  finances  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  normal 
operation of financial markets, and therefore also necessary for the indebted economies to 
return to a phase of durable growth. 
Just as important is to encourage the banking sector to adjust and shed any excess capacity 
that  exists  in  the  financial  services  industry.  Otherwise,  the  European  governments  in 
particular may end up supporting a number of ineffective and unviable banks. 
A  simultaneous  improvement  in  the  financial  condition  of  banks,  households,  and 
governments will be a difficult and slow process as long as high risk aversion prevails in the 
capital  markets  and  until  there  is  growth  and  a  recovery  of  investment  activity.  The 
improvement is especially challenging in countries which have lost their competitiveness and 
have run current account deficits, financed by borrowing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Financial regulation 
(slide 8) 
One part of the new landscape is the new and coming regulatory environment of finance and 
banking.  This  will  have  a  profound  impact  on  how  the  financial  sector  will  operate  in  the 
future. The aims of the regulators are logical as consequences of the lessons learned during 
the last years.  
There are several regulatory reforms that are currently in progress. 
Most importantly, banks are required to strengthen their capital ratios. This is motivated by 
two  reasons.  Larger  capital  buffers  will  make  banks  more  resilient  towards  losses.  At  the 
same  time,  the  owners  of  bank  equity  will  have  a  larger  stake  in  a  bank’s  business  and 
risk-taking. That is expected to encourage better monitoring of the business on the part of the 
owners.  The  complaint  that  in  banking,  “profits  are  private  but  losses  socialized”,  that  has 
motivated political decision-makers to require the new regime to be implemented quickly. 
New so-called macro-prudential tools are also being developed. The word macro-prudential 
refers to the aim of these new regulations, which is to steer the market as a whole instead of 
focusing  on  the  riskiness  of  individual  banks.  The  macro-prudential  regulation  should,  in 
particular, reduce the danger of excess indebtedness in the economy and the financing of 
asset market bubbles in the future. 
There are also more far-reaching proposals on the table: In the US and the UK, proposals 
are under consideration to separate investment banking from the narrowly defined “normal” 
part of the banking business. In Europe, the need of such structural restrictions is now being 
considered in a European Commission working group under the chairmanship of Governor 
Liikanen of the Bank of Finland. 
At the same time, more efficient procedures of crisis management are being developed. The 
goal is that the supervisors could intervene in a loss-making bank well before the equity is 
exhausted.  This  should  reduce  the  risk  borne  by  taxpayers  in  rescue  operations.  The 
possibility  of  early  intervention  by  the  supervisors  can  also  improve  the  incentives  of  the 
managers and equity holders to avoid excessive risk taking. 
Regulation vs. growth 
The  new  regulatory  measures  have  financial  stability  as  their  main  aim.  At  the  same  time 
they would limit risk-taking by banks. 
This  raises  an  interesting  and  very  important  question:  Is  there  a  conflict  between  these 
safety-oriented reforms on the other hand, and growth and investment on the other? Is there 
a  danger  that  the  new  regulations  perpetuate  the  present  tendencies  of  excessive  risk 
aversion and liquidity hoarding? If that is the case, the consequences would be negative for 
an economic recovery in the short run and for growth in the long run. 
These questions cannot be passed over lightly. How can the long-run goal of a more resilient 
financial  system  be  reconciled  with  the  need  to  have  more  investment  and  a  more 
growth-friendly  business  environment?  Will  the  quest  for  a  safer  banking  system  lead  to 
scarcity of credit and finance for real investment? 
It is only realistic to admit that this problem may be relevant in the short run. But we should 
not overstate the conflict. In the long run, the conflict between stability and the availability of 
finance should disappear, because in the long term, the focus is by definition on sustainable 
profits and returns. So, more a stable financial system should provide a better environment 
for investment as well. 
The European Banking Authority is presently assessing banks’ recapitalization plans which 
they  have  submitted  as  responses  to  the  EBA’s  Recommendation  on  recapitalization.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
first results suggest, fortunately, that European banks expect to be able to meet most, by far, 
of their recapitalization needs by far by raising new capital, retaining earnings or conversion 
of hybrid liabilities. 
One  observation  related  to  that  is  that  when  the  banking  system  is  re-engineered  and 
becomes  safer  and  better  capitalized,  the  cost  of  equity  capital  for  banks  should  also  fall. 
Investors in bank stock will be satisfied with a lower rate of return when the capital structure 
of banks is improved. Because of this effect, the cost of new regulations to the banks and 
their negative impact on growth is likely to be less than in has been claimed by some critics. 
The way ahead 
(slide 9) 
In  the  future  recovery,  finance  will  probably  take  the  back  seat.  Just  as  the  financial 
expansion of 2001–2007 did not create sustainable growth in the developed world, financial 
consolidation – although necessary – will not alone be a sufficient condition for growth. A key 
ingredient  to  sustainable  growth  is  the  revival  of  real  investment.  It  is  not  a  substitute  for 
financial consolidation, but a complement to it. And it requires a change in the time horizon 
and  risk  appetite  of  investors  who  for  several  years  now  have  been  hoarding  liquidity  and 
“quality”. 
The way forward is in profitability of REAL business investment, and improved international 
competitiveness of those economies and sectors which are in need to deleverage. The facts 
that  there  is  an  unprecedented  amount  of  funds  held  in  liquid  assets  and  that  the  current 
levels  of  risk  aversion  seem  exceptional  in  a  longer  perspective  suggest  that  finance  for 
economic recovery will be quickly and abundantly available when conditions are right. 
(slide 10) 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me come back to the story of the tourist asking the way to Galway. 
So, should you ask me for the way ahead to sustainable economic growth, I would propose 
you to consider whether and when it would make sense to start by shifting investments from 
liquidity to productive assets. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Slide 2 
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
