Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Global challenges and local opportunities 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
IBBM-APABI Conference: “Global challenges and local opportunities”, Kuala Lumpur, 8 May 
2012. 
 It  is  my  honour  to  officiate  this  Asian-Pacific  Association  of  Banking  Institutes  (APABI) 
Conference hosted here in Kuala Lumpur by the Institute of Bankers Malaysia (IBBM). This 
Association has an important role in bringing together financial industry training institutes that 
share  a  common  goal  to  equip  financial  institutions  with  the  capacity  to  deal  with  the 
transformational  developments  that  are  shaping  the  financial  sector  –  by  supporting  the 
continued renewal of its most valuable asset, human capital.  
The global financial industry is experiencing a period of profound change. In the advanced 
economies,  decades  of  exceptional  growth  are  giving  way  to  contracting  financial  and 
economic conditions, greater regulation and significant government intervention, while in the 
emerging  world  however,  financial  and  economic  growth  have  continued.  In  addition,  the 
intensification  of  policies  and  reforms  to  address  structural  issues  in  several  of  the  major 
advanced economies will also have a significant bearing on the future growth prospects for 
many financial institutions and businesses. This is reinforced by the implementation of new 
prudential  standards,  both  at  the  national  and  global  levels,  which  are  also  set  to 
substantially redefine the expected norms and the boundaries of modern finance.  
As emerging Asia aspires towards achieving higher levels of income and living standards, a 
different  path  from  that  which  led  the  way  for  many  advanced  economies  will  need  to  be 
considered.  The  global  financial  crisis  and  the Asian  financial  crisis  have  provided  us  with 
many important lessons that should form the underpinnings for the development of a sound 
economic and financial policy framework. Such a framework must effectively combine strong 
regulation and market discipline to reinforce financial stability. The recent crisis has shown 
that markets cannot be exclusively relied on to rein in excesses. A broader perspective of 
regulation that looks beyond individual institutions is also essential to identify the build-up of 
system-wide risks. Equally, financial institutions need to consider how to meaningfully include 
such  system-wide  perspectives  in  their  approach  to  managing  risks  in  their  respective 
institutions.  
Public policy also has a crucial role in promoting economic development that benefits society 
at large, and that addresses the disproportionate social welfare effects of a financial crisis on 
the  most  vulnerable  groups  of  society,  including  low-income  households,  retail  consumers 
and  small  businesses.  Specifically,  policies  that  protect  the  core  savings  of  these  groups, 
promote  financial  inclusion  and  contain  excessive  leverage  should  also  form  an  integral 
component of the resolution and reform agenda. Given the high costs of financial crises there 
is  now  a  better  appreciation  of  the  need  for  such  policies  to  co-exist  with  free  markets, 
working to efficiently allocate economic capital to achieve more sustainable outcomes. 
While significant challenges continue to confront several of the advanced economies as they 
seek to address the structural problems that remain unresolved, Asia must chart its own path 
in  formulating  strategies  to  develop  our  economies  and  financial  systems.  Following  the 
Asian financial crisis, most emerging economies in Asia have strengthened their economic 
and financial fundamentals, improved their fiscal and external debt positions, and reformed 
their banking sectors. This has supported our economies through the recent global financial 
turmoil.  With  a  significantly  stronger  foundation,  Asia  has  now  every  potential  to  meet  its 
growth and development goals in a manner that avoids the pitfalls that will undermine our 
future prospects. This morning, I would like to focus my remarks on five factors that I believe 
will serve to anchor sustainable growth and stability in Asia going forward.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Supporting sustainable growth and stability in Asia  
First is that the growth of the financial sector in Asia remains largely anchored in productive, 
real  economic  activity.  In  contrast  to  developments  in  recent  years,  financial  innovation  in 
Asia has mostly served to support the legitimate financing, investment and risk management 
needs of businesses and households. The growth of the financial sector has not significantly 
outstripped  economic  growth  and  new  innovations  in  financial  products  and  services  have 
not  taken  on  the  degree  of  complexity  and  high  leverage  observed  in  the  economies  that 
were affected by the crisis.  Financial institutions in Asia also had limited exposure to highly 
leveraged  activities,  such  as  complex  derivatives  and  structured  credit  instruments. 
Consistent with the more traditional banking models in Asia, there are now calls for a return 
to  basic  banking  and  its  clear  separation  from  higher  risk-taking  activities.  The  growth  of 
Islamic finance, with its emphasis on the close link between financial transactions and real 
economic activity and which embraces universal values such as transparency and fairness, 
further supports this trend. 
The emphasis on productive financial innovation has also been reinforced by a long standing 
focus in Asia on promoting effective consumer protection arrangements. In the recent period, 
this has received renewed attention by authorities given the experience of the recent crisis 
which has underscored how market conduct failures that led to widespread mis-selling and 
predatory lending, was not only detrimental to consumers, but also a source of systemic risk. 
An  emphasis  on  product  transparency  and  disclosure,  responsible  sales  and  marketing 
practices as well as investment in financial education have served to better align the interests 
of  financial  institutions  and  consumers,  thus  reducing  the  potential  for  harmful  practices. 
Asian  economies  have  also  taken  steps  to  strengthen  the  financial  safety  net  including 
deposit insurance, while putting in place institutional arrangements for debt counselling and 
restructuring.  These  measures  can  contribute  towards  pre-empting  widespread  defaults 
particularly during periods of stress.  
Second is the continued commitment and sustained progress in the development of strong 
regulatory  and  supervisory  systems  for  the  financial  sector.  Significant  progress  has  been 
achieved in Asia in this recent decade to strengthen the institutional arrangements and the 
capacity to safeguard financial stability. This includes putting in place more comprehensive 
regulatory  frameworks,  improving  supervisory  approaches  and  having  clear  mandates  for 
central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  to  deal  with  system-wide  risks.  While  these 
measures  have  yielded  tremendous  pay  offs,  efforts  have  continued  to  be  made  to 
strengthen further the resilience of the financial system. New initiatives are being pursued to 
enhance  surveillance  and  crisis  management  tools  to  enable  swift  responses  to  emerging 
risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system,  including  those  within  the  traditionally 
unregulated segments of the financial system. Authorities in Asia are also continuing to refine 
and  sharpen  the  efficacy  of  “macroprudential”  instruments  to  manage  excesses  and 
imbalances  in  the  financial  system.  Asia  already  has  considerable  experience  with  these 
instruments  during  periods  of  escalating  asset  prices  and  excessive  financial  market 
volatility.  They  therefore  already  represent  an  important  part  of  the  broader  toolkit  for 
managing risks to financial stability. 
The effort to implement global regulatory reforms is also now underway in Asia, with many 
jurisdictions  making  significant  progress 
the 
Basel III standards. The international reform package aims to significantly raise the resilience 
of the global banking system and to promote sound risk-taking. The standards will see banks 
holding  larger  amounts  of  capital,  including  buffers  which  can  be  drawn  down  as  losses 
occur, thus ensuring their continued ability to support lending to the economy even during 
times  of  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  the  standards  will  also  require  banks  to  significantly 
strengthen 
to  support  orderly  credit 
intermediation  processes.  Concerns  have  however  been  raised  about  the  unintended 
consequences  that  may  arise  from  the  implementation  of  these  standards  –  including 
potential ramifications on the real economy – and therefore the need for the reforms to be 
funding  positions 
in  detailing  out 
liquidity  and 
implement 
in  order 
rules 
their 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
implemented  cautiously.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  conducting  impact  and 
behavioural studies during the transition period, and the need to consider how the national 
implementation  of 
the  global  standards  should  reflect  domestic  experiences  and 
circumstances.  
Third is the high priority placed on the pursuit of a balanced and equitable growth through the 
financial  inclusion  agenda  as  a  key  component  of  Asia’s  overall  strategy  for  sustaining 
medium and long-term economic progress. At its core, the financial inclusion agenda seeks 
to empower all individuals, irrespective of income level, economic activity or geography, to 
have  the  means  and  opportunity  to  undertake  financial  transactions,  generate  income, 
accumulate assets and to financially protect themselves against unexpected adverse events.  
Countries in this region have been active in pioneering sustainable financial inclusion tools 
and  models.  Due  in  large  part  to  a  strong  public  policy  focus  on  promoting  an  inclusive 
financial  sector,  the  financial  industry  in  Asia  is  also  more  attuned  to  financial  inclusion 
objectives  in  their  business  outlook.  This  can  be  seen  from  recent  evidence  of  financial 
institutions in the region that have successfully adopted “double bottom line” strategies that 
combine  enhanced  financial  access  goals  with  profitability,  thus  enabling  the  financial 
inclusion  agenda  to  be  achieved  in  a  responsible  and  sustainable  manner.  Institutions  in 
several  parts  of  Asia  have  been  effective  in  utilising  innovative  means  of  outreach  to 
overcome  geographical  and  cost  barriers  in  delivering  essential  financial  services  such  as 
microcredit,  affordable  insurance,  avenues  for  savings,  and  accessible  payments  and 
remittance  services.  Governments  in  the  region  continue  with  measures  to  bridge  the  gap 
with  the  necessary  financial  infrastructure,  developing  rules  for  orderly  and  responsible 
business conduct, and catalysing the volume of financial transactions by channelling social 
transfers, wages or pensions through the formal financial system. 
Such  advancements  by  the  region  in  financial  inclusion  contribute  towards  eradicating 
poverty and uplifting living standards. As growth in the region continues, it will become even 
more  important  to  ensure  that  such  growth  does  not  further  widen  the  social  divide  and 
disenfranchise those who remain excluded from its benefits. An inclusive growth process in 
the  region,  which  draws  marginalised  segments  into  the  formal  financial  system  and  that 
empowers  small  businesses  and  consumers  already  within  the  financial  system  to  better 
utilise financial services, will enhance the contribution of this segment of the population to the 
economic growth process.  
Fourth,  is  the  greater  regional  economic  and  financial  integration  in  Asia  which  has  been 
supported  by  strengthened  institutional  frameworks  for  safeguarding  regional  financial 
stability and a deepening of regional cooperation. With greater cross-regional participation in 
the  respective  domestic  financial  systems,  efforts  have  intensified  to  build  a  strong 
foundation  that  will  promote  regional  stability  alongside  the  measures  implemented  to 
strengthen domestic frameworks. These include wide ranging measures to develop regional 
financial  markets, 
to  strengthen 
cooperation  networks  for  the  supervision  of  regionally-active  financial  institutions  and  to 
establish regional infrastructure to enhance the efficiency and lower the risks associated with 
cross-border payments and settlements.  
Regional arrangements between central banks and supervisory authorities have also been 
significantly strengthened to actively share information on emerging risks to regional stability 
and where necessary to coordinate regional responses. An important part of this includes the 
ongoing  work  to  enhance  the  frameworks  for  crisis  management  including  the  orderly 
resolution of financial institutions with significant cross-border operations. Within the ASEAN 
region, measures are currently being pursued to promote greater consistency in the adoption 
of regulatory and supervisory standards in anticipation of a larger role for ASEAN banks in 
driving  regional  integration  as  part  of  the  broader  agenda  to  realise  an  ASEAN  Economic 
Community by 2015. Collectively, these arrangements aim to ensure that the expansion of 
liquidity  management  across  borders, 
improve 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
cross-border financial linkages takes place within a framework and process that adequately 
mitigates systemic risk across borders. 
Fifth, central banks and regulatory authorities in most emerging economies in Asia have the 
broader  mandate  that  includes  a  focus  on  the  development  of  the  financial  sector  as  a 
means  not  only  to  enhance  the  growth  and  development  potential,  but  also  to  reinforce  a 
strong  foundation  for  financial  stability.  In  Malaysia,  the  development  and  reform  of  the 
financial sector in the decade that followed the Asian financial crisis has not only developed 
the financial sector to better serve the Malaysian economy, but it has also better positioned 
financial institutions to withstand the destabilising episodes emanating from external shocks. 
This has included strengthening financial intermediaries, not only in terms of scale but also in 
their financial positions, risk management and governance practices. This has contributed to 
more  efficient  financial  intermediation  while  improving  access  to  financing,  particularly  for 
small  and  medium  scale  businesses.  Efforts  to  develop  a  vibrant  capital  market  have 
meanwhile opened up alternative channels for financing, while mitigating concentration risk 
in  the  financial  system  and  enhancing  its  ability  to  absorb  large  and  volatile  cross-border 
capital flows.  
These  factors  will  place  Asia  on  a  firm  foundation  to  achieve  its  growth  and  development 
goals.  While  public  policy  clearly  has  an  important  role,  it  is  as  important  for  the  financial 
industry to align itself with the desired outcomes of sustainable growth within a longer term 
horizon.  This  will  involve  a  number  of  important  considerations  for  financial  institutions, 
including the rethinking of business models in the light of a re-assessment of risk and return 
expectations,  a  reflection  on  fundamental  value  systems  that  ultimately  shape  individual 
actions,  with  greater  premium  placed  on  responsible  and  ethical  behaviour,  and  the 
regulatory changes taking place. 
New imperatives for talent development in the financial sector 
Having  the  required  talent  will  be  a  key  pillar  in  managing  the  challenges  confronting  the 
Asian  financial  sector  moving  forward.  The  increased  demand  and  competition  for 
highly-skilled financial professionals in the financial sector continues to be fierce. In Malaysia, 
demand is expected to be particularly pronounced for specialised skills in risk management 
and high growth and niche areas.  
At  the  same  time,  the  new  financial  landscape  also  raises  critical  leadership  and 
organisational  challenges,  particularly  as  banks  in  Asia  become  larger  and  more  complex 
with increasingly diverse geographical and product markets. This underscores the need for 
financial  institutions  to  be  helmed  by  world-class  leaders,  with  critical  strategic  and 
leadership capabilities to build institutions that are dynamic, resilient and agile in the face of a 
more challenging operating environment. In line with the increasing regional character of the 
financial  sector,  there  will  also  be  a  greater  emphasis  on  talent  that  better  appreciates 
national  and  cultural  differences.  Meanwhile,  boards  of  directors  are  also  be  expected  to 
have  a  more  effective  role  in  providing  independent  oversight  and  strategic  guidance  that 
promotes the long-term resilience and continued viability of financial institutions.  
These  imperatives  translate  into  significant  demands  on  human  capital  development.  New 
talent development strategies are needed, as well as a critical re-assessment of the existing 
content and approach to training for the financial industry workforce to ensure their continued 
relevance, within a broader regional context. This represents a significant challenge and an 
important  priority  for  Asia.  In  order  to  bring  talent  development  to  the  next  level,  there  is 
scope to pursue meaningful strategic partnerships in financial sector education and training. 
With  growing  cross-border  linkages  of  the  region’s  financial  systems,  there  are  significant 
benefits  to  be  gained  from  improving  the  quality  and  consistency  of  standards  in  financial 
sector training in the region.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On collaboration in financial industry training  
This conference represents a unique collaborative opportunity to discuss current issues and 
trends in human capital development in the banking sector across different financial systems 
within the Asia Pacific region. The efforts of APABI in providing this platform should therefore 
be  well  leveraged  by  its  member  institutes.  Given  the  varying  levels  of  financial  sector 
development across the region, there will be tremendous benefit in the sharing of ideas and 
methodology on human capital development especially in newly introduced areas in banking 
and finance.  
In  Malaysia,  our  approach  to  human  capital  talent  development  is  also  founded  on  the 
collaborative  approach.  With  the  establishment  of  the  Asian  Institute  of  Finance  (AIF)  in 
2009, talent development in the financial sector is given a strategic priority and is coordinated 
in a holistic manner, across the spectrum of the financial services industry. This is important 
as  many  of  the  initiatives  supporting  these  human  capital  development  strategies  are 
multi-disciplinary  and  multi-layered.  Under  this  arrangement  individual  training  institutes 
comprising  banking,  insurance,  Islamic  finance  and  the  capital  markets  sector  have  now 
converged onto a single platform to formulate a unified approach in strategic direction. The 
ultimate goal for this is to develop financial sector talent with world class capabilities to drive 
a sustainable growth and development of the financial sector.  
Conclusion  
Notwithstanding  a  more  challenging  period  ahead,  the  financial  industry  in  Asia  is 
well-positioned  to  benefit  from  continued  favourable  growth  prospects,  supported  by 
strengthened fundamentals that underpin the financial sector. The financial industry has an 
important  role  in  reinforcing  these  fundamentals  through  the  business  strategies  that  are 
pursued, alignment of incentives and developmental priorities, including the development of 
human  capital.  Conferences  such  as  this  can  contribute  towards  developing  a  broader 
understanding of the important issues to the industry, and to direct the focus of cooperative 
opportunities to build a stronger foundation for sustainable growth. On that note, I wish you a 
productive and engaging Conference. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
