G Padmanabhan: Alternate payment channels – prepaid cards: issues 
and challenges 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
5th Financial Inclusion and Digital Payments Conference, Mumbai, 12 September 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  S/Shri  G  Srinivas,  Saswat  Mahapatra  and  Smt  Radha  Somakumar  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  happy  to  be  in  your  midst  today  and  share  some  thoughts  with  you  on  the  future 
roadmap  of  the  Indian  payments  system.  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  interacting  with  the 
industry participants in similar conferences organised by IAMAI twice in the past. Since then, 
several developments have taken place which I firmly believe will result in a greater role to 
the assembled stakeholders in the Indian payments industry. 
The enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 was a watershed in the 
sense that it permitted non-bank entities a formal entry into payment systems after being duly 
authorised by the Reserve Bank of India. Several if not most of you assembled here are now 
offering  payment  services  albeit  mostly  in  the  pre-paid  payment  instrument  category. 
Nascent as your efforts are it is viewed by us in the Reserve Bank as a welcome and positive 
beginning in our long haul towards a less-cash society. Given this profile of the audience, I 
shall confine my comments to issues that are of more direct relevance to this group. 
In  our  efforts  to  move  towards  a  less-cash  society,  we  have  recently  unveiled  our  draft 
Payment Systems Vision Document, and placed it in the public domain for comments. I am 
happy  to  share  with  you,  that  we  received  responses  from  several  of  you.  We  are  in  the 
process of finalising the Vision Document taking into your comments and observations. 
What  are  the  issues  that  we  have  flagged  in  our  Vision  Document  and  what  are  the 
challenges  before  the  industry  in  fulfilling  these  goals?  Our  vision  is  to  “proactively 
encourage electronic payment systems for ushering in a less-cash society in India” and to 
ensure  that  the  “payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the  country  are  safe,  efficient, 
interoperable,  authorised,  accessible,  inclusive  and  compliant  with  international  standards” 
One amongst the key additions which is relevant on this occasion is the term “inclusive” and 
the emphasis on “less-cash” – please note we are not talking about cashless but less cash 
which  we  consider  more  realistic.  Besides,  now  that  India  is  a  member  of  Committee  on 
Payment and Settlement Systems, we have to be compliant with international standards. 
What are the challenges in our achieving the stated goals? Recently, I happened to read an 
interesting  book  entitled,  “Jugaad”  (NaviRadjou,  JaideepPrabhu  and  Simone  Ahuja).  First, 
what  is  jugaad?  According  to  authors,  jugaad  is  a  colloquial  Hindi  word  that  means 
something  like,  an  innovative  fix,  an  improvised  solution  born  out  of  ingenuity  and 
cleverness.  The  authors  point  out  that  the  biggest  Indian  jugaad  to  communication  is  the 
“missed  call”  on  the  mobile  phones.  India  perhaps  leads  the  world  in  this!  Negative 
connotation to this jugaad notwithstanding, we need to think positively  and appreciate that 
innovation  or  jugaad-  in  a  positive  way-  is  going  to  be  critical  for  India-  not  only  for 
competitive  advantage,  but  also  to  ensure  that  our  future  development  is  sustainable  and 
inclusive.  The  authors  flag  six  principles  of  jugaad  in  emerging  countries  which  is  worth 
recounting to an audience like this: 
1.  
2.  
3.  
Seek opportunity in adversity 
Do more with less  
Think and act flexibly  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Keep it simple  
Include margin  
Follow your heart 
4.  
5. 
6.  
These six principles when viewed in the context of this conference can be interpreted to pose 
some fundamental issues. 
First, can the prepaid industry today proclaim that they have done all what could have been 
done? I am of the view that although the regulator has authorized the non banks to enter the 
payments  sphere  and  the  non-banks  have  largely  chosen  PPI,  the  results  are  not  very 
heartening and encouraging. Available data indicates that the growth of the issuance of PPIs 
in  India  has  and  continues  to  be  sluggish.  The  average  issuance  of  PPIs  during  the  year 
averaged  48.96  million,  with  a  peak  issuance  of  57.46  million  in  July  2011.  And  even 
amongst  these  numbers,  it  has  come to  our  notice  that  a  particular  PPI  issuer  has  issued 
PPIs  of  Re  1/–  each  in  large  numbers!  Reflecting  this  growth  pattern,  the  volume  of 
transactions (2.3 percent) and value transacted (2.5 percent) with PPIs as a percentage of 
total card transactions is also very marginal. Second, has the regulator done what could be 
done?  Let  me  try  and  defend  myself.  RBI  has  always  been  in  the  forefront  of  building  an 
enabling  environment  for  the  players  of  the  payment  industry.  Since  the  inception  of  the 
PSS Act and issuance of guidelines in April 2009, 21 non-bank entities have been authorized 
for PPI issuance exclusively of which 18 are issuing PPIs, while the other 3 non-bank entities 
are in the process of doing so. Apart from authorization, RBI has also proactively undertaken 
policy measures in consultations with stakeholders to encourage the growth of the industry. 
While  doing  so,  we  have  always  kept  the  management  of  risks  and  addressing  AML 
concerns  as  a  cornerstone  of  our  policy.  Based  on  this  approach,  we  have  ushered  in 
several  rationalisation  measures.  But  as  we  all  know,  while  the  regulator  can  act  as  a 
catalyst,  it  is  the  issuers  who  have  to  hit  the  ground  running.  Third,  have  the  industry 
associations  done  what  could  have  been  done?  Are  we  focusing  too  much  on  so  called 
stumbling  blocks  and  regulations  instead  of  channelising  our  energies  in  achieving  the 
required  scale  of  operations?  Let  me  not  pre-judge.  But,  may  be  it  is  time  for  more 
introspection. 
Let me now flag certain important issues which I hope would be discussed over the course of 
next two days. 
Payment system innovation and role of non-banks payment system providers 
The  increased  role  of  non-bank  entities  in  payment  system  is  linked  to  their  potential  to 
change the payment system landscape as they can leverage on their product offerings with 
latest technological features to cater to wide segment of the market. Has this taken place in 
India? As can be seen from statistics, the share of PPIs in the overall retail segment though 
growing is yet to achieve a significant level. If we analyse the types of PPIs being issued, 
paper  vouchers  constitute 
instruments  with 
73.40 percent. The relative share of others is magstripe cards: 16.59 percent (mostly issued 
by banks), m-wallets: 9.94 percent and e-wallets: 0.07 percent. What is the innovation that 
has taken place if paper PPIs are merely acting as a substitute for cash? Similarly, why are 
micro payments with PPIs not been successful even though regulations are not stringent in 
this segment? KYC requirements for PPIs issued up to Rs.2000/– as well as utility payment 
PPIs are quite relaxed. Why then have PPIs not been successful in at least these segments? 
Do we have any credible answers? 
the  major  share  of  pre-paid  payment 
Promoting access and inclusion 
In  our  vision  document  we  have  laid  emphasis  on  access  and  inclusion.  We  have  been 
receiving a number of suggestions from the PPI industry as to how PPIs could address the 
present  gap  in  access  and  inclusion.  The  questions  to  consider  in  this  context  are,  is  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
current  model  of  PPIs  issuers  appropriate?  Most  issuers  are geographically  restricted. We 
have  not  seen  scaling  up  of  transactions  by  several  issuers  after  getting  authorization. 
Therefore, the larger issue is – do the PPI issuers have the wherewithal to be ready for the 
long haul and provide nationwide effects? What are the plans for increasing the scale and 
network services? Why cannot the PPI issuers try to build a relationship with banks by acting 
as  a  Business  Correspondents  and  load  the  government  disbursements  onto  the  prepaid 
payment  instruments  issued  by  them  which  in  turn  would  lead  to  promoting  access  and 
inclusion  through  electronic  payments?  The  access  and  inclusion  concerns  though  are  far 
greater  in  semi  urban  and  rural  areas.  What  is  the  scale  and  presence  of  PPI  issuers  in 
semi-urban and rural areas to address the access and inclusion gaps in the existing payment 
systems? In this context, the related question for the regulator is whether there is a need to 
review the entry norms so that only serious players come in? Or is it too early to take this 
step? 
Standardization and interoperability 
In our vision document we have stressed on the need for standardization and interoperability. 
We have been also receiving a number of suggestions from the PPI industry for permitting 
interoperability among the PPIs, use at all PoS terminals, inter-operability with other payment 
system operators as in the case of other payment products. All these are well appreciated by 
us.  For  interoperability  to  happen,  standardization  is  a  pre-requisite.  It  is  only  through 
standardization that the interoperability amongst non bank issued PPIs, usage of such PPIs 
at  channels  where  the  bank  issued  PPIs  and  other  payment  modes  are  accepted  can  be 
achieved.  Convergence  of  any  payment  instrument  into  the  mainstream  acceptance 
infrastructure is the need of the hour. For PPIs issued by non banks to be accepted at the 
PoS terminals, they need to adhere to the form factor specification and connectivity to their 
switch.  Is  the  industry geared  up for this?  On the  other  hand,  PPIs  issued  by  banks  have 
access  to  acceptance  infrastructure  as  they  adhere  to  industry  wide  standards.  Significant 
changes  will  therefore  be  required  in  the  technology  and  business model  of  non-bank  PPI 
issuers.  Another  important  question  is,  when  a  majority  of  the  cards  are  issued  in  paper 
mode, is the industry geared up for such changes? Is there a specific plan to go paperless by 
these service providers? 
Interoperability  also  pre-supposes  a  central  infrastructure  for  clearing  and  settlement.  We 
have  already  permitted  transfer  of  funds  from  a  fully  KYC  compliant  PPI  issued  by  a 
non-bank authorised entity to a bank account through the sponsor bank route riding over the 
banks membership with NFS, NPCI. Why is such a fund transfer not picking up? 
In our vision document we have discussed about the need for collaboration and co-operation 
between payment system operators. What is level of co-operation amongst the PPIs issuers? 
Have there been any efforts to collaborate at least on boarding of merchants? Is there any 
effort to standardize the merchant code and enable all the PPI issuers once approved under 
the  PSS  Act,  to  have  access  to  all  the  merchants?  Has  the  industry  deliberated  how 
collaboration  and  co-operation  could  be  achieved  in  the  three  party  model  to  increase  the 
scale and volume of transactions? 
Arriving  at  a  consensus  on  these  issues  will  increase  the  acceptability  amongst  the 
customers  as  they  will  have  a  wider  choice  of  PPIs  and  will  help  achieve  the  objective  of 
increasing the cashless transactions. 
KYC related issues 
Several  requests  for  liberalisation  of  KYC  requirements  have  been  received  from  the 
industry. Several schemes in other countries which are operating in a relaxed and liberalized 
KYC environment have been cited. We are also aware of the use of PPIs for disbursement of 
Government benefits in some countries. Before sharing with you what we are reviewing, let 
me  sound  a  word  of  caution.  How  many  of  you  have  read  Ravi  Subramaniam?  More 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
specifically,  how  many  of  you  have  read  his  book  “The  Incredible  Banker”?  Can  we  draw 
comfort  that,  what  Ravi  describes  is  mere  fiction?  The  underlying  message  is  clear. 
Competition cannot degenerate into the race to the bottom! Relaxation cannot be confused 
with abdication. If you are allowed to travel fast on a newly laid road, it does not mean that 
you have unbridled freedom to close your eyes and drive! Now let me turn to what we are 
trying to review. 
In  our  vision  document,  we  have  committed  that  the  PPI  guidelines  would  be  reviewed  to 
provide  further  impetus  to  the  industry.  But  it  needs  to  be  appreciated  that  closer  the  PPI 
gets to a bank account, the greater the need to apply the same set of KCY/AML regulations 
which are applicable to the banks. In particular, as the functionalities of PPIs form an ongoing 
relationship, comparable AML/CFT obligations will have to apply. That is the reason we have 
been  following  a  risk  based  approach  within  the  extant  AML  framework  for  PPIs.  We  will 
continue to evolve our guidelines balancing the demand of the PPI industry and extant AML 
framework. While  doing so  there  are  a few  aspects  to  remember.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  the  schemes  cited  in  other  countries  cannot  be  replicated  in  India  in  toto.  The  risk 
perception while issuing PPIs up to USD1000 without KYC in USA may not be same as the 
risk perception associated with PPIs up to Rs.50,000/– in India. The permissible limits, top 
ups and reloadability will depend not only on the purchasing power but also on systems in 
place to address the risk in terms of strong enforcement and compliance framework. 
One  of  the  reasons  cited  for  replacing  cash  with  PPIs  is  the  trails  that  PPIs  will  provide. 
However,  it  is  essential  that  PPI  issuers  are  in  a  position  to  deliver  the  requisite  trails.  In 
some of the cases we have observed there is no proper system to track the card issuance let 
alone  system  for  tracing  the  transaction  trails.  To  put  it  more  directly,  in  a  mobile  based 
prepaid system, this auditability is more straight forward if there has been proper adherence 
to  rules  while  issuing  SIM  cards  since  minimum  KYC  standards  are  prescribed  now.  The 
national  identity  scheme  needs  to  be  vigorously  integrated  with  the  payment  systems  to 
create the necessary synergies. The industry may need to examine how quickly the Aadhaar 
scheme could be used to address the identification and authentication requirements. While 
this process is ongoing, caution has to be the better part of valour. So, while the demand for 
relaxation  of  KYC  is  well  taken,  the  industry  should  work  on  improving  the  system  for 
providing the necessary trace and transaction trails. 
There have been demands for increasing the transaction limits. Increasing transaction limits 
by compromising on the KYC would be a risky proposition given its susceptibility to money 
laundering.  As  you  will  be  aware  increase  in  transaction  limits  will  need  proportionate 
increase  in  safety  and  security  of  transactions  as  applicable  to  other  card  schemes  in  the 
form of an additional factor of authentication. The industry needs to deliberate more actively 
on this issue and we as a regulator would be willing to act as a catalyst in the process. 
Creating awareness – is the industry doing enough to increase the use of alternate 
payment channels? 
I  am  asked  why  a  customer  will  buy  a  PPI  and  block  up  to  Rs.50,000/–  without  earning 
interest. It points towards the need for creating awareness about the PPIs. I do appreciate 
that  it  is  a  tightrope  walk  as  bringing  cash  transactions  through  the  PPI  route  also  needs 
identification  of  that  segment  of  population  that  would  be  happy  to  hold  cash  and  use  it 
anywhere. The test lies in convincing them about the advantages of such a product but the 
acceptance infrastructure and backward linkages have also to be built. We have to find ways 
to address such issues through awareness campaigns over the mass media. 
The need for orderly growth – Is the industry adhering to laid down rules and 
regulations? 
As  a  part  of  our  oversight  responsibility,  we  had  carried  out  on  site  inspections  of  certain 
operators. This revealed several shortcomings relating to maintenance of escrow accounts, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
adherence  to  guidelines  on  KYC,  absence  of  an  efficient  system  to  monitor  and  report 
suspicious transactions and in putting in place systems and practices for ensuring customer 
protection. 
The regulatory guidelines for the PPI industry are three years old in the country. Entities are 
still learning the eco system and the business models are still evolving. Being new, non-bank 
entities  are  obviously  focusing  more  on  business  than  the  processes.  This  is  not  very 
heartening from a regulatory perspective. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  I  have  tried  to  highlight  some  of  the  important  issues  that  the  PPI 
industry should address to make this alternate payment channel scale up and become more 
vibrant. At the same time, certain concerns relating to non-adherence to regulations and laid 
down procedures have come to light during the first round of on-site inspections of some of 
the  entities.  This  needs  to  be  addressed  and  remedied  urgently.  In  this  context,  industry 
organizations like IAMAI can play a useful role if they increasingly assume the role of a SRO 
rather than a mere lobbying body for its members. I thank you for your attention as I leave 
you with these thoughts and concerns. 
I wish your deliberations all success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
