Louis Kasekende: Econometric analysis and policy changes in Africa 
Opening remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at The 
Seventeenth Conference of the African Econometric Society, Kampala, 25 July 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  begin  by  welcoming  everyone  to  this  conference  and,  to  those  of  you who have 
travelled from abroad, to Uganda. 
The theme of the conference is “Econometric Analysis and Policy Challenges in  Africa”. 
It  is  a  theme  which  is  close  to  my  own  heart  as  a  central  banker,  because  I  am 
frequently  faced  with  having  to  make  policy  decisions  in  circumstances  in  which  our 
knowledge  of  critical  relationships  in  the  economy  –  for  example  the  relationships  which 
underlie the monetary transmission mechanism – is somewhat rudimentary. In many cases, 
decisions  must  be  taken  even  though  there  exist  no  strong  empirical  evidence  drawn 
directly  from  our own economy to inform our assumptions about the economic relationships 
which  are  relevant  to  these  decisions.  Instead  we  have  to  fall  back  on  what economic 
theory  tells  us  about  the  nature  of  these  relationships,  supplemented  in  some  cases  by 
empirical  evidence  of  similar  relationships  from  other  African countries, if such evidence 
exists. 
Hence  inevitably  the  expected  outcomes  of  decisions  are  often  clouded  in  uncertainty;  of 
course  in  a  probabilistic  world  outcomes  are  always  uncertain,  but  the  degree  of 
uncertainty  is  probably  greater  in  Africa  than  in  many  other parts  of  the  world,  because 
our  economies  have  been  the  subject  of  much  less  rigorous  empirical  research  than 
economies  elsewhere.  Clearly  this  is  not  a  satisfactory  basis  for  making  decisions 
which  affect  the  lives  of  millions  of people.  It  is  a  problem  which  affects  policymaking  in 
many  different  areas  of  macro  and  micro  economics,  from  monetary  policy,  to  public 
finance, to agricultural policy. 
Econometric  analysis  can  make  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  understanding  of the  policy 
challenges  in  Africa  because  it  is  the  key  research  tool  available  to economists  for  the 
testing  of  hypotheses  against  the  data,  for  establishing  causal  relationships  and  for  the 
measurement  of  relationships  posited  by  economic  theory.  In  the  final  analysis,  if  we 
want to strengthen our analysis of  economic relationships, there is no substitution for taking 
theory to the data in a statistically  rigorous  manner.  Econometrics  is  also  a  valuable  tool 
for  aiding economic forecasting, which is essential for policymaking in many areas. 
Although  there  has  been  much  progress  over  the  last  few  years,  supported  in  no  small 
measure  by  the  African  Econometric  Society,  the  volume  of  econometric research  on  all 
aspects  of  African  economies  is  tiny  by  comparison  with  the empirical research on the 
economies of other regions of the world. I will highlight one topical example to illustrate this 
point. 
Since the global financial crisis triggered recession in many parts of the world, the  efficacy 
of  fiscal  policy  as  a  countercyclical  tool  to  stimulate  aggregate demand has been at the 
forefront  of  the  macroeconomic  policy  debate  in  many  countries.  Researchers,  in  both 
academia  and international institutions,  have responded by applying rigorous econometric 
techniques to the empirical analysis  of  the  relationship  between  fiscal  policy  and  output 
under  different  circumstances  (the  level  of  public  debt,  whether  monetary  policy  is 
accommodative,  etc).  This  research,  which  has  generally  provided  evidence  that  fiscal 
policy  has  standard  Keynesian  effects  in  economies  with  negative  output  gaps,  has 
undoubtedly advanced scientific knowledge in this area, and this advance in knowledge has 
begun to influence the policy debate in the Advanced countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  negative 
impact  on  domestic  economies  of 
Fiscal  policy  has also  been  used as a  countercyclical  tool  in  some  African countries  to 
offset 
the  global  economic  crisis. 
However, in contrast to the advanced countries, there has as yet been  virtually  no  empirical 
analysis  conducted  on  African  economies  to  guide policymakers charged with setting fiscal 
policy as to whether, and what circumstances,  fiscal  policy  might  have  the  intended  impact 
on  output.  Fiscal policymakers have been forced to fall back on what economic theory tells 
them should happen, even though the theory itself provides no unequivocal answers. 
What  can  we  do  to  increase  the  volume  of  high  quality  empirical  research  on  African 
economies?  First,  we  need  to  strengthen  the  training  of  African  economists  at  the  post 
graduate  level  in  econometric  research  techniques.  The  African  Economic  Research 
Consortium  is  making  a  valuable  contribution  to this  endeavour  and  is  giving  incentives 
to  African  researchers  to  undertake  and  publish  their  research.  Second,  we  need  to 
make  more  resources  available  to  fund  research  in  African  universities  and  research 
institutes.  Third,  we  need  to improve  the  quality  and  availability  of  economic  data.  There 
is  no  doubt  that econometric  analysis  of  African  economies  is  severely  hampered  by  the 
paucity of reliable data, especially high frequency economic data. As a result, estimating time 
series  relationships  is  often  very  difficult.  Data  on  some  of  the  key  variables  in  these 
relationships,  such  as  GDP,  are  often  lacking  at  the  frequency  which  is  required  for 
estimation.  Unfortunately,  I  think  that  national  account  statistics  have  not  always  been 
given the priority that they deserve by the statistical bureau in many African countries. 
The  quality  and  quantity  of  econometric  research  on  African  economies  is,  however, 
increasing. The quality and breadth of the papers which will be presented  at  this  conference 
bears  testimony  to  the  tremendous  strides  which researchers  on  African  economies  are 
making,  despite  the  difficulties  that  that  they  face  in  terms  of  data  and  resources.  The 
conference  features  sessions  on  a number  of  themes  which  are  particularly  pertinent  to 
the  most  salient  policy challenges facing the African continent. 
Many  of  papers  address  issues  which  are  critical  to  agricultural  productivity,  including 
the  adoption  and  benefits  of  high  yield  seed  varieties,  the  control  of  soil  erosion,  the 
benefits  of  dams  and  the  impact  of  climate  change.  The  modernisation  of  agriculture  is 
probably  the  most  pressing  long  term  policy challenge  facing  Africa,  because  it  holds 
the  key  to  structural  transformation, alleviating poverty and ensuring food security. As such 
it  is  very  opportune  that  researchers  have  directed  so  much  of  their  efforts  to  analysing 
different aspects of the topic. 
The conference also features many papers which address the related challenges of  human 
capital  and  household  welfare;  challenges  which  are  also 
term 
development  in  Africa.  Because  of  the  application  of  econometric  techniques  to  large 
scale  household  data  sets,  we  are  now  acquiring  a  better  understanding  of 
the 
microeconomic  factors  which  influence  poverty,  health, education and household incomes, 
all of which are issues which will be covered in papers to be presented at the conference. 
Macroeconomics  provides  a  third  set  of  issues  which  are  relevant  to  the  policy challenges 
facing  Africa  and  which  feature  prominently  at  this  conference.  As  our  economies 
become  more  diversified,  sophisticated  and 
the  global  economy, 
macroeconomic  management  will  become  more  complex  and challenging,  and  hence  our 
need  for  high  quality  macroeconomic  research  will become  even  more  critical.  Papers  to 
be  presented  at  this  conference  address  a  number  of  important  macroeconomic  topics, 
including  the  determinants  of  growth,  exchange  rates  and  inflation,  financial  liberalisation, 
and the macroeconomic consequences of oil exports. 
I  would  like  to  finish  by  briefly  discussing  the  relationship  between  academic  research 
and  policymaking.  Obviously,  there  are  mutual  benefits  to  be  gained  by  researchers  and 
policymakers  from  the  former  undertaking  policy  relevant  research,  but 
is 
important  that  researchers  maintain  their  academic independence at all costs. They should 
not  be  too  close  to  policymakers,  whether  in  governments  or  international  institutions,  or 
integrated 
to  long 
integral 
think 
into 
it 
I 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
dependent  on  them  for  financial resources.  If  they  allow  their  academic  independence  to 
be eroded, researchers will eventually become reluctant to give policymakers messages that 
they do not want  to  hear. Moreover the economic research  agenda should  not  be dictated 
by  governments  or  international  institutions;  it  should  be  determined  by  academics 
themselves. The utility of research findings to policymakers is not the only valid reason  for 
undertaking  research.  These  issues  are  relevant  to  academics  all  over  the  world  but 
probably  more  pressing  in  Africa  because  the  sources  of  funding for research on African 
economies are often much narrower than elsewhere. 
I would like to wish you fruitful deliberations in the conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
