Daniel Mminele: The importance and development of sound financial 
market infrastructures to position South Africa in SADC, BRICS and 
worldwide 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
SWIFT Business Forum, Johannesburg, 6 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. 
It  is  a  privilege  to  be  here  today  and  to  participate  in  this  SWIFT  Business Forum.  It  is 
taking  place  at  a  special  time,  coinciding  with  the  celebration  of  South  Africa’s  three 
decade long association with the SWIFT community. It is quite fitting then that today is also 
the first forum that focusses specifically on the South African financial community. I should 
also  at  the  outset  acknowledge  SWIFT  as  a  worldwide  Financial  Market  Infrastructure 
which  is extensively  used in South Africa and also indicate that South Africa has recently 
joined  the  SWIFT  Oversight  arrangement  headed  by  the  National Bank of Belgium. 
The  program  looks  to  be  one  that  should  provoke  a  lot  of  discussion,  particularly  around 
South  Africa’s  role  in  international  fora  such  as  BRICS, and how we can best contribute 
towards and leverage off these relationships. 
Why is BRICS important? 
2.  
In  December  2010,  it  was  announced  that  South  Africa  had  been  invited  to become  a 
full member of the BRIC group. In April 2011, South Africa joined the  BRICS  group  at  the 
third  Summit  in  China.  South  Africa’s  inclusion  into  BRICS  was  met  with  surprise  by 
many,  for  a  number  of  reasons,  not  least of which  relates to the economics. It is true that 
South  Africa’s  economy  is  dwarfed  by  the  other  BRIC  countries  when  measured  in  GDP 
purchasing power parity terms. South Africa’s unemployment rate is also much higher, while 
in terms of population, we are similarly much smaller. Had it been on the basis of economics 
alone, South Africa probably would not be part of BRICS today. Why then? South Africa is 
strategically  important,  boasts  a  relatively  developed  economy,  deep  and  liquid  financial 
markets,  a  well-regulated  banking  sector,  strong 
institutions,  democratic  governing 
standards, and has the ability to influence the global agenda as a result of its participation in 
fora such as the G20 and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
South  Africa  is  also  systemically  important  in  the  African  context.  To  quote  from  the 
2012  New  Delhi  BRICS  report,  “With  the  most  developed  industrial  and 
financial 
capabilities  on  the  African  continent,  South  Africa’s  role  in  the  integration  of  policies, 
markets,  finance,  and 
to  Africa’s  economic  development  and 
realization  of  the  continent’s  potential  as  a  growth pole  in  the  global  economy.  Outwardly 
oriented  South  African  companies  are among  the  largest  sources  of  FDI  in  Africa  and 
the  country’s  development  financing  institutions  are  playing  an  increasing  role  in  the 
funding  of  regional  infrastructure  investment.”  Therefore,  our  inclusion  in  BRICS  has 
implications  not  just  for  South  Africa  but  for  the  continent  as  a  whole  and  adds  a 
continent-wide  dimension  to  BRICS,  which  lends  it  greater  credibility  and  significance. 
Rather  than  being  a  mere  “gate-crasher”  at  somebody’s  party,  South  Africa  has  an 
important role to play and can add significant value to BRICS. 
Why  is  BRICS  important?  Globally,  BRICS  accounts  for  over  40  per  cent  of  the  world 
population,  over  a  quarter  of  world  GDP  and  16  per  cent  of  world export volumes. In the 
medium to long-term, the significance of BRICS countries on the global arena is expected to 
infrastructure 
is  vital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
grow,  and  this  presents  immense  opportunities  for  cooperation  in  a  number  of  areas, 
including trade, infrastructure development and finance. 
The BRICS have identified a number of areas for cooperation. Among these is the  proposed 
new  BRICS  Development  Bank.  A  feasibility  study  is  being conducted currently, and it 
is hoped that the creation of such a bank will help mobilise resources for infrastructure and 
sustainable  development  projects  in BRICS and other emerging economies and developing 
countries.  These  efforts  are  to  supplement  the  existing  efforts  of  multilateral  and  regional 
financial  institutions  for global growth and development.  A report back is expected by the 
fifth Summit to be held in South Africa in 2013. There are also ongoing  discussions  about 
the  possibility  of 
further 
developments  with  respect  to  BRICS,  and  the  hosting  of  the  fifth  BRICS  Summit  in 
March next  year provides  South Africa with  an  opportunity to give  strategic  and  directional 
input into various BRICS initiatives. 
local  currency  swap  agreements.  We 
forward 
look 
to 
the 
impede 
interrupt  or 
financial  market 
infrastructure  can 
The importance of financial market infrastructure 
3.  
I  will  now  turn  to  the  topic  of  this  forum,  being  the  importance  of  financial  market 
infrastructures.  All  of  us  sitting  here  today  understand  and  appreciate  the  importance  of 
sound  financial  market  infrastructures.  They  play  a  critical  role  in  the  global  financial 
system, often likened to the “plumbing of a building”, largely going unnoticed, until such time 
that  there  is  a  leak  or  a  pipe bursts. A  problem  with  the  plumbing  of  the  financial  system 
can  have  severe  repercussions  for  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  A  disorderly 
failure  in 
the  effective 
operation of markets, causing severe systemic disruptions and financial instability.  Financial 
market  infrastructures  went  largely  unnoticed  until  the global  financial  crisis  broke,  and 
although  they  performed  well  through  the crisis, it was only then that an appreciation was 
found for the true importance of  such  infrastructures,  reflecting  the  fundamental  role  they 
play  in  ensuring financial stability. 
With this in mind, in April 2012, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems at the 
Bank for  International  Settlements  (CPSS)  and the  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO)  published  new  international  standards  for  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement  systems,  including  central  counterparties.  The  main  objectives  of  the  new 
principles are to ensure a robust global financial market infrastructure, which if faced with the 
financial  shocks  of  the  magnitude  experienced  in  2007/2008,  will  continue  to  operate 
effectively. 
These new standards are tougher and are due to be adopted by CPSS and IOSCO members 
by the end of 2012. However, I note that the next session will be dealing specifically with this 
issue, insofar as it pertains to South Africa and our state of readiness, and so I will refrain 
from going into any further detail. 
Financial market infrastructure developments in South Africa 
4.  
It  is  important  to  indicate  at  the  outset  that  financial  market  infrastructures  in  both  the 
payment and securities markets require a collaborative approach from all the stakeholders. 
Clearing  and  settlement  processes  in  both  these  areas  involve  the  interaction  of  various 
parties,  including  participants,  infrastructure  providers  and  regulatory  authorities,  who  all 
have an important role to play. 
As early as 1993, discussions were initiated between the South African Reserve  Bank  (the 
Bank) and the banking industry to modernise and develop the  domestic  payment  system. 
In  this  process,  a  strategic  approach  for  the  development  of  the  payment  system  was 
adopted  and  meetings  were  held  at  different  levels  with  various  stakeholders,  which 
culminated  in  the  publication of  the  Framework  and  Strategy  document  for  the  National 
Payment  System  (commonly  known  as 
in  1995.  The  Blue  Book 
the  “Blue  Book”), 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
outlined  various  strategies  envisioned  for  the  payment  system  over  the  next  ten  years, 
leading  up  to  2005. The  strategies  addressed  various  aspects  of  payment system  reform 
that  had  been  identified,  as  well  as  the  establishment  of  key pillars of the desired financial 
market infrastructures and appropriate supporting  arrangements.  One  of  the  strategies,  for 
example,  relates  to  the establishment of a sound legal framework which culminated in the 
promulgation  of  the  National  Payment  System  (NPS)  Act  in  October  1998.  A  review 
completed  in  2003,  revealed  that  all  major  payment  system  strategies  that  had  been 
identified in the Blue Book had been achieved. 
The South African payment industry has matured immensely since the launch of  the  Blue 
Book  and  subsequently  two  additional  vision  documents  with  a  shorter  time  horizon  of 
five years, namely, Vision 2010 and Vision 2015, were established to guide the development 
of the payment system into the future. 
I would like to briefly sketch a broad outline of the payments industry in South Africa, before 
delving into the achievements made in the payment space since the introduction of the Blue 
Book. 
At the end of August 2012, there were 24 active settlement participants in the South African 
Multiple Options Settlement system (SAMOS). The bulk of settlement  happens  in  the  real 
time stream, which captures over 90 per cent of  settlements,  the  remainder  accounted  for 
by  the  retail  stream.  The  latter has experienced a significant increase in electronic funds 
transfer (EFT) credits over the years, increasing from 58 per cent of the retail stream in 2005 
to  74 per cent  in  2011. There  has also  been a substantial decline  in  cheque usage, given 
that this is a relatively expensive  payment instrument and much more  vulnerable  to  fraud. 
In  volume  terms,  the  bulk  of  purchases  at  retailers are  in  cash  (5.3  billion),  as  compared 
to  credit  (360  million)  and  debit  cards  (460  million).  In  value  terms,  however,  the 
difference  is  less  stark,  as  cash accounts for R332 billion worth of purchases at retailers, 
and  credit  and  debit cards accounting for R134 billion and R120 billion respectively. As at 
December  2011, 
teller  machines  and 
277  478  point  of  sale  devices.  If  one  looks  at  the  number  of  cards  in  issue, debit  cards 
are by far the most widely used, amounting to 42 million  out of a total number of  cards in 
issuance  of  62 million.  Credit  cards  in  issue  are  just under 8 million and gifts or pre-paid 
cards  being  the  next  highest  at  5.8  million.  The  growth  in  the  credit  card  industry  has 
been  hit  by  the  global  financial crisis,  largely  owing  to  more  stringent  borrowing  terms 
and  shrinking  credit limits.  The  use  of  mobile  devices  by  banks’  clients,  to  access  their 
accounts and to initiate/facilitate transactions, has also grown significantly over the past few 
years. These mobile devices include mobile phones and the various tablets available in the 
market today. There has also been a steady increase in the use of mobile phones to facilitate 
person to person payments/transfers. 
Since the launch of the Blue Book, numerous achievements have been made. On  9  March 
1998,  the  South  African  Multiple  Options  Settlement  (SAMOS) system  was  implemented. 
Since  then  various  upgrades  have  taken  place  to  ensure  that  the  settlement  system  is 
well-functioning, safe and efficient.  Thus far during 2012, the average value settled through 
SAMOS on a monthly basis equates  to  approximately  R7.3  trillion.  In  October  2008,  at  the 
height  of  the global  financial  crisis  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  a  record 
settlement of R8.5 trillion took place. 
The  upgrades  to  the  SAMOS  system  were  undertaken  in  the  interest  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole  and  in  order  to  ensure  South  Africa’s  continued  participation  in  the 
global financial arena. Some of  these include facilities that enabled  the  integration  of  the 
payment  system  and  securities  clearing  and  settlement  system. This  enabled  the  South 
African financial markets to conform  to  international  best  practice  with  the  introduction  of 
the  delivery  versus  payment  (DVP)  principle,  as  well  as  various  other  liquidity  saving 
mechanisms to make settlement more efficient. 
total  of  24  063  automatic 
there  were  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to 
the 
reduce 
industry 
initiative 
implemented 
The  low  value  Rand  payment  clearing systems have  also  evolved  to  current best  practice 
and  interfaces  for  these  systems  to  the  core  SAMOS  system have been established to 
ensure that settlement of all transactions is undertaken  in  central  bank  money  and,  as  far 
as  possible,  the  principle  of same day settlement is achieved. 
As  was  mentioned  earlier,  the  NPS  Act  was  promulgated  in  October  1998.  The  Act 
provided  the  SARB  with  the  mandate  to  oversee  the  payment  system  and  several 
amendments  have  been  effected  over  time  where  necessary. Clearing  and  settlement 
agreements  and  rules  have  also  been  implemented as part of the objective of creating a 
sound legal and regulatory framework. 
One  of  the  most  important  achievements  in  the  NPS  was  the  inclusion  of  the  South 
African  rand  in  the  Continuous  Linked  Settlement  (CLS)  system  in  2004.  CLS  is  a 
worldwide 
risks  associated  with 
cross-currency transactions by settling the two legs of a foreign  exchange  (FX)  transaction 
simultaneously  in  order  to  eliminate  FX settlement risk.1 
Leading  up  to  the  Rand  joining  the  CLS  settlement  system,  the  SARB  issued  a  position 
paper late in 2002 supporting the inclusion of the rand as a settlement currency in the CLS 
system and encouraged South African registered  banks  to  support  this  initiative  in  areas 
where  their  actions  were required to enable this initiative. 
On  6  December  2004,  CLS  Bank  International  (CLS  Bank)  announced  that  four  new 
currencies  went live  in  the  CLS  system, one  of them  being the  South African  rand. At the 
time, this brought the number of currencies being settled through  the  CLS  system  at  the 
end  of  2004,  to  fifteen.  This  achievement  ensured  the  integration  of  the  domestic 
financial  market  infrastructure  to  the international system that enables our local participants 
to benefit from the risk reduction opportunities offered by the CLS system. 
We  are  aware  that  while  none  of  the  other  BRICS  countries  have  joined  the CLS,  they 
are  currently  in  the  process  of  joining  the  CLS  system,  although  they  are  at  different 
stages  in  the  process.  Such  initiatives,  when  implemented,  will  provide  a  platform  for 
transactions among the BRICS countries to be undertaken in a safe and efficient manner and 
will help facilitate  the  many  initiatives  underway  in  the  BRICS  and  the  achievement  of our 
objectives. 
Another  major  project  which  is  currently  underway  is  the  integration  of  the  payment 
systems  in  the  Southern  African  Development  Community  (SADC),  so  as  to  create  a 
regional  financial  market  infrastructure.  The  approach  adopted  in  this  process  is  to 
implement  the  desired  infrastructure  on  a  small  scale,  initially  linking  a  few  countries 
and  thereafter  rolling  it  out  to  more countries in  a  controlled  manner. This will go  a  long 
way  in  facilitating trade within the region. International standards are adopted in this process 
to  ensure 
financial  market 
infrastructure  is  enabled  to  integrate  with  other  market  infrastructures  in  other  regions  as 
well  as  internationally.  It  is  envisaged  that  this  infrastructure  could be launched for testing 
as early as 2013. 
It  is  imperative  that  domestic  financial  market  infrastructures  are  developed  with  due 
consideration  of  international  standards  and  best  practice.  This  will enable integration with 
those  operated  by  other  countries  and/or  regions  and  thus  facilitate  cross  border  trade. 
Financial market infrastructures should endeavour to meet the highest standards of security, 
availability and operational  effectiveness  in  order  to  retain  the  confidence  of  its  users.  In 
this regard,  reputational  risk  is  key  in  maintaining  a  high  level  of  confidence  and trust in 
the system. 
that  where  appropriate 
regional 
future, 
the 
the 
in 
                                                
1   FX  settlement  risk  is  the  risk  that  originates  once  a  currency  has  been  irrevocably  paid  by  one  party,  and 
thereafter the counterparty fails to meet its obligation in the trade. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There are, however, challenges that need to be managed in the development of a financial 
market infrastructure. Some of these relate to striking a balance between interoperability and 
innovation. It is an accepted fact that interoperable systems are effective and convenient for 
their users. On the other hand, during the early stages of innovation, it is difficult to also meet 
the interoperability objective. A managed process is thus necessary to move new innovations 
to  interoperable  standards.  Another  important  factor  relates  to  regulation  vs.  innovation. 
While  regulators  should  avoid  stifling  innovation  in  terms  of  how  they  introduce  their 
regulation, there is sometimes a thin line in balancing this act. In the South African context, 
we have chosen an approach where regulation follows innovation. In this regard, we closely 
watch innovative developments and develop appropriate regulation to manage any possible 
risk as the system develops. 
Another  aspect  of  focus  in  the  development  of  financial  market  infrastructures  relates  to 
considerations  for  public  policy  objectives  such  as  financial  inclusion.  We  recognise  the 
importance  of  understanding  the  needs  and  requirements  of  the  market  so  as  to  avoid 
putting  effort  into  initiatives  that would  not  address  the  core  needs  of  the  targeted  users. 
Examples  of  such initiatives such as the Mzanzi account that have been undertaken in the 
quest to address our financial inclusion objective exist and some lessons have been drawn 
from these initiatives. 
Financial  inclusion  has  been  placed  on  the  Mexico  G20  agenda  in  2012, focussed  on 
improving  access  to  finance  and  improving  the  confidence  and integrity  of  the  financial 
sector.  The  work  is  divided  into  three  subgroups,  being  data  measurement,  standard 
setting  bodies  and  principles,  and  SME  financing.  South  Africa  co-chairs 
first 
sub-group  and  will  be  hosting  a Global  Partnership  for  Financial  Inclusion  (GPFI)  forum 
and  the  first  plenary  meeting  in  Cape  Town  at  the  end  of  this  month.  The  second 
subgroup  has  commissioned  a  study  into  the  relationship  between  financial  inclusion, 
financial  stability,  financial  integrity  and  financial  consumer  protection  with South Africa 
as the first country to be studied in this regard. 
the 
Concluding remarks 
5.  
Overall,  the  South  African  financial  market  infrastructures  are  well  developed and  always 
strive  to  meet  international  standards  and  best  practice  in  order  to be open for integration 
with  other  markets.  Our  participation  in  regional  formations,  international  standard  setting 
bodies  and  oversight  arrangements  also  offers  a  platform  for  us  to  gain  insight  and 
learn 
from  developments  elsewhere.  This  also  offers  us  an  opportunity  to  make  a 
contribution to these regional and international developments. 
I  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  share  our  experiences  and  look forward  to  hearing  your 
views. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
