Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Asian market integration and financial innovation 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
International  Conference  on  “Asian  market  integration  and  financial  innovation”,  Tokyo, 
10 February 2012. 
 The  world  economy  and  international  financial  system  is  entering  into  a  new  phase  of 
globalisation. Far from having an effect of slowing the pace of globalisation, the recent global 
financial crisis has intensified the process, resulting in a more connected and interdependent 
world. While – previously – globalisation manifested itself in the form of trade and investment 
between the emerging and developed world, emerging economies are now becoming more 
connected with each other within and across regions. This trend is being reinforced by similar 
changes in the pattern of financial flows. While previously, financial flows were predominantly 
between  the  developed  and  emerging  world,  greater  financial  integration  among  the 
emerging economies is facilitating the intensification of this connectivity. 
While unable to be in Tokyo, it is my pleasure to speak at this international conference on the 
topic  of  Asian  Financial  Integration.  My  remarks  will  touch  on  the  main  motivation  for 
pursuing  financial  integration  in  Asia,  despite  the  fact  that  its  absence  has  not  previously 
hindered  economic  integration  in  the  region.  Whilst  Asia  may  draw  lessons  from  the 
European experience, I will discuss the different approach that is being pursued in Asia. The 
growing internationalisation of Islamic finance is also contributing to strengthened economic 
and financial ties among emerging economies including in Asia and the Middle East. Finally, 
I  will  discuss  the  current  global  regulatory  reform  and  its  possible  implications  for  regional 
financial integration in Asia. 
The  aspiration  for  greater  economic  and  financial  integration  in  Asia  is  to  achieve  greater 
shared  prosperity  that  is  mutually  reinforcing  for  the  economies  in  the  region.  Regional 
financial integration will achieve more efficient and effective intermediation of funds to enable 
at  least  some  part  of  the  surplus  savings  of  the  region  to  be  channeled  to  productive 
investments  in  the  region,  and  at  lower  costs  with  improved  risk  diversification.  Improved 
access to financing would also support intra-regional trade while a more cohesive region will 
facilitate  greater  collaborative  efforts  on  safeguarding  financial  stability.  Collective  actions 
would  also  enhance  the  ability  to  better  manage  and  respond  to  risks  to  the  region.  And 
finally, as a cohesive group, our perspectives and position would be better represented in the 
governance structure and processes in the international financial system. 
Approach of financial integration in Asia 
Asia  comprises  a  highly  heterogeneous  group  of  countries  that  are  different  in  terms  of 
economic structure, natural resources, degree of market orientation, stage of development, 
size  and  degree  of  openness.  Asian  economies  have  however,  recognised  the  respective 
individual comparative advantages and have leveraged on the prevailing complementarities. 
Given  the  diverse  nature  of  the  region,  it  would  be  highly  ambitious  and  challenging  to 
achieve  the  necessary  preconditions  for  achieving  an  integration  that  is  similar  to  that  in 
Europe. 
The integration process in Europe was taken forward with the establishment of supranational 
institutions  with  mandates  to  promote  common  approaches  and  frameworks  across  the 
member states in the union. In contrast, Asia is adopting a more flexible approach. Regional 
financial  integration  in  Asia  has  manifested  itself  mainly  in  the  form  of  greater  regional 
presence  and  participation  in  domestic  financial  systems.  This  is  taking  place  with  the 
gradual and sequenced liberalisation of the financial sector and the capital account. Capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for  surveillance 
is  being  reinforced  by  arrangements 
account  liberalisation  in  particular  is  prompting  increased  intra-regional  investment  and 
portfolio flows which in turn contributes to the deepening of the financial markets.  
By itself, the liberalisation of the financial sector and the capital account will however, not be 
sufficient  to  achieve  regional  financial  integration.  Most  important,  is  the  development  of 
regional  financial  markets,  the  financial  infrastructure  including  the  regional  payments  and 
settlement  systems,  harmonising  the  financial  standards  and  practices  including  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  and  building  the  institutional  capacity  of  the  domestic 
financial intermediaries. For the ASEAN region, an agreement has already been reached to 
allow for different speeds of integration depending on the state of readiness of the respective 
member  countries.  This 
for 
assessments  of  risks  to  the  region  and  regional  frameworks  for  crisis  management  and 
resolution, including arrangements for mutual assistance. Equally important in this process is 
the  cooperation  and  collaboration  among  regulatory  authorities  for  sustaining  regional 
financial  stability.  Much  of  this  work  has  focused  on  putting  in  place  strong  and  effective 
institutional arrangements to preserve regional financial stability. 
In the decade following the Asian Financial Crisis, most of Asia has accelerated the pace of 
financial  sector  development  and  reforms.  Several  of  the  Asian  economies  have  made 
significant  strides  in  improving  the  soundness and  efficiency  of  financial  institutions  and  in 
developing domestic financial markets. At the regional level, key initiatives have included the 
development of the regional bond markets through the creation of various Asian Bond Funds 
and the ASEAN+3 Bond Market Initiatives, the regional arrangements for crisis management 
that  includes  liquidity  support,  and  the  collaborative  efforts  advanced  under  EMEAP  to 
facilitate liquidity management for financial institutions operating in the region through Cross-
Border  Collateral  Arrangements.  Currently,  while 
intra-regional  cross-border  portfolio 
investments  within  Asia  is  relatively  small,  it  has  already  increased  to  28  percent  of  total 
assets holdings in 2011 compared with 21 percent in 2001. 
Another important development that has contributed to greater regional financial integration 
is  the  increasing  role  of  Islamic  finance  in  the  international  financial  system.  In  its  early 
stages  of  development,  Islamic  finance  was  highly  domestic-centric  in  its  orientation.  This 
recent  decade  has  seen  the  rapid  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  resulting  in 
significant  growth  in  cross  border  financial  flows.  The  development  of  Islamic  financial 
markets, in particular, the sukuk market, the progressive financial sector liberalisation, and 
the  establishment  of  international  arrangements  and  institutions  to  safeguard  financial 
stability,  cumulatively  have  contributed  to  enhance  the  international  dimension  of  the 
industry. There are now more than 600 Islamic financial institutions operating in more than 
75 countries. 
Given that Islamic financial transactions require an underlying economic transaction, it is a 
form  of  financial  intermediation  that  is  well  anchored  to  serve  the  real  economy.  With  its 
internationalisation,  it  has  become  an  increasingly  more  important  channel  for  the  efficient 
allocation of financial resources across borders and for the diversification of risks. This new 
international dimension of Islamic finance has facilitated stronger financial ties between Asia 
and  the  Middle  East.  The  sukuk  market  in  particular  has  become  an  important  avenue  for 
international  fund  raising  and  investment  activities  that  generate  significant  cross  border 
flows. 
While the efforts to put in place these pre-conditions will continue, equally important is the 
role of the private sector in driving the Asian regional financial integration agenda, particularly 
in  building  the  institutional  capability  to  effectively  intermediate  funds  in  the  region.  While 
foreign presence throughout our region facilitates this process, it needs to be complemented 
by strong domestic regional intermediaries whose operations would be more inclusive and 
thus increase the potential for balanced growth in our region. 
Asia  has  demonstrated  its  resilience  to  the  many  shocks  from  the  international  financial 
markets  and  the  global  economy  during  this  recent  global  financial  crisis.  As  highly  open 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economies,  most  economies  in  Asia  have  been  highly  affected  by  these  developments. 
Stronger  domestic  demand,  greater  intra-regional  trade  and  investment,  reinforced  by 
resilient  financial  systems  and  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  have  supported  the 
economic  performance  of  our  region.  There  have  been  tremendous  payoffs  for  the  region 
from the decade long of financial reforms, institutional building and development of financial 
infrastructure.  Despite  the  highly  challenging  environment  of  slower  trade  and  volatile 
financial markets, financial intermediation in Asia has continued uninterrupted and financial 
markets, while more volatile, have remained orderly. It is thus on these strong foundations 
that the regional financial integration in Asia is not being set back. On the contrary, despite 
these  global  developments,  the  integration  process  has  continued  and  regional  financial 
cooperation  and  collaboration  has  strengthened,  reinforced  by  the  increased  regional 
participation and presence of the private sector. 
Global regulatory reforms 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  global  regulatory  reforms  and  its  implications  for  Asia.  The  global 
regulatory response to the financial crisis is now moving into the implementation phase. At its 
core are the reforms to build a stronger global regulatory framework to significantly raise the 
level of resilience of the banking system. While that work has now been largely finalised, the 
complex task of implementing the new global capital and liquidity standards is just beginning. 
Indeed,  this  implementation  is  proceeding  at  a  time  of  a  difficult  global  financial  and 
economic  environment.  Several  countries  have  however,  announced  their  timelines,  with 
some that are moving faster and further than the Basel III standards. 
Asia is in a relatively stronger position to transition to the new standards. We are, however, 
vigilant over the global economic and financial consequences of its implementation in other 
parts  of  the  world.  As  open  economies,  we  are  not  insulated  from  these  consequences. 
While the work of the Basel Committee suggests that the effect of tightening conditions on 
economic  growth  will  be  modest,  the  highly  dynamic  global  financial  conditions  imply  that 
regulators  will  have  to  continue  to  proceed  cautiously,  and  on  a  fully  informed  basis,  in 
implementing the new standards. Of importance is the need to recognise the point beyond 
which  the  costs  to  the  real  economy  exceed  the  desired  benefits  of  greater  systemic 
resilience.  
The reform agenda has also focused on the fundamental and no less significant changes to 
institutional arrangements and market structures. Some of these, such as reforms involving 
the  OTC  derivatives  markets  and  policy  frameworks  for  systemically  important  financial 
institutions  (SIFIs),  are  being  advanced  through  global  platforms,  notably  the  Financial 
Stability Board (FSB). Other reforms, such as the structural changes to banking models that 
are being contemplated in the UK and the implementation of wide-ranging reforms under the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  in  the  US,  although  not  being  imposed  outside  these  countries,  are 
nevertheless  charting  a  path  forward  that  is  likely  to  have  wider  ramifications,  given  the 
significant cross-border operations of affected institutions, including in Asia.  
Like most jurisdictions, the options for central clearing for domestic OTC derivatives are also 
being examined. These reforms are already under way in the world’s larger financial markets 
to  meet  the  G20  mandate  for  standardised  OTC  derivatives  transactions  to  be  centrally 
cleared  by  the  end  of  2012.  For  smaller  OTC  derivatives  markets  in  Asia,  the  effects  on 
domestic  market  efficiency  and  stability  are  key  considerations  in  contemplating  a  move 
towards central clearing arrangements. A key concern is the potential for the offshore central 
clearing of transactions in key domestic markets to increase the stability risks to the domestic 
financial system. There will also be limited scope for domestic regulatory authorities to have 
oversight  on  such  offshore  central  counterparties  (CCP)  and  to  respond  during  periods  of 
financial  stress.  Domestic  central  clearing  arrangements,  however,  could  have  negative 
effects  on  efficiency  and  the  functioning  of  the  market,  in  particular  for  cross  border 
transactions. 
reduce  netting 
fragmented  clearing  arrangements  could 
In  addition, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
opportunities and collateral efficiencies, in turn raising costs to participants. There is also a 
need to close important information gaps on the rules that will govern global CCPs, including 
the criteria for mutual recognition of CCPs and membership conditions, as well as details on 
the  arrangements  to  mitigate  the  concentration  of  risk  to  the  CCP  itself  or  its  members. 
These  gaps  are  currently  limiting  a  more  complete  assessment  of  domestic  and  regional 
options for central clearing.  
The global reforms for the most part would contribute to the promotion of more consistent 
approaches to regulation which is an important precondition for greater financial integration 
in Asia. In a number of countries, the global reforms have had a role in accelerating further 
domestic priorities to strengthen financial resilience. Initiatives that are being advanced at the 
global level also work to strengthen regional financial stability arrangements. This includes 
putting in place more robust frameworks for the oversight of systemically important financial 
institutions at a regional level. Within Asia, a clear evolution of such frameworks can already 
be seen in the operationalisation of cross-border supervisory colleges for financial institutions 
with  a  significant  regional  presence.  The  reforms  have 
further  encouraged  closer 
coordination and communication on financial stability developments between countries in the 
region.  This  has  been  borne  out  of  common  perspectives  and  challenges  shared  among 
countries  in  the  region  on  the  direction  and  impact  of  the  reforms,  and  the  need  to  bring 
forward  the  collective  views  of  the  region.  These  implications  will  further  strengthen  the 
foundations for regional financial integration in Asia. 
Policy  shifts  and  the  proliferation  of  binding  “one-size-fits-all”  regulatory  prescriptions 
however, goes against the grain of regulation that is proportionate to risk which has been a 
well established principle of sound regulation. There is therefore considerable risk to simply 
following  new  “trends”  which  may  lead  us  down  yet  another  potentially  misguided  path.  In 
particular,  the  significant  efforts  made  in  the  region  over  the  recent  decade  to  bolster 
financial sector efficiency and innovation, which in turn promotes financial integration, could 
be disproportionately curtailed.  
In addition, it has only been recently that the global attention has also turned to enhancing 
supervisory  intensity  and  effectiveness  as  an  essential  component  of  the  financial  reform 
effort. This is a welcome move and will add a critical dimension to the consideration of future 
reforms  by  national  authorities.  In  Asia,  financial  reforms  were  already  accompanied  by  a 
significantly strengthened supervisory approach and safety net arrangements, which served 
to  check  unfettered  innovation  and  reckless  risk-taking  behaviours  and  promote  strong 
incentives for prudent risk management. For these reasons, our banking systems have been 
resilient through the global financial crisis and have continued to remain strong since, despite 
continued  risks  in  the  global  economy.  As  we  contemplate  the  raft  of  reforms  that  will 
continue to occupy the global agenda in the next few years, our considerations should be to 
pursue  domestic  and  regional  solutions  that  will  deliver  a  more  resilient  financial  system 
without impairing the continuous provision of efficient financial services that are vital for our 
economies. 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  While  many  challenges  remain,  Asia  is  at  the  cusp  of 
experiencing significant collective economic growth and development. Asia should however 
significantly  draw  important  lessons  from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  recognise  the 
implications  of  greater  interdependence.  In  addition,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe 
relates not only to fiscal matters but to debt management which has significant implications 
for financial markets. While fiscal issues may remain a national matter, its financing and its 
broader consequences needs to be addressed. Given the positive environment in Asia, the 
opportunity needs to be taken to put in place the necessary arrangements to best address 
these challenges. The world is increasingly now looking towards Asia. With these enabling 
conditions,  Asian  economies  would  be  better  positioned  to  collectively  strive  and  work 
towards achieving the shared vision of financial and economic integration that will not only 
unlock our potential but also enhance the prospects to contribute towards a more balanced 
and sustainable global economy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
