Andrew G Haldane: Accounting for bank uncertainty 
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
at  the  Information  for  Better  Markets  conference,  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  in 
England and Wales, London, 19 December 2011. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Financial Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank  Alan  Ball,  Verena  Bracke,  Antony  Ford,  Priya  Kothari,  Vasileios  Madouros,  Colin  Miles  and  Peter 
Richardson and Paul Tucker for comments and contributions. 
Introduction1 
Fair value accounting principles are under attack from all quarters – accountants, regulators 
and politicians. The paper by Christian Laux is a welcome attempt to shed some analytical 
light  on  this  heated  debate.  It  represents  a  staunch  defence  of  fair  value  accounting 
principles, as the least-worst means of measuring and managing financial risk. It makes a 
compelling case. In these comments, I will focus on three issues.  
Linking  these  issues  is  the  idea  that  the  special  characteristics  of  banks  might  require  a 
special accounting treatment, perhaps even a distinct accounting regime. As context for that, 
the  fair  value  debate  is  first  placed  in  some  historical  context.  Accounting  rules  for  banks 
have  not  stood  the  test  of  time,  especially  at  crisis  time.  Better  recognition  of  the 
uncertainties associated with bank assets, and the fragilities associated with bank liabilities, 
might make for a more durable accounting regime.  
Fair values and financial crises 
The fair value debate is not a new one. It has a history stretching back at least a century. The 
fortunes  of  this  debate  have  been  shaped  importantly  by  financial  crises.  Indeed,  a  clear 
historical  pattern  has  emerged:  fair  value  accounting  principles  have  waxed  when  asset 
prices and banks are rising and waned when both are falling.2  
Consider  experience  in  the  United  States  either  side  of  the  Great  Depression.  Fair  value 
principles were rolled-out progressively during the early part of the 20th century. This move 
was led by the banks who held marketable securities as assets. As these securities rose in 
value ahead of the Great Crash, marking them to market allowed profits to be booked. Rising 
asset  prices  and  bank  profits  went  hand  in  hand,  with  fair  values  playing  the  role  of 
matchmaker. That was one reason why the “roaring ‘20s” roared.  
The stock market crash of 1929 put paid to this happy marriage. Falling asset prices, marked 
to  market,  crushed  bank  profits  and  balance  sheets.  In  the  United  States,  around 
10,000 banks  went  bust  between  1929  and  1938.  Fair  values  were  now  seen  as  more 
troublemaker  than  matchmaker.  Pressures  to  suspend  fair  values,  from  banks,  regulators 
and politicians, began to mount. 
By 1938, after an initial recovery from the Great Crash, the United States was bracing itself 
for a double-dip recession. In response, under pressure from the Federal Reserve, President 
Roosevelt suspended fair valuation of investment bank assets. He instructed bank regulators 
                                                 
1  These remarks were given at the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales Information for Better Markets 
conference on 19 December 2011, in response to a paper by Christian Laux. Both the paper and remarks are forthcoming in 
Accounting and Business Research (July 2012). 
2  Simonson and Hempel (1993), Plantin, Sapra and Shin (2008), Haldane (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to  revert  instead  to  what  today  would  be  called  amortised  cost.  This  was  regulatory 
forbearance on a system-wide scale. And a suspension of fair value accounting rules lay at 
its heart.  
Fast  forward  half  a  century.  During  the  1970s,  fair  value  principles  began  again  to  extend 
their reach. The United States Savings and Loans crisis in the mid-1980s provided further 
impetus.  One  of  the  major  contributors  to  the  downfall  of  the  thrifts  was  amortised  cost 
valuation  conventions,  which  hindered  the  recognition  of  interest  rate  risk.  This  allowed 
systematic  over-reporting  of  the  health  of  the  thrifts.  In  response,  the  United  States 
developed and introduced a prompt corrective action regime, the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA), with fair values at its core. 
But the wind was again about to shift direction in response to financial pressures. From the 
early 1990s, the United States was facing severe financial headwinds. A real estate crash 
placed US bank balance sheets under acute stress.3 Falling asset prices, marked to market, 
added to these financial pressures. Questions about fair values resumed. In response, and 
echoing Roosevelt in 1938, President Bush granted the SEC authority to suspend fair value 
rules.  Although  this  authority  was  not  invoked,  it  demonstrated  a  willingness  to  provide 
system-wide forbearance through fair value accounting rules. 
Today, the self-same cycle is in motion. During the long pre-crisis boom, fair value principles 
gained  ground,  in  particular  in  the  valuation  of  debt,  equity  and  derivatives:  in  the  US, 
through  Statement  of  Financial  Accounting  Standard  157  (SFAS  157);  internationally, 
through International Accounting Standard 39 (IAS 39). As in the roaring ‘20s, rising asset 
prices, marked to market, inflated bank profits and balance sheets. Between 2000 and 2007, 
major  international  banks  recorded  accumulated  gains  in  their  trading  book  totalling  over 
£200 billion.  
But as the crisis tide has turned, with falling asset prices and failing banks, so too has the fair 
value  debate.  In  2008,  under  intense  pressure  from  an  ailing  banking  community,  the 
Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  and  the  International  Accounting  Standards 
Board (IASB) eased back on fair value accounting rules. For example, banks were allowed to 
switch financial instruments from trading to holding to avoid mark-to market requirements.  
So,  historically,  fair  value  accounting  principles  have  gained  ground  when  the  going  has 
been good, and lost it when it has got tough. From a financial stability perspective, this is a 
cause  for  concern.  To  see  why,  consider  how  banks’  balance  sheets  then  appear  to 
investors.  During  the  asset  upswing,  fair  value  gains  ground.  Mark-to-market  gains  are 
booked as profits. To the extent that asset prices are over-inflated, so too are the recorded 
profits of the banks.  
During the downswing, fair value principles are rolled back. Potential losses are then hidden 
from  view.  Today,  some  of  the  uncertainty  around  global  bank  valuations  stems  from  the 
difficulty  in  gauging  these  losses,  obscured  by  provisioning  practices  in  banking  books. 
Regulators and investors alike fear the fog created by such forbearance. 
In  sum,  accounting  rules  in  general,  and  fair  value  principles  in  particular,  appear  to  have 
played  a  role  in  both  over-egging  the  financial  upswing  and  elongating  the  financial 
downswing. They have tended to over-emphasise return in the boom and under-emphasise 
risk  in  the  bust.  That  is not  a  prudent  approach.  Indeed,  it  is  a  pro-cyclical  one.  We  need 
accounting rules for banks which are crisis-neutral, valuation conventions for all seasons.  
What  accounting  regime  might  best  deliver  this  robustness?  A  reasonable  starting  point 
would be to recognise the clear differences between bank and non-bank balance sheets, in 
                                                 
3  Bernanke and Lown (1991). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
particular  valuation  uncertainty  associated  with  assets  and  maturity  mismatch  associated 
with liabilities.  
Bank assets and valuation uncertainty 
Banks’  asset  portfolios  are  not  just  larger  and  more  complex  than  for  non-financial 
companies. The business of banking is predicated on banks’ capacity to screen and monitor 
these assets more accurately than capital markets. Banks serve as a “delegated monitor” for 
investors.4 This means the risks and uncertainties around the valuation of bank assets are 
fundamentally different than for non-financial firms. 
To willingly finance loans to banks, however, investors need to be capable of monitoring and 
pricing  these  risks  (known  unknowns)  and  uncertainties  (unknown  unknowns).5  Risks  to 
banks’ balance sheets include the credit, market and liquidity risks associated with different 
asset classes. Pricing these risks is, in some respects, the less difficult task. Standard asset 
pricing models, such as the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), put the pricing of risk at 
their core.  
Pricing uncertainty is an entirely different kettle of fish. That uncertainty arises in part from 
the absence of a single, well-defined model for pricing some assets. When there is model 
uncertainty,  the  equilibrium  price  of  an  asset  is  no  longer  uniquely  defined.  Instead 
equilibrium  prices  are  defined  by  a  range.6  The  wide  range  of  prices  at  which  similar-risk 
assets have recently been carried on the balance sheet of banks is testament to the scale of 
this model uncertainty (Chart 1). 
To  price  that  uncertainty,  investors  would  need  information  on  the  potential  range  of 
valuations, looking across sets of models and classes of assets. Historically, that information 
has not been made available to investors. Post-crisis, this may have contributed to investor 
aversion to bank instruments. Pre-crisis, it may have contributed to a lack of timely action by 
banks themselves to restrict exposures to assets with significant valuation uncertainty.  
In the light of this, the Bank of England has recently helped initiate a programme to enhance 
information  on  the  valuation  range  of  banks’  fair-valued  assets,  working  alongside  the 
Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA)  and  the  auditing  profession.  A  framework  for  capturing 
such  uncertainty  was  put  forward  in  an  FSA  consultation  paper  on  “Proposed  Regulatory 
Prudent Valuation Return”, published in December 2011.7  
This  framework  suggests  that  an  upside  and  downside  range  for  fair-valued  assets  be 
identified, categorised into distinct buckets.8 This would give a guide to the potential variation 
in a bank’s solvency position arising from model uncertainty. It also asks banks to identify 
portfolios where valuation uncertainty is so severe that it is not possible to provide a plausible 
bound and to make disclosures around portfolios of particular interest to regulators. A VaR-
equivalent figure needs also to be disclosed for each asset class, with reconciliation to the 
net and gross values of all fair-valued assets and liabilities. 
This  initiative  can  be  seen  as  a  first,  but  important,  step  towards  quantifying  the  intrinsic 
uncertainty  around  the  valuation  of  banks’  asset  portfolio.  For  perhaps  the  first  time,  it 
provides  confidence  intervals  around  banks’  balance  sheets  –  what  some  have  called 
In the language of Knight (1921). 
                                                 
4  Diamond (1984).  
5 
6  Epstein and Wang (1994).  
7  Financial Services Authority (2011). 
8  These  buckets  would  provide  additional  granularity,  and  allow  greater  comparison  across  banks,  over  and  above  the 
classification employed by, for example, the IFRS Levels 1, 2 and 3.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
“confidence accounting”.9 The stage is now hopefully set for such principles to be rolled out 
across Europe. For example, the European Banking Authority (EBA) is developing binding 
technical standards on a prudent valuation methodology by end-2012.  
These  developments  are  a  significant  departure  from  past  practices  in  reporting  bank 
balance sheets. At present, this prudent valuation information will form part of the regulatory 
return, which may be publicly disclosed. But in time, it would be desirable if it formed part of 
banks’  reported  annual  accounts  to  maximise  investor  transparency  and  consistency.  This 
would  parallel  the  approach  used  in  other  realms  of  public  policy  to  capture  economic 
uncertainty – for example, the “fan charts” for inflation and GDP published by the Bank of 
England.  
Bank liabilities and maturity mismatches 
A second dimension along which banks’ balance sheets are different is the structure of their 
liabilities. Typically, these have a considerably shorter duration than their assets – in others 
words, banks engage in maturity transformation. This is one of the main reasons for separate 
regulatory and resolution rules for banks. But it has a bearing, too, on appropriate accounting 
rules. 
To see why, consider a bank with 50-year assets funded by overnight deposits. The bank 
intends  to  hold  these  assets  to  maturity.  Under  current  rules,  holding intent,  alongside  the 
characteristics of the assets themselves, is the arbiter of valuation. So those intentions would 
enable  the  bank  to  hold  the  asset  in  its  banking,  rather  than  trading,  book  for  regulatory 
purposes. 
But  the  liability  structure  of  banks  means  that  holding  ability  may  in  practice  matter  much 
more  than  holding  intent.  For  the  stylised  bank,  its  50-year  best  intentions  could  be 
invalidated  within  24  hours.  In  that  event,  amortised  cost  would  be  a  very  misleading 
valuation  convention.  The  bank’s  entire  asset portfolio  ought  really  to  be  valued  at  market 
(and potentially fire-sale) prices.  
For a bank with long-maturity illiquid assets, these differences in valuation convention could 
have a material impact on solvency. They may even be the difference between solvency and 
insolvency. Had their loan books been marked to market during the crisis, UK banks would 
have had significantly negative net worth for a protracted period (Chart 2). Most global banks 
would have been in a similar position. As the maturity of banks’ liabilities was low and falling 
during  this  period,  this  marked-to-market  thought-experiment  is  not  as  fanciful  as  it  may 
sound.  
Three  implications  follow.  First,  it  underscores  the  importance  of  liquidity  regulation.  This 
aims to close any maturity mismatch across the balance sheet. For example, the purpose of 
the net stable funding ratio, agreed as part of Basel III, is to correct mismatches calculated 
across the whole balance sheet.  
Second, there is a debate underway internationally about the appropriate criteria for defining 
the  boundary  between  banks’  trading  books  and  banking  books  for  regulatory  purposes. 
Currently,  the  regulatory  boundary  is  based  on  banks’  trading  intent.  Yet  as  the  stylised 
example  demonstrates,  holding  intentions  may  be  an  economically  incoherent  basis  for 
valuation. There is a strong economic case for moving away from the existing intent-based 
convention for differentiating banking and trading books. Indeed, there is a strong case for 
basing asset valuations more systemically on the characteristics of banks’ liabilities, as well 
as their assets.  
                                                 
9  Giffords and Mainelli (2009). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third, the maturity mismatch on banks’ balance sheets generates an inherent fragility. This 
makes assessments of “going concern” by the auditing profession problematic. A run on a 
bank  with  short-duration  liabilities  could  call  into  question  a  going  concern  assessment  in 
very short order. The situation is made worse by the fact that, at present, the options open to 
auditors when summarising a firm’s going concern status are effectively binary: either issue a 
“clean” report or not.  
For auditors, this can be an invidious choice. A clean verdict runs the risk of that judgement 
being quickly invalidated if maturity mismatches are exposed by a liquidity run. But anything 
other than a clean report might itself provoke that very run and hence become self-fulfilling. A 
more  graduated,  less  binary,  approach  to  classifying  banks’  accounts  may  be  needed  if 
auditors are to avoid finding themselves stuck between the devil and the deep blue sea.  
Conclusion 
To date, accounting rules for banks have bent with the financial stability wind in ways which 
have  amplified  investor  and  regulatory  uncertainty.  To  lean  against  the  prevailing  wind, 
accounting rules for banks may need to recognise more explicitly their differences. It is, after 
all,  precisely  these  differences  that  justify  separate  regulatory  and  resolution  regimes  for 
banks. A distinct accounting regime for banks would be a radical departure from the past.10 
But if we are to restore investor faith in banking sector balance sheets, nothing less than a 
radical rethink may be required.  
 
 
                                                  
10  Sharman (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
   References 
Bernanke,  B  and  Lown,  C  (1991),  “The  Credit  Crunch”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic 
Activity, 1991:2, pages 205–39.  
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  “Banking  and  monetary  statistics, 
1914–1941”, page 283, available at http://fraser.stlouisfed.org/publications/bms/. 
Diamond,  D  (1984),  “Financial  Intermediation  and  Delegated  Monitoring”,  Review  of 
Economic Studies, 51(3), pages 393–414. 
Epstein, L and Wang, T (1994), “Intertemporal Asset Pricing under Knightian Uncertainty”, 
Econometrica, 62(3), pages 283–322. 
Financial  Services  Authority  (2011),  “Proposed  Regulatory  Prudent  Valuation  Return”, 
Financial  Services  Authority,  CP11/30,  available  at  http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/cp/ 
cp11_30.pdf. 
Giffords,  B  and  Mainelli,  M  (2009),  “The  Road  to  Long  Finance:  A  Systems  View  of  the 
Credit Srunch”, Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation, Number 87.  
Haldane, A G (2010), “Fair Value in Foul Weather”, available at http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech427.pdf. 
Knight, F H (1921), “Risk, uncertainty and profit”, Hart, Schaffner and Marx Prize Essays, 
no. 31, Boston and New York, Houghton Mifflin.  
Laux,  C  (forthcoming),  “Financial  instruments,  financial  reporting,  and  financial  stability”, 
Vienna University of Economics and Business. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lord  Sharman  of  Redlynch  (2011),  “Going  Concern  and  Liquidity  Risks:  Lessons  for 
Companies and Auditors, Preliminary Report and Recommendations of the Panel of Inquiry”, 
available  at  http://www.frc.org.uk/images/uploaded/documents/The%20Sharman%20Report 
%20-%20final%200311111.pdf. 
Plantin, G, Sapra, H and H S Shin (2008), “Fair Value Accounting and Financial Stability”, 
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business Research Paper 08–15. 
Simonson,  D  G  and  G  H  Hempel  (1993),  “Banking  Lessons  from  the  Past:  The  1938 
Regulatory Agreement Interpreted”, Journal of Financial Services Research, pages 249–267.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
