Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The thrift banking industry amid an evolving 
global landscape 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the annual convention of the Chamber of Thrift Banks, Manila, 
21 March 2012. 
 The officers and members of the Chamber of Thrift Banks under the leadership of President 
Patrick  Cheng,  distinguished  leaders  of  the  banking  community,  fellow  workers  in 
government, special guests from the media, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
On  behalf  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  I  commend  the  CTB  for  the  choice  of  its 
convention theme this year. It is simple and straightforward: “Thrift Banks: Partner in National 
Development”. 
There is a clear understanding of the role you play in our economy. Indeed, by accumulating 
savings  of  depositors  to  finance  small  and  medium  enterprises…  as  well  as  consumer 
loans,… thrift banks continue to help the economy grow and generate employment.  
The resources of thrift banks deposits, loans and capital have all grown substantially. 
A review of industry figures indicate that increases in deposits in thrift banks were matched 
by  similar  increases  in  loans  to  consumers…  as  well  as  to  micro,  small,  and  medium 
enterprises…  or  what  we  call  MSMEs.  As  a  result,  thrift  banks  in  general  are  comfortably 
above the minimum threshold …mandated for MSME lending.  
Nevertheless, given that our banks remain quite liquid, thrift banks can help more deserving 
MSMEs. The importance of MSMEs in our country cannot be overemphasized. The MSME 
sector provides employment for most Filipinos; it is, in fact, the backbone of our economy. 
This is where the members of the Chamber of Thrift Banks can make a lot of difference in 
terms of moving our economy forward.  
Ladies and gentlemen. Our country is poised to achieve solid growth this year … with both 
our monetary and fiscal engines running. The BSP’s recent monetary policy decisions have 
kept  our  interest  rates  at  low  single-digit  levels.  This  keeps  the  cost  of  money  down  and 
provides stimulus for our economy. At the same time,  Government  has been raising more 
revenues and will be spending more this year for infrastructure, education, and other public 
services. Steady investment inflows provide additional impetus for growth.  
Thus,  while  the  global  economy  continues  to  grapple  with  the  adverse  impact  of  the  debt 
crisis  in  Europe  and  slower  growth  in  developed  countries,  the  Philippines  continues  to 
generate good macro-economic numbers.  
Among others, our economy grew 3.7 percent last year; the stock market is touching record 
high  levels;  inflation  rate  dipped  to  2.7 percent  in  February;  overseas  remittances  remain 
strong and continue to beat expectations; and our strong external position is underscored by 
gross international reserves that set a new record high of $77.7 billion in February 2012.  
Nevertheless, even with these positive indicators on hand, much still needs to be done if we 
are to sustain our growth momentum.  
This  is  the  reason  why  the  Bangko  Sentral  continues  to  pursue  a  reform  agenda  that 
encompasses  different  facets  of  market  conduct  and  the  enabling  prudential  environment. 
Our  reform  agenda  includes  continuing  capital-buildup…  for  our  banks  to  prepare  for  the 
challenges that lie ahead.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For  stand-alone  thrift  banks,  the  era  of  Basel  1.5  is  upon  you.  The  rest  of  the  thrift  bank 
industry  is  under  Basel  2,  but  for  those  with  parent  universal  and  commercial  banks,  the 
window for Basel 2.5 and Basel 3 has likewise been opened.  
It is easy to get lost in all the technical nuances of the Basel versions. We have in-between 
standards like 1.5 – our local variant – and 2.5 of the Bank for International Settlements.  
We can discuss its finer details later …but I trust that its fundamental message is not lost on 
the thrift banking industry: the Basel core principles and the Basel Accord itself…regardless 
of  version…  have  always  been  about  recognizing  the  risks  in  the  banking  business  as  a 
protection to our ultimate constituents.  
Indeed,  banks  must  not  only  redirect  the  flow  of  depositors’  savings  into  investments  and 
loans, they must also manage the risks that arise as a consequence. This is not a trivial task.  
Whether  your  focus  is  consumer  or  corporate  finance,  the  stakes  are  high.  Bank  failures 
always have adverse consequences: whether to the depositors who have invested their faith 
and funds in the bank, the bank employees who lose their jobs, and the community which 
depends on the economic activities funded by the savings of others. 
For this reason, we have been active proponents of the Basel framework. This is not mere 
adherence  to  the  letter  of  provisions  …but  rather  a  commitment  to  what  it  stands  for:  risk 
awareness and risk management. 
For the same reason, we have pushed the frontier with recent issuances on the compliance 
program under Circular 747… and on corporate governance under Circular 749.  
We want banks to put in place a compliance system that is best suited to their needs. While 
the circular establishes the senior role of the Chief Compliance Officer, it is the compliance 
system that is truly the central feature of the policy direction. We are not interested in citing 
one-off deviations; rather, we want to nurture a culture of compliance among our banks.  
This dovetails with the revised corporate governance framework… as approved recently by 
the  Monetary  Board.  As  you  know,  corporate  governance  is  about  managing  the  potential 
conflicts  of 
invariably  arise.  The  Board  of  Directors,  board-level 
committees… as well as senior management … all have distinct roles to play in managing 
the conflicts of interest between handling public funds and deploying the same at a margin.  
Independent  directors,  in  particular,  are  increasingly  critical  components  of  a  check  and 
balance  system  that  can  oversee  any  breaches  in  agreed  protocols  …  and  maintain  an 
appropriate system of compensation and rewards. 
At this point, I also wish to cite the valuable contribution of some members of the CTB to the 
Bangko Sentral’s stress testing program. By participating in this exercise, you provide us with 
a holistic view of potential system-wide effects from extreme events.  
We  understand  that  tests  –  especially  those  conducted  by  regulators  –  can  be  daunting 
exercises.  However,  the  gains  we  stand  to  make…  are  considerable.  We  look  forward 
therefore to increased participation of more thrift banks in due course.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  Basel  framework,  the  new  circulars  on  compliance  and 
governance,  …  and  the  stress  tests….  will  serve  as  catalysts  for  change  in  your  banks. 
Certainly, change is not easy; on the other hand, standing still is not an option. We either 
innovate… or stagnate.  
Today,  in  your  convention,  I  hope  you  will  maximize  the  opportunities  available  to  you  to 
identify  possible  areas  for  improvement,  …  for  streamlining,  …  for  upgrading,…  and  for 
innovation.  
As I look around, I see many familiar faces. To me, this is a welcome sight: it tells me that the 
industry is in capable hands. At the same time, I also see new faces who should bring fresh 
perspectives to the sector. This mix of seasoned and fresh bankers is bound to keep the thrift 
that  will 
interest 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banking sector innovative, exciting and dynamic. Yes, innovative, exciting and dynamic – the 
opposite of complacent.  
Indeed, there should be no room for complacency in banks… and bankers. Filipinos trust you 
with their money. You are accountable to them. Shape up, …level up, … and never betray 
their trust.  
If you are faithful to your clients, they will be faithful to you. Then you can grow together as 
partners.  
On our part, we at the Bangko Sentral will continue to work with you in actively pursuing our 
reform  agenda  ….  and  in  crafting  policies  and  programs  that  will  empower  thrift  banks  to 
become  more  effective  partners...  for  national  development  and  growth.  Growth  that  is 
sustained, and growth that is inclusive.  
Mabuhay ang thrift banks! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!  
Maraming  salamat  sa  inyong  lahat  at  taus  pusong  pagpati  sa  inyong  bagong  Board  of 
Director. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
