Mario Draghi: Interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in the Frankfurter 
Allgemeine Zeitung, conducted by Messrs Holger Steltzner and Stefan Ruhkamp, published 
24 February 2012. 
 lies  with 
to  controlling  risks 
their  country’s  responsibilities.  The  key 
For two years, Europe’s politicians have been promising to save the euro, whatever 
the  cost.  But  the  problems  have  kept  on  growing.  Do  you  believe  the  second  aid 
programme for Greece will be successful? 
Yes,  I  do.  But  the  work  has  only  just  begun.  With  the  adoption  of  this  comprehensive 
financial package, we are sending a clear signal: Europe is helping Greece, and important 
international institutions, such as the IMF, are assisting as well.  
What is different this time? 
Of  course  the  ball  is  now  in  Greece’s  court.  The  country  has  started  to  take  action:  for 
example,  to  cut  the  minimum  wage.  Above  all,  however,  political  debate  in  Greece  has 
changed. The Greek people and Greece’s politicians now have a completely different attitude 
towards 
the 
implementation of the programme, which has to be flawless. The upcoming elections will be 
very important. It is essential that the new government supports the programme, just as the 
old one has. Since everything depends on the implementation of the programme, monitoring 
is very important. And that is being taken care of.  
Is that also what the “escrow” account is for, which has been set up for Greek debt 
servicing? 
In  organising  such  a  large  financial  aid  programme,  we  need  effective  assurances  to 
minimise the risk as much as possible. That is why there is such an account for the first time.  
The  haircut  requested  of  Greece’s  private  creditors  has  been  raised  again.  Do  you 
expect voluntary agreement? 
Yes, all parties involved have signalled their agreement. 
Then there is no need for clauses to enable a binding haircut for all creditors, the so-
called Collective Action Clauses? 
No, they may need them to achieve a sufficient level of participation among creditors. 
That  doesn’t  sound  quite  so  “voluntary”  any  more.  Won’t  it  then  come  to  what  the 
ratings agencies call a default? Will the ECB then accept Greek bonds as collateral? 
It  is  not  a  rating  default  yet.  But,  of  course,  that  could  happen,  if  Greece  introduces  the 
clauses  by  law.  Then  we  will  have to  stand  by our  principles.  The  alternative  is:  we  could 
ignore it and continue to accept bonds as collateral, which we don’t intend to do. 
Or you obtain collateral from the other Member States. 
That  is  the  solution  it  boils  down  to.  Via  the  EFSF,  additional  safeguards  to  the  value  of 
€35 billion  are  to  be  provided  for  a  transitional  period,  so  that  the  Eurosystem  could  then 
accept Greek bonds as collateral, even if they were to be downgraded to “selective default”. 
We are not the IMF of Europe. Our primary task is to ensure price stability in the euro area 
as a whole, irrespective of what is happening in an individual country such as Greece.  
By removing the Greek bonds held by the central banks from the debt restructuring, 
the ECB has gained a privileged position as creditor. How is that justified? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The bonds were bought for monetary policy reasons. There is therefore a public interest. But 
even  more  important  is  the  fact  that,  in  the  end,  it  is  taxpayers’  money.  It  is  our  duty  to 
protect  the  taxpayers’  assets.  Moreover,  we  are  not  there  to  contribute  to  government 
financing by dispensing with claims. 
But the ECB has always said that the purchases were part of its monetary policy. If it 
was an independent decision, why shouldn’t the central banks bear the losses, which 
they  would  take  over,  without  hesitation,  if  the  financing  of  a  bank  proved  to  be 
unprofitable? What is the difference between losses on government bonds and losses 
from a bank failure? 
Look at the United States and the United Kingdom. In both cases, the central banks have 
bought up large amounts of securities and the State has secured it with guarantees.  
But for the markets, this means that the risk for private creditors has become greater. 
They have to count on the fact that, if the worst comes to the worst, the central bank 
will  be  serviced  first.  How  great  is  the  damage  for  the  European  government  bond 
market? 
Not  very  great,  because  the  amount  of  our  bond  purchases,  compared  with  the  entire 
market, is small. For that reason, we do not see any effect on risk premia either. Moreover, 
Greece is a special and unique case of private sector involvement. 
The call for Greece’s creditors to accept a haircut makes it clear that there is no such 
thing as a risk-free investment any more. Is that a problem? 
That issue was processed by the markets a long time ago. The decisions of autumn 2010 (at 
the  Deauville  summit)  put  an  end  to  all  public  debtors  borrowing  at  the  same  conditions, 
irrespective of their creditworthiness.  
Does the disappointment that there is no absolute security any more actually, in the 
end, have a stabilising effect on the financial system? 
Of  course  there  is  an  excess  of  risk  aversion  and  fluctuations,  and  that  may  cause  great 
difficulties for monetary policy. But in the long run, the different perception of risks makes the 
system  more  stable.  And  what’s  more,  it  forces  governments  to  keep  their  finances  under 
control.  Before  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  corrective  signals  came  from  exchange  rates. 
After this corrective mechanism ceased to exist, some governments thought they could do 
and allow what they wanted, without having to pay. Now market prices are being corrected 
and  that  is  a  good  thing.  However,  we  must  of  course  be  careful  that  the  markets  do  not 
overdo it and send false signals. Markets can be stabilising up to a point, but destabilising 
beyond it.  
How can you tell whether a market price is right or wrong? 
One indication is extremely high volatility. Strong fluctuations can shake confidence so badly 
that  nobody  dares  to  lend  out  money  any  more.  Interbank  lending  then  becomes  virtually 
impossible  and  the  banks  can  no  longer  issue  any  bonds  either,  even  when  these  –  like 
covered bonds – are well secured. In such a situation one knows that something is wrong.  
And then the central bank must intervene? 
If the operation of monetary policy is no longer certain because of the distrust, if monetary 
policy is no longer reaching the economy which negatively affects credit, overall demand and 
ultimately  price  stability.  Yes,  then  the  central  bank  must  act  and  work  out  a  strategy  for 
dealing with the disruptions. Of course it depends on the reason for the risk aversion. If it is 
because  of  a  lack  of  liquidity,  or  even  just  the  assumption  that  the  counterparty  might  be 
short of funds, then the central bank could help. But if banks have a capital shortfall, then it is 
not the task of the central bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Many Germans are concerned about the majority composition of the ECB Governing 
Council, which in numerical terms is dominated by central bankers from fiscally weak 
countries. They fear inflation. What would you say to these people? 
The ECB acts according to two maxims: that it should ensure price stability and should not 
provide monetary financing to governments. We operate independently of our nationality. In 
the  early  phase  of  the  currency  union,  the  former  president  of  the  Bundesbank,  Hans 
Tietmeyer,  whose  picture  hangs  on  the  wall  here,  once  refused  to  sit  at  a  table  on  which 
name  cards  specifying  the  participants’  respective  institutions  had  been  laid  out.  He  said: 
“Clear them away, we are here in a personal capacity and not as envoys of our institution or 
country.” This is the spirit of the ECB.  
Even  after  the  debt  forgiveness,  Greece’s  government  debt  will  amount  to  120%  of 
annual overall economic output. That is barely sustainable for a country with a sound 
economy, but much less so for a country in a poor competitive position. What is so 
terrible about the idea that Greece might give up the euro?  
Firstly there is no provision in the treaty for  a country to leave or to be excluded from the 
euro. But even apart from that: do you think that by leaving the euro, printing a new currency 
and undergoing the subsequent adjustment, Greece could avoid the structural reforms that 
are necessary?  
No, they remain necessary. But it would be easier to find agreement for the adjustment 
and,  above  all,  the  sheer  possibility  of  an  exit  would  improve  the  basis  for  the 
negotiations  with  Greece.  Without  this  option,  the  rest  of  Europe  is  signalling: 
whatever you do, whatever happens, we will fund you.  
That is not true, because Member States and the IMF would not finance a programme that 
lacked credibility.  
But  if  the  Greeks  remain  in  the  euro  area,  they  must  reduce  their  costs  and,  for 
example, cut the wage level by at least a third. Will that succeed?  
There is no alternative, because even if a country has flexible exchange rates and devalues 
but make no other changes, it has not gained anything. It depends on the real lowering of 
wage  costs.  In  the  currency  union,  this  occurs  when  nominal  wage  costs  fall  or  remain 
contained, while prices remain stable. Experiences in the 1970s show that this is the more 
sustainable  method  to  regain  competitiveness.  Otherwise  we  get  inflation  with  high  social 
costs over the long term.  
If Greece keeps the euro, the adjustment will take many years. During that time, the 
country will import more than it exports. As this current account deficit will no longer 
be financed by private lenders, this task will fall to the central bank. 
That is correct, there will be deficits for a while. But Greece is making progress. A part of the 
adjustment  in  wage  costs  that  is  required  to  restore  competitiveness  has  already  been 
achieved. Some of the agreed structural reforms will only make themselves felt in the long 
term, but others, such as efforts to make the labour market more flexible, can immediately 
strengthen confidence. 
The  funding  of  such  deficits  of  fiscally  weak  euro  countries  are  visible  in  the  huge 
balances  of  the  TARGET  payment  system.  Would  the  Eurosystem  have  already 
collapsed without this rescue system, this bailout?  
I cannot see any bailout there. We have a currency union and a payment system which is 
organised by the ECB as a single platform. And there are payment flows from one country to 
another. The fact that these balances arise at all is because of the disturbed conditions in the 
money market, in which banks distrust each other. Rather than lending money to each other, 
they borrow it from the central bank and deposit it there too.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Does that not entail enormous risks for central banks, at which TARGET claims are 
mounting up because of the imbalances? For the Bundesbank alone, they amount to 
almost €500 billion. 
There are no risks in a cohesive monetary union. There are certainly grounds to monitor the 
imbalances,  because  in  a  currency  union  with  a  well-functioning  interbank  market,  the 
TARGET claims would not become so large in the first place.  
Do you expect the TARGET balances to disappear again one day? 
Yes,  of  course.  We  have  seen  in  the  past  that  imbalances  recede  whenever  the  situation 
improves. 
In December the ECB provided financing of almost €500 billion for the unusually long 
period of three years. The second operation of this kind, which will be conducted at 
the end of February, could be of a similar magnitude. Can you understand that these 
large sums make many people feel uneasy, and lead them to wonder if they will one 
day have to foot the bill? 
It is important to explain things well. That’s why the media are so important. 
Only we are worried too, unfortunately. 
The  net  inflow  from  the  first  three-year  tender,  at  a  good  €200  billion,  was  not  that  high. 
There is no sign of inflationary tendencies in the euro area, quite the opposite. And if there 
should  be  any  sign  of  future  inflation,  we  have  the  instruments  with  which  to  absorb  the 
liquidity again within a short space of time. 
But  with  the  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  the  ECB  also  relaxed  the  collateral 
framework.  
We have made it possible for individual loans to be lent on. This mainly benefits the smaller 
banks, which do not have the capacity to securitise such credit claims and then use them as 
collateral  with  the  central  bank.  This  extension  involves  additional  collateral  of  around 
€600 billion,  which,  as  a  result  of  the  large  haircuts,  can  permit  additional  lending  of 
€200 billion. In relation to the size of the euro area, that is not such a big sum. In addition, the 
national central banks bear the risk stemming from these loans.  
There were rumours that the ECB asked the banks to borrow a lot of money and then 
to use it to buy government bonds. 
Who said that? I’d like to have a word with that person. No, we made it very clear that the 
banks  take  their  own  decisions.  We  would  prefer  it  if  they  would  lend  the  money  to 
companies  and  households. 
tender  was 
underestimated when I announced it in December, because many people expected the ECB 
to  expand  its  government  bond  purchases,  the  famous  “bazooka”.  Maybe  I  should  have 
called the tender “Big Bertha” when I announced it, then everyone would have listened. 
The  ECB  is  hardly  buying  any  bonds  of  fiscally  weak  euro  area  countries  at  the 
moment. Wouldn’t this be a good opportunity to put an end to this programme that is 
so controversial, particularly in Germany? 
The markets are still vulnerable, and so we have to be very careful about announcing the 
end of such an instrument. The Securities Markets Programme has served a purpose since it 
was introduced. 
If  the  situation  were  to  worsen  again,  would  you  be  ready  to  expand  the  collateral 
framework again? 
That would be for the Governing Council of the ECB to decide, but I personally am not in 
favour  of  it.  We  have  done  enough.  The  collateral  rules  should  not  be  relaxed  further.  In 
future, based on the current outlook, it will rather be a question of tightening the requirements 
again. 
Incidentally, 
impact  of 
three-year 
the 
the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
You said recently that the ECB’s financing measures had prevented a credit crunch in 
December. What has changed since then? 
Banks  were  tightening  their  credit  conditions.  This  applied  more  to  countries  such  as 
Portugal and Spain and less so to Germany. But following the very weak fourth quarter of 
2011, both hard indicators and confidence indicators have gradually improved. The situation 
varies considerably across the individual euro area countries, but it has stabilised overall.  
Have the positive signs increased over the past two weeks? 
Yes, I would say so, although uncertainty remains high. 
Is there still a risk of a “lost decade” of very low growth, as experienced in Japan? 
No. What makes me confident are the reforms that have been started in Europe in the past 
four or five months. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
