Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Expanding financial access and 
financial inclusion in Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
official opening of Bank of Baroda (U) Ltd’s new branch, Entebbe, 2 June 2012. 
 The Global Chairman and Managing Director of Bank of Baroda,  
The Board of Directors, Bank of Baroda (U) Ltd,  
Management and Staff of Bank of Baroda (U) Ltd,  
Distinguished Customers,  
Invited Guests in your respective capacities,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It gives me great pleasure this morning to preside over the official opening of the Entebbe 
Branch of Bank of Baroda (Uganda) Ltd.  
I would like to begin by congratulating the Bank of Baroda for its foresight in extending its 
branch  network  outside  of  Kampala,  a  move  which  bears  testimony  to  the  fact  that  our 
economic  growth  is  geographically  broad  based.  With  the  opening  of  this  new  branch  in 
Entebbe and another which will open in Kabale next week, Bank of Baroda will expand its 
network to 13 branches countrywide. Bank of Baroda began its operations in Uganda almost 
60 years ago, in 1953. It has demonstrated its attachment to Uganda through good times and 
bad,  and  in  doing  so  has  built  up  a  reputation  for  serving  the  needs  of  customers  with 
dedication and reliability. 
The  opening  of  new  bank  branches,  especially  in  the  towns  and  cities  outside  Kampala, 
makes  an  important  contribution  to  the  goal  of  expanding  financial  access  and  financial 
inclusion in this country. It brings banking services closer to the people, reduces transactions 
costs  for  ordinary  customers  and  enhances  competition  in  the  banking  industry.  As  our 
economy develops and per capita incomes increase, demand for financial services from both 
the corporate sector and the general public is growing rapidly, as is demand for new types of 
financial  products.  The  expansion  of  Bank  of  Baroda’s  branch  network  will  strengthen  the 
bank’s capacity to meet this growing demand for financial services.  
The decision of Bank of Baroda to open a branch in Entebbe also bears testimony to the very 
bright prospects for business and commerce in the town. Entebbe and its environs already 
play an important role in the tourism and horticultural industries. Both of these industries are 
at  the  forefront  of  Uganda’s  efforts  to  modernize  and  diversify  its  economy,  through  the 
production of higher value goods and services which can compete on international markets. 
To be competitive on global markets, our domestic traded goods industries, such as tourism 
and  horticulture,  need  access  to  first  class  financial  services  of  the  type  which  Bank  of 
Baroda can provide.  
Entebbe has been chosen by the United Nations as its hub for its operations in this region of 
Africa; a decision which will generate more business for the town, especially in the services 
sector. Government also plans to build a new highway to connect Entebbe to Kampala and 
to the road networks which lead to the northern and western parts of this country. The new 
highway will ease traffic congestion, reduce travel times and thus lower costs for businesses 
which are located in this area or which use the facilities in this area, such as the airport. The 
business  community  in  Entebbe  can  thus  look  forward  to  growing  opportunities  across  a 
broad range of business activities, and now has a partner in the name of Bank of Baroda, 
one the oldest and best established banks in Uganda, with which to do business.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With these remarks, allow me to once again congratulate the Shareholders, the Board and 
Senior Management of Bank of Baroda (U) Ltd for demonstrating their commitment to serve 
the people of Uganda.  
It  is  now  my  pleasure  and  honour  to  declare  Bank  of  Baroda  (U)  Ltd.  Entebbe  Branch 
officially opened for banking business.  
I thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
