Ardian Fullani: Promoting investment in Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  3d  International 
Conference  on  “FDIs  in  Albania”,  organised  by  the  Albanian  Investment  and  Development 
Agency (AIDA) and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), Tirana, 11 June 2012. 
 Your Excellency Mr. Sali Berisha,  
Dear Mr. Khalid Al Aboodi,  
Dear Minister of Finance,  
Dear ladies and gentlemen!  
It is a special pleasure for me to address this joint conference with the Islamic Development 
Bank,  dedicated  to  the  promotion  of  investment  in  Albania.  Allow  me  first  to  extend  my 
thanks to Dr. Ahmed Mohamed Ali Al Madani, President of the Islamic Development Bank, 
for  his  utmost  contribution  to  lobbying  and  supporting  Albania’s  interests  in  the  Arab  and 
broader world.  
The Bank of Albania assesses that Albania’s macroeconomic stability has been and remains 
a  fundamental  condition  steering  economic  agents’  investment,  consumption  or  savings-
related  decision-making,  not  only  for  the  present  but  also  for  the  future.  It  is  this  very 
fundamental equilibrium in the economy that paves the way for Albania’s long-term economic 
and financial development.  
Let me recall to you that, in present days, macro-financial situation represents the “passport” 
the entire economic and financial credibility of a country is built on. In an integrated market 
that is ever-increasingly being affected by the globalization process, macroeconomic stability 
exerts the same impact on foreign investors as well. It is for this reason that our monetary 
policy,  our  role  as  the  supervisory  authority  for  the  banking  sector  in  Albania,  and  our 
contribution to the communication between the public authorities at home, have been based 
on and have reflected this fundamental principle.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  succeeded  in  guaranteeing  a  favourable  macroeconomic 
environment in the recent years. I would like to remind you that the stability of the Albanian 
economy  has  been  achieved  under  the  constant  pressure  of  the  global  crisis,  which  has 
severely hit our main trading partners.  
Thanks  to  the  efforts  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  successful  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  mix, 
stimulating policies in the tax area and ongoing improvement of the business environment, 
the Albanian economy has recorded satisfactory growth rates ranging 3–4% in real annual 
terms. This growth has been achieved amidst an environment characterized by stable prices 
and a balanced exchange rate. Albania’s financial stability has, in no single moment, been 
put into question, and the banking system, which enjoys buoyant liquidity situation, continues 
to increase financial intermediation in the economy.  
Allow me now to elaborate on these issues. The primary objective of the Bank of Albania is 
to maintain consumer price stability, which in quantitative terms is expressed as the annual 
increase in prices in the 2–4% range and targeting the midpoint of 3%. The Bank of Albania 
has successfully achieved this objective.  
Different surveys show that economic agents report stable expectations for a low inflation. 
This consistent profile of our monetary policy has proved particularly useful in the last few 
years. We  have  had  greater  flexibility  to  implement  a  prudent  easing  monetary  policy  that 
promotes investment and consumption at home. Over a several-month period, the Bank of 
Albania has made a number of decisions for cutting the key interest rate in the economy, the 
one-week interest rate on repurchase agreements, to its record low of 4.25%. It is a pleasure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to  note  that  the  degree  of  pass-through  to  the  economy  is  satisfactory  and  in  accordance 
with  the  time  lags  in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  During  this  easing  cycle,  the 
annual increase in the inflation rate has remained under control and lek’s exchange rate has 
been stable.  
As a result, foreign direct investment and other portfolio flows have been stable, financing the 
major part of economic agents’ current demand for foreign currency. Macroeconomic stability 
is not an exclusive task of the central bank’s activity, but it reflects broadly the sharing of the 
same principle and harmonization of actions with fiscal policy.  
Financial system’s stability, and the banking sector’s stability in particular, is the second main 
pillar  of  our  activity.  I  can  state  that,  in  the  recent  years,  we  have  devoted  most  of  our 
capacities to meeting this objective.  
The challenges have been numerous considering that banking activity reflects not only the 
stability of the institution itself, but also the overall economic conditions. However, in close 
cooperation  with  the  banking  industry,  we  have  succeeded  in  taking  some  measures  that 
have enhanced the banking system’s resilience.  
As a result, despite the slower credit growth rate and lower credit quality, the banking sector 
continues  to  generate  profit  and  remains  well  capitalized  and  liquid.  In  March,  capital 
adequacy  ratio  stood  at  15.9%,  while  liquid  assets  accounted  for  almost  one-third  of  total 
sector’s  assets.  The  banking  sector  has  expanded  its  activity  driven  mainly  by  the 
performance of public deposits, which continue to grow at buoyant rates.  
We are, however, aware of the risks exposed during this period characterized by numerous 
unstable  developments  in  global  and  regional  economy.  Therefore,  our  supervision  has 
placed  great  emphasis  on  identifying  the  various  risks  to  banking  activity,  improving  the 
banking  sector’s  ability  to  manage these risks  and  strengthening the  legal  and  operational 
framework to address them in case of their materialization.  
In  the  wake  of  the  global  economic  crisis,  many  countries  are  redesigning  their  economic 
development  agendas  and  models.  Throughout  many  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
initiated, encouraged and supported this discussion by engaging in an open communication 
with the public authorities, business community and academic circles.  
Our  opinion  is  that  economic  development  policies  should  contribute  to  setting  a  better 
balance  between  the  development  priorities  of  the  sectors  of  the  economy,  by  supporting 
agriculture  and  production.  One  of  our  immediate  objectives  is  enhancing  the  economic 
capacities that improve  the competitiveness of our products and benefit more from foreign 
demand. To this purpose, the development and further perfection of financial infrastructure, 
as well as the qualitative improvement of technology, are, among others, a priority. We must 
ensure  a  well-educated  labour  force,  able  to  adapt  to  the  international  labour  market,  in 
addition to the local one. Therefore, the education-related policies on the younger generation 
must,  above  all,  ensure  the  quality  of  education  and  incorporate  programmes  that  assign 
greater importance to its practical orientation.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  now  very  seriously  committed  to  its  public  financial  literacy 
programme.  In  this  context,  we  have  designed  and  implemented  a  series  of  projects  and 
cooperation  initiatives,  covering  different  age  groups  and  geographical  areas  across  the 
country.  
It is clear that these objectives cannot be accomplished by the simple wave of a magic wand. 
They  are  even  hard  to  be  accomplished  in  due  time  and  with  the  capacities  of  a  single 
economy. Albania is indeed a small economy but thanks to continuous reforms, it has turned 
into an attractive country to foreign investors. Our vision has been and remains open to any 
regional  initiatives.  We  are  able  to  become  part  of  joint  regional  projects,  thus  providing 
evidence for the great absorptive capacity for big investments and serious investors.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Therefore,  the  formulation  of  policies  for  attracting  foreign  investment,  coupled  with  the 
constant  improvement  of  the  business  climate  and  relevant  legal  framework,  should  be 
continuous part of the country’s economic development strategy.  
Dear guests,  
Despite being a small country, Albania represents a vibrant economy with vital people who 
are able to undertake wide-ranging business intitiatives.  
Moreover,  our  country  shares  a  considerable  part  of  its  official  borders  with  Albanian-
inhabited  areas,  hence  providing  a  different  quantitative  and  geographical  dimension  to 
various potential business initiatives. I believe that Albania is one of the countries currently 
being  listed  among  the  distinguished  European  countries,  enjoying  stable  macroeconomic 
and financial stability, and economic growth.  
We  have  ample  natural  resources, 
fantastic  diversity  of  climate,  cultures,  social, 
ethnographic and geographical features, qualified labour force, admirable flexibility of private 
entrepreneurship and an improved legal framework. For these reasons, I avail myself of this 
opportunity  to  invite  you  to  increase  your  interest  in  Albania  and  make  it  part  of  your 
investment or partnership projects. I am strongly confident that this will not only contribute to 
Albania’s and the Albanian people prosperity in the future, but it will also represent a safe 
investment alternative.  
Thank you for your attention and I wish you all great success!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
