Ong Chong Tee: Financial economics 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ong  Chong  Tee,  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  SKBI  Annual  Conference  on  “Financial  economics”,  at 
Singapore Management University (SMU), Singapore, 7 May 2012. 
 Professor Arnoud De Meyer, President of Singapore Management University 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
Introduction 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  join  you  today  at  SKBI’s  second  Annual  Conference  on 
Financial Economics. Since its establishment in 2008, SKBI has pursued research on topics 
in  economics  and  finance  relevant  to  Asia  and  the  Singapore  economy.  A  recent  working 
paper on “Testing for Multiple Bubbles” by Phillips, Shi and Yu, for example, sheds light on 
techniques for identifying asset price bubbles, and has useful implications for the surveillance 
strategies of central banks.1 
I  am  privileged  to  join  an  outstanding  line-up  of  speakers  including  keynote  speaker 
Professor Sir James Mirrlees. I think some of you may be familiar with his groundbreaking 
work on optimal tax policy, and his modelling of the key role uncertainty plays in economics. 
The  Mirrlees  Review,  a  recent  review  of  the  UK  tax  system  chaired  by  Sir  James,  offers 
invaluable  practical  lessons  on  optimal  tax  design,  including  specific  recommendations  for 
the taxation of savings and wealth. 
Structural change in the Singapore economy 
The perfect financial storm of the recent crisis severely disrupted markets and economies, 
and  also  shook  key  tenets  fundamental  to  our  understanding  of  economics  and  finance. 
Established beliefs in efficient markets, asset price dynamics, and more, have all been called 
into question. 
Amid  the  flux  in  the  global  financial  and  economic  landscape,  Singapore  also  has  its  own 
challenges. Resource constraints mean that we have to restructure the economy to depend 
less on the labour force and more on productivity increases for growth. 
During  this  period  of  transition,  important  adjustments  in  domestic  resource  costs  and 
consumer prices are taking place, alongside the usual cyclical developments confronting the 
economy.  Dealing  with  the  confluence  of  factors  affecting  domestic  prices  has  been 
particularly  challenging,  for  us  at  the  central  bank  and  equally  so  for  consumers  and 
businesses. CPI-All Items inflation, for instance, has been elevated coming out of the recent 
financial crisis, averaging 4.1% since 2010, much higher than the historical norm of below 
2%.  MAS  Core  Inflation,  which  excludes  changes  in  accommodation  and  private  road 
transport costs, averaged a lower 2.0% over the same period. 
Consumer  price  pressures  have  picked  up  more  recently.  CPI-All  Items  Inflation  reached 
almost  5%  in  Q1  this  year  and  households  may  face  higher  price  increases  for  specific 
expenditure items. MAS is monitoring these and other cost indicators closely. Allow me  to 
take this opportunity to highlight some conceptual issues concerning price adjustments in the 
                                                 
1  Phillips, P, Shi, S and Jun, Y (2011), “Testing for Multiple Bubbles”, Working Paper No. 03–2011, Singapore 
Management University. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economy  and  their  implications  for  monetary  policy.  In  other  words,  why  is  inflation  higher 
than what we have experienced historically, and is monetary policy responding in an optimal 
way? 
Implications for Inflation 
First,  it  is  important  to  recognise  the  complex  interplay  of  demand  and  supply  factors 
underpinning the recent price developments in Singapore. 
Demand-side  pressures  on  prices  have  built  up  as  domestic  economic  activity  rebounded 
strongly from the Great Recession of 2008/09. Regional demand has been firm, supporting 
the  continued  expansion  of  many  of  our  services  industries,  while  strong  employment 
conditions in Singapore have underpinned robust consumption growth for a range of goods 
and  services.  Sustained  low  global  interest  rates  and  capital  inflows  have  supported  the 
demand for housing – a point I will return to later. 
At  the  same  time,  supply-side  factors  have  become  more  significant,  with  the  immediate 
constraints  in  labour  and  housing  markets  pushing  up  domestic  costs.  These  reflect 
structural  capacity  constraints  in  the  economy.  Policy  measures  are  being  put  in  place  to 
help  the  economy  transit  to  a  more  sustainable  model  of  productivity-led  growth,  as 
Singapore’s reliance on foreign workers is reduced. As the economy adapts and productivity 
growth rises, price pressures are likely to subside and provide a lift to real wages, making 
Singaporean workers better off. 
Implications for monetary policy 
My second observation is that the monetary policy stance has to be carefully calibrated to 
take into account the multiple influences on consumer prices. 
Monetary  policy  should  act  decisively  to  ease  short-term  inflationary  pressures  driven  by 
strong demand, through applying an appropriate constraint on overall economic activity. Our 
studies  continue  to  show  that  in  our  small,  open  economy,  the  exchange  rate  has  a 
significantly  greater  impact  on  growth  and  inflation  compared  to  domestic  interest  rates. 
Hence, MAS has been tightening monetary policy by allowing a stronger rate of appreciation 
of the S$ nominal effective exchange rate since April 2010. 
However, with respect to cost pressures arising from the supply-side, monetary policy should 
aim to temper, but not fully offset. Higher labour costs in the short term due to permanent 
supply-side  shifts  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  market’s  equilibrating  process  to  guide  the 
economy to a sustainable growth path. But MAS will be vigilant to the risks that these price 
developments can set off second-round price effects if left unchecked. 
The appropriate monetary policy response thus depends on the nature and persistence of 
the shocks that are affecting prices. Herein lies the monetary policy challenge: how do we 
distinguish between the relative importance of demand and supply factors in driving cost and 
price increases in the economy? On one hand, there could be a risk of keeping policy too 
loose  and  unhinging  inflation  expectations.  On  the  other  hand,  stamping  out  inflation 
aggressively could forestall the important signalling role of relative price adjustments, as well 
as add to transitional costs, including the negative impact on growth. 
Let me illustrate with the example of ongoing changes in our labour market. While the shift in 
foreign worker policy is necessary to allow for a more efficient allocation of resources and a 
more productive workforce, the latter will take time to come to fruition. During this transitional 
phase,  business  costs  are  likely  to  rise  somewhat  as  a  result  of  tight  labour  market 
conditions, before productivity gains catch up to offset the cost increases. In the short term, 
the prices of some consumer services – especially those with high labour content – can rise 
and indeed, have increased in the early months of this year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Reflecting these considerations, the tighter monetary stance adopted by MAS in April 2012 
was  a  calibrated  move  to  facilitate  the  ongoing  supply-side  adjustments,  while  anchoring 
inflation expectations. The policy stance was aimed at keeping the economy on an even keel 
with GDP growth expected to come in at 1–3% this year. We expect that headline and core 
inflation will ease gradually through the year, but along a somewhat elevated trajectory. Over 
time,  the  cumulative  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  will  temper  the  pace  of  price 
increases in the economy. MAS is firmly committed to our objective of price stability over the 
medium  term,  even  as  productivity  improvements  arising  from  the  significant  economic 
restructuring will help to prevent higher costs from fuelling strong price increases. 
To  ease  the  immediate  burden  of  price  and  cost  pressures  faced  by  households  and 
businesses during this period of transition, the government has implemented a wide-ranging 
package of relief measures. These include targeted utility rebates that directly alleviate the 
higher  cost  of  living  for  households.  Similarly,  SMEs  received  a  one-off  cash  grant  in  this 
year’s Budget to help offset higher business costs. 
Implications for asset prices 
My third point is that it is important to respond appropriately to rising asset prices, including 
in the housing market. 
Following  the  recent  financial  crisis,  major  central  banks  reduced  policy  interest  rates  to 
historical lows. Credit growth in this region has recovered strongly, in Singapore and other 
Asian  economies.  There  is  a  danger  that  systemic  risk  can  develop  and  crystallise  in  a 
number of ways. For instance, low interest rates may encourage risky borrowing and lending 
practices, to create a build-up of leverage in households’ and banks’ balance sheets. Capital 
flows into Asia can also contribute to higher bank leverage, as well as asset price inflation, 
with the risk of sharp corrections in asset prices should these capital flows reverse quickly. 
Past  experiences  have  shown  that  when  highly  leveraged  asset  markets  correct  sharply, 
they can lead to enormous stress on the banking system and significant collateral damage 
on the real economy. The views among central bankers have therefore increasingly shifted 
towards the need to take pre-emptive measures at an early stage. 
The global experience with monetary policy, however, suggests that broad policy instruments 
like exchange rates and interest rates have very significant collateral effects, and are often 
subject to long and variable lags before impacting asset markets. Instead, it is preferable to 
consider  a  greater  reliance  on  macro-prudential  tools  and  other  administrative  measures 
targeted  at  specific  asset  markets  such  as  property,  in  an  environment  of  strong  capital 
inflows and domestic economic growth. This will allow the central bank to better achieve its 
financial stability objective, as well as serve as a counter-cyclical tool to dampen excessive 
credit  growth  and  price  increases.  But  macro-prudential  policy  cannot  be  a  substitute  for 
sound  macroeconomic  policies.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policies  need  to  continue  to  focus  on 
correcting macroeconomic imbalances, with macroprudential policy focused on ensuring that 
systemic risk is well-contained. 
In Singapore and elsewhere in the region, authorities have implemented measures such as 
Loan-to-Value (LTV) ratios and buyer/seller stamp duties to prevent the formation of asset 
price bubbles. Our approach in Singapore has been targeted and incremental. Measures are 
focused  on  discouraging  short-term  speculative  activity  that  can  distort  underlying  prices, 
while  encouraging  greater  financial  prudence  among  property  purchasers.  Where  supply 
constraints  can  be  ameliorated  to  relieve  cost  pressures  in  the  housing,  commercial  and 
industrial property segments, the government has done so directly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Conclusion 
I  have  highlighted  a  few  issues  and  challenges  arising  from  structural  changes  in  the 
Singapore  economy.  In  these  areas,  there  is  much  scope  for  further  study  including  joint 
collaboration between  academia and policymakers. First, in robust statistical techniques to 
identify  demand  and  supply  shocks  in  a  dynamic  economy.  Second,  in  formulating  robust 
monetary policy rules in the context of ongoing supply-side changes in the economy. And, 
finally, in developing early warning indicators for different types of inflationary pressures, and 
assessing the efficacy of various macroprudential instruments. Partnerships with academia 
can also play a key role in public insights and understanding of structural issues, challenges 
and the policy trade-offs. In this regard, I encourage SKBI to be at the forefront of applied 
financial and economic research that can help shape policy thinking. 
An American opera soprano and actress turned self-help guru, Dorothy Sarnoff, once said: 
“Make sure you finished speaking before your audience finished listening”. This morning, I 
am sure many of you are looking forward to the keynote address by Sir James Mirrlees as 
much as I am. So allow me now to end my opening address here. Thank you for your kind 
attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
