Charles S R Chuka: Looking at Malawi’s future 
Address  by  Mr  Charles  S  R  Chuka,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the 
Economics Association of Malawi (ECAMA) business dinner, Blantyre, 20 July 2012. 
 The Patron, Economics Association of Malawi, Mr Thom Mpinganjira; 
CEO of FDH Financial Holdings; 
Acting President of ECAMA, Mr Edward Chilima 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It  gives  me  enormous  pleasure  to  be  amongst  you  tonight  and  so  I  do  want  to  say, 
thank you, for inviting me to this annual dinner. 
I  have  been  reminded  this  evening  that,  by  virtue  of  being  Governor  of  the  country’s 
“dreaded”  central  bank,  I  also  assumed  the  position  of  Chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Trustees  of  the  Economics  Association  of Malawi. While I am yet to fully appreciate my 
new role in the Association,  I  am  most  grateful  to  whoever  came  up  with  the  idea  of 
honouring a Governor with such responsibility. Allow me for a moment  only  to  count  my 
luck  that  many  of  the  stones  that  will be thrown upon me will not come from this highly 
cultured group. 
In  such  turbulent  waters,  it  is  always  worthwhile  to  take  time  off to interact  and  share 
hopes  and  fears  with  others  equally  stressed  by  the unwelcome costs of adjustment to 
such  an  acute  macroeconomic  misalignment  as  that  Malawi  went  through  in  last  five 
years. 
I do not intend to recap what happened since 2004 – well that is a year after I  took  an 
early retirement – a well-deserved one. Suffice to ask a  few  questions:  when  fate  has 
placed  upon  you  responsibility 
for  monetary  policy,  what  do  you  do  if  you  find 
yourself  siting  on 
less  than  one  month  import  cover,  money  stock  is  growing 
consistently at above  30  percent  a  year  and  inflation  that  used  to  be  in  single  digits for 
a while – thanks to cash transfers to farmers – is accelerating fast. 
But  hold  on,  a  few  clarifications  are  in  order  here:  first,  what  I  called one month import 
cover  should  be  adjusted  by  the  fact  that  the  banking  system  was  holding  payments 
arrears  of  about  $400  million,  and  you  have  no  idea  what  was  kept  outside  that 
system.  Second,  the increase in money stock was being pushed by credit expansion to 
both the  private  sector  and  government.  And  this  despite  the  fact  that  you had a zero 
fiscal budget. 
Yes,  I  heard  you  saying  to  me,  Mr. Governor,  get  to  the  point.  How  do  you  justify  the 
excruciating  pain  being  experienced  by  industry  and  the  man  on  the  street?  You 
devalued  by  a  whole  49  percent  to  K250 and  the  currency  has  depreciated  since  then 
by  another  14  percent  to K285.  Then  from  nowhere  you  increased  interest  rates  by an 
ugly  5 percentage points! That’s not all, Mr. Governor; you have done nothing when the 
banks raised lending rates not by 5 but by 10 percentage points! 
Give  me  a  chance  to  respond  albeit  briefly.  As  we  are  dining here tonight,  the  IMF 
team  working  on  Malawi’s  request  for  a  new  Fund-  supported  economic  recovery 
program,  and  Malawi’s  Executive  Board  member  in  the  Fund,  are  putting  together  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
strong  case  that  Malawi  deserves  to  be  supported  in  its  recovery  program.  I  can 
envisage  the way the case will be laid out. 
Let  me try  to  put  the  argument  before the IMF  Board: In  sharp contrast  to  the  political 
impasse  to  effectively  deal  with  the  country’s problems  under the Bingu regime, indeed 
departing  sharply  from  the  country’s  history  of  stop-go  policies,  the  new  government  of 
H.E.  Mrs.  Joyce  Banda  has  undertaken  bold  measures  to  correct  long-  standing 
macroeconomic imbalances and to set the stage for an economic recovery in the months 
ahead. 
The local currency has depreciated by 63 percent in the last two months and interest rates 
have  been  hiked  with  the  Bank  Rate  jumping  from  13%  to  23%  to  tame  underlying 
inflation  pressures  and  support the  Kwacha  exchange  rate  which  now  floats  freely. 
Indications  are that  the  pace  of  reforms  will  be  sustained  consistent  with  the  agreed 
program  in  view  of  the  President’s  demonstrated  passion  to  transform  Malawi  and 
improve the welfare of her people. The President has also taken clear steps to allow the 
central bank policy independence which Malawi  badly  needs.  We  therefore  recommend 
approval  of Malawi’s reform program with a doubling in access to Fund resources. 
Well,  I  believe  I  can  afford  to  be  presumptuous  here,  if  this  story  line is  true,  then  the 
chances  are  that  come  Tuesday  morning  Malawi  will  wake  up  to  realize  that  the  IMF 
program has been approved and if the government  can  adhere  to  its  stated  policy  of 
zero  borrowing,  then Malawi’s future is on the right path. 
You  can  imagine  what  some  of  us  feel  when  we  read  in  the  papers  and  hear  on  the 
radio,  and  indeed  hear  in  some  circles  “amenewa  ndiye  sakutithandiza”.  Dumbani 
Mzale  in  an  article  in  today’s  The  Nation tried  to  produce  a  balanced  article  by  putting 
together  the  comments by World Bank’s Country Manager, and those by Ben Kalua, with 
a  rejoinder 
that  “recent  monetary  policy 
developments have triggered a high cost of borrowing by the private sector which could 
essentially  retard  Malawi’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  of  4.3 percent  manufactures 
.will incur huge cost of production which could force them to pass on to consumers; hence 
exerting pressure on the headline inflation rate.” 
I  wish  I  was  in  a  position  to  determine  how  many  economists  agree with  which  side 
of  the  story.  I  will  never  know  of  course.  But  my  sense  is  that  even  learned 
economists  and  experienced  businessmen  share  the  sentiments  of  the  unnamed 
economist. 
Fortunately,  the  IMF  Board  will  not  say  to  the  staff  team, hold on, what  we  hear  in 
Malawi  is  that  people  are  hurting, companies  are closing  down,  the  government  has 
no  will  or  capacity  to  see  through this  complex  reform  program.  No,  they  will  not  say 
that,  not  because  it  cannot  be  said  but  because  we  are  not  a  special  case.  Many 
people around  the  world  are  going  through  the  same  thing.  Not  because  the IMF says 
so.  But  because  when  you  mess  up  you  pay  the  price.  We  all  messed  up.  We  all 
consumed  beyond  our  means,  thanks  to  an  over-  valued  exchange  rate.  We  all 
praised  the  government  for  single  digit inflation and we agreed with the measures being 
put in place to generate foreign exchange. 
To 
to  force  every 
exporter  to  repatriate  our  hard  won  foreign  exchange  –  I  am  yet  to  fathom  how  a 
country  can  claim hard currency  it  has  not earned  –  the  government  only  owns  what 
it earns  through  taxes  and the hard currency earned through sales of its local currency. 
The government does not own anybody’s assets, and that’s by Constitution. 
justify  an  over-valued  currency,  we  called  upon  government 
from  an  unnamed  economist  arguing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  savings  culture  and  encourage 
The short of the story is that we have all become Indigenous Economists –  we  recall  that 
we  have  lived  on  subsistence  farming  all our  lives,  we  will  make  it. Global  rules of the 
game  do  not  apply  to  us – we have our own rules. The man on the street is entitled to 
undiminished income. He is entitled to zero inflation. If the government has devalued the 
currency,  it  must  increase  salaries  by  as  much.  I  am  not  even  sure  that  the  ailing 
companies have the resources to fully compensate for the lost purchasing power without 
passing on the cost to the same consumer. 
We  want  to  live  comfortably  as  before,  forget  the  fact  that  others  are  unemployed 
because  we  are  busy  exporting  jobs  through  an  overvalued  exchange  rate,  through 
negative  interest  rates  that  undermine 
low 
productivity.  Forget  the  many  hours  spent  out  of  the  office  in  search  of  fuel  that 
never came or that finished just before we got there. 
Allow  me  to  conclude  on  the  following  note.  If  we  had  a  choice,  we would  have  left 
the  Kwacha  and  interest  rates  alone. However,  the extent  of  economic  malaise  was 
unprecedented  in  our short  history and it will take a lot more work and sacrifice by the 
man on the street before things get better. This is not the time for growth. It is the time 
for  correction.  Hopefully  by  this  time  next  year,  so  I  believe,  this  country  will  be 
different. 
The  key  to  successful  recovery  will  be  the  patience  of  the  man  on  the street  and  the 
political  will  to  implement  the  2012/2013  Budget  as  passed.  With  that  the  currency 
will  stabilize;  interest  rates  will  begin to come down; foreign exchange reserves will be 
built up and investors will start looking at Malawi again. 
Inflation  should  be  contained  within  an  average  of  18.5  percent  in  2012,  coming 
down  slightly  to  about  16  percent  in  2013  but  with  a much  lower  rate  at  year-end. 
Growth  will  pick  up  as  projected  at  5.9 percent  and  payments  arrears  will  be  history. 
We will forget that fuel used to be scarce. With increased reserves, we will open up trade 
more  so  that  Malawians  can  enjoy  the  economic  freedoms  so  enshrined  in  our 
Constitution. 
That  will  be  the  time  for  the  central  bank  to  watch  carefully  growth  prospects  and 
prevent  a  runaway  inflation  –  single  digit  inflation  will come  but  in  a  sustainable  way. I 
can foresee increasing investment in both export and import-substitution industries. 
That’s  what  a  free  float  supported  by  appropriate  other  monetary  and  fiscal  policies 
brings about. Obviously, that brings about some instability but not forex shortages. By the 
way, with a free float you do not  need  3  months  import  cover  every  time.  But we must 
build  up reserves  even  beyond  three  month  because  this  is a  country  and  we face 
many  exogenous  shocks  which  require  reserves  to  be  addressed expeditiously. 
Well,  we  do  not  have  the  luxury  of  the  counter-factual  –  what  would  have  been  the 
situation had the government – as two journalists have put  it  this  week  –  through  the 
Reserve  bank  of Malawi,  taken  the policy actions to-date. We will never know. 
As  I  close,  I  believe  commendations  are  in  order  for  your  continued participation  and 
contributions  towards  ECAMA,  its  mission,  as  well as for the way you have championed 
economics.  Now  everyone  wants  to  be  known  as  such.  You  have  more  work  to  do 
ahead of us. Keep the torch burning. 
Oh,  yes,  perhaps  I  should  remind  us  that  ECAMA’s  sole existence depends  on  our 
resources,  time,  and  dedication.  Your  gathering  here tonight in such large numbers to 
dine  and  share  economic  experiences is clear  evidence of your  willingness to enhance 
the economic profession  and  progress  in  the  country  for  the  benefit  of  the  state  and its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
citizens.  Please  do  make  sure  you  are  a  registered  member  and  to  pay  any  dues. 
You  get  from  ECAMA  what  you  put  in  –  ideas  for strengthening the Association. 
With these remarks, it is now my  pleasure and privilege to wish  you a great dinner and 
fruitful discussions, bon appetite. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
