Benoît Cœuré: Restoring confidence in the euro area 
Remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Festival dell’Economia, Trento, 1 June 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  Tito  Boeri  and  Lucrezia  Reichlin  for  their  invitation  to  this  sharing  of 
views on how to restore growth in the euro area. 
Central banks are not central to delivering long-term economic growth. Long-term growth is 
about  education,  innovation  and  the  functioning  of  markets,  none  of  which  is  really  in  our 
hands. We  can  nevertheless  contribute  by  providing  stability  –  in  particular,  price  stability, 
which is at the heart of our mandate, as well as confidence.  
Let’s face it: the euro area today lacks both stability and confidence. Price stability has been 
achieved and the ECB will strive to maintain it, but financial markets are under strains. The 
question being asked today by market participants no longer concerns a particular country or 
sector: it is whether the political commitment exists to support the euro as a project and to 
improve  this  project.  The  answer  to  this  question  should  be  clear:  the  euro  has  brought 
immense economic benefits to its member countries, both in northern and southern Europe, 
and to non-participating countries such as the UK. We must unite to support the euro as a 
project and to decisively improve it. 
What does it take to restore confidence? 
First,  governments  should  pursue  their  efforts  to  bring  down  public  debt.  They  have 
exhausted their fiscal room for manoeuvre and must rebuild it so as to be resistant to future 
shocks.  Fiscal  consolidation  weighs  down  on  short-term  economic  activity,  but  it  is  a 
precondition to crowd in private investment and restore long-term growth. 
Second, we must put a halt to financial market fragmentation. The disintegration of euro area 
capital  markets  has  reached  a  point  where  it  puts  at  risk  the  whole  European  project, 
including  the  single  market  for  goods  and  services.  European  firms  can  no  longer  finance 
their investments from a single pool of savings. This hampers the possibility of a sustained 
and high level of growth. By extending ample amounts of liquidity to euro area banks, the 
ECB has mitigated the retreat of private cross-border capital flows. It is not its role however 
to allocate financial resources across the region. Resource allocation should be performed 
through market mechanisms, with appropriate price signals. 
Bringing  euro  area  capital  markets  together  will  require  more  than  technical  adjustments. 
There can indeed be technical considerations, such as the impact of the forthcoming liquidity 
regulation  under  the  Basel  III  agreement,  which  should  be  calibrated  in  such  a  way  that it 
does not impede the functioning of the interbank market. But it’s trust that is the essence of 
the  lending  relationship.  Restoring trust  in  banks  and  disentangling  the  fate  of  banks from 
that of governments are absolute prerequisites.  
The ECB’s two longer-term refinancing operations, or LTROs, have been powerful enough to 
ensure continued excess liquidity and to ease most of the tensions in funding markets. But 
there  is  nothing  that  the  ECB  can  do  when  it  comes to  banks’  solvency.  Euro  area  banks 
should strengthen their capital and do it in a way that makes them less dependent on their 
governments. To this end, the euro area needs a single resolution mechanism and resolution 
fund, and a unified mechanism of deposit insurance. Banks that need recapitalisation must 
also be allowed to directly access the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and, when 
it is in place, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). Let me add a warning. Letting euro 
area  banks  access  the  EFSF/ESM  should  not  be  a  way  for  governments  to  escape  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
responsibilities and to rid themselves of the cost of past errors. It should be accompanied by 
strong, centralised supervision of systemically important institutions. 
In a nutshell, the only way out of this crisis is to map out a credible path towards a stronger 
Europe.  Of  course,  far-reaching  institutional  changes  can  only  be  based  on  democratic 
deliberation,  especially  as  some  of  those  changes  would  entail  an  additional  transfer  of 
responsibilities to a supranational level. Any such mechanism should have strong democratic 
foundations  and  be  subject  to  appropriate  accountability,  in  particular  to  the  European 
Parliament.  
How then can growth be achieved? 
Price stability and financial stability are essential preconditions for growth. What can then be 
done to improve the long-term rate of growth of the euro area? 
Many good ideas have been floated here and I will not repeat them. A lot can be achieved in 
my view by strengthening the single market for goods and services. So far, the single market 
has  not  suffered  from  the  ongoing  crisis,  but  we  all  know  that  it  has  not  been  completed, 
especially  in  services.  Mario  Monti  made  some  proposals  in  this  respect  in  2010,  as  did 
Michel  Barnier  more  recently.  Competition  is  of  the  essence.  In  many  sectors,  rents  are 
appropriated  by  special  interest  groups  and  should  be  returned  to  the  people  of  Europe. 
Finally, investment in research, human capital and infrastructure is key to ensuring that the 
negative  impact  of  austerity  remains  limited  in  time  and  does  not  weigh  down  on  the 
long-term  growth  potential.  New  ways  of  pooling  resources  and  financing  the  common 
provision of public goods should be found. 
I conclude on a positive note. Overall, the euro area has a high private saving rate and sound 
fiscal fundamentals, with deficit and debt ratios that are much lower than in the US, the UK or 
Japan. Its workforce is industrious and highly skilled; its firms are innovative and do not fear 
global competition. If the euro area unites and overcomes the present crisis of confidence, it 
will emerge as a strong economy for the rest of the 21st century. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
