Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Toward overcoming deflationary pressures in 
Japan 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Okayama, 18 April 2012. 
 Introduction 
I  am  privileged  and  honored  to  be  here  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative  and 
business  leaders  in  Okayama  Prefecture.  I  deeply  appreciate  your  continuing  support  and 
cooperation in taking part in interviews and surveys conducted by our Okayama branch. The 
quantitative  and  qualitative  information  from  these  interviews  and  surveys  is  invaluable  to 
making timely assessments of economic conditions, and thus appropriate policy decisions. 
This can be especially true in the case of great uncertainty that follows events that profoundly 
alter  economic  and  financial  conditions,  such  as  the  Lehman  Shock  and  the  Great  East 
Japan  Earthquake.  Although 
render  past  statistical  data 
uninformative or even utterly useless, the Bank cannot delay its policy responses just for the 
sake of waiting for new data to be released. Even in situations such as these, our regular 
contact with you provides us with valuable information about what is really happening in the 
real world in various respects. In fact, our colleagues at foreign central banks consider the 
Bank of Japan as fortunate and privileged in this regard. I would like to express my sincere 
gratitude and also ask for your continued cooperation. 
Let me start today by discussing the economic outlook at present and its risk factors. After 
that, I would like to share the Bank’s basic thinking on the necessary measures to overcome 
deflationary pressures. Furthermore, I will explain the Bank’s policy responses geared toward 
this  aim  –  as  put  forth  during  the  February  and  March  Monetary  Policy  Meetings  –  by 
answering frequently asked questions. In closing, I would like to touch upon some relevant 
issues for the economy in Okayama Prefecture. 
those  events  effectively 
I. 
Economic outlook at present and its risk factors 
Economic outlook at present 
A. 
Let me first describe the current domestic and overseas economic conditions and the outlook 
at present. 
First,  I  will  start  with  developments  overseas.  Despite  the  recent  nervousness  seen  in  the 
foreign  exchange  and  stock  markets,  the  funding  environment  for  financial  institutions  in 
global financial markets has been calm and stable against the background of ample liquidity 
provision by the European Central Bank and certain progress in efforts to support Greece. 
However, overseas economies as a whole have yet to emerge from a deceleration phase. In 
the  United  States,  although  some  improvements  have  been  observed  in  consumption  and 
employment, such positive movements have not yet gained momentum, as evidenced by the 
recent  weaker-than-expected  employment  statistics.  Against  such  a  background,  Japan’s 
exports and production have not emerged from the phase of crawling growth, and thus the 
country’s economic activity remains more or less in a lull. However, domestic demand has 
recently  shown  some  signs  of  improvement.  Steps  toward  restoration  and  rebuilding 
following the Great East Japan Earthquake are progressing, most notably in business fixed 
investment.  Private  consumption  has  firmed  up  due  in  part  to  the  effects  of  measures  to 
stimulate  demand  for  automobiles,  such  as  the  reintroduction  of  subsidies  for  purchasing 
energy efficient cars and the release of popular models of new cars. Industrial production has 
begun  to  show  signs  of  a  possible  improvement.  As  for  the  outlook,  Japan’s  economy  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
expected  to  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path  as  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas 
economies  picks  up,  led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  as 
reconstruction-related demand after the earthquake disaster gradually strengthens.  
Risk factors 
B. 
Whether or not this projection is going to be realized depends on various risk factors. The 
one  that  the  Bank  is  most  concerned  with  is,  in  short,  uncertainties  regarding  the  global 
economy.  Among  them  –  including  the  prospects  for  the  European  debt  problem, 
developments  in  international  commodity  prices,  and  the  likelihood  of  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies maintaining growth under price stability – I regard whether 
improvement in economic indicators in the United States can continue or not as particularly 
important  and  deserving  of  very  careful  monitoring,  as  this  is  attracting  wide  attention 
recently. 
The sustainability of the ongoing U.S. recovery requires careful examination, for two reasons. 
First,  in  the  United  States,  there  is  rising  bifurcation  of  the  labor  market  into  two  groups: 
(1) those  who  have  no  concern  about  their  employment  and  (2) those  who  do.  The  recent 
firm  economic  indicators  reflect  a  recovery  in  consumption  by  the  former  group,  which 
benefited  from  a  decline  in  mortgage  rates  and  rising  stock  prices.  However,  the 
distinguishing feature of the current business cycle has been a large increase in the number 
of the latter group – i.e., those who have concerns about their employment – and its size has 
not decreased notably even in the recovery phase. This could weigh on the U.S. economic 
recovery ahead. 
Second,  there  is  a  possibility  that  a  seasonal  adjustment  method  used  for  major 
U.S. economic data had created some distortions due to the effects of the Lehman Shock, 
causing the data for the period from winter to early spring to be overvalued and those for the 
period  toward  summer  to  fall  to  be  underestimated.  If  this  is  the  case,  it  means  that  the 
favorable data so far have exaggerated actual economic performance and the forthcoming 
data  will  be  disappointing  –  showing  a  weaker  picture  than  actual  conditions.  Attention 
should be paid to the risk that such distorted data could weaken expectations for recovery 
held by firms, households, and markets. 
As  a  longer-run  risk  for  many  economies,  prolonged  stagnant  economic  performance 
coupled with the aging of a population could reduce the flexibility of the economy such as in 
terms of the mobility of people across sectors and regions, thereby making it more difficult for 
the supply side to respond smoothly to changes in the demand structure. As a result, growth 
potential could decrease. Such a reduction in the flexibility of the economy amid a situation of 
an  aging  population  has  become  a  serious  problem  not  only  in  Japan  but  also  in  other 
advanced  countries,  such  as  the  United  States  and  Europe.  Even  emerging  economies, 
including  those  in  Asia,  are  not  immune  to  this  problem  because  the  aging  population 
problem is set to intensify considerably within the next ten years and it is not unimaginable 
that early indications of the problem could emerge in the very near future. 
Bearing in mind that there are various risk factors, the Bank will conduct a thorough review of 
the outlook for economic activity and prices and will issue the results in our biannual outlook 
report, to be released at the end of this month. 
Toward overcoming deflationary pressures 
II. 
Next, I would like to turn to the challenge of overcoming deflationary pressures. In order for 
Japan’s economy to make steady progress toward overcoming deflationary pressures, it is 
necessary to make efforts on the following two fronts. 
The first one involves continual support of the recent momentum toward economic recovery 
to  enhance  the  level  of  economic  activity.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  make  steady 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
progress in narrowing the negative output gap by firmly supporting positive developments at 
home and abroad. 
Second,  it  is  necessary  to  make  efforts  to  tackle  the  long-term  structural  problem  that 
Japan’s economy has confronted of declining trend growth rates. It is no easy task to raise 
the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  when  the  working  population  decreases  due  to 
aging. In order to raise the growth potential of Japan’s economy by capturing new demand, it 
is crucial that business firms, financial institutions, the government, and the Bank each take 
decisive measures in their respective roles.  
One  possible  direction  is  for  Japanese  firms  to  tap  global  demand,  mainly  in  emerging 
economies,  by  undertaking  a  reappraisal  of  their  comparative  advantages,  such  as  the 
capacity  to  develop  new  materials,  “integral-type  technology”,  production  efficiency,  and 
attentive  customer  service,  in  pursuit  of  a  best  mix  of  these  advantages  that  fits  with 
respective market demand. In this regard, manufacturers continue to expand their overseas 
business while reestablishing global production and sales networks. Recently, more firms in 
domestic  demand-oriented  industries  have  also  started  making  efforts  to  capture  global 
demand. What is important is to establish a favorable domestic business environment so that 
firms’ active movements to capture global demand lead to enhancing the growth potential of 
Japan’s  economy  rather  than  causing  a  hollowing-out  of  domestic  industries.  At  the  same 
time,  efforts  to  stimulate  domestic  demand  are  also  crucial.  From  the  standpoint  of 
enhancing the growth potential of Japan’s economy, it is an extremely important challenge to 
make steady progress in regulatory reform to promote growth industries and in supplying risk 
money to them, so that seeds for growth are produced, sprout, and evolve into flourishing 
domestic demand. 
The Bank of Japan’s policy measures 
III. 
Next, I would like to touch on the Bank’s policy measures. As I have stated so far, in order to 
overcome deflationary pressures and achieve sustainable growth with price stability, it is vital 
to  make  efforts  both  to  firmly  support  the  recently  observed  upward  momentum  toward 
economic recovery and to strengthen growth potential. Based on its recognition of this point, 
the  Bank  launched  a  policy  package  to  overcome  deflationary  pressures  at  the  Monetary 
Policy  Meetings  held  in  February  and  March.  I  will  briefly  describe  the  essence  of  the 
package. 
A. 
Policy measures in February: introduction of “The Price Stability Goal in the 
Medium to Long Term”, clarification of the Bank’s commitment regarding the 
policy time horizon, and expansion of the asset purchase program in size 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 12 and 13, 2012, the Bank decided three 
measures.  
First, it introduced “the price stability goal in the medium to long term”. This represents the 
price stability that the Bank should aim to achieve using the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the consumer price index (CPI). The Bank judges the “goal” to be within a positive range of 
2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, and it set a goal of 
1 percent  for  the  time  being.  In deciding  a  specific  inflation  rate,  the  Bank  considered  that 
(1) there  is  considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the  prospects  for  Japan’s  economy 
because  it  is  in  a  process  of  transition  to  a  normal  growth  path  following  long-term 
stagnation,  and  therefore  (2) deliberations  should  fully  take  into  account  the  perception  of 
price developments held by the general public, which is used to long periods of low inflation 
rates, including even the period of the financial bubble prior to the 1990s. As a result, the 
Bank decided to set a specific goal of 1 percent for the time being, and from a longer-term 
perspective, to express the goal with a degree of latitude as “a positive range of 2 percent or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
lower” given the possibility that the inflation rate the Bank should aim to achieve could rise 
due to changes in the economic structure at home and abroad. 
Second, the Bank clarified its commitment regarding the time horizon for pursuing powerful 
monetary  easing.  By  promising  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  the  future,  based  on 
certain conditions regarding the economic environment, the commitment aims to strengthen 
the immediate monetary easing effects by bringing forward future easing effects. In line with 
the introduction of “the price stability goal”, the Bank decided at the February meeting that it 
will aim to achieve the goal of 1 percent CPI inflation and will continue the pursuit of powerful 
monetary easing until the goal is in sight, conducting its virtually zero interest rate policy and 
implementing the Asset Purchase Program mainly through the purchase of financial assets. 
The  Bank  clarified  its  stance  to  actively  take  policy  measures  by  expressing  the  specific 
inflation rate of 1 percent as a goal and using the phrase “aim to achieve” with respect to said 
goal.  The  Bank  also  stated  specifically  that  it  will  continue  to  not  only  conduct  its  virtually 
zero interest rate policy, but also implement the Asset Purchase Program mainly through the 
purchase of financial assets until the conditions in the commitment are met. 
Third, the Bank made a decisive increase in the total size of the Asset Purchase Program, of 
10 trillion yen. As a result, together with its regular purchases for the purpose of supplying 
currency consistent with underlying steady development in the economy, the Bank is going to 
purchase  a  large  amount  of  JGBs  until  the  end  of  this  year,  at  the  pace  of  about 
40 trillion yen per year. 
The  aforementioned  three  measures  are  aimed  at  strongly  supporting  recent  positive 
momentum  from  the  financial  side  through  a  clarification  of  the  Bank’s  policy  stance  to 
overcome  deflationary  pressures  and  an  enhancement  of  its  pursuit  of  powerful  monetary 
easing. 
B. 
Policy measures in March: enhancement of fund-provisioning measure to 
support strengthening the foundations for economic growth 
At the subsequent Monetary Policy Meeting in March, the Bank decided to enhance the fund-
provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth 
(hereafter referred to as “the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility”). The Growth-Supporting 
Funding  Facility  supplies  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  financial  institutions  in 
accordance with their efforts – in terms of lending and investment – toward strengthening the 
foundations for economic growth. Looking at the composition of the areas to which financial 
institutions  have  been  lending  and  investing  using  this  facility,  “environment  and  energy 
business”  and  “medical  and  nursing  care  business”  accounted  for  a  large  share.  Let  me 
share with you some examples of actual lending or investment based on information made 
public by financial institutions. For example, there was a project in which the manager of a 
nursing home for the elderly upgraded the air-conditioning system to an eco-friendly one that 
recovered  waste  heat.  In  another  case,  food  manufacturers  made  investments  for  the 
purpose of expanding their production sites in emerging Asian economies, so as to respond 
to vigorous demand from such economies.  
Taking  into  account  the  lending  and  investment  conducted  under  the  facility,  the  Bank 
decided  to  establish  special  rules,  first,  for  a  new  lending  arrangement  for  small-lot 
investments and loans and, second, for a new  U.S. dollar lending arrangement for foreign 
currency-denominated  investments  and  loans.  The  Bank  also  decided  to  increase  the 
maximum outstanding balance of loans under the main rules for the facility, which raised the 
overall outstanding balance of loans available through the facility by 2 trillion yen. The Bank 
also  decided  to  extend  the  deadline  for  applications  for  new  loans  under  the  facility,  by 
two years.  
Such  measures  are  aimed  at  further  enhancing  the  Bank’s  efforts  to  strengthen  growth 
potential, which is another pillar for overcoming deflationary pressures. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Has the Bank changed? 
IV. 
The series of policy measures by the Bank – especially its decision in February to clarify its 
policy  stance  and  further  enhance  monetary  easing  –  took  many  market  participants  by 
surprise,  since  few  had  predicted  such  responses.  Following  the  Bank’s  decision,  stock 
prices  rose  and  the  yen  depreciated.  These  developments  were  of  course  significantly 
influenced by some new positive worldwide developments at that time, such as diminishing 
perceived  risks  from  the  European  debt  problem  and  relatively  firm  improvement  in  the 
U.S. economy.  In  addition,  I  believe  that  the  Bank’s  clarification  of  its policy  stance,  which 
was  taken  as  a  positive  surprise,  also  had  a  considerable  impact  on  those  market 
developments. 
I am often asked whether the Bank’s policy objectives, basic thinking behind the conduct of 
monetary  policy,  and  policy  stance  have  changed  since  its  decision  in  February.  Next,  I 
would like to outline my understanding of what has changed and what has stayed the same 
with regard to the Bank’s policy conduct. 
Question: has the aim of the Bank’s monetary policy changed? 
A. 
With  regard  to  the  introduction  of  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  in 
February, a frequent interpretation is that the Bank has finally adopted the so-called “inflation 
targeting  framework”.  I  would  like  to  outline  my  reflections  on  this  point  by  asking  the 
following question: “has the aim of the Bank’s monetary policy changed?” 
The Bank’s basic thinking about the price stability that a central bank should aim to achieve 
includes the following three elements. First, “price stability” is a state where economic agents 
such  as  households  and  firms  may  make  decisions  regarding  economic  activities  without 
being  much  concerned  about  the  fluctuations  in  the  general  price  level.  Second,  central 
banks should pursue “price stability” over the medium to long term that should not be judged 
by short-term developments in the recent period. Third, “price stability” should be expressed 
in numerical terms using indicators that cover goods and services consumed by households 
and  represent  the  public’s  true  feelings  regarding  price  developments.  This  basic  thinking 
had  been  explained  to  the  public  before  the  introduction  of  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the 
medium to long term”, and has not changed with this introduction. 
That being said, I believe that the introduction of “the price stability goal” in place of the old 
“understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” is significant as an effort to specifically 
express  what  the  Bank  pursues  based  on  its  basic  thinking  on  price  stability.  When 
conducting monetary policy, each Policy Board member makes decisions based on their own 
thinking  on  price  stability  that  should  be  pursued  by  the  Bank.  The  old  “understanding” 
showed  the  range  of  inflation  rates  that  each  Policy  Board  member  understood  as 
numerically  expressing  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  long  term.  There  should  be  no 
confusion,  since  if  inflation  rates  fail  to  be  within  this  range,  then  it  is  obvious  that  price 
stability has not been achieved from any of the members’ perspectives. However, there was 
a criticism that the old “understanding”, which was a collection of individual Board members’ 
views,  did  not  represent  the  “price  stability”  that  is  the  basis  of  the  policy  decisions  of  the 
Bank as an institution. In addition, there was some difficulty with the word “understanding”, in 
that  it  failed  to  deliver  the  message  that  the  Bank  was  making  active  moves  toward  price 
stability.  Taking  account  of  these  problems,  the  Policy  Board  members  have  made  a 
collective decision on how to express the price stability that the Bank should aim to achieve. 
They  have  also  decided  to  use  the  word  “goal”,  so  that  the  Bank’s  policy  stance  can  be 
understood clearly. 
I would like to point out that there is a notable feature in the introduction of the “goal”. That is, 
the “goal” for the time being is set differently from the “goal” from a longer-term perspective. 
The Bank has decided to set a specific inflation rate goal for the time being – a rate that it 
currently  aims  to  achieve  –  even  though  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
prospects for Japan’s economy, such as in terms of changes in economic structures. At the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
same  time,  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  if  the  efforts  to  strengthen  growth  potential 
successfully boost real growth rates to an adequate level in a sustainable manner, then the 
medium- to long-term sustainable inflation rate – and consequently, the nominal growth rate – 
will  gradually  rise.  Bearing  in  mind  such  a  possibility  from  a  longer-term  perspective,  the 
Board has decided to express “the goal for price stability in the medium to long term” with a 
degree of latitude as “a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI” and to review the “goal” once a year in principle. 
As long as the Bank’s thinking behind the “the price stability goal in the medium to long term” 
is  shared  correctly,  it  is  not  essential  to  argue  about  what  it  should  be  called.  I  feel  no 
discomfort in referring to the “goal” as a flexible inflation target. 
B. 
Question: was the policy change in February based on the assessment from 
the “Two Perspectives”? 
Next,  let  me  take  up  the  issue  of  how  difficult  it  was  to  predict  the  February  decision  to 
enhance  monetary  easing.  Since  March  2006,  in  deciding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy, 
the Bank has been examining economic activity and prices from two perspectives. The first is 
in  terms  of  whether  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices 
follows a sustainable growth path with price stability. To put it another way, using the new 
framework, this is with regard to whether the economy is heading toward achieving the “price 
stability goal”. The second perspective is in terms of what kind of risk factors are considered 
relevant  to  the  baseline  scenario.  I  would  like  to  examine  the  market  comments  that  the 
policy  change  in  February  was  difficult  to  predict  because  such  a  decision  could  not  be 
derived  from  the  monetary  policy  framework  based  on  the  assessment  from  the  two 
perspectives. 
At  the  time  of  the  February  Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  some  positive  developments  were 
observed in domestic and overseas economies, such as receding tensions in global financial 
markets, some improvement observed in the U.S. economy, and the firm domestic demand 
due in part to reconstruction-related demand after the earthquake disaster. However, Japan’s 
economic  conditions  continued  to  be  harsh  with  the  level  of  economic  activity  not  having 
recovered  from  the  plunge  after  the  Lehman  Shock,  due  to  the  slowdown  in  the  overseas 
economies and the appreciating yen. At the same time, as you can find in the Minutes of the 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  in  January  2012,  the  following  recognition  had  been  gradually 
spreading  among  Policy  Board  members  during  the  process  of  discussing  prolonged 
deflationary pressures: the Bank’s intention in its conduct of monetary policy might not have 
been  fully  understood  by  firms,  consumers,  and  markets  since  the  Bank’s  communication 
had  not  been  effective  enough,  and  consequently  the  effects  of  powerful  monetary  easing 
have been considerably diminished. In addition, market participants and the media renewed 
their attention on the central bank’s policy stance toward achieving price stability triggered by 
the U.S. Federal Reserve’s decision on January 25, 2012 to set the inflation rate of 2 percent 
as its “longer-run goal”. 
Thus,  the  Bank  faced  a  situation  where,  from  the  perspective  of  achieving  the  “goal”,  it 
needed to consider the risk that the effects of monetary easing that was designed to achieve 
the  baseline  scenario  had  been  noticeably  compromised.  Taking  into  account  such  a 
situation,  the  Policy  Board  recognized  that  it  was  necessary  to  communicate  the  Bank’s 
policy stance clearly in order to ensure the realization of the baseline scenario so that the 
“goal”  would  be  achieved,  and  if  the  Bank  did  not  take  such  action,  more  time  might  be 
needed to achieve the “goal”. This led the Bank to make a policy decision at the February 
meeting. Also, to make its intention clear, the Bank decisively increased the total size of the 
Asset Purchase Program. It deemed that such a decision would strongly support the positive 
momentum observed at that time from the financial side, and that it would bring about visible 
effects of monetary easing. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Even  after  replacing  the  “understanding”  with  the  “goal”,  the  Bank  continues  to  conduct 
monetary  policy  based  on  the  assessment  from  the  two  perspectives.  It  had  been  quite 
unfortunate that, until last February, the Bank’s policy stance was not well communicated in 
an  effective  manner  and  thus  not  fully  understood.  The  introduction  of  the  “goal”  was 
received  with  some  surprise  partly  because  of  this  communication  problem.  The  Bank 
introduced the “goal” with the clear aim of solving this problem, and  will continue to make 
further efforts to enhance its communication. 
Question: has the possibility of further monetary easing increased? 
C. 
I will now make my best effort to provide an answer to the following difficult question. Has the 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  stance  become  more  dovish  after  all?  In  other  words,  has  the 
possibility of further monetary easing increased? 
As I have already stated, the Bank’s stance has not changed toward the conduct of monetary 
policy  based  on  the  “price  stability  goal”  and  the  assessment  from  the  “two  perspectives”. 
Allow  me  to  repeat  the  Bank’s  current  monetary  policy  stance:  “[The  Bank]  will  aim  to 
achieve  the  goal  of  1  percent  CPI  inflation  and  continue  the  pursuit  of  powerful  monetary 
easing  until  the  goal  is  in  sight,  conducting  its  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  and 
implementing the Asset Purchase Program mainly through the purchase of financial assets.” 
As  stated  in  the  Minutes  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  in  February  2012,  the  described 
policy stance shows that the Bank is committed to implementing additional easing measures, 
if deemed necessary. The clarification of the Bank’s determination to overcome deflationary 
pressures has been understood in financial markets more clearly and widely than before. I 
think this might have given the impression to some that the Bank has changed. 
After all, the Bank’s policy decision depends on the outlook for economic activity and prices 
and  on  the  results  of  the  assessment  of  risk  factors  in  the  context  of  achieving  the  “price 
stability goal”. An examination of policy effects is also important. It is often said that there is 
considerable uncertainty regarding when the effects of monetary policy will emerge, because 
they often come with a variable time lag (sometimes long). Unconventional policy measures 
taken recently are no exception. 
As  I  have  stated,  although  positive  momentum  has  been  observed  in  Japan’s  economy, 
there remains considerable uncertainty, mainly regarding the outlook for the global economy. 
There is also non-negligible uncertainty about how the policy changes in February and March 
will  affect  the  public’s  medium-  to  long-term  expectations  regarding  economic  activity  and 
prices.  The  Bank  would  like  to  conduct  appropriate  monetary  policy  while  taking  fully  into 
account such risk factors and examining the outlook for economic activity and prices. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me briefly touch upon some relevant issues for the economy in Okayama Prefecture.  
I  stated  a  short  while  ago  that,  in  order  to  overcome  deflationary  pressures,  (1) efforts  to 
strengthen  growth  potential  are  crucial  and  (2) business  firms,  financial  institutions,  the 
government, and the Bank should make such efforts within their respective roles. From this 
standpoint,  let  me  take  a  look  at  the  efforts  being  made  in  Okayama  Prefecture.  Several 
projects  have  been  actively  conducted  to  develop  industries  that  have  growth  potential  
– such as aircraft-related and medical and nursing care industries – into key industries, with 
the  government  and  the  private  sector  working  together.  Firms  in  the  chemicals  and  steel 
businesses – which have been the main industries in this region – have been making efforts 
to  develop  new  products  and  business  plans  targeted  at  environment-  and  energy-related 
sectors  using  the  skills  they  have  acquired  so  far.  Meanwhile,  financial  institutions  have 
taken  steps  to  develop  a  system  to  firmly  support,  from  the  financial  side,  firms’  efforts  to 
strengthen  growth  potential  while  using  the  Bank’s  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility.  In 
addition, I have heard that academics have made unique proposals for urban development 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
using  technological  knowledge  acquired  from  universities  and  university  hospitals.  I  am 
thrilled  to  hear  that  substantive  efforts  to  strengthen  growth  potential  have  been  made  in 
various areas. I truly hope that these various efforts align further with each other and lead to 
strong economic growth, not only in Okayama but in Japan as a whole. 
Thank you for your kind attention.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
