Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Financial crises and the future of global and 
Asian banking 
Statement  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Sasin 
Bangkok Forum 2012 Plenary Session “Financial crises and the future of global and Asian 
banking”, Bangkok, 9 July 2012. 
 Theme: “Strategy for Known-Unknown”. The critical success factors are 3 Cs: Coordination 
of regulators, Commitment forged by Inclusiveness, and Communal responsibility to restore 
market mechanism as a pillar of governance and financial discipline. 
 
Good  morning.  It  is  an honor  to  join  all  of  you  today.  I  would  like  to  thank  Sasin for 
organizing this forum and for inviting me. Over the past three decades, Sasin has played an 
important  role  in  grooming  business  and  policy  leaders  who  have  been  instrumental  in 
building  Thailand’s  open  and  competitive  economy.  Today,  we  are  facing  another  critical 
juncture for Thailand and the global economy. This forum has brought together the world’s 
leaders in public policy, businesses, as well as academia, and is therefore a rare opportunity 
for dialogue on our strategy going forward. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
 
 
This brings me to the topic of my remark today. The future of banking industry at the 
global  level  and  in  Asia  is  being  shaped  by  three  major  forces,  namely,  the  fragile  global 
economy,  global  financial  regulatory  reforms,  and  the  rise  of  Asia  which  faces  its  own 
developmental challenges. These forces are interrelated and complex, no one can claim to 
fully understand the final outcome. So is this the new paradigm of known-unknown? That is, 
we know what the major drivers of change are, but we cannot forecast outcome. So the key 
strategic challenge is how to deal with Known-Unknown. 
 
For  the  short-term,  the  key  priority  is  dealing  with  the  fragile  and  volatile  global 
economy. Stability is the priority for banks and regulators. The strategic policy question is 
how  to  get  the  right  balance  between  risk  and  return,  stability  and  growth.  Weaker 
banks  will  retrench,  leaving  rooms  for  the  few  stronger  banks  to  take  up  market  share.  In 
Asia, we have seen banks from the Asia-Pacific, notably Japanese, Chinese, and Australian 
banks  moved  into  market  space  where  European  and  U.S.  banks  have  retracted.  ASEAN 
banks are also shifting strategy to play a greater role to support their conglomerates in the 
regional  expansion.  If  this  regional  banking  trend  continues,  what  are  the  implications  for 
banks,  regulators,  and  central  banks?  While  the  region  has  so  far  remained  relatively 
resilient to the first round impact of European bank deleveraging, there is significant concern 
about the second round impact through the slowdown in global trade and economy that will 
impact growth. 
 
Another known-unknown in the short-term is the impact of interaction of various 
traditional  and  non-traditional  policy  measures,  such  as  monetary  policy,  prudential 
policy including macroprudential. As a result of this crisis, the acceptable policy space has 
been  significantly  widened,  for  example,  macroprudential  policy  now  includes  sectoral 
measures such as those to prevent property bubbles or to control adverse impact of capital 
flows. While these measures have merits in safeguarding financial stability, they could have 
complex and cross-border impact. 
Even  on  the  monetary  policy  front,  unconventional  measures  are  becoming  more 
 
conventional. Central banks in the major economies have increasingly used unconventional 
monetary  easing.  Though  necessary  to  stabilize  their  economies  at  this  juncture,  these 
policies  have  side  effects  of  large  and  volatile  capital  inflows  into  Asia.  This  further 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
complicates safeguarding of financial stability in other countries including Asia, and could, in 
turn, trigger some countries to resort to macroprudential measures themselves. 
 
Thus, in terms of policy space, we are dealing with a new paradigm of expanded policy 
tools,  with  new  transmission  mechanism,  and  requiring  their  own  policy  framework  and 
governance. So we need to recognize the need for crossborder coordination as well as 
flexibility in execution given emerging uncertainty. 
 
Turning  to  the  more  medium-term  structural  issues,  major  regulatory  reforms 
especially Basel III, Financial Stability Board reforms, and Dodd-Frank Act are still a 
known-unknown. We do know that they are designed to redress weaknesses that caused 
the crisis by enhancing capital and liquidity, while addressing the problems of procyclicality, 
and too-big-to-fail of SIFIs. For this, their merits are well recognized. But these reforms will 
reshape  the  global  financial  landscape  and  raise  cost  of  financial  intermediation.  They  will 
also have implications for cross-border level playing field, regulatory arbitrage, and alter risk 
profile  of  banks.  Therefore,  we  need  to  recognize  the  unknown  element,  that  is,  we  don’t 
know their full impact on the financial market and global economy. 
 
The  latest  review  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  of  potential  unintended 
consequences of regulatory reforms pointed to these concerns. Emerging markets have 
raised  some  concerns  about  the  Basel  III  capital  and  liquidity  frameworks.  These  may 
have negative impact on domestic financial markets, increase banks’ cost, and thus reduce 
credit  and  financial  market  liquidity.  In  particular,  the  liquidity  standard,  which  is  not  yet 
finalized,  the  calculation  in  the  framework  may  not  accurately  reflect  emerging  market’s 
financial market, and the implementation could distort local financial market. There have also 
been concerns about the treatment of traditionally low-risk trade finance in leverage ratio 
which  may  impact  growth  and  development.  Emerging  Asia  is  predominantly  bank-based; 
thus, Basel III will affect its financial intermediation relatively more than in the West, just at 
the  time  when  financial  intermediation  is  critical  to  support  economic  development  and 
integration. Some of these standards are still under discussion, and thus Asia-Pacific region 
already  has  a  proactive  regional  strategy  to  help  steer  these  regulatory  reforms,  such  as 
through EMEAP forum, to reflect our economic and financial market context. 
With  regard  to  the  OTC  derivatives  reform  which  aims  to  move  OTC  derivatives 
 
trading  on  to  exchanges  and  cleared  through  central  counterparties.  There  are  concerns 
regarding  inconsistency  of  regulation  between  countries,  infrastructure that  is  needed,  and 
cost for users. For example, if national central counterparty is not a viable and efficient model 
for a small economy, then the cost of hedging would increase with higher risk weight under 
Basel III. Meanwhile, if derivatives are cleared overseas, through regional or global central 
counterparties,  we  need  to  consider  implication  for  cross-border  supervisory  coordination, 
financial stability, and development  of local financial market and competition. On a  related 
issue  of  Dodd-Frank  Act,  restriction  on  proprietary  trading  of  US  bank  could  impact  the 
liquidity of US dollar markets abroad, as well as liquidity of foreign government bond markets 
which are the back-bone of their monetary policy operation. 
 
Another key issue going forward is the balance of authority between Home and Host 
regulators.  There  are  concerns  about  the  proposal  of  Financial  Stability  Board  on 
cross-border  resolution  of  Global  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions,  or  G-SIFIs. 
The concern is that some Host regulators may not be included by the Home regulator in the 
Crisis  Management  Group  or  resolution  planning,  even  if  the  institution  is  systemically 
important in their jurisdictions. 
 
We are glad to see the FSB taking initiatives to identify potential problems. Now it is the 
time to work together on solutions in an inclusive manner. This is because the inclusiveness 
of  the  process  assures  acceptability  and  commitment,  and  reduces  the  uncertainty  from 
unilateral  action  of  individual  countries.  These  international  regulatory  standards  have  no 
direct international enforcement power. Before the global crisis, the governance is based on 
discipline which came from the market discipline, but now market discipline has diminished. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Also the influence and discipline from the IMF program or FSAP may have been somewhat 
countered by growing importance of regional financial assistance mechanism with their own 
governance.  Each  country  or  region  would  be more  likely to  adopt  these  new  standards  if 
they  buy-in  to  the  rationale  of  the  reform. Inclusiveness and coordination are therefore 
keys  for  commitment,  and  the  pillars  of  the  new  governance  for  bodies  such  as  the 
Basel Committee and Financial Stability Board; this is perhaps the new Bretton Woods. 
 
Turning  to  longer-term  challenges  and  strategy,  Asia’s  increased  economic 
importance will rise as a consequence of its development efforts in liberalizing the economy 
and  the  financial  system,  allowing  market  forces  to  enhance  efficiency  and  productivity. 
These forces will accelerate with increased integration of the ASEAN Economic Community, 
ASEAN plus 3, and plus 6. 
 
For  intra-Asia’s  financial  flows,  Asia  is  not  “homogenous”  –  the  “North  Asia”  and 
financial center economies are developed, and some are mature economies facing their own 
challenges. The rest of Asia is emerging economies, some facing middle income trap, and 
some  facing  the  transition  challenges  from  centrally  planned  to  market  economy.  “North 
Asia”  will  tend  to  have  savings  surplus,  and  need  growth  potential  and  to  export  of  FDI. 
“South Asia” will need savings to finance investments. There is a natural synergy in resource 
allocation,  industrial  and  logistic  linkage.  Thus,  regional  financing  and  growing  role  of 
regional-centric financial services would naturally follow. 
 
The  most  critical  challenge  emerging  Asia  faces  is  to  build  economic  and 
financial  infrastructure  fast  enough  to  properly  harness  the  growth  energy  and  put 
these capital into productive use. Without adequate financial infrastructure, namely market 
and  legal  infrastructure,  and  financial  literacy,  there  is  potential  risk  that  emerging  Asia 
cannot  absorb  such  flows.  This  could  result  in  misallocation  of  resources,  including  asset 
bubbles  and  instability.  In  parallel,  public  investment  in  infrastructure  projects,  as  well  as 
social  investments  in  education  and  healthcare,  are  keys  for  increased  productivity  and 
economic  upgrade.  The  challenge  lies  in  getting  the  right  balance  between  growth  and 
stability,  in  managing  large  and  long-term  financing,  increasing  public  investment,  while 
keeping financial discipline. 
 
These are complex issues on how to ensure efficient resource allocation. A key 
strategy is to enhance the role of the market mechanism of the financial sector in Asia 
to rise to the challenge, and to act as check-and-balance on public policy. 
 
In closing, we are at an important turning point where we face paradigm shift. This is 
one of the realignment of relationship between the market, regulators, and society. In crisis 
countries, the balance of the relationship between the financial industry and the society shifts 
because  the  cost  of  financial  crisis  is  born  by  the  society.  In  emerging  Asia,  public  policy 
including financial regulation comes under pressure from social demand for financial access 
as well as consumer protection. These naturally accompany the take-off in growth as a result 
of economic and financial liberalization. 
 
Both  banks and  regulators  need  a proactive  strategy  to  deal  with  social  and  political 
environment that will shift banking environment and regulatory paradigm. Thus, the strategy 
for  banks  going  forward  must  also  include  proactive  governance  and  accountability 
framework  that  seeks  to  restore  trust  in  market  mechanism,  and  improve  the  social 
and political environment in which they operate. Failing to recognize the powerful social 
forces  will  result  in  less  than  optimal  regulations.  Similarly,  the  strategy  for  successful 
global regulatory reform is to assure an inclusive process, to garner commitment and 
credibility for the reform. 
In concluding, the key strategy for dealing with this paradigm shift of known-unknown is 
 
based  on  3  Cs.  Coordination 
financial  stability. 
Commitment forged by inclusive global reform process. And, Communal responsibility, 
or governance, that can regain trust of society in market mechanism, so that we can rebuild 
market discipline as a key governance and pillar of the financial system. These are our best 
to  deal  with  our 
interconnected 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
hope  for  striking  the  right  balance  between  risk  and  return,  growth  and  stability,  and 
regulation and market discipline at a time of known-unknown. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
