Duvvuri Subbarao: Agricultural credit – accomplishments and 
challenges 
Speech by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the thirty years 
anniversary celebration of NABARD, Mumbai, 12 July 2012. 
 I am delighted to be a part of NABARD’s celebrations of its completion of thirty years. This is 
a special occasion for NABARD, of course; but also a special occasion for the Reserve Bank, 
for  NABARD  was  incubated  in  the  Reserve  Bank  before  it  rolled  out  as  an  independent 
development financial institution in 1982. The bondage between our two institutions has not 
only  remained  strong  but  is  getting  stronger.  We  share  a  common  goal  –  of  furthering 
inclusive  growth.  We  also  share  significant  professional  domain  because  of  our  joint 
responsibility for the flow of agricultural credit.  
NABARD 
I. 
Over the last three decades, NABARD has grown and evolved from a uni-dimensional apex 
financing  agency  into  a  multi-dimensional  institution  for  shaping  and  implementing  the 
country’s overall rural credit policy. NABARD has been a leader in promoting microfinance 
through the SHG-Bank linkage programme. By investing huge energies and manpower into 
this programme and drawing upon its myriad roles, NABARD has reached nearly 97 million 
households, making India’s microfinance programme the fastest, if not also the largest, in the 
world. All of you – management and staff of NABARD – including those who have retired can 
be proud of this very credible record of achievement of NABARD. My congratulations to all of 
you for serving this great institution so competently.  
Completing  three  decades  is  an  occasion  for  celebration;  it  is  also  an  occasion  for 
introspection  –  to  look  back  on  what  you  have  accomplished  and  to  look  ahead  to  the 
challenges  on  the  way  forward.  I  thought  the  best  way  I  can  add  value  to  NABARD’s 
celebrations  is  to  do  precisely  that  –  to  look  back  and  look  ahead  on  the  challenges  of 
agricultural credit – the quintessence of NABARD’s mandate.  
Importance of agricultural credit 
II. 
Starting from Pandit Nehru’s exhortation soon after independence that “everything else can 
wait, but not agriculture”, agricultural growth has all along been central to India’s efforts at 
poverty  reduction.  We  have  come  a  long  way  from  the  chronic  food  shortages  and 
occasional famines of the immediate post-independence years; even as the population has 
increased,  we  have  been  able  to  maintain  food  self-sufficiency  through  both  extensive 
agriculture  and  productivity  improvement.  But  in  recent  years,  there  has  been  growing 
concern  about  the  erosion  at  the  margins  of  food  self-sufficiency.  A  big  challenge  for 
sustaining food self-sufficiency is raising production which, given that available land is fixed if 
not diminishing, has to come from improved productivity. A host of cash and non-cash inputs 
is necessary to improve productivity, and an important one is agricultural credit.  
Development  experience  shows  that  credit  is  an  important  determinant  of  value  added  in 
agriculture. A quick assessment by the Reserve Bank of the relationship between institutional 
credit  to  agriculture  (from  commercial  banks,  cooperatives  and  RRBs)  evidences  positive 
and  statistically  significant  elasticity  –  every  1  per  cent  increase  in  real  agricultural  credit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
results in an increase in real agricultural GDP by 0.22 per cent with a one-year lag.1 Further, 
the  Granger  causality  test  (based  on  lag  length  of  1)  also  indicates  that  the  causality  was 
unidirectional from agricultural credit to agricultural GDP. 
Looking back – major policies for promoting agricultural credit 
III. 
In order to look ahead, it will be instructive to look back on the policies that shaped the flow 
of agricultural credit over the last 60 years.  
In the first two decades after independence, the conduit for institutional credit to agriculture 
was the cooperative sector. Although sound in concept, the cooperative sector failed to live 
up  to  expectations.  With  the  nationalisation  of  commercial  banks,  the  decade  of  1970s 
marked  the  entry  of  commercial  banks  into  agricultural  credit.  This  period  saw  the 
introduction of the Lead Bank Scheme and regulatory prescription of priority sector lending – 
two landmark development policies that survive even today. The 1970s also witnessed pilot 
experiments  in  specialised  agency  approach  for  directing  credit  to  small  and  marginal 
farmers.  The  Small  Farmers  Development  Agency  (SFDA)  and  Marginal  Farmers  and 
Agricultural Labourers Development Agency (MFALDA) that were started in select districts of 
the country on a pilot basis had later been extended to the whole country as District Rural 
Development  Agencies,  which  now  play  a  central  role  in  coordinating  and  managing  the 
several poverty alleviation initiatives at the district level.  
The economic reforms of the 1990s, starting with the first Narasimham Committee of 1991, 
emphasised financial soundness and operational efficiency of the financial sector – including 
rural financial institutions. The Reserve Bank gradually deregulated the interest rate regime 
to aid improvement in the operational efficiency of banks. The next two decades witnessed 
several important innovations in agricultural credit. 
 
Both direct and indirect credit to agriculture were recognised as priority sector, albeit 
with  some  ceiling  on  indirect  credit.  What  is  included  under  direct  and  indirect 
agricultural credit has been revised from time to time in keeping with the changing 
requirement.  
Starting 1995, banks that fell short of their target of priority sector/agriculture/weaker 
sections  lending  were  required  to  deposit  the  shortfall  amount  in  the  Rural 
Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) set up by NABARD. Funds in the RIDF are 
lent to state governments for financing rural infrastructure. 
Since 1994/95, commercial banks have been required to prepare special agricultural 
credit plans with prescribed annual growth rates.  
In 1989, NABARD introduced the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) which a farmer could use 
to draw credit for all production needs, almost as if on tap, through the production 
                                                    
1  The study takes data from 1990/91 onwards.  
 
The model has been specified as follows: Ln (AGDP) = 10.52 + 0.22Ln (Acredit(–1)) 
(22.89)* (5.61)* 
Adj R2 = 0.91 DW = 1.52 
  Where,  
  AGDP = GDP from agriculture and allied activities at constant prices 
  Acredit = Credit for agriculture and allied activities deflated by GDP deflator with one year lag 
 
 
* Significance at 1 per cent level of significance 
Though  the  unit  root  test  revealed  that  both  series  were  integrated  of  order  1,  we  did  not  adopt  the 
conventional Box-Jenkins methodology of differencing the series in order to present the elasticity estimates. 
Instead,  we  have  presented  “t”  statistics  that  are  robust  to  autocorrelation  by  using  the  Newey  West 
methodology. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   cycle. The KCC has, thus, been a powerful mechanism for cutting down transaction 
costs both for the farmer and the bank.  
In 2004, a “Comprehensive Credit Policy” was announced with a mandate to step up 
institutional credit to agriculture by 30 per cent every year. Also banks were enjoined 
to ensure that every branch finances at least 100 farmers (5 million farmers at the 
aggregate level) and at least two or three agriculture projects every year. The policy 
also  included  a  host  of  debt  relief  measures  such  as  debt  restructuring,  one-time 
settlement and loans to pay off borrowing from money lenders. 
An interest subvention scheme was introduced in 2006/07 on the short-term credit 
extended to farmers. The budget for 2011/12 announced an additional subvention of 
3 per cent for prompt repayment by farmers.  
The  last  decade  has  seen  significant  financial  innovation  in  terms  of  financing 
farmers through Joint Liability Groups (JLGs), “aggregation models” and developing 
Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) into multi-service centres especially to 
meet the credit and non-credit services required by small and marginal farmers.  
Evolving patterns in the flow of agricultural credit 
IV. 
Having looked back on the policies that shaped agricultural credit, I will now highlight some 
of the broad outcomes of those policies.  
Growing role of the formal institutional structure in rural credit 
(i) 
Over the years, there has been a striking increase in the share of formal financial institutions 
(commercial  banks,  RRBs  and  cooperatives)  in  the  total  credit  availed  by  cultivator 
households.  In  the  1950s,  non-institutional  sources,  particularly  money  lenders,  accounted 
for virtually all the credit taken by cultivator households with only negligible credit flow from 
the formal institutional structure. This situation had changed dramatically by the early 1980s, 
with  formal  financial  institutions  accounting  for  as  much  as  60  per  cent  of  the  total  credit 
[Table 1].2 
The gradual increase in the share of formal institutional credit in agriculture witnessed some 
reversal in the period between 1991 and 2002 mainly because of a pull back by commercial 
banks. This disquieting trend is, in part, due to a contraction in rural branch network in the 
1990s,  and  in  part  due  to  the  general  rigidities  in  procedures  and  systems  of  institutional 
sources of credit.3  
Has there been a definite reversal of this trend after 2002? We have to wait for the findings of 
the  next  All  India  Debt  and  Investment  Survey  (AIDIS)  to  verify  if  the  several  new  policy 
initiatives in the decade of 2000s for expanding the rural branch network and stepping up the 
supply  of  agricultural  credit  have  resulted  in  commercial  banks  regaining  the  space  they 
vacated in agricultural credit.  
                                                 
2  The data pertains to total amount of credit taken by cultivator households for both production and consumption 
purposes. Data on credit for production alone by source of credit is not available. Nevertheless this does not 
alter the inference of the broad shift in pattern. 
3  These reasons have been illustrated in NABARD (2010), Report of the Task Force on Credit Related Issues of 
Farmers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Table 1: 
Shares in Total Debt of Cultivator Households 
Source: All India Debt and Investment Survey, NSSO, Government of 
India, various rounds. 
 Increasing intensity of agricultural credit 
(ii) 
Over the last 40 years, there has been a striking increase in the credit intensity of agriculture 
as  measured  by  the  ratio  of  agricultural  credit  to  agricultural  GDP.  The  credit  intensity 
increased from 12 per cent in the early 1970s to 67 per cent by 2010/11 [Chart 1].  
Between 1970s and 2010, there were, in fact, three distinct phases in the behaviour of credit 
intensity.  The  first  phase  from  early  1970s  to  the  mid  1980s,  saw  a  moderate  increase  in 
credit intensity. The second phase from the mid 1980s to late 1990s saw a declining trend. 
This  was  a  period  when  the  share  of  institutional  sources  in  total  debt  of  cultivator 
households  was  also  on  a  decline  as  already  illustrated  with  the  help  of  AIDIS  data  in 
Table 1. By contrast, in the third phase starting 2000, there was a marked increase in the 
credit intensity of agriculture.  
Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, RBI (2010–11) 
Note:  Since  the  data  on  agricultural  credit  from  cooperatives  were 
available only up to 2007/08, figures for the years between 2008/09 and 
2010/11  are  based  on  estimates  made  using  the  three-year  moving 
average method 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Growing share of commercial banks in total agricultural credit starting 1980s 
(iii) 
Among the institutional sources of agricultural credit, cooperatives have been the oldest, and 
for a long time, the dominant source. Starting with the nationalisation of banks, commercial 
banks have gradually become an important source of agricultural credit, although the growth 
in their share has not been monotonic [Chart 2].  
Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, RBI (2010–11) 
Note:  Since  the  data  on  agricultural  credit  from  cooperatives  were 
available only up to 2007/08, figures for the years between 2008/09 
and  2010/11  are  based  on  estimates  made  using  the  three-year 
moving average method 
 At the beginning of the 1980s, cooperatives supplied about half of the total institutional credit 
while commercial banks had a share of about 40 per cent and RRBs just about 2 per cent.4 
The  share  of  commercial  banks  had  increased  continuously  through  the  1980s  overtaking 
the share of the cooperatives. This trend, however, reversed in the 1990s when the share of 
commercial banks declined. This is possibly accounted for by the fact that this was a period 
when banking penetration across the country, as measured by the number of rural branches 
and average population per branch, showed a fall during this period. 
Sharp growth in commercial bank credit to agriculture in the 2000s 
(iv) 
The decline in the share of commercial banks in total institutional credit to agriculture in the 
first  half  of  the  1990s  as  indicated  above  began  to  change  with  a  moderate  revival  in  the 
second half of the 1990s, and then a steep rise in the first half of 2000s. By 2005/06, the 
(three-year  moving)  average  growth  in  agricultural  credit  was  in  double-digits,  hovering 
around  35  per  cent  per  annum  [Chart  3].  Agricultural  credit  from  commercial  banks  grew 
significantly faster than that from cooperatives during this period.  
                                                 
4  Figures do not add to 100 on account of the share of the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, RBI (2010–11) 
Notes: (i) The growth rates presented are three-year moving averages. 
(ii)  The  wide  fluctuations  in  cooperative  credit  are  on  account  of 
variations in indirect agricultural credit from cooperatives.  
(iii)  Since  the  data  on  agricultural  credit  from  cooperatives  were 
available  only  up  to  2007/08,  growth  rates  for  the  years  between 
2008/09 and 2010/11 have been estimated using the three-year moving 
average method. 
Commercial banks – growth in agricultural credit and total credit 
(v) 
How does commercial bank credit to agriculture compare with aggregate commercial bank 
credit? Notably, growth in commercial bank credit to agriculture, which was lower than the 
growth in aggregate bank credit during the 1990s, picked up sharply in the first half of the 
2000s and largely coincided with the growth in aggregate bank credit. There was a downturn 
in  the  growth  in  commercial  bank  credit  to  agriculture  after  2005/06,  when  growth  in 
aggregate bank credit also slowed down [Chart 4]. 
 
Source: Returns on Sectoral Deployment of Bank Credit, Database on Indian 
Economy, RBI.  
Note: The growth rates presented are three-year moving averages. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Faster growth of indirect credit to agriculture5 
(vi) 
Since the second half of the 1990s, indirect credit to agriculture grew faster than direct credit 
taking  the  share  of  indirect  credit  in  total  agricultural  credit  supplied  by  commercial  banks 
from about 11 per cent in 1995 to 29 per cent by 2011. During the second half of the 2000s, 
indirect credit even exceeded its prescribed sublimit under the priority sector guidelines by a 
narrow margin.6 The rising importance of indirect credit can be interpreted as a reflection of 
the  growing  credit  needs  for  strengthening  the  supply  chain  infrastructure  and  the 
consequent widening of the definition of indirect credit [Chart 5]. 
Source: Priority Sector Returns of Scheduled Commercial Banks, RBI. 
Note: In the chart, the sub-limit for indirect agricultural credit is plotted in terms of 
share in total agricultural credit to make it comparable. For working this out, the 
sub-limit of 4.5 per cent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) was first converted 
into absolute amount by taking actual data on ANBC. Second, the share of this 
amount in total (both direct and indirect) agricultural credit was calculated. 
 Decline in the share of long-term agricultural credit 
(vii) 
Starting the 1990s, the share of short-term agricultural credit in total agricultural credit has 
been  going  up,  and  that  of  long-term  credit  has  been  declining.  This  is  disturbing  but  not 
surprising given the slowdown in capital formation in agriculture [Chart 6].  
                                                 
5 
Indirect credit to agriculture includes loans to food and agro-based processing units (with investments in plant 
and machinery up to  100 million), credit to all activities that contribute to the development of diary business, 
credit for purchase and distribution of fertilisers, pesticides, and seeds, credit for purchase and distribution of 
inputs  for  the  allied  activities  (up  to  4  million),  two-third  of  loans  (in  excess  of  10  million)  to  corporates, 
partnership  firms  and  institutions  for  allied  activities,  finance  for  setting  up  agri-clinics  and  agri-business 
centres, finance for hire-purchase schemes for distribution of agricultural machinery and implements, loans to 
farmers through Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), Farmers’ Service Societies (FSS) and Large-
sized Adivasi Multi Purpose Societies (LAMPS), loans to cooperative societies of farmers for disposing of the 
produce of members, loans for construction and running of storage facilities, finance extended to dealers in 
drip irrigation/sprinkler irrigation system/agricultural machinery subject to certain conditions, credit outstanding 
under  loans  for  general  purposes  under  General  Credit  Cards,  Loans  to  MFIs  for  on-lending  to  agriculture 
subject to certain conditions, loans granted to RRBs for on-lending to agriculture and allied activities sector, 
and overdrafts, up to  25,000 (per account), granted against “no-frills” accounts in rural and semi-urban areas. 
6  The sub-limit for indirect credit to agriculture is fixed at 4.5 per cent of Adjusted Net Bank Credit (ANBC) under 
the  priority  sector  guidelines.  Indirect  credit  in  excess  of  this  sub-limit  is  not  reckoned  for  assessing 
performance under the 18 per cent priority sector target for agriculture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, RBI (2010–11) 
 Skewed distribution of agricultural credit 
(viii) 
The regional distribution of agricultural credit by commercial banks, both in terms of quantum 
of credit and the number of accounts, has been skewed. There is a significant concentration 
in  the  southern  states  (Andhra  Pradesh,  Karnataka,  Kerala,  Tamil  Nadu)  followed  by  the 
northern and western states. In contrast, the share of the eastern (Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha 
and West Bengal) and the north-eastern states has been low. The low credit availability in 
the  north-eastern  states  can  be  explained  by  the  relatively  shallower  financial  inclusion  in 
these  states.  However,  statistical  analysis  shows  that  the  inequality  in  the  incremental 
agricultural  credit  favouring  southern,  western  and  northern  regions  marginally  declined  in 
the 2000s as compared to the 1990s.7 
Introduction and expansion of Kisan Credit Cards 
(ix) 
The Kisan Credit Card (KCC) is a credit delivery innovation for providing adequate and timely 
credit to farmers under a single window with a flexible and simplified procedure. The KCC has 
been an important instrument for deepening financial inclusion in recent years [Chart 7]. As at 
end-March 2011, about 10.2 million KCCs were issued while the amount of agricultural credit 
outstanding against them was  726 billion. Commercial banks, with a share of 55 per cent in 
total cards issued and 69 per cent in the total amount of credit, played an important role in 
expanding the KCC route to credit.  
A  short  while  ago,  I  had  the  privilege  of  launching  a  smart  card  linked,  mobile  based  and 
Aadhar enabled KCC. This is really a great example of harnessing the latest technology for 
user  friendly  applications  in  an  area  of  economic  priority.  I  believe  this  will  further  reduce 
                                                 
7  The  concentration  curve  (plotting  cumulative  percentage  shares  of  different  regions  in  total  cropped  area 
against cumulative percentage shares in the incremental agricultural credit towards the same regions during 
two time periods, viz., 1990–2000 and 2000–2010), indicates that the cropped area related inequality in the 
distribution  of  incremental  agricultural  credit  favouring  southern,  western  and  northern  regions  marginally 
declined  during  the  period  2000–2010  as  compared  to  the  period  1990–2000.  The  data  on  state-wise  total 
cropped area has been sourced from the online official data base of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation. The state-wise data on total cropped area was available for the year 2007–08. The analysis 
was carried out by making the assumption that the composition of total cropped area across states remained 
more or less the same during the 2000s. State-wise data on agricultural credit have been sourced from the 
Basic Statistical Returns of Scheduled Commercial Banks in India for the respective years. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
transaction costs for farmers and thereby enhance productivity. My compliments to NABARD 
for this very thoughtful innovation. 
 
Source: The Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, RBI [2010–11]. 
Level of agricultural NPAs 
(x) 
During  the  period  2004–12,  the  gross  NPA  ratio  in  agriculture  was  higher  than  the 
corresponding  ratio  in  the  non-agricultural  sector,  except  during  2009  and  2010.  This  was 
partly  due  to  the  implementation  of  the  agricultural  debt  waiver  and  relief  scheme.  In 
2011/12, agricultural NPAs rose by 47 per cent as against the NPAs in the non-agricultural 
sector which rose by 40 per cent. The rise in agricultural NPAs during 2011/12 could be due 
to  the  lagged  effect  of  double-digit  growth  in  agricultural  credit  during  the  last  four  years 
(2006/07 to 2009/10), the general economic slowdown and also, possibly, the new system-
wide identification of NPAs [Chart 8]. 
Source: RBI Supervisory Returns 
 Summary of evolving trends 
To  summarise,  the  broad  trends  in  agricultural  credit  are:  (i) increasing  share  of  formal 
institutional credit in total rural credit; (ii) increasing credit intensity (ratio of agricultural credit 
to  agricultural  GDP)  of  agriculture;  (iii) increasing  share  of  commercial  banks  in  total 
institutional credit to agriculture; (iv) faster growth of indirect agricultural credit; (v) decline in 
the  share  of  long-term  agricultural  credit;  (vi) skewed  regional  distribution  of  agricultural 
credit; (vii) importance of Kisan Credit Cards; and (viii) higher level of NPAs in the agriculture 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
sector compared to the non-agriculture sector. As is clearly evident, some of these trends are 
positive and some negative.  
Looking ahead – challenges in agricultural credit 
V. 
Despite the impressive gains made by the rural credit delivery system in terms of resource 
mobilisation,  geographical  coverage  and  functional  reach,  the  financial  health  of  the  rural 
credit  institutions  has  deteriorated  raising  questions  about  their  sustainability.  Nearly  three 
quarters of the farmer households still do not have access to the formal credit system and 
have no means to insure themselves against income shocks. This leaves them vulnerable to 
the informal money lenders. Against this backdrop and the trends in agricultural credit that I 
traced earlier, let me now look ahead to the challenges in the supply of agricultural credit.  
Demand-supply gap 
By far, the biggest challenge is the demand-supply gap in agricultural credit. Notwithstanding 
the expanded rural credit network and growth in quantum of credit, the demand-supply gap 
has  been  widening.  Rough  calculations  [Table  2]  show  that  during  the  period  2002/03  to 
2007/08, when agricultural GDP grew at an average rate of around 3 per cent per annum, 
the  demand-supply  gap  in  total  institutional  agricultural  credit  was  estimated  to  be  around 
14 per  cent  (as  a  proportion  of  actual  supply  of  agricultural  credit).8  Clearly,  if  agricultural 
sector  had  grown  faster  than  3  per  cent,  the  corresponding  demand-supply  gap  in 
agricultural credit would have been much larger.  
Table 2: 
Agricultural Credit: Demand-Supply Gap 
Note: Calculations based on the data published in the Handbook of Statistics 
on Indian Economy, RBI (2010–11). 
                                                  
8  The demand for agricultural credit is estimated within a simultaneous Demand-Supply equation system taking 
data from 1997 to 2007, using two stage least square procedure. The exogenous variables in the system, at 
their lags and levels are employed as instruments. In order to derive the demand-supply gap, it is assumed 
that, agricultural GDP grows at 3 per cent per annum, which was the actual average growth rate of agricultural 
GDP,  during  the  period  2002–03  to  2007–08.  The  estimated  coefficients  of  the  demand  equation  for 
agricultural credit was applied to the agricultural GDP trend incorporating this assumption, yielding estimates 
of demand for agricultural credit that prevailed during this period. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Cost of credit 
The  cost  of  agricultural  credit  has  generally  been  high.  A  comparison  of  the  Weighted 
Average  Lending  Rate  (WALR)  for  agriculture  (which  reflects  transaction  costs  apart  from 
cost of funds and other add-ons such as costs of capital/provisioning, statutory prescriptions 
and profit margin) with the aggregate WALR of the banking system does not evidence any 
explicit upward bias for interest rate in agriculture. The WALR of agriculture was lower than 
the aggregate WALR in the early 1990s but the advantage, small as it may have been, got 
completely eroded by 2000, where after the WALR for agricultural credit tended to track the 
overall WALR [Chart 9].  
 Interestingly, after the introduction of interest subvention for agricultural credit in 2006/07, the 
WALR of agricultural credit did not decline significantly; it trended just marginally below the 
aggregate WALR. Part of the explanation for the stickiness in the WALR of agricultural credit 
could be that agricultural credit also includes lending for allied activities all along the supply 
and  production  chains  such  as  warehousing,  cold  storage,  input  producers  and  tractors, 
which do not enjoy interest subvention. But, that may not be an adequate explanation as the 
bulk of agricultural credit is still direct lending.  
We need further studies to understand whether the interest subvention scheme is distorting 
the  flow  of  agricultural  credit.  Anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  some  agricultural  loans, 
contracted at a sub-market rate of interest because of the subvention, are being diverted for 
non-agricultural purposes. This evidently defeats the objective of the subvention scheme and 
needs  to  be  corrected  either  by  remodelling  the  subvention  scheme  or  through  tighter 
monitoring of the end use of agricultural loans.  
Transaction costs 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that a number of  factors inhibit smooth credit delivery to the 
agriculture sector. These are: (i) insistence on collateral, (ii) complicated loan administration 
procedures, (iii) distances from the villages to the branches, (iv) higher monitoring and follow 
up  costs,  (v) culture  gap  between  bank  officials  and  farmers,  (vi) political  interference, 
(vii) inflexible  lending  policies  and  procedures  including  cumbersome  documentation, 
(viii) difficulties in recoveries of overdue loans, (ix) lack of provision for consumption credit, 
(x) absence of effective systems for screening credit risks and, finally (xi) a misplaced belief 
that the borrowers in the agricultural sector, particularly, small and marginal farmers with low 
per  capita  incomes  are  risky  and  hence  non-bankable.  Some  of  these  factors  ostensibly 
translate  into  higher  transaction  costs,  which  include  expenses  incurred  in  appraisal  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
processing, 
documentation 
loan 
borrowers, 
monitoring/supervision  and  collection,  and  the  proportionately  allocated  cost  of  branch, 
division and head office expenses. Quite clearly, it is necessary to reduce such transaction 
costs to lower the cost of delivery of credit and cost of funds to the ultimate borrower in the 
agricultural sector.  
disbursement 
charges, 
and 
Unlicensed cooperative banks 
The deteriorating financial position of unlicensed cooperative banks is an issue of concern. Of 
the 402 cooperative banks in the country as on March 31, 2009, 313 were unlicenced. The 
Committee on Financial Sector Assessment had recommended that no unlicenced cooperative 
bank is to be allowed to function in the country after March 31, 2012. In the intervening three 
year period, RBI and NABARD worked closely with the cooperative banks and licenced 270 of 
them, in some cases by relaxing the licencing norms. Thus as on April 1, 2012, there remained 
43  cooperative  banks  which  could  not  meet  even  the  relaxed  licencing  norms.  In  order  to 
maintain  the  integrity  of  the  cooperative  system  and  to  protect  public  interest,  the  Reserve 
Bank imposed Directions on these 43 banks prohibiting them from accepting fresh deposits.9 
The Directions do not imply any ban on the normal operations of the banks concerned with the 
existing account holders.  
The  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  of  the  Reserve  Bank  directed  that  these  as  yet 
unlicenced  banks  be  given  six  months  time,  up  to  September  30,  2012,  to  formulate 
Monitorable  Action  Plans  for  attaining  the  eligibility  norms.  The  Regional  Offices  of  the 
Reserve Bank in states where these unlicenced banks are located have been asked to form 
Task Forces to monitor the progress of these banks towards meeting the licencing norms. 
While  imposing  the  Directions  on  these  banks  prohibiting  them  from  accepting  fresh 
deposits,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  guided  by  the  need  to  protect  the  interests  of 
depositors and the decision was taken in the best public interest.  
Agricultural extension 
Provision of credit is necessary, but not sufficient, to improve agricultural production in the 
country. Credit needs to be supplemented by research and knowledge dissemination to the 
farmers. In the 1960s and 1970s, India had an agricultural extension service that did a very 
credible job in translating knowledge from the lab to the land. In the 1970s, Government of 
India  launched  the  Command  Area  Development  Programme  to  ensure  full  utilisation  of 
existing irrigation facilities to improve agricultural productivity. During this period, the World 
Bank funded Training and Visit (T&V) System also played an important role in strengthening 
agricultural extension by unifying the country-wide attempts in agricultural extension services 
and conveying regular messages to farmers, especially on Green Revolution technologies.  
Over the years, the extension network has crumbled away owing to a variety of reasons. In 
this “information age”, the key to raising productivity lies in learning from the best practices in 
the  world  and  adapting  them  to  local  conditions  –  “thinking  global  and  acting  local”  in  its 
quintessence.  Rebuilding  an  agricultural  extension  system 
is  knowledgeable, 
enthusiastic and sensitive to the Indian learning culture remains a challenge.  
that 
                                                 
9  After the imposition of Directions, two cooperative banks met the licencing norms. The Directions imposed on 
them have since been withdrawn, and issue of licences to them is under process. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Credit for promoting rain-fed agriculture 
Nearly 65 per cent of agriculture in India is rain-fed, cultivated largely by small and marginal 
farmers.  Evidently,  improving  productivity  here  is  critical  to  overall  agricultural  growth.  We 
cannot  raise  agricultural  growth  consistently  to  4  per  cent  per  annum  without  a  focus  on 
research and agricultural credit in rain-fed areas.  
There is also need for more robust weather insurance and agricultural extension services to 
target diversified livelihood options in the rain-fed areas. As appraisal and disbursement of 
credit  for  rain-fed  agriculture  requires  a  different  orientation  and  approach,  there  is  also  a 
need  to  design  innovative  credit  products.  Such  products  would  help  in  building  the 
confidence  of  bankers  in  rain-fed  agriculture,  and  would  also  ensure  the  financial  and 
economic inclusion of the vast majority of small and marginal farmers from these areas.  
Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) 
The Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) was established in NABARD in 1995 as a 
repository  of  the  shortfall  in  the  priority  sector  lending  by  commercial  banks.  Funds  from 
RIDF are lent to state governments for implementing rural infrastructure projects. Originally, 
the objective was to allocate these funds only for financing the “last mile” funding gap, that is 
to provide financing for projects that are nearly, but not fully, complete. The intention was that 
this will ensure that the sunk investment does not remain a deadweight and overall efficiency 
would improve. Over time, yielding to the demands of the state governments, RIDF funding is 
now available for all rural infrastructural projects diluting the “last mile” objective. I am told 
several projects funded by RIDF are also lagging behind schedule. It is important to review 
both  the  incentive  framework  governing  the  banks  and  state  governments  as  also  the 
operational guidelines.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude.  It  is  clichéd;  nevertheless,  it  is  well  worth  repeating  that  agriculture 
defines the emotional and economic well being of India. True, agriculture’s share in GDP is 
less  than  15  per  cent  but  it  still  remains  the  direct  domain  of  over  half  of  the  population 
whose  economic  prospects  are  linked  to  the  performance  of  agriculture.  According  to  a 
World  Bank  Report,  “among  42  developing  countries,  over  the  period  1981–2003, 
one per cent  GDP  growth  originating  in  agriculture  increased  the  expenditures  of  the 
three poorest  deciles  at  least  2.5  times  as  much  as  growth  originating  in  the  rest  of  the 
economy”.10 Clearly, improving the performance of agriculture is key to our quest for inclusive 
growth and poverty reduction.  
We need to do many things to improve the performance of our agriculture sector; improving 
the flow of agricultural credit is one of the important ones. This requires effort from all the 
three  institutional  segments  –  commercial  banks,  RRBs  and  cooperatives.  Commercial 
banks need to find innovative ways of reaching out to farmer, RRBs need to leverage on their 
comparative  advantage  and  cooperatives  have  to  improve  their  governance  structures.  As 
the premiere public institution in agricultural credit, NABARD’s role is crucial in this regard. 
What  NABARD  does  and  how  well  it  does  will  be  a  very  critical  factor  in  our  agricultural 
sector’s performance. On the occasion of this 30th anniversary celebrations, my best wishes 
to the Chairman, Directors on the Board, management and staff of NABARD in meeting the 
challenges of agricultural credit.  
                                                 
10  World Development Report (2008) of World Bank (Chapter I: Growth and Poverty Reduction in Agriculture’s 
Three Worlds). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
