Rundheersing Bheenick: “We need to shine the torch of transparency on 
everything connected with banking” 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the opening 
ceremony of the Bank of Baroda Branch, Rose Belle, 25 July 2012. 
 I am delighted to be here with you this morning at the opening of this new branch of the Bank 
of Baroda in Rose Belle. This makes it the ninth Bank of Baroda branch in Mauritius and also 
the  ninth  bank  branch  in  Rose  Belle.  As  demonstrated  here  in  Rose  Belle,  the  branch 
network  of  our  banking sector continues to  expand,  thus giving  the  lie to  observers  of  the 
financial scene who have been predicting the end of the brick-and-mortar model of banks. 
The Minister will be pleased to know that this now allows Rose Belle (his constituency) to pull 
ahead  of  Triolet  (the  Prime  Minister’s  constituency)…  but  it  is  still  one  branch  behind 
Flacq (the Vice Prime Minister’s constituency)… and trails behind Curepipe by two branches.  
Our banks in Mauritius value close proximity to their clients. Since I took over as Governor in 
2007, I have seen the number of branches growing by 30 per cent, to 217. This translates 
into  some  interesting  ratios  regarding  financial  access:  we  have  one  branch  for  every 
9.4 square kilometre of territory and for every 6,000 inhabitants – among the highest in the 
world. This banking model has served us well and I can safely say that it has contributed to 
bolster confidence in banking while adding to its resilience.  
The  Bank  of  Baroda  is,  of  course,  no  stranger  to  proximity.  Soon  after  it  set  up  shop  in 
Mauritius, and drawing on its experience of more than a century of taking banking services to 
remote areas of India, the bank introduced Mobile Banking in Mauritius. These days when 
we  speak  of  “mobile  banking”,  we  refer  to  banking  and  financial  services  and  payments 
enabled by cellular technology. In those days, Baroda’s mobile bank was empowered by an 
altogether  different  technology  –  the  internal  combustion  engine.  Bank  of  Baroda  mobile 
banking was a bank on wheels. It would go – as it still does – from village to village, bringing 
banking  to  rural  and  unbanked  areas.  There  are  many  who  can  still  recollect  the  flurry  of 
activity  that  would  greet  the  van  as  it  arrived  in  a  village.  At  that  time,  banking  was 
concentrated in urban areas. Transport facilities were not as developed and made it difficult 
to  reach  certain  localities  where  population  was  sparse.  The  Bank  of  Baroda  mobile  thus 
contributed to financial access in rural areas. It helped many agricultural labourers, farmers 
and entrepreneurs to have access to basic banking services. This was a revolutionary step 
for the rural community at the time.  
Let me sincerely congratulate the management of Bank of Baroda for their involvement here 
and for their contribution to the economic and social development of our country for nearly 
half  a  century  now.  I  understand  you  will  soon  be  celebrating  the  golden  jubilee  of  your 
presence  in  Mauritius.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  five  years  your  junior!  We  owe  you  some 
respect,  don’t  we?  Bank  of  Baroda  has  a  long-standing  relationship  with  our  country.  It 
opened  its  first  branch  in  Mauritius  in  1962,  when  it  became  the  fourth  full-fledged 
commercial bank in the country after Mauritius Commercial Bank, Barclays Bank DCO, and 
Mercantile  Bank  of  India,  and  broke  a  monopoly  that  had  reigned  through  colonial  times. 
Since then, Bank of Baroda has pioneered many developments. It was associated with the 
development  of  our  offshore  sector  since  the  very  outset.  When  offshore  banking  was 
launched in Mauritius in the late 1980’s, Bank of Baroda was among the first to establish an 
offshore  banking  unit. Today,  this  segment  has grown  into  a  profitable business.  Over the 
years, our banking landscape has witnessed the emergence of new players. We now have 
21 banks and Bank of Baroda is now solidly in the middle, ranking 10th, with an asset size of 
Rs 24 billion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I am sure this new branch will bring added value to the locality and the surrounding areas 
and  instil  more  competition  for  the  benefit  of  customers.  Banking  has  to  become  more 
customer-centric. The financial  crisis  has  changed  the  rules  of  the  game.  Only  two  weeks 
ago, at the Bank of Mauritius, we have taken very forceful steps to protect bank customers. 
We set up a Task Force on unfair terms and conditions in financial contracts, including fees, 
charges, commissions and other levies imposed by banks. By now, you should all know what 
prompted this initiative of the Bank. At the risk of repeating myself, I have spoken out about 
the many grievances spanning a wide range of issues from dissatisfied customers knocking 
at the door of the central bank. They complain about practices that are crying out for reform. 
Your central bank cannot remain indifferent to such calls from the public.  
The global economic downturn is impacting on our exports, on our employment and on our 
standard  of  living.  This  difficult  and  delicate  situation  requires  that  all  stakeholders  look 
beyond their narrow self-interest and share in the pain of adjusting to the new realities. It is a 
matter of continuing surprise to me that in the fifth year of an unprecedented financial and 
economic crisis of global proportions, some of our banks are still insolently reporting record 
profits.  
I am happy however to see that, at least on this score, I am no longer a lone voice in the 
desert. Others have recently joined me in denouncing this state of affairs. The Competition 
Commission  has  just  completed  an  exercise  on  the  bundling  of  insurance  products  where 
some banks were suspected of taking unfair advantage of their customers by selling them 
possibly overpriced insurance products from associated suppliers. It is currently investigating 
into credit card charges – another area where malpractices are rife, at least internationally. 
The  government  authorities  have  also  stepped  in.  They  set  up  a  second  Commission  of 
Inquiry on the procedures and practices of sales by levy to which banks have recourse when 
they foreclose on properties secured as collateral. It started work earlier this month. You may 
rest assured that the Bank will take corrective actions to remedy the situation.  
It may be appropriate here to point out a growing trend to impose very hefty fines on global 
banks in other countries for all manners of misdemeanours and transgressions, ranging from 
conspiracy to rate-rigging. Bank CEO’s and Chairmen have been seen off the stage for their 
failures  and  violations,  including  money-laundering  offences.  These  are  not  just  corporate 
banking failures; corporates only act through individuals. These are therefore also individual 
failures.  Criminal  prosecution  of  the  individuals  responsible  is  something  that  we  shall  be 
hearing more about in the weeks and months ahead.  
To my mind, this places individual responsibility at the centre of things. The reforms that are 
now being envisaged to prevent future crises, will hopefully address this issue.  
We feel strongly that banks – and those working in them at whatever level − should be held 
accountable for their actions. Eight months ago, at the Bank’s Annual Dinner for economic 
operators, I had invited bank executives and directors to reconnect with reality – and not to 
do things that would resurrect the image of banksters. I understand some bankers had then 
toyed with the idea of a walk-out. Two weeks ago, the very respectable Economist magazine 
– in its UK edition for the week July 7th-13th – had “Banksters” emblazoned on its cover in 
large characters, complete with gangster-like cut-outs of bankers in dark-goggles by way of 
illustration. The only thing missing from the picture was some machine-guns or AK 47 rifles in 
their  hands.  But  who  needs  these  crude  weapons  when  bankers  can  go  around  in  total 
impunity toting the much more powerful “weapons of mass financial destruction” – as Warren 
Buffet put it.  
Two  days  ago,  the  respected  Chairman  of  the  British  Financial  Services  Authority,  Lord 
Turner, used the “bankster” word on Bloomberg. Bankers, the world over, cannot walk out. 
There is no place to hide! Instead of walk-outs, we need work-outs − to purge the system of 
crooked practices and crooked individuals. We need to shine the torch of transparency on 
everything  connected  with  banking.  Corporate  governance  is  key.  We,  at  the  Bank,  have 
examined  the  matter  at  length.  We  are  issuing  a  revised  Guideline  on  Corporate 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Governance.  Very  shortly,  we  will  also  issue  a  consultation  document  on  Basel  III.  On  a 
separate note, we are in the final stages of setting up the Deposit Insurance Scheme, which 
is a missing link in our financial infrastructure.  
Let me say a word on the Special Line of Credit in foreign currency that we have offered to 
banks  for  on-lending  to  exporters.  With  this  measure,  the  Bank  is  using  its  own  balance 
sheet in an attempt to resolve issues faced by enterprises at the micro-level. This has a cost 
to us. The Bank cannot keep this line of credit open indefinitely. Judging from some press 
reports, it would seem that some banks are able to meet the demand at comparable terms 
on their own. If that is so, well and good! Let them get on with it. Others claim there is no 
demand for such foreign currency loans in the first place as exporters are apparently quite 
happy  with  their  foreign  currency  exposure  –  and  that  includes  the  very  real  depreciation 
risks of their export currencies. Let us bear in mind that micro-economic matters are not the 
normal business of the Bank and we have taken extra pain to explain the rationale behind 
our unusual move aimed at a very specific segment of our constituency. Rest assured that 
we have no difficulty in re-focusing our efforts back on the macroeconomic front, and on the 
broader  needs  of  our  complex  multiple  constituency.  We  will,  therefore,  soon  start 
redeploying progressively some of the funds earmarked for this Special Line of Credit, if, for 
whatever reason, the demand is not there.  
Again, congratulations to the management of Bank of Baroda for adding this ninth branch to 
your network. I have no doubt that you will do your utmost to serve the best interest of the 
community.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
