Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Launching the Bank of Uganda Retired 
Staff Association 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
launch of the Uganda Retired Staff Association, Kampala, 31 August 2012. 
 Governor Emeritus, Mr. Leo Kibirango 
Senior Management of Bank of Uganda Staff 
Retired Bank of Uganda Staff 
I am very privileged to have the honour of addressing this inaugural meeting of the Bank of 
Uganda  Retired  Staff  Association.  In  setting up  this  association,  Bank of  Uganda  staff  are 
demonstrating  their  commitment  to  continue  being  active  and  to  serving  their  country  and 
community, after retiring from the Bank. This is a very welcome initiative which has my full 
support.  
As  is  the  case  in  all  organisations,  Bank  staff  face  a  drop  in  income  when  they  retire, 
because their monthly pension payment is unavoidably lower than their after tax salary at the 
time when they retire. As a result, many retirees desire to supplement their pension income, 
especially  those  who  still  have  pressing  commitments  to support family  members.  For this 
reason,  the  Bank  encourages  its  retired  staff  to  try  and  remain  economically  active  if 
possible,  through  paid  work  or  private  business.  Many  retired  staff  has  expertise  and 
experience  which  can  be  of  valuable  use  to  society  and  can  be  used  to  generate  income 
after retirement.  
A good example of such endeavours is the work done by our Governor Emeritus, through his 
consultancy firm, L.K. Consultants. This firm spearheaded the recent right-sizing exercise at 
the Bank and was a pre-cursor for launching the Bank’s Strategic Plan 2012–2017, which we 
launched last month. It is no surprise, therefore, that Mr Kibirango has played a leading role 
in setting up the Bank of Uganda Retired Staff Association.  
The concept of having an association for Bank of Uganda retired staff comes at a time when 
Uganda  has  decided  to  open-up  the  pension  sector  to  new  entrants;  a  move  expected  to 
strengthen savings mobilization and provide competition to the NSSF. The liberalization of 
the pension sector will create a possibility for employees of institutions such as the Bank of 
Uganda to eventually choose for themselves which pension scheme they wish to contribute 
to. As such it will be necessary for all staff of the Bank to pay close attention to the costs and 
benefits of the different pension schemes which will become available as the pension sector 
opens up.  
Before I conclude let me offer you some words of wisdom from Marcus Tullius Cicero, a first 
century before Christ Roman philosopher:  
“As I approve of youth that has something of the old man in him, so I am no less 
pleased with an old man that has something of the youth. He that follows this rule 
may be old in body, but can never be so in mind.”  
It is now my honour and pleasure to launch the Bank of Uganda Retired Staff Association. I 
wish  the  association  the  very  best  for  the  future  and  I  am  sure  it  will  make  a  very  useful 
contribution to the welfare of all retired staff of the Bank.  
Thank you and good afternoon.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
