Jörg Asmussen: Key issues about the crisis and the European response 
Intervention by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington DC, 20 April 2012. 
 It is a pleasure to be here today at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and I 
would  like  to  thank  Karl-Theodor  zu  Guttenberg  for  his  kind  invitation.  In  recent  years  a 
common  theme  in  U.S.  foreign  policy  discussions  was  whether  to  disengage  from  Europe 
and focus on the Pacific. Today it seems that people in Washington are more interested than 
ever in European affairs. Unfortunately, it is for entirely the wrong reasons. How nice it would 
be to go back to those days of being irrelevant! 
I would like to set the stage for our discussion today by addressing some of the key issues 
about the crisis and the European response to it. These issues get to the heart of the major 
debates  in  the  U.S.  and  Europe  at  the  moment.  They  are  complex  and  they  require  us  to 
think long-term and avoid simplifications. Ultimately, they are about what kind of Europe we 
want for the future.  
In particular, I will focus my intervention on three questions: 
Is the worst of the crisis over? 
Is the European response to the crisis killing growth? 
Is the ECB’s response to the crisis swamping the world with liquidity? 
Is the worst of the crisis over? 
Policy-makers  are  often  asked  if  the  worst  of  the  crisis  is  over.  It  is  a  difficult  question  to 
answer. If we are optimistic we are accused of cheerleading. If we are pessimistic we risk 
panicking the markets and setting off self-fulfilling cycles. So we have to go by what the data 
are telling us. And the data show a clear stabilisation in the global economy since last year. 
The U.S. is showing signs of a sustained recovery. Data releases have consistently surprised 
on the upside throughout the first quarter of this year, although April was more mixed. Survey 
data point to a moderate expansion in economic activity in early 2012. Unemployment is now 
at the lowest level since January 2009.  
In the euro area, survey data confirm a stabilisation in economic activity at a low level in early 
2012. We continue to expect the euro area economy to recover gradually in the course of the 
year. The outlook is supported by strong export growth to the U.S. and emerging markets. 
Downside risks remain, however, related to a possible worsening of the sovereign debt crisis. 
Financial markets are also now generally less volatile – although we must closely monitor the 
situation in the Spanish government bond market. Certainly the doomsday predictions from 
the fourth quarter of last year seem to have been avoided. 
We  should  not  forget  that,  only  five  months  ago,  der  Spiegel,  the  leading  German  weekly 
magazine ran an article entitled “A continent stares into the abyss”, which declared that the 
end-game for the euro had begun. The front cover of The Economist magazine in the same 
week asked “Is this really the end?”, set against an image of a burning 1 euro coin hurtling 
towards oblivion. What changed in this time? In my view, the explanation is actions taken at 
three levels.  
First,  Member  States  recognised  the  seriousness  of  the  situation  and  implemented  major 
reforms. Spain has begun addressing its competitiveness problem with the most significant 
labour  market  reform  in  a  generation.  It  is  also  improving  central  control  over  regional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
spending. Italy is increasing competition and modernising its public administration to increase 
its potential growth. The debt exchange in Greece was successful, which gives the country a 
fresh  start  to  address  its  fiscal  and  competitiveness  issues.  Ireland  and  Portugal  have 
continued to implement their EU-IMF programmes, which are both on track. 
Second,  Europe  has  strengthened  its  economic  governance.  Fiscal  rules  have  been 
reinforced  through  the  agreement  on  the  fiscal  compact,  which  obliges  all  euro  area 
countries to run a structural balanced budget. It also shifts the onus for enforcement away 
from Brussels and onto national institutions, encouraging greater ownership. 
Monitoring  of  economic  policies  will  go  deeper  through  the  new  “enhanced  surveillance” 
legislation.  It  allows  the  Commission  to  send  missions  to  countries  experiencing  or 
threatened  with  financial  difficulties  and  recommend  policy  changes.  This  gives  the 
Commission the power to demand some reforms that the U.S. federal government could not 
demand of a U.S. state. 
Euro area firewalls have been strengthened by the decision to increase the total resources to 
around  I  trillion  US  dollars.  Altogether,  this  presents  a  convincing  package  for  markets:  a 
tough new set of rules, a strong regime for monitoring those rules, and a credible safety net 
to back it up. 
Third, the ECB has played its part by preventing a funding crisis in the banking sector. The 
two 3-year LTROs launched in December and February have eased bank funding pressures 
and  stopped  further  deleveraging.  This  should  over  time  support  lending  to  firms  and 
households across the euro area. 
These actions have pulled the euro area back from the very dangerous situation we faced 
last year. But the crisis of public and private debt in some countries is clearly not over. The 
recent  rise  in  Spanish  yields  is  evidence  of  this.  This  is  no  longer  a  problem  that  can  be 
addressed through bigger firewalls or a more active ECB. It can only be addressed through 
consistent and determined reform, even if it is painful in the short term. 
In the Spanish case the shift in market sentiment is a result of poor communication on deficit 
targets and delays in announcing the budget. In other words, Spain currently has a credibility 
problem with the markets. But this can be fixed by taking measures to regain credibility.  
Overall, we should not wait for a “silver bullet” to end the crisis. It does not exist. The end of 
the crisis will come only after a series of comprehensive steps taken over a number of years. 
This means all Member States and EU institutions playing their part. 
Let me stress that we are greatly helped in this task by excellent transatlantic cooperation, 
not least between the ECB and the Federal Reserve. Among other things, the provision of 
dollar swaps lines has been a key weapon in fighting the crisis since 2007. So the U.S. is 
also playing an important role in supporting the European recovery. 
Is the European response to the crisis killing growth? 
This leads into my second question: is the response I just described – fiscal consolidation 
and structural reforms – killing growth in Europe? It is important to understand that we see 
things  differently  in  Europe  and  the  U.S.  In  our  view,  strong  public  finances  are  a 
pre-condition  for  sustainable  growth.  We  see  fiscal  consolidation  as  supporting  growth, 
because  it  creates  confidence  effects  that  will  support  consumption  and  investment  in  the 
future. 
Certainly, the short term effects of consolidation can be negative. We recognise this. That is 
why  we  always  recommend  that  consolidation  is  accompanied  by  productivity-enhancing 
structural  reforms.  This  means  inter  alia  opening  up  closed  professions,  increasing  the 
efficiency of public administration and improving judicial systems. These are reforms that will 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
ultimately  benefit  the  majority  of  people,  by  increasing  the  growth-potential  of  these 
economies. 
Take the example of Spain. The labour market reforms I mentioned are essential to increase 
employment.  The  Spanish  labour  market  has  for  too  long  been  organised  in  a  way  that 
protects insiders. This is what lies behind the very high rate of youth unemployment.  
It may be the case that these reforms will not return some of the current problem countries to 
pre-crisis growth rates. So there will inevitably be calls for more stimulus. But we should keep 
in mind that the last ten years were not representative: it was a boom period, built on credit, 
creating ever larger imbalances. 
That  party  is  now  over.  We  need  to  learn  the  lessons  from  it.  And  the  lesson  from  the 
bursting of a debt bubble cannot be to load up on more debt. These countries need reforms 
that undo previous excesses and re-build their economies on a more sustainable basis. This 
is the direction in which Europe is currently heading. And there is really no alternative. 
There is one area, however, where I fear we are not learning the right lessons in Europe. 
Several European countries face a vicious circle where  weak domestic banks cause fiscal 
difficulties for governments, which in turn undermines public debt sustainability and further 
damages banks’ balance sheets. 
In the U.S., such a feedback loop does not exist, because federal institutions act as shock 
absorbers.  They  prevent  local  crises  from  becoming  systemic:  for  example,  banks  can  be 
recapitalised through the U.S. Treasury and resolved through the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation. In Europe we need to look to the U.S. for inspiration in this area. This is why I 
have called for a European bank resolution authority. 
Is the ECB’s response to the crisis swamping the world with liquidity? 
Let me turn now in more detail to the recent actions by the ECB – in particular, the question 
whether  the  3-year  Long  Term  Refinancing  Operations  (LTROs)  have  swamped  the  world 
with  liquidity.  Behind  this  question  is  the  implication  that  increasing  central  bank  liquidity 
always leads to distortions, be it inflation or currency volatility. But this misunderstands what 
central bank liquidity is. 
ECB  liquidity  is  a  very  specific  form  of  money.  It  can  be  used  only  to  make  payments 
between  banks  with  accounts  at  the  ECB  and  to  meet  reserve  requirements.  There  is  no 
automatic mechanism which converts this liquidity into loans or asset purchases. Banks take 
such  decisions  based  on  factors  like  their  financial  strength,  their  risk  aversion  and  the 
demand for credit by non-financial corporations and private households.  
So we should not make simplistic assertions about one factor leading to another. We should 
ask: what are we seeing in the data? Looking at credit growth in the euro area, we see few 
signs of distortions. The LTROs have certainly prevented an abrupt deleveraging. But loans 
to  the  euro  area  private  sector  increased  by  only  1.1%  in  February,  compared  with  an 
average of around 7% since the start of the euro. 
Looking at capital flows to other parts of the world, we see a broadly balanced picture. The 
euro  has  in  fact  appreciated  in  effective  terms  since  we  conducted  the  first  LTRO  in 
December  2011.  There  have  been  significant  capital  inflows  due  to  renewed  interest  and 
confidence by foreign investors. 
The strongest effect of the LTROs has been on bank funding. Euro area banks issued EUR 
55 billion in senior unsecured bank debt in the first two months of this year, more than the 
whole amount in the second half of last year. This is exactly what the LTROs were intended 
to  achieve:  to  prevent  a  bank  funding  crisis.  Over  time  we  expect  this  to  feed  into  higher 
credit for firms and households. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
When this happens, we will be constantly alert to any threats of inflation. Our commitment to 
price  stability  is  steadfast  and  credible.  And  observers  recognise  this.  Following  the  two 
3 year LTROs market indicators of inflation expectations – that is, investors risking their own 
money – show no signs of inflation above our medium-term objective. 
So to conclude, the euro area still has a lot of work to do to put itself back on a sustainable 
footing. This work is difficult because it goes to the root of our economic problems. But it is 
also essential. Solutions that would paper over these problems by creating more debt are not 
in Europe’s long-term interest. They would solve this crisis by creating the conditions for the 
next one.  
But we also need to be patient. The euro area is made up of 17 different democracies. And 
as you know very well in Washington, democracy is sometimes messy. Events may not play 
out as an economist would determine in his or her model. We may not take the most direct 
route to our destination. But important thing is that, in the end, we get there. I am confident 
that in Europe we are heading slowly but surely down the right track. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
