William C Dudley: Reforming the OTC derivatives market 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Harvard  Law  School’s  Symposium  on  Building  the 
Financial System of the 21st Century, Armonk, New York, 19 March 2012. 
 It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here. Today I will focus on two related 
aspects of the regulatory reform agenda that are complex and global in nature. 
First,  I  will  discuss  the  efforts  underway  to  reform  the  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives 
markets.  This  includes  creating  strong  incentives  to  standardize  trades  and  clear  those 
trades  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  and  improving  disclosure  and  transparency 
through mandatory reporting of all OTC derivative trades to trade repositories. 
Second, I will discuss the global program to establish tougher standards for the regulation 
and  oversight  of  financial  market  infrastructures  (FMI)  –  focusing  particularly  on  CCPs  for 
over-the-counter derivatives. 
Over the past two years, two important standard setting bodies – the Committee on Payment 
and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the  Technical  Committee  of  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have been developing a new package of 
standards called, Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures. The aim is to strengthen the 
resiliency and robustness of FMIs that are systemically important and are the backbone of 
the global financial system. I anticipate that the approval process will be completed and the 
finalized Principles document will be issued and broadly distributed sometime next month. 
As always, what I have to say here reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal  Reserve  System. Also,  I  speak  for  myself 
rather than for CPSS and IOSCO. 
Turning to my first topic, the financial crisis exposed many shortcomings with respect to the 
OTC derivatives market. For example, the use of OTC derivatives referencing private-label 
mortgage-backed securities that held poor quality subprime and alt-A mortgages multiplied 
the amount of gains and losses in the financial system. There were not only the losses on the 
actual mortgages, but also on the CDS that were linked to these mortgages through the OTC 
derivatives market. This increased the stress on the system when the referenced subprime 
and alt-A mortgages began to perform poorly. 
Moreover,  the  structural  characteristics  of  the  over-the-counter  derivatives  market  itself 
amplified the shocks created by the housing bust in several ways. First, the collateral calls 
generated  by  sharp  movements  in  the  mark-to-market  value  of  the  OTC  derivative  trades 
drained  liquidity  buffers  and  provoked  the  fire  sales  of  assets.  These  fire  sales  increased 
volatility  and  provoked  still  greater  margin  calls.  This  dynamic  was  one  reason  why  the 
market prices of these assets overshot to the downside – that is they fell more than needed 
simply  to  reflect  the  increase  in  expected  credit  losses.  In  other  words,  the  illiquidity  risk 
premiums embedded into the prices of these assets became very large. 
Second, the bilateral nature of the OTC derivatives market – between the two parties to the 
contract – be it dealer and customer or dealer and dealer – created its own set of difficulties. 
When counterparties became concerned about the health of a particular dealer, they often 
moved  their  trades  –  via  novation  –  to  other  dealers.  They  did  this  to  protect  themselves 
should the dealer subsequently fail. But this process was difficult to carry out quickly and in 
size. The cumbersome nature of the process disturbed market liquidity and function. It also 
tended to drain off the liquidity from the troubled dealers because these dealers often used 
the counterparty cash collateral to fund their own operations. When customers moved their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
refer 
to  as 
to  other  dealers  –  which  we 
business, the collateral balances departed with them and this worsened the funding crunch 
on the troubled dealers. 
Third, when a large counterparty, Lehman Brothers, filed for bankruptcy, it could no longer 
meet  its  obligations.  The  claims  of  Lehman’s  customers,  including  those  open  OTC 
derivatives positions in which Lehman owed them money, were frozen. The lack of adequate 
segregation of the customers’ assets from the Lehman estate and the inability to move the 
outstanding  obligations 
lack  
of portability – created large problems for Lehman’s counterparties. Often Lehman’s clients 
were  in  the  position  that  one  side  of  a  trade  executed  with  Lehman  was  frozen,  but  the 
offsetting  side  remained  open  and  exposed  to  volatile  financial  markets.  This  asymmetry 
contributed  to  the  sharp  increase  in  market  volatility,  the  dramatic  reduction  in  market 
liquidity, and the impairment in market function following the Lehman failure. Fear that this 
could happen again if another firm failed, encouraged flight from other dealers perceived by 
market participants to be relatively weak that might have large potential exposures. 
Of course, as if this were not bad enough, the opaqueness of the OTC derivatives market 
made the situation much worse. No one had a clear insight into the financial health of their 
counterparties. Although each market participant could calculate its bilateral exposures to a 
particular dealer and the particular dealer could understand its own exposure to each of its 
own counterparties, this didn’t answer the broader question: how exposed were the clients 
and dealers to others in the financial system through their derivatives trades and other open 
positions?  Because  there  was  no  easy  way  to  know  who  was  in  difficulty  or  not,  the 
incentives were all on the side of assuming the worse – closing out open trades, hoarding 
liquidity,  and  retreating  to  the  sidelines.  The  crisis  had  made  it  crystal  clear  that  the 
regulatory  regime  had  not  kept  pace  with  the  rapid  growth  of  the  global  OTC  derivatives 
market. 
In  assessing  the  shortcomings  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market  after  the  crisis,  a  global 
consensus has been reached. Although I will be over-simplifying in the interest of time, I view 
the  following  aspects  of  reform  as  the  most  important.  First,  there  have  to  be  strong 
incentives in the system – such as capital requirements on banks and securities dealers – to 
provide  an  impetus  for  dealers  to  standardize  OTC  derivatives  trades  whenever  practical. 
The goal is fewer bespoke trades and more standardized trades. Second, the G20 leaders 
agreed  that  all  standardized  OTC  derivative  trades  should  be  mandatorily  cleared  through 
CCPs by the end of 2012. Third, records for all OTC derivative trades – including bilateral 
bespoke trades – must be reported to trade repositories. The data as part of this reporting 
requirement would include key trade attributes and a legal entity identifier so that aggregate 
exposures  could  be  readily  calculated.  Fourth,  the  two  standard-setting  bodies  mentioned 
earlier  –  CPSS  and  IOSCO  –  would  strengthen  and  broaden  the  principles  for  financial 
market  infrastructures. Fifth,  these  Principles  would  be  adopted  globally,  strengthening  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
The logic behind these five elements of reform goes like this: 
Standardizing  trades  improves  transparency  and  price  discovery.  This  mitigates  the 
opaqueness that helped to generate the illiquidity and loss of market function evident during 
the crisis. 
Requiring  that  such  trades  be  cleared  through  CCPs  is  designed  to  reduce  the  aggregate 
amount of risk in the system. That is because the gross exposures can be netted down when 
all the dealers clear through one common central clearing party. In a CCP framework, the 
bilateral exposures of each dealer to one another are replaced by a single set of claims to 
and from the CCP. The idea is that because some dealers are likely to be long some trades 
to one dealer and short some trades to other dealers, passing both sets of trades through a 
single CCP can reduce the aggregate amount of risk in the system. This would occur as the 
long trades are netted out against the short trades, leaving only the remaining smaller net 
exposure of the dealer to the CCP. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Inserting a CCP in between two counterparties to a trade can also help reduce the “run risk” 
faced by a potentially troubled dealer. As we saw during the crisis, market participants often 
abruptly pull their trades away from a dealer that they perceive to be weak, which in turn can 
have  the  self-fulfilling  effect  of  magnifying  market  or  liquidity  pressures  on  the  dealer.  If, 
however, trades with the dealer are cleared through a CCP, direct exposures to the dealer 
are eliminated and replaced by exposures to the CCP itself. This risk shifting can reduce the 
incentives to suddenly halt trading with a dealer, for example, due to uncertainty about the 
dealer’s financial condition or future prospects. 
Mandatory reporting of trades to trade repositories is designed to ensure that the details of 
each contract are preserved and available to the regulatory authorities. 
Finally,  the  fact  that  CCPs  will  be  central  to  the  system  dramatically  increases  their 
importance. In essence, global CCPs will be systemically important. Thus, for the system to 
be safer it is not sufficient to ensure that trades are standardized and that they are mandated 
to be cleared through CCPs, but also it is necessary that CCPs be “bullet proof.” They have 
to have the ability to perform and meet their obligations regardless of the degree of stress in 
the financial system and even if one or more of their participants were to fail in a disorderly 
manner. Hence, there is a compelling need for tougher principles that are broadly enforced. 
In addition, to ensure that this all works as well in practice as in theory, the Financial Stability 
Board, CPSS and IOSCO, and other regulatory authorities have emphasized the importance 
of four safeguards to ensure that mandatory, standardized clearing through CCPs will make 
the financial system more robust and resilient. 
The first safeguard is that the oversight of global CCPs needs to be cooperative – involving 
the  securities  regulators  and  central  banks  in  the  country  in  which  the  CCP  operates  (the 
home country) and the countries for which the CCP may be systemically important. Global 
CCPs  are  likely  to  be  established  –  some  are  already  up  and  running  –  that  will  clear 
different  types  of  OTC  derivatives  such  as  interest  rate  swaps,  credit  default  swaps,  or 
commodity-based swaps that are traded around the world, both solely within one country or 
on a cross-border basis. 
Many  regulators  have  important  stakes  in  ensuring  that  a  global  CCP  can  meet  its 
obligations. In addition to regulators of the country in which the CCP is headquartered, these 
include foreign regulators. These regulators may be interested parties for many reasons. For 
example, their currencies may be used in settling the obligations of the CCP, they may have 
counterparties to the CCP that are headquartered or do significant amounts of business in 
their country, or they may have FMIs that are linked to the CCP. 
I want to emphasize that effective cooperative oversight is essential. Otherwise, the risk is 
that the system will become overly fragmented, with a proliferation of national CCPs. In this 
case,  many  of  the  risk-reducing  benefits  from  CCPs  could  be  lost  or  severely  attenuated. 
That is because fewer offsetting positions would likely be cleared through any particular CCP 
and this would reduce the scope for reducing large gross exposures into much smaller net 
positions. 
The  second  safeguard  is  to  ensure  fair,  open  and  safe  access  to  global  FMIs  around  the 
world. It is important, for example, that global CCPs have rules that are not exclusionary or 
that  unnecessarily  entrench  the  position  of  whatever  dealer,  firm,  or  FMI  is  currently 
dominant in the market. 
The third safeguard is to establish rules to ensure that, if a major market participant were to 
fail, a CCP can liquefy its collateral quickly so that it can meet its obligations in a timely way. 
But this also needs to be done in a way that would not disrupt financial markets or the CCP’s 
participants. As I will discuss shortly, although there may be a potential role for central banks 
here,  CCPs,  at  a  minimum,  must  have  their  own  liquidity  resources  as  the  first  line  of 
defense. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Fourth, there needs to be a viable resolution regime for CCPs. This is needed to ensure that 
the CCP either can be recapitalized and recover or, if necessary, wound down in an orderly 
way without disrupting the provision of essential market services. Also, a resolution regime is 
necessary to ensure that a central bank that might lend to a CCP in extremis will be repaid. 
To help ensure that these safeguards are met, a major part of the reform effort is to establish 
a strong set of principles for financial market infrastructures. These principles must embody 
the four safeguards and ensure that the infrastructure can withstand any stresses that could 
plausibly occur. 
The process of developing such a set of principles began about two years ago and is now 
nearing completion. 
So  why  the  new  principles  and  what  do  they  embody?  During  the  crisis,  financial  market 
infrastructures  performed  very  well.  In  fact,  FMIs  were  actually  a  source  of  strength.  They 
enabled market participants to settle obligations when they came due in a timely way. Also, 
their  robustness  gave  confidence  to  market  participants  that  they  could  continue  to  trade, 
knowing that the transactions would almost certainly be settled and cleared without difficulty. 
Despite this excellent record of performance during a period of unprecedented stress, there 
still is room for improvement. First, future stresses could be more severe or might come in 
different  forms.  This  could  expose  vulnerabilities  in  FMIs  that  have,  up  to  now,  not  been 
visible. Also, extraordinary interventions in the crisis to backstop market function or rescue 
key  financial  intermediaries  may  have  prevented  the  stress  level  from  reaching  the  point 
where FMIs couldn’t perform their functions. Because there can be no assurance that such 
interventions will necessarily occur in the future, it is important that the stability of the FMI 
architecture not depend on timely extraordinary interventions. 
Second, under the new regime of central clearing for standardized OTC derivatives trades, 
the role of FMIs will become even more important in the future. Moreover, the new regime 
will lead to the development of new types of FMIs. CCPs for OTC derivatives will become 
widespread – and trade repositories will be established. Principles are needed to underpin 
these new institutional arrangements. 
Third, for FMIs to be resilient they would undoubtedly need to have some ability to access 
central bank services, including the lender of last resort function. But, if FMIs had access to 
such services, this would create moral hazard. The best way to address this conundrum is to 
hold the FMIs to tougher global standards. 
Fourth, a stronger and better system of FMI governance and oversight can help to ensure 
that  those  systems  that  support  a  global  market  are  subject  to  consistent  standards 
regardless of the jurisdiction where they operate. Relying solely on a patchwork of differing 
national  standards  in  a  global  world  would  not  work  well.  It  would  encourage  business  to 
migrate to the lowest standard. Without establishing a global floor, there would otherwise be 
a “race for the bottom.” 
These are the major reasons why CPSS and IOSCO took on the task of strengthening and 
broadening the standards for FMIs. 
There are two major goals of this effort. The first goal is to strengthen the current standards 
by: 1) raising the bar for existing standards such as for governance, credit risk, liquidity risk, 
collateral  and  margin  requirements;  2)  including  requirements  for  new  areas  such  as 
segregation  and  portability,  general  business  risk,  links,  tiering  and  disclosure;  and 
3) extending coverage to include trade repositories. 
As proposed in the consultation document, the Principles will significantly strengthen existing 
requirements for an FMI’s governance and financial resources. One way the  Principles do 
this is by requiring FMIs to take a more comprehensive and proactive view of the roles they 
play, the risks they face, and their potential to support the stability of the broader financial 
system.  In  particular,  as  markets  become  even  more  interconnected,  FMIs  must  approach 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
their governance and risk management  more  holistically, in a  manner consistent with their 
growing importance to the global markets and the stakeholders that they serve. 
Regarding an FMI’s financial standards, it is important that they be prepared to handle even 
greater potential disruptions and more extreme market conditions. For example, while an FMI 
must  cover  its  largest  current  credit  exposure  to  any  single  participant  under  pre-crisis 
standards, the Principles would require an FMI to collateralize its current credit exposures to 
all of its participants. Furthermore, for CCPs that face potential future credit exposures from 
the  open  contracts  that  they  guarantee,  the  Principles  impose  rigorous  stress  testing  and 
strengthened  margin  and  default  fund  requirements.  These  requirements  are  to  guard 
against a wide range of possible stress scenarios in extreme but plausible market conditions. 
The  Principles  also  raise  the  bar  for  an  FMI’s  management  of  liquidity  risk  to  ensure  that 
systemically important payment obligations can be settled on time. For instance, when sizing 
its potential liquidity needs in the event of a participant default, an FMI should have sufficient 
liquid resources to cover not only the shortfall caused by the default of the individual legal 
entity  that  settles  directly  through  the  FMI,  but  also  the  shortfall  that  could  arise  from  the 
failure  of  all  affiliates  of  the  direct  participant.  In  addition,  FMIs  will  need  to  address  how 
potential uncovered liquidity shortfalls or credit losses would be allocated, and how the FMI 
would replenish any financial resources it uses in a stress event so that it can continue to 
operate in a safe and sound manner. 
The  Principles  also  introduce  a  number  of  new  requirements.  Some  of  these  address 
shortcomings that were observed during the crisis. For example, the Principles require CCPs 
to  have  segregation  and  portability  arrangements  that  protect  customer  positions  and 
collateral. An FMI will also be required to manage the risks it bears from and poses to, not 
only its participants and their customers, but also to other entities with which it does business 
such as linked FMIs, settlement banks, custody banks, and liquidity providers. Furthermore, 
the Principles will require FMIs to establish a dedicated financial cushion that could absorb 
unanticipated general business losses. This is to ensure that an FMI can continue to provide 
its critical services. The Principles also require that FMIs have plans for their recapitalization 
or orderly wind down, if that were to prove to be necessary. 
Finally, the coverage of the international standards has been expanded to trade repositories 
as  a  new  category  of  FMI,  to  further  complement  the  G-20  OTC  derivatives  initiative  for 
mandatory  trade  reporting.  The  Principles  that  address  trade  repositories  focus  on  their 
transparency and the disclosure of market data. This reflects the important and unique role 
they will play in disseminating information both to regulators and to the market more broadly. 
The second major goal is to promote consistent global enforcement of the standards. Toward 
this  end,  the  Principles  unify  and  harmonize  three  existing  sets  of  standards  –  Core 
Principles  for  Systemically  Important  Payment  Systems;  Recommendations  for  Securities 
Settlement Systems; and Recommendations for Central Counterparties. 
As  part  of  this  effort,  the  Principles  strengthen  the  “responsibilities  of  authorities.”  This 
includes  a  new  framework  for  cooperation  among  financial  authorities.  It  calls  for  central 
banks, market regulators, and other relevant authorities to cooperate with each other, both 
domestically  and  internationally,  and  to  support  each  other  in  fulfilling  their  respective 
mandates to promote the safety and efficiency of FMIs. This builds upon existing frameworks 
that have already been used successfully by CPSS and IOSCO for effective cooperation in 
the  oversight  of  global  institutions.  Such  cooperation  can  facilitate  more  comprehensive 
oversight, improve efficiency and effectiveness, reduce or eliminate any gaps in regulation, 
supervision, and oversight, and minimize potential duplication of effort and burden on both 
the FMIs and the cooperating authorities. 
Toward  the  goal  of  consistent  global  enforcement,  the  Principles  are  considered  to  be 
minimum  requirements.  In  contrast,  the  three  old  sets  of  guidance  were  weaker,  being 
recommendations rather than requirements. As recommendations, they could be ignored. In 
contrast, as the Principles make clear, countries that are members of CPSS and IOSCO are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
forms, 
take  a  variety  of 
to apply the principles to “the fullest extent possible.” This means that regulation and legal 
frameworks are to be adjusted as needed in order to accommodate the standards. 
To  ensure  that  this  happens,  CPSS  and  IOSCO  are  also  developing  disclosure  and 
assessment  regimes.  The  purpose  is  to  facilitate  a  consistent  set  of  disclosures  by  the 
different FMIs and a consistent set of assessment methodologies that can be used by the 
relevant international institutions, namely the International Money Fund and the World Bank, 
and by the relevant national authorities of the FMIs domiciled in their jurisdictions. 
When the Principles are published next month, CPSS and IOSCO will also issue a disclosure 
regime proposal and an assessment regime proposal. These will be put forward for a 60-day 
consultation  period  to  give  the  market  participants,  FMIs,  and  regulators  an  opportunity  to 
comment. 
Also,  once  the  Principles  are  rolled  out  and  countries  start  to  implement  the  legal  and 
regulatory changes necessary to put the Principles into practice, it is anticipated that CPSS 
and  IOSCO  will  undertake  a  monitoring  effort to  see  how  it  is  going. The  focus will  be  on 
evaluating how quickly and broadly the Principles are being embedded in national legal and 
regulatory frameworks. 
The  Principles  are  important  in  supporting  the  G20  strategy  of  mandatory  clearing  of 
standardized  OTC  derivatives  trades  and  in  ensuring  that  the  four  safeguards  discussed 
earlier for global CCPs and other FMIs are implemented. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  new  Principles  lay  out  the  responsibilities  of  authorities  for 
cooperative  oversight.  Cooperation  can 
formal 
arrangements that are organized under memoranda of understandings, specific protocols or 
other documentation for the exchange of critical information, and informal arrangements for 
regular and ad hoc communications. Much work is currently underway to establish various 
forms of effective cooperation, particularly for individual CCPs and trade repositories that are 
becoming globally important. However, as the work toward meeting the G-20 commitments 
continues, much more work is needed to design and implement such arrangements for the 
relevant FMIs. 
In  terms  of  the  issue  of  access,  explicit  requirements  for  FMIs  are  embedded  in  the 
Principles.  The  Principles  establish  a  framework  that  covers  access  by  direct  participants, 
indirect participants – i.e., those who trade indirectly through a direct participant, and access 
and links between FMIs. 
In terms of the lender of last resort issue, the Principles strengthen the requirements for FMIs 
in terms of such aspects of financial strength such as capital and liquidity, and operational 
and business risk. This implies that enforcement of the Principles should significantly mitigate 
any moral hazard issue that could arise if an FMI were able to obtain credit from a central 
bank. 
On  resolution,  the  Principles  contain  explicit  requirements  to  ensure  that  all  systemically 
important  FMIs  have  viable  recovery  plans  and,  if  circumstances  ever  warrant,  could  be 
wound down in an orderly fashion without the disruption of the provision of key services. The 
Principles’ provisions for an FMI’s recovery and orderly wind down will inform upcoming work 
by CPSS-IOSCO on the potential role and attributes of official regimes for the resolution of 
FMIs. This work is underway and should be completed later this year. 
I’m  pleased  to  see  what  has  already  been  accomplished.  But  let’s  be  clear,  when  the 
Principles are published that won’t be the end. To quote Winston Churchill, it will only be “the 
end of the beginning”. Thereafter, the resolution, disclosure and assessment frameworks will 
need to be finalized later this year. The CPSS and IOSCO members will have to adopt the 
new Principles into their regulatory and legal frameworks, with a target date of year-end. The 
new Principles will then be put into effect next year, with FMIs expected to observe the new 
Principles as shortly thereafter as is feasible. This is obviously an ambitious schedule, but 
one that is fully consistent with the G20 leaders’ mandate. 
including 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  we  should  recognize  that  the  global  financial  system  is  a  complex  one  that  is 
continuously evolving and that we are introducing many significant changes into that system. 
We have to recognize that there may be trade-offs between some of our objectives, and that 
the  system  may  evolve  in  ways  that  we  do  not  expect.  There  may  be  unintended 
consequences. Maybe the major dealers will not standardize as many trades as is desirable 
or, perhaps, CCPs will develop in too fragmented a manner so that the netting of risk doesn’t 
occur  to  the  extent  potentially  feasible.  Or  the  development  of  global  CCPs  could  have 
unanticipated negative consequences for market structure, competition and/or efficiency. 
We must be open-minded about the potential need for mid-course corrections. We will need 
to ensure that the incentives are right to get the greatest amount of risk reduced in the most 
efficient manner. Currently, for example, we are evaluating how the changes in terms of the 
Basel  capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  banks  will  interact  with  the  changes  in  the  OTC 
derivatives  regime  in  terms  of  influencing  the  incentives  for  standardizing  OTC  trades  and 
mandatory  clearing  through  CCPs.  But  we  shouldn’t  kid  ourselves  –  we’ll  be  off  in  our 
forecast. Thus, we must be ready to make adjustments as this process unfolds and we learn 
more. 
As long as regulators, FMIs, and market participants make the effort, we should be able to 
make  the  financial  system  much  safer,  resilient,  and  transparent.  The  changes  in  train,  if 
properly  executed,  should,  over  time,  significantly  reduce  the  shortcomings  in  the  OTC 
derivatives market that exacerbated the financial crisis. Properly enacted and implemented, 
net  exposures  should  be  smaller  because  of  the  netting  that  occurs  through  the  CCP 
process.  Transparency  into  counterparty  risk  should  be  greatly  improved  via  disclosure 
requirements  and  the  ability  to  aggregate  trade  information  in  trade  repositories,  and  end 
user  trading  positions  should  be  much  better  protected  by  segregation  and  portability 
requirements and a more robust financial market infrastructure. Although there is still much 
to do as part of this process, I’m optimistic that we are on the right road. We just need to 
continue to push ahead and not forget the lessons learned from the financial crisis. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
