Anselmo Teng: Development opportunity arising from cross-border RMB 
business and internationalization of enterprises 
Speech by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the Forum 
on 
cross-border  RMB  business  and 
internationalization of enterprises”, Guangzhou, 28 June 2012. 
“Development  opportunity  arising 
from 
 The Honourable Ouyang Weimin, Vice Mayor of the People’s Government of Guangzhou,  
The Honourable Ying Yujing, Secretary-General, Monetary Policy Committee, PBOC,  
The Honourbale Luo Bo Chuan, President of PBOC Guangzhou Regional Branch,  
Dear Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
My greetings!  
I feel delighted to take part in today’s forum to share and communicate the ways and means 
to  promote  Guangdong-Macao  cross  border  RMB  business.  I  would  like  to  express  my 
gratitude  to  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  who  invited  me,  and  I  wish  today’s  forum  a  huge 
success.  
I would first introduce the economic and financial condition of Macao. Then I would connect it 
to  the  main  theme  of  the  forum  and  raise  some  of  my  views.  I  hope  you,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, would take it as reference and your views are also appreciated.  
As we all know, Macao is a small area with a small economy. However, after its return to the 
Motherland in 1999, under the support of the Central Government and the leadership of the 
MSAR  Government,  coupled  with  the  collective  effort  of  the  Macao  citizens,  the  overall 
economy of Macao has experienced rapid growth.  
As an example, in 2011, real growth of Macao was 20.7% with a per capita GDP equivalent 
to USD66,000. Growth for the first quarter of this year was still an enviable 18.4%. Export of 
tourism  services,  investment  and  private  sector  consumption  are  the  main  driving  force 
behind the rapid growth. At the same time, we can perceive the gradual success of policy 
measures relating to appropriate diversification advocated by the SAR Government for years. 
Fresh domestic and overseas investments are on the rise, market consumption is growing 
steadily,  service  industries,  particularly  the  financial  industry,  have  developed  robustly  and 
prospered.  
As the financing intermediary for all walks of trade, the financial industry has been playing a 
major  role  in  promoting  economic  development  of  Macao.  When  gauged  in  the  context  of 
GDP, the Macao financial industry contributes about 8%. In the Macao financial sector, the 
banking  sector  has  a  leading  role,  no  matter  appraised  by  asset  value  or  contribution  to 
GDP.  
On the RMB front, all through the years, our country has been deepening financial reform 
through internationalizing the RMB. In the 12th Five Year Plan, the strategic preparation of 
“enlarge  the  cross-border  use  of  the  RMB  with  a  view  to  gradually  realizing  the  free 
convertibility of capital items denominated in RMB” has been clearly stipulated. Recently, the 
PBOC and related government agencies have been implementing new ways incessantly to 
widen  the  channel  of  RMB  recycling,  enlarge  cross-border  use  of  RMB,  explore  RMB  FDI 
(foreign  direct  investment  by  overseas  investors).  At  the  moment,  the  pilot  area  for 
cross-border trade settlement in RMB has been extended to cover the whole country while 
the  scope  has  been  extended  from  initially  merchandize  trade  to  services  trade  and  other 
current  items,  and  will  be  extended  to  cover  some  capital  items.  All  these  moves  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
propelled further development of cross-border RMB business and provided driving force in 
promoting the use of RMB internationally. The whole exercise has provided opportunity for 
further  development  of  RMB  business,  motivation  in  the  internationalization  of  the  RMB, 
while Macao will benefit from financial and RMB business development.  
As a special administrative region of the nation, Macao is obliged and delighted to participate 
in the process of the internationalization of RMB. As a matter of fact, Macao was designated 
as early as 2004 as one of the pilot areas for cross-border RMB business. In July 2009, the 
PBOC  and  relevant  ministries  of  the  State  Council  jointly  promulgated  “Management  of 
Cross-Border RMB Trade Settlement under Pilot Programme”, which permitted Macau banks 
to  conduct  cross-border  RMB  trade  settlement  business.  At  the  same  time,  the  scope  of 
individual RMB business was widened in December 2009 from the scope in the beginning. In 
tandem with the increasing integration of Macao with the Mainland, RMB notes are broadly 
accepted  and  circulated  in  Macao.  RMB  business  has  become  an  important  driving  force 
behind business diversification of Macao financial institutions and the healthy progress of the 
sector as a whole.  
As  per  the  end  of  April  2012,  the  value  of  RMB  deposit  with  banks  in  Macao  stood  at 
RMB49.8  billion  (12%  of  total  deposits),  which  was  an  increase  of  85.8%  year-on-year. 
Accumulated  cross-border  RMB  trade  settlement  business  since  its  inception  in  2009 
amounted  to  RMB92.3  billion,  of  which  RMB60  billion  was  conducted  in  2011  which  was 
tenfold that of 2010. In the process, Macao banks have accumulated abundant experience in 
relation to the handling and management of RMB business. The related supervisory work is 
also being carried out effectively, which has enabled the Macao RMB business to develop in 
a  fine  and  orderly  manner.  It  has  not  only  intensified  the  integration  of  Macao  with  the 
Mainland, it can also prompt Macao banks to develop steadily and healthily. I would like to 
take this opportunity, on behalf of the Monetary Authority of Macao, to express our candid 
gratitude to PBOC and other relevant government agencies for their consistent support and 
help.  
How  to  further  and  develop  cross-border  RMB  business?  We  have  the  following 
recommendations.  
All  along,  Macao  has  always  been  proactively  exploring  economic  and  commercial 
communication  and  cooperation  with  the  Mainland,  particularly  the  Guangdong  Province. 
Last year, the Guangdong Provincial Government and the MSAR signed the “Guangdong-
Macao  Cooperation  Framework  Agreement”,  which  signifies  that  the  already  close 
cooperation  between  Guangdong  and  Macao  has  entered  into  a  new  chapter.  The 
cooperation between these two regions is proceeding fast in the direction of systemization, 
standardization and in all aspects.  
The  new  situation  related  to  Guangdong-Macao  Cooperation  shows  that  the  integration 
continues to deepen and strengthen. What comes next will be the need for cross-border fund 
flow  and  fund  transfer.  The  related  cross-border  financial  services  should  follow  up  to 
accommodate.  We  can  make  use  of  the  implementation  of  the  “Guangdong-Macao 
Cooperation Framework Agreement”, and stick to the principle of servicing the real economy, 
in order to encourage and promote the programmes under cooperation to be denominated in 
RMB,  and  hence  more  RMB  cross-border  business.  However,  nowadays  only  remittances 
relating  to  individuals  and  cross-border  trade  are  allowed  to  be  transferred.  It  is  therefore 
suggested  that  we  make  full  use  of  the  national  policy  of  “try  it  out”  by  making  innovative 
arrangement  to  relax  the  pipeline  governing  RMB  fund  transfer  between  the  two  regions, 
which  will  fully  embody  the  financial  effect  under  the  “Guangdong-Macao  Cooperation 
Framework  Agreement”,  so  as  to  create  more  RMB  business  between  Guangdong  and 
Macao.  
In practice, cross-border RMB business can be promoted in 3 directions.  
First, it can be promoted via practical business cooperation between banks or other financial 
institutions of the two regions. Macao banks should be allowed to fund in RMB when comes 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to participating in project finance, commercial lending and syndicated loans of the Mainland. 
What is worth mentioning is that the Mainland banks are the major component of banking 
system of  Macao. At the moment, among the 5 giants, except for the Agricultural Bank of 
China, the other banks all have operations in Macao. They account for over 70% of market 
share. Through their cooperation and interaction with banking groups on the Mainland, it not 
only helps enterprises of Guangdong Province to avail themselves of the financial services 
provided  by  Macao  financial  markets,  it  can  also  enhance  the  financial  support  to  Macao 
enterprises operating in the Guangdong Province. To achieve it, we should reduce policy and 
technical obstacles arising from business cooperation between the two regions to a minimal. 
We should also facilitate the application of financial services to trade, such as simplification 
of business certification, standardization of registration relating to pledged property, mutual 
recognition of assets under pledge and facilitation of remittance arising from disposal of the 
pledged assets.  
Second, it can be realized via setting up financial institution on a reciprocal basis. Therefore, 
it  is  suggested  that  we  make  full  use  of  the  “try  it  out”  Policy  sanctioned  by  the  Central 
Government  by  establishing  a  “special  passage”  for  Macao  financial  institutions  to  go  to 
Guangdong Province, allowing Macao financial institution to establish branches/subsidiaries 
with lower threshold prescribed by CEPA. These outlets are allowed to operate all kinds of 
permitted  business  which  will  generate  more  Guangdong-Macao  cross-border  RMB 
business.  
Third,  at  the  same  time,  financial  infrastructure  as  a  platform  between  Guangdong  and 
Macao  should  be  linked  up  to  provide  better  facilities  for  Guangdong-Macao  cross-border 
RMB  business.  In  this  connection,  Macao  has  rolled  out  the  discussion  with  PBOC 
Guangzhou  Branch.  Both  sides  are  endeavouring  along  this  direction.  We  believe  the 
clearing systems can be linked up gradually in the next one or two years.  
Apart from promoting cross-border RMB business between Guangdong and Macao, further 
steps to widen the cross-border movement and use of RMB will be of importance to elevating 
the status of RMB internationally. As a matter of fact, Macao has some competitive edge in 
this  respect.  The  full  exploration  of  such  competitive  edge  can  contribute  much  in  further 
widening cross-border flow and the use of RMB.  
First, Macao has been adopting free market economic system. According to the “Basic Laws 
of  the  Macao  Special  Administrative  Region”,  Macao  has  no  FX  control  policy,  the  MSAR 
guarantees free operation of financial markets and financial institutions and the free flow of 
funds into and out of the MSAR  without restrictions. In the realm of the implementation of 
free  market  economic  system,  according  to  The  Heritage  Foundation’s  “Global  Index  of 
Economic  Freedom”  published  in  January  2012,  Macao  ranks  6th  in  Asia-Pacific  while 
among  the  179  economic  systems  round  the  globe,  Macao  ranks  19th.  In  a  free  market 
economic system, funds can move without obstacles, can facilitate and provide foundation 
for development of cross-border RMB business.  
Second,  Macao  has  a  safe  and  stable  banking  system  all  along.  It  has  developed  cross-
border services with other nations and regions. At the moment, there are 29 banks permitted 
to operate in Macao. They mainly come from the Mainland, Portugal, Hong Kong, the UK, the 
US, Singapore and Chinese Taipei. The biggest players are from the Mainland. As per the 
end of April this year, aggregate assets of Macao banking system stood at MOP732.8 billion, 
a  year-on-year  increase  of  21.3%;  total  loans  stood  at  MOP355.9  billion,  a  year-on-year 
increase of 21.8%; total deposits were valued at MOP476.9 billion, a year-on-year increase 
of 26.2%. Non-performing loan ratio was only 0.32%; capital adequacy ratio reached 15.1%, 
composed  mainly  of  tier  one  capital.  At  the  same  time,  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  is 
relatively ample, as per the end of April, one month liquidity ratio of the banking system was 
69.7%, three month ratio was 70.4%. There is one thing worth special mentioning; up to this 
moment,  direct  impact  of  the  recent  international  financial  crisis  on  the  Macao  banking 
system  is  rather  limited.  In  business  operation,  apart  from  servicing  local  demand,  Macao 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
banks  make  use  of  Macao  as  their  business  development  platform.  Through  their  global 
networks, they proactively develop services with other nations and regions, among which, a 
substantial part is cross-border financial business between the Mainland and other nations or 
regions.  
Third,  Macao  has  been  an  important  liaison  platform  in  the  economic  and  commercial 
cooperation  between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  Macao  is  the  only  city  in 
China  to  maintain  such  special  relationship  with  these  countries.  The  Central  Government 
attaches much importance to it. As early as 2003, the standing secretariat of the “Forum for 
Cooperation and Development between China and Portuguese Speaking Countries” was set 
up in Macao. It carries the function of enhancing economic and trade relation between China 
and  Portuguese  speaking  countries  (including  Angola,  Brazil,  Cape  Verde,  East  Timor, 
Guinea Bissau, Mozambique and Portugal). Premier Wen Jiabao was present in Macao in 
November 2010 for its third ministerial conference and made an important speech. He raised 
a series of policy measures which would promote Macao to be the platform for economic and 
trade  cooperation  between  China  and  Portuguese  speaking  countries.  Vice  Premier  Wang 
Qishan met with delegates of Macao financial sector in October last year. He had high regard 
of  Macao  for  its  function  as  bridge  and  hub  belt  servicing  liaison  between  China  and 
Portuguese  speaking  countries.  He  also  hoped  that  Macao  would  play  a  pivotal  role  in 
promoting trade settlement denominated in RMB with Portuguese speaking countries. At the 
same  time,  Macao  and  Europe  has  rather  long  relationship.  The  linkage  of  Macao  and 
Europe  can  be  traced  back  to  the  16th  century.  At  that  time,  religious  practices,  culture, 
technology  and  manufactured  products  of  Europe  were  imported  into  Macao  from 
South Asia, and then were transmitted to other regions of East Asia. Before the 19th century, 
Macao played an important role in communication in economic and cultural aspects between 
civilians  of  the  Mainland  and  European  countries.  After  the  establishment  of  the  SAR,  the 
Chief Executive visited a number of member states of the European Union which has further 
strengthened  linkage  in  a  number  of  realms  of  the  European  Union.  In  addition,  the  SAR 
Government has established the Office to the European Union, which would further reinforce 
relationship between Macao and the European Union.  
Fourth, the financial supervision of Macao has achieved international standard. In 2008, IMF 
conducted an appraisal of financial supervision of Macao. Out of the 25 core principles for 
effective  banking  supervision,  21  were  compliant,  4  were  largely  compliant.  Financial 
institutions  in  Macao  have  fine  risk  management.  The  regulator  carries  out  effective 
supervision in a consistent manner. This creates a solid ground work for the RMB to “reach 
out”.  
Fifth,  as  aforementioned,  Macao  was  designated,  as  early  as  2004,  one  of  the  testing 
grounds for offshore RMB business. Banks of Macao have accumulated ample experience 
related  to  RMB  business  operation  and  management  which  is  conducive  to  helping  the 
further  widening  of  circulation  and  use  of  RMB  notes.  For  RMB  to  be  able  to  “reach  out”, 
apart from the activities of offshore centres as a core support, the support from “satellites” is 
equally important. Macao can be and is willing to be one of the satellites.  
Cross-border  circulation  of  RMB  is  an  irreversible  trend.  In  promoting  Guangdong-Macao 
cooperation to facilitate cross-border RMB business development, we do sincerely hope that 
along  the  process  it  can  further  deepen  the  context  of  Macao  RMB  business.  While  we 
provide  financial  support  to  Guangdong-Macao  cooperation,  we  will  make  full  use  of  the 
competitive  edge  of  Macao,  especially  the  historical  attachments  and  relations  between 
Macao and Portuguese speaking countries and the E.U. In this way, we contribute our part in 
the “reaching out” of RMB and, at the same time, we are motivating the development of the 
Macao  financial  industry  which  will  enhance  appropriate  diversification  of  the  Macao 
economy and promote continued prosperity and stability of the MSAR.  
Finally, I would like to wish everybody good health, plain sailing at work and happiness in the 
family. Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
