Vítor Constâncio: Presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2011 to the 
European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to  the  European  Parliament’s  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs,  Brussels, 
25 April 2012. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a great pleasure to present to you the European Central Bank’s Annual Report for 2011 
which  forms  a  core  part  of  our  accountability  towards  the  European  Parliament.  I  will  first 
very briefly review the economic and monetary developments over the past year and explain 
our monetary policy decisions. I will then touch upon the current fiscal challenges in the euro 
area  and  progress  made  to  reinforce  the  EU  economic  governance  framework.  Finally,  I 
would  like  to  address  issues  related  to  financial  stability  and  regulation,  with  which  your 
Committee deals extensively.  
Before doing so, I should like to highlight an important event in 2011: the enlargement of the 
euro  area  to  a  seventeenth  member,  Estonia.  There  is  no  better  way  to  demonstrate  the 
pivotal  role  in  the  wider  European  integration  process  of  the  euro  area,  which  is  open  to 
those countries and economies that are fully compliant with the entry criteria in a convincing 
and sustainable manner.  
Economic and monetary developments in 2011 
2011 continued to be an exceptional year, confronting the ECB again with rather challenging 
economic and financial conditions.  
In the earlier part of the year, the economic recovery in the euro area continued, supported 
by  global  growth  and  strengthening  domestic  demand.  Headline  inflation  rates  rose 
significantly in early 2011 due to energy and commodity price increases, and the balance of 
risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  shifted  to  the  upside.  To  preserve  price  stability  and  retain 
inflation expectations in the euro area firmly anchored, the Governing Council raised the key 
ECB interest rates in April and July 2011 by 25 basis points on each occasion, after having 
kept them at very low levels for almost two years. 
As  of  mid-July,  tensions  in  financial  markets  again  intensified,  fuelled  mainly  by  market 
participants’ concerns about the evolution of public finances in several euro area countries. 
The  resulting  tighter  financial  conditions  and  rapidly  deteriorating  economic  confidence, 
together with lower global demand, dampened euro area economic activity in the second half 
of  2011.  High  financial  market  uncertainty  together  with  deleveraging  pressures  on  banks’ 
balance sheets also affected money growth, which diminished towards the end of the year. In 
view  of  this,  the  Governing  Council  subsequently  reduced  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  in 
November and December by a total of 50 basis points. Since then, rates have remained at 
the historically low level of 1.0%. 
As 
transmission 
mechanism, the Governing Council also adopted a range of non-standard monetary policy 
measures  as  of  August  2011.  These  included  the  reactivation  of  the  Securities  Markets 
Programme, the launch of a second covered bond purchase programme and measures to 
provide liquidity in foreign currencies. Furthermore, the Eurosystem decided to maintain the 
fixed rate full allotment procedure in all refinancing operations until at least the end of June 
2012.  
tensions  adversely  affected 
the  monetary  policy 
financial  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In December the Governing Council adopted additional enhanced credit support measures, 
including  the  conduct  of  two  longer-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  three-year  maturity, 
increased collateral availability and a reduction in the reserve ratio to 1%. The main purpose 
of these measures was to address the short-term funding needs of the euro area banking 
sector so as to mitigate the effects of strains in financial markets on the supply of credit to 
households and businesses.  
finances 
is  a  prerequisite 
that  ensuring  sound  public 
Fiscal policies, bond markets and economic governance 
The  crisis  has  shown 
for 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  as  well  as  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  monetary 
union. In response to the sovereign debt crisis and negative spillover effects, and in order to 
restore credibility, several euro area countries, including the most affected, implemented bold 
fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reform  measures,  and  strengthened  their  budgetary 
frameworks in 2011. 
As a result, the aggregate general government deficit for the euro area fell significantly from 
6.2% of GDP in 2010 to 4.1% of GDP in 2011. This reduction in the budget deficit was driven 
both by consolidation measures (notably cuts in government investment and employment, as 
well as increases in indirect taxes) and some favourable revenue developments stemming 
from more supportive cyclical conditions. The improved fiscal situation was reflected also by 
bond  markets:  on  average,  government  bond  yields  declined  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole 
between the start and the end of the year. 
A  key  feature  of  the  euro  area  government  bond  markets  in  2011  was  the  diverging 
development in yields across countries mainly as a consequence of the markets’ perceptions 
of  the  individual  countries’  fiscal  fundamentals.  The  actions  of  Central  Banks  to  support 
liquidity  in  the  global  financial  system  contributed  to  ease  tensions  in  the  sovereign  debt 
markets.  In  the  context  of  the  Euro  Area  other  measures  operated  also  to  reduce  those 
tensions.  I  am  referring  to  the  re-activation  of  the  SMP  programme  in  August  2011,  the 
outcome  of  the  meeting  of  the  euro  area  Heads  of  State  or  Government  on  9  December, 
which led to the adoption of the “fiscal compact”, and finally to the ECB decisions to reduce 
key interest rates and organize two 3 year Long Term Refinancing Operations.  
Finally, progress has been accomplished to reinforce the economic governance framework of 
EMU  –  both  as  regards  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution.  The  EU  rules  guiding  the 
design and implementation of national fiscal policies have been strengthened as well as in 
the legal frameworks of Member States. A new macroeconomic surveillance framework has 
been  created.  The  new  provisions  included  in  the  elements  for  EU  fiscal  governance 
framework are important steps in the right direction. However, the devil lies in the details of 
the implementation. Most notably, the 2012 European Semester should be used to enforce 
rigorously the reinforced fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance mechanism.  
The ECB will play a significant role in the crisis management framework. Together with the 
Commission and the IMF, ECB staff will undertake a rigorous debt sustainability analysis of a 
Member State requesting financial stability support in the context of the European Stability 
Mechanism (ESM). The ECB will also be involved in the programme design and monitoring. 
EFSF and ESM interventions in the secondary bond market will be performed on the basis of 
an  ECB  analysis  recognising  the  existence  of  exceptional  financial  market  circumstances 
and  risks  to  financial  stability.  The  ECB  welcomes  the  Eurogroup’s  recent  decision  to 
increase  the  total  size  of  the  euro  area  firewall  to  around  800  billion.  However,  let  me  be 
clear on one point: no firewall will be high enough to be a substitute for the required fiscal 
and structural adjustments in euro area Member States. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Financial sector issues 
As  regards  the  on-going  financial  regulatory  reform,  the  EU  has  taken  important  steps  in 
2011. I would like to highlight three areas. 
Let  me  start  off  with  banking  regulation.  With  the  introduction  of  the  CRD  IV/CRR  the 
European Union will be among the first to implement the Basel III framework, a cornerstone 
development for strengthening financial stability.  
As the CRD IV is advancing towards finalisation, I would mention that the ECB strongly 
supports  the  establishment  of  a  single  European  rulebook  for  financial  institutions  
– mitigating regulatory arbitrage and competitive distortions – which at the same time allows 
for  flexibility  at  national  level  by  Member  States  to  apply  more  stringent  prudential 
requirements where systemic risks arise. To this aim, it is important that Member States are 
able to tighten temporarily, i.e. while those specific risks remain, the quantitative ratios and 
limits  of  some  prudential  policy  requirements  while  leaving  the  definitions  intact.  The  ECB 
favours  the  inclusion  in  that  list  of  instruments:  the  capital  ratio,  the  large  exposures,  the 
liquidity ratios and the leverage ratio, as expressed in our published opinion. This availability 
of  differential  calibration  of  macroprudential  tools  is  particularly  important  in  the  euro  area 
where  the  single  monetary  policy  focused  on  average  conditions  does  not  allow  member 
countries to use monetary policy instruments to avoid specific excessive credit booms and/or 
asset price misalignments.  
I  would  hope  that  EU  institutions  will  be  able  to  reach  an  agreement  on  these  and  other 
CRDIV matters by the summer of this year.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  comprehensive  reform  of  the  EU  framework  for  securities  and 
derivatives  regulation,  which  gained  momentum  in  2011.  The  ECB  welcomes  the  recent 
agreement  on  EMIR,  which  will  implement  the  G20  mandate  to  enhance  the  safety  and 
resilience  of  OTC  derivatives  markets  and  will  establish  common  EU  rules  for  Central 
Counterparties and Trade Repositories. At the same time, the ECB sees a continued need 
for monitoring inconsistencies of EU rules with the global CPSS-IOSCO principles. We will 
also  keep  a  close  monitoring  of  potential  risks  to  central  bank  independence  arising  from 
future  proposals  on  CCP  access  to  central  bank  liquidity.  Finally,  there  will  be  a  need  to 
address potential divergences in the supervision and oversight of Trade Repositories, given 
the lack of cooperation with central banks on TRs under EMIR. 
Moreover, the ECB welcomes the review of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
and supports the objective pursued in the Commission’s proposal on credit rating agencies. 
Reducing reliance on credit ratings is of utmost importance. The Eurosystem itself does not 
mechanically  rely  on  these  assessments,  as  it  is  aware  of  the  limitations  in  terms  of 
methodologies.  I  would,  however,  add  a  strong  word  of  caution  against  imposing  legal 
constraints on the use of ratings by the ECB in its collateral framework. The Treaty provides 
the  ECB  with  the  exclusive  competence  to  determine  independently  the  conditions  under 
which credit operations should be conducted.  
These  regulatory  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  Single  Financial  Market  and  its  infrastructure 
will be complemented by an important Eurosystem project, the Target2 Securities, the future 
IT platform for securities settlement in central bank money. The development of the platform 
is  well  on  track  and  its  go-live  is  set  in  2015.  After  two  years  of  negotiations,  central 
securities depositories (CSDs) have now been asked to sign – by June 2012 at the latest – a 
binding  legal  contract  to  participate  in  T2S.  This  will  mark  a  key  milestone  in  the  project. 
Combined with the future legislation on CSDs and CCPs as well as MiFID, T2S will provide 
the operational framework to stimulate competition in the post-trade environment. 
Moving  on  to  banking  crisis  management,  we  fully  support  the  Commission’s  initiative  to 
introduce an EU bank recovery and resolution framework that should contribute to address 
current obstacles to the effective crisis management of EU cross-border financial institutions. 
Every Member State should have a broad set of tools, such as recovery and resolution plans, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
asset  separation  and  bridge  banks.  As  regards  more  specifically  bail-in,  a  right  balance 
needs  to  be  struck  between  the  need  to  comply  with  international  standards  (FSB  Key 
Attributes for Resolution) and the need to avoid undesired negative effects on bank funding 
also in light of current market conditions. In this perspective any decisions about the use of 
“bail-in-able” securities should be delayed for some years. At the same time, any mandatory 
issuance of “bail-in-able” instruments should be reserved to systemically relevant institutions 
at  the  national  and  European  levels.  Smaller  institutions  would  have  difficulties  in  placing 
such  securities  in  the  market  and  are  easier  to  resolve  without  such  instruments.  For 
systemic institutions I see “bail-in-able” debt securities as an important tool being capable of 
supporting the resolution process by absorbing losses with an efficient burden sharing within 
the private sector thereby reducing taxpayers’ support. 
Another  important  dimension  of  the  resolution  regime  refers  to  the  desirable  creation  of 
Resolution Funds that would be financed by the financial sector and would play an important 
role, particularly in resolution of cross-border institutions. In this perspective, we said in the 
ESCB opinion, published in May last year, that: “…the establishment of a network of national 
funds should not exclude the possibility of establishing, at a later stage, an European Fund-
of-Funds  to  address  the  issues  which  may  arise  in  respect  of  cross-border  banks.  …  it 
should also not be excluded to move the establishment of an European Resolution Fund up 
in the agenda.” 
In  view  of  the  importance  of  the  adoption  of  a  clear  resolution  regime  to  banks  and  to 
eliminate  uncertainty,  it  would  be  important  that  the  Commission’s  proposals  are  released 
before the summer.  
Finally, let me say a few words on the EBA Capital Exercise. We support the EBA’s efforts to 
strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  European  banking  sector  against  the  broader  distress  in 
financial markets. We have taken note of the EBA’s deliberations about banks’ capital plans 
to comply with the requirements of the exercise and are satisfied with the message that bad 
deleveraging for the financing of the economy will be very limited. The actions of banks to 
comply with the requirements by the end-June 2012 deadline should be closely monitored by 
the relevant authorities. 
Conclusion 
Madam Chair, Honourable Members, 
2011 has been undoubtedly once again a challenging year for the euro area, especially due 
to the negative interplay between the sovereign debt problems and the financial sector. I trust 
that the vast programme of economic governance and financial regulatory reforms that you, 
as  EU  co-legislator,  have  been  or  are  currently  adopting  will  contribute  to  strengthen  the 
stability and resilience of the euro area. One crucial condition must, however, be met to reap 
the  benefits  of  all  these  legislative  reforms:  their  swift  and  faithful  implementation.  I  am 
confident that the European Parliament will fully play its role for the rigorous achievement of 
that goal.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
