Erkki Liikanen: Monetary policy in unconventional times 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at an European Central Bank 
colloquium in honour of Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board 
of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 16 May 2012. 
 Session 1 – Panel discussion on non-standard measures and monetary policy: what 
have we learned from recent experience? 
It  is  now  nearly  five  years  since  the  start  of  the financial  market  turmoil.  During these five 
years,  many  dimensions  of  monetary  policy  have  changed.  I  will  touch  on  three  such 
dimensions. Each of them deals with links between monetary policy in the modern narrow 
sense and issues that, before the present crisis, were thought to be clearly distinct from it. 
During the last three or four years we have had to think thoroughly about the following: 
• 
• 
• 
the link between price stability and financial stability, 
the link between monetary policy stance and its implementation, and  
the link between monetary policy and fiscal policy. 
Financial stability and price stability 
Let  me  start  from  the  relationship  between  financial  stability  and  price  stability.  Here,  the 
crisis has inspired a lot of rethinking. Some commentators, such as Paul DeGrauwe1, have 
gone so far as to suggest that the crisis has revealed inflation targeting as a “fallacy”. Others, 
such as Lars Svensson2 maintain their belief in strict, forecast-based inflation targeting. 
It may be useful to think of the relationship between financial stability and price stability as a 
continuum of views that falls between two extremes: 
At  one  extreme,  financial  stability  would  be  elevated  to  the  position  of  a  new, 
additional objective for monetary policy, alongside  with price stability.  Monetary 
policy  would  be  about  finding  the  right  balance  between  financial  stability 
considerations and price stability considerations.  
The  other  extreme  is  what  used  to  be  the  prevailing  view  before  the  crisis; 
namely,  that  price  stability  should  remain  the  single  ultimate  monetary  policy 
objective, and financial stability should enter monetary policy consideration only 
indirectly, to the extent it affects price stability.  
I  don´t  think that the  price  stability  objective  has failed.  If  a  conflict  has  emerged  between 
financial  stability  and  some  conceptions  of  inflation  targeting,  this  cannot  be  held  against 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  which  has  always  taken  a  medium-term  view  and  takes 
monetary analysis and credit expansion explicitly into account when setting monetary policy. 
This is visible even today. The ECB has repeatedly stressed the importance of preventing a 
contraction in bank lending, in a situation where inflation has temporarily been higher than 
we will tolerate in the longer term. 
                                                
1  Paul de Grauwe: “Central banks should prick asset bubbles”. Financial Times November 1, 2007. 
2  Lars  Svensson:  “Inflation  Targeting  and  Financial  Stability”.  Policy  lecture  at  the  CEPR/ESI  14th  Annual 
Conference on How Has Our View of Central Banking Changed with the Recent Financial Crisis? hosted by 
the Central Bank of Turkey, October 28–29, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 
So, there is no long-term conflict between financial stability and price stability. It is more a 
question of time horizon and of the realization that a serious credit crunch can pose the risk 
of deflation. 
We cannot operate on point forecasts. In a recent paper, Michael Woodford has argued that, 
when thinking about the role of financial stability, central bankers should think less in terms 
expected  outcomes  and  more 
terms  of  wider  probability  distributions  and  risk 
management.  
Woodford does not see the central bank’s financial stability task as identifying bubbles and 
using monetary policy to prick them. This would be difficult; unnecessary even. Instead, he 
thinks that one of the tasks of the central bank is to monitor the accumulation of systemic risk 
in the economy and, when necessary, use monetary policy – alongside other policy tools − to 
counteract excessive increase in tail risks. 
What kind of indicators should a central bank then follow in trying to gauge risks to financial 
stability?  There  are  of  course  many  potential  sources  of  tail  risk.  It  could  be  financial 
institutions  engaging  in  increasingly  aggressive  maturity  transformation.  Or  it  could  be 
increasing  bank  exposures  to  a  particular  sector  or  asset,  say  the  housing  market.  In 
general, a necessary condition for severe crisis seems to have been excessive leverage.  
For  any  such  potentially  risky  development,  there  is  typically  no  shortage  of  good 
explanations  why  everything  is,  in  fact,  fundamentally  healthy.  And  obviously,  the  central 
bank does not really possess superior knowledge.  
What  is  clear  though  is  that  aggressive  expansion  of  credit  increases  systemic  risk  and, 
ultimately, the risk of a breakdown of monetary policy transmission. Hence there has to be a 
policy response. 
Interest  rates  affect  credit  expansion,  but  monetary  policy  needs  also  to  be  supported  by 
more  effective  macroprudential  instruments.  Synergies  between  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential supervision are clear and should be utilized. 
Whether the response to emerging problems comes from the monetary policy instruments or 
from  the  macroprudential  tools  –  or  even  the  fiscal  –  side,  depends  on  the  situation.  The 
more  widespread  the  symptoms  are  of  excessive  risk-taking,  the  more  likely  it  is  that 
monetary policy needs to carry a substantial part of the responsibility. 
The  views  I  have  described  are  by  no  means  novel.  In  fact,  they  are  not  too  far  off  the 
emerging post-crisis consensus in the central banking community. Over the last few years, 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  has  won  many  hearts  and  minds  among  central  bankers  and 
academic  economists.  My  reading  of  the  two  papers  by  Brunnermeier  and  Sannikov3, 
distributed  for  this  event,  enforce  the  points  made  by  Woodford:  since  risk-taking  is 
endogenous, just  clearing  up  the  damage  in  crisis  times  is  not  enough, there  needs to  be 
some leaning to control the build-up of risks.  
I don’t think we have yet learnt all there is to be learnt about the role of financial stability in 
monetary policy making. I do however believe that we have learnt enough to know that we 
should not return to where we were before the crisis. An increased role for financial stability 
considerations  in  monetary  policy  making  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  lasting  legacies  of  the 
crisis. 
                                                
3  Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov: “The I Theory of Money” and “A Macroeconomic Model with a 
Financial Sector”. Manuscripts, 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Monetary policy stance and implementation 
Another  boundary  that  has  been  completely  redrawn  during  the  crisis  is  the  one  between 
monetary  policy  stance  and  implementation.  This  is  the  boundary  where  Jose-Manuel  has 
been most directly involved during the crisis as the Executive Board member responsible for 
Market Operations since June 2006.  
Before the crisis, monetary policy stance was about setting the key policy rates. Everything 
else  was  seen  as  operational  implementation  with  the  focus  on  money  market  liquidity 
management. The ECB even had a name for it: the separation principle. According to this 
principle, the experts working on implementation issues should be separated from the ones 
assessing  the  stance,  so  that  the  liquidity  conditions  and  shortest  market  rates  would  not 
convey any signals on forthcoming stances.  
The  age  of  innocence  came  to  an  end  with  the  return  of  liquidity  and  credit  risks  to  the 
markets’  often  narrow  radar  screens.  Before  the  crisis,  banks’  demand  for  liquidity  was 
predictable;  it  was  set  by  reserve  requirements.  During  the  turmoil,  unpredictable 
precautionary liquidity hoarding emerged as the dominating factor behind the demand.  
There were two important consequences. First, accurate measurement of the neutral level of 
aggregate  liquidity  became  impossible;  and  second,  the  distribution  of  liquidity  between 
banks started to matter. During the acute phases of the crisis, the interbank market, which 
used  to  be  extremely  efficient  in  allocating  central  bank  reserves,  vanished  almost 
completely.  
Suddenly,  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  were  forced  to  worry  not  only  about  making 
sufficient amounts of central bank reserves available to banks, but also about making sure 
that those that needed the liquidity the most had access to it. A large part of the financial 
intermediation – previously taken care of by the interbank market – had to be taken over by 
the central bank balance sheet.  
The traditional monetary policy tool, the short term rate, was also used to the full. Once the 
interest  rates  were  brought  to  virtually  zero,  the  transformation  of  monetary  policy  was 
complete. Essentially, monetary policy became an exercise in inventing operational tools that 
would allow liquidity to flow to those parts of the financial system where it was most needed. 
Arguably, the operational decisions taken by the ECB during the crisis (such as the shift to 
fixed-rate full-allotment liquidity auctions, the extension of operation maturities well beyond 
the money market maturities, and the widening of the set collateral eligible to monetary policy 
operations) have been every bit as important as its decisions on the level of the short term 
interest rates. Most of the innovative changes to the ECB’s operating procedures have been 
widely appraised. And no one deserves the praise better than Jose-Manuel as the Executive 
Board Member responsible for market operations.  
Few expect things to revert back where they were before the crisis. Things have changed, 
and higher risk aversion is likely to stay with us for some time. It is possible that we are not 
able  to  return  to  the  conditions  where  monetary  policy  stance  could  be  identified  with  the 
steering  rate,  and  where  collateral  and  liquidity  conditions  were  regarded  as  technicalities 
with  little  macroeconomic  interest.  In  that  sense,  central  banking,  real  banking  is  back  in 
monetary policy.  
Monetary domain and fiscal domain 
Perhaps the most sensitive of the boundaries that have been tested during the crisis is the 
boundary  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  The  crisis  has  compelled  many  central 
banks to break taboos and to take a more expansive view of their mandate. 
But nowhere has drawing the line between the monetary domain and the fiscal domain been 
as difficult as in the euro area. The ECB is the central bank, not for a single sovereign state, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
but for 17 sovereign states. The EU has strictly limited risk sharing arrangements between 
member  states  and  none  between  the  national  banking  systems.  Now,  in  the  crisis,  the 
divergence of the euro area economies has dramatically increased and the ECB could easily 
end up becoming such a risk sharing mechanism. 
The ECB or the Eurosystem cannot become a mechanism for sharing fiscal risks between 
the  member  states.  This  is  because  its  monetary  policy  and  its  independence  could  be 
compromised.  The  risks  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  must  therefore  be  limited  to  what  is 
required by monetary policy and by the goal of ensuring the transmission of the monetary 
policy to all parts of the euro area.  
There are very good reasons for not monetizing budget deficits in countries with a national 
currency. There are even more reasons for not doing so in a monetary union such as the 
euro area. 
Before the crisis, it was too often argued that current account positions between members of 
a  currency  union  are  meaningless,  and  that  there  cannot  be  balance-of-payments  crises 
within a currency union. The last couple of years have proven the fallacy of this view. The 
sovereign debt crisis carries all the hallmarks of a balance-of-payments crisis. It goes without 
saying that a central bank whose job it is to equalize monetary conditions between the crisis 
countries  and  the  safe-haven  countries  will  inevitably  face  a  formidable  task.  It  can  only 
succeed if the imbalances within our currency area are solved, in the medium term, by real 
adjustments, including budgetary adjustment. 
The ECB is protected by its institutional independence. But as the crisis has demonstrated, 
this independence needs to be complemented by economic policies that avoid the build-up of 
serious imbalances within the currency area.  
All  in  all,  the  tradeoffs  the  ECB  has  dealt  with  during  the  crisis  have  been  difficult.  The 
challenge has been to do what is necessary to maintain a sufficient functioning of monetary 
policy transmission mechanism for the single monetary policy to operate, while at the same 
time avoid creating significant moral hazard and AVOID making monetary policy a vehicle of 
fiscal  transfers.  The  path  between  the  two  is  narrow,  and  only  time  will  tell  whether  we 
succeeded.  
Conclusions 
The evolution of economics is driven by crises. The breakdown of the Bretton Woods system 
and the inflationary years of the 1970s gave impetus to an era of rapid progress of monetary 
economics.  The  result  was  a  vast  literature  on  central  bank  credibility,  independence, 
transparency  and  price  stability  mandate.  At  the  beginning  of  the  new  millennium,  the 
development  of  monetary  economics  reached  its  culmination.  The  main  challenges  of 
monetary policy were thought to be, by and large, solved. 
We know  now  that  this was  not  so.  Monetary  economics  had failed  to  incorporate  several 
crucial aspects of real life. The role of the financial sector in monetary transmission, financial 
fragility,  systemic  risk,  and  the  role  of  liquidity,  to  name  just  a  few,  were  not  sufficiently 
appreciated. 
I still believe that the core insights of the pre-crisis monetary theory will survive this crisis. 
Monetary  stability  will  still  require  a  credible  and  independent  central  bank  with  clear 
mandate  based  on  price  stability.  But  the  crisis  will  leave  a  permanent  mark  as  to  how 
monetary  policy  is  done.  We  will  be  thinking  more  about  tail  risks.  We  will  have  a  more 
expansive view of the central banks’ toolbox than we used to have. And we will have to think 
of ways of redrawing a clear boundary between what belongs to monetary policy and what 
belongs to fiscal policy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
