Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity, prices, and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Chiba, 28 March 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with people representing Chiba 
Prefecture. Allow me to express also my gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of 
the Research and Statistics Department and other departments of the Bank of Japan. 
I have been told that the Bank’s meetings with business leaders have not been held in Chiba 
since October 2003, and thus I am looking forward to hearing your views. In my speech to 
you today, I will review economic activity and prices both overseas and in Japan – whose 
economy 
the  global  economic  
slowdown – and then present a few remarks on monetary policy. My concluding remarks will 
touch on the economy of Chiba Prefecture. 
toward  recovery  despite 
the  effects  of 
is  heading 
I. 
Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
Overview  
A. 
Japan’s economy entered a soft patch around the turn of the year. While domestic demand 
has been firm, growth in external demand has been sluggish, reflecting the deceleration of 
the global economy – caused by the European economy’s stagnation due to the European 
debt  problem,  a  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy  due  to  monetary  tightening,  and  the 
flooding in Thailand – as well as the continued appreciation of the yen. As a result, Japan’s 
economic activity as a whole has remained more or less flat.  
However, it is expected that the pace of recovery in overseas economies will pick up slowly, 
led by emerging economies, and reconstruction-related demand after the Great East Japan 
Earthquake  in  March  2011  will  gradually  increase.  Supported  by  these  factors,  Japan’s 
economy  is  expected  to  gradually  emerge  from  its  soft  patch  and  return  to  a  moderate 
recovery path.  
In what follows, I will present an overview of developments in overseas economies, and then 
discuss the current situation and prospects for Japan’s economy.  
Overseas economies 
B. 
The  European  economy  experienced  severe  strains  in  the  financial  markets  and  financial 
systems  until  around  the  end  of  2011,  because  of  the  European  debt  problem.  However, 
market conditions subsequently improved with the subsiding of tail risks such as the funding 
collapse  at  financial  institutions.  This  positive  development  was  partly  the  result  of  a 
reduction in the pricing on the existing temporary U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations by 
six  central  banks  and  36-month  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  with  full 
allotment  conducted  twice  by  the  European  Central  Bank.  In  particular,  approximately 
500 billion euros on a net basis were provided through each tranche of the LTROs, which 
facilitated the smooth redemption of corporate bonds and reduced the yields on government 
bonds  through  their  purchase  by  financial  institutions.  With  the  recovery  of  stability  in 
financial  markets  and  financial  systems,  some  financial  institutions  have  begun  issuing 
uncollateralized  corporate  bonds,  and  the  situation  has  been  steadily  improving.  In 
mid-March, debt restructuring with Greek government bondholders in the private sector was 
carried out successfully and the second tranche of financial assistance under the economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
adjustment  programme  for  Greece  was  agreed.  The  risk  of  anxiety  sweeping  through 
financial  markets  or  rapid  economic  deterioration  –  which  had  been  acknowledged  in  the 
phrase “Europe is the greatest risk” – thus appears to have been alleviated.  
Nevertheless,  the  European  debt  problem  itself  has  not  been  resolved,  and  concern  over 
deleveraging – whereby financial institutions reduce lending and adversely affect economic 
activity – has yet to be dispelled. European financial institutions appear to be reducing their 
foreign  currency-denominated  lending,  such  as  syndicated  loans,  in  North  and  South 
America  and  Asia.  It  has  been  reported  that  these  institutions  have  also  been  gradually 
reducing  euro-denominated  lending,  particularly  in  some  European  peripheral  countries.  In 
the background, it seems that two factors are at work, namely, sluggish demand for funds by 
firms and households due to the economic downturn, and the need of financial institutions to 
improve their capital ratios. Future developments in both factors continue to require attention. 
More fundamentally, Europe faces the critical challenge of pursuing both fiscal consolidation 
and  structural  reform  at  the  same  time  and  raising  growth  potential.  The  difficulty  for  the 
European countries is that they must pursue fiscal consolidation in the short run but at the 
same time boost private-sector vitality and enhance economic growth, while preventing fiscal 
consolidation from further harming economic activity. The European economy as a whole is 
likely to stagnate for the time being and subsequently return to a moderate recovery path. 
Given that disparities in competitiveness are becoming apparent among European countries, 
it is possible that the pace of recovery will be extremely slow. Due attention should continue 
to be paid to the risk that economic stagnation might become chronic or prolonged. 
As for the United States, several favorable economic indicators have been released recently 
and the economy is recovering moderately. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less food and energy has been stable at about 2 percent. The 
general  picture  of  the  economy  is  that  households’  balance-sheet  adjustments  continue  to 
weigh  on  economic  activity,  but  the  mechanism  of  economic  recovery  supported  by  the 
corporate sector is operating continuously and the momentum for a moderate improvement 
is being maintained.  
Let me elaborate on this point for a moment. In the United States, housing prices have been 
sluggish,  but  firms’  production,  exports,  and  profits  have  been  strong  because  they  have 
succeeded in tapping global demand, and this has led to an improvement in employment and 
income conditions and steadily underpinned private consumption. Gradual materialization of 
pent-up  demand,  or  potential  demand,  which  had  been  contained after  the  Lehman  shock 
and  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  seems  to  have  also  supported  the  economic 
recovery. Another advantage is the fact that spill-over effects of the European debt problem 
on economic activity have thus far been less serious than initially expected. 
As for the outlook for the U.S. economy, a number of private research agencies hold the view 
that moderate growth of 2.0–3.0 percent is achievable. Given that housing construction and 
house sales are showing signs of bottoming out against the background of a solid expansion 
in employment and a gradual reduction in the ratio of household debt to disposable income, it 
appears that the burden of households’ balance-sheet adjustments is gradually easing as a 
whole and the economy is gradually increasing in resilience to downside shocks.  
Having said that, as a current risk to the U.S. economy I would point to the surge in gasoline 
prices stemming from an increase in crude oil prices. Thus far, the rise in crude oil prices is 
considered to be largely attributable to supply-side factors, including the situation in Iran, and 
thus the price hike is likely to be temporary. As natural gas prices have been declining in the 
United  States  due  partly  to  progress  in  shale  gas  development,  we  might  not  need  to  be 
overly concerned about the rise in crude oil prices. However, if gasoline prices – which at 
present  are  3.8  U.S.  dollars  per  gallon  –  exceed  4  U.S.  dollars,  this  is  likely  to  adversely 
affect economic activity, mainly in the form of its impact on medium- to low-income families, 
and thus the situation warrants attention.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the meantime, stock prices have recovered to their level prior to the Lehman shock and 
developments  in  U.S.  financial  markets  have  been  favorable.  Although  long-term  interest 
rates have not moved in tandem with the rise in stock prices and have been more or less flat 
for  some  time,  they  have  started  to  rise  recently,  gradually  reflecting  the  improvement  in 
economic activity.  
Asian  emerging  economies,  led  by  China,  have  been  maintaining  high  growth  rates,  and 
medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  also  appear  to  be  high.  In  China,  however, 
exports and imports declined and the pace of increase in production slowed around the turn 
of the year, due to the effects of monetary tightening to contain the rise in prices as well as to 
stagnation  in  the  European  economies  associated  with  the  debt  problem.  Consequently, 
exports  have  declined  and  the  economies  of  the  NIEs  and  the  ASEAN  countries  have 
decelerated somewhat as well. 
Asian  emerging  economies  are  leading  the  global  economy,  and  the  Bank’s  baseline 
scenario  is  that  these  economies  will  gradually  recover,  supported  by  buoyant  domestic 
demand. At the same time, attention should be paid to the possibility that European financial 
institutions’ credit contraction will spill over to trade credits and prolong the current economic 
slowdown.  In  terms  of  achieving  sound  development  of  the  global  economy  in  the  longer 
term, a key factor will be how to maintain the balance between economic growth and price 
stability. In this regard, China’s announcement that lowered the economic growth target from 
8.0  percent  in  2011  to  7.5  percent  in  2012  was  a  favorable  step  toward  achieving  a  soft 
landing of the economy, despite the weakened economic stimulus effect in the short term. At 
any rate, in 2012 uncertainty and changes in economic policy associated with the transition 
of leadership in China should be carefully monitored. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan 
C. 
One  year  has  passed  since  Japan’s  economy  experienced  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake. Following the disaster, economic activity plunged due to the disruption of supply 
chains and constraints on electric power supply. Thereafter, as a result of strenuous efforts 
by the parties concerned, Japan’s economy began to recover in the July-September quarter 
of 2011. However, in the October-December quarter, the economy faced downward pressure 
as  exports  and  production  grew  at  a  sluggish  pace  due  to  a  slowdown  in  overseas 
economies – on the back of the European debt problem, monetary tightening in China, and 
the  flooding  in  Thailand  –  as  well  as  the  appreciation  of  the  yen.  The  annualized 
quarter-on-quarter  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  on  a  seasonally  adjusted  basis  in  2011  was 
minus 6.9 percent in the January-March quarter, minus 1.2 percent in the April-June quarter, 
7.1 percent in the July-September quarter, and minus 0.7 percent in the October-December 
quarter.  
In  recent  months,  exports  and  production  have  remained  more  or  less  flat,  but  domestic 
demand has been solid. Business fixed investment has been on an increasing trend, albeit 
moderately,  supported  by 
facilities,  and  private 
consumption has firmed up due in part to the effects of measures to stimulate demand for 
automobiles. Housing investment has generally been picking up and public investment has 
stopped declining. Household and business sentiment appears to have stopped deteriorating 
in  general.  Thus,  although  the  Bank  judged  that  Japan’s  economic  activity  has  remained 
more or less flat, it has shown some signs of picking up. 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  the  baseline  scenario  is  that  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to 
gradually emerge from the current phase of flat growth and return to a moderate recovery 
path  as  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas  economies  picks  up,  led  by  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies, and reconstruction-related demand gradually increases. It 
is desirable for such improvement to be as sustainable as possible. 
From the viewpoint of achieving sustainable growth, it is desirable if, both in manufacturing 
and  nonmanufacturing 
is 
the  restoration  of  disaster-stricken 
industries,  high-quality  capital 
that  enhances  value-added 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
accumulated  domestically,  investment  increases,  and  the  competitiveness  of  industries 
improves.  It  is  important  to  maintain  and  enhance  in  the  domestic  economy  the  qualities 
necessary for manufacturing, while working to tap domestic demand that reflects the needs 
of the aging population. 
Looking at developments in domestic private business fixed investment, we can see that it 
declined substantially after the Lehman shock and the ensuing pace of its recovery has been 
quite modest. The slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen in the 
second  half  of  2011  might  have  put  additional  downward  pressure  on  business  fixed 
investment in the manufacturing industry. According to the Cabinet Office’s “Annual Survey 
of Corporate Behavior in FY2011,” however, firms are forecasting an annual growth rate of 
about 1.5 percent in real GDP and about 4 percent in business fixed investment for the next 
three years, which suggests that as a whole firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations 
have been maintained and their investment appetite has not declined. In the survey, firms’ 
overseas  production  ratio  is  currently  about  18  percent  and  is  forecast  to  reach 
approximately 22 percent in five years, which suggests that the balance between overseas 
and domestic production will be maintained. In addition, as investment was reduced to the 
level  below  depreciation  following  the  Lehman  shock,  this  in  turn  is  currently  encouraging 
replacement investment. It can also be expected that firms will add investment spending to 
restore and reconstruct disaster-stricken facilities as well as to strengthen their earthquake 
resistance.  
Given  the  situation  I  have  described,  it  would  be  no  surprise  if  domestic  business  fixed 
investment, compared with firms’ cash flows or depreciation costs, became more apparent, 
and thus potential demand for investment is likely to have accumulated accordingly. If actual 
investment has been contained even though firms’ investment appetite has not declined, this 
might mean that firms have been deferring investment decisions because of sluggish stock 
prices,  the  yen’s  appreciation,  the  slowdown  in  the  global  economy  stemming  from  the 
European debt problem, and related uncertainty about the future. 
Let  me  repeat  that  firms’  forward-looking  investment  in  projects  that  would  enhance 
value-added is a major driving force in order to increase the growth potential of the economy 
and  improve  productivity.  It  would  also  contribute  to  overcoming  deflation.  Whether  firms’ 
investment  spending  will  steadily  increase  –  at  a  pace  consistent  with  their  growth 
expectations, both at home and abroad, in a balanced manner – is vital for Japan’s economy 
to achieve sustainable growth and overcome deflation. 
Turning  to  price  developments,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less 
fresh food) slowed at a moderate pace in 2011, reflecting the improvement in the aggregate 
supply and demand balance, and has been hovering around 0 percent since the summer of 
2011.  The  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  prices  projects  that  the  current  situation  is 
likely  to  continue  for  the  time  being,  but  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  will 
gradually turn positive as the aggregate supply and demand balance improves. 
While crude oil prices have recently been surging due partly to the situation in Iran, the price 
levels of other commodities have not necessarily risen compared with 2011. As this seems to 
be consistent with the currently still-weak recovery of the global economy, upward pressure 
on  crude  oil  prices  might  be  temporary  due  to  supply-side  factors.  Since  crude  oil  prices 
might  remain  high  depending  on  developments  in  geopolitical  risk,  careful  monitoring  is 
required.  
II. 
Monetary policy 
Conduct of monetary policy 
A. 
Let me now discuss the Bank’s enhancement of monetary easing decided in February 2012. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 13 and 14, the Bank – amid the continued 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
high uncertainty surrounding economic developments both at home and abroad – judged it 
necessary  to  further  support  the  recent  positive  developments  from  the  financial  side  and 
better  ensure  the  economy’s  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path.  Accordingly,  the  Bank 
decided to introduce “the price stability goal in the medium to long term,” clarify its monetary 
easing  stance,  and  increase  the  total  size  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  (hereafter  the 
Program). In this regard, let me mention three points. 
First,  the  introduction  of  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term.”  Prior  to  the 
introduction,  the  Bank  had  shown  the  range  of  inflation  rates  that  each  of  the  nine  Policy 
Board members understood as price stability in the form of the “understanding of medium- to 
long-term price stability.” At the Monetary Policy Meeting in February, the Bank replaced this 
to show the Bank’s own judgment. Namely, it judges “the price stability goal in the medium to 
long term” to be within a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI, and has set the goal at 1 percent for the time being. 
Second, 
the 
aforementioned goal, the Bank further clarified its powerful easing stance by clearly stating 
that, for the time being, it will continue to pursue powerful monetary easing by conducting its 
virtually zero interest rate policy and by purchasing financial assets, with the aim of achieving 
the goal of 1 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, until it judges 
that the 1 percent goal is in sight.  
Third,  the  increase  in  the  total  size  of  the  Program.  The  Bank  increased  the  purchase  of 
Japanese government bonds (JGBs) through the Program by about 10 trillion yen, thereby 
increasing  the  total  size  of  the  Program  from  55  trillion  yen  to  65  trillion  yen.  This 
demonstrates the clarification of the Bank’s monetary easing stance in the form of action.  
the  Bank’s  monetary  easing  stance.  Based  on 
the  clarification  of 
B. 
Channels through which the enhancement of monetary easing should lead to 
the overcoming of deflation 
Based  on  the  decisions  I  have  just  mentioned,  let  me  now  consider  the  channels  through 
which deflation can be overcome. With regard to the transmission channels for the effects of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  under  the  zero  interest  rate  policy,  enhancing  monetary 
easing – by committing to continue the virtually zero interest rate policy into the future and by 
increasing asset purchases – would induce a decline in longer-term interest rates and risk 
premiums  through  both  the  interest  rate  channel  and  the  portfolio  channel.  The  declines 
would  influence  firms’  borrowing  costs,  a  range  of  asset  prices  including  stock  prices  and 
foreign  exchange  rates,  and  bank  lending,  thereby  influencing  households’  and  firms’ 
spending and eventually have positive effects on economic activity and prices.  
Looking at the developments following the February decision based on this consideration – in 
the  form  of  effects  on  longer-term  interest  rates  and  people’s  risk-taking  appetite  brought 
about by prospects, that is, valid expectations for future aggressive monetary policy conduct 
– the 2-year government bond yield has declined, the yen has depreciated, and stock prices 
have  risen.  The  depreciating  trend  of  the  yen  and  the  rise  in  stock  prices  were  already 
evident  prior  to  the  February  decision,  reflecting  the  mitigation  of  global  risk  aversion, 
improvement in the U.S. economy, and Japan’s trade deficit. The decision at the Monetary 
Policy Meeting in February also appears to have contributed to establishing the trend. The 
clarification of the Bank’s powerful monetary easing stance and decisive policy action seem 
to have exerted a strong commitment effect and a policy duration effect. These spilled over 
and  lowered  longer-term  interest  rates  –  including  the  5-year  government  bond  yield  
–  enhanced  people’s  risk-taking  appetite  –  lowering  required  risk  premiums  in  turn  –  and 
thereby enhanced the effects to improve financial conditions.  
I  pointed  out  earlier  that  firms’  investment  spending  might  have  been  restrained  due  to 
sluggish stock prices, the appreciation of the yen, and the slowdown in the global economy. 
If  the  current  improving  trend  in  financial  conditions  continues  in  tandem  with  the 
improvement in overseas economies, these improvements could induce a favorable turn in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
increase  forward-looking 
investment,  and 
corporate  profits  and  business  sentiment, 
concurrently enhance growth potential and value creativity. The depreciation of the yen and 
the  rise  in  stock  prices  might  also  lead  to  an  improvement  in  consumer  sentiment  and  an 
increase  in  tourists  from  abroad,  thereby  further  stimulating  domestic  demand.  Such 
developments would likely work to induce a sustainable economic recovery and a moderate 
rise  in  prices.  As  cautious  views  remain  with  regard  to  future  uncertainties,  the  headwind 
Japan’s  economy  faces  is  likely  to  continue.  Nevertheless,  what  I  have  just  discussed 
suggests  one  channel  through  which  powerful  monetary  easing  could  lead  to  overcoming 
deflation. 
If  the  path  of  improvement  induced  by  powerful  monetary  easing  can  be  forecast  and 
grasped by market participants, the improvement in financial conditions thus far will not be 
short-lived  but  might  reflect  trends  and  sustainable  movement  consistent  with  economic 
fundamentals. The movements of financial indicators actually observed reflect a mixture of 
the effects of various short-term factors and underlying factors. While it is difficult to clearly 
distinguish between the two types of factors, we cannot rule out the possibility that further 
enhancement of monetary easing has been supporting the desirable trend.  
The need to strengthen growth potential 
C. 
In  the  policy  decision  made  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  February  13  and  14, 
2012, the Bank clarified its commitment to aim at achieving 1 percent inflation and continue 
pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  until  it  judged  that  the  1  percent  goal  was  in  sight. 
Further  clarification  of  the  commitment  has  the  key  merit  of  reducing  forecasting 
uncertainties  and  further  enhancing  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  conduct.  Having  said 
that, however, if policy is conducted in a manner “only to achieve 1 percent inflation at any 
cost,”  it  would  be  too  rigid  and  would  not  be  desirable  for  the  sound  development  of  the 
national economy. Overcoming deflation is an overriding issue and needs to be supported 
from the financial front. To this end, it is necessary for policy conduct to combine credibility 
and flexibility. 
In  pursing  aggressive  monetary  easing  going  forward,  one  of  the  necessary  flexibilities  is 
proper attention to potential side effects.  
The  Bank’s  purchases  of  JGBs  within  the  framework  of  the  Program  are  monetary  policy 
measures that have been judged necessary to overcome deflation, and are not conducted 
with the aim of financing the fiscal deficit. At the same time, Japan’s enormous fiscal deficit 
and  government  debt  outstanding  are  significant  concerns  that  could  elevate  fiscal  risk.  A 
rise in government bonds’ risk premiums and an increase in interest rates, in the absence of 
an  economic  recovery  and  a  rise  in  stock  prices,  would  indicate  an  unfavorable  rise  in 
interest rates. The manifestation of such fiscal risk must be avoided by all means.  
To  this  end,  first  of  all,  medium-  to  long-term  fiscal  discipline  must  be  ensured.  Even  if  a 
central  bank  implements  aggressive  asset  purchases  and  government  bond  purchases  to 
overcome  deflation,  this  could  increase  the  probability  of  “unintended  consequences”  from 
fiscal risk manifestation unless key fiscal discipline is ensured.  
Furthermore, I believe it is important for Japanese people to make efforts steadily to increase 
Japan’s growth potential. If firms and households rein in such efforts because uncertainties 
regarding  the  outlook  are  not  dispelled,  the  crucial  growth  potential  will  not  increase. 
Focusing  on  savings  without  carrying  out  forward-looking  investment  might  induce  a 
substantial  decline  in  growth  potential  and,  as  a  result,  larger  negative  impact  on  public 
finance, including a decline in tax revenue. 
Confidence in government bonds is sometimes considered from the viewpoint of confidence 
in Japan’s economy as a whole, by focusing on the current account balance and net external 
assets. There is a view that, as long as the trend of current account surplus is maintained, 
Japan  can  continue  to  accumulate  net  external  assets,  which  currently  total  about 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
250 trillion yen.  Therefore,  for  Japan’s  economy  as  a  whole,  including  the  corporate  and 
household sectors, confidence has been maintained and net external assets will serve as a 
cushion  against  fiscal  risk.  In  the  sense  that  the  current  account  surplus  and  net  external 
assets might be factors inducing the yen’s appreciation, these might contain to some extent 
the risks of a one-sided depreciation of the yen and capital flight. However, there is no simple 
one-to-one  relationship  between  confidence  in  fiscal  sustainability  and  the  current  account 
balance  or  the  external  position.  In  order  to  maintain  confidence  in  fiscal  sustainability, 
therefore, I believe it is ultimately necessary to ensure fiscal discipline and increase Japan’s 
growth potential. 
In order to increase growth potential, a reasonable amount of time is required to implement 
measures,  including  economic  and  fiscal  structural  reforms.  This  should  be  obvious  even 
without reference to the example of Europe. On the relation between monetary policy and 
fiscal reform, there are views on one hand that fiscal structural reform cannot be promoted 
unless  deflation  is  first  overcome  and,  on  the  other,  that  further  monetary  easing  
– particularly purchases of government bonds – should be restrained unless fiscal structural 
reform progresses. I support neither of these views. Aggressive efforts from the financial side 
to overcome deflation, fiscal structural reform, and efforts to increase growth potential should 
all be carried out at the same time by the public as a whole, from the respective standpoint of 
each individual.  
As  for  the  Bank’s  policy  taken  to  strengthen  growth  potential,  the  Bank  has  been 
implementing  the  “fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for 
economic growth,” and has been supporting financial institutions’ efforts in this regard. At the 
Monetary Policy Meeting held on March 12 and 13, 2012, with a view to enhance support by 
broadening the base for the efforts, the Bank decided on the following measures. First, the 
Bank extended the deadline for applications for new loans by two years, to March 31, 2014. 
Second,  it  established  a  new  arrangement  for  loans  of  500  billion  yen  for  small-lot 
investments and loans (1 million yen or more but less than 10 million yen). Third, the Bank 
raised the ceiling for the outstanding balance of loans under the existing arrangement from 
3 trillion yen to 3.5 trillion yen. And fourth, with a view to support financial institutions’ efforts 
also  from  the  side  of  foreign  currency  funds  provisioning,  the  Bank  established  a  new 
arrangement for providing loans in U.S. dollars to the equivalent of 1 trillion yen, using the 
U.S. dollar reserves held by the Bank. Details of the measures will be examined at the next 
Monetary Policy Meeting to be held on April 9 and 10, 2012. As a result of the measures, the 
outstanding  balance  of  loans  under  the  arrangements  will  increase  from  3.5  trillion  yen  to 
5.5 trillion yen. 
Up to now, I have described the Bank’s efforts to overcome deflation and discussed things to 
keep  in  mind  by  focusing  on  the  policy  decisions  made  recently.  In  the  actual  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  based  on  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices,  it  is  necessary  to 
respond carefully and decisively by identifying the timing and measures while monitoring a 
range of conditions and possibilities. The Bank will continue to do its utmost as the central 
bank by pursuing powerful monetary easing to overcome deflation, ensure financial market 
stability, and provide support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
Concluding remarks: the economy of Chiba prefecture 
In my conclusion, let me touch on the economy of Chiba Prefecture.  
The Great East Japan Earthquake in March 2011 caused tremendous damage to the region, 
including  fires,  tsunami,  and  soil  liquefaction.  One  year  has  passed  since  the  disaster 
occurred. Let me express once again my heartfelt condolences to the victims of the disaster 
and their families. I also salute the local citizens, firms, and governments for their efforts to 
achieve restoration and reconstruction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chiba Prefecture is bounded by water on three sides, and it is blessed with mild weather and 
rich natural surroundings. It has a strong agricultural sector with an array of crops that rank 
first nationwide in terms of output, including peanuts, Japanese radishes, green soybeans, 
and Japanese pears, and its agricultural output as a whole ranks third in the nation. Chiba 
Prefecture  also  ranks  high  in  terms  of  fisheries,  with  plenty  of  fishing  ports,  including  the 
nation’s largest, in the city of Choshi. The coastal area contains the Keiyo industrial zone, 
which  serves  as  the  nation’s  largest  supply  depot  for  raw  materials  and  energy,  such  as 
chemical products, steel, and oil. More than six million people live in Chiba Prefecture, which 
also  serves  as  a  bedroom  community  in  the  Tokyo  metropolitan  area,  and  the  many 
commercial and recreational facilities attract numerous visitors from other prefectures. Such 
diversity,  offering  something  for  everyone,  is  a  key  characteristic  and  strength  of  Chiba 
Prefecture. 
Chiba also contains historic tourism resources including Narita-san, a Buddhist temple that 
has been a popular tourist attraction since the Edo Period. A number of efforts have been 
made to promote Chiba’s attractions to people both within and outside the prefecture. The 
Chiba Aqualine Marathon, the first full marathon ever routed on an expressway over the sea, 
will be held this October, and a model cycling course has been set up to popularize cycling 
tourism.  Other  promising  steps  in  the  prefecture  include  an  expansion  of  the  number  of 
annual departure and arrival slots as well as the introduction of low-cost air carrier service at 
Narita International Airport, which should boost exchanges with other regions.  
I trust that Chiba Prefecture will develop even further through people’s efforts to maximize 
the diverse strengths of their region. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
