Rundheersing Bheenick: Special Line of Credit in Foreign Currency 
Remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Signature 
Ceremony  of  the  Agreement  between  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  Mauritius  Post  and 
Cooperative  Bank  in  respect  of  the  First  Disbursement  under the  Special  Line  of  Credit  in 
Foreign Currency, Port-Louis, 10 August 2012. 
 A  very  good  morning  to  all  of  you.  I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  this  morning  to  our 
Headquarters  for  a  special  event:  the  signing  of  an  Agreement  between  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius and the Mauritius Post and Cooperative Bank Ltd (MPCB) in respect of the First 
Disbursement under the Special Line of Credit in Foreign Currency.  
It  is  especially  heart-warming  to  note  that  the  management  of  MPCB,  its  board  and  its 
executive management are once again making a difference. They are the first one to get out 
of  the  starting  stalls  and  come  up  to  sign  a  framework  agreement  in  the  form  of  a 
Memorandum of Understanding which we will be entering into this morning. You will recall 
that MPCB was also the first bank to deal with us when we offered a special line of credit to 
the  sugar  sector  when  it  was  going  through  a  tough  time.  While  other  banks  were  being 
reticent, MPCB was the first one to come forward, and we agreed to go ahead. Obviously 
other banks joined afterwards on the same terms and conditions. MPCB therefore deserves 
our congratulations for their readiness to join the central bank in its endeavours to reach out 
to sectors in need.  
A lot has been said about this foreign currency line of credit. Why are we offering it? Why 
were  the  terms  what  they  were?  And  why  have  we  taken  two  months?  Yes,  two  whole 
months. It has, in fact, been two-month period of laborious gestation! We actually announced 
it on Saturday night of the 9th of June and you would have thought that people would have 
come queuing to the door of the Central Bank on the following Monday morning itself. But no! 
We  had  many  carpic  critics.  Some  were  thinking  that  perhaps  there  were  some  ulterior 
motives behind it; others that perhaps the Bank was trying to deflect attention away from the 
real issue. Such reactions and misconceptions require that we give  you some background 
and explain to you the rationale that lies behind the two measures, the Operation Reserves 
Reconstitution (ORR) and the Special Line of Credit in Foreign Currency.  
One  school  of  thought  believes  that  the  real  solution  lies  in  depreciating  the  currency. 
Depreciating  and  devaluing  massively  to  bail  out  key  operators  in  the  economy  is  fraught 
with  difficulty  and  grossly  unfair  in  terms  of  the  quality  of  economic  development 
requirements and social welfare losses. Our mandate at the Central Bank is to look at the 
interest of the entire nation and our responsibility, under the Bank of Mauritius Act, requires 
us to ensure that there is price stability and monetary stability. Robbing Peter to pay Paul 
was never a very good policy especially if Peter happens to be poorer than Paul who owns 
all the assets in the country!  
It was clear for us that the economic crisis was not going to be behind us so quickly – in fact, 
the latest data flow shows that prospects are getting gloomier, and dark clouds continue to 
hang over the global economic landscape. So we came forward with a proposal to refinance 
the stock of outstanding debt in rupees of our export operators, which was showing a glaring 
mismatch with their income streams. In the 45 years of history of the Bank, I don’t think the 
Bank  has  ever  offered  this  kind  of  refinancing  of  the  stock  of  outstanding  debt.  It  was  a 
path-breaking move for an innovative central bank. With the Special Line of Credit in Foreign 
Currency, our operators, who are now exposed, will probably be in a better position to sit out 
this  crisis,  without  inflicting  heavy  costs  on  the  rest  of  the  economy  if  we  take  the  easy 
solution of depreciating the currency – definitely not a sustainable solution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Another school of thought believed that the two solutions that we had offered on the 9th of 
June actually cancelled each other out. The argument was that, since the ORR was basically 
aiming at trying to build up our reserves, it would probably lead to a slide-depreciation of the 
currency. Operators would prefer to wait until the currency had slid enough, and would then 
come and convert at a very favourable rate through the foreign currency line. We never saw 
it that way.  
We started the process of reserves reconstitution, the ORR, in the light of studies made by 
the  IMF.  These  studies,  using  different  models,  showed  clearly  that  there  was  a  growing 
misalignment of the rupee in relation to fundamentals, that needed to be corrected. At the 
start of the implementation of the ORR, the Gross Official Reserves of the country stood at 
2.67  billion  dollars  representing  4.5  months  of  import  cover.  Currently,  they  increased  to 
2.86 billion dollars for 5 months of import cover. We accumulated around 191 million dollars. 
We are well on the way of reconstituting our reserves towards the targeted level of 6 months 
import cover. And we are doing it in a planned and orderly manner.  
The  ORR  has  been  a  calculated  move  for  the  exchange  rate  to  reach  more  competitive 
levels. We were never in the market to provoke an uncontrolled slide of the Mauritian rupee, 
for that would have been a very dangerous step. Instead we had a controlled approach to it. 
In May 2012, before the start of the ORR, MERI1 stood at 91.375. Our MERI1 increased to 
94.984 in July 2012 resulting in an adjustment of around 4%, a level with which we are quite 
comfortable. We are now watching the exchange rate very carefully to make sure it does not 
have negative repercussions on our CPI. The figures that are coming out up to now show 
that there has been no direct inflationary impact in this controlled slide of 4%. The kind of 
currency adjustment that desperate exporters seem to be praying for, cannot be envisaged 
as the consequences would be unbearable for the rest of the population. We should bear in 
mind  that  while  the  Export-Oriented  Enterprises  employ  around  55,000  people  and  the 
tourism sector, some 40,000, against a total employment of 536,700 in 2011, their weights in 
our GDP represent 6.3% and 7.9% respectively. The other sectors actually contribute more 
to  GDP  and  would  be  penalized  by  currency  depreciation.  All  this  needs  to  be  taken  into 
consideration before we envisage any further currency adjustment.  
As I was saying earlier, it took two months before seeing the crystallization of our efforts to 
come to the help of economic operators in these two sectors. It is understandable that the 
banking  community,  not  used  to  the  kind  of  measures  the  Bank  was  proposing,  required 
some time to reflect upon it to see whether it made sense for them as well. So we listened to 
them  and  understood  their  predicament  to  adequately  cover  the  risks  borne  by  them  in 
extending such facilities to their clients. And we agreed to share our already very slim margin 
with them. We gave banks more flexibility to charge rates based on their risk assessment.  
The  other  reason  advanced  for  not  using  this  line  of  credit  is  that  international  banks  can 
actually  have  access  to  foreign  currency  at  more  competitive  rates.  The  Special  Line  of 
Credit  in  Foreign  Currency  was  offered  to  give  a  sense  of  direction  to  the  industry.  So  if 
branches  and  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks  are  prepared  to  share  these  competitive  rates 
with the final borrowers, we can but encourage them to go in that direction, so long as the 
debt conversion does happen and other borrowers can benefit from the line of credit made 
available  by  these  international  banks  from  their  own  sources. We  are  happy  to  note  that 
there are already a few proposals at advanced stages of finalization.  
A final point on the Special Line of Credit in Foreign Currency: had we had a deeper financial 
market  in  Mauritius,  we  would  not  have  spent  two  months  to  get  this  going.  Our  capital 
market is very small and very illiquid. One of our targets as a central bank is to achieve a 
certain deepening of our financial market. Together with our colleagues in the capital market, 
we are working towards developing the bond market, alongside our own attempts to develop 
a secondary market of Government paper. This would hopefully result in the issuance of a 
corporate bond which would have been the ideal vehicle for us to refinance existing rupee 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
debt, by underwriting corporate bonds in foreign currency. We hope to be able to make some 
progress on this front in the next six months.  
The other issue on which we have made some progress is the Task Force on Unfair Terms. 
The  Task  Force  is  well-engaged  in  the  information-gathering  stage  and  various  initiatives 
have  been  taken  to  sensitize  the  general  public  on  the  importance  to  contribute  to  the 
exercise. We believe it is high time that we try to give the consumer a fairer deal than what 
he has been getting so far and for our banks to help the sectors that are hurting, a bit more 
than they have been doing.  
Another  project  in  the  pipeline  is  work  on  Basel  III.  As  you  know  we  are  one  of  the  few 
countries in Africa that have moved to Basel II, and Basel III is round the corner. Basel III is 
trying  to  remedy  internationally  the  kinds  of  problems  identified  in  the  banking  sector  that 
have  been  responsible,  amongst  others,  for  the  global  economic  crisis.  Soon  we  will  be 
issuing a consultation paper to the industry indicating our own approach to Basel III. So we 
will be introducing Basel III in a phased manner and by the end of 2018 approximately, we 
should be there. Our banks are already meeting by and large many requirements of Basel III 
e.g.  capital  buffers,  Tier  1  capital,  and  capital  adequacy  ratios.  However,  there  are  other 
requirements which we still have to meet.  
Among  those  is  the  whole  issue  of  domestic  systemically  important  banks,  the  so-called 
DSIBs. We  have  at  least  two  banks  in  our jurisdiction  that  would  qualify  as  DSIBs.  These 
DSIBs  require  a  different  regime.  In  other  jurisdictions,  systemically  important  institutions 
(SIFIs) are required to actually come forward with a living will. They are deemed to be too big 
to fail  but  they  are  also too  big  to  bail. Why  are  they  too  big to  bail?  Because  the  cost of 
bailing them out is well beyond the resources either of the central bank as a regulator and 
lender of last resort, or well beyond the resources of the country that holds these institutions 
in terms of ratio to GDP of the banking sector assets. We fall in that category. Therefore we 
need  to  be  very  careful  not  to  end  up  with  a  banking  sector  bust  up  like  Ireland  or  like 
Iceland, which would have tremendous implications for the public sector budget. The Bank is 
currently  working  on  a  framework  for  the  monitoring  of  such  institutions  which  may  be 
required to maintain additional capital.  
So,  I  am  delighted  to  be  proceeding  this  morning  with  the  first  disbursement  under  the 
Special  Line  of  Credit  in  Foreign  Currency  to  an  economic  operator  in  the  tourism  sector, 
Mr Shakeel Nundlall, who is here with us today and who, I am sure, will open the way for 
other economic operators to go and convert their stock of debt into foreign currency.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
