Peter Praet: Sound money, sound finances, a competitive economy – 
principles of a European culture of stability 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  symposium  on  “Perspectives  for  a  common  stability  culture  in  Europe”  organised  by 
Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, Berlin, 27 February 2012. 
 I would like to thank Francesco Mongelli for his contributions to the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is an honour for me to have been invited here today to speak about the emergence of a 
European culture of stability. In Germany, such a culture is the outcome of what is known as 
Ordnungspolitik. It involves the primacy of sound monetary policy, sound finances and solid 
institutions,  as  well  as  ensuring  fair  competition.  Ordnungspolitik  is  firmly  entrenched  in 
German  governance.  Its  intellectual  roots  can  be  traced  all  the  way  back  to  the  Freiburg 
School of Economics and in particular Walter Eucken. It advocates an institutional framework 
promoting  a  free,  yet  ethically  responsible,  market  economy.  Within  this  framework, 
economic actors are then free to pursue their own goals.  
Speaking at the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung today, let me also pay tribute to the first German 
Chancellor of the Federal Republic. He firmly believed in a new Germany, inside a peaceful 
and  integrated  Europe.  He  once  said,  “Unser  Ziel  ist  es,  daß  Europa  einmal  ein  großes, 
gemeinsames Haus für die Europäer wird, ein Haus der Freiheit” (Our goal is to turn Europe 
into a large house for Europeans to share, a house of freedom). 
Today, I will provide you my reflections about how I see the crisis changing both Europe and 
Europeans. There are changes in governance, tighter rules, some new institutions have been 
created to complete the architecture of EMU, and some of the older institutions have tighter 
mandates  and  instruments.  There  is  now  realism  and  acceptance  of  the  need  for  such 
changes as never before.  
My  reflections  are  organised  along  the  subjects  of  sound  money,  sound  finances  and  a 
competitive economy. Some lessons and final thoughts will conclude. Overall, I think there 
are signs of stabilization that give us confidence about the future.  
framework  of 
Sound money 
The financial crisis we are experiencing is not a “monetary crisis” in its essence. The ECB 
has  secured  price  stability.  It  is  also  remarkable  that  inflation  expectations  have  remained 
anchored  throughout  the  crisis.  Looking  ahead  they  remain  anchored  even  in  the  distant 
future. Yet, the ECB has to continue earning the confidence it has acquired.  
is 
The  operational 
implemented, has proven to be resilient and effective. The ECB was the first central bank to 
respond  to  what  was  initially  called  “financial  turmoil”.  A  very  important  part  of  the  ECB’s 
policy responses came in the form of cutting rates and providing liquidity against collateral.  
In  order  to  prevent  a  serious  credit-crunch  –  and  preserve  the  proper  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  –  the  ECB  embarked  in  a  series  of  exceptional  monetary  measures.  For 
example, last December the ECB decided to hold two very long-term refinancing operations 
with  a  maturity  of  3  years  against  adequate  collateral.  The  first  was  conducted  already  in 
December,  and  the  second  is  forthcoming.  These  measures  are  supporting  the  liquidity 
planning of banks, thus allowing the flow of credit from banks to the real economy.  
through  which  monetary  policy 
the  Eurosystem, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Hence, the ECB has delivered in line with its mandate. However, looking ahead we have to 
ensure that this will remain so. Risks that monetary policy may be overburdened in the future 
need to be counteracted. The primacy of sound monetary policy and price stability must be 
safeguarded. It is our shared asset in the euro area.  
In order to safeguard sound money, the other elements of Ordnungspolitik also need firming 
up. I now turn to them.  
Sound finances 
Sound finances entail two components. The first is sound public finances, while the second is 
provided by sound financial markets. The crisis has shown that fiscal stability and financial 
stability  are  linked.  Unfortunately,  both  have  struggled  throughout  this  long,  and  mutating, 
financial crisis. Yet, there has been progress on both components.  
A point sometime missed is that some of the root causes of the crisis go very far back in 
time.  In  many  societies  there  was  an  excessive  build-up  of  debt  in  recent  decades:  both 
sovereign  debt  and  private  sector  debt  (household  &  corporate).  Warnings  were  voiced 
repeatedly,  also  by  the ECB.  But,  the  start  of serious  debt  consolidation  was  continuously 
postponed,  offloading  on  future  generations.  There  was  too  much  complacency,  although 
many  debt  sustainability  analyses  showed  that  there  was  a  limited  period  of  time  to  truly 
address the problem. The crisis has cut the room for manoeuvre.  
The economic downturn that followed the Lehman bankruptcy – which many refer to as the 
“Great Recession” – changed all this. It has brought the debt problem forward. The crisis and 
the recession have forced euro area countries to face their responsibilities right away. This 
entails  undertaking  very  substantial  adjustments  now.  Let  me  provide  you  with  some 
reflections about the two main components of sound finances in more detail. 
The fiscal component of sound finances 
Failings in national governance caused severe fiscal strains in quite a number of euro area 
countries,  while,  at  the  same  time,  European  governance  lacked  teeth.  The  Stability  and 
Growth Pact was even weakened in 2003 – at the behest of some of the largest euro area 
countries  –  and  then  reformed  in  2005.  This  was  not  the  only  problem.  Financial  market 
discipline, another powerful deterrent, was virtually absent until well into the crisis, but came 
back  with  a  vengeance  over  recent  years.  Financial  markets  became  dysfunctional  driving 
sovereign risk premia of a number of euro area countries ever higher. Hence, two important 
deterrents were missing in the first decade of EMU.  
After the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, automatic fiscal stabilisers cushioned the impact of 
the crisis, and many European governments introduced economic stimuli programs. On top 
of  this,  the  financial  recapitalisation  required  was  immense  in  some  countries.  As  a 
consequence, deficits soared and governments’ indebtedness surged.  
The  overall  public  sector  deficit  in  the  euro  area  increased  from  1.4%  of  GDP  in  2006  to 
6.2% in 2010. At the same time, general government debt in the euro area rose from 68.5% 
in 2006 to around 85.6% in 2010. However, according to the European Commission’s latest 
forecast, the deficit ratio should gradually decline to below 3% of  GDP by 2013, while the 
aggregate debt ratio in that year is projected to exceed 90% of GDP. 
This is a challenging legacy of the crisis. Today, a number of countries have embarked in 
fiscal  consolidation  programs,  and  as  you  know,  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal  are  now 
implementing  ambitious  adjustment  programs.  Hence,  fiscal  policies  are  adjusting  as  a 
response to the crisis. 
But how can public finances be returned to soundness more fundamentally? How can sound 
fiscal institutions, and therefore sound fiscal governance, be secured in the future? The new 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fiscal  compact  –  that  is  soon  to  be  ratified  –  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.1  It  addresses 
some of the weaknesses of the previous fiscal governance framework.  
The  fiscal  compact  has  two  main  elements.  The  first  is  the  mandatory  introduction  of  a 
balanced budget rule and a correction mechanism for deviations from balanced budgets at 
the  national  level.  The  second  element  envisages  a  strengthening  of  the  excessive  deficit 
procedure within the Stability and Growth Pact.  
If effectively implemented, the fiscal compact will help to anchor market expectations on the 
sustainability of public finances in Europe (and narrow the currently abnormal spreads). Yet, 
Governments now need to prove their commitment to these new fiscal rules by ensuring a 
rapid ratification of the new Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in EMU, which 
includes the fiscal compact, its transposition into national law and by living up to the rules 
and the spirit of the fiscal compact. 
how can a better pricing of risk be insured?  
how can asset price bubbles be detected and corrected in time?  
how can procyclicality of financial markets be attenuated? and  
how can the financial system better align with the needs of the real economy?  
The financial stability component of sound finances 
August 2007 saw the start of the financial turmoil with an increasing loss of confidence in the 
financial  markets,  a  drying-up  of  liquidity  and  an  increase  in  both  risk  premia  and 
counterparty  risks.  Ever  larger  volumes  of  so  called  AAA-rated  privately  issued  assets 
became “toxic”.  
In September 2008, after Lehman’s bankruptcy, money markets virtually seized up, financial 
losses rose rapidly and a process of deleveraging set in. Financial stress spilled over to the 
real  economy  with  a  sudden  and very  severe  impact  on  trade  and  growth.  This  led  to  the 
global financial crisis.  
How can financial markets be made sound again? This question raises many issues which I 
have not time to address here today but are fundamental, like: 
 
 
 
 
There have been several institutional developments. A new supervisory framework has been 
put in place in the EU in order to share information and best practices, foster cooperation and 
identify sources of systemic financial risks at an early stage. It consists of two pillars. The first 
covers micro-prudential supervision and comprises the European Banking Authority as well 
as  other  supervisory  agencies.2  Supervisory  colleges  for  pan-European  banks  are  also 
starting  to  operate.  The  second  pillar  is  dedicated  to  macro-prudential  supervision  and  is 
centred on the European Systemic Risk Board. The ESRB can issue warnings and macro-
prudential  recommendations  whenever  necessary.  In  addition,  the  new  Basel  III  rules  are 
being implemented to secure adequate capitalization of banks.  
What  explains  the  rapid  contagion  that  has  characterised  the  sovereign  debt  crisis?  As  I 
already  said,  the  crisis  has  revealed  weaknesses  in  the  prevention  side  of  economic 
governance. But, there were also other gaps in the architecture of euro area institutions. This 
became apparent in early 2010 after the onset of the sovereign debt crisis in Greece. One 
after the other, fiscally weak euro area countries saw their sovereign risk premia rising and 
                                                 
1  A “6-pack” came into force in December 2011, and a “2-pack” is soon to be finalised. They already envisage 
diverse strengthenings of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
2  Two  more  supervisory  agencies  were  also  created:  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions 
Authority (EIOPA) and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
their  rating  downgraded.  As  a  consequence,  their  sovereign  spreads  soared.  An  adverse 
feedback loop set in: a vicious circle by which weak sovereign hurt banks and the need for 
bank  recapitalization  and  refinancing  hurt  sovereign.  Risk  aversion  by  market  participants 
soared: there was contagion.  
The architecture of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) had been designed without a 
proper  framework  to  manage  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  (and  which  may  have  slowed  down 
contagion).  
One  side  of  this  institutional  gap  is  now  being  addressed  through  the  establishment  of 
firewalls  such  as  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  –  and  the  forthcoming 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  –  with 
for  sovereign  crisis 
management and resolution.  
Some further steps are still needed. For example, there are only national arrangements for 
interventions to resolve crises of big pan-European banks. Some account for a large share of 
national GDP of their home country. Thus, while progress was made on the sovereign side:  
 
we  still  lack  a  European  crisis  management  and  resolution  framework  for 
systemically important banks;  
there  are  as  yet  no  funds  earmarked  or  clear  provisions  to  help  in  the 
recapitalization  of  big  banks  (although  the  ESFS/ESM  might  acquire  such  a 
mandate as well); and  
the fundamental issue of institutions that are “too big to fail” has only started to be 
addressed. 
framework 
their 
  Hence, it is fair to say that while a lot has already been achieved, some hard work remains 
ahead of us in order to secure fundamentally sound finances.  
A competitive economy 
International competitiveness, i.e. a free, flexible, innovative and open economy, is the third 
pillar  of  Ordnungspolitik.  Economic  agents  need  to  fulfil  the  highest  global  standards  of 
efficiency.  On  this  front,  too,  matters  in  individual  euro  area  countries  have  not,  however, 
developed  as  would  have  been  desired  since  the  launch  of  the  euro.  There  have  been 
persistent economic imbalances in several euro area countries, and slow productivity growth 
in a number of others. The “Great Recession”, the epicentre of which initially seemed to be 
far away, has exposed and exacerbated these weaknesses.  
How  could  this  go  on  for  so  long?  Diverse  national  factors  played  a  role:  as  a  result 
competitiveness changed significantly and heterogeneities build up. Hence, there was also a 
lack of macro-economic surveillance and too little focus on job creation and improving growth 
prospects.  
Many of these weaknesses are now being addressed by national policies. A number of euro 
area countries have started serious structural reforms. But looking ahead, how can the euro 
area remain competitive more fundamentally? A new Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure 
(MIP) is now in place. A warning system is helping us in identifying risks arising from large 
and  protracted  swings  in  competitiveness  as  well  as  sustained  budget  deficits  at  an  early 
stage. How? By monitoring amongst others, domestic prices, costs of production, wages, unit 
labour  costs,  export  market  shares,  and  productivity.  The  MIP  complements  the  fiscal 
compact. 
Hans-Gert Pöttering, the President of the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung and our host today, has 
put it very clearly: “Die Durchsetzung umfassender Strukturreformen… kostet in erster Linie 
Kraft  –  nicht  Geld”  (The  implementation  of  comprehensive  structural  reforms  …  calls  for 
great efforts, rather than money). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What have we learned from the crisis? 
The speed with which persistent imbalances in EMU can result in systemic risks was not fully 
understood  prior  to  the  crisis.  An  important  lesson  is  that  due  to  high  trade  and  financial 
integration in the euro area, the build-up of imbalances in any individual euro area country 
increasingly affects all others. In other words, there are greater spillover effects on account of 
increasing interconnectedness. The financial contagion of the sovereign debt crisis is a case 
in point.  
Therefore, substantial risks to fiscal and financial stability can build up if structural reforms, 
liberalisation  and  fiscal consolidation  are  postponed  for  too  long,  i.e.  in  the  absence  of  an 
effective Ordnungspolitik. This leads to stress in our societies. For each euro area country, 
the  pressures  for  maintaining  sound  finances  and  remaining  competitive  have  grown 
tremendously. At the same time, also the incentives of each euro area country to monitor its 
peers have grown to virtually the same extent. Hence, my message is that each euro area 
country is a stakeholder in the success of the others.  
Some final thoughts 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  been  a  traumatic  event  in  the  still  short  history  of  the  euro 
area. Yet, it has also been a wake-up call. In my view it has been a catalytic event that is 
changing both Europe and Europeans. The contours of a shared European culture of stability 
are gradually emerging. It is a culture of respect of rules and institutions and transparency. 
This will support the economic growth that is indispensable to heal the legacy of the crisis. 
But let us be modest and bear in mind that solutions to the crisis are only good: 
 
 
 
if they are thought through carefully, 
if they are widely accepted and shared by European citizens, and 
if  they  are  widely  implemented  across  euro  area  countries  and,  when  needed, 
improved and strengthened as necessary. 
As Konrad Adenauer put it many years ago, “Die Einheit Europas war ein Traum Weniger. 
Sie wurde eine Hoffnung für viele. Sie ist heute eine Notwendigkeit für alle” (The unification 
of Europe was the dream of a few. It became a hope for many. Today, it is indispensable for 
all).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
