Loi M Bakani: Corporate governance 
Speech  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at 
the PNG Institute of Directors Workshop, Port Moresby, 16–17 July 2012. 
 Introduction  
Welcoming remarks  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Before  I  begin,  I  would  like  to  thank  PNG  Institute  of  Directors  (PNGID)  for  hosting  this 
Workshop and for the opportunity to address the participants on a common interest which is 
to enhance corporate governance in our institutions.  
Directors and official of PNG Institute of Directors (PNGID),  
Facilitator of the Workshop, Mendhurst Associates, Mr. John Mendzela  
Participants of licenced financial institutions  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Corporate Governance  
I  know  you  all  have  now  appreciated  that  good  Governance  is  important  in  every 
organizations  and  that  the  lack  of  it  results  in  poor  management  and  performance  of 
institutions. We all should know (because its public information) the bad experiences in the 
recent  past  as  a  result  of  bad  Governance.  For  example,  the  demise  of  our  former 
government  bank,  PNG  Banking  Corporation  (PNGBC)  and  three  of  our  superannuation 
funds  namely,  Defence  Force  Retirement  Benefit  Fund  and  former  Public  Officers 
Superannuation  Fund  (POSF)  and  National  Provident  Fund  (NPF)  were  involved  in  bad 
management  or  questionable  investments  that  resulted  in  three  separate  Commission  of 
Inquiries.  
The financial sector reforms that took place in 2000 resulted in amendments to the Central 
Banking Act and the Bank and Financial Institutions Act. This was followed by the enactment 
of the Superannuation and Life Insurance Act. These reforms established the independence 
of  the  Central  Bank  and  enabled  effective  and  stringent  regulations.  With  greater 
independence comes greater accountability and transparency on the part of the Central Bank 
and the Governor.  
In addition to the monetary policy responsibilities, regulatory and supervisory powers of the 
Bank  were  also  enhanced.  The  Central  Bank  now  has  powers  to  issue  rules,  regulations, 
directives  and  prudential  standards  and  to  take  timely  interventions  to  ensure  that  bad 
governance and unacceptable management practices are deterred.  
The  new  standard  on  Corporate  Governance  was  drafted  as  a  result  of  various  onsite 
prudential reviews conducted by the Bank since the financial sector reform in 2000. In all its 
findings, the lack of good corporate governance was the key central theme.  
The  Bank  emphasizes  that  the  Board  is  ultimately  responsible  for  governance  of  financial 
institutions, for employing the right persons in management positions and ensuring that the 
business functions and their risks are managed in line with Board expectations and in such a 
way that also serves the interests of the stakeholders.  
The Board and senior management of the supervised institutions are expected to promote 
and  demonstrate  an  organizational  culture  that  expects  integrity  from  its  employees  in 
conducting the institution’s business and for ensuring a sound and prudent approach to risk 
identification  and  management.  The  Bank  also  emphasizes  that  the  responsibility  of  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
institution’s  Board  and  management  is  to  ensure  that  the  institution  meets  prudential  and 
statutory requirements and has management practices to limit risks to prudent levels.  
Key statistics  
Since the reform, there have been positive results over the last few years compared to the 
bad experiences some 13 years ago where contributors lost a lot of their savings. Prudent 
and good management and good corporate governance framework are enabling factors to 
the positive results that we see today.  
The way ahead  
In anticipation of lifting the performance of the financial system as a whole, there are several 
challenges we face at the Central Bank. These are:  
• 
Constantly enhancing our supervisory responsibilities as a result of global financial 
developments including the recent Global Financial Crisis and other external factors. 
This  includes  allocating  adequate  resources  to  undertake  prudential  reviews, 
provision of technical training and other manpower developments;  
Introduction  of  new  prudential  standards  covering  best  practices  on  good 
governance;  
Revision of existing prudential standards to align with best practices but in a PNG 
context;  
Financial crime – improving ways of dealing with perpetrators of money schemes, 
financial fraud and theft, proceeds of crime;  
 Financial  inclusion  –  how  to  get  the  un-banked  portion  of  our  population  into  the 
formal financial system;  
Financial Awareness and literacy – to educate the populace on financial matters and 
awareness against fast money scams;  
Payment System – improvements to instruments and settlements to ensure a safe, 
cost-effective and efficient payments system.  
      The Bank is prepared to deal with these challenges to ensure that our supervision results in 
a sound and prudently managed financial system in PNG as experienced to date.  
With these remarks, I would like to again say thank you to PNGID for hosting the Workshop 
and for Mr. John Mendzela in conducting this workshop and for all of you who attended today 
to take a day of from your busy schedule not only to refresh your mind, but to learn about the 
best  practises  in  implementing  good  corporate  governance.  I  hope  that  what  you  all  have 
learnt during this workshop has been valuable and you would take some important lessons 
from the workshop to be utilised in your respective institutions.  
Thank you, Ladies and gentleman. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
