Choongsoo Kim: Returning to sustainable growth – an EME’s 
perspective 
Special  speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  G20  High 
Level  Seminar  on  “Returning  to  sustainable  growth  –  an  EME’s  perspective”,  Mexico  City, 
24 February 2012. 
 Fellow governors and finance ministers, and ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a great honor and pleasure to speak at this high-level seminar. I am grateful to Secretary 
Meade,  Governor  Carstens,  and  Managing  Director  Dallara  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this 
special address. 
The  recent global  crisis  has cast  a  long shadow  on  financial  and  real activities  worldwide. 
The  financial  disruptions  and  severe  recession  following  the  crisis  hit  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic,  and  at  the same  time  triggered  negative  spillovers  to  EMEs, many  of  which  were 
mere innocent by-standers. The euro area debt crisis, and its threat to financial stability, was 
the culmination not only of the structural imbalances within the euro area itself but also of a 
complex  web  of  real  and  financial  linkages  that  had  not  been  well  understood.  The  global 
crisis  also  revealed  a  number  of  shortcomings  in  our  financial  system,  ranging  from 
inadequate  regulatory  frameworks  for  addressing  systemic  risk  to  under-regulated  cross-
border capital flows. 
Over  the  past  three  years  or  so,  the  international  community  has  discussed  possible 
solutions  to  improve  stability  and  resilience  of  the  global  financial  system.  And  notable 
progress  has  been  achieved  on  multiple  fronts,  including  formulating  a  strengthened 
regulatory  framework  and  laying  the  foundation  for  reform  of  the  international  monetary 
system under G-20 leadership. No doubt more challenges remain in our search for durable 
global  financial  stability.  In  this  respect,  the  G-20  must  continue  to  be  the  locus  of 
international cooperation and policy coordination. 
As we enter our fourth year since the crisis, however, I would argue that the time is now ripe 
for  renewed  attention  to  sustainable  growth.  Financial  stability  –  or  more  broadly 
macroeconomic  stability  –  is  of  course  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  growth,  but  the 
converse is also true. In other words, the real and financial linkages involve a two-way traffic. 
And indeed, it is hard to imagine that the highly indebted countries in Europe will be able to 
successfully put their public finances on sustainable footings if their growths remain stagnant.  
From this perspective, global financial resources may have in recent years been directed 
too much toward the financing of unsustainable fiscal deficits in debt-ridden countries, and 
too little toward  growth. I believe  that  the redirecting  of  financial resources  more toward 
growth  –  more  specifically,  toward  countries  with  high  productivity  growth  –  could  yield 
substantial stability benefits to all in the long run.  
Despite  some  irregular  signs  of  economic  recovery  in  the  United  States,  the  most  recent 
economic outlook by the IMF points toward slower economic growth this year in advanced 
economies, particularly those in Europe. Emerging market economies are also projected to 
face growth deceleration.  
A challenging question at this juncture would therefore be what it would take to lift the global 
economy out of growth recession and return it onto a path of sustainable growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Greater role of EMEs in reviving growth 
I believe that active macroeconomic policies played an essential role in containing the global 
crisis, and saved us from repeating the same mistakes our predecessors made some eighty 
years ago. But I am suspicious that more macroeconomic stimulus by advanced economies 
can be a solution to reviving growth going forward. The financial markets are already flooded 
with  liquidity,  but  in  the  midst  of  high  uncertainty  and  financial  deleveraging  its  effects  in 
boosting investment and consumption still fall short. In fact, the available policy space may 
be quite limited in advanced economies, where interest rates are already near zero and fiscal 
consolidation is necessary to keep sovereign debt sustainable. 
In this respect, I see a greater role for EMEs. They weathered the global crisis relatively well, 
with few scars in their real or financial sectors. Their public finances are generally stronger 
than  those  of  advanced  economies,  and  their  inflationary  pressures  are  now  adequately 
contained.  These  features  of  EMEs  grant  them  substantial  policy  space  for  stimulating 
growth in the short run. 
One may argue that EMEs where inflation is well under control should therefore not hesitate 
to use the policy space available to them to address the downside risks to growth. But the 
reality is far more complicated than it appears. There is substantial tail risk associated with 
the euro area debt crisis, which if it materializes could wreak havoc on EMEs. This will make 
EMEs more cautious in using their available policy space for growth right now. Rather, they 
might wish to preserve it for a much worse scenario. 
It is thus crucial, for reviving growth, to defuse the euro area debt crisis by putting in place 
credible fiscal plans. I am hopeful that the recent positive developments related to the Greek 
bailout program will translate into a sharp reduction in the financial uncertainties now facing 
EMEs. 
Reforms for sustainable growth 
Let me turn to the issue of how to return to sustainable growth. 
Reviving  growth  following  recession  and  returning  to  sustainable  growth  are  of  course  not 
one  and  the  same.  The  latter  will  require  comprehensive  reforms  –  in  both  advanced  and 
emerging countries. 
And again I see greater scope here for EMEs, particularly emerging Asia, to lead the way 
back to sustainable growth. To be specific, EMEs contributed about 40 percent to world GDP 
growth  during  the  globalization  period  of  1986–2007,  compared  to  27  percent  for  the  pre-
globalization  period  of  1973–1985.  More  recently,  emerging  Asia  alone  accounted  for 
50 percent  of  world  GDP  growth  during  2006–11.  And  IMF  projections  suggest  that  the 
growth  contribution  of  emerging  Asia  will  continue  at  around  50  percent  for  the  next  five 
years.  These  are  not  surprising  in  that  EMEs  are  well  positioned  to  undertake  high 
investment for growth along their catch-up process which is not yet completed. 
But  this  large  contribution  to  global  growth  masks  important  risks  to  EMEs,  in  leading  the 
return to sustainable growth. Many EMEs rely heavily on external demand for growth, and 
therefore will face challenges going forward if advanced economies do not grow fast enough. 
Over a longer horizon, the export-led growth strategies of large EMEs will be unsustainable, 
given  their  implications  for  the  global  imbalances.  This  suggests  that  EMEs  need  to 
rebalance their growth, toward a greater share driven by domestic demand.  
Another risk facing EMEs is financial vulnerability. Liberalization of their capital accounts has 
exposed  these  countries  to  the  vagaries  of  financial  shocks  of  external  origin,  while  their 
underdeveloped  domestic  financial  markets  offer  little  scope  for  hedging.  Indeed,  financial 
crises have often interrupted the otherwise steady growth trends of many EMEs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Advanced countries of course also face significant risks to sustainable growth. Their high and 
rising public debts undermine not only financial stability but also growth. Evidence suggests 
that public debt above 85–90 percent of GDP tends to affect growth negatively. High long-
term  unemployment  will  lead  to  permanent  losses  of  productive  human  capital.  More 
recently, rising unemployment and income inequality have compromised social cohesion in 
these countries. Last but not least, the euro area has and will remain vulnerable to growing 
structural imbalances between its core members and its periphery. 
Based upon these observations, I would like to touch briefly now on several reform agenda 
that I believe could help us to return to sustainable growth. 
First, fiscal and financial regulatory reforms  
There is no question that fiscal reform should be the first priority, and mark the starting point 
of any reform sequence in debt-ridden advanced economies. But EMEs also need to prepare 
for approaching fiscal challenges associated with population aging and growing demand for 
social welfare. As to financial regulatory reforms, they have been extensively discussed and 
formulated  into  the  Basel  III  policy framework.  And  for  this  reason,  I  will  not  discuss  them 
further here. 
Second, more and better financial integration by EMEs  
We all know that trade integration has enabled many EMEs to grow rapidly and accelerate 
their catch-up processes. I believe that financial integration can do the same for EMEs, by 
improving resource allocation within and across countries and offering greater liquidity and 
risk hedging. The diverse development stages and demographics of EMEs offer very fertile 
ground for efficiency gains from financial integration. These gains can of course be reaped 
only  if  the  attendant  systemic  risk  is  adequately  controlled.  But  the  strengthened  Basel  III 
framework will render financial integration by EMEs more opportune going forward. 
Third, structural reforms to promote domestic demand 
Promotion of domestic demand helps to diversify the sources of growth, and thereby yields 
stability gains for EMEs. Empirical evidence indicates that economic growth in EMEs is not 
related to the size of the trade surplus, or even to the volume of exports, but rather to the 
output of industrial products. And as long as domestic demand is sufficient to accommodate 
it, EMEs can attain sustainable growth by expanding their industrial economic activities.  
While  the  list  of  possible  reforms  to  achieve  this  is  long,  I  would  like  to  highlight  here  the 
effects  of  domestic  financial  development  and  social safety  nets.  A  recent  study  finds  that 
their underdeveloped financial systems could be a cause of the high savings rates in Asian 
EMEs. With limited access to financial markets or opportunities for diversification, firms tend 
to retain their earnings for future investment and households to increase their precautionary 
saving. These tendencies dampen private consumption. Incentives for precautionary saving 
will be even stronger, I should add, if the social safety net remains relatively weak.  
Finally, strengthening the global financial safety nets (GFSNs) 
The  large  literature  on  economic  development  suggests  that  the  quality  and  volume  of 
financial intermediation matters a great deal for long-run growth. Existing studies also show 
that leveraged risk-taking enhances growth. It does of course also bring about undesirable 
side effects, such as recurring financial crisis, but a review of the evidence indicates that the 
growth-enhancing effects dominate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In the context of EMEs, financial intermediation for growth has involved significant amounts 
of cross-border transactions. And as a result, one of the most pressing issues facing them is 
how to guard against the contingent risks of negative spillovers from advanced economies. 
Improved oversight of capital inflows and macro-prudential regulations will help to address 
the danger of global liquidity surges, and the attendant risk of asset price bubbles. 
But  emerging  economies  will  still  remain  vulnerable  to  sudden  reversals  or  disruptions  of 
global liquidity. Enhanced protection against such global liquidity disruption would facilitate 
their  promotion  of  financial  integration  as  a  new  source  of  growth.  The  existence  of  well-
functioning global financial safety nets would also help to reduce EMEs’ temptations to pile 
up large volumes of foreign reserves for self-insurance, and thereby mitigate the problem of 
the global imbalances. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. 
The  G-20  was  pivotal  in  coordinating  the  macroeconomic  policies  adopted  to  address  the 
global  crisis,  and  it  has  since  made  great  contributions  to  framing  the  reform  agenda  for 
financial stability and to formulating effective policy solutions as well. 
Despite this great success, however, the G-20 now faces an even greater challenge – that of 
finding  solutions  to  lead  our  return  to  sustainable  growth.  This  is  particularly  challenging 
given  our  lack  of  sufficient  knowledge  to  serve  as  a  guide.  Country  experiences  of 
sustainable growth are too diverse to draw universally applicable and time-invariant lessons. 
And the theoretical underpinnings of sustainable growth seem too abstract to offer practical 
guidance for reforms. 
I am confident, however, that collective wisdom and creative thinking will ultimately emerge. I 
hope that the G-20 agenda under Mexico’s Chairmanship will be a turning point in our search 
for solutions to achieving sustainable growth and global prosperity in the years ahead. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
