Glenn Stevens: The glass half full 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the American 
Chamber of Commerce (SA) AMCHAM Internode Business Lunch, Adelaide, 8 June 2012. 
 It is very good to be back in Adelaide. Thank you for the invitation.  
As  we  meet  here,  economic  discussion  in  Australia  has  reached  a  rather  curious  position. 
Consider the background. Australia avoided a deep downturn in 2009, when most countries 
did not. A large number of businesses and jobs were saved by that outcome – though we will 
never know how many.  
Almost  as  a  matter  of  arithmetic,  the  ensuing  upswing  was  always  going  to  be  of  the 
moderate  variety.  Rapid  cyclical  growth  usually  comes  after  a  serious  slump  (and  when  it 
doesn’t,  it  comes  just  before  one).  After  small  downturns,  less  spectacular  growth  is  the 
usual experience. So it has proved on this occasion.  
Even so, three and a half years after the depths of the crisis in late 2008, this unspectacular 
growth has nonetheless seen real GDP per capita well and truly pass its previous peak. This 
is something yet to be achieved in any of the other nations shown here (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
 According to data published this week by the Australian Statistician, real GDP rose by over 
4 per cent over the past year. This outcome includes the recovery from the effects of flooding 
a year ago, so the underlying pace of growth is probably not quite that fast, but it is quite 
respectable – something close to trend. Unemployment is about 5 per cent. Core inflation is 
a bit above 2 per cent. The financial system is sound. Our government is one among only a 
small number rated AAA, with manageable debt. We have received a truly enormous boost 
in national income courtesy of the high terms of trade. This, in turn, has engendered one of 
the  biggest  resource  investment  upswings  in  our  history,  which  will  see  business  capital 
spending rise by another 2 percentage points of GDP over 2012/13, to reach a 50-year high.  
To  be  sure,  we  face  considerable  structural  adjustment  issues  arising  from  the  mining 
expansion, and from other changes in the world economy. These are not easy to deal with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(though  they  are  not  insurmountable).  And  we  live  in  a  global  environment  of  major 
uncertainty,  largely  because  of  the  problems  of  the  euro  zone.  Nonetheless,  an  objective 
observer coming from outside would, I think it must be said, feel that Australia’s glass is at 
least half full.  
Yet the nature of public discussion is unrelentingly gloomy, and this has intensified over the 
past six months. Even before the recent turn of events in Europe and their effects on global 
markets,  we  were  grimly  determined  to  see  our  glass  as  half  empty.  Numerous  foreign 
visitors to the Reserve Bank have remarked on the surprising extent of this pessimism. Each 
time I travel abroad I am struck by the difference between the perceptions held by foreigners 
about Australia and what I read in the newspapers at home.  
I  harbour  no  illusion  that  this  can  suddenly  be  lifted  by  anything  I  say  today.  But  it  is, 
hopefully, worthwhile to offer a few facts, and some perspective and analysis of the situation.  
The multi-speed economy 
Much  of  our  public  discussion  proceeds  under  the  rubric  of  the  so-called  “two-speed 
economy”. It’s become very much the description of the moment, and not only in Australia. 
One picks up the same theme in many other countries. Indeed it is a description of the global 
economy. Growth in the advanced industrial countries continues to be sluggish, and in some 
cases output is going backwards. Within Europe, Germany has been doing well, while other 
nations face huge economic challenges. Meanwhile growth in the “emerging world” has been 
pretty robust apart from the effects of natural disasters. So in popular terms, we might say 
that there are varying lanes on the global growth highway: fast, slow, very slow. There are a 
few economies in the breakdown lane.  
Turning to Australia, we have long had a multi-speed economy. For example, it has been a 
very  long-running trend that population growth tends to be faster in Western Australia and 
Queensland  than  in  Tasmania  or  South  Australia.  Typically,  certain  industries  such  as 
housing construction show the expected differences due to population growth.  
Moreover  while  we  debate  the  rise  of  mining  and  the  much  heralded  “decline  of 
manufacturing”,  we  might  note  that  it  has  been  a  very  long  running  trend  that  output  and 
employment in manufacturing has grown more slowly than in the economy as a whole, and 
that output of various kinds of service provision has grown faster. That has been happening 
for  at  least  five  decades,  and  in  most  countries  in  the  developed  world.  In  the  case  of 
Australia’s manufacturing sector, this decline reverses an earlier rise. In fact, the respective 
shares of mining and manufacturing in Australia’s GDP at present are about where they were 
in 1900.  
It is obvious at present that the mining expansion is quite concentrated both in its industrial 
and geographical dimensions, and economic indicators do reflect that. But the mining sector 
is  not  the  only  sector  growing.  If  the  recent  data  are  taken  at  face  value,  the  non-mining 
economy  has  grown  at  about  2 per cent  over  the  past  year.  Mining  employment  is  indeed 
growing quickly – interestingly enough according to the available data, the increase in mining 
employment  exceeded  the  fall  in  manufacturing  employment  over  the  past  year.  But  the 
largest increase of all was in the sector called “health care and social assistance”, in which 
employment  rose  by  about  the  size  of  the  combined  fall  in  manufacturing  and  retailing 
employment over the same period. And while there are clearly differing drivers by industry 
and  by  region,  there  are  mechanisms  that  even  out  at  least  some  of  these  differences. 
Spillovers  do  occur  both  in  the  private  sector  and  via  the  tax  and  expenditure  system.1 
Remarkably, in the face of the understandable concern about job losses in particular regions 
                                                
1  See  Lowe,  P,  “The  Forces  Shaping  the  Economy  over  2012”,  Address  to  the  Committee  for  Economic 
Development of Australia, Sydney, 16 February 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and industries, the dispersion of unemployment rates by statistical region is no larger today 
than has usually been the case over the past 20 years. Hence while there are clearly multiple 
speeds,  the  total  speed  seems  to  have  been  one  of  reasonable  growth  and  low 
unemployment.  
The behaviour of households 
But there is another aspect of the “multi-speed” experience, which I suspect explains a good 
deal  of  the  dissatisfaction  we  see,  and  it  has  to  do  with  the  behaviour  of  the  household 
sector. Some parts of the economy that depend on household spending are still experiencing 
relatively  weak  conditions,  compared  with  what  they  have  been  used  to.  But  this  isn’t 
because  the  mining  boom  spillovers  have  failed  to  arrive.  It  is,  instead,  the  result  of  other 
changes that actually have nothing to do with the mining boom per se, but a lot to do with 
events that occurred largely before the mining boom really began.  
The  story  is  summed  up  in  the  two  charts  shown  below.  The  first  shows  household 
consumption  spending  and  income,  both  measured  in  per  capita  terms,  and  adjusting  for 
inflation  (Graph 2).2  In  brief,  household  spending  grew  faster  than  income  for  a  lengthy 
period  up  to  about  2005. The  arithmetically  equivalent  statement  is that the  rate  of  saving 
from current income declined, by about 5 percentage points over that period.  
Graph 2 
It was no coincidence that households felt they were getting wealthier. Gross assets held by 
households  more  than  doubled  between  1995  and  2007.  The  value  of  real  assets  
– principally dwellings – rose by more than 6 per cent per annum in real, per capita terms 
over the period (Graph 3).  
                                                 
2  These are updated versions of charts I first used one year ago. See Stevens, G, “The Cautious Consumer”, 
Address to The Anika Foundation Luncheon, Sydney, 26 July 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Graph 3 
 Only a small part of this was explained by an increase in per capita expenditure on dwellings. 
The bulk of it came from rising prices. Moreover, a good deal of borrowing was done to hold 
these assets and household leverage increased. The ratio of aggregate household debt to 
gross  assets  rose,  peaking  at  about  20 per cent.  There  was  definitely  a  large  rise  in 
measured  net  worth,  but  relative  to  aggregate  annual  income,  gross  debt  rose  from 
70 per cent in 1995, to about 150 per cent in 2007. Correspondingly, by 2007 the share of 
current  income  devoted  to  servicing  that  debt  had  risen  from  7 per cent  to  12 per cent, 
despite interest rates in 2007 being below those in 1995.  
It  is  still  not  generally  appreciated  how  striking  these  trends  were.  I  cannot  say  that  it  is 
unprecedented for spending to grow consistently faster than income, because it had already 
been  doing  that  for  the  20  years  prior  to  1995.  That  is,  the  saving  rate  had  been  on  a 
long-term downward trend since the mid-1970s. But it is very unusual in history for people to 
save  as  little  from  current  income  as  they  were  doing  by  the  mid-2000s.  And  it  is  very 
unusual, historically, for real assets per person to rise at 6 per cent or more per annum. It is 
also  very  unusual  for  households  actually  to  withdraw  equity  from  their  houses,  to  use for 
other purposes, but for a few years in the mid-2000s that seemed to have been occurring.  
Of course, Australia was not alone in seeing trends like this. There were qualitatively similar 
trends  in  several  other  countries,  particularly  English-speaking  countries  that  experienced 
financial  innovation.  The  international  backdrop  to  this  period  was  the  so-called  “great 
moderation”,  in  which  there  was  a  decline  in  macroeconomic  variability.  There  were  still 
business cycles but downturns were much less severe than in the 1970s or 1980s, inflation 
was low and not very variable, which meant that nominal interest rates also were generally 
low and not very variable, and compensation for risk became very modest.3  
                                                
3  There  was,  of  course,  a  nagging  problem  of  periodic  financial  panics.  But  several  of  these  seemed  to  be 
managed without serious lasting damage. The Asian financial crisis was devastating for the Asian countries 
involved, but the global economy was not badly affected. The Russian crisis of 1998 – described, remarkably, 
by one experienced observer at the time as the worst since the 1940s – was similarly handled without serious 
fall-out. The bust of the dot-com bubble was associated with an economic downturn in the early 2000s but this 
too was, by historical standards, quite mild. Perhaps people began really to believe that major downturns were 
always  avoidable  and  that  higher  leverage  therefore  was  safe.  If  so,  they  had  a  major  fright  from  2007 
onwards. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This “moderation” came to an end with the crisis beginning in 2007. And with a few years of 
perspective,  it  is  increasingly  clear  that  Australian  households  began  to  change  their 
behaviour at that time, or even a little before. The rate of saving from current income stopped 
falling probably around 2003 or 2004, and began to increase (we now know), slowly at first 
as  the  income  gains  from  the  first  phase  of  the  resources  boom  started  in  about  2005  or 
2006, and then more quickly in 2008 and 2009.  
Real consumption spending per head initially remained pretty strong in this period, reaching 
a peak in 2008. It then declined for a year or so, before resuming growth in the second half of 
2009. That growth has, however, been much slower than had been observed previously. In 
the nearly three years from mid-2009 through to the March quarter 2012, real consumption 
per head rose at an annual pace of about 1½ per cent.  
This is more than a full percentage point lower than the growth rate from 1995 to 2005. But 
this sort of growth is in fact quite comparable with the kind of growth seen in the couple of 
decades leading up to 1995. It is line with the quite respectable growth in income. But the 
gap  between  the  current  level  of  consumption  and  where  it  would  have  been  had  the 
previous trend continued is quite significant. If we then consider the growth of foreign online 
sales  and  so  on,  and  the  fact  that  consumers  seem  more  inclined  to  consume  services  
– experiences, as opposed to goods – we can see this is a significant change for the retail 
sector.  
No doubt reinforcing this trend towards more circumspect, but more typical, behaviour is that 
the earlier strong upward trend in real assets per head has abated over recent years. In fact, 
real household assets per head today are about the same as they were five years ago, with a 
dip during the crisis, a subsequent partial recovery and then a slow drift down over the past 
couple of years. Both dwelling prices and share prices – the two really big components of 
wealth – have followed that pattern.  
At some point, wealth will begin to increase again. After all, people are saving a reasonable 
amount from current income and placing the proceeds into various assets (especially, of late, 
deposits  in  financial  institutions).  That  is,  they  are  building  wealth  the  old  fashioned  way. 
Ultimately these flows will be reflected in higher holdings of real and financial assets, at least 
once  debt  levels  are  regarded  as  comfortable.  Asset  valuation  changes  can  of  course 
dominate  saving  flows  in  shifting  wealth  over  short  periods  and  they  are  inherently 
unpredictable.  So  no  one  can  predict  the  course  of  these  measures  of  wealth  over  any 
particular short period. But wealth will surely resume an upward track, sooner or later.4  
When it does, however, it is unlikely to be at 6 or 7 per cent per year in real, per capita terms. 
I would guess that over the long term, something more like 3 per cent would be nearer the 
mark.  
I think this is a profoundly important point and worth emphasising. The decade or more up to 
about 2007 was unusual. It would be quite surprising, really, if the same trends – persistent 
strong increases in asset values, very strong growth in per capita consumption, increasing 
leverage, little or no saving from current income – were to re-emerge any time soon. That is, 
the gap between consumption today and the old trend level on the chart is not going to close. 
                                                
4 
In considering these trends in wealth and household spending behaviour, we could ask which way causation 
ran – did changing wealth drive changing spending patterns, or was it the other way around? The answer is 
almost certainly  that causation  ran both  ways.  If  rising  asset  values creates a sense  of greater  wealth  and 
people feel less need to save from current income to achieve any goal they might have for their assets, they 
can spend more from current income. But in spending more, and being prepared to borrow more, they also 
tend in the process to affect asset values for both real and financial assets, which then reinforces the trend in 
wealth,  and  so  on.  So  it  is  not  possible,  in  a  very  simple  analysis  such  as  the  one  presented  here,  to 
disentangle all that. But it seems the two trends have been related, and mutually reinforcing, in both directions. 
Both the strong rise in spending and the strong rise in gross assets (and leverage) ended some years back 
now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I noted to another audience about three years ago that the prominence of household demand 
in driving growth in the 1990s and 2000s was unlikely to be repeated.5 If there were business 
strategies that assumed a resumption of the earlier trend, they will surely be disappointed in 
time, if they have not been already.  
There were several parts of the economy that benefited from that earlier period, and that are 
finding the going much tougher now. Retailing was obviously one, but so was banking. Banks 
and other financial institutions enjoyed rapid balance sheet and profit expansion as they lent 
to  households  and  some  businesses.  But  they  can  see  that  period  has  now  finished. 
Businesses  that  serviced  rapid  turnover  in  the  dwelling  stock  (such  as  real  estate  agents, 
mortgage brokers) are seeing those revenue streams considerably reduced, and are having 
to adjust their strategies and capacity to suit changed conditions. For example, the rate of 
dwelling turnover is about one-third less than it was on average over the previous decade, 
and about half its peak levels. This is affecting state government stamp duty collections as 
well as the real estate sector.  
We can also see some echoes of these changing trends in household demand in business 
investment spending.  
Graph 4  
 This  chart  shows  business  investment,  split  into  mining  and  non-mining,  and  measured  in 
real, per capita terms, so as to be consistent with the earlier charts (Graph 4). Investment 
has been on a stronger upward trend since the mid-1990s than it had been for a number of 
years before that. In particular, business investment in real per capita terms has grown, on 
average, by over 6 per cent per annum since 1995, more than double the average pace over 
the  preceding  35  years.  Moreover  a  lot  of  this was  in  the  non-mining  sector,  and  it  began 
before the present run up in mining investment really got going. Some of this growth reflected 
the same “consumer facing” growth sectors mentioned above. Of the four sectors that had 
the  fastest  growing  investment  spending  over  that  period,  three  were  finance,  one  called 
“rental hiring and real estate services”, and retail trade. Some of these sectors are slowing 
their investment rates now.  
                                                
5  Stevens,  G,  “Challenges  for  Economic  Policy”,  Address  to  The  Anika  Foundation  Luncheon,  Sydney, 
28 July 2009. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Meanwhile,  mining  investment  has  recently  been  rising  at  an  extraordinary  pace.  In  2005, 
mining investment was near its long-run average of around 2 per cent of GDP. By mid-2014 
we  expect  it  to  reach  at  least  9 per cent  of  GDP.  If  that  occurs,  mining  investment  will  be 
about  as  large  as  business  investment  in  the  rest  of  the  private  economy  combined.  As a 
result of that, total business investment will reach new highs this year, and next. Hence there 
is  a  very  large  build-up  in  the  nation’s  capital  stock  occurring.  If  it  is  well  managed  and 
soundly  based,  that  ought  to  allow  the  possibility  of further growth  in  output  and  incomes. 
The investment phase of the mining boom will start to tail off in a couple of years’ time, after 
which the shipments of natural resources should step up significantly.  
We might expect by then as well that some other areas of investment spending that are weak 
at  present  will  be  picking  up.  More  generally,  I  suspect  we  will  discuss  the  nature  of 
investment quite a bit in coming years as we grapple with structural change in the economy 
and powerful shifts in the population’s needs (think of investment in the aged-care sector, for 
example, or public infrastructure needs). We will also be looking for productivity pay-offs from 
the various investments. 
But the key message for today is that the multi-speed economy is not just about the mining 
sector  squeezing  other  sectors  by  drawing  away  labour  and  capital  and  pushing  up  the 
exchange rate. It is doing that, but slower growth in sectors that had earlier done well from 
unusually  strong gains  in  household  spending would  have  been  occurring  anyway,  even  if 
the mining boom had never come along. It is these changes in behaviour by households, in 
asset  markets  and  in  credit  demand,  that  I  think  lie  behind  much  of  the  disquiet  
– dissatisfaction even – that so many seem to have been expressing. But this would, as I 
say, have occurred with or without the mining boom. In fact, without the mining boom and its 
spillovers, we would have been feeling the effects of those adjustments rather more acutely 
than  we  do  now.  The  period  of  household  gearing  up  could  have  ended  in  a  much  less 
benign way.  
Implications for policy 
What  are  the  implications  of  these  trends  for  economic  policy,  and  particularly  monetary 
policy? Does it have a role in helping the adjustment?  
One  thing  we  should  not  do,  in  my  judgement,  is  to  try  to  engineer  a  return  to  the  boom. 
Many people say that we need more “confidence” in the economy among both households 
and businesses. We do, but it has to be the right sort of confidence. The kind of confidence 
based  on  nothing  more  than  expectations  of  ever-increasing  housing  prices,  with  the 
associated willingness to continue increasing leverage, on the assumption that this is a sure 
way to wealth, would not be the right kind. Unfortunately, we have been rather too prone to 
that misplaced optimism on occasion. You don’t have to be a believer in bubbles to think that 
a return to sizeable price increases and higher household gearing from still reasonably high 
current levels would be a risky approach. It would surely be a false basis for confidence. The 
intended effect of recent policy actions is certainly not to pump up speculative demand for 
assets.6 As it happens, our judgement is that the risk of re-igniting a boom in borrowing and 
prices is not very high, and this was a key consideration in decisions to lower interest rates 
over the past eight months.  
Hence,  I  do  not  think  we  should  set  monetary  policy  to  foster  a  renewed  gearing  up  by 
households.  We  can  help,  at  the  margin,  the  process  of  borrowers  getting  their  balance 
sheets  into  better  shape.  To  the  extent  that  softer  demand  conditions  have  resulted  from 
                                                
6  As  in  2009,  the  challenge  is  “how  to  ensure  that  the  ready  availability  and  low  cost  of  housing  finance  is 
translated  into  more  dwellings,  not  just  higher  prices”.  See  Stevens,  G,  “Challenges  for  Economic  Policy”, 
Address to The Anika Foundation Luncheon, Sydney, 28 July 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
households or some businesses restraining spending in an effort to get debt down, and this 
leads  to  lower  inflation,  our  inflation  targeting  framework  tells  us  to  ease  monetary  policy. 
That is what we have been doing. The reduction in interest rates over the past eight months 
or  so  –  125 basis points  on  the  cash  rate  and  something  less  than  that,  but  still  quite  a 
significant fall, in the structure of intermediaries’ lending rates – will speed up, at the margin, 
the process of deleveraging for those who need or want to undertake it.  
In saying that, of course, we cannot neglect the interests of those who live off the return from 
their savings and who rightly expect us to preserve the real value of those savings. Popular 
discussion of interest rates routinely ignores this element, focusing almost exclusively on the 
minority  of  the  population  –  just  over  one-third  –  who  occupy  a  dwelling  they  have 
mortgaged.  The  central  bank  has  to  adopt  a  broader  focus.  And  to  repeat,  it  is  not  our 
intention  either  to  engineer  a  return  to  a  housing  price  boom,  or  to  overturn  the  current 
prudent habits of households. All that said, returns available to savers in deposits (with a little 
shopping around) remain well ahead of inflation, and have very low risk.  
So monetary policy has been cognisant of the changed habits of households and the process 
of  balance  sheet  strengthening,  and  has  been  set  accordingly.  As  such,  it  has  been 
responding, to the extent it prudently can, to one element of the multi-speed economy – the 
one where it is most relevant.  
What monetary policy cannot do is make the broader pressures for structural adjustment go 
away. Not only are the consumption boom and the household borrowing boom not coming 
back,  but  the  industry  and  geographical  shifts  in  the  drivers  of  growth  cannot  be  much 
affected by monetary policy. To a large extent, they reflect changes in the world economy, 
which  monetary  policy  cannot  influence.  Even  if,  as  a  society,  we  wanted  to  resist  the 
implications of those changes other tools would be needed.  
In fact Australia does better to accommodate these changes, and to think about what other 
policies might make adjustment less difficult and quicker for those adversely affected. It is in 
this  area,  in fact, that  we  need  more  confidence:  confidence  in  our  capacity  to  respond  to 
changed circumstances, to respond to new opportunities, and to produce goods and services 
which  meet  market  demands.  It  is  also  to  be  hoped  that  some  of  the  recent  positive  data 
outcomes will give pause to reflect that, actually, things have so far turned out not too badly.  
Conclusion 
We face a remarkable period in history. The centre of gravity of the world economy seems to 
be  shifting  eastwards  – towards  us  –  perhaps  even  faster  than  some  of  the  optimists  had 
expected.  Granted,  that  is  partly  because  the  relative  importance  of  Europe  seems  to  be 
shrinking, perceptibly, under the weight of its internal problems. But even if the Europeans 
manage the immediate problems well, there is no mistaking the long run trend.  
That this comes just as a very unusual period for household behaviour in Western advanced 
countries (including Australia) has ended, has been a remarkably fortuitous combination for 
Australia.  Certainly  it  means  we  have  the  challenge  of  adjusting  our  behaviour  and  our 
expectations to new drivers for growth and new imperatives for responsiveness, but we do so 
with growing incomes, low unemployment and exposure to Asia. That is infinitely preferable 
to the sorts of adjustments that seem to be the lot of so many others at present.  
The Australian community has understood that we can’t base growth persistently on falling 
saving and rising debt and that is forcing changes to business models. But it has to be said 
that the return of a certain degree of thrift actually strengthens our medium-term position. If 
we  can  marry  that  to  a  focus  on  incrementally  improving  the  way  we  do  things  –  lifting 
productivity – there is actually a lot to look forward to. For Australians, the glass is well and 
truly half full.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
