Deepak Mohanty: India’s post-crisis macroeconomic challenges 
Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Ruia 
College, Mumbai, 28 August 2012. 
 The assistance provided by Rajeev Jain and Binod B Bhoi in preparation of the speech is acknowledged. 
I thank Professor Aditi Abhyankar for the opportunity for being a part of such a distinguished 
panel and share my thoughts with the young audience. As the future of the country, you have 
a  great  stake  in  the  performance  of  our  economy  in  a  globalised  world:  the  opportunity  it 
provides, the promise it holds and the challenges we face. Therefore, the focus of my talk 
today is on the recent macroeconomic performance of the Indian economy. 
As you know the Indian economy experienced an acceleration in growth in the early 2000s 
which  was  dented  by  the  global  financial  crisis,  particularly  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers in September 2008. Though the world economy has recovered from the recession 
in 2009, it continues to be buffeted by problems. Apart from the uncertainties in the global 
economy, Indian economy faces challenges from several other domestic factors. 
Against this background, I sequence my presentation as follows. First, I will situate India in 
the  global  economy  under  the  rubric  of  emerging  and  developing  economies  (EDEs). 
Second,  I  compare  and contrast the macroeconomic  performance  in the  post  crisis  4-year 
period of 2008–12 with the preceding high growth 5-year period of 2003–08. Third, I highlight 
a  few  key  challenges  that  the  Indian  economy  needs  to  overcome  to  regain  its  growth 
momentum.  Finally,  I  conclude  with  the  conjecture:  when  can  India  become  a  high 
middle-income country, for your inquisitive minds to ponder over? 
India in the world 
The  global  economic  landscape  has  changed  substantially  over  the  past  decade  with  the 
share of EDEs in the global GDP rising from about 20 per cent in 2000 to 36 per cent by 
2011  in  terms  of  US  dollar  at  market  exchange  rate.  In  terms  of  purchasing  power  parity 
(PPP), the share rose from 37 per cent to almost 49 per cent. Thus, at the current juncture, 
the  global  economic  weight  is  equally  split  between  the  EDEs  and  advanced  economies 
(AEs).  But,  what  is  interesting  is  that  the  EDEs  will  continue  to  grow  faster  than  the  AEs, 
even  under  adverse  economic  conditions.  This  will  increasingly  tilt  the  global  economic 
balance  in  favour  of  EDEs.  Hence,  the  focus  has  shifted  from  AEs  to  EDEs  in  sustaining 
global  growth.  Concurrently,  the  resilience  of  growth  in  the  major  EDEs  such  as  Brazil, 
Russia, India, China and South Africa – popularly known as BRICS – has been at the centre 
of such an assessment. 
Over the period 2000–11, India’s share in world GDP rose from 1.5 per cent to 2.4 per cent 
in  terms  of  US  dollar,  and  from  3.8  per  cent  to  5.7  per  cent  in  terms  of  PPP.  This 
achievement, however, looks small considering India’s large share of about 17.4 per cent in 
the global population. 
The  growth  dynamics  looks  strikingly  different  when  a  comparison  is  made  between  the 
pre-crisis  5-year  period  with  the  post-crisis  4-year  period.  Between  these  two  periods,  the 
drop in India’s real GDP growth was less pronounced as compared to the fall in global GDP 
growth.  Thus,  despite  growth  moderation,  India’s  contribution  to  world  growth  rose  from 
about 10 per cent to almost 16 per cent over the same period (Table 1). 
The initial phase of high growth enabled India to raise its per-capita gross national income 
(GNI) to cross the threshold of US$ 1025 for the first time in 2008 and be classified by the 
World Bank as a lower-middle income country. Subsequently, the per capita income rose at 
a slower pace to US $ 1,410 by 2011 during the post-crisis period. While at the current level, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
India’s  per  capita  income  is  the  lowest  amongst  the  BRICS  nations,  it  is  noteworthy  that 
successively  India  has  taken  less  and  less  number  of  years  to  double  its  real  per-capita 
income: 40 years since 1950–51; 15 years since 1991–92 and going by the current trend, it 
may take about 10 years to double the real per-capita income by 2017–18.1 
Let me now turn to the key drivers of India’s economic growth and the factors leading to the 
growth moderation during the post-crisis period after 2007–08. 
Pre-crisis growth upswing 
India recorded real GDP growth of 8.7 per cent per annum during the 5-year period 2003–08, 
contributed by all the three major sectors: agriculture, industry and services (Table 2). This 
marked a significant upward shift in the growth trajectory. While the high growth in industry 
and  services  sector  was  supported  by  past  reforms  and  conducive  global  economic 
environment,  agricultural  growth  was  partly  aided  by  favourable  monsoons.  Though  the 
share  of  agriculture  in  the  economy  is  progressively  shrinking,  it  is  important  to  recognise 
that the  above-trend  agricultural  growth  not  only  provided  some  upward  momentum to  the 
overall growth but also enabled domestic price stability by helping to keep food prices low. 
Another  way  to  analyse  sources  of  GDP  growth  is  the  expenditure  approach.  From  the 
expenditure side, the higher economic growth was enabled by a surge in overall investment 
rate largely driven by the private corporate sector. Investment was financed mostly by higher 
domestic  saving  (Table  3).  Private  sector  investment  grew  on  the  back  of  increased 
availability of resources reflecting reduction in public sector’s draft on private saving following 
the rule-based fiscal consolidation. The attraction of higher growth made it easier to access 
foreign  sources  of  funding.  The  corporate  sector  also  generated  higher  internal  resources 
through  enhancement  of  its  own  retained  earnings.  This  was  made  possible  by  greater 
profitability  reflecting  improved  productivity,  lowering  of  tax  rates  as  well  as  lower  debt 
servicing  costs  enabled  by  lowering  of  nominal  interest  rates.2  The  reduction  in  nominal 
interest rates, in turn, was facilitated by the moderation in inflation brought about by prudent 
fiscal and monetary policy. 
The reduction in the overall interest rate structure also enabled the Government to reduce its 
debt servicing burdens, which partly contributed to a step-up in public sector saving. More 
importantly, the perseverance with the rule-based fiscal policy under the FRBM Act 2003 led 
to significant moderation in all the deficit indicators. Centre’s fiscal deficit fell to 3.6 per cent 
of GDP during the high growth phase from 5.9 per cent during the 1990s. The primary deficit 
turned into a marginal surplus. Consequently, public sector saving increased to 2.9 per cent 
of GDP during 2003–08 from a dis-saving of 0.8 per cent in the preceding five years. 
Another  feature  was  the  sustained  increase  in  household  financial  saving.  This  largely 
financed  the  saving-investment  gaps  in  the  corporate  and  the  public  sector.  With  the 
deepening  of  the financial  sector,  there  was  greater  access to  bank  credit  by  households, 
especially housing finance, which was reflected in the increase in household investment rate. 
The overall gross domestic saving rate of 33.3 per cent of GDP during the high growth phase 
facilitated the increase in overall investment rate to 33.6 per cent without much recourse to 
external borrowings. Concurrently, the productivity of capital was also high as reflected in the 
incremental capital-output ratio (ICOR) of a shade below 4. Provisional  estimates from the 
                                                
1  See Mohanty, Deepak (2011), “Indian Economy: Progress and Prospects”, Speech delivered at the Harvard 
Business School, Boston on September 27. 
2   For  a  detailed  discussion  see  Mohan,  Rakesh  (2008),  “The  Growth  Record  of  the  Indian  Economy,  
1950–2008: A Story of Sustained Savings and Investment”, Speech delivered at the Conference “Growth and 
Macroeconomic Issues and Challenges in India” organised by the Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi on 
February 14. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
India  Productivity  Report  2012,  suggest  an  appreciable  increase  in  total  factor  productivity 
(TFP)  at  the  economy  level  to  1.9  per  cent  per  annum  during  2000–2008  from  about 
0.7 per cent per annum during 1980–1999. Thus, the growth acceleration was contributed by 
high domestic saving accompanied by improvement in productivity. 
Post-crisis growth moderation 
The onset of global financial crisis in 2008 interrupted India’s growth trajectory. Despite being 
located far away from the epicentre of the crisis, India could not remain insulated from the 
adverse  impact  of  the  crisis.  The  knock-on  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  was  felt 
through  all  the  channels  –  finance,  real  and  more  importantly,  the  confidence  channel.3 
Initially  the  impact  was  visible  on  India’s  financial  markets  –  equity  prices  fell  reflecting 
withdrawal  of  global  investment,  currency  depreciated  reflecting  global  risk  aversion,  and 
money  and  credit  markets  came  under  pressures  with  substitution  of  external  sources  of 
funding  with  domestic  sources.  Reflecting  greater  global  integration,  the  Indian  trade  and 
increasingly  synchronised  with  global  cycles.4 
business  cycles  had  also  become 
Consequently, the adverse impact of external demand shocks was manifested in terms of a 
moderation  in  Indian  economic  growth  from  9.3  per  cent  in  2007–08  to  6.7  per  cent  in 
2008–09.  Following  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  response,  growth  recovered 
quickly  during  2009–10  and  2010–11,  before  slumping  again  to  6.5  per  cent  in  2011–12. 
GDP growth is expected to be around 6.5 per cent in 2012–13 also.  
Despite  the  predominant  domestic  nature  of  Indian  growth  story,  volatility  in  growth  has 
brought to the fore the debate on the potential rate of growth and the role of macroeconomic 
policies  in  stabilising  growth  around  the  potential.  Analysis  of  the  sectoral  composition  of 
growth  reveals  that  the  growth  moderation  during  2008–12  has  been  driven  largely  by 
manufacturing  and  agriculture  sectors.  On  the  expenditure  side,  growth  was  led  by  both 
private  and  government  consumption  expenditure  as  investment  growth  moderated. 
Productivity  growth  has  slackened  as  reflected  in  increase  in  ICOR  to  4.8  from  3.9  in  the 
pre-crisis  period.  Domestic  saving  has  moderated  driven  by  significant  fall  in  public  sector 
saving  as  government  revenue  deficit  increased.  More  worrying  has  been  a  sharp 
deterioration in household saving in financial assets. 
While full saving estimates for 2011–12 are not available, preliminary estimates suggest that 
household  financial  saving  has  plummeted  to  7.8  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2011–12  from  an 
already low of 9.3 per cent in 2010–11 as compared with an average of 11.6 per cent in the 
high growth phase. In an inflationary environment, households have tried to protect their real 
value  of  consumption  by  dipping  into  their  saving.  Moreover,  increasing  household 
preference for gold has also dented financial saving. 
The saving-investment gap has widened which was filled through greater recourse to foreign 
saving. This was reflected in the widening of the current account deficit (CAD) to 3.0 per cent 
of GDP during 2008–12 from 0.3 per cent during the high growth phase. In fact, the CAD was 
record high at 4.2 per cent of GDP in 2011–12. 
The sharp increase in imports of gold and crude oil – the latter reflecting in parts increase in 
global  prices  and  incomplete  domestic  price  pass-through  –  largely  contributed  to  the 
deterioration  in  CAD.  As  much  of  the  gold  demand  is  met  through  imports,  this  not  only 
created leakages from the banking system but also contributed to the widening of the CAD 
                                                
3  Subbarao,  D.  (2009),  “Impact  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  on  India:  Collateral  Damage  and  Response”, 
Speech delivered at the Symposium on “The Global Economic Crisis and Challenges for the Asian Economy 
in a Changing World” organised by the Institute for International Monetary Affairs, Tokyo, February 18. 
4  Mohanty,  Deepak  (2009),  “Global  Financial  Crisis  and  Monetary  Policy  Response  in  India”,  RBI  Bulletin, 
December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
beyond the sustainable level of around 2.5 per cent of GDP.5 With net capital flows turning 
insufficient to finance CAD, there was a drawdown of reserves during crisis years – 2008–09 
and  2011–12.  Reflecting 
in  external 
vulnerability indicators: ratio of short term debt to total debt increased and import cover of 
reserves fell. Net international investment position (IIP), another indicator of sustainability of 
external position, deteriorated during post-crisis period (Table 4).  
there  was  deterioration 
these  developments, 
Role of monetary policy 
During the high growth phase of 2003–08, inflation was low and stable. All the measures of 
inflation – WPI, CPI and GDP deflator – hovered around 5 per cent. This was facilitated by 
the  rule-based  fiscal  policy  which  enabled  monetary  policy  to  effectively  focus  on  inflation 
control  and  expansion  of  credit  in  a  non-inflationary  manner.  In  line  with  the  growing 
investment  demand  in  the  economy,  non-food  bank  credit  increased  significantly  during 
2003–08  to  26.7  per  cent  per  annum  from  an  average  of  15.4  per  cent  during  the  1990s 
(Table  5).  Monetary  policy  gave  significant  weight  to the  analysis  of  sectoral  credit growth 
and pursued macro-prudential policies to contain overheating concerns in the economy while 
at  the  same  time  ensuring  increasing  credit  flow  to  finance  investment.  Financial  stability 
objectives  became  an  integral  part  of  monetary  policy  making.  Money  supply  growth  was 
made consistent with the projections of inflation and growth in order to maintain the resource 
balance consistent with the needs of a fast growing economy. 
The lower inflation rate during pre-crisis high growth phase resulted in lower nominal lending 
rates.  Even  as  real  lending  rate  was  significantly  high,  averaging  around  7  per  cent  per 
annum, it did not deter private investment as stable inflation reduced inflation risk premia. In 
any case, the real lending rates were lower than the average real GDP growth of 8.7 per cent 
during 2003–08 and hence was sustainable. More importantly, the substantial positive rate of 
return  on  loans  enabled  banks  to  offer  significantly  positive  real  rates  of  return  on 
term-deposits which helped raise household financial saving (Table 6). 
During  the  post-crisis  phase  of  2008–12  while  growth  generally  moderated,  inflation  rose 
complicating the task of monetary management. The Reserve Bank began exiting from the 
crisis-driven accommodative monetary policy stance in October 2009, first by phasing out all 
the unconventional measures and then raising interest rates. Overall, headline WPI inflation 
increased to an average of 7.6 per cent during 2008–12 largely reflecting near double digit 
inflation for most months during January 2010 – November 2011 period. WPI inflation has 
since moderated to around 7.0 per cent but remains above 5.5 per cent observed during the 
pre-crisis  period.  Growth  moderation,  coupled  with  signs  of  thawing  of  WPI  inflation  since 
December  2011,  prompted  the  Reserve  Bank  to  cut  the  repo  rate  by  50  basis  points  to 
8.0 per cent in April 2012. 
A disaggregated analysis of the sources of inflation during post-crisis period suggests that 
the  increase  in  inflation  was  contributed  by  more  than  doubling  of  food  price  inflation  to 
11.8 per cent during 2008–12 (Table 5). This was, in turn, driven by sharp increase in the 
prices  of  protein-rich  food  items,  reflecting  higher  demand  for  these  items  complicated  by 
inadequate supply response. Fuel group inflation also increased reflecting increases in global 
crude prices. The persistence of food price inflation, in turn, widened the divergence between 
WPI  and  CPI  based  inflation  during  this  period,  at  times  complicating  the  assessment  of 
inflationary pressures for monetary policy purposes. 
A major factor from the demand side contributing to the persistence of food price inflation, 
which caused generalisation of inflation and fuelled inflationary expectations, was the sharp 
increase  in  rural  wages.  While  the  share  of  agriculture  and  allied  activities  was  only 
                                                
5  RBI’s Macroeconomic and Monetary Developments for the First Quarter Review 2011–12 estimated that with 
GDP growth of 7 per cent, CAD-GDP ratio of about 2.5 per cent is sustainable. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
14.0 per cent  of  GDP,  rural  population  constitutes  68.0  per  cent  of  total  population  and 
accounts  for  52.0  per  cent  of  workforce.  Hence,  rural  demand  has  a  significant  impact  on 
food inflation and thus overall inflation. 
The  annual growth  in  nominal  wages  in  both rural  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  sectors 
almost tripled during the post-crisis period as compared to the earlier high growth phase. In 
fact, increase in real wages was significantly higher than the rate of growth of GDP in the 
agriculture and allied sector (Table 7). 
While  this  partly  reflected  labour  market  tightening  as  evident  in  reduction  in  work 
participation  rate  (WPR),  the  increase  in  higher  minimum  wage  for  public  works  under 
various  government  programs  could  also  have  contributed  to  rising  real  wages  during  the 
post-crisis  period.  Available  information  suggests  that  urban  wages  have  also  increased 
significantly. Hence, food inflation which emanated from the supply side persisted supported 
by higher wages. Thus, it has acquired a structural character in absence of adequate supply 
response. This period also coincided with general increase in food prices globally. 
Overall,  despite  inflation  remaining  high,  average  nominal  policy  rates  were  lower  at 
6.5 per cent during the post-crisis period. In real terms, the policy rates turned negative while 
the  real  lending  rates  almost  halved  to  around  3.7  per  cent  during  the  post-crisis  period 
(Table 6). Despite lower real interest rates, investment has slackened reflecting the role of 
non-monetary factors in the growth slowdown. While the heightened uncertainties following 
the eurozone crisis could have dampened investment climate, the slowdown  in investment 
could have been partly driven by the high inflation environment itself. Thus, what is desirable 
is  a  low  real  interest  rate  environment  as  an  outcome  of  a  low  inflation  environment  for 
promoting investment and growth. Concurrently, as highlighted in the RBI Annual Report for 
2011–12, there is a need to address other constraints to investment, such as domestic policy 
uncertainties and structural impediments in the infrastructure space. 
Challenges ahead 
Let  me  now  turn  to  some  of  the  challenges  for  the  Indian  economy  to  regain  the  growth 
momentum. 
First, as the past-experience suggests, rule-based fiscal policy becomes absolutely important 
to  afford  the  space  for  monetary  policy  to  contribute  to  the  improved  macroeconomic 
performance.  Fiscal  prudence  is  also  required  to  alleviate  the  resource  constraints  by 
boosting domestic saving crucial for raising domestic investment rate. 
Second,  monetary  policy  needs  to  focus  on  containing  inflation  and  anchoring  inflation 
expectations. This is essential to usher in a low interest rate environment which is crucial for 
raising the overall investment. 
Third,  there  is  a  need  to  increase  agricultural  productivity  and  improve  supply  elasticities. 
Without adequate agricultural supplies, inflation management is going to be a difficult task, 
given the transition of a significant part of the population into the consumption stream. 
Fourth,  lower  household  financial  saving  as  observed  over  the  last  two  years  can  pose  a 
resource  constraint  for  growth  in  coming  years.  It  could  be  due  to  several  factors,  viz., 
entrenchment  of  household  consumption  levels,  persistently  high  inflation  and  consequent 
lower  real  return  on  financial  assets,  and  increasing  popularity  of  gold  as  an  investment 
option.  Therefore,  control  of  inflation  and  improving  the  real  return  on  financial  assets 
become  important  so  that  growth  prospects  do  not  suffer  due  to  inadequate  supply  of 
domestic saving. 
Fifth, the current account deficit, recorded at historically high of 4.2 per cent in 2011–12 is 
not  only  unsustainable  but  also  does  not  augur  well  for  growth  potential  of  the  economy. 
Increasing vulnerability of India’s external sector can deter confidence of global investors and 
impair financial flows required to meet the domestic saving-investment gap. Therefore, there 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
is a need to improve competitiveness of the domestic economy while ensuring that the policy 
environment  remains  conducive  for  investment.  In  this  context,  price  stability  is  also 
important for exchange rate stability. 
Sixth, we often talk about the demographic dividend that some EDEs like India may enjoy in 
the medium to long-run. In the absence of reforms aiming at improving the quality of human 
capital,  such  demographic  features  may  not  have  the  desired  impact  on  growth  and 
development  of  Indian  economy.  Policy  emphasis  on  social  sector  development  and  skill 
improvement is required to help to absorb excess labour from farm sector to industrial and 
services sectors. 
Seventh, India needs to enhance investment in social and physical infrastructure in order to 
sustain  the  growth  momentum.  Given  the  limited  space  for  public  sector  for  infrastructure 
investment, incentivising private investment in infrastructure is critical. 
Eighth, efforts towards easing the access of poor and under-privileged to the organised credit 
market need to be intensified so as to enable their participation in growth and development 
process. This will raise India’s credit-GDP ratio, which is relatively low by global standards. 
As  nominal  credit  grows  faster  than  nominal  GDP,  the  possible  inflationary  impact  of  this 
process in the short-term needs to be carefully managed. 
(US$  10,720),  Russia 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  The  growth  acceleration  that  we  have  seen  over  the  last  decade, 
notwithstanding some moderation in the recent years, has propelled India to the position of 
the  third  largest  economy  globally  after  the  US  and  China  in  terms  of  PPP  GDP  and  has 
improved its global ranking in terms of per capita income. However, India’s per capita income 
(GNI  per  capita  in  current  US$)  at  US$  1,410  is  quite  low  as  compared  with  other  BRICS 
such  as  Brazil 
(US$  4,930)  and 
South Africa (US$ 6,960). 
If  India  were  to  progress  towards  upper-middle  income  category  of  countries  –  as  per  the 
extant  World  Bank  definition  of  GNI  per  capita  income  of  more  than  US$  4035  at 
2011 US$ – it has to regain the growth momentum which has been lowered by the global 
financial crisis and several domestic challenges, some of which I have highlighted here. With 
appropriate policy response, India could emerge as a upper- middle income country by the 
middle of the next decade, i.e., 2025. However, the growth process, itself, is not free from 
risks and challenges which need to be recognised and addressed as we move along. 
Thank you. 
(US$  10,400),  China 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
