Andreas Dombret: New year, old problems – Europe’s sovereign debt 
crisis 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to the International Bankers’ Club, Luxembourg, 6 February 2012. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank you very much for your invitation. I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to 
you  today  at  the  International  Bankers’  Club.  As  you  will  know  the  central  banks  of 
Luxembourg and Germany work closely together and exchange views regularly – this is why 
I am here today. Even at the start of a new year, we are still facing the same old problems: 
we are battling a crisis which is now in its fifth year and has reached its fourth stage. 
The first stage was the subprime crisis which struck the US real estate market. At its heart 
were  those  financial  products  which  spread  the  risks  stemming  from  US  housing  loans  all 
over the world. The loss of confidence within the international financial system following the 
Lehman  Brothers  bankruptcy  and  the  subsequent  global  economic  crisis  mark  the  second 
stage. The third stage has been the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis, which became 
visible to the whole world in Greece in May 2010. It was initially perceived as a problem of 
what is known as the “euro-area periphery”. Now, in the fourth stage of the financial crisis, 
however, it is no longer limited to these countries. 
The sovereign debt crisis, unfortunately, has now spread to the core of the euro area. This 
was  made  painfully  clear  to  us  once  again  in  the  middle  of  last  month.  On  the  13th  of 
January, Standard & Poor’s downgraded nine euro-area countries. However, I do not want to 
join the chorus of criticism against the rating agencies. Those who would pin the blame on 
the agencies are confusing cause and effect. The agencies are merely the bearers of bad 
news, and “shooting the messenger” is not only unfair – it does not solve the problem, either. 
I would therefore like to take a closer look at the causes of the bad news which has been 
hitting us in waves since the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis. There are three questions 
I would like to examine more closely. Firstly, what actually caused the crisis? Secondly, how 
do we contain the crisis? Thirdly, where do we want to go with our monetary union in the long 
run?  
The causes of the sovereign debt crisis 
2 
Severely unhealthy economic developments had apparently been brewing in several euro-
area countries for many years. These included, most notably, excessive lending, asset price 
bubbles and a loss of competitiveness. These structural problems were the breeding ground 
for the sovereign debt crisis. 
The actual weak link at the launch of our monetary union, however, was the combination of a 
single monetary policy and a decentralised fiscal policy. Monetary policy, as you know, is set 
at the European level – by the European Central Bank. On the other hand, responsibility for 
fiscal  policy  rests  with  the  individual  member  states,  i.e.  at  national  level.  However,  in  a 
currency area where fiscal policy is decentralised, the member states have a relatively large 
incentive  to  borrow.  If  a  country  accumulates  more  and  more  debt,  it  does  not  face  the 
consequences by itself as these are spread across the entire currency area – for example, 
through rising interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for 
individual 
individual 
responsibility 
responsibility:  member  states’ 
The  founding  fathers  of  our  monetary  union  therefore  created  a  framework  of  rules  to 
prevent, or at least correct, such unsound developments: the Stability and Growth Pact. This 
was  intended  to  keep  national  fiscal  policies  in  check.  One  of  its  tenets  was  that  annual 
government budget deficits may not exceed 3% of gross domestic product. The penalties for 
breaching this deficit limit could be escalated all the way to financial sanctions. 
There is one more key building block in the edifice of the euro area alongside the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact:  the  no-bail-out  principle,  which  forbids  member  states  from  assuming 
liability for the debts of other member states. The guiding principle of monetary union was 
therefore 
the 
consequences  of  their policies  and  financial  market  agents’  individual  responsibility  for  the 
consequences of their investment decisions. 
Despite these rules, however, member states’ borrowing has not been effectively contained. 
Why  not?  Mainly,  because  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  not  only 
circumvented but even stretched to its limit. This was possible thanks to a crucial flaw in the 
system: countries that violated the deficit limit were not automatically punished. Instead, the 
other member states voted on a sanction. This, of course, encouraged an attitude of “I won’t 
punish you today if you don’t punish me tomorrow”. 
Looking  back,  it  must  also  be  noted  that  the  financial  markets  did  not  exert  the  desired 
disciplining effect on fiscal policy. Investors turned a blind eye to the misbehaviour of some 
member states for far too long. By the time the interest rates on government bonds started to 
rise, the damage had already been done.  
And, faced with that situation, it is extremely difficult to uphold the no-bail-out principle. As 
I’m  sure  you  will  remember,  no  member  state  is  allowed  to  assume  liability  for  another’s 
debts. This principle was, at the very least, stretched quite a long way when assistance was 
granted to Greece. That, however, was not entirely unjustified: the euro-area countries are 
now so closely integrated that problems in one country can spread quickly to the entire euro 
area  in  a  phenomenon  known  as  contagion.  When  push  came  to  shove,  it  appeared 
necessary to help other member states. And that is quite understandable in the short term. 
However,  in  the  long  run  it  is  dangerous  if  countries  with  a  debt  problem  can  expect  to 
receive  help  no  matter  what.  This  risks  triggering  a  dangerous  spiral  of  more  and  more 
assistance and less and less confidence in the will of the affected countries to mend their 
ways. 
Routes to a stable monetary union 
3 
And such a loss of confidence is just what we are facing right now. The public, and also the 
markets, have lost faith – in politics, but also in the architecture of our monetary union. The 
question is: how do we go about restoring confidence? 
Let  me  begin  by  stating  clearly  what  won’t  work.  Setting  up  larger  and  larger  rescue 
packages is not the way to instil lasting confidence. This strategy ultimately has its limits – be 
they political or financial. And the proposal of circumventing financial limits by printing money 
is dangerous. Of course the resources of a central bank are, in theory, nearly without limit. 
Using  them  to  finance  sovereign  debt,  however,  does  not  solve  problems  but,  instead, 
creates  new  ones.  Such  an  approach  would  endanger  the  key  foundation  of  a  stable 
currency: the independence of a central bank dedicated to price stability. This would throw 
overboard the very things that need saving. 
And, as I said earlier: money can’t buy confidence. Even the largest rescue packages can 
provide no more than a temporary reprieve. Time, in fact, is the only thing you can buy. But 
this  bought  time  must  actually  be  used  to  eliminate  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis. And  this 
leads us to three key steps that the Bundesbank believes need to be taken. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Firstly,  government  budgets  need  to  be  put  back  in  order.  This  goes  for  all  euro-area 
countries  but  is  particularly  the  case  for  those  countries  which  have  put  off  the  necessary 
adjustments time and again. This is where the critics jump in to say that excessive saving 
damages  economic  growth.  However,  I  think  this  is  too  short-sighted.  Of  course  fiscal 
consolidation normally dampens economic activity. But there is no way the present situation 
can be described as “normal”! In fact, doubts about the sustainability of government finances 
are probably themselves a considerable drag on growth. The critics are right about one thing, 
though: consolidation alone is not enough to solve the problems we are facing. 
Secondly, the countries affected by the crisis therefore need to conduct structural reforms in 
order  to  become  more  competitive  and  to  promote  economic  growth.  Such  reforms  are, 
naturally, difficult and painful. Ireland has shown, however, that they are possible, and the 
German experience has proven that they pay off in the long run. 
And,  thirdly,  we  need  a  stable  architecture  for  our  monetary  union.  Instead  of  constantly 
patching  up  the  results  of  fiscal  policy  mistakes  and  insufficient  implementation  of  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the  framework  of  monetary  union  has  to  be  changed  in  a  way 
such  that  sound  fiscal  policy  is  also  truly  guaranteed  in  future.  In  my  view,  there  are  two 
options open to the euro area: either we can return to the founding principles of monetary 
union  agreed  at  Maastricht,  or  we  should  venture  the  step  towards  a  deeper  European 
integration which also includes fiscal policy. 
Returning to the founding principles of monetary union 
3.1 
Regarding the first option – returning to the founding principles of monetary union – I do not 
share the frequently voiced fear that the current framework is unsuited to monetary union. 
Nevertheless, it does require considerable adjustment. There are three key points here. 
Firstly,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  needs  to  be  given  “teeth”.  In  particular,  stronger 
automatism is needed to penalize breaches of the deficit and debt limits.  
Secondly,  the  no-bail-out  principle  needs  to  be  reinforced:  no  member  state  should  be 
permitted to assume liability for the debt of another member state. Financial market investors 
will only punish bad fiscal policy behaviour promptly if they expect to lose their money. 
Thirdly, the euro area needs a permanent crisis mechanism. Recourse could be taken to this 
mechanism  if  a  crisis  erupts  and  financial  stability  throughout  the  euro  area  is  at  risk. 
However, there are three important aspects to note: assistance to individual countries must 
be  tied  to  strict  economic  and  fiscal  policy  conditionality,  it  must  only  be  granted  with 
appropriate  interest  rate  premiums,  and  private-sector  investors  have  to  bear  their  losses 
themselves in the event of a default. 
In view of these pressing needs, a “fiscal compact” was agreed upon at the EU summit last 
week.  This  compact  includes  the  introduction  of  debt  brakes  which  should  be  firmly 
enshrined in national law. At the same time, the Stability and Growth Pact will be enhanced 
to  be  better  protected  from  political  influence  in  the  future.  Whether  these  decisions 
represent  a  major  step  forward  remains  to  be  seen.  As  happened  before,  the  initial 
agreements  seem  to  have  been  watered  down  during  the  negotiation  process.  The  rules 
regarding the debt brakes leave significant room for interpretation, and their application and 
enforcement will not be monitored at the European level. It seems that the new version of the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  might  not  be  followed  too  strictly  at  the  European  level,  either. 
Altogether, the latest decisions are not entirely convincing. 
Deepening European integration 
3.2 
Besides strengthening the existing framework of monetary union, there is an alternative route 
to stabilising the euro area. This would involve deepening European integration. However, it 
would  not  necessarily  also  mean  the  wholesale  transfer  of  fiscal  policy  from  national  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
European level. National parliaments could retain their independence in deciding on revenue 
and spending; European involvement would only affect borrowing and indebtedness if limits 
are breached. So what form could this involvement take? 
It  would  be  important  to  set  strict  deficit  and  debt  limits  at  the  European  level  for  national 
budgets. These limits would then apply at all national levels. In Germany, for example, this 
includes federal, state and local government and the social security systems. The European 
rules would have to be combined with strict powers of intervention as this is the only way to 
make them enforceable.  
But it has to be crystal-clear: any member state in breach of the predefined deficit and debt 
limits  would  lose  its  fiscal  policy  sovereignty.  Ultimate  budget-setting  authority  would 
therefore no longer rest with national parliaments but at the European level.  
In this area, however, the latest EU summits have made little headway. The adopted “fiscal 
compact”  does  not  provide  for  intervention  in  national  fiscal  policy  even  if  a  country 
repeatedly  breaches  the  rules.  This  means  the  “fiscal  compact”  is  not  the  same  as  a  true 
“fiscal union”. If, for instance, Eurobonds were to be issued now, there would be a mismatch 
between liability and control: all euro-area countries would be jointly liable for the debts of 
other  euro-area  countries  but  would  not  be  able  to  keep  them  in  check.  However,  in  this 
framework,  mutual  assistance  must  be  granted  only  as  a  last  resort,  must  be  strictly 
conditional and must involve considerable interest rate premiums, in order to give countries 
an incentive to balance their government budgets. 
Financial market reform as a necessary addition 
3.3 
National fiscal policymakers are ultimately responsible for convincing market participants to 
invest in their sovereign bonds. The recent past has served as a painful reminder that the 
status of sovereign bonds as a de facto risk-free asset has to be defended time and again. 
And rightly so: the only way to get governments to live within their means is if the financial 
markets reward good fiscal policy and punish bad fiscal policy. 
However, in order to have a disciplining effect, the financial markets need a firm set of rules – 
as was made abundantly clear by the crisis. And significant progress has already been made 
in adapting the rules. The reform of the capital framework, which will improve the  quantity 
and  quality  of  banks’  capital  and  thus  their  capacity  to  absorb  losses,  is  certainly  a 
particularly welcome development. Increasing the amount of losses the banks’ investors are 
able, and required, to take, reduces the danger of taxpayers once again having to foot the 
bill. The phenomenon of systemically important banks, however, also shows that Basel III is 
by no means the final step. The internationally agreed rules for dealing with the “too-big-to-
fail” issue now have to be implemented quickly – and in an internationally consistent manner. 
The oversight and, if necessary, regulation of the shadow banking system remain atop the 
reform agenda. 
The laundry list of regulatory reforms continues to be very long, and its details are often so 
complex that it is difficult to explain to the general public. This opens the door to populist calls 
for seemingly simple solutions – such as a financial transactions tax. We at the Bundesbank 
are  of  the  view  that,  if  at  all,  such  a  tax  would  have  to  be  introduced  at  least  in  all  major 
financial centres. 
Looking at the financial markets and their regulation, however, I would like to mention one 
more thing. The sovereign debt crisis is shining a new light on a commonly held assumption, 
namely, that crises are caused by unfettered markets and can be avoided only by giving the 
state  more  space.  However,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  shown  quite  clearly  that  even 
sovereign debtors can fail. 
Of course, the crisis has opened our eyes to a blind faith in the market that has sometimes 
prevailed; however, statism and dirigism are, by no means, the right path to take. Instead, I 
suggest we return to a founding tenet of the social market economy: individual responsibility. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Those  who  take  risks  must  also  face  the  consequences.  Attaching  more  importance  to 
reviving  this  principle  would  represent  major  progress  –  including  with  respect  to  the 
sovereign debt crisis.  
Conclusion 
4 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  dear  members  of  the  International  Bankers’  Club,  I  have  touched 
upon  various  aspects  which  I  believe  to  be  essential  for  overcoming  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis.  At  the  EU  summit  last  week,  policymakers  decided  to  adopt  a  “fiscal  compact” 
designed to strengthen, and in some cases go beyond, the Maastricht Stability and Growth 
Pact.  This  is,  in  principle,  a  good  first  step,  but  it  has  yet  to  prove  its  usefulness  and 
effectiveness in “everyday use”. In any case, the Bundesbank will not cease to call for the 
compact to be implemented in a manner which is conducive to safeguarding stability. In this 
endeavour, we hope for your support. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
