Kerstin af Jochnick: My thoughts on monetary policy and financial 
stability 
Speech  by  Ms  Kerstin  af  Jochnick,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting at SEB, Stockholm, 4 May 2012. 
 As this is my first public speech as a member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank I would 
like to take this opportunity – from the starting point of my previous background – to point out 
a number of factors that are important to my view of monetary policy and financial stability.  
First: Sweden has become increasingly dependent on what happens abroad. How the debt 
crisis in Europe is managed is the most important factor for economic activity and monetary 
policy in the period ahead. Second: There are links between monetary policy and financial 
stability. We must be aware that imbalances and risks to financial stability can arise if interest 
rates remain low for too long. Third: One of the most important lessons of the financial crisis 
is the need to adopt a broader perspective on financial stability – as in the new policy area 
macroprudential  policy.  The  Riksbank  should  play  a  major  role  in  the  work  with 
macroprudential policy.  
How my background has shaped my view of the Riksbank’s work 
As most of you know I am a new member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank, which I 
joined at the turn of the year. However, what most of you probably do not know is that this is 
not my first spell at the Riksbank. I previously worked there for a period of almost 15 years, 
from the end of the 1970s and throughout the 1980s (see slide 1). When I began working at 
the Riksbank in 1977 times were very different, which was reflected in both the economy and 
the work environment The economy was marked, for instance, by the fixed exchange rate 
regime and the banking and foreign-exchange markets were extensively regulated – far from 
the economy that we have today. When I started at the Riksbank there was also just a very 
small group of people that drafted and made the important decisions. Today the Riksbank is 
a flat organisation and our personnel are highly involved in our main tasks.  
It was in the early 1990s that I left the Riksbank to begin working at what was then the Bank 
Inspection Board, now Finansinspektionen, and I stayed there until 2007 (see slide 1). 
As the financial markets have become increasingly interlinked, and since Sweden joined the 
EU in 1995, the international perspective has become increasingly important. This has led 
me to several international assignments.1 
In  the  last  two  years  before  I  returned  to  the  Riksbank  I  was  Managing  Director  of  the 
Swedish  Bankers’  Association,  a  trade  organisation  for  banks  in  Sweden.  This  involved  a 
readjustment as my perspective was now from inside the banking sector. One of the issues 
that I pursued in my role as Managing Director of the Swedish Bankers’ Association was that 
Swedish banks should be competitive in a European context.  
So, how has my background shaped my view of my new job as a member of the Executive 
Board of the Riksbank? A marked change since I last worked at the Riksbank is Sweden’s 
increased  dependence  on  developments  abroad.  One  could  also  say  that  what  I  primarily 
“bring  with  me”  from  the  different  perspectives  of  my  earlier  working  life  –  the  supervisory 
                                                 
1 
I  was,  for  example,  a  member  of  the  Basel  Committee  from  2003  to  2009  and  chaired  the  Committee  of 
European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) – which was the forerunner of the European Banking Authority (EBA) 
– in 2008–2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
perspective,  the  international  perspective  and  the  banking-sector  perspective  –  is  this 
realisation of the increase in Sweden’s international dependence.  
Monetary policy – my view 
Sweden  is  what  we  usually  call  a  small,  open  economy.  This  means  that  our  economy 
cannot be seen in isolation as we are highly dependent on the world around us – a factor that 
it is important to take into account, not least in monetary policy. 
Sweden – a small, open economy  
The situation in Sweden in recent years reflects our great dependence on the outside world; 
exports  make  up  approximately  50  per  cent  of  our  GDP.2  The  global  financial  crisis  of  
2008–2009 thus had a dramatic impact on us and contributed to the largest fall in GDP in 
Sweden since World War II. When global economic activity recovered in 2010, growth was 
instead the highest for 40 years (see slide 2). But this is history now. Over the last 12 months 
in  particular,  the  European  debt  crisis  has  had  a  considerable  impact  on  economic 
development. And Sweden is a part of Europe – not just geographically but economically too.  
A majority of our goods exports go to Europe and over 35 per cent to the euro area (see slide 
3).  The  weak  development  of  the  Swedish  economy  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year 
also reflects a dramatic fall in exports. Let me therefore comment on the situation in Europe, 
as  it  has  such  a  significant  impact  on  the  Swedish  economy  and,  by  extension,  monetary 
policy. 
The debt crisis in Europe – a lot of work remains to be done but things are moving in 
the right direction 
One of the most important pieces of the puzzle with regard to economic development in the 
period ahead is how the debt problems in Europe are managed (see slide 4). I think we can 
go as far as to say that the entire global economy is dependent on the debt crisis in Europe 
being managed in a sensible way over the next few years. The problems in Europe must be 
solved  so  that  the  financial  markets  work  effectively  and  the  real  economy  grows  if  global 
growth is to pick up again.  
My assessment is that we have a few years of weak growth in the euro area ahead of us. 
Several countries are facing gigantic problems, partly in the form of large public debts and 
partly  in  the  form  of  seriously  weakened  competitiveness.  It  will  be  hard  to  find  the  right 
balance  of  measures  to  deal  with  these  problems  as  budget  consolidation,  which  is 
necessary  to  restore  confidence  in  sustainable  public  finances,  must  not  be  allowed  to 
restrict growth too much in the short term. Structural reforms are also required to improve 
competitiveness. 
However, several important steps have been taken in the EMU over the last 12 months to 
deal  with  the  weaknesses  that  led  to  the  debt  crisis  becoming  so  extensive:  imbalances 
between the economic development of different countries, a lack of discipline in fiscal policy 
and inadequate financial supervision.3 One example of this is the fiscal compact, which was 
signed in March this year. The ECB has also taken short-term crisis management measures 
that have helped to improve confidence on the markets since the end of last year. Here I am 
thinking mainly of the three-year loans. To increase confidence in the long term, however, we 
                                                 
2  This figure may vary somewhat depending on how it is calculated. 
3  See also the article “The EMU and the debt crisis in Europe” in the Monetary Policy Report of February 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
need  real  changes  and  the  credible  implementation  of  requirements  for  sustainable  public 
finances. Nevertheless, the situation looks much better now than it did in the autumn.  
If we look outside Europe, we can see the beginnings of a turnaround in the US economy 
and China, for example, is still experiencing good growth. Despite this, however, we should 
probably expect the impetus to the Swedish economy from abroad to be limited over the next 
few years, mainly due to weak development in Europe.  
Inflation and growth prospects justify keeping the repo rate low 
Developments  abroad,  and  above  all  in  Europe,  are  thus  highly  important  to  the  Swedish 
economy. But the development of domestic demand, for example household consumption, 
was also weak in the second half of 2011.  
Since then, however, we have received a number of somewhat more positive signals. Share 
prices have risen since the end of last year and confidence indicators are clearly pointing in 
the right direction, although from relatively low levels. There is thus potential for an eventual 
increase in household demand. Growth may gradually increase. 
The  main  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  keep  inflation  close  to  the  target.  Without 
prejudicing this objective, it should also strive to promote a stable development of the real 
economy, or stabilise resource utilisation if you like. So what can we say about inflation in 
Sweden? At present, inflation is low and it is probably fairly safe to say that it will continue to 
be low for some time. Resource utilisation is difficult to measure, but it is probably below its 
normal level at the moment and will remain so for a while. Economic activity will gradually 
improve, which will lead to rising inflation and the normalisation of resource utilisation. But 
this will take time. Growth may not increase significantly in Sweden until next year. 
Given this, my assessment was that it was necessary to cut the repo rate to 1.50 per cent in 
February  and  to  leave  it  at  this  level  in  April.  I  have  also  expressed  my  support  for  the 
repo-rate  forecasts  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Update,  which 
predict that the repo rate will remain unchanged in the year ahead. The forecasts also say 
that  we  will  need  to  raise  the  repo  rate  when  economic  activity  recovers  and  inflationary 
pressures  increase.  Let  me  say  that  the  situation  is  really  uncertain  at  the  moment.  The 
greatest uncertainty factor is how the situation will develop in Europe.  
Since the monetary policy meeting of 18 April, some new statistics have become available 
for Sweden, including figures for unemployment, the retail trade and foreign trade in March 
and  the  tendency  survey  of  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research  for  April.  By  and 
large, these statistics do not indicate any significant changes in the course of development 
than that we saw ahead of us in the Monetary Policy Update in April. However, I think we 
should be cautious about reading too much into figures for individual months. I will therefore 
wait  to  make  an  overall  assessment  of  the  new  statistics  until  our  next  monetary  policy 
meeting in July.  
A factor that I think should be highlighted – although it did not directly determine my stance at 
the  latest  monetary  policy  meetings  –  is  the  link  between  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability. Let me explain this in more detail. 
The link between monetary policy and financial stability  
In my opinion there are links between monetary policy and financial stability. We should be 
careful to monitor the incentives that low policy rates can create over time (see slide 5). Both 
housing prices and household debts have increased dramatically in Sweden for some time 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
now. This has been noted, for example, by the European Commission in an Alert Mechanism 
Report.4 These tendencies have slowed down over the last 12 months.  
However, if the expansion of credit really accelerates again this may lead to problems in the 
longer  term.5  It  is  therefore  important  to  carefully  monitor  the  situation  so  that  risks  to 
financial  stability  do  not  arise.  Financial  stability  is  also  a  precondition  for  the  ability  of 
monetary policy to have the desired effects on inflation and the real economy. I therefore see 
it as natural that aspects of financial stability may have to be taken into account in monetary 
policy decisions.  
On the other hand, we should not exaggerate the importance of the policy rate as a tool for 
promoting financial stability. The policy rate is a relatively blunt instrument that has an impact 
over a broad front. I am convinced that there are other instruments that are more effective for 
managing financial stability. This naturally leads on to how we can adopt a new perspective 
on financial stability against the background of the financial crisis – and the new policy area 
macroprudential policy. 
Macroprudential policy – financial stability from a new perspective 
Despite the fact that there are plenty of historical examples, not least our own banking crisis 
in  the  early  1990s,  I  think  that  many  people  were  surprised  by  the  latest  global  financial 
crisis,  and  the  size  and  scope  of  it.  There  were  probably  few  people  who  thought  that 
problems on the US housing market could lead to a debt crisis in Europe. Despite enormous 
support measures, the recovery has been slow in both Europe and the United States, and 
few people would dare to guess what the final bill for the crisis will be. In other words, we 
need  to  do  all  we  can  to  avoid  ending  up  in  a  similar  situation  again.  This  involves 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  counteracting  the  development  of 
risks. 
The  latest  crisis  also  clearly  demonstrated  that  we  live  in  a  world  with  a  highly-integrated 
financial system. The financial institutions have major exposures to each other, which means 
that problems at one institution can spread like wildfire throughout the financial system and 
even  between  countries.  With  hindsight,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  we  lacked  institutions  and 
regulatory  frameworks  with  the  ability  to  predict  and  manage  a  global  financial  crisis.  This 
lesson has led to the emergence of an entirely new policy area – macroprudential policy. 
Focus on the financial system as a whole – and its link to the macroeconomy 
Macroprudential  policy  can  be  seen  as  a  complement  to  both  traditional  supervision  and 
monetary  policy  when  it  comes  to  promoting  financial  stability  (see  slide  6).  The  focus 
changes  from  supervising  individual  institutions  to  analysing  systemic  risks  in  the  financial 
sector  and  the  links  between  the  different  players  in  the  financial  system.  Macroprudential 
policy also aims to analyse the links, between the financial system and the macroeconomy 
over time.  
A prerequisite for macroprudential policy becoming an efficient and effective policy area is 
that there is a clearly defined objective for the work. We must be clear about what we want to 
achieve and why. Otherwise there is a risk that we will see macroprudential policy as the new 
panacea for future crises rather than as a well-needed complement to monetary policy and 
micro supervision. 
                                                 
4  See European Commission (2012): Alert Mechanism Report, published on 14 February. 
5  See, for example, IMF (2012): World Economic Outlook, April, where it is pointed out that recessions that are 
preceded by a rapid increase in indebtedness tend to be both longer and more severe than other recessions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The importance of wider safety margins  
One way of reducing systemic risks is to increase the safety margins in the financial sector. 
However,  the  international  capital  flows  and  the  interlinked  financial  system  mean  that  we 
must  reach  international  consensus  on  how  this  should  be  done.  I  would  also  like  to 
underline the importance of having a transparent process so that investors and the market 
understand the thinking of the national authorities. 
A large part of the work to establish a safer and more robust banking sector is conducted 
within the framework of the Basel III regulations. An issue of the highest priority for the Basel 
Committee has been to ensure that the financial markets never again suffer such a severe 
case  of  liquidity  fever  as  the  one  we  saw  in  the  initial  phases  of  the  financial  crisis.  The 
Committee  has  therefore  required  the  banks  to  hold  sufficient  liquidity  to  cope  with  a 
highly-strained  market  situation  for  a  period  of  at  least  30  days  and  to  better  match  the 
maturities of their assets and liabilities.  
Another  cornerstone  of  the  Basel  III  regulations  is  increased  capital  requirements  for  the 
banks. The idea behind this is simple: more and better capital will increase the resilience of 
the banks. This in turn will increase confidence in the banks and in the system as a whole. It 
has proved to be increasingly important to have a large capital base, not least in order to get 
access to the capital markets. However, the exact capital ratios for an individual bank should 
be  subject 
for  dealing  with 
systemically-important banks lies at the national level then the right to set the size of “risk 
premiums” should also lie there.  
An  interesting  instrument  that  has  been  put  forward  within  the  framework  of  Basel  III  is 
countercyclical capital buffers, which entail the banks holding extra capital in good times that 
they can then use when times are not so good. It will, in other words, be more expensive for 
the  banks  to  increase  lending  in  good  times  at  the  same  time  as  this  will  create  some 
protection against losses when a downturn comes. As I mentioned earlier, the policy rate is 
an  instrument  that  has  an  indiscriminate  impact  on  the  economy,  while  countercyclical 
buffers,  for  example,  can  be  seen  as  an  instrument  that  is  more  specifically  aimed  at  the 
“credit cycle”. Instruments of this type could also reduce the need to use the policy rate to 
promote financial stability. 
to  national  decisions.  As 
the  responsibility 
long  as 
The special characteristics of the Swedish banking market – what demands do they 
make? 
I would now like to draw your attention to the conditions on the Swedish banking market that 
indicate that substantial safety margins are justified. Sweden has a large banking sector in 
relation to the size of the economy and the banks have substantial operations abroad (see 
slide 7). At the same time, the market is dominated by a few large players. These banks also 
have  low  risk  weightings  for,  among  other  things,  mortgages.  Another  risk  factor  is  that 
Swedish  banks  are  highly  dependent  on  market  funding,  particularly  in  foreign  currencies 
(see  slide  8).  In  addition  there  is  the  effect  of  the  market  players’  expectation  that  the 
government will ultimately act as a guarantor of the banks’ operations and will not let them 
fail, in other words there is an implicit state guarantee. 
There  is  thus  a  significant  risk  that  the  collapse  of  a  Swedish  bank  would  have  major, 
negative  consequences  for  the  entire  Swedish  banking  system  and  for  the  economy  as  a 
whole. It is important for a central bank to manage these risks in such a way that they can 
never 
that  a 
systemically-important bank should be subject to particularly stringent capital requirements. 
The study that the Riksbank published at the end of last year shows that increasing capital 
ratios is an effective way of safeguarding financial stability, at the same time as the economic 
reasonable  consequence  of 
financial  stability.  A 
threaten 
this 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
last  year, 
the  Riksbank, 
the  end  of  November 
costs of this – in terms of lower GDP – are not necessarily significant.6 Sweden’s historical 
experience of low capital ratios is also bad, which is demonstrated not least by the banking 
crisis of the 1990s, and this has led to a gradual improvement.  
At 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Finansinspektionen  issued  a  joint  press  release  in  which  they  declared  how  much  capital 
they believed the four major Swedish banks should have. The capital ratio should be at least 
10 per cent by 1 January 2013 at the latest, and at least 12 per cent by 1 January 2015.7 I 
would like to emphasise that it is very important that the banks reach these levels. However, 
we  should  not  make  this  sound  more  dramatic  than  it  actually  is.  The  Swedish  banks  are 
already  well-capitalised  (see  slide  9).  I  do  not  think,  therefore,  that  the  new  capital 
requirements will be much of a problem for the Swedish banks.  
We have now made some progress in clarifying what regulations should apply to the banks 
in the future. This is good. A lot of the earlier criticism from, for example, the Swedish banks, 
stemmed  from  the  great  uncertainty  about  the  form  of  the  new  regulations  and  how  they 
would affect the future playing field. I am also convinced that well-capitalised Swedish banks 
will do well in the fact of international competition in the period ahead. 
Central banks should play an important role in macroprudential policy 
In  Sweden,  both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  have  a  responsibility  to  maintain 
financial  stability.  However,  although  the  objective  is  the  same  the  areas  of  responsibility 
differ.  Finansinspektionen  is  responsible  for  supervising  individual  institutions,  in  particular 
those  that  can  affect  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system.  The  authority  should  also 
work  to  promote  orderly  financial  markets  by  supervising  securities  trading.  The  Riksbank 
has a broader assignment and monitors the development of the financial system as a whole. 
How responsibility for macroprudential supervision should be divided is now being studied by 
the Financial Crisis Commission. Some guidance can be taken from the European Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB). The ESRB was set up in early 2011 to manage macroprudential policy 
at the EU level. However, the body has no binding instruments; it can instead issue warnings 
and  recommendations  to  various  players.  Since  its  inception,  the  Board  has  issued  three 
public  recommendations.8  One  of  these  addresses  how  macroprudential  policy  should  be 
organised  at  the  national  level.  The  ESRB  proposes  that  national  legislation  should  be 
passed  to  appoint  a  body  with  responsibility  for  macroprudential  policy  and  that  this  body 
could in turn consist of one or several institutions. At the same time, the ESRB stresses that 
the central banks should play a leading role in macroprudential policy. I think that there is a 
lot  to  be  said  for  this,  even  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  situation  in  Sweden.  A  lot  of  the 
analysis  of  macroprudential  policy  issues  is  already  conducted  at  the  Riksbank,  and  there 
are also clear links between monetary policy and macroprudential policy.  
While  awaiting  further  guidance  on  how  the  work  with  macroprudential  policy  should  be 
organised  in  Sweden,  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  have  formed  a  temporary 
collaboration council. The idea is that this council should act as a forum for discussion and 
the exchange of information with regard to preventive work in the field of financial stability. 
The council should be seen a first step towards creating robust macroprudential policy. But 
talk  alone  is  not  enough;  we  must  also  show  that  we  can  take  action.  I  am  really  looking 
forward to playing my part in this work together with my colleagues at the Riksbank. 
                                                 
6  See Sveriges Riksbank, (2011): “Appropriate capital ratios in major Swedish banks – an economic analysis” 
7  These demands relate to the core Tier 1 capital ratio that is the ratio between equity and risk-weighted assets. 
See  http://www.riksbank.se/en/Press  &  published/Press/Press  releases  /2011/New  capital  requirements  for 
Swedish banks. 
8  See http://www.esrb.europa.eu/recommendations/html/index.en.html. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I  have  experienced 
regulation,  supervision  and  crisis  management. 
Concluding thoughts 
I  have  worked  in  the  financial  sector  for  the  last  35  years,  and  for  most  of  that  time  with 
financial 
the 
development  of  the  world  of  finance  and  banking  from  different  perspectives  –  the 
supervisory  perspective,  the  international  perspective  and  the  sector  perspective.  Perhaps 
the most important lesson I have learned from my previous experience is that Sweden has 
become increasingly dependent on the rest of the world, from both the real economic and the 
financial points of view. 
In  the  field  of  monetary  policy,  the  development  of  the  European  debt  crisis  is  the  most 
important – and most uncertain – factor to take into account. To attain the inflation target and 
stabilise  resource  utilisation,  a  low  policy  rate  will  be  needed  for  some  time  to  come. 
Monetary policy and financial stability must also be seen in a joint context. Low interest rate 
levels  may  eventually  create  imbalances  that  we  must  be  wary  of.  It  may  therefore  be 
necessary  to  take  some  aspects  of  financial  stability  into  account  when  making  monetary 
policy decisions.  
One  of  the  most  important  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis  is  the  need  for  macroprudential 
policy. Important work lies ahead of us here, at the European level and in Sweden. Several 
important  steps  have  already  been  taken.  The  Riksbank’s  possibilities  to  influence  factors 
that are important to financial stability must be improved, and I think there are good reasons 
why  the  Riksbank  should  play  a  major  role  in  the  work  with  macroprudential  policy.  New 
instruments within the framework of macroprudential policy can complement monetary policy 
and traditional micro supervision in order to promote financial stability. 
I am really looking forward to continuing to work with monetary policy and financial stability at 
the Riksbank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
