Jean-Pierre Danthine: The Swiss National Bank’s 2012 Financial Stability 
Report 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 14 June 
2012. 
 Introductory remarks by Jean-Pierre Danthine 
I, too, would like to welcome you to this news conference, which for me is also the occasion 
to  present  the  2012  edition  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  Financial  Stability  Report.  The 
report  contains  the  SNB’s  assessment  of  the  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  Swiss  banking 
system,  and  of  the  need  for  action.  This  promotes  risk  awareness  among  Swiss  banking 
sector agents, thereby contributing to financial stability. 
Introduction 
Economic and financial conditions for the Swiss banking sector have deteriorated since the 
last Financial Stability Report. The sovereign debt crisis escalated, threatening to spill over 
from peripheral euro area countries to the core countries of the euro area. In addition, global 
economic  growth  lost  momentum  and  tensions  grew  in  the  international  banking  system. 
There was, likewise, no easing of tension on the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets. 
The momentum observed in real estate prices and mortgages continued. 
As my colleague, Thomas Jordan, has already mentioned, under its baseline scenario the 
SNB  expects  a  gradual  improvement  in  economic  and  financial  conditions  over  the  next 
12 months. Although this is considered to be the most likely scenario, the risk of a renewed 
deterioration in the environment remains high. In the short term, under the adverse scenario 
there  could  be  a  substantial  price  correction  on  financial  markets,  and  economic  growth 
could  slow  markedly.  Such  a  scenario  would  affect  the  two  big  banks  in  particular.  For 
domestically  focused  commercial  banks,  the  main  risk stems  from  a  potential  fall in  Swiss 
real estate prices over the medium term. This risk increases the more market prices diverge 
from those justified by fundamentals. 
Given the high risks in the economic and financial environment, the SNB considers that there 
is  a  need  for  action  by  big  banks  and  domestically  focused  commercial  banks  alike.  The 
SNB’s  recommendations  are  aimed  at  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  Swiss  banking 
system, to ensure that it is in a position to continue performing its essential functions for the 
Swiss economy, even if the adverse scenario I have just described were to materialise. 
Situation at the big banks 
I would now like to present the key points of our assessment of the big banks. 
Since June 2011, both big banks have made further progress in improving their resilience; 
first,  by  increasing  their  highest-quality  capital  –  by  which  I  mean  loss-absorbing  capital  – 
and, second, by reducing their risk-weighted assets. CDS spreads, for example, suggest that 
the market considers the solvency of both big banks to be above average compared to other 
international  banks.  This  is  partly  explained  by  the  fact  that  they  are  only  moderately 
exposed to the most vulnerable peripheral euro area countries. 
Despite the fact that this progress has been achieved, the SNB considers that the big banks’ 
loss-absorbing  capital  is  still  below  the  level  needed  to  ensure  sufficient  resilience.  This 
assessment is based on three factors: First, in the event of a further escalation of the euro 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
area crisis, the loss potential for the big banks would be substantial compared to their loss-
absorbing  capital.  As  I  have  just  pointed  out,  the  big  banks  have  only  moderate  direct 
exposure  to  the  most  vulnerable  peripheral  euro  area  countries,  yet  if  the  crisis  in  these 
countries were to deepen, a general deterioration in economic and financial conditions could 
be expected. In such a case, the potential losses for the banks would extend to a significant 
portion of their credit and trading positions. 
Second, the SNB’s assessment is based on a comparison with capitalisation levels at other 
international big banks. This comparison uses the definitions of the Basel III framework once 
fully  implemented.  These  definitions  yield  the  most  accurate  picture  of  a  bank’s  true 
resilience.  The  comparison  based  on  these  definitions  reveals  that  both  Swiss  big  banks  
– and in particular Credit Suisse – are below the international average. Given the importance 
of  the  big  banks  for  the  Swiss  economy  and  for  financial  stability,  an  above-average 
capitalisation level would be appropriate. 
Third, the leverage of both big banks remains very high, despite a reduction in risk-weighted 
assets. At end-March 2012, the share of loss-absorbing capital in the net balance sheet total 
was  2.7%  at  UBS  and  only  1.7%  at  Credit  Suisse.  This  capital  would,  for  example,  be 
insufficient to absorb losses such as those experienced by UBS in the recent financial crisis 
(over 3% of the net balance sheet total). In addition, the question remains as to what extent 
the reduction of risk-weighted assets is matched by an effective reduction of economic risks, 
if the balance sheet total remains unchanged. 
For  these  reasons,  the  SNB  considers  that  it  is  essential  for  both  big  banks  to  further 
strengthen their resilience. It recommends that UBS continue with the capital strengthening 
process  –  including,  in  particular,  pursuing  a  policy  of  dividend  restraint.  Credit  Suisse, 
meanwhile, should accelerate its process and take all action necessary to expand its loss-
absorbing capital base significantly during the current year. 
The SNB also recommends that both big banks increase their transparency with regard to 
resilience.  Concretely,  they  should  publish  information  on  their  capitalisation  as  defined 
under Basel III once fully implemented – as, indeed, UBS has done in the two most recent 
presentations of its quarterly results. They should also regularly calculate and disclose their 
risk-weighted  assets  according  to  the  Basel  standardised  approach.  The  results  of  such 
calculations would provide a basis for comparison with risk-weighted asset figures calculated 
using internal risk models. This comparison would enable the ongoing reduction of risks to be 
presented more transparently. 
Implementing  these  two  measures  is  necessary  from  a  financial  stability  perspective. 
However, it is also in the big banks’ own interest to hold sufficient loss-absorbing capital, as a 
high  level  of  resilience  strengthens  their  competitiveness  in  the  core  business  of  wealth 
management, and boosts market confidence. 
Situation at domestically focused commercial banks 
I would now like to turn to our assessment of domestically focused commercial banks. 
There are clear and growing signs of a build-up of imbalances on the Swiss mortgage and 
real  estate  markets.  Over  the  past  12  months,  mortgage  lending  volumes  and  real  estate 
prices have once again grown strongly. Thus, the mortgage-to-GDP ratio, which was already 
high  in  a  historical  comparison,  continued  to  increase.  At  the  same  time,  residential  real 
estate prices have reached levels that, in some cases, exceed those that can be justified by 
fundamental  factors,  such  as  demographics  or  per  capita  income.  Taking  the  national 
average, this is the case for prices of owner-occupied apartments. In some regions such as 
Lake Geneva, Lake Zurich and Lake Zug, this is the case, on average, for all segments of 
the residential property market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Under  the  baseline  scenario,  the  momentum  in  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets 
continues. It is therefore to be expected that imbalances will continue to build up, and that, 
consequently,  the  risk  of  an  abrupt  correction  of  these  imbalances  will  increase  over  the 
medium term. 
For  domestically  focused  commercial  banks,  average  capitalisation  relative  to  regulatory 
requirements is at a historically high level. Moreover, most of these banks’ capital is of the 
highest quality, and thus loss-absorbing. However, in the current environment, the resilience 
of these banks, as measured by the regulatory capital indicators, is overestimated. 
 
First, certain risks are not captured by the regulatory requirements. This applies, in 
particular, to interest rate risk in the banking book, which covers traditional deposit 
and lending activities. In the current situation, with historically high interest rate risk 
exposures, this is a significant shortcoming. 
Second, the current capital requirements have a procyclical effect. Thus rising real 
estate  prices,  by  causing  loan-to-value  ratios  to  fall,  can  lead  to  lower  capital 
requirements.  Given  the  growing  imbalances  on  the  real  estate  market,  banks’ 
resilience, as measured by the regulatory capital indicators, is overestimated. 
Third, the low level of diversification of most domestically focused commercial banks 
is  not  taken  into  account  in  capital  requirements.  The  main  focus  of  these  banks’ 
business  activities,  and  their  risk  exposures,  relate  to  mortgage  lending.  This 
concentration  of  activities  is  compounded  by  a  geographical  concentration  at  the 
cantonal or regional level. 
  In the light of these factors, the SNB considers that action is needed on two fronts: First, the 
capacity  of  some  banks  to  bear  the  risks  incurred  must  be  reviewed,  and  strengthened  if 
necessary.  This  applies  particularly  to  banks  which  have  cumulative  risks,  such  as  high 
interest  rate  risk  and  high  exposure  to  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets.  FINMA’s 
microprudential  measures  will  play  a  key  role  in  this  regard.  Second,  as  the  SNB  has 
repeatedly  emphasised,  given  the  cyclical  risks  in  the  Swiss  mortgage  and  real  estate 
markets, a temporary adjustment of banking system-wide capital requirements may have to 
be  considered.  To  this  end,  on  1  June  the  Swiss  Federal  Council  announced  that  a 
macroprudential instrument will be made available to the Swiss authorities from 1 July, in the 
form of a countercyclical capital buffer. 
Introduction of a macroprudential instrument 
To conclude, I would like to briefly describe how the countercyclical capital buffer will work. 
This  instrument  will  enable  the  authorities  to  adjust  capital  requirements  in  the  banking 
system,  depending  on  potential  excesses  in  the  Swiss  credit  market.  It  is  a  preventive 
instrument that can be activated if necessary, to a level deemed appropriate. It can also be 
targeted  to  a  specific  segment  of  the  credit  market.  Once  the  imbalances  have  been 
corrected,  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  will  be  deactivated,  either  immediately  or 
gradually. 
In  activating  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  the  aim  of  the  authorities  is  twofold: First,  it 
should increase the resilience of the banking sector, thereby helping to protect against the 
consequences  of  a  correction  of  excessive  credit  growth.  Second,  it  should  help  to  lean 
against the build-up of such excesses. 
The Federal Council decides on the activation, deactivation and level of the countercyclical 
capital buffer, upon the proposal of the SNB. The SNB consults FINMA before submitting its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
proposal. The proposal will be based on an in-depth analysis and assessment of the situation 
on the Swiss credit market, which will, in principle, be carried out once a quarter.1 
The  signs  of  a  build-up  of  imbalances  on  the  Swiss  credit  market  relate  to  the  residential 
mortgage segment. Thus, if the buffer had to be activated, it would be aimed solely at this 
segment of the credit market. When assessing the necessity of activating the buffer, the SNB 
will  take  into  account  the  impact  of  other  recently  announced  measures  focusing  on  the 
mortgage  and  real  estate  markets.  These  measures  include  a  further  revision  of  the  self-
regulation rules and a tightening of risk weightings for mortgage loans. In addition, as part of 
its monetary policy mandate, the SNB will closely monitor the impact of a possible activation 
of the countercyclical capital buffer, in order to assess the consequences for the economy as 
a whole. 
The  current  situation  justifies  the  fact  that  this  instrument,  scheduled  for  implementation 
under Basel III, has been made available to the Swiss authorities at an early date. Numerous 
past crises have highlighted the costs associated with credit market excesses. Even if the 
countercyclical capital buffer does not enable us to prevent the build-up of all imbalances in 
the  Swiss  credit  market,  it  should  help  to  reduce  these  costs  in  the  future,  provided  it  is 
activated early enough for its preventive properties to take full effect. 
                                                 
1   Swiss National Bank, “Implementing the countercyclical capital buffer in Switzerland: concretising the Swiss 
National Bank’s role”, fact sheet, June 2012; available at www.snb.ch, Financial Stability, Publications. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
