Charles I Plosser: A progress report on our monetary policy framework 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Forecasters Club, New York, 29 February 2012. 
The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Introduction 
I am pleased to be here today, and I will do my best to avoid all the hackneyed forecaster 
jokes. I am sure you have heard them all anyway. I will simply note that I have often said that 
forecasting  can  be  a  humbling  experience  in  the  best  of  times  but  I  have  learned  some 
lessons along the way. For example, one Thursday morning not long ago, a reporter asked 
me what I thought the monthly employment numbers would show when they were released 
the  next  day.  I  responded  that  I  had  been  around  long  enough  to  learn  never  to  predict 
anything about which I can be proven right or wrong within a week and certainly not within 
24 hours. It simply doesn’t pay. 
So, in lieu of a typical forecasting speech today, I would like to discuss the recent steps taken 
by  the  Federal  Reserve  to  improve  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy.  These  important 
initiatives  are  intended  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  the 
accountability of our central bank. 
Over the last few years, I have spoken frequently about the need to improve transparency 
and to bring our monetary policy framework into the 21st century.1 In my view, there are four 
interrelated dimensions to a stronger monetary policy framework. The first is to ensure that 
the  central  bank  commits  to  a  set  of  clearly  articulated  objectives  that  can  be  feasibly 
achieved  by  monetary  policy.  The  second  element  requires  the  central  bank  to  be 
transparent and clear in its communications. The third element, related to the second, is for 
the central bank to conduct monetary policy in a systematic or rule-like manner.2 The fourth 
element,  and  arguably  the  most  important,  is  for  the  central  bank  to  set  monetary  policy 
independently from the fiscal authorities. 
As  many  of  you  know,  last  year  Chairman  Bernanke  asked  Governor  Yellen,  Governor 
Raskin, Chicago Fed President Evans, and me to serve on a subcommittee whose task was 
to  develop 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee’s 
communications.  In  January,  the  FOMC  adopted  two  initiatives  brought  forward  by  the 
subcommittee. 
I want to review these initiatives today and how they relate to my broader views on a stronger 
monetary policy framework. Of course, improving policy transparency will always be a work 
in  progress.  So,  I  will  also  talk  about  additional  steps  I  believe  we  could  take  to  further 
improve our framework for conducting policy. 
recommendations 
improve 
to 
                                                 
1  See Plosser (2010) and (2011), among others. As always, these views are my own and not necessarily those 
of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
2  See Dotsey and Plosser (2012) and Plosser (2008). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Statement of principles 
The  first  communications  initiative  adopted  by  the  FOMC  was  to  issue  a  consensus 
statement of principles about its long-run policy goals and objectives. The statement makes 
four very significant points in clarifying our policy objectives. 
First, the statement reaffirms the Committee’s commitment to its congressional mandate to 
promote “maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates”. 
More  important,  the  statement  gives  texture  to  those  objectives  in  a  way  never  before 
articulated. In particular, the statement’s second significant point stresses that inflation over 
the  longer  run  is  mainly  determined  by  monetary  policy.  In  this  sense,  the  FOMC 
acknowledges  what  every  economist  has  known  for  over  two  centuries:  inflation  is  a 
monetary  phenomenon.  Therefore,  it  is  both  appropriate  and  feasible  for  the  monetary 
authority to set an inflation goal and be held accountable for achieving it. The Committee, 
therefore, adopted a long-term inflation goal of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change 
in the price index for personal consumption expenditures. By establishing an explicit inflation 
target, the Federal Reserve is adopting a practice used by most major central banks around 
the  world  and  one  that  is  acknowledged  as  a  best  practice  by  academics  and  central 
bankers. 
A third important point made in the statement is that it is not appropriate for the central bank 
to  set  an  explicit  numerical  goal  for  the  maximum  employment  part  of  our  mandate. 
Maximum employment is mainly determined by nonmonetary factors, such as demographics, 
technological change and productivity, the structure of the labor market, and governmental 
policies – for example, minimum wage laws, unemployment benefits, retirement incentives, 
and taxes. Since these factors change over time, the concept of maximum employment can 
also  change  over  time.  While  policymakers  consider  a  wide  range  of  indicators  to  assess 
employment, the value of such indicators is subject to considerable uncertainty. Economists, 
for  example,  can,  and  often  do,  have  very  different  assessments  of  what  the  level  of 
maximum employment is at any point in time. This arises because different models suggest 
different  conceptual  definitions,  most  of  which  are  not  directly  observable.  So,  monetary 
policy  should  not  seek  to  achieve  an  explicit  objective  for  something  it  does  not  directly 
control and cannot accurately measure. 
Fourth,  the  statement  notes  that,  in  general,  price  stability  and  maximum  employment  are 
complementary.  Price  stability  promotes  economic  efficiency  by  giving  individuals  and 
businesses  more  confidence  that  the  purchasing  power  of  the  dollar  will  not  erode. 
Conversely,  the  failure  to  maintain  price  stability  can  often  lead  to  greater  instability  in 
employment and output. When inflation rises to unacceptable levels, as it did in the 1970s, 
monetary policy will be forced to react to restore price stability. This, in turn, could lead to 
increased instability in employment and output, as it did in the recession in the early 1980s. 
But the FOMC’s consensus statement of principles also acknowledges that in the short run, 
the maximum employment and price stability parts of the Fed’s mandate could be in conflict. 
In such circumstances, monetary policy will seek to follow a balanced approach in promoting 
its statutory mandate. 
The consensus statement does not provide answers for all the hard policy choices. How best 
to  implement  this  balanced  approach  requires  judgment  and  may  well  differ  across 
policymakers who may have different models of the economy even as they work to promote 
the same long-term goals for monetary policy. 
Improvements in the summary of economic projections 
The  second  important  step  the  Committee  took  in  January  toward  increased  transparency 
involved the economic projections that the FOMC releases four times a year. The Summary 
of Economic Projections, or SEP for short, summarizes the individual FOMC policymakers’ 
views  on  the  economy  as  reflected  in  several  key  economic  variables,  including  output, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflation,  and  unemployment.  Yet,  these  projections  are  not  forecasts  in  the  usual  sense. 
Each  policymaker’s  projections  are  conditioned  on  the  policymaker’s  assessment  of 
“appropriate policy”, that is, the policy path that he or she views as the most likely to yield the 
best outcomes for the economy in the absence of further shocks. 
This policy path isn’t necessarily the most likely path; instead, it is the path viewed as being 
the  best  policy.  Thus,  the  projections  should  not  be  compared  with  the  forecasts  of 
private-sector  forecasters  who  try  to  predict  what  the  Fed’s  next  move  might  be.  Instead, 
each policymaker makes economic projections based on an assessment of the best policy 
path to achieve the most desirable outcomes. 
Until January, the SEP did not reveal any information about the appropriate paths assumed 
by the participants. This lack of information about the underlying policy assumptions made it 
difficult to know what the SEP represented. For example, two participants may be projecting 
the same long-run inflation rate, but they may believe it will take very different policy paths to 
achieve that outcome. 
Other central banks, such as those of Norway, Sweden, and New Zealand, have provided 
information about the assumed path of policy. In January, the Fed joined them and began 
releasing  information  on  the  underlying  policy  paths  assumed  by  the  participants  in  their 
economic projections. These policy paths are summarized in two charts. The most important 
chart displays the level of the federal funds rate assumed by each participant at the end of 
each calendar year for three years out and for the longer run. This information provides a 
useful  picture  of  the  range  of  views  of  future  policy  assumed  by  policymakers.  Note  once 
again  that  these  are  assumptions,  not  forecasts  in  the  usual  sense.  For  example,  I  might 
submit  a  very  different  projection  of  inflation  rates  if  I  were  asked  to  use  someone  else’s 
policy path or even the policy path implicitly assumed in the fed funds futures market. 
It  is  also  important  to  emphasize  that  these  policy  assessments  do  not  constitute  a 
commitment to follow a particular path but will evolve as economic conditions evolve. In fact, 
I  believe  that  changes  in  this  chart  over  time  will  prove  to  be  a  far  better  way  to  provide 
information about the path of policy than using calendar dates, as we are currently doing in 
our  FOMC  statements.  Policy  should  be  conditioned  on  the  state  of  the  economy,  not  the 
calendar. Observers watching how these policy paths evolve as the economy improves are 
likely to learn more about the timing and magnitude of future policy actions. This then will 
reveal more about the policymakers’ reaction function, on which I will have more to say in a 
moment. 
From my perspective, our actions in January were important steps forward. We clarified our 
goals and objectives, and we became more transparent about our views of future policy. 
More to do 
Of course, as I mentioned at the outset, improving the transparency of our communications 
and strengthening our policy framework is a work in progress. More can be done. 
First, as a way to increase transparency, I believe the SEP should include more information 
about the linkages among the economic variables and the associated policy paths. Even with 
the recent improvements, the public cannot link a policy path to a particular set of projections 
for  output,  inflation,  and  unemployment  in  the  SEP.  That  is  only  possible  when  individual 
policymakers  choose  to  reveal  such  information  in  their  speeches  and  other  public 
communications.  A  natural  next  step  would  be  to  include  a  matrix  of  output,  inflation,  and 
unemployment,  and  the  associated  policy  path  assumptions  that  each  policymaker 
submitted. This would make the information in the SEP easier to interpret and give a better 
sense of the linkage between changes in economic conditions and policy. 
Second,  I  believe  the  Federal  Reserve  should  do  a  more  comprehensive  monetary  policy 
report four times a year. Currently, the Chairman testifies before Congress twice a year – in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
fact,  he  is  doing  so  today  –  and  that  testimony  is  accompanied  by  a  written  report.  In 
addition, the Chairman holds press briefings four times a year to summarize the SEP. I think 
there is an opportunity to combine these efforts in a more comprehensive report on monetary 
policy. Most central banks that have adopted an inflation target have also sought to improve 
communication  and  transparency  through  the  publication  of  a  regular  policy  report.  In  the 
U.K., for example, the Bank of England issues a quarterly Inflation Report. Other countries 
produce a Monetary Policy Report that discusses the central bank’s forecasts and the longer-
term  context  of  policy.  These  reports  offer  an  opportunity  to  reinforce  the  underlying 
framework  the  central  bank  has  adopted  for  the  conduct  of  policy.  I  think  the  Fed  should 
consider producing a similar report to elaborate and reinforce its policy framework and how it 
relates to economic conditions. These reports will help improve the public’s understanding of 
policy, which will help make policy more effective and the central bank more accountable. 
Third,  I  believe  the  FOMC  should  adopt  clearer  guidelines  on  how  policy  evolves  with 
economic conditions. The better the public and the markets understand how policy is likely to 
be adjusted as the economy changes, the more predictable policy becomes, which promotes 
price stability and better economic outcomes. 
The history of U.S. monetary policy is filled with stops and starts and changes in direction, 
yet the Fed has communicated little about what drives those decisions. Indeed, historically, 
central  bankers  have  tended  not  to  reveal  such  information,  since  they  preferred 
discretionary policy over systematic policy. 
Of course, policymakers do not know with any degree of certainty how economic conditions 
will evolve. So they cannot and should not say with any certainty what policy will be in the 
future.  But  policymakers  can  provide  information  about  the  factors  that  will  influence  their 
policy decisions. Some call this a policy rule. Milton Friedman advocated a rule in the form of 
a k-percent growth rate of the money supply. John Taylor devised a rule that depends on a 
measure  of  inflation  relative  to  a  target  and  some  measure  of  resource  utilization.  Other 
versions of the Taylor rule involve a degree of smoothing to minimize sharp swings in the 
policy  rate. A  policy  rule  is  also called  a  reaction  function or  response  function  because  it 
describes how policy will evolve as key economic conditions evolve. 
I  believe  that  the  Fed  should  provide  more  information  about  its  reaction  function.  The 
practice  of  using  systematic  rules  as  guides  to  monetary  policy  imposes  an  important 
discipline on policymaking and improves communication and transparency. This is because 
systematic rules make policy more predictable and therefore helps the public and markets 
make better decisions. Moreover, if policymakers choose to deviate from the guidelines, they 
are forced to explain why and how they anticipate returning to normal operating practices. 
Systematic policy also reduces the temptation to engage in discretionary policies. 
I  believe  the  Committee  is  still  some  way  from  agreeing  on  one  systematic  policy  rule  or 
reaction  function.  Such  choices  will  involve  elaborate  discussions  and  agreement  on  the 
appropriate  class  of  models  and  an  agreed-upon  loss  function.  One  way  to  move  toward 
more systematic policy would be to describe the variables that are important for our response 
function.  The  academic  literature  suggests  using  rules  that  respond  aggressively  to 
deviations  of  inflation  from  the  central  bank’s  target  and  less  aggressively  to  deviations  of 
output from some concept of “potential output”. Research has found that such rules perform 
fairly well in a variety of models and frameworks.3 
Thus, it is reasonable and feasible for the Fed to describe policy in terms of the variables in a 
rule that is robust across models. We would not have to articulate a precise mathematical 
rule but would provide the key variables and then communicate policy decisions in terms of 
changes in these key variables. If policy were changed, then we would explain that change 
                                                 
3  See Orphanides and Williams (2002). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
based  on  how  the  variables  in  our  response  function  have  changed.  If  we  choose  a 
consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, the 
public  will  have  a  greater  ability  to  form  judgments  about  the  likely  course  of  policy.  This 
would reduce uncertainty about policy and promote stability. 
There is one more item on my list of things to do. At the beginning of my remarks, I stressed 
the importance of maintaining the independence of the central bank. That independence is 
now under attack. Last week, I gave a speech on the fraying boundaries between monetary 
and fiscal policy.4 I noted that while monetary policy and fiscal policy are intertwined through 
the  government’s  budget  constraint,  there  are  good  reasons  to  maintain  clear  boundaries 
between  the  two.  Specifically,  in  a  world  where  fiscal  discipline  is  lacking,  governments 
without  the  institutional  or  constitutional  guarantees  of  an  independent  central  bank  often 
resort to money creation as a solution to fiscal problems. This, of course, is a recipe for high 
rates of inflation and, in the extreme, hyperinflation. For this reason, countries throughout the 
world  have  moved  over  the  last  60  years  to  strengthen  the  independence  of  their  central 
banks. It is simply good governance to keep a healthy degree of separation between those 
responsible for tax and spending policies and those responsible for monetary creation. 
The  pressure  on  independence  stems,  in  part,  from  fiscal  imbalances  and  the  inability  of 
governments  to  develop  credible  and  sustainable  plans  to  finance  public  expenditures.  In 
turn, the pressure can manifest itself in calls for higher inflation or for central banks to act as 
lenders of last resort for failing governments. Yet central banks have also contributed to the 
breakdown of the boundaries by engaging in credit allocations to particular sectors, such as 
housing, and bailouts to particular firms, such as Bear Sterns. Thus, the fiscal authorities and 
supposedly  independent  central  banks  have  acted  in  ways  that  undermine  central  bank 
independence.  I  believe  this  is  a  dangerous  path  and  one  that  needs  to  be  changed.  We 
need to restore the boundaries. 
Conclusions 
To summarize, the FOMC has taken significant actions toward greater transparency, most 
recently  with  the  historic  steps  adopted  in  January.  These  steps  in  turn  help  to  promote 
better public understanding of the rationale behind the FOMC’s decisions. First, we released 
a statement clarifying the long-run goals of monetary policy and our policymaking strategy. 
Second, we began releasing information about the policy paths that underlie our economic 
projections. 
Yet, I believe there is more that can be done. We can and should provide more details about 
the interplay between economic conditions and policy. We can also better define our reaction 
function,  to  enable  the  public  to  better  understand  and  anticipate  future  policy  actions. 
Economic research has shown that increased transparency can improve the effectiveness of 
monetary  policy,  as  well  as  the  Fed’s  accountability  with  the  public.  These  benefits 
underscore the importance of our continued pursuit of finding better ways to communicate 
our framework for monetary policy decisions. 
References 
Dotsey,  Michael,  and  Charles  I.  Plosser.  “Designing  Monetary  Rules  in  an  Uncertain 
Economic  Environment”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  Business  Review  (First 
Quarter 2012). 
Orphanides,  Athanasios,  and  John  C.  Williams,  “Robust  Monetary  Policy  Rules  with 
Unknown Natural Rates”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2002), pp. 63–118. 
                                                 
4  See Plosser (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Plosser,  Charles.  “The  Benefits  of  Systematic  Monetary  Policy”,  speech  to  the  National 
Association  for  Business  Economics,  Washington  Economic  Policy  Conference,  March  3, 
2008. 
Plosser, Charles. “Credible Commitments and Monetary Policy After the Crisis”, speech to 
Swiss National Bank Monetary Policy Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 24, 2010. 
Plosser,  Charles.  “Strengthening  Our  Monetary  Policy  Framework  Through  Commitment, 
Credibility,  and  Communication”,  speech  to  Global  Interdependence  Center’s  2011  Global 
Citizen Award Luncheon, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, November 8, 2011. 
Plosser, Charles. “Fiscal Policy and Monetary Policy: Restoring the Boundaries”, speech to 
U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Forum,  University  of  Chicago  Booth  School  of  Business,  New  York, 
New York, February 24, 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
