Vítor  Constâncio:  Accounting, 
governance for central banks 
Opening remarks by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the third conference on 
accounting,  financial  reporting  and  corporate  governance  for  central  banks,  Frankfurt  am 
Main, 4 June 2012. 
financial  reporting  and  corporate 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you, on behalf of the Executive Board of the ECB, to the 
third  conference  on  accounting,  financial  reporting  and  corporate  governance  for  central 
banks. We are indeed pleased that so many eminent speakers in these fields are present to 
lead the discussions. 
Given  the  current  circumstances,  and  particularly  with  regard  to  the  financial  crisis,  the 
issues of financial strength and accounting practices of central banks have moved into the 
focus of public attention. High quality accounting and reporting frameworks are essential in 
policy objectives. Our aim for today and tomorrow is to compare notes on recent accounting 
developments  from  a  central  bank  perspective  and  in  that  way  to  learn  from  each  other’s 
experiences.  I  am  therefore  delighted  to  see  that  –  once  more  –  there  has  been  such  a 
strong response to our invitation. 
The conference is structured around a number of presentations on three interrelated parts, 
each of which is dealt with in a number of presentations from different perspectives. 
The  first  part  deals  with  the  impact  of  international  accounting  developments  on 
central  banking,  with  particular  focus  on  the  interaction  between  accounting  and 
financial stability. In my remarks I would like to focus on the tension between these 
two fields of expertise. 
The turmoil on international financial markets over the last years has revealed a number of 
shortcomings  in  the  area  of  accounting  These  shortcomings  are  to  a  large  extent 
underpinned  by  the  current  accounting  paradigm  and  the  dominance  of  the  shareholder 
value approach. The shareholder value approach typically adopts a short-term perspective 
and aims to determine the value of a particular reporting entity as if the owners were to sell 
the entity today in an arm’s length transaction. The short-term perspective in turn builds upon 
the illusion of efficient markets, rational investors and complete information. I would like to 
highlight that the outcome of such an accounting paradigm is often misleading for investors 
and detrimental to financial stability.  
From the perspective of financial stability considerations, let me briefly recall two specific 
examples  where  the  current  accounting  paradigm  may  be  detrimental:  First,  the  extent  to 
which  the  application  of  fair  value  accounting  may  provide  adverse  incentives  regarding 
management and investment decisions. The crisis has largely confirmed the scepticism that 
fair value is not the most relevant measurement for all asset portfolios at every moment. That 
would  not  be  the  case  if  all  financial  markets  would  obey  to  the  canons  of  perfect 
competition,  would  process  information  with  full  efficiency  and  would  not  be  subject  to 
overshooting, herd behaviour and price misalignments during significant periods of time. As 
this  does  not  correspond  to  the  real  world,  full  fair  value  tends  to  create  what  has  been 
dubbed  as  “artificial  volatility”  in  a  company’s  earnings,  particularly  in  the  case  of financial 
institutions.  When  profits  are  artificially  inflated,  this  may  lead  to  higher  dividends  and 
bonuses based on the recognition of unrealised gains. The undesirable side effect of such 
payments would be an effective depletion of capital; a capital cushion that might be needed 
at a later stage when the markets correct. In some cases fair value accounting may provide 
information that is in my view outright wrong even for investors. Consider the recent example 
of  a  swiss  bank.  The  bank’s  recently  published  first  quarter  results  was  only  SFr  44m 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
because the bank had to recognise losses in the range of SFr 1.5 bn from an improvement in 
its  own  creditworthiness  that  raised  the  value  of  its  own  debt  securities.  Presumably  the 
opposite occurred in some previous year, meaning recognition of profits, when it may have 
suffered  a  decrease  in  its  rating.  It  is  doubtful  that  this,  in  my  view,  distorted  information 
provides the right incentives for proper risk management and can indeed be considered to be 
“useful”,  which  is  a  stated  objective  that  accounting  should  meet  in  line  with  the  IASB’s 
Conceptual Framework.  
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  the  impact  of  “short-termism”  and  volatility  of 
accounting information can be very detrimental as both may aggravate pro-cyclicality. This 
means  more  severe  downturns  and  more  acute  building  up  of  risks,  resulting  in  a 
misallocation  of  resources  that  lead  to  an  overall  welfare  loss  for  society.  This  is  also 
consistent with the findings of a recent paper by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston1 which 
also  concluded  that  implementing  fair  value  accounting  more  broadly  may  not  necessarily 
provide financial statement users with more transparent and useful reporting. Additionally, it 
stressed that financial stability may be negatively impacted by fair value accounting due to 
the interconnectedness of financial institutions, markets and the broader economy.  
The second example where accounting seems to have an impact on market dynamics and 
cyclicality  within  the  financial  system  is  the  provisioning  or  impairment  methodology  The 
main criticism of the “incurred loss” model that is currently in place was that it did not reflect 
the need for earlier recognition of loan losses. Under this model, the bank would usually start 
to provide for the related credit losses only once those losses actually materialised. 
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  and  I  hope  we  can  all  agree,  this  is  too  late  and  is 
highly  pro-cyclical.  In  my  view  one  of  the  key  lessons  from  the  crisis  is  that  consideration 
should also be given to the losses that are inherent to specific assets and are expected to 
arise over the lifetime of these assets.  
These two examples point to another striking feature of the current financial reporting regime, 
namely that traditional performance measures mainly based on accounting figures relating to 
net income are inadequate in periods of high volatility.  
Therefore let me now turn to potential remedies.  
First  of  all,  let  me  be  clear  on  one  thing:  There  is  no  way  back  to  full  historical  cost 
accounting.  In  some  cases,  for  example  trading  book  items,  fair  value  information  may 
indeed be useful. There are however a set of possible measures which may help address the 
described  shortcomings  and  to  –  at  least  partially  –  reconcile  the  needs  of  investors  and 
prudential regulators.  
First, adjustment measures should be put in place at regulatory level to prevent the depletion 
of  regulatory  capital  via  distributions  during  upturns.  A  concrete  example  would  be  the 
introduction  of  a  non-distributable  Economic  Cycle  Reserve  along  the  lines  of  what  was 
proposed by Adair Turner in the so-called “Turner Review” (March 2009).  
Second, we should move from the current “incurred loss impairment model” to an “expected 
loss  impairment  model”.  In  this  context,  the  ECB  welcomes  the  IASB  proposal  for  a  new 
impairment  methodology  that  is  based  on  the  concept  of  “expected  losses”,  which  would 
contribute to mitigating pro-cyclicality. Given that the work in this field is on-going, the ECB 
urges  the  IASB  to  continue  working  together  with  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  with  a  view  to  developing  an  operational  solution  to  a  more  forward-looking 
provisioning approach.  
                                                
1 
“Evaluating  the  Impact  of  Fair  Value  Accounting  on  Financial  Institutions:  Implications  for  Accounting 
Standards Setting and Bank Supervision”, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third,  to  better  reflect  actual  risks  in  the  performance  measures  for  banks,  my  proposal 
would  be  to  introduce  more  sustainable  risk-adjusted  performance  indicators.  A  concrete 
example might be the use of a broader performance measurement framework as proposed in 
the  September  2010  EU  Banking  Structures  Report.  Such  broader  performance measures 
would  incorporate  more  forward-looking  information,  encompass  more  aspects  of  the 
performance than just profitability and therefore could be less prone to manipulation from the 
markets relative to a pure market-oriented indicator such as Return on Equity. Moreover, it 
provides  investors  with  relevant  risk-based  information  that  is  useful  and  relevant  for 
investors.  In  this  context,  a  BIS  paper  already  proposed  in  2005  the  usefulness  of 
complementing the current accounting reporting framework with risk information.2 
Ladies and Gentlemen, not just for the aforementioned reasons do central banks have an 
interest in IFRSs. There is an additional reason. In particular, an increasing number of central 
banks around the globe either comply fully with IFRSs or apply an adjusted version of IFRSs. 
Issues like (a) volatility in the profit and loss account from the use of fair value accounting, 
(b) poor interaction of accounting rules with profit distribution rules and the resulting impact 
on  the  financial  strength  of  central  banks,  as  well  as  (c)  the  extensive  disclosure 
requirements that might not be in line with policy objectives become relevant in this context. 
I would like to emphasise that the ECB has been a strong supporter of the objectives and 
work of the IASB since its inception and I personally believe that the IASB has significantly 
progressed in a relatively short period. The IASB has recognised the widening stakeholder 
interest  in  the  development  of  accounting  standards,  and  I  appreciate  that  it  has  actively 
engaged  with  central  banks,  supervisors  and  financial  stability  experts  in  developing  what 
should eventually be a single set of globally accepted, high quality accounting standards. 
Finally on this point I am delighted that Mr Hans Hoogervorst, Chair of the IASB, has agreed 
to join us today to share with us his vision on the future of IFRSs, and I am delighted that Mrs 
Flores,  Chair  of  the  European  Financial  Reporting  Advisory  Group  is  also  here  with  us  to 
present Europe’s view regarding IFRS developments on financial instruments. 
The  second  part  of  this  conference  deals  with  the  sensitive  issue  of  the  financial 
strength of central banks. 
This issue has become more relevant over the last years as, due to non-standard operations, 
balance  sheet  risks,  and  in  particular  credit  risk,  have  increased  for  a  number  of  central 
banks.  A  lot  has  been  written  by  central  bank experts  in  the  past  decade  on  central  bank 
independence  and  the  link  with  the  central  bank’s  financial  strength,  sometimes  with 
conflicting views. A number of studies have argued that financial weakness could impair the 
central bank’s pursuit of price stability. Other studies have suggested that central banks can 
successfully operate with negative equity. 
The  ECB  takes  this  matter  very  seriously,  especially  when  reviewing  any  legislative 
proposals  in  the  EU  which  affect  individual  central  banks.  The  ECB,  as  a  relatively  new 
institution,  has  been  viewed  as  having  a  strong  degree  of  independence  based  on  the 
relevant EU legislation backing our establishment. In particular, the principle of central bank 
independence is an essential element of the ESCB Statute.  
For  the  ESCB,  the  ECB  has  indicated  in  its  2010  Convergence  Report  that  the  overall 
independence  of  an  NCB  would  be  jeopardised  if  it  could  not  autonomously  avail  itself  of 
sufficient financial resources to fulfil its mandate. In the same report, recapitalisation needs, 
accounting rules, and profit distribution schemes are linked to the financial independence of 
the NCBs. 
                                                
2  C.  Borio  and  K.  Tsatsaronis,  “Accounting,  Prudential  Regulation  and  Financial  Stability:  Elements  of  a 
Synthesis” (September 2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The third part of this conference is devoted to financial reporting in central banks. 
It is evident that in the context of the financial crisis the operations and balance sheets of 
central banks are in the public spotlight. The effective communication of the nature and the 
outcome of these operations is of profound importance. This is true mainly for two reasons. 
The first reason is that the central bank is accountable to society for the use of resources 
entrusted  to  it.  However,  the  financial  performance  of  a  central  bank  is  not  necessarily  a 
good indicator of an effective pursuit of policy goals. Excess or little accounting returns as 
well  as  balance  sheet  risks  can  be  associated  with  the  central  bank  policy  operations. 
However, the real benefit or loss for the society does not, in my opinion, come from these 
returns.  It  comes  from  the  effective  or  ineffective  implementation  of  policy  objectives.  And 
this very fact should be properly highlighted and communicated. 
The  second  reason  why  communication  is  important  is  linked  to  the  effectiveness  of  the 
policy  operations.  An  operation  is  less  likely  to  be  successful  if  it  is  not  combined  with  an 
appropriate  communication  that  allows  the  stakeholders  to  understand  the  nature,  the 
objective  and  the  outcome  of  these  operations.  Financial  reporting  serves  as  an  important 
communication channel here. 
The ECB and the ESCB national central banks developed an own set of accounting rules for 
specific central bank operations back in the mid 1990’s at a time when national accounting 
rules  took  precedence.  The  Eurosystem  rules  have  not  stayed  static  since  then.  New 
operations,  analytical  work  and  a  continuous  drive  to  improve  these  rules  have  led  to  the 
enhancement of the relevant legal instruments for a number of times. Looking back it seems 
that the harmonisation achieved then by Eurosystem central banks set a good example for 
wider harmonisation efforts which are being pursued nowadays. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  accounting  profession  has  never  been  so  challenging  and 
important. In a changing, demanding and complex  world  your role is critical in maintaining 
the credibility of central banks. And, as you are aware, credibility is necessary in convincing 
market  participants,  governments  and  the  society  as  a  whole  that  the  central  bank’s 
operations can achieve their objectives. Without this credibility, a central bank’s potential to 
influence events will be substantially impaired. 
In concluding I wish you two days of very fruitful discussions and hope that you find your 
visit to the ECB worthwhile. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
