Mario Draghi: Verbatim of the remarks at the Global Investment 
Conference 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Global 
Investment Conference, London, 26 July 2012. 
 (…) 
I asked myself what sort of message I want to give to you; I wouldn’t use the word “sell”, but 
actually I think the best thing I could do, is to give you a candid assessment of how we view 
the euro situation from Frankfurt. 
And the first thing that came to mind was something that people said many years ago and 
then stopped saying it: The euro is like a bumblebee. This is a mystery of nature because it 
shouldn’t fly but instead it does. So the euro was a bumblebee that flew very well for several 
years. And now – and I think people ask “how come?” – probably there was something in the 
atmosphere, in the air, that made the bumblebee fly. Now something must have changed in 
the air, and we know what after the financial crisis. The bumblebee would have to graduate 
to a real bee. And that’s what it’s doing.  
The first message I would like to send, is that the euro is much, much stronger, the euro area 
is much, much stronger than people acknowledge today. Not only if you look over the last 
10 years  but  also  if  you  look  at  it  now,  you  see  that  as  far  as  inflation,  employment, 
productivity, the euro area has done either like or better than US or Japan. 
Then the comparison becomes even more dramatic when we come to deficit and debt. The 
euro area has much lower deficit, much lower debt than these two countries. And also not 
less  important,  it  has  a  balanced  current  account,  no  deficits,  but  it  also  has  a  degree  of 
social cohesion that you wouldn’t find either in the other two countries. 
That is a very important ingredient for undertaking all the structural reforms that will actually 
graduate the bumblebee into a real bee. 
The second point, the second message I would like to send today, is that progress has been 
extraordinary in the last six months. If you compare today the euro area member states with 
six months ago, you will see that the world is entirely different today, and for the better. 
And this progress has taken different shapes. At national level, because of course, while I 
was  saying,  while  I  was  glorifying  the  merits  of  the  euro,  you  were  thinking  “but  that’s  an 
average!”, and “in fact countries diverge so much within the euro area, that averages are not 
representative any longer, when the variance is so big”. 
But  I  would  say  that  over  the  last  six  months,  this  average,  well  the  variances  tend  to 
decrease  and  countries  tend  to  converge  much  more  than  they  have  done  in  many  years 
– both at national level, in countries like Portugal, Ireland and countries that are not in the 
programme, like Spain and Italy. 
The progress in undertaking deficit control, structural reforms has been remarkable. And they 
will have to continue to do so. But the pace has been set and all the signals that we get is 
that they don’t relent, stop reforming themselves. It’s a complex process because for many 
years, very little was done – I will come to this in a moment. 
But a lot of progress has been done at supranational level. That’s why I always say that the 
last summit was a real  success. The last summit was a real success because for the first 
time in many years, all the leaders of the 27 countries of Europe, including UK etc., said that 
the only way out of this present crisis is to have more Europe, not less Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
A  Europe  that  is  founded  on  four  building  blocks:  a  fiscal  union,  a  financial  union,  an 
economic  union  and  a  political  union.  These  blocks,  in  two  words  –  we  can  continue 
discussing this later – mean that much more of what is national sovereignty is going to be 
exercised  at  supranational  level,  that  common fiscal  rules  will  bind  government  actions  on 
the fiscal side. 
Then  in  the  banking  union  or  financial  markets  union,  we  will  have  one  supervisor  for  the 
whole euro area. And to show that there is full determination to move ahead and these are 
not just empty words, the European Commission will present a proposal for the supervisor in 
early September. So in a month. And I think I can say that works are quite advanced in this 
direction. 
So more Europe, but also the various firewalls have been given attention and now they are 
ready to work much better than in the past. 
The second message is that there is more progress than it has been acknowledged. 
But the third point I want to make is in a sense more political. 
When people talk about the fragility of the euro and the increasing fragility of the euro, and 
perhaps  the  crisis  of  the  euro,  very  often  non-euro  area  member  states  or  leaders, 
underestimate the amount of political capital that is being invested in the euro. 
And  so  we  view  this,  and  I  do  not  think  we  are  unbiased  observers,  we  think  the  euro  is 
irreversible. And it’s not an empty word now, because I preceded saying exactly what actions 
have been made, are being made to make it irreversible.  
But there is another message I want to tell you. 
Within  our  mandate,  the  ECB  is  ready  to  do  whatever  it  takes  to  preserve  the  euro.  And 
believe me, it will be enough. 
There  are  some  short-term  challenges,  to  say  the  least.  The  short-term  challenges  in  our 
view  relate  mostly  to  the  financial  fragmentation  that  has  taken  place  in  the  euro  area. 
Investors retreated within their national boundaries. The interbank market is not functioning. 
It  is  only  functioning  very  little  within  each  country  by  the  way,  but  it  is  certainly  not 
functioning across countries. 
And I think the key strategy point here is that if we want to get out of this crisis, we have to 
repair this financial fragmentation. 
There are at least two dimensions to this. The interbank market is not functioning, because 
for any bank in the world the current liquidity regulations make – to lend to other banks or 
borrow from other banks – a money losing proposition. So the first reason is that regulation 
has to be recalibrated completely. 
The  second  point  is  in  a  sense  a  collective  action  problem:  because  national  supervisors, 
looking at the crisis, have asked their banks, the banks under their supervision, to withdraw 
their activities within national boundaries. And they ring fenced liquidity positions so liquidity 
can’t flow, even across the same holding group because the financial sector supervisors are 
saying “no”. 
So even though each one of them may be right, collectively they have been wrong. And this 
situation will have to be overcome of course. 
And then there is a risk aversion factor. Risk aversion has to do with counterparty risk. Now 
to the extent that I think my counterparty is going to default, I am not going to lend to this 
counterparty. But it can be because it is short of funding. And I think we took care of that with 
the two big LTROs where we injected half a trillion of net liquidity into the euro area banks. 
We took care of that. 
Then you have the counterparty recess related to the perception that my counterparty can 
fail because of lack of capital. We can do little about that. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Then there’s another dimension to this that has to do with the premia that are being charged 
on sovereign states borrowings. These premia have to, as I said, with default, with liquidity, 
but they also have to do more and more with convertibility, with the risk of convertibility. Now 
to the extent that these premia do not have to do with factors inherent to my counterparty 
– they come into our mandate. They come within our remit. 
To  the  extent  that  the  size  of  these  sovereign  premia  hampers  the  functioning  of  the 
monetary policy transmission channel, they come within our mandate. 
So we have to cope with this financial fragmentation addressing these issues.  
I think I will stop here; I think my assessment was candid and frank enough.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
