Hirohide Yamaguchi: Economic slowdown and monetary easing 
Speech  by  Mr  Hirohide  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Asian 
Affairs Research Council, Tokyo, 24 September 2012. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  speak  at  the  Asian  Affairs  Research  Council 
special lecture in front of distinguished members who are active in a wide range of areas. 
For half a century since 1964, the Council has been, through its various kinds of research 
and  studies  about  the  Asia  and  Pacific  region,  contributing  to  the  deepening  of  mutual 
understanding  and  harmonious  development  of  the  region. The  year  1964  was  when  the 
Tokyo  Olympics  were  held  and  when  Japan  joined  the  Organisation  for  Economic 
Co-operation and Development. Japan’s trade balance turned into a clear surplus from that 
year and continued to be in surplus for 47 years  up to 2010. The year 1964 could be said 
as a milestone for Japan’s economy. 
In September 1964, the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the 
World  Bank  Group  were  held  in  Tokyo. Half  a  century  since  then,  Japan’s  economy  has 
grown  significantly  and,  amid  globalization,  a  linkage  between  Japan  and  the  rest  of  the 
world has been further closely interrelated. In the week after next, from Tuesday, October 
9, the Annual Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank Group will be held in Tokyo for the 
second time. The Bank of Japan, together with the Ministry of Finance, is preparing for the 
Meetings  as  a  host  country. About  20  thousand  participants  and  concerned  parties from 
all  over  the  world  are  expected  to  join,  and  many  conferences  and  seminars  on  the 
global  economy,  financial  systems  and  other  various  issues  are  to  be  held. In  order  to  let 
people know further about Japan’s economy, the best way is to let them actually see Japan. 
I believe  many of  you  are  already planning to  participate, and hope that  you  will seize  the 
opportunity for a lively exchange of views. 
Today I will talk under the theme of the “Economic Slowdown and Monetary Easing.” In the 
first  half,  I  will  present  an  overview  of  the  current  state  and  outlook  for  the  global 
economy  and  Japan’s  economy.  In  the  second  half,  based  on  such  things  about  the 
economies  at  home  and  abroad,  I  will  explain  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  To  summarize  the  thrust  of  my  speech  in  advance,  there  are  five  points.  First, 
looking  at  overseas  economies,  due  to  the  effects  of  the  European  debt  problem, 
business  sentiment  has  become  cautious  in  many  countries  and  regions,  mainly  in  the 
manufacturing sector, and the economies have moved somewhat deeper into a deceleration 
phase. Future uncertainty  remains  high. Second,  in  considering  the  background  to  the 
slowdown in overseas economies, it might be better not to focus only on the effects of the 
European debt problem, but to view from a broader perspective. Namely, we need to have 
the following big picture in mind. During the period up to the mid-2000s of the so-called Great 
Moderation, a bubble was generated in advanced countries and they are still suffering from 
the balance-sheet adjustments after the burst of the bubble. In emerging economies, as an 
excess supply capacity of a low cost labor force, which was a factor in supporting the Great 
Moderation,  becoming  low,  it  has  become  difficult  to  simultaneously  achieve  economic 
growth and price stability. Third, Japan’s economy registered relatively high growth in the first 
half of 2012, but the pick-up in economic activity has come to a pause, reflecting the weak 
developments  in  overseas  economies. Economic  activity  is  expected  to  level  off more  or 
less  for  the  time  being. Fourth,  in  response  to  a  weaker  outlook  for  economic activity, the 
Bank of Japan further enhanced monetary  easing at the Monetary Policy Meeting  held  last 
week  so  that  the  future  economy  will  not  deviate  from  the  orbit  of  “returning  to  the 
sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.”  Fifth,  in  order  for  Japan’s  economy  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
overcome  deflation,  in  addition  to  such  support  from  the  financial  side,  it  is important to 
make efforts to strengthen growth potential and take advantage of accommodative  financial 
conditions. After explaining those issues, I will answer to some of the questions raised about 
this time’s monetary easing. 
Current state and outlook for overseas economies 
I. 
Let  me  start  with  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy. Overseas  economies  have 
moved somewhat deeper into a deceleration phase. While the global economy has been on 
a  deceleration  phase,  it  seems  that  the  extent  of  deceleration  has  recently  increased 
mainly in manufacturers in many countries and regions. 
firms  and  households  have  worsened,  posing  pressure 
Current state of the European economy 
The  European  economy  is  currently  in  a  deceleration  phase. Three  years  have  already 
passed  since  concern  over  the  government  debt  was  recognized  in  international  financial 
and capital markets, and, at present, the problem has not been limited to Greece, Portugal, 
and Ireland, which have already been receiving support from the European Union (EU) and 
the  IMF  but  also  spread  over  to  major  southern  European  countries,  including  Spain  and 
Italy. In  those  countries,  due  to  a  rise  in  government  bond  yields,  namely,  a  decline  in 
government bond prices, financial institutions’ assets have deteriorated, which has led to a 
rise  in  funding  costs  and  instability  of  financial  positions.  As  a  result,  financial  conditions 
surrounding 
to  suppress 
economic activity. Such  deterioration  in  the  real  economy  and  concern  over  the  financial 
systems have  been  fed  back  to  the  fiscal  problem  through  a  decline  in  revenue  and  an 
increase in support  for  financial  institutions. In  such  a  way,  in  Europe,  a  vicious  cycle  of 
public  finance,  the  financial  system,  and  the  real  economy  has  been  at  work,  mainly  in 
peripheral  countries.  Therefore,  the  stagnation  in  the  European  economy  has  been 
protracted,  and  that  has  recently  been  spread  to  core  countries,  including  Germany, 
mainly  in  terms  of business sentiment. The growth rate of the euro area economy has been 
negative for three consecutive quarters. 
In  the  meantime,  the  European  authorities  have  been  taking  various  policy  measures. In 
July,  a  financial  support  measure  to  inject  public  funds  into  Spanish  financial  institutions 
was  compiled,  and  in  the  beginning  of  September,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) 
introduced a  new  program  to  purchase  government  bonds  with  a maturity of between  one 
and  three  years,  with  no  ex  ante  quantitative  limits  on  the  size  of  purchases. However,  in 
starting  purchases  of  government  bonds,  the  ECB  is  going  to  make  some  conditions. For 
example,  the  issuer  countries  of  bonds  to  be  purchased  will  have  to  accept monitoring  by 
the  EU  and  the  IMF  on  the  progress  of  fiscal  consolidation. Thanks  to  those  various 
policy responses, stability has been maintained in interbank funding markets, and investors’ 
risk aversion has abated somewhat in international financial and capital markets as a whole. 
The  policy  responses  by  the  ECB  and  other  policy  authorities  are  indispensable  for 
containing  the  vicious  cycle  of  public  finance,  the  financial  system,  and  the real  economy. 
However, in order to resolve  the European debt  problem  fundamentally,  it is necessary for 
countries whose fiscal sustainability has been a cause for concern to make some progress 
in  meeting 
to 
long-term  growth  potential,  and  reinforcing  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In 
addition,  for Europe  as  a  whole,  integrating  fiscal  policy  and  banking  supervision  of  the 
nations  is  an unavoidable challenge. None of these challenges is easy to meet and thus it 
is likely that high uncertainty will continue to surround future progress. 
Speaking of risks associated with the European debt problem, there is a risk that stagnation 
in the real economy might become protracted under the vicious cycle of public finance, the 
financial system, and the real economy, and there is a risk that a financial crisis might occur 
due  to  concern  over  the  financial  system. Put  simply  about  the  recent  developments  in 
fiscal  consolidation,  strengthening  medium- 
the  challenges  such  as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Europe, it can be summarized that the risk that stagnation in the real economy, including the 
spillover to core countries, might become protracted has still been large, while  the risk that 
a financial crisis might occur has subsided due to various policy responses. 
Current state of the U.S. economy 
Let me turn to the United States. The U.S. economy has been on a modest recovery trend 
with a moderate increase in private consumption, including automobile sales, and signs of a 
pick-up in the housing market. However, there have been weak developments. Improvement 
in  employment  has  been  slow  and,  amid  economic  adjustment 
in  Europe  being 
protracted,  business  sentiment,  mainly  of  manufacturers  operating  globally,  has  recently 
become cautious and an increase in business fixed investment has been slowing. 
Against  such  a  backdrop,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  recently  decided  to  keep  the  target 
range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  0  to  1/4  percent  and  changed  the  outlook  for  the 
duration  in which exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted, 
from  “at  least  through  late  2014”  to  “at  least  through  mid-2015.”  In  addition,  it  has 
decided  to purchase  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  issued  by  governmental  financial 
institutions, called agency MBS, at a pace of 40 billion dollars per month until the outlook for 
the labor market improves substantially in a context of price stability. 
In the United States, while balance-sheet adjustments due to the burst of a housing bubble 
have been progressing to a certain degree, it has steadfastly remained. In such  a situation, 
in addition to the effects of the European debt problem, there are no prospects for a solution 
to the so-called fiscal cliff problem and there is an increasing awareness about uncertainty 
of fiscal consolidation over time. Those factors are likely to continue to constrain economic 
activity  for  the  time  being  through  growing  cautiousness  in  household  and  business 
sentiment. While  the  U.S.  economy  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  partly supported 
by accommodative financial conditions, the pace of recovery for the time being is likely to be 
only moderate. 
Current state of the Chinese economy 
Next is China. While the  Chinese  economy has  been growing at a  relatively high rate, the 
state of slowdown has become protracted. It has been pointed out that, in the background, 
there  are  a  slowdown  in  exports  to  Europe  and  a  deceleration  in  private  real  estate 
investment  due  to  the  effects  of  past  monetary  tightening  and  policy  measures  to  control 
real  estate  transactions. With  final  demand  at  home  and  abroad  declining,  pressure  for 
inventory adjustments in the raw material industry and  a  wide  range  of areas has recently 
been increasing, which has been spreading to production in the manufacturing industry. 
In  China,  as  the  authorities  were  taking  policy  responses,  including  monetary  easing  and 
advancement  of  infrastructure  investment,  the  economy  was  considered  to  gradually 
accelerate  the  pace  of  growth  if  those  effects  would  manifest  themselves. While  I  believe 
such  a  scenario  is still  maintained,  the slowdown has been  lingering longer than  expected 
and it is certain that the time when economic activity gets out of the state of slowdown will 
be  deferred. While  it  is  due  mainly  to  greater-than-expected  stagnation  in  the  European 
economy,  which  is  the  largest  trading  partner,  there  might  be  a  more  structural  problem. 
One is that the policy authorities seem to be hesitant about stepping on the gas pedal toward 
economic growth. That might be due to a bitter experience that a large-scale fiscal spending 
and  monetary  easing  after  the  Lehman  shock  led  to  a  rise  in  prices  and  a  surge  in  real 
estate prices. A simultaneous achievement of both economic growth and price stability  is  a 
common  challenge  to  many  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  which  I  will 
talk  about  in  detail  later.  Another  reason  might  be  that,  in  China,  as  a  result  of  continued 
growth  for  a  long  period  led  largely  by  public  investment  and  business  fixed investment, 
industries,  mainly  the  raw  material  industry,  have  been  carrying  a  structural problem  of 
excessive  investment,  and  the  balance  between  supply  and  demand  has  been prone  to 
be  lost. In  the  process  of  China’s  transition  from  high  growth  to  sustainable growth,  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
answer  to  the  question  on  how  to  change  the  balance  between  investment  and 
consumption,  domestic  and  external  demand,  urban  and  rural  areas,  and  coastal  and 
inland areas is yet to be found, and that might have been increasing uncertainty about the 
future economic activity. 
Overall picture of the global economy 
While  I  have  explained  Europe,  the  United  States,  and  China,  respectively,  that  will  not 
suffice to see the overall picture of the global economy. There are other elements, including 
challenges  advanced  countries  are  commonly  faced  with  and  challenges  emerging 
economies  are  faced  with,  that  should  be  understood  in  the  overall  picture  of  the  global 
economy. 
In  order  to  consider  the  challenges  common  to  advanced  countries,  let  us  go  back  to  the 
period  up  to  the  mid-2000s,  which  was  called  the  “Great  Moderation.”  At  that  time,  as 
various  favorable  factors  including  a  rise  in  emerging  economies  and  technological 
innovation  in  finance  overlapped,  extremely  favorable  economic  conditions  of  high  growth, 
low inflation, and low interest rates continued for a long period. Against such a backdrop, an 
optimistic  view  on  the  economic  outlook  spread  globally  and  an  investment  boom  and  a 
boost of demand for consumer durables surfaced in the United States and Europe. On the 
financial  front,  financial  institutions’  risk-taking  attitude  became  aggressive,  and  a  rapid 
bloat in credit and a rapid increase in leverage took place. In short, an excess was generated 
both  on  the  real  economy  and  financial  front,  and  such  excesses  were  finally corrected 
by the Lehman shock. 
Subsequently, the experience the United States, Europe, and other advanced countries had 
is  that,  once  a  large-scale  bubble  bursts  and  a  financial  crisis  occurs,  economic 
adjustment becomes  protracted and,  in  the meantime, the economy is  forced  to  grow  at  a 
low rate  – a phenomenon repeated over and over in history. In the United States, substantial 
impairment  of  households’  balance  sheets  due  mainly  to  the  subprime  mortgage  problem 
has  made  a  recovery  in  the  U.S.  economy  a  sluggish  one. In  Europe,  amid  an  optimistic 
mood  called  “europhoria,”  which  is  a  word  coined  by  combining  “euro”  with  “euphoria,” 
loose  fiscal  management  in  Greece  and  excessive  real  estate  investment  in  southern 
Europe took place, and left a severe problem in the balance sheets of the governments and 
financial institutions. In the process of balance-sheet adjustments, economic activity will not 
recover  as  wished. An  economy  that  is  unlikely  to  accelerate  and  remains  vulnerable  to 
the  downside  will  continue  for  a  long  period.  Without  recognizing  that  fact,  frustrations  of 
“why  the  growth  rate  is  not  increasing  despite  those  policy  responses”  or  “why  the 
unemployment  rate  does  not  decline”  are  prone  to  surface. It  seems  that  both  the  United 
States  and  Europe  are  yet  to  identify  “a  normal  pace  of  economic  growth”  in  the 
balance-sheet  adjustment  process.  That  seems  to  have  induced  difficult  problems  of 
heightening  expectations  for  economic  policy  and  social  unrest  or  dissatisfaction.  While  it 
might  be  somewhat  too  much  to  say,  from  such  a  viewpoint,  there  is  in  a  sense  a 
commonality among dissatisfaction among young people in Spain for a high unemployment 
rate,  demonstrations  against  fiscal  austerity  in  Greece,  and  repeated  conflicts  on  fiscal 
management in the United States. At least, resulting increased reliance on central banks in 
the United States and Europe is an obvious tendency. 
In  the  meantime,  China  and  other  emerging  economies  were  affected  by  a  plunge  in 
advanced economies  immediately after the Lehman shock, but they subsequently restored 
growth at an early stage on the back of buoyant domestic demand and have been growing at 
somewhat high  rates. The continued capital inflow to emerging economies, while advanced 
countries  have  been  continuing  monetary  easing  and  providing  ample  funds, seems  to 
have  also  been  boosting  domestic  demand  in  emerging  economies. Recently, contribution 
to  the  global economic growth by  advanced  countries  has  been declining markedly and 
that  by  emerging  economies  has  been  increasing.  According  to  the  IMF,  the  proportion of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
advanced  countries  and  emerging  economies  in  world  GDP  has  shifted  substantially from 
“7 to 3” to “5 to 5” in the past 30 years. 
While  emerging  economies  have  been  leading  the  global  economy,  they have  been  faced 
with a new challenge after the Lehman shock. That is a simultaneous achievement of high 
growth  and  price  stability.  One  important  element  that  supported  the  “Great  Moderation” 
was  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  world’s  supply  capacity  due  to  emerging  economies’ 
industrialization on the back of an ample and inexpensive labor force. However, demand in 
emerging  economies  increased  accordingly  and  that  resulted  in  putting  constant  upward 
pressure  on  commodity  prices  and  food  prices.  In  addition,  for  example  in  China,  while 
development  in  inland  areas  has  progressed,  a  mechanism,  in  which  an  increase  in  the 
labor force  was  covered  by  a  population  inflow  from  rural  to  urban  areas,  has  recently 
been changing. As  a  labor  population  as  a  whole  is  expected  to  decline  in  the  future, 
labor supply will become more prone to fall short than in the past, and inflationary pressure 
might also stem from that aspect. 
At  present,  in  response  to  the  pressure  of  economic  slowdown  from  Europe  and  other 
advanced  countries,  emerging  economies  have  been  taking  policy  responses,  including 
monetary  easing,  but  it  has  been  difficult  to  take  drastic  measures  as  the  economy  has 
been  susceptible  to  inflationary  pressure.  There  is  uncertainty  as  to  when  those  policy 
effects will surface in emerging economies and the pace of growth will accelerate. As crop 
prices have  recently  been  surging,  a  simultaneous  achievement  of  economic  growth  and 
price stability is likely to continue to be a challenge for emerging economies. 
In  such  way,  the global  economy has  moved  somewhat  deeper into a  deceleration phase, 
with the effects of the European debt problem combined with unique factors various countries 
and  regions  have  been  involved  in  –  namely,  a  great  challenge  of  balance-sheet 
adjustments  in  advanced  countries  and  that  of  searching  for  a  sustainable  growth  path  in 
emerging  economies.  As  mentioned  earlier,  with  the  U.S.  economy  continuing  to  recover 
moderately  and  policy  effects  gradually  surfacing  in  the  Chinese  economy,  the  global 
economy is likely to get out of a deceleration phase, but the exit has been deferred. 
Current state and challenges of Japan’s economy 
II.  
Let  me move  on  to Japan’s economy. As  I have  just  explained,  overseas economies have 
moved  somewhat  deeper  into  a  deceleration  phase. As  a  result,  exports  and  industrial 
production  have  been  relatively  weak. The month-on-month  rate  of change  in  real  exports 
has been negative for four consecutive months since May due to a weakness in exports to 
Europe  and  China,  and,  against  such  a  backdrop,  industrial  production  declined  again  in 
July relative to the April-June quarter, following a decline in the April-June quarter relative to 
the previous one. On the other hand, domestic demand has been resilient mainly supported 
by  reconstruction-related  demand.  Public  investment  has  been  clearly  increasing  and 
business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend  with  an improvement 
in corporate profits. Private consumption has been resilient with improving employment and 
housing  investment  has  generally  been  picking  up.  However,  there  have  recently  been 
somewhat  weak  indicators  in  private  consumption.  While  that  is  partly  due  to  a  weather 
factor, a sluggish pace of growth in overtime wages mainly in the manufacturing  industry  due 
to  weak  production  and  a  decline  in  summer  bonuses  might  have  contributed  to 
constraining consumption from the income side. While an application for  receiving  subsidies 
for  eco-friendly  cars  ended  at  the  end  of  last  week,  last  minute  demand  was  not 
observed. That  was  partly  because  efforts  by  car  sellers  after  ending  of the  application, 
including  a  rebate  in  place  of  the  subsidies  and  the  release  of  popular  fuel-efficient 
new-models,  had  been  anticipated,  but  it  perhaps  should  be  interpreted  as  a  sign  that 
pre-consumption  of  future  demand  has  reached  its  limit. As  for  business  fixed investment, 
while it is likely to continue increasing as a trend, attention should be paid to whether there 
are any effects of a global deterioration in business sentiment. While domestic demand as a 
whole  is  likely to  maintain  its  firmness,  it  might  be  difficult  to  expect  domestic  demand  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
have  power  to  offset  the  weakness  in  external  demand  and  further  elevate  economic 
activity. 
As  explained,  Japan’s  economy  registered  relatively  high  growth  in  the  first  half  of  2012, 
supported  by  the  firmness  in  domestic  demand,  but  the  pick-up  in  economic  activity  has 
come to a pause, reflecting the developments in overseas economies. Economic activity is 
expected  to  level  off  more  or  less  for  the  time  being. On  the  price  front,  the  year-on-year 
rate  of change  in  consumer  prices  excluding volatile  food  has  been  around 0  percent  and 
was  minus  0.3  percent  in  July  as  the  earlier  fall  in  crude  oil  prices  has  been  exerting 
downward  pressure. The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  consumer  prices  is  expected  to 
remain at around 0 percent for the time being. 
Regarding  risks,  there  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  global  economy, 
including the European debt problem, the momentum toward a recovery in the U.S. economy, 
and  a  simultaneous  achievement  of  price  stability  and  economic  growth  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies.  Furthermore,  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  effects  of 
financial and foreign exchange market developments on economic activity and prices. 
III.  
The bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
Comprehensive Monetary Easing 
Based on the state of the economy at home and abroad, let me turn to the Bank’s conduct 
of monetary policy. 
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation  and  returning  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability,  and  has  been 
pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing.  As  powerful  monetary  easing  is  pursued  within  the 
framework of Comprehensive Monetary Easing, let me first briefly explain the framework. 
It was October 2010 when Comprehensive Monetary Easing was introduced and about two 
years  have  passed  since  then. The  basic  reason  for  the  introduction  was,  amid  the  policy 
rate  virtually  becoming  0  percent,  to  further  generate  easing  effects. The  specifics  of  the 
framework  were  as  follows. First,  the  Bank  has  been  encouraging  the  policy  rate  of  the 
overnight rate in the uncollateralized call market, namely, an interest rate of a quite short-term 
of  one-day  borrowing,  to  move  at  around  0  to  0.1  percent,  which  can  be  said  as virtually 
0 percent. Second, the  Bank  introduced financial  assets  purchasing  program named  an 
Asset  Purchase  Program  (hereafter  referred  to  as  “the  Program”)  and  under  the Program 
has  been  purchasing  short-term  and  long-term  government  securities  as  well  as  a  wide 
range  of  risk  assets,  such  as  commercial  paper  (CP),  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). That has been a measure, 
through  influencing  longer-term  interest  rates  and  risk  premiums,  to  urge  the  effects  of 
monetary easing to  spread steadily over  to  firms’  funding costs. Third, the Bank  has  been 
aiming at 1 percent in terms of the year-on-year growth rate in consumer prices for the time 
being  and  made  a  commitment  to  continuing  its  powerful  monetary  easing  through  the 
pursuit of virtually zero interest rate policy and purchases of financial assets until it judges 
the  1  percent  goal  to  be  in  sight. By  a  central  bank  making  a  commitment  to  continuing 
monetary  easing  for  a  long  period,  there  will  be  momentum  for  pushing  down  the  entire 
yield curve, including longer term yields. 
Background to the enhancement of monetary easing 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held last week, the Bank further enhanced monetary easing. 
Specifically,  first,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the  total  size  of  the  Program  by  about 
10 trillion  yen,  from  about  70  trillion  yen  to  about  80  trillion  yen. The  completion  of  the 
purchases under the Program was extended for six months and the purchases will continue 
until  around  the  end  of  2013. Second,  the  Bank  decided  to  remove  the  minimum  bidding 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
yield, which used to be set at 0.1 percent per annum, for the outright purchases in order to 
ensure smooth purchase of the Japanese government bonds (JGBs). 
Looking  at  the  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  that  led  to  the  decisions,  as 
explained  earlier,  while  overseas  economies  have  moved  somewhat  deeper  into  a 
deceleration phase, the pick-up in economic activity has come to a pause and is expected to 
level  off  more  or  less  for  the  time  being. The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI 
excluding volatile food is to hover at around 0 percent for the time being. In the meantime, 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  effects  of  financial  and  foreign  exchange  market 
developments on economic activity and prices. 
Until recently, the Bank had judged that, from a longer term perspective, Japan’s economy 
would  return  to  the  moderate  recovery  path  as  domestic  demand  remained  firm  and 
overseas economies gradually emerged from the deceleration phase. And, the year-on-year 
rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  excluding  volatile  food  would  start  to  gradually increase  and 
was  likely  to  reach  1  percent  in  the  not  so  distant  future  from  fiscal  2014 onward. 
However, taking into account the current developments in economic activity and prices, the 
time of “overseas economies to gradually emerge from the deceleration phase” and the time 
of “Japan’s economy to return to the moderate recovery path” are both likely to be delayed. 
While to what extent the delay will be is not clear amid continued high uncertainty concerning 
China and other overseas economies, roughly speaking, it is likely to be about six months. 
If  things  had  remained  as  they  were,  Japan’s  economy  would  have  been  on  the  verge  of 
deviating from the assumed orbit of “return to the moderate growth path with price stability.” 
To  avoid  that,  the  Bank  judged  it  necessary  to  further  strengthen  monetary easing  this 
time.  The  aim  of  the  measures  this  time  is,  by  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing, 
inclusive  of  the  measures  this  time,  to  bring  back  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices  in  the  long  run  to  the  orbit  of  returning  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price 
stability. 
Specifics of the enhancement of monetary easing 
As mentioned earlier, the Bank  decided this time to  increase  the total  size of the Program 
substantially  by  about  10  trillion  yen. Based  on  the  recognition  of  the  current  state  of 
economic  activity  and  prices,  the  Bank  considered  that  a  large  amount  of  funds  would  be 
necessary in order to prevent the outlook for economic activity and prices in the long term 
from deviating from the orbit of returning to the sustainable growth path with price stability. 
While  there  was  a  choice  to  increase  additional  purchases  in  risk  assets,  as  the  current 
financial conditions in Japan were not in a situation  in  which risk premiums increased due 
to  investors’  anxiety  or  risk  aversion,  the  Bank  opted  to  increase  purchases  of  short-term 
and  long-term  government  securities. By  increasing  purchases  of  those  by  about  5  trillion 
yen  each,  the  Bank  aimed  at  influencing  the  entire  yield  curve. Japanese  firms’  funding 
structure,  unlike  that  of  the  United  States  in  which  the  proportion  of  long-term  corporate 
bonds and mortgage loans are high, has a characteristic of a high proportion of bank loans 
of  three  years  or  less. In  particular,  bank  loans  of  one  year  or  less  account  for  about 
one-third  of  new  loans,  and  there  are  also  long-term  loans  with  variable  rates. Taking  into 
account  such  structure  of  corporate  finance,  the  effects  on  the  entire  yield  curve,  and 
financial  institutions’  sense  of security in  their funding,  the  Bank considers that  purchasing 
government securities with a remaining maturity of three years or less in a balanced manner 
will be effective in further spreading monetary easing effects. 
While the increase in the outstanding amount of the Program  was to be completed by the 
end of June 2013, it is extended to be completed by the end of December 2013. Given the 
economic  situation,  the  Bank  has  judged  it  necessary  to  beef  up  the  aforementioned 
“commitment to continuing monetary easing for a long period” by extending the accumulation 
period of the Program. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
falling  short  of 
In  addition,  while  the  minimum  bidding  yield  for  purchases  of  the  JGBs  and  corporate 
bonds was set at 0.1 percent, the Bank has decided to remove  it. With the Bank pursuing 
monetary easing, the bidding yield for the JGB issuance as well as actual market transaction 
rates up to three years have often fallen below 0.1 percent. To that end, in the purchases of 
the  JGBs,  aggregate  bids 
the  so-called 
undersubscription,  has  taken  place. While  such  phenomenon  itself  is  an  indication  that 
monetary  easing  has  been  spreading  powerfully,  in  order  to  further  ensure  purchases  of 
financial assets, the Bank has decided to remove the minimum bidding yield. By combining 
an  increase  in  the  total  size  of  the  Program  and  the  removal  of  the  minimum  bidding 
yield, the Bank believes that the effects of  monetary  easing will occur more powerfully. 
As the current amount outstanding of the Program is about 60 trillion yen, hereafter, toward 
the  scheduled  amount  of  80  trillion  yen  by  the  end  of  2013,  the  Bank  will  accelerate  its 
purchase  schedule  to  further  accumulate  20  trillion  yen  of  financial  assets.  The  Bank  will 
continue to proceed with monetary easing in a continuous manner by steadily increasing the 
amount outstanding of the Program. 
the  Bank’s  offers,  or 
the  Bank’s  powerful  monetary  easing,  Japan’s 
Accommodative financial conditions 
Then  through  what  transmission  channels  will  this  time’s  measures  influence  economic 
activity  and  prices  and  “ensure  the  return  of  Japan’s  economy  to  the  sustainable  growth 
path”? 
First of all, since the measures are to increase the amount of purchase by the Program and 
to enable the Bank to purchase the JGBs at a yield level of 0.1 percent or lower, they will 
add further  downward  pressure  on  market  interest  rates. That  will  encourage  a  decline 
in financial institutions’ lending rates and influence interest rate formation in various financial 
markets,  thereby  making  financial  conditions  surrounding  firms  and  households  more 
accommodative. That is an effect that could be clearly confirmed in two years’ experience of 
Comprehensive Monetary Easing. 
Under 
financial  conditions  are 
accommodative. Since  the  introduction  of  the  Program,  longer  term  market  interest  rates 
have  been  steadily  declining. Looking  at  the  yields  of  the  government  securities,  in  a 
manner  of  spreading  from  short-term  to  long-term,  yields  up  to  about  three  years  have 
already  been  hovering  at  an  extremely  low  level  of  about  0.1  percent. A 5-year  yield  has 
also declined to about 0.2 percent. Such a decline in market interest rates has encouraged 
a decline in firms’ funding costs and increased a sense of security for funding. According to 
a  survey  on  firms  about  their  cash  management  and  financial  institutions’  lending  stance, 
diffusion  indexes  have  clearly  improved  to  the  levels  better  than  the  average  since  2000. 
Issuing  conditions  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  have  generally  been  favorable  and  banks’ 
average  contracted  interest  rates  on  new  loans  and  discounts  have  been  at  about 
1 percent for  both  short  and  long  terms,  which  are  at  historically  low  levels  of  even  lower 
than  those  during  the  period  of  quantitative  easing  policy  in  the  first  half  of  the  2000s. 
Against  such  a  backdrop,  average  interest  payment  on  firms’  interest  bearing  debt  has 
declined to around 
1.5  percent. That  is  an  extremely  low  level  compared  with  firms’  return  on  asset  (ROA) 
being  around  3.0–3.5  percent. Consequently,  firms  can  now  borrow  a  sufficient  amount  of 
funds at much lower interest rates than their own profitability. 
In such a way, as for the effects monetary policy exerts on the real economy, it can be said 
that  the  effects  of  monetary  easing  have  thoroughly  spread  in  terms  of  the  first  stage  of 
transmission  from  monetary  policy  to  financial  conditions.  What  is  important  for  Japan’s 
economy  is  that  firms  and  households  take  advantage  of  the  accommodative  financial 
conditions  and  increase  investment  and  spending  aggressively. By  that,  the  second  stage 
of transmission from financial conditions to the real economy will be strengthened. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Efforts to take advantage of accommodative financial conditions 
In  that  regard,  currently,  as  firms  are  not  confident  about  their  future  profits  environment, 
they have not necessarily been able to take full advantage of such accommodative financial 
conditions.  What  becomes  important  here  is  the  efforts  to  strengthen  growth  potential.  If 
strengthening  growth  potential  actually  proceeds  and  growth  expectations  for  Japan’s 
economy pick up, the outlook for firms’ profits will increase or the expected rate of return of 
investment  will  increase,  which  will  lead  to  positive  developments  like  firms’  investment. If 
that happens, accommodative financial conditions will further exert their effects. Once such 
virtuous  cycle  starts,  inflation  will  be  more  likely  to  rise  through  an  improvement  in 
aggregate supply and demand balance. 
In such efforts to strengthen growth potential, it goes without saying that  private economic 
entities will play the most important role. Recently, as seen in an increase in consumption by 
the  elderly  and  in  renewable  energy-related  investment,  the  move  to  convert  challenges 
Japan’s economy is faced with into an opportunity to tap new demand  has been gradually 
taking place. It is important to grow such bud of growth and nurture it to a larger market. In 
doing  so,  the  role  of  financial  institutions  in  providing  funds  necessary  for  firms’  activity, 
including in their startups, and the role of the government in preparing an environment that 
facilitates  firms’  activity,  including  promotion  of  deregulation,  are  also  important.  Also  the 
Bank,  from  the  viewpoint  of  making  utmost  contribution  that  a  central  bank  can  do,  has 
been  implanting  the  extraordinary  “Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening 
the Foundations for Economic Growth” since June 2010. 
The  measure  is  for  the  Bank  to  provide  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  financial 
institutions carrying out lending and investment that contribute to Japan’s economic growth, 
and  the  total  amount  of  line  of  credit  has  now  reached  5.5  trillion  yen,  inclusive  of  the 
U.S. dollars.  While  the  measure  is  an  extraordinary  one,  given  the  intrinsic  role  of  a 
central bank, the reason the Bank dares to do it is that the Bank expects the measure to play 
the  role  of  a  “catalyst”  in  strengthening  growth  potential.  In  addition  to  the  impact  of 
actually  providing  funds,  significance  of  sharing  the  recognition  that  strengthening  growth 
potential is important is not small at all. In fact, since the introduction of the measure, there 
have  been  not  a  few  examples  of  promoting  voluntary  initiatives  toward  strengthening 
foundations for economic growth, such as some financial institutions setting up a dedicated 
fund for the regions’ promising businesses. 
If  such  efforts  further  develop  and,  as  the  moves  to  take  advantage  of  the  current 
accommodative financial conditions increase, the effects of monetary easing will be further 
exerted. While accommodative monetary conditions have reached a state of saturation as I 
have  explained  earlier,  from  the  viewpoint  of  taking  advantage  of  such  accommodative 
financial  conditions,  a  strong  possibility  still  remains  for  monetary  easing  exerting  greater 
effects. 
Assessment of the economy and the timing of monetary easing 
As for this time’s measures, I have explained a grand view of the assessment of underlying 
economic  activity  and  prices  and  the  aim,  the  specifics  of  the  measures,  assumed 
transmission channels, and the importance of strengthening growth potential to utilize them. 
In  the following,  I will answer  to some questions raised  related to the measures taken this 
time. 
First,  the  question  on  “why  the  Bank  decided  monetary  easing  at  this  time’s  Monetary 
Policy Meeting.” That originates both from a view that “the past assessment of the economy 
might have been too optimistic” and a view that “the Bank could have waited until it checked 
the result of the Tankan survey to be released at the beginning of October and it conducted 
the full examination in the Outlook Report scheduled for the end of October.” 
As  for  the  assessment  of  the  economy,  in  recent  months,  it  has  been  said  that  the 
deceleration  phase  of  overseas  economies  has  been  continuing  on  such  occasions  as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
to  Japan’s  exports  and 
Governor’s  press  conferences,  speeches,  and  interviews. Against  such  a  backdrop,  it  has 
been confirmed that the extent of deceleration has recently increased in many countries and 
regions,  mainly  in  the  manufacturing  industry,  and  that  the  phenomenon  has  been  clearly 
spreading 
industrial  production.  The  weaker-than-expected 
developments in the global economy in the meantime  were, as shown in a deterioration in 
business sentiment indicators, beyond many people’s expectations, including us. 
As  for  the  question  on  what  cases  the  Bank  will  make  policy  responses  in,  I  myself 
mentioned  at  various  opportunities  that  “when  the  outlook  turns  out  to  be  weaker  than 
expected  or  the  risk  associated  with  it  intensifies,  the  Bank  will  not  hesitate  to  implement 
additional  monetary  easing.”  The  Bank,  not  only  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  to 
publish  the  Outlook  Report  but  also  in  every  Meeting  decides  on  the conduct  of  monetary 
policy by examining the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices as 
well  as  risk  factors  surrounding  it  based  on  available  information. As  a  result  of  such 
examination at the latest Meeting, the Bank judged that the scenario it assumed had been 
delayed or weaker than expected. As long as there is such judgment, there is no reason to 
procrastinate a policy response. In such a way, the decision this time was quite an orthodox 
one  in  line  with  the  basic  concept  expressed  at  various  opportunities.  The  further 
enhancement of monetary easing decided this time, together with the cumulative effects of 
the  past  measures,  will  ensure  the  return  of  Japan’s  economy  to  a  sustainable  growth 
path with  price  stability. Then,  in  the  Outlook  Report  scheduled  to  be  released  at  the  end 
of October,  based  on  new  indicators  and  developments  being  added  by  then,  the  outlook 
for economic activity and prices as well as risk factors are to be examined comprehensively. 
As  for  the  Bank’s  decision  on  enhancement  of  monetary  easing  at  this  timing,  there  have 
been comments, for example,  from market  participants  that “the Bank has followed central 
banks  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.” Each  country’s  central  bank  has  been  striving  to 
pursue  optimal  policy  according  to  each  country’s  economic  and  financial  situation,  and 
does  not  consider  taking policy action  following another  country’s  central  bank. As  long as 
the economy itself has been interrelated globally, there is a good chance that the economies 
of  countries  and  regions  simultaneously  become  weaker  than  expected  and,  as  a  result, 
each  country’s  or  region’s  central  bank  takes  the  same  kind  of  response  at  the  same 
period. As for  this time’s  policy actions,  amid  a  sense  of slowdown  in  the  global  economy 
becoming stronger than widely predicted, it appears to be the case that major central banks 
have  examined  the  situation  of  each  country  or  region  and  have  respectively  chosen 
responses deemed appropriate. 
As a policy stance going forward, the Bank has clarified its view that “[t]he Bank continues to 
conduct  monetary  policy  in  an  appropriate  manner.  The  Bank  will  also  do  its  utmost  to 
ensure  the  stability  of  Japan’s  financial  system,  while  giving  particular  attention  to 
developments  in  global  financial  markets.” As  has  been  the  case,  the  Bank  will  examine 
the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  risk  factors,  and,  when  judged 
necessary, respond decisively and flexibly. 
Comparison with overseas central banks 
In relation to monetary easing by overseas central banks, we sometimes receive an opinion 
that  “the  Bank  should  pursue  bolder  monetary  easing,  like  the  Federal  Reserve,  by 
purchasing assets without setting a ceiling and a time limit or clarifying the duration for the 
zero interest rate.” 
In  that  regard,  as  said  before,  a  central  bank  strives  to  choose  the  most  effective  policy 
measure  or  policy  framework  based  on  policy  challenges  and  the  financial  and  economic 
situation  of  each  country  or  region. While  there  are  various  differences  in  policy  conduct 
between the Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve, both share the view of doing its utmost 
as  a  central  bank  to  achieve  respective  goal. It  might  not  be  desirable  to  argue  which 
central bank is bolder, based on the difference in specific monetary easing measures. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
To  be  somewhat  specific,  let  me  point  out  three  things.  First,  the  relationship  with  policy 
challenges. The  Bank,  with  the  recognition  that  Japan’s  economy  is  faced  with  the  critical 
challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  and  returning  to  the  sustainable  growth  path  with  price 
stability,  has  been  purchasing  various  assets,  including  risk  assets,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  ventured  into  taking  an  extraordinary  measure,  as  a  central  bank,  to  support 
strengthening  foundations  for  economic  growth.  Central  banks  of  major  countries  are 
choosing policy responses in line with challenges each central bank is faced with. 
Second, about a ceiling and time limit. While the Bank has set a ceiling and time limit for the 
Program,  they  have been  increased  or extended from time  to time. What started initially at 
about  35 trillion  yen  in  the total amount and  to be completed  by the end of 2011 has now 
become a much larger and much longer easing measure than initially planned, with the total 
amount  of  about  80  trillion  yen  and  to  be  completed  by  the  end  of  2013.  Regardless  of 
whether  there  is  a  predefined  ceiling  or  time  limit,  the  idea  of  strengthening  monetary 
easing  if  those  are  judged  insufficient  in  achieving  a  policy  objective  is  the  same in every 
central bank. 
Third,  how  to  show  the  duration  for  maintaining  the  virtual  zero  interest  rate. The  Bank, 
while presenting the outlook for economic activity and prices of two to two and a half years 
ahead,  has  clearly  made  a  commitment  to  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  through 
measures, including the virtually zero interest rate policy and purchases of financial assets, 
until  it  judges  “the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  for  the  time  being  of 
1 percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  to  be  in  sight. From  a 
perspective  of  practical  effects,  we  recognize  that  there  is  not  a  great  difference  between 
such approach and the Federal Reserve’s approach, which specifically shows  the duration 
for  maintaining the  zero interest  rate  on the  basis  of the  outlook  for  economic  activity and 
prices at  a  certain point  and  change  the  duration  in  accordance  with  subsequent  changes 
in the outlook. 
Therefore,  it  seems  to  be  no  significant  difference  in  the  basic  idea  and  effects  of  policy 
conduct between major central banks, albeit some difference in specific ways of conduct. 
Purchase of government bonds and confidence in currency 
Finally,  in  relation  to  the  Bank’s  decision  to  increase  the  purchase  of  the  JGBs,  we 
sometimes receive concern that “the Bank’s massive purchase of government bonds is fiscal 
monetization by a central bank and eventually confidence in currency will not be maintained.” 
Let me touch on that point. 
At  present,  the Bank  has  been  purchasing  the JGBs  according  to  two  different  objectives. 
One  is  the  purchase  of  the  JGBs  corresponding  with  the  trend  increase  in  demand  for 
banknotes  associated  with  economic  growth.  In  that  case,  as  long  as  the  purchase 
corresponds  with  the  trend  increase  in  demand  for  banknotes,  it  is  rational  to  hold  not 
short-term  assets  but  long-term  government  bonds. And  in  light  of  the  thrust  of  such 
purchase,  the  outstanding  amount  of  banknotes  issued  is  set  as  the  ceiling  of  the  JGB 
purchases. The other purchase of the JGBs is through the Program, which I have repeatedly 
mentioned  today. As  those  purchases  are  decided  based  on  monetary  policy judgment to 
influence longer-term interest rates and other rates, there is no such condition that the total 
size of the purchases should be kept within the amount of banknotes issued. 
The outstanding amount of the JGBs held by the Bank has increased from about 66 trillion 
yen at the end of 2011 to about 84 trillion yen at present, coming to exceed the outstanding 
amount  of banknotes issued. That is due to an increase in the JGB purchases through the 
Program  under  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing. As  it  is  expected  that  the  outstanding 
amount  of  the  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  will  increase  to  about  92  trillion  yen  at  the  end  of 
2012,  it  will  be  an  increase  of  about  26  trillion  yen  in  one  year. Given  that  this  year’s 
issuance  of  special  deficit-financing  bonds  is  about  38  trillion  yen,  it  can  be  said  that,  the 
Bank’s purchase of the JGBs has already reached to a substantial size. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
If by any chance such massive purchase of the JGBs is interpreted, apart from the necessity 
in monetary policy conduct, as aiming at fiscal monetization,  confidence in the Bank could 
be  eroded  considerably  and  long-term  interest  rates  could  rise  substantially.  That  will 
affect  significantly  the  government  which  issues  the  JGBs  and  financial  institutions  which 
hold  the  JGBs,  thereby  could  impair  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  the  real 
economy. In order to avoid such things, the Bank considers it important to firmly convey the 
idea to the market that the Bank will not carry out fiscal monetization. In addition, so that the 
market can always check the Bank’s actions, the Bank will continue to disclose the state of 
purchases under the Program in a transparent manner. 
Concluding remarks 
I have spent quite a time talking about the current state and outlook of the global economy 
and  Japan’s  economy,  and  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy  based  on  them. In 
conclusion, let me briefly touch on the prospects of Asian economies and Japan’s economy. 
Japan’s economy was faced with a structural challenge of declining growth potential due to 
rapid  aging  and  has  long  been  struggling  to  overcome  it. As  mentioned  earlier,  recently 
there  have  been increasing moves  to  seize it  as  an opportunity to  tap  new  demand. Such 
moves  have  been  factors  underpinning  the  relatively  resilient  domestic  demand.  If  such 
moves  continue  in  Japan,  it  will  have  a  significant  meaning  for  the  Asian  economy  as  a 
whole  in  the  future. That  is  because  aging  is  a  problem  that  other  Asian  countries  also 
have to be faced with in  the not so distant future. As the income levels of Asian emerging 
economies  rise,  the  potential  market  size  of  business  for  the  elderly  has  a  chance  of 
expanding dramatically. To utilize the fruits of the efforts to tap demand of the elderly that has 
accumulated  in  Japan  as  a  result  of  facing  the  challenge  ahead  of  other  countries, 
namely,  to  utilize  the  wisdom  of  maintaining  and  improving  the  vitality  of  the  economy 
even with aging in Asian markets will not only raise the growth potential of  Japan but also 
enhance the economic and social sustainability of other Asian countries and lead to benefits 
for  the  Asian  economy  as  a  whole.  Those  are  not  limited  to  the  problem  of  aging.  I 
recognize  that  it  will  become  increasingly  important  to  have  a  perspective that  Japan’s 
efforts to overcome various challenges will lead to global benefits. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
