Barbro Wickman-Parak: Monetary policy and unemployment – a 
constantly topical debate 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  to  the 
Swedish Trade Union Confederation (LO), Stockholm, 24 January 2012. 
 I would like to thank Maria Sjödin and Magnus Wiberg, at the Monetary Policy Department of the Riksbank, for 
their help with writing this speech. 
High  unemployment  implies  the  failure  of  the  welfare  state.  In  Sweden,  unemployment 
increased  strongly  in  conjunction  with  the  crisis  of  the  1990s,  following  which  it  has  never 
fallen  below  6  per  cent.  In  this  situation,  it  is  important  to  use  every  means  to  improve 
conditions on the labour market and also to debate the role that could be played by monetary 
policy  in  the  fight  against  unemployment.  But  it  is  equally  important  that  this  debate  is 
realistic.  From  time  to  time,  we  have  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  possibilities  monetary 
policy  has  in  this  area  have  their  limits.  This  is  primarily  a  matter  of  influencing  the  more 
short-term area of unemployment, which depends on economic activity, via effects on total 
demand in the economy. The area of unemployment that also exists in balanced economic 
cycles is harder to deal with. This unemployment is usually called long-term unemployment 
or equilibrium unemployment. The degree of equilibrium unemployment is highly dependent 
on  how  well  the  labour  market  is  functioning,  which  is  affected  by  policy  areas  other  than 
monetary policy. Placing an excessive focus on monetary policy in this context could easily 
lead  to  the  underlying  problems  on  the  labour  market  –  and  the  solutions  to  them  –  not 
receiving the discussion they deserve. 
The  target  of  monetary  policy  is  to  stabilise  inflation  at  around  two  per  cent.  Without 
prejudicing  this  target,  monetary  policy  should  also  strive  to  stabilise  production  and 
employment  around  long-term  sustainable  development  paths.1  Put  very  simply,  this  is  a 
matter of trying to steer demand so that resource utilisation is balanced but inflation does not 
deviate  too  far  from  two  per  cent.  It’s  easy  to  describe,  but  it’s  a  difficult  balancing  act  in 
practice. 
Unlike inflation, resource utilisation is not observable; instead, its level must be estimated. 
The Riksbank has put a lot of work into estimating various so-called gap measures that show 
how  strained  resource  utilisation  is,  compared  with  a  normal  situation  (examples  of  these 
include  the  GDP  gap,  the  hours  gap  and  the  unemployment  gap).  Using  these  various 
measures  as  a  basis,  we  make  an  overall  assessment  of  resource  utilisation.  What  these 
gap  measures  have  in  common  is  the  comparison  of  the  various  quantities  actually 
measured to unobservable quantities. For example, the unemployment gap is calculated by 
comparing  actual  unemployment  to  estimated  equilibrium  unemployment.  So  all  of  these 
calculations  are  uncertain.  For  the  unemployment  gap  to  be  a  practicable  measure  in 
monetary policy requires that the cyclical part of unemployment (which can be influenced by 
monetary  policy)  can  be  distinguished,  with  a  reasonable  degree  of  certainty,  from 
equilibrium unemployment (which depends on how the labour market functions). As will be 
seen, this is not a trivial problem. 
In  my  speech  today,  I  will  discuss  resource  utilisation:  specifically  what  is  known  as  the 
unemployment gap and its role in monetary policy decision-making. Recently, there has been 
                                                 
1  This  is  usually  called  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  policy.  The  term  flexible  inflation-targeting  policy  was 
introduced by Svensson (1999). The definition of the term entails the central bank minimising a squared loss 
function  consisting  of  both  inflation’s  deviation  from  target  and  output’s  deviation  from  potential  output.  A 
central  bank  that  only  considers  inflation’s  deviation  from  target  is  said  to  be  conducting  a  strict  inflation-
targeting policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
frequent discussion of the unemployment gap in monetary policy contexts, but this is not a 
new discussion.2 
For my part, I’m extremely doubtful about placing too much importance on the unemployment 
gap when taking monetary policy decisions in the here and now. It may look easy in theory; 
but in practice, it is not. My view is that we should continue to use several different measures 
of  resource  utilisation  instead.  Taken  together,  these  can  serve  as  guidance  for  monetary 
policy. But I do not consider that there is a single measure that can or should be held up as 
the  only  measure  that  we  should  adjust  monetary  policy  to.  At  least  as  important  as  the 
various estimated gap measures are survey-based measures of resource utilisation such as 
capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  industry  and  labour  market  shortages,  as  well  as 
indicators  from  the  traditional  labour  market  statistics.  The  labour  supply  holds  a  central 
position among these indicators. At this point, I would like to point out that it is important to 
not  just  see  the  labour  supply  as  a  homogenous  aggregate.  Equilibrium  unemployment  is 
influenced  by  how  well  the  match  between  jobseekers  and  job  vacancies  works.  And  the 
conditions for this matching are influenced by factors such as the composition of the labour 
supply, which, in turn, may partly be due to changes in the population structure. I will return 
to this point later on. 
The central message of my speech here today can be summarised as follows: to reduce the 
risk of going seriously wrong with monetary policy, I consider it important not to place any 
blind faith in the exactness of the gap measures we use, be this the unemployment gap or 
any other measure. So I have nothing against the fact that we use different measures; rather, 
I am concerned about how we use them. 
Let  me  now  discuss  the  problem  of  calculating  the  unemployment  gap,  which,  as  I  was 
saying, is produced by comparing actual unemployment with equilibrium unemployment. I will 
start by discussing a couple of aspects of the definition of actual unemployment. 
Actual unemployment 
Official unemployment in Sweden is measured by Statistics Sweden’s monthly labour force 
survey (AKU), in which a sample of the population in the age group 15–74 is interviewed. 
The  unemployed  are  defined  as  those  who  are  out  of  work  and  who,  on  the  date  of  the 
survey or in the previous four weeks, have looked for work that they would be able to take up 
immediately or within the next 14 days.3 
The Swedish Public Employment Service also reports unemployment figures every month on 
the basis of the people registered at its offices. Each month, the Swedish Public Employment 
Service publishes figures showing what is known as total unemployment. This includes both 
the openly unemployed and persons in labour market programmes with activity grants.4 
                                                 
2  See, for example, “Monetary policy and unemployment” in Economic Review 2005:4. In this article, Bergström 
and  Boije  discuss  the  problems  of  using  unemployment  as  an  indicator  of  resource  utilisation.  Rogerson 
(1997)  has  reviewed  the  literature  covering  so-called  equilibrium  unemployment  and  points  out  that  the 
meaning of this term is extremely unclear. Rogerson also points out that there are many different definitions of 
equilibrium unemployment in the theoretical literature and that their significance varies depending on which 
theoretical model is being used. The question of how central banks can take real economic considerations into 
account has also recently  been discussed by the Centre for Business  and Policy  Studies’ Economic  Policy 
Group. 
3  The  unemployed  also  includes  people  who  have  been  offered  work  starting  within three months, assuming 
that they would have been able to work on the date of the survey or to start within 14 days. 
4  Open unemployment is a definition used by the Swedish Public Employment Service to refer to jobseekers 
who  are  actively  looking  for  work,  who  are  able  to  enter  the  labour  market  immediately,  and  who  are  not 
participating in a labour market policy programme. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However,  it  is  not  certain  how  actual  unemployment  is  to  be  defined  if  the  intention  is  to 
measure the spare capacity of the labour market. Youth unemployment can be taken as an 
example.  In  October  2007,  Statistics  Sweden  went  over  to  reporting  unemployment 
according to an internationally-established standard. Full-time students who have looked for 
work  and  could  have  worked  were  now  reported  as  unemployed.  This  change  meant  that 
unemployment  in  the  age  group  15–24  increased  strongly,  even  though  this  group’s  main 
activity was studying. The number of people unemployed in relation to the number of people 
in the labour force in the category young people was about 25 per cent in 2010. Using the 
previous  reporting  method,  unemployment  would  have  been  15  per  cent.5  For  total 
unemployment,  the  changed  method  meant  that  measured  unemployment  increased  by 
about 2 percentage points. 
Neither is it clear how individuals participating in labour market policy programmes should be 
classified. For example, individuals obtaining what are known as entry-level jobs, new start 
jobs or sheltered employment through the Swedish Public Employment Service are counted 
as employed under Statistics Sweden’s classification, while those participating in vocational 
training courses (for example) are counted as unemployed. These classifications are not self-
evident. While attending these programmes, the participants are probably less active in their 
job-seeking.  If  an  unemployed  person  stops  looking  for  work  while  participating  in  a 
programme, perhaps we could question whether this person should still be considered to be 
unemployed. 
So actual unemployment can be measured in different ways: including or excluding full-time 
students  who  are  looking  for  work  and  can  work;  including  or  excluding  individuals 
participating in labour market policy programmes. It is unclear which of these definitions is 
the most relevant measure of welfare and which measure should be used in the monetary 
policy analysis. 
Covariation with economic activity… 
Regardless  of  how  we  choose  to  define  and  measure  actual  unemployment,  experience 
shows that it clearly covaries with economic activity, albeit with a certain time lag. At the start 
of  an  upturn  in  economic  activity,  the  number  of  hours  worked  and  employment  normally 
increase after a time lag, compared with GDP. This is reflected by the increase of output. It is 
due  to  companies  initially  using  existing  personnel  to  a  greater  extent.  In  downturns,  the 
reverse is common: companies retain their personnel as long as it remains uncertain whether 
the downturn will be long-lasting, meaning that output temporarily declines. This means that 
resource  utilisation,  measured  in  terms  of  GDP,  can  increase  or  decrease  without  there 
being any simultaneous change in unemployment. Neither is it certain, after companies have 
decided  to  increase  or  decrease  employment,  that  this  will  be  reflected  by  changes  in 
aggregate  unemployment.  As  the  size  of  the  labour  force  also  varies,  for  cyclical  reasons 
among  others,  the  level  of  unemployment  will  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  individuals 
leave, remain in or enter the labour market. 
… but the connection is not stable 
Monetary policy is forward-looking and must be based on forecasts. The practical conditions 
for forecasting actual unemployment are made more difficult by changes, over time, in the 
historical relationship between economic activity and the development of the labour market. 
During  the  financial  crisis  of  2008–2009,  the  Riksbank  was  surprised  (as  were  other 
analysts)  to  see  that  unemployment  did  not  increase  more,  considering  the  steep  fall  in 
                                                 
5  AKU, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
output in the Swedish economy. The Swedish labour market coped comparatively well, both 
in  comparison  with  how  it  is  usually  affected  by  falls  in  GDP  and  in  comparison  with 
developments in many other countries.6 The former point is illustrated by Figure 1. 
Figure 1 
Unemployment calculated according to Okun’s law7 
Per cent of labour force 
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
Outcome
Okun 1 (differences, 1980-)
Okun 2 (differences, 2001-)
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
 Note: The difference version of Okun’s law captures the relationship between GDP growth and the change 
in unemployment. The figure shows unemployment forecasts based on estimates of this relationship in two 
different time periods.  
Source: The Riksbank 
According  to  the  historical  relationship  between  changes  in  GDP  and  changes  in 
unemployment, the change in GDP between the first quarter of 2009 and the third quarter of 
2011  should  have  led  unemployment  to  increase  by  1.5–2.5  percentage  points  above  the 
actual increase. 
The functioning of the labour market is decisive. 
Actual  unemployment  is  not  only  influenced  by  economic  activity,  but  also  by  structural 
factors  that  shape  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market.  These  structural  factors  influence 
both  the  decision  to  enter  the  labour  market  and  companies’  decisions  to  hire  and  fire. 
Examples of structural factors are the design of the taxation and social insurance systems, 
                                                 
6  See,  for  example,  the  article  “The  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  labour  market  –  a  comparison  of 
Sweden, the euro area and the United States”, Monetary Policy Report, February 2011, and “The relationship 
between  the  business  cycle  and  the  labour  market  in  Sweden”,  Economic  Commentaries  no. 2,  2010, 
Sveriges Riksbank. 
7  Okun’s law shows the short-term relationship between the level of unemployment and GDP. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
competitive pressures in the economy, labour market legislation, the negotiating strength of 
employers  and  employees  and  so  on.8  These  are  the  factors  that  determine  equilibrium 
unemployment.  So  affecting  these  would  require  broad-based  economic  policy  measures. 
Although it is obvious, it is still important to bear in mind that monetary policy cannot affect 
these fundamental conditions for long-term growth and employment. 
Breaking down unemployment – a complicated story 
On  the  other  hand,  however,  monetary  policy  is  able  to  influence  the  cyclical  part  of 
unemployment  via  effects  on  the  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  In  theory,  this  is  a 
matter  of  using  monetary  policy  to  keep  actual  unemployment  as  close  to  the  equilibrium 
level as possible. In practice, this is difficult, as equilibrium unemployment is not observable 
but must be calculated indirectly. These calculations are highly uncertain, something which is 
true of all gap calculations in which various actually-measured quantities are related to an 
estimated, unobserved quantity. So this also applies to the GDP gap, the hours gap, and so 
on. But the unemployment gap has an advantage over other gap measures, as the actual 
statistics are not revised, as is the case with GDP and to some extent the number of hours 
worked, for example. 
Allow me to now discuss this uncertainty when it comes to calculating the labour market gap 
in a little more detail. 
Calculations of equilibrium unemployment 
According to a common interpretation, equilibrium unemployment is the unemployment that 
arises when an economy is not impacted by new shocks or disruptions for a longer period of 
time  and  is  thus  in  a  state  of  long-term  equilibrium.9  Equilibrium  unemployment  is  thus 
independent  of  economic  activity.  However,  this  is  a  theoretical  concept.  In  practice,  the 
economy is never in a shock-free state in which long-term equilibrium has been achieved. 
Assessing  the  level  of  equilibrium  unemployment  depends  partly  on  the  theoretical  model 
used as a basis and partly on the calculation methods used. There is no consensus on which 
method  of  calculation  is  best,  and  this  creates  uncertainty  on  the  level  of  equilibrium 
unemployment. Let me illustrate this with a diagram. 
The  figure  shows  how  equilibrium  unemployment  in  Sweden  has  been  calculated  for  the 
period  1980–2010  using  three  different  methods.  The  red  curve  in  the  figure  is  actual 
unemployment.  The  yellow  curve  in  the  figure  shows  a  calculation  of  equilibrium 
unemployment using what is known as an unobserved components model. The upper and 
lower  confidence  intervals  for  this  calculation  method  mean  that  the  current  level  of 
equilibrium unemployment can be said, with 95 per cent confidence, to lie between just over 
four  per  cent  and  nine  per  cent.  The  grey  curve  shows  a  calculation  using  an  alternative 
unobserved components model, while the blue curve is a calculation based on what is known 
as a structural VAR model, which includes GDP and unemployment. When it is considered 
that it is unclear which of the three methods of calculation should be used, uncertainty over 
the  equilibrium  level  will  increase.  This  can  be  seen  from  the  variation,  depending  on 
method, of the estimates of equilibrium unemployment. 
                                                 
8  See, for example, Forslund (2008) for a discussion of factors affecting the level of equilibrium unemployment. 
9  This state of long-term economic equilibrium is the same as saying that the economy is in a steady state. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure 2 
Unemployment and model estimates of equilibrium unemployment10 
Per cent of labour force 
Unemployment
SVAR
UC gap
UC trend cycle
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Note: The diagram only shows the so-called point estimate for the SVAR and UC trend cycle models. The 
uncertainty/error margin associated with these two calculation methods is thus not shown. 
Source: The Riksbank 
So, even though the calculations shown in the figure are based on historical data, the level of 
equilibrium  unemployment  cannot  afterwards  be  determined  with  any  degree  of  certainty. 
This is because equilibrium unemployment is not observable. Given this uncertainty, it could 
be  asked  whether  equilibrium  unemployment  is  a  stable  enough  measure  to  use  in  the 
assessment  of  actual  resource  utilisation.  The 
that  estimates  of  equilibrium 
unemployment vary heavily over time and depending on the calculation model used provides 
a  good  illustration  of  the  risk  in  having  blind  faith  in  the  exactness  of  the  estimated 
unemployment gap. 
This  uncertainty  means  that  deciding  which  view  to  take  of  long-term  unemployment  is 
always,  ultimately,  a  matter  of  judgement.  Figure  3  shows  the  Riksbank’s  present 
assessment  of  equilibrium  unemployment,  together  with  the  latest  assessments  from  the 
National Institute of Economic Research and the Ministry of Finance. Unlike in Figure 2, this 
is a matter of more long-term calculations of equilibrium unemployment.  
fact 
                                                 
10  In  Figure  2,  NAIRU  (Non-Accelerating  Inflation  Rate-of-Unemployment)  has  been  calculated.  The  terms 
NAIRU  and  equilibrium  unemployment  are  sometimes  used  as  synonyms.  There  is,  however,  a  theoretical 
difference. NAIRU is the level of unemployment that is compatible with a stable rate of inflation. The rate of 
inflation rises when unemployment is below NAIRU and falls when unemployment is higher. This means that, 
in the short term, NAIRU may vary with economic activity, unlike equilibrium unemployment. However, over 
the longer term, NAIRU and equilibrium unemployment coincide. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 3 
The level of equilibrium unemployment according to the Riksbank,  
the National Institute of Economic Research and the Ministry of Finance 
Per cent 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Riksbank
NIER
Ministry of Finance
Actual unemployment 15-74 years
80
84
88
92
96
00
04
08
12
16
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Note: With regard to statistics on actual unemployment pre-1987 data is spliced by the Riksbank. 
Sources:  The  Riksbank,  Ministry  of  Finance,  National  Institute  for  Economic  Research  and  Statistics 
Sweden 
As the figure shows, assessments of the level of equilibrium unemployment for the last four 
years (2008–2011) are relatively similar. The Ministry of Finance assumes that equilibrium 
unemployment will decrease strongly in the years ahead. The difference in the assessments 
is primarily because the National Institute of Economic Research and the Riksbank do not 
expect the economic policy to have such large effects on equilibrium unemployment. 
Good guidance for monetary policy? 
So  serious  attempts  at  calculating  equilibrium  unemployment  have  been  made,  but  these 
have concluded in different assessments. Nevertheless, it is important that we try to gain an 
idea of equilibrium unemployment. Not least is this important in a time when reforms have 
been  adopted  that  should  (as  most  analysts  agree)  lead  equilibrium  unemployment  to 
decrease. But I am extremely doubtful as to whether measures of equilibrium unemployment 
should be given too prominent a role in practical monetary policy. It seems simple in theory; 
but,  in  practice,  it  is  not.  Even  if  we  could  be  more  certain  of  the  level  of  equilibrium 
unemployment  further  ahead,  this  would  not  give  us  such  strong  guidance  for  monetary 
policy decisions in the here and now. This can be illustrated by the following diagram. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Figure 4 
Theoretical sketch, adjustment to new equilibrium unemployment 
Per cent 
Equilibrium unemployment
Actual unemployment
Adjustment path 3
Adjustment path 2
Adjustment path 1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Source: The Riksbank 
Figure  4  illustrates  three  different  adjustment  paths  to  a  new  level  of  equilibrium 
unemployment  (broken  red,  yellow  and  grey  curves)  and 
the  variation  of  actual 
unemployment around the equilibrium (blue curve). In this example, the economy is assumed 
to  be  exposed  to  a  structural  change  in  year  seven  which  decreases  equilibrium 
unemployment from six to four per cent and, five years later, the economy has adjusted to 
the new equilibrium. Due to various frictions in the economy, such as matching frictions and 
changeover costs on the labour market, the adjustment to the new equilibrium takes time. 
Cyclical  unemployment  is  measured  by  the  unemployment  gap,  which  is  the  vertical  gap 
between  actual  unemployment  and  the  adjustment  path.  The  figure  is  thus  a  schematic 
illustration of how unemployment adjusts to a new calculated equilibrium. However, in reality, 
we have no knowledge of how the adjustment to a new equilibrium takes place and how long 
it  takes.  The  lack  of  knowledge  about  adjustment  is  represented  by  the  three  different 
adjustment  paths.  We  don’t  know  which  adjustment  path  will  lead  to  the  new  equilibrium, 
which creates uncertainty about the most appropriate monetary policy during the period of 
adjustment. Research can give us no guidance here. But, as monetary policy works over the 
medium term and the economy is regularly subjected to structural changes, this adjustment 
process is of central importance to monetary policy. So the adjustment process, and our lack 
of  knowledge  about  it,  illustrates  the  difficulties  in  using  equilibrium  unemployment  in 
practical monetary policy in an economy that is regularly subjected to structural changes that 
impact the equilibrium. 
The labour supply under the magnifying glass 
Despite uncertainty over the unemployment gap and the difficulties in using this variable in 
practical monetary policy, resource utilisation is very important to monetary policy. We at the 
Riksbank are therefore strongly committed to trying to develop the best possible analyses of 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resource utilisation. Our approach is to use several different measures and I believe this is 
wise. To assess developments on the labour market in recent years, the Riksbank closely 
monitors several types of indicators that together can give us an idea of how well matching 
and wage formation function. The labour supply plays an important role here. When it comes 
to  the  labour  supply,  my  view  is  that  it  is  extremely  important  not  to  regard  it  as  a 
homogenous aggregate, but instead to analyse it in greater detail, based on the assumption 
that  it  consists  of  a  heterogeneous  collection  of  individuals.  I  consider  that  this  provides 
better guidance with regard to the scope of monetary policy. 
Equilibrium unemployment is influenced by how well the match between jobseekers and job 
vacancies works. Factors influencing the conditions for this matching include the composition 
of the labour supply, which, in turn, may be partially affected by changes in the population 
structure. For example, an increase in the percentage of young and inexperienced people in 
the  labour  market  can  contribute  to  a  deterioration  in  the  matching  of  job  seekers  to 
vacancies.  This  is  because  matching  seems  to  work  less  efficiently  for  young  people,  in 
comparison  with  unemployed  people  of  other  ages.  Young  people  thus  have  higher 
unemployment than older people. 
Another group that tends to have a higher average rate of unemployment consists of those 
born  abroad.  A  report  by  Statistics  Sweden  (2010)  shows  that  the  degree  of  employment 
among those born abroad amounts to 58 per cent in Swedish metropolitan regions, which 
can  be  compared  with  82  per  cent  for  those  born  in  Sweden.11  However,  there  are 
substantial  differences  between  the  different  groups  born  abroad.  The  employment  rate  is 
lowest  for  those  born  outside  of  Europe,  and  lower  for  those  born  outside  of  the  Nordic 
region than for those born in the Nordic countries. It also appears to take a long time before 
immigrants  from  other  countries  manage  to  enter  the  Swedish  labour  market.  This  means 
large  welfare  losses  for  both  the  individual  and  Swedish  society,  and  that  a  well-needed 
injection  of  resources  to  the  Swedish  labour  market  risks  being  lost.  Integration  work  is 
therefore important to turn this trend around. 
Integration work should emphasise the importance of education as there has been a large 
immigration of groups lacking basic education. The possibilities to find work are affected to a 
great extent by the level of education the job seeker has. Upper-secondary school education 
is  usually  a  basic  requirement  when  recruiting  staff  and,  according  to  the  Swedish 
Employment  Service,  most  jobs  that  do  not  require  an  upper-secondary  school  education 
have disappeared forever from the Swedish labour market. A worrying development is that 
the  percentage  of  unemployed  with  only  secondary  school  education  has  increased 
substantially in the age groups below 35 years. This is because a large percentage does not 
obtain complete grades at upper-secondary school. 
So  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  Swedish  Public  Employment  Service  points  to  the  fact  that 
there has been a rapid inflow to the labour force in recent years of people in groups that have 
difficulty finding jobs quickly. This increase is partially linked to people being transferred from 
the Social Insurance Office to the Swedish Public Employment Service. At the same time, 
the Swedish Public Employment Service has been given the main responsibility for people 
who have immigrated to Sweden. The so-called vulnerable groups, which according to the 
Swedish  Public  Employment  Service  will  have  difficulty  finding  work,  include,  for  instance, 
young people with little education and people born outside of Europe. 
As shown in Figure 5, the percentage of people registered as unemployed and belonging to 
vulnerable groups rose in 2008 and 2009. This percentage has since remained at a level that 
is much higher than for groups with a stronger position. 
                                                 
11  See Statistics Sweden’s report “Integration – a regional perspective”, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Total unemployment broken down into vulnerable and non-vulnerable groups 
Percentage of register-based labour force, seasonally-adjusted and trend-adjusted statistics 
Figure 5 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Vulnerable
Non-vulnerable
Total
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Note: The group of vulnerable people includes those with only secondary-school level education, those in 
the age range 55–64, those born outside Europe, and those with disabilities. 
Source: Swedish Public Employment Service 
Despite the recovery in economic activity in 2010 and 2011, the percentage of employed in 
the most vulnerable groups thus hardly declined at all. Almost 60 per cent of the total number 
of persons registered as unemployed belongs to groups in the labour market that experience 
difficulty  finding  jobs  quickly.  In  October  2011,  the  number  of  persons  registered  as 
unemployed  in  the  groups  regarded  as  vulnerable  amounted  to  220,000  (of  a  total  of 
372,000 persons registered as unemployed), which is almost double the amount in 2008 (an 
increase  of 100,000).  A  large  number  of  the  persons  registered  as  unemployed  also  have 
long periods without work behind them. One in four people has been without work for more 
than  three  years  of  the  past  ten  years.  As  the  matching  for  vulnerable  groups  appears  to 
function poorly and there has been a rapid inflow in recent years to the labour force of people 
from groups that have difficulty getting jobs quickly, this is having a more long-term impact on 
unemployment and is thus also impacting various measures of equilibrium unemployment. 
It  means  that  a  change  in  the  composition  of  the  labour  supply  could  lead  to  substantial 
changes  in  equilibrium  unemployment  and  resource  utilisation.  When  we  try  to  assess 
resource utilisation, we therefore need to take into account the heterogeneity of the labour 
supply and expected changes in the composition of the labour supply. 
Concluding thoughts 
What  I  have  discussed  today  points,  as  I  see  it,  to  a  general  truth;  namely  that  many 
apparently  simple  and  straightforward  concepts  are  suddenly  revealed,  in  a  confrontation 
with reality, to be much more complicated. We have an official measure of unemployment, 
but even here there is reason to reflect on what this measure says about the amount of spare 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  practical  monetary  policy 
that  using  equilibrium  unemployment 
capacity in the labour market. Calculating equilibrium unemployment after the fact is difficult 
and requires a number of assumptions. Serious attempts have been made, but as shown, 
they have had varying results. 
At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  is  forward-looking  and  is  thus  guided  by  forecasts  of 
economic  development.  However,  assessing  the  level  of  equilibrium  unemployment  in 
several years is even more complicated. And, as I mentioned earlier, even if we could know 
what the level of equilibrium unemployment would be further ahead, this would give us no 
guidance  for  monetary  policy  in  the  here  and  now.  The  economy  is  regularly  subjected  to 
structural  changes  affecting  equilibrium  unemployment.  And  we  have  limited  knowledge  of 
how the adjustment from one equilibrium rate to another occurs, or how long it takes. This 
means 
is  not 
uncomplicated.  It  is  therefore  important  to  closely  monitor  all  of  the  statistics  that  reflect 
conditions on the labour market, which we already do. 
Monetary policy can primarily affect unemployment in the short term, via aggregate demand. 
Here I can mention that several debaters have previously claimed that an incorrect balance 
in monetary policy has made a significant contribution to the negative developments in the 
labour  market.  Naturally,  we  should  not  conduct  a  monetary  policy  that  leads  to  demand 
being  unnecessarily  low  and  to  unemployment  becoming  higher  than  it  would  have  been 
because we single-mindedly react to the risk of inflation rising. If we were to systematically 
conduct monetary policy in this way, we could be accused of contributing to the persistency 
of unemployment.12 At the same time, it is important that we maintain the credibility of our 
inflation-targeting  policy.  Ultimately,  it  is  a  question  of  actually  delivering  an  inflation  rate 
close to the target, seen over a longer period of time. 
If one looks at what is known as CPIF inflation, which excludes the effects of interest rate 
adjustments,  this  averages  1.8  per  cent  from  the  beginning  of  2000  to  the  end  of  2011. 
These statistics do not indicate that the Riksbank one-sidedly reacts to an upside inflation 
risk.  The  periods  when  inflation  has  deviated  from  the  target  have  had  their  explanations. 
One  example  of  this  is  the  period  at  the  beginning  of  the  2000s  when  productivity  rose 
substantially  and  unexpectedly  at  the  same  time  as  import  prices  fell.  We,  like  all  other 
analysts, overestimated inflation in our forecasts at that time. With hindsight, the interest rate 
could have been somewhat lower. But you don’t have the benefit of hindsight in advance. 
The Riksbank plays an important role in stabilisation policy, not least given that fiscal policy 
decisions have longer lead times and therefore risk coming at the wrong part of the economic 
cycle. But, at the same time, monetary policy cannot fine tune the economy either; we like all 
others have incomplete knowledge of the starting situation in the economy and we must base 
our decisions on forecasts. These forecasts are made more difficult by the continual revision 
of economic statistics. To reduce the risk of major errors in monetary policy, it is important to 
bear this in mind when making decisions, and not to have blind faith in the exactness of the 
measures we use. 
References 
Labour Force Survey, March 2010, Statistics Sweden. 
Bergström, V. and Boije, R. 2005. “Monetary policy and unemployment”, Economic Review, 
2005:4: 15–49. 
Flodén, M., Larsson, A., Ravn, M. and Vredin, A. 2012. “Enkla regler, svåra tider – behöver 
stabiliseringspolitiken  förändras?”  (“Simple  rules,  hard  times  –  does  the  stabilisation  policy 
                                                 
12  The concept of persistency means that unemployment tends to remain at a higher level after recessions or 
rapid structural transformations and then slowly adjust towards lower, more normal levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
need  to  be  changed?”),  SNS  (Centre  for  Business  and  Policy  Studies)  Economic  Policy 
Group Report 2012, SNS. 
Forslund,  A.  “Den  svenska  jämviktsarbetslösheten  –  en  översikt”  (“Swedish  equilibrium 
employment – a review”). Report 2008: 17, Swedish Fiscal Policy Council. 
Sveriges  Riksbank  “The  relationship  between  the  business  cycle  and  the  labour  market  in 
Sweden”, Economic Commentaries no. 2, 2010. 
Sveriges Riksbank, “The effects of the financial crisis on the labour market – a comparison of 
Sweden, the euro area and the United States”, Monetary Policy Report, February 2011. 
Rogerson,  R.  1997.  “Theory  Ahead  of  Language  in  the  Economics  of  Unemployment”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(1): 73–92. 
Statistics Sweden, 2010. “Integration – a regional perspective”, Integration: Report 3. 
Svensson,  L.E.O.  1999.  “Inflation  Targeting:  Some  Extensions”,  Scandinavian  Journal  of 
Economics 101(3): 337–361. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
