Mario Draghi: Competitiveness of the euro area and within the euro area 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the colloquium “Les 
défis  de  la  compétitivité”,  organised  by  Le  Monde  and  l’Association  Française  des 
Entreprises Privées (AFEP), Paris, 13 March 2012. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am delighted to have the opportunity to participate in this debate.  
Competitiveness  is  a  key  issue  of  economic  policy  in  each  and  every  country  of  the  euro 
area. It is a key issue for the euro area as a whole. And it is of fundamental importance to the 
lives and long-term prosperity of all of our citizens.  
We at the European Central Bank (ECB) have a steadfast commitment to price stability. This 
in  turn  provides  support  for  economic  growth  and  job  creation  across  Europe.  But  for  any 
individual member of the euro area to prosper in a globalised world, our contribution needs to 
be complemented by the work of national policy-makers. 
Future prosperity requires us all to establish and maintain a competitive position, both inside 
and outside the euro area. These external and internal dimensions of competitiveness will be 
the main focus of my remarks. But first let me say a few words about how we see the current 
economic situation.  
The state of the euro area economy 
Overall, we see continued signs of stabilisation in the euro area economy, albeit still at a low 
level.  The  situation  in  financial  markets  has  clearly  improved  in  response  to  the  ECB’s 
measures.  The  improvement  is  also  due  to  the  progress  made  by  euro  area  governments 
towards  accepting  more  binding  common  fiscal  rules  and  by  the  progress  on  fiscal 
consolidation and economic reform in many countries.  
Countries should use this phase of financial stabilisation to make further progress on their 
programmes of economic reform – to strengthen their potential growth, to boost employment 
and to enhance competitiveness.  
Banks too should use this currently more benign environment to strengthen their resilience 
further,  including  by  retaining  earnings,  cutting  dividends  and  bonuses.  The  soundness  of 
banks’ balance sheets will be a key factor in facilitating an appropriate provision of credit to 
the economy, which is their main task. The financial system should serve the real economy, 
not the other way around.  
As far as monetary policy is concerned, growth will be supported by the very low short-term 
interest rates and by all the measures adopted by the ECB to foster the proper functioning of 
the euro area’s financial sector.  
Taking the context of deeply malfunctioning credit markets, our recent decision on medium-
term liquidity has been central in banks returning to play their vital role in the real economy. 
Banks account for over two thirds of external financing of firms in the euro area. Banks are 
especially important for small and medium-sized enterprises, which account for nearly three 
quarters of employment in the private sector.  
As many as 800 banks participated in our last operation. They cover virtually the entire euro 
area. Many of the banks are small, regional institutions. I cannot even mention their location, 
the towns, the villages where these banks are, because often they would be the only bank in 
town so they could be identified. This tells us one thing – that the money is now closer to 
households and the small and medium-sized enterprises than it was before.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We  are  continuously  alert  to  the  risk  of  inflation,  but  this  risk  is  not  materialising  at  the 
present  time.  Moreover,  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  price 
stability.  All  the  necessary  tools  to  address  potential  upside  risks  to  medium-term  price 
stability are fully available. 
Over the past 13 years, the ECB has achieved one of the best records of price stability in 
European history. We are committed to maintaining that record.  
The recent signs of stabilisation allow us all to face the medium-term challenges for the euro 
area with a degree of confidence. All policy-makers should take advantage of this position to 
continue their reforms with confidence.  
Competitiveness: the external and internal dimensions  
Let me turn now to the theme of this conference and explain the term competitiveness.  
Competitiveness,  broadly  defined,  is  firmly  grounded  in  a  notion  of  relative  productivity:  a 
competitive economy is one that provides the institutional environment necessary to foster 
the development of highly productive firms.  
Such firms have the capacity to sell their goods and services abroad easily and profitably, 
contributing to longer-term economic growth and employment and, ultimately, to the welfare 
of citizens. 
But competitiveness is not only international price competitiveness. Competitiveness is also 
related more broadly to a country’s external performance. Analysis of this broader concept of 
competitiveness  includes  indicators  of  export  growth,  market  shares  and  current  account 
balances.  
Prices, costs and wages are important factors in determining the ability of firms to compete in 
international markets. But for firms – and thus countries – to adjust successfully to the big 
changes implied by globalisation, other factors have become increasingly important. 
These  include  the  range  and  quality  of  the  products  a  country  exports.  In  this  regard, 
countries in the euro area can take advantage of their high technological advancement and 
well-educated labour forces. They should be producing higher quality and more sophisticated 
goods, and redirecting their exports towards strongly growing markets.  
Against  this  background,  the  domestic  environment  in  which  firms  operate  is  central  to 
fostering  competitiveness.  Countries  whose  firms  compete  successfully  in  international 
markets  are  in  general  those  with  better  technology,  a  higher  degree  of  openness  and 
greater domestic market competition.  
A growing body of cross-country evidence confirms that policies to promote competition in 
Europe’s  markets  for  goods  and  services  clearly  raise  the  potential  for  growth  and  job 
creation  at  little  or  no  cost  to  the  public  purse.  Continued  efforts  to  promote  stronger 
competition and  further market  integration  within  Europe  are  important  tools  for  enhancing 
the global competitiveness of European firms.  
In this vein, supportive national economic environments – including well-conceived physical 
and  social  infrastructures,  sound  public  finances  and,  I  should  emphasise,  stable  financial 
systems – will all contribute to the competitiveness of the euro area.  
Let me go a little deeper into the challenges of competitiveness for Europe’s economy. For 
the  euro  area,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  two  distinct  concepts:  the  external 
competitiveness  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  in  the  global  economy;  and  the  internal 
competitiveness of the various countries within the euro area.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
External competitiveness 
Let me start with external competitiveness.  
The  euro  area  has  actively  contributed  to  the  rise  in  international  trade  that  is  one  of  the 
defining features of globalisation. In the last two decades, the openness of the euro area has 
increased markedly.  
In the mid-1990s, exports of goods and services from the euro area as a whole to the rest of 
the world were equivalent to 15% or less than one sixth of GDP; now they amount to 23% or 
nearly  a  quarter  of  GDP.  Even  though  we  are  roughly  comparable  in  size  to  the  United 
States,  the  euro  area  is  about  ten  percentage  points  more  open,  and  we  are  much  more 
open than Japan despite our larger size.  
This also means that we have ample evidence that any fears of a “Fortress Europe” were 
completely unfounded. On the contrary, we are the most open of the largest economies.  
External performance in terms of the current account shows that the euro area as a whole 
has performed well, and that external imbalances have been kept in check. The euro area’s 
current account has traditionally been close to balance, compared with sustained deficits in 
the US and sustained surpluses in Japan.  
Of course, remaining competitive is a continuous challenge. Over the past two decades, as 
low-cost  competitors  have  emerged  elsewhere  in  the  world,  the  euro  area  –  like  other 
advanced economies – has recorded some decline in export market shares. These losses 
partly  reflect  the  mechanical  effect  of  the  new  entrants.  Nevertheless,  the  euro  area  does 
need to adjust the range of goods, services, sectors and industries in which it specialises.  
Euro area countries have changed their specialisation over the last two decades, but not all did 
so to the same extent. As a consequence, the specialisation of the euro area as a whole has 
not  changed  much.  We  could  have  expected  that  the  euro  area  would  have  shifted  more 
towards higher quality products and products that are more skill-intensive and capital-intensive.  
The fact that there has not been more progress overall might reflect structural rigidities that 
constrain  firms’  ability  to  adjust  rapidly  and  to  make  substantial  changes  in  their 
specialisation – particularly towards high-technology products.  
In particular, rigidities in the product and labour markets make it difficult for firms to adjust 
costs  and  prices  to  changing  conditions.  The  ability  of  countries  to  adopt  the  appropriate 
specialisation may also be limited by structural issues related to the quality of education and 
the incentives for innovation.  
Internal competitiveness 
The general picture for the external competitiveness of the euro area is positive.  
But this general picture does not necessarily hold for each member of the euro area.  
Overall,  looking  at  competitiveness  within  the  euro  area,  there  have  been  substantial 
differences across countries.  
Indeed, the strains in some sovereign debt markets have been compounded by the severe 
competitiveness differentials that have emerged within the euro area. 
A  convenient  way  to  identify  competitiveness  differentials  is  simply  to  look  at  the  current 
account balances of each country.  
Current account imbalances could be justified for any country, including those participating in 
a  monetary  union,  and  they  do  not  necessarily  reflect  a  loss  of  competitiveness.  But 
increasingly, larger current account deficits have resulted from significant losses of national 
competitiveness,  signalling  domestic  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  deeper  structural 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
problems. These losses of competitiveness limit the country’s growth potential and hinder its 
participation in the global trade integration.  
Against this background, rather than financing productive investment in the tradable sector 
and  fostering  export  performance,  capital  inflows  in  some  countries with  excessive  current 
account  deficits  have  fuelled  asset  price  rises  and  private  indebtedness.  Hence,  current 
account  imbalances  within  the  euro  area  should  be  a  source  of  concern  for  policy-makers 
when they relate to losses of competitiveness.  
A useful way to measure excessive imbalances is to look at unit labour costs, as these reflect 
developments in both productivity and labour costs. If we compare countries with an external 
surplus and countries with an external deficit, we see that, since the introduction of the euro, 
unit labour costs have increased by 28% in deficit countries, 2.5 times as much as in surplus 
countries.  
For sure, some of this differential might reflect sustainable increases in income per capita or 
other  “catch-up”  effects.  But  to  a  much  larger  extent,  this  differential  relates  to  structural 
problems and reflects growing misalignments between developments in wages and productivity. 
These  misalignments  have  also  become  visible  in  terms  of  deviations  from  price  stability. 
Indeed, we can observe that most countries with strong current account deficits prior to the 
crisis had also experienced substantial increases in prices.  
Ensuring price stability is key for competitiveness.  
It provides the nominal anchor for future price developments. It is key for the euro area as a 
whole as much as it is key for all countries.  
Significant  and  persistent  deviations 
competitiveness and should be corrected.  
Restoring competitiveness is vital for a number of countries within the euro area. Policies to 
ensure sufficient responsiveness in wages and prices, as well as to boost productivity, are 
crucial ingredients in the rebalancing. 
from  price  stability 
losses  of 
translate 
into 
The policy challenge 
Let  me  conclude.  The  euro  area’s  performance  in  the  global  economy  is  good,  but 
continuous adjustment is needed to keep up in a highly dynamic international environment. 
Within  the  euro  area,  a  number  of  countries  need  to  repair  and  strengthen  their 
competitiveness for the sake of their own continued prosperity and the overall stability of our 
economic  and  monetary  union.  This  process  requires  going  to  the  root  of  the  loss  of 
competitiveness, tackling its sources and enhancing the opportunities for growth.  
The time frame of this correction will differ according to the degree of the imbalances and 
countries’ overall economic conditions. But in times of severe financial constraints, there is 
no  other  choice  than  to  address  the  structural  losses  in  competitiveness  in  an  urgent  and 
decisive manner.  
What monetary policy can do for competitiveness is to ensure price stability in the euro area, 
reducing  risk  premia  and  making  sure  that  all  the  transmission  channels  of  the  monetary 
impulse do work.  
I  would  add  that  the  markets  clearly  understand  that.  Thus,  continued  price  stability, 
unencumbered  credit  markets,  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms  that  decisively 
address the issue of insufficient growth stemming from loss of competitiveness would bring 
about an increase in confidence. And, as I am sure we all understand, increased confidence 
will further contribute to Europe’s recovery and to our longer-term potential for growth, jobs 
and continued prosperity. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
