Njuguna Ndung’u: Financal services sector – steering the economy to 
the next level 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  during  the 
4th Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya (ICPAK) Financial Services Conference 
“Financal services sector – steering the economy to the next level”, Nairobi, 4 July 2012. 
 Mr. Patrick Mtange, Chairman, Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya;  
Ms. Caroline Kigen, Chief Executive Officer, ICPAK;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It gives me great pleasure to be here today to open this 4th Financial Services Conference. 
Let  me  at  the  outset  thank  the  Institute  of  Certified  Public  Accountants  of  Kenya  for 
organizing  this  forum  and  particularly  for  the  choice  of  the  theme  “Financial  Services 
Sector: Steering the Economy to the Next Level ”. At the Central Bank we work on the 
subject at the policy level with patriotic interest.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  For  our  country  to  develop  and  realize  the  aspirations  of  Vision 
2030, the financial services sector must take the lead in steering the economy “to the next 
level”. Towards this goal, it is critical to keep in focus the vision for the financial sector as 
contained  in  the  Vision  2030  blueprint  that  is,  to  create  a  vibrant  and  globally  competitive 
financial sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: In pursuit of this vision, the Central Bank in collaboration with the 
government and market players continues to play a pro-active role in initiating the necessary 
reforms  geared  towards  creating  an  enabling  environment.  Significant  progress  has  been 
made on these initiatives but at the outset, we need to recognize that it is financial inclusion 
that will provide the gateway. The progress made so far shows that financial inclusion is a 
major public policy instrument. Several successes can be listed on this front:  
Licensing of Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions (DTMs) 
I. 
Since  2008  when  the  DTMs  regulatory  framework  became  effective,  6 DTMs  have  been 
licensed and two granted approval in principle. As at the end of May 2012, the 6 licensed 
DTMs  had  63 branches  and  1.56 million  deposit  accounts  with  deposits  worth  over 
Ksh.11.6 billion. They also had 495,840 loan accounts with an outstanding loan portfolio of 
over  Ksh.17.7 billion.  This  is  significant  progress  given  that  banks  in  total  only  have 
2.1 million loan accounts.  
The DTMs provide an avenue of reaching out to the lower levels of the population given that 
our  markets  are  segmented,  requiring  different  and  more  specialized  actors  in  some 
segments.  DTMs  can  be  community  based  or  nationwide  with  different  core  capital 
requirements of Ksh.30 million and Ksh.60 million, respectively.  
Agency banking 
II. 
Effective  2nd  January  2012,  DTMs  were  allowed  to  appoint  third  parties  (agents)  to  offer 
specified DTM services on their behalf. This followed the successful rollout of agent banking 
by banks effective May 2010. So far eleven (11) banks have been granted approval to roll 
out  their  agency  networks.  Eight  (8)  of  these  banks  have  appointed  11,176  agents,  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
had executed over 18.6 million transactions valued at over Ksh.93.1 billion over the two year 
period to May 2012.  
Mobile phone financial services 
III. 
There  has  been  tremendous  growth  in  Mobile  phone  financial  services  in  the  country. 
Consequently, a number of institutions have initiated various innovations and new products 
to  conveniently  serve  their  customers  and  reduce  the  long  queues  that  were  previously 
experienced  in  banking  halls.  Mobile  phone  money  transfer  services  have  been  a 
phenomenal  success  and  have  put  the  country  at  the  global  centre  stage  of  financial 
inclusion and innovation.  
In  a  country  like  ours  with  remote  corners  not  served  by  financial  institutions,  Mobile 
Financial  Services  has  provided  the  answer.  More  importantly,  our  banks  have  easily 
integrated into their financial services with these technological platforms. The up-scaled level 
is now to use mobile phones to send money to savings accounts and credit provision through 
the same channels. This is already taking place with M-Kesho type of products in the market.  
Credit information sharing 
IV. 
The  Credit  Information  Sharing  (CIS)  mechanism  for  banking  institutions  has  successfully 
taken  root  with  mandatory  sharing  of  negative  information  on  a  monthly  basis.  All  the 
43 licensed commercial banks in Kenya and institutions under the Deposit Protection Fund 
Board  have  been  submitting  negative  credit  information  to  the  licensed  Credit  Reference 
Bureaus (CRBs) within the required timeframes.  
The  Banking  Act  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  Act  have  now  been  amended  to  allow 
institutions  licensed  under  both  the  Banking  Act  and  the  Microfinance  Act  to  share  both 
positive  and  negative  credit  information  of  their  customers.  This  will  go  a  long  way  in 
enriching  the  CRBs  database  for  the  benefit  of  the  entire  banking  sector  and  create 
objectivity  in  reporting.  Credit  information  sharing  allows  the  market  to  build  information 
capital for the financial sector in Kenya. This will help build credit histories of borrowers and 
support  a  change  of  collateral  technology  in  use  currently.  Development  of  information 
capital will remove information asymmetry that promotes moral hazard and adverse selection 
consequences in the financial market.  
V. 
East Africa community harmonization of legal and prudential supervisory 
rules and practices 
As part of the ongoing integration of the East African Community (EAC) member states, the 
EAC Central Banks are in the process of harmonizing their supervisory prudential rules. This 
will enhance the performance of Kenyan banks covering the EAC region.  
The harmonization process has already identified the key aspects of divergence that require 
harmonization. A draft convergence criteria based on international best practice as well as 
feedback from players in the banking industries of member countries has been developed.  
Anti-money laundering framework 
VI. 
Following the operationalisation of the Proceeds of Crime and Anti-Money Laundering Act, 
2009  effective  28th  June  2010,  the  Financial  Reporting  Centre  (FRC)  was  created  on 
12th April 2012. The Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance seconded staff to facilitate the 
setting up of the FRC. The CBK has continued to undertake public sensitization on the AML 
regulatory  framework  including  the  establishment  of  the  FRC.  This  is  to  safeguard  the 
credibility of the financial sector as we push our financial inclusion agenda and goals forward.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Ladies and Gentlemen: In order for us to appreciate where we have came from; allow me to 
mention some key indicators of financial performance:  
 
Total Assets of banks have increased from Ksh.951 billion as at December 2007 to 
Ksh.2.12 trillion in April 2012, an increase of 123%.  
The  loan  portfolio  in  the  same  period  has  increased  from  Ksh.534  billion  in 
December 2007 to Ksh.1.26 trillion in April 2012, an increase of 136%  
Banks’  branch  network  has  increased  from  740  to  1200  currently,  while  we  also 
have more than 10,000 Agents now in operation  
Mobile phone financial services have 19 million subscribers to date transacting an 
average of Ksh.3.0 billion every day  
Increase  in  the  number  of  bank  deposit  accounts  from  4.7  million  in  2007  to 
14 million in April 2012, a phenomenal increase of almost 300%. While the deposit 
values have grown from Ksh. 710 billion in 2007 to Ksh.1.6 trillion in April 2012, an 
increase of 125%.  
Loan and Advances accounts have increased from 1.2 million in 2007 to 2.1 million 
currently.  
     Ladies and Gentlemen: These statistics show a phenomenal growth in less than five years. 
In 2010, the financial sector grew by 8.8% while the economy grew by 5.6%. In 2011, the 
financial sector grew by 7.8% and the economy by 4.4%. This shows that the financial sector 
is  deepening  and  that  its  growth  is  pulling  the  national  economic  growth  with  it.  As  the 
economy  continues  to  recover  and  the  government  is  rolling  out  infrastructure  projects  to 
increase  the  capacity  for  future  economic  growth,  the  financial  sector  will  thrive  and  must 
stand ready to finance long-term projects to support this growth of the economy.  
Indeed  this  impressive  performance  is  an  indication  of  our  growing  economy  but  also 
supported by the prudent risk management and regulatory reforms that continue to be put in 
place  in  line  with  best  practice.  As  efforts  progress  towards  a  more  developed  financial 
sector, there is need to ensure fairness and transparency. The public needs to be furnished 
with reliable and adequate financial information.  
While discharging your duties therefore, be it as accountants, auditors or advisers of financial 
institutions, bear in mind that you play a critical role towards protecting and guiding the sector 
in the development of our economy. The constitution has two important contributions on this: 
the Competition Policy (that lowers unit cost) and Consumer Protection. These two important 
aspects will drive a healthy balance for the sector and the consumers of financial services. 
As  ICPAK  theme  this  year  is  in  these  lines,  we  consider  you  as  partners  in  this  important 
journey.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  Central  Bank  in  conjunction  with  Government  and  all  other 
stakeholders  in  the  financial  sector  will  continue  the  policy  path  of  maintaining  macro-
economic  stability  for  development  and  financial  inclusion  for  financial  deepening  and 
development even with frequent occurrences of economic shocks.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is now my honor and privilege to declare this conference with a 
very enviable theme officially open and to wish you fruitful deliberations.  
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
