V K Sharma: The framework for pre-empting systemic financial risks 
Inaugural address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
World Risk Workshop 2012, organized by R-square RiskLab, Mumbai, 6 February 2012. 
 The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. 
For  all  the  like-never-before-and-hopefully-never-after  financial,  fiscal, economic  and  social 
costs of the Global Financial Crisis, the one perverse benefit of it, nevertheless, has been 
that it has tellingly focussed attention of global law and policy makers and head honchos of 
finance  and  banking  industry,  also  like  never  before,  on  risk  and  the  risk  management 
imperative  as  also  compelled  a  cathartic  reappraisal  of  how  risk  should  be  defined  and 
measured ! As someone has famously said, what you cannot see, you cannot measure and 
what you cannot measure, you cannot manage. For such is the insidiousness of risk that its 
under-pricing  is  perceived  as  low,  or  no  risk,  and,  therefore,  policy  makers,  regulators, 
supervisors, economic agents including banks, business and industry are caught unawares 
and  blind-sided  when  risk  suddenly  eventuates.  However,  before  I  take  forward  the 
subject-matter of Risk identification, (under-)pricing, management, and prevention of future 
crises, it would only be appropriate that I deal, in some detail, with the genesis of the crisis. 
The  recent  financial  crisis  has  thrown  into  sharp  relief,  as  never  before,  the  critical  and 
important  role  of  “asset  price”  inflation/asset  bubbles  also,  as  opposed  to  that  of  shop 
Floor/products/services inflation alone, as a key variable, in monetary policy response. For 
what happened was unprecedented in that with monetary policy focussed only on traditional 
CPI,  interest  rates  were  kept  low  in  spite  of  exploding  prices  of  assets  like  real 
estate/property,  credit  assets,  equity  and  commodities.  And  this  was  all  made  possible 
because  of  huge  current  account  surpluses  in  China  and  other  EMEs,  and  huge  private 
capital inflows into EMEs in excess of their current account deficits, getting recycled back as 
official  capital  flows  into  government  bonds  of  reserve  currency  countries,  especially  the 
USA, resulting in compression of long term yields which, in turn, translated into lower long 
term interest rates even for the riskier asset classes mentioned above. This chasing of yield, 
due  to  global  savings  glut,  in  turn,  led  to  a  veritable  credit  bubble,  characterized  by 
unprecedented underpricing of risk as reflected in the all-time-low risk premia with junk bond 
spreads  becoming  indistinguishable  from  investment  grade  debt,  and  thus,  to  paraphrase 
Jim  Grant,  the  riskiest  of  assets  effectively  offering  return  free  risk  !  All  this  while,  the 
US growth story stayed non-inflationary due primarily to cheap imports from China, Asia and 
EMEs  which,  only  perversely,  reinforced  the  continuation  of  the  loose  monetary  policy, 
focused, as I just said, as it was on the shop-floor-price inflation to the complete exclusion of 
the broader “asset price” inflation!  
Such  a  low  interest  rate  environment,  coupled  with  luxuriant  supply  of  liquidity,  created 
enabling  environment  for  excessive  leverage  and  risk  taking  so  much  so  that  American 
household debt exceeded the country's GDP! In fact, in the US, in particular, the financial 
sector, instead of being a means to an end of sub-serving the real sector, ended up being an 
end  in  itself.  Interestingly,  in  this  context,  Satyajit  Das,  a  world  renowned  expert  in 
derivatives, in his characteristic breezy and racy style, describes the financial syndrome as 
“too  much”  and  “too  little”  –  too  much  liquidity,  too  much  leverage,  too  much  complex 
financial engineering, too little return for risk, too little understanding of risks”. This syndrome 
of too much of arcane rocket science and financial alchemy in the financial sector, almost 
entirely for its own sake to almost complete exclusion of the needs of the real sector, created 
a massive “financial sector – real sector imbalance” which, being, intrinsically unsustainable, 
culminated  eventually 
the  now-all-too-familiar  apocalyptic  denouement,  entailing 
cumulative  global  write-downs  and  credit  losses  aggregating  US  $  2  trillion  by  banks  and 
financial firms. 
into 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As I observed in my speech, “Identifying Systemic Risk in Global Markets – Lessons Learned 
from the Crisis : Asian Regulators’ Views on what have they done to contain the building up 
of systemic risk and to prevent the recurrence of future crisis”, delivered at the 2nd Pan-Asian 
Regulatory Summit at Singapore, in September 2011, systemic risks in global markets can 
be best identified and measured by looking at some select key parameters which, between 
them, indicate the extent of asset bubbles and the corresponding under-pricing of risks and, 
therefore, it is not so much high volatility, which is the “effect”, that should be a cause for 
concern,  as  persistent  and  excessively  low  volatility,  which  is  the  “cause”  and  was  the 
hallmark of the pre-crisis period. In particular, it is very instructive to look at the readings on 
parameters such as (i) TED Spread (3M LIBOR – 3M Treasury Bill), (ii) 3M LIBOR – 3M OIS, 
(iii)  3M  LIBOR  –  Effective  Fed  Funds  Rate,  (iv)  VIX  Index  and  (v)  CDX  Crossover  index. 
Pre-crisis, these were at historically low levels. This was the time when there was a veritable 
bubble  across  credit  and  equity  markets  and  global  policy  makers  were  already  warning 
about  huge  under-pricing  of  risks  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis.  But  unfortunately,  nothing,  in 
terms of pre-emptive, proactive and credible policy response, other than these warnings, was 
delivered. If one looks at the recent readings, there is incontrovertible evidence that there is 
yet  again  a  huge  under-pricing  of  risks  in  the  financial  system  and,  therefore,  it  is  not  a 
question  of  if,  but  when,  generic  asset  bubble  caused  by  manifold  increases  in  balance 
sheets  of  central  banks  will  burst.  Specifically,  currently  the  global  liquidity  has  become  a 
bigger concern than it was in the pre-2007 period what with ultra-low and near-zero policy 
rates and major central banks’ balance sheets 1.50 to 3 times their pre-2007 levels, adding 
about  USD  4  trillion  in  incremental  central  bank  liquidity.  Worse,  US  banks  are  reportedly 
keeping excess reserves of US $ 1.5 trillion with the Fed rather than lend to small businesses 
and  households.  Alongside,  non-financial  corporations  in  the  US  are  reportedly  sitting  on 
cash and liquid assets worth USD 2 trillion which they do not know what to do with ! In this 
background of huge deluge of global liquidity, there are unmistakable signs of asset bubbles 
inflating again in almost a replay of the last global financial crisis. As the Table shows, as of 
27  January,  2012,  the  over-valuation  of  gold  –  what  we  can  also  call  gold  bubble  –  with 
reference  to  7  competing  asset  classes  varied  from  78%  against  highly  correlated  metal 
prices proxied by LMEX, 62% against WTI crude, 109% against US Treasuries proxied by 
JP Morgan index, and roughly 230–275% against Credit Default Swap index, Dow Jones, the 
US dollar index DXY and the US home price Case-Shiller index. (To detect an asset bubble 
(gold in the present case), fair value/price of gold with reference to competing asset classes 
like US dollar, US stock market, crude oil, the US treasuries, credit risk, base metals, and 
US house  prices,  proxied,  respectively,  by  the  DXY  (Euro,  Pound  Sterling,  Japanese  Yen, 
Swiss  Franc,  Canadian  Dollar  and  Swedish  Krona),  the  Dow  Jones  Industrial  Average 
(DJIA),  WTI  spot,  J.P.  Morgan  Bond  Index,  CDX  IG,  a  CDS  Index  for  Investment  Grade 
US bonds, London Metal Exchange (LMEX) (nickel, tin, alluminium, copper, zinc and lead) 
and  S&P  CASE-SHILLER  index,  has  been  computed.  The  Table  I  is  self-explicit.  This 
intuitively appealing methodology of computing fair value is reasonably robust and rigorous 
based  as  it  is  on  the  assumption  that  any  investor  will  have  this  maximum  investment 
opportunity set to choose from to allocate her portfolio). 
In  fact,  in  my  speech  “Genesis,  Diagnosis  and  Prognosis  of  the  Current  Global  Financial 
Crisis”, published in BIS Review 34/2009, I had mentioned that there was significant risk that 
the then monetary policy environment of very low interest rates and unprecedented deluge of 
liquidity  may  yet  again  engender  another  bubble  in  the  not  too  distant  future!  Indeed,  we 
almost had a commodity bubble which, to all intents and purposes, was caused by this very 
huge  deluge  of  liquidity  but  burst  due  to  the  enveloping  global  economic  downturn,  in 
general, and countercyclical measure of NYMEX raising cash margins on crude oil futures 
and  CFTC  checking  speculative  positions,  in  particular.  Perhaps,  if  this  swamp  of  liquidity 
and monetary easing are not unwound appropriately, and in an orderly, and timely manner, 
the next crisis might well be a veritable “financial and economic nuclear winter”! Thus, you 
will see that we almost had a bubble which burst and now we are heading towards another 
one,  shades  of  which,  contextually,  we  experienced  recently  on  August  4,  2011,  and  post 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regulators/policy-makers  need 
FOMC  meeting  on  September  20,  2011,  when  almost  in  prophetic  confirmation  of  my 
prognostication, based on the aforesaid analysis, crude oil and global stock markets slumped 
by  around  5%  and  gold,  after  touching  its  all-time-high  of  US  $  of  1920  slumped  to 
$ 1530 per troy ounce on Chicago Mercantile Exchange raising cash margins on gold futures 
by 20% !  
As regards prevention of the building up of such systemic risks, the answer is addressing the 
“cause” and which is again there in my same speech. At the risk of being repetitive, it must 
be  noted  that  even  if  global  imbalances  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  provided  an 
enabling environment for excessive leverage and risk taking, it was still the responsibility of 
regulators  and  supervisors  to  have  taken  appropriate  counter-cyclical  macro-prudential 
measures, pre-emptively, decisively and proactively, rather than reactively. But unfortunately 
this  broad-spectrum  and  generic  failure  of  an  inertial  regulatory  and  supervisory  system 
worldwide, especially in the West, precipitated the unprecedented global financial crisis. The 
most no-holds-barred acknowledgement of this, though it came much later only recently, was 
when Donald Kohn, former Vice Chairman of the US Federal Reserve apologized by saying, 
“The  cops  were  not  on  the  beat,  resulting  in  the  worst  economic  recession  and  loss  of 
millions of jobs” ! This regulatory and supervisory inertia to unprecedented build up of risk 
globally, typical and characteristic, of the hunky-dory and gung-ho financial environment of 
the pre-crisis days, is most graphically epitomized by what Mark Twain said 100 years ago: 
“It ain't what you don't know that gets you into trouble; it is what you know for sure that just 
ain't so!”. This is precisely what the insidiousness of risk is all about ! Specifically, based on 
the financial parameters for detecting asset bubbles and under-pricing of risk, delineated in 
the  paragraph  4  above, 
to  deliver  sector-specific 
counter-cyclical  prudential  measures  like  selectively  increasing  capital  charge  for  riskier 
categories of assets by increasing risk weights for asset classes where bubbles exist, or are 
in the process of building. In addition, they need to be complemented by fixing the maximum 
absolute  leverage  (not  allowing  for  risk  weights  for  assets)  in  addition  to  risk  weighted 
asset-based capital prescription. Contextually,  it is instructive to note the comments of the 
legendary  investor  Warren  Buffett  who,  contemporeously  with  the  roll-out  of  Basel  I  in  the 
late  eighties,  tellingly  remarked  that  he  did  not  like  banking  stocks  where  assets  were 
20 times equity, translating into common equity to total assets ratio of 5%, which is roughly 
1.67  times  the  Basel  III  prescribed  minimum  common  equity  to  total  assets  ratio  of 
3% (leverage of 33.33 times) ! Be that as it may, these regulatory measures obviate the need 
of monetary policy tightening which is a blunt tool indiscriminately affecting all sectors of the 
financial markets and the real economy, although, significantly, I am separately setting out in 
this Speech how monetary policy tool can also be deployed alongside as a complementary 
companion  tool  to  credibly  and  effectively  address  the  build  up  of  systemic  financial  risks. 
Besides,  significantly,  the  credit  crisis  has  also  thrown  into  sharp  relief  a  “strong  connect” 
between  “liquidity  risk”  and  “opaque  off-balance  sheet  exposures”  of  whatever  description. 
The appropriate supervisory and regulatory response to these risks would, therefore, be to 
insist on full disclosure and transparency of off-balance sheet commitments / exposures and 
supervisory  insistence  on  an  appropriate  mix  of  “stored”  and  “purchased”  liquidity  and 
appropriate capital charge for liquidity risk; the higher the “purchased liquidity” component, 
the higher the capital charge and the higher the “stored liquidity” component, the lower the 
capital  charge.  Thus,  banking  supervisors  and  regulators  need  to  be  more  hands-on  and 
pro-active in focusing supervisory attention on this critical risk category than has been the 
case  so  far.  (In  fact,  in  India  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  almost 
presciently focused on this critical risk in the month of May itself, much before the liquidity 
and credit crunch of August 2007).  
In  refreshing  contrast,  in  India,  we  have  had  remarkable  financial  stability,  not  fortuitously, 
but thanks to pre-emptively and pro-actively delivered counter-cyclical prudential measures 
like increase in risk weights for exposures to commercial real estate, capital market, venture 
capital  funds  and  systemically  important  non-deposit  accepting  Non  Banking  Finance 
Companies  (NBFCs).  These  pre-crisis  prudential  regulatory  measures  of  Reserve  Bank  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
by 
for 
have 
been 
various 
strongly 
adoption 
commended 
the  counter-cyclical  prudential 
India  represented  what  now  are  famously  known  as  “countercyclical  prudential  measures” 
and 
recent 
Working  Groups  /  Committees  of  international  regulators.  Indeed,  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  and  resulting  economic  recession,  these  counter-cyclical  prudential 
measures  were  rolled  back  to  cushion  the  adverse  impact  of  the  crisis  to  considerable 
beneficial  effect  to  the  Indian  economy.  Not  only  that,  in  equally  refreshing  contrast, 
post-Basel II, the Reserve Bank, unlike in the West, did not allow banks in India to reduce 
their capital and prudentially mandated that banks continue to hold the then existing absolute 
capital. As a result, we, in India, are in a happy situation where banks have a common equity 
to total assets ratio of more than 7% which is already “more-than- twice” Basel III compliant 
on this critical parameter. Significantly, recently again, to contain potential systemic liquidity 
risk,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  capped  banks’  investments  in  Fixed  Income  Mutual  Funds  to 
10% of their net worth. 
I now turn to what I said before, in the paragraph 6, about how monetary policy tool can also 
be  deployed  alongside 
regulatory  measures  as  a 
complementary companion tool to credibly, effectively and decisively address the build-up of 
systemic financial risks. In my considered opinion, the famous Taylor rule can be modified 
suitably  to  include,  alongside  inflation  and  GDP,  additional  terms  representing  systemic 
financial  conditions  based  on  the  financial  parameters  for  detecting  asset  bubbles  and 
under-pricing of risks, already delineated in the paragraph 4 of my Speech. Although, while 
for now this challenge is a work-in-progress for me personally, I would strongly encourage 
discerning researchers to pursue and take this idea forward. I am convinced that once the 
modified version of the Taylor rule is in place, it will provide the much-needed conceptually 
robust, and technically rigorous, analytics content to monetary policy making with a view to 
pre-emptively , pro-actively and decisively addressing potential asset bubbles. 
To  sum  up,  my  message  to  this  learned  and  discerning  audience  is  that  the  build  up  of 
systemic  financial  risks  needs  to  be  pre-emptively,  credibly  and  decisively  addressed  by 
deploying  monetary  policy  tool  based  on  the  proposed  modified  version  of  the  Taylor  rule 
and counter-cyclical prudential regulatory measures. While I wish the Workshop all success it 
so  very  much  deserves,  I  do  hope  that  the  Workshop  will  shine  light  on  the  newer  and 
unconventional,  but  conceptually  robust,  and  technically  rigorous,  alternatives  of  modeling 
risk, possibly shorn of its innate insidiousness. But at the end of the day, at the most basic 
and  fundamental  level,  most  un-euphemistically  speaking,  it  all  boils  down  to  summoning 
courage  to  remove  –  this  phrase  was  very  common  in  similar  policy  debates  in  the  
980s – the “punch bowl” when the party is on ! For the problem is not knowing the problem, 
but knowing it and dithering, agonizing over choices, temporizing, procrastinating and doing 
nothing  credible,  timely,  tangible  and  decisive  about  it.  In  other  words,  paraphrasing  John 
Ruskin, what finally matters is not knowing what must be done but actually doing what must 
be done and doing it when it must be done!!  
Thank you all so very much. 
-x-x-x-x-x-x-x- 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Asset/Index   Avg. of 
TABLE  
Current 
ratio as 
on Jan 
27, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
Levels as 
on Jan 
27, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
daily gold 
to asset 
price ratio 
(Mar’ 2000 
– Feb’ 
2010) 
 
 
 
(1) 
3.57 
Implied 
price of 
gold as 
on Jan 
27, 
2012 
 
 
 
(1)x(3) 
=(4) 
465.49 
over-
valuation 
as on 
Jan 27, 
2012 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
 
274% 
 over-
valuation 
as  
on Sep 14, 
2011  
 
 
 
 
(6) 
over-
valuation 
as  
on Oct 27, 
2010 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
292% 
169% 
  13.34 
130.39 
78.90 
95.48 
6.24 
5.50 
0.05 
1.27 
22.04 
18.21 
0.14 
2.66 
CASE- 
SHILLER 
US National 
Home price 
index 
DXY 
CDX IG* 
Dow Jones 
JP Morgan 
US 
Treasury 7–
10 yr bond 
index 
LMEX 
WTI  
 
(closing spot gold price as on Jan 27, 2012 was at US$1739.07) 
12660.46 
654.73 
3753 
99.56 
0.26 
10.76 
0.46 
17.47 
   492.34 
525.14 
633.02 
831.51 
975.78 
1071.3 
  253% 
231% 
175% 
109% 
 78% 
62% 
280% 
251% 
224% 
123% 
174% 
149% 
138% 
78% 
84% 
90% 
 34% 
50% 
 (Source- Bloomberg) 
* The earliest CDX IG data are available from September 24, 2004. The average value of series 3 has been used 
as  a  proxy  for  CDS  from  March  1,  2000.  The  CDX  spread-based  index  values  have  been  converted  into 
price-based  values  so  that  the  ratio  of  gold  price  and  implied  CDS  price  can  be  worked  out  on  a  “comparing 
apple- with–apple basis”.  
** CASE-SHILLER US National Home price index is published quarterly. The latest one is available up to quarter 
ended September 2011. The level of the index was compared with quarterly average of daily gold price since April 
2000.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
