Christian Noyer: Re-examining central bank orthodoxy for un-orthodox 
times 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  conference  of  the  Global 
Interdependence Center/Bank of France, Paris, 26 March 2012. 
 inflation 
to  anchor 
independent,  a  condition  recognised  as  necessary 
The  unconventional  policies  implemented  during  the  crisis  have  transformed  the  face  of 
central  banking.  But  will  these  changes  prove  permanent  and  will  “the  unconventional 
become the new normal?” There is not yet definitive answer to this question. We may not, as 
easily as we would like, be able to revert exactly to the status quo ante. However, I strongly 
believe we must make sure that the gains from the pre-crisis period, in terms of monetary 
and price stability, are not compromised in the process.  
Prior to the crisis, a description of central banks would have centred on four characteristics: 
They  were  focused  with  price  stability  being  their  primary  or  key  objective,  and  no 
responsibility was sought or given for financial stability;  
They  were  of  limited  size  with  very  small  balance  sheets  and  interest  rates  as  their  only 
policy instrument; 
They  were 
expectations, and embodied in very strong institutional frameworks; 
And  they  were  successful:  the  “Great  moderation”,  a  period  of  exceptional  low  volatility  in 
output and inflation, was widely seen as a product of efficient and wise monetary policies. 
There  was  a  happy  feeling  that,  at  last,  a  perennial  monetary  regime  had  been  found, 
well-tailored  to  the  characteristics  of  a  modern  market  economy.  Financial  markets  were 
efficient and the zero lower bound and liquidity trap appeared to be no more than historical 
curiosities.  
With hindsight, of course, we can see now that this “ideal” economy may never have existed. 
The  Great  Moderation  was  as  much  a  product  of  “good  luck”  (brought  by  disinflationary 
effects of globalisation) than good policy. Monetary stability is a necessary but not a sufficient 
condition  of  financial  stability,  because  capital  markets  are  not  always  and  necessarily 
efficient. And downward financial spirals may quickly bring our economies to the point where 
interest rates can no longer be used as effective tools. 
Therefore,  as  the  crisis  unfolded,  central  banks  responded  by  taking  unprecedented 
measures and, in the process, underwent three major changes  
A diversification of their interventions. In order to both: 
Unclog  financial  markets  (both  private  and  public).  This  involved  exceptional  liquidity 
provision to banks as well as temporary purchases of assets, both private and public.  
Circumvent  the  zero  lower  bound  and  bring  down  real  long-term  interest  rates  through 
purchases of government bonds, and/ or interest rate guidance. 
As a consequence, central banks’ balance sheets expanded by a factor of three, dramatically 
increasing their role in financial intermediation and sometimes raising concerns, at least in 
some  quarters,  about  the  possible  inflationary  impactTogether,  this  diversification  and  the 
increase  in  size  have  created  more  complex  interactions  with  fiscal  policies.  Specifically, 
asset purchases are sometimes seen as “quasi fiscal policies” both on the asset side (due to 
the  potential  risks  attached)  and  the  liability  side  (when  they  contribute  significantly  to 
meeting the funding needs of the sovereigns).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
At the time they were decided, those exceptional interventions were absolutely necessary. 
Although it had been forgotten, central banks were initially created to protect the economy 
from excessive financial disturbances. This was, historically, their “raison d’être”. As ultimate 
and unique providers of liquidity, they cannot escape this responsibility and let the financial 
system and the economy collapse.  
At the same time, by doing so, central banks have exposed themselves to a number of risks 
First, there are risks linked to balance sheet expansion. They cannot be ignored, although all 
central  banks  have  been  extremely  careful  in  valuing  the  assets  purchased  or  taken  as 
collateral. 
Second, they run the risk of blurring the lines between fiscal and monetary responsibilities. A 
dynamic  use  of  their  balance  sheets  by  central  banks  has  effects  on  the  allocation  and 
distribution  of  resources  in  the  economy.  They  may  favour  or  penalise  some  types  of 
collateral or certain borrowers. If central banks take on additional responsibilities in the area 
of financial stability, they will have to do so in close cooperation with fiscal authorities, thus 
exposing themselves to possible interferences with monetary policy.  
The  major  risk,  however,  is  the  risk  of  confusion.  A  multiplicity  of  interventions  could  be 
interpreted as a relative dilution of objectives. There is a tendency by market participants and 
some  policymakers  to  consider  central  banks  to  be  “universal  problem  solvers”  whose 
balance sheets can be used, without cost, for all purposes. There is also a doubt, at least an 
ambiguity,  in  the  minds  of  some  analysts,  about  the  true  purpose  of  government  bond 
purchases. Central banks’ activism may create doubts as to their ability to stick to their core 
mandate – price stability – in the face of increasing pressures and constraints. 
Overall, the euro area is well protected against all of these risks thanks to the robustness of 
its institutional framework 
Price stability is unambiguously the priority objective of monetary policy 
Monetary financing of governments is strictly prohibited 
The Eurosystem (the ECB and National Central Banks) is extremely well capitalised, which 
protects its independence.  
This  has  allowed  the  Eurosystem  to  implement  nonstandard  measures  on  a  large  scale 
without endangering its credibility. 
Of  course,  we  do  not  control  fiscal  policy.  We  will  never  accept  a  situation  where  fiscal 
imbalances could constrain monetary policy. It is very important, therefore, that credible fiscal 
consolidation takes place across the euro area. This will make it easier for the Eurosystem to 
be active in protecting financial stability. On the contrary, doubts over governments’ resolve 
to ensure the sustainability of public finances would make us powerless to fight instability and 
expose the euro area to great dangers.  
Now for the more normative aspects. We may have to live with nonstandard measures for 
a 
interest  rate  guidance 
announcements covering the next two years. It is likely that monetary policy will, for some 
time,  make  use  of  a  diversity  of  instruments.  Macro-prudential  measures  will  interact  with 
monetary policies in a complex way.  
In that context, it is therefore all the more important to keep clarity of purpose and stick to two 
crucial features inherited from the pre-crisis consensus: the focus on price stability and, its 
corollary, central bank independence. 
There  should  be  no  ambiguity  about  what  central  banks  are  trying  to  achieve.  The  more 
non-conventional  their  actions,  the  less  obscurity  there  should  be  as  to  their  ultimate 
purpose.  Non-conventional  measures,  like  any  others,  can  only  achieve  their  objectives  if 
inflation expectations are solidly and clearly anchored. From that point of view, calls by some 
economists  and  market  participants  for  a  temporary  relaxation  of  price  stability  objectives 
Indeed,  some  central  banks  have  adopted 
time. 
long 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are, in my view, totally misguided. I find it significant, on the contrary, that two major central 
banks  have  recently  decided  to  quantify  their  price  stability  objectives  and  enhance  their 
communication accordingly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
