Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Financial crises – impact and challenges for 
Spain 
Opening speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
“XIX Encuentro del sector financiero”, organised by Deloitte-ABC, Madrid, 10 April 2012. 
 Good morning, 
Four years have gone by since the Federal Reserve had to bail out Bear Stearns and what 
was then known as “turbulences” began, ultimately turning into the most serious crisis the 
developed countries have faced since the Great Depression in the 1930s. 
A  year  earlier,  Spain  had  begun  to  feel  the  effects  of  the  exhaustion  of  a  long  phase  of 
disproportionate  expansion,  in  the  form  of  a  build-up  of  private  debt  and  a  loss  of 
competitiveness. The latter, under way before Spain joined the euro, was fuelled by the low 
interest rates that suited the euro area as a whole, prompting an extraordinary deficit on the 
current-account balance.  
The joint outbreak of these two crises, the international one and the domestic one in Spain, 
led output to fall and public revenue to collapse. And this, together with a further increase in 
public  spending  aimed  at  softening  the  recession,  meant  that  the  budget  surplus  run  from 
2005 to 2007 turned into a deficit in 2008 and came to exceed 11% of GDP in 2009. If this 
were not enough, in April 2010 a third crisis hit Spain: the sovereign debt crisis or the euro 
crisis. 
Both the Spanish economy and its banking system suffered and continue to suffer from the 
coincidence of these three high-intensity crises, any of which may return at any time, since 
the  economy  moves  in  waves.  But  it  appears  highly  unlikely  that  the  conjunction  of  three 
such crises could recur for many years.  
The challenges Spain had to face at the onset of the crisis were enormous. Public attention 
has  focused  on  cutting  the  budget  deficit,  but  the  tasks  of  reducing  the  towering  debt 
accumulated  by  households  and  firms,  and  that  of  regaining  lost  competitiveness  within  a 
monetary  union  are  also  huge.  A  Latin  American  colleague  used  a  metaphor  which,  while 
exaggerated, clearly expressed the difficulty ahead of Spain: “regaining competitiveness”, he 
said, “is like painting a house. If your brush is the exchange rate and it is flexible, you simply 
let it move from the top downwards. But since in Spain you’re in the euro and you can’t move 
the brush, all you can do is move the house upwards from below”.  
The task is an arduous one but not impossible if we believe that, though it is very difficult, we 
are  capable  of  changing  and  reforming.  This  is  why  I  shall  begin  my  speech  with  an 
optimistic message, offering you some examples showing how Spain has already progressed 
with some adjustments and has undertaken major reforms during the difficult times we have 
faced during these years of crisis. I’m aware of the risk of showing optimism amid the crisis, 
in the same way that during the bubble whoever dared denounce the imbalances being built 
up  was  called  a  pessimist.  But  I  hope  my  optimism  is  qualified  by  my  reminder  that 
complacency, that is to say believing that we have already done everything that has to be 
done and that nobody can teach us any lessons, is the arch-enemy in the battle to exit the 
crisis.  
To earn the confidence provided by the knowledge that Spain has been capable of adjusting 
and  reforming  during  these  years  of  crisis,  I  have  chosen  two  examples.  First,  the  rapid 
improvement in our current-account balance; and second, the headway during these years in 
restructuring our banking system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  is  well  known,  under  normal  conditions  the  current-account  balance  is  very  easy  to 
finance in a monetary union, but its size is a good indicator of two of the deepest imbalances 
that came about in Spain during the expansionary phase: the explosion in debt and the loss 
of  competitiveness.  Indeed,  from  1996  credit  began  to  outpace  gross  domestic  product, 
doing so systematically until 2006, when its annual growth peaked: at a rate of over 25% for 
total  credit,  and  more  than  40%  for  credit  extended  to  real  estate  development  activities. 
Over the same period, Spanish CPI growth was systematically higher than that of the euro 
area.  
Although the growth rate of credit began to fall as from 2006, growing debt and the loss of 
competitiveness over the 12 years to 2008 led the external imbalance to an unsustainable 
position,  with  a  current-account  deficit  of  10%  of  GDP  and  a  strong  increase  in  Spain’s 
external debt.  
But what counts is that Spain has since adjusted its current-account deficit at a spectacular 
pace.  From  almost  10%  in  2008,  the  deficit  fell  at  the  end  of  last  year  to  3.7%  –  an 
adjustment  of  more  than  6  pp  of  GDP  in  three  years  –  and  at  the  end  of  2012  we  might 
already be in balance.  
The climate of pessimism accompanying the crises leads some to underestimate the effort 
made by Spanish private-sector firms, suggesting that the external adjustment has been due 
exclusively  to  the  fall  in  domestic  demand.  This  decline  naturally  plays  a  part,  but  the 
improvement  is  also  attributable  to  the  relative  gains  in  our  export  shares  compared  with 
other  developed  countries.  During  the  years  of  crisis,  Spain  has  seen  its  exports  outgrow 
those of France, Italy and even Germany, and this situation should not worsen in the coming 
years.  
And not only has there been an improvement in exports, but the decline in imports has been 
greater than the fall in domestic demand, which also shows gains in the share of sales of 
Spanish products at home.  
Behind  these  improvements  in  the  current-account  balance  is  the  significant  progress 
recorded  in  the  trade  and  services  balance.  Traditionally,  Spain’s  trade  balance  with  our 
European  partners  has  run  a  deficit.  Two  years  ago,  this  deficit  had  already  fallen  to 
€4 billion,  but  the  good  news  is  that  at  the  end  of  last  year  it  ran  a  surplus  of  a  similar 
amount,  meaning  that,  last  year  alone,  there  was  a  favourable  turnaround  of  €8  billion  in 
terms of Spain’s trade balance with the countries of the Union. At a greater level of detail we 
can see how the non-energy goods balance improved from a deficit of €50 billion, i.e. 5% of 
GDP, in 2008 to a deficit of only €5 billion, i.e. 0.5% of GDP, at end-2011. And the balance of 
non-tourist services, which has traditionally run a deficit, moved into a surplus of €4.7 billion 
at end-2011 after posting a deficit of €2 billion in 2008.  
A  further  example  of  the  progress  made  during  these  difficult  years  has  been  the 
restructuring of our credit institutions. The Lehman Brothers crisis forced many countries to 
adopt  numerous  measures  during  2009  to  repair  their  banking  systems.  As  is  known,  in 
Spain’s case the direct effect of the international financial crisis – the sudden emergence of 
toxic  assets  on  bank  balance  sheets  –  was  minimal,  thanks  to  the  soundness  of  our 
regulation and supervision and to our banks’ business model. But the indirect effects of the 
international crisis, such as the decline in GDP and the drying up of bank funding, seriously 
affected our system.  
Undoubtedly, the most significant effect of the global crisis on our banks was the fact that the 
path  of  gradual  adjustment  of  imbalances  that  Spain  had  undertaken  and  which  until  then 
was  the  scenario  shared  by  all  analysts  and  national  and  international  organisations, 
suddenly  turned  into  a  collapse  of  all  macroeconomic  indicators.  That  obliged  banks  and 
savings banks to accelerate the clean-up of their balance sheets and to set in train what has 
ultimately become a full-fledged industrial restructuring of the Spanish banking system.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  speed 
into  banks;  new  capital  requirements 
The toolkit at hand, which had been successfully used in the past, was not up to facing a 
crisis of this nature. The legislation on bank resolution had not been adapted to the demands 
of the Monetary Union, in particular to the prohibition of monetary financing, and nor did it 
envisage that it was savings banks that would essentially need to be repaired. Moreover, the 
singularity  of  a  systemic  crisis,  on  a  global  scale  and  with  absolutely  unrestricted  capital 
movements,  made  it  impossible  to  make  creditors  take  haircuts  without  running  the  very 
serious  risk  that  market  alarm  would  ultimately  lead  healthy  institutions  to  sink.  Our  main 
strength  –  one  by  no  means  insubstantial  –  was  that  the  large  credit  institutions  were 
reasonably  sound  and  that  the  problems  were  concentrated  in  a  clearly  defined  group  of 
small and medium-sized institution.  
So as to be able to have a new toolkit adapted to this crisis, more than half a dozen laws1 
had to be approved, from first creating the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking 
Sector (FROB) in 2009 to the last Decree Law approved in February, with regulations that 
have  set  about  righting  the  shortcomings.  These  include  the  creation  of  an  institution/fund 
allowing for the obligatory and orderly restructuring of non-viable banks and encouraging the 
merger  of  viable  ones;  the  regulation  of  institutional  protection  schemes;  the  possibility  of 
converting  savings  banks 
through 
restructuring;  the  granting  of  greater  powers  to  the  Banco  de  España;  the  merger  of  the 
deposit  guarantee  funds,  etc.  Promoting  all  these  changes  in  a  full-blown  crisis  was  like 
carrying out two tasks on a ship that has hit the rocks: while evacuating the passengers, it 
was necessary to repair the lifeboats.  
A most difficult task, as I said, but the seven laws have now been passed. And there is one 
very positive aspect, namely that all these regulations had the backing of the country’s two 
main  parties.  This  is  perhaps  why  these  reforms  have  maintained  a  series  of  common 
characteristics and, while giving due merit to the main actors, i.e. the different governments 
and  the  legislative  chambers,  mention  might  be  made  of  the  advice  that  the  Banco  de 
España has offered and continues to offer. The strategies pursued have involved using the 
least possible amount of public funds, concentrating on cleaning up bank balance sheets by 
demanding  additional  provisions,  raising  capital  requirements,  encouraging  mergers, 
transforming  savings  banks  and  improving  their  governance,  reducing  capacity,  increasing 
efficiency by bolstering the size of banks, making the worst managed banks disappear and 
minimising the time the State has a presence in banks in which it had to intervene.  
The results mean we can be encouraged by what we see Spain has been able to do during 
these difficult years of crisis. As regards cleaning up bank balance sheets, since late 2007 to 
the end of last year provisions have been increased by €112 billion. Once this year, thanks to 
the  recent  legislation,  an  additional  write-down  of  €35  billion  is  completed,  a  figure  of 
€147 billion will have been reached, namely 14% of GDP. As regards capitalisation, deposit 
institutions  have  during  this  period  increased  their  capital  both  in  absolute  terms  and  in 
relation to their assets, thanks partly to the fact that the legislation passed in 2011 and 2012 
has  imposed  on  Spanish  banks  capital  requirements  greater  than  those  required  by  the 
Basel  III  calendar.  As  regards  capacity,  although  the  plans  are  not  complete,  there  have 
been reductions of 12% in the number of branch offices and 10% in the number of staff, with 
sharper falls at savings banks (of the order of 16% and 13%, respectively). As to removing 
the weakest institutions from the system, 2 banks and 28 savings banks had disappeared up 
to  December  through  integration  processes,  and  there  should  be  further  processes  in  the 
coming months. Finally, as concerns having institutions on a more efficient scale, average 
size measured by managed assets has doubled over these years.  
                                                 
1  RDL 9/2009; Third Additional provision of Law 3/2009; RDL 6/2010; RDL 11/2010; RDL 2/2011; RDL 16/2011 
y RDL 19/201; and RDL 2/2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But perhaps the results best testifying to the transformation of Spain’s banking system during 
the  crisis  are  not  quantitative  but  qualitative,  for  example,  the  metamorphosis  of  savings 
banks into banks. If before the crisis someone had said that, except for two small institutions, 
all Spanish savings banks would be converted into banks, nobody would have taken them 
seriously  and  they  would  have  been  accused  of  seeking  to  do  away  with  one  of  Spain’s 
oldest and best-loved institutions. Yet today what this conversion brings in terms of improved 
management,  market  discipline,  etc.  has  been  accepted,  and  should  in  the  future  spare 
Spaniards  from  again  suffering  the  consequences  of  the  excesses  detected  at  certain 
savings banks. Another most important qualitative advance with a view to the medium term 
has been the enhanced transparency of our banks, not only thanks to the stress tests which, 
as  you  know,  were  first  proposed  by  Spain,  but  above  all  to  the  greater  disclosure 
requirements progressively imposed over recent years.  
While the merit of what has been achieved should be accorded to many, allow me briefly to 
acknowledge the work of the staff of the Banco de España, and most specifically the body of 
bank examiners, economists, lawyers and the senior managers of the supervisory, regulatory 
and legal arms of the Bank, on whom the greatest burden has fallen in terms of implementing 
the strategy approved in legislation.  
The fact is, the task discharged by them has perforce been complex and time-consuming. 
The decision by the authorities – previous and present alike – to use limited public funds in 
the reconstruction of the banking system was warranted because the big Spanish banks did 
not and do not need help and because, given the delicate situation of our country’s public 
finances  then  and  now, the  impact on  the  markets  of  a  sharp  and  sudden  increase  in  the 
budget deficit might have led to the collapse or intervention of the entire Spanish economy, 
as indeed occurred in some other countries. But with this strategy of minimising the use of 
public resources, the restructuring work increases exponentially and extends over time. The 
Spanish  supervisor  has  had  no  “bad  bank”  with  which  to  restructure  the  sector.  Here  we 
have  not  seen  a  State  which,  armed  with  taxpayers’  money,  has  bought  bad  assets  from 
banks, thereby resolving all supervised banks’ problems at a stroke.  
Our  Bank’s  supervisory  team  has  had  to  apply  a  strategy  which  has  obliged  it  to  seek 
predominantly private solutions. And this takes considerably more time than addressing or 
doing  away  immediately  with  problems  by  injecting  public  funds.  Yet  this  requirement  to 
promote private solutions does not fully explain the enormous workload that has fallen on the 
supervisor  over  recent  years.  Insofar  as  it  was  decided  at  first  to  retain  without  major 
changes 
their 
governance,  this  made  it  necessary  to  pursue  most  complex  negotiations  with  the  parties 
involved,  namely  trade  unions,  managers,  regional  governments,  etc.,  each  with  very 
different interests from those that prevail in any mercantile company, where market discipline 
leads  owners  to  worry  about  minimising  losses  and  increasing  shareholder  value,  and  not 
about maintaining power, or the total amount devoted to early retirements, or about where 
headquarters should be established. In merger operations, processes such as determining 
shares  of  interest  are  reasonably  easy  to  agree  upon,  since  it  suffices  to  make  a  proper 
valuation and to assign to each party what corresponds to it. But those who have followed 
the  news  in  recent  years  will  have  witnessed  the  long  drawn-out  discussions,  on  a  flimsy 
economic  basis,  that  have  been  necessary  to  determine  the  power  apportioned  to  each 
player in savings bank integrations. Before their transformation into banks, observance of the 
legal structure of savings banks meant that their restructuring could only move forward very 
gradually, step by step and with great prudence. The clearest example was the constitution 
of  institutional  protection  schemes  initially,  without  which  it  would  have  been  extremely 
difficult to finally bring about inter-regional mergers. 
Today some of these problems have already been resolved thanks to these seven laws that 
have  gradually  improved  the  resolution  instruments  available  at  the  start  of  the  crisis.  For 
instance, with all savings banks having converted de facto into banks, the current situation 
differs greatly from that at the start of the process, when the regional governments had the 
for  savings  banks,  and  particularly 
legal  arrangements 
the  singular 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
power to veto mergers. And although the perseverance and skill of the Bank’s supervisory 
arm  managed  to  convince  most  regional  governments  of  the  inevitability  of  merging  with 
savings banks from other territories, there have been cases in which sounder inter-regional 
alternatives were turned down for the sake of mergers which, though they were viable in the 
scenario  then  foreseen  for  the  Spanish  economy  and  avoided,  moreover,  more  costly 
interventions  for  taxpayers,  were  clearly  worse  than  the  mergers  suggested  by  the 
supervisor.  
As  encouraging  examples  of  Spain’s  achievements  during  these  years,  I  have  chosen  the 
progress  made  in  correcting  the  current-account  deficit  and  in  financial  restructuring. 
However,  I  could  have  chosen  other  actions.  For  instance,  the  Pension  Reform  Law  has 
made  historically  significant  changes  and,  if  its  sustainability  provisions  are  properly 
implemented, will enable not only the pensions of our generation, but also of our children’s, 
to  be  paid  without  problem.  Spain  has  been  one  of  the  first  European  countries  to  have 
incorporated  a  balanced  budget  requirement  into  its  constitution,  with  broad  Parliamentary 
backing.  A  more  recent  example  is  labour-market  reform.  This  is  of  great  importance, 
because Spain had not taken such a significant step in this area since the 1984 reform. If the 
1984 reform allowed Spain to create millions of jobs and to increase the welfare of Spaniards 
during  upswings,  the  reform  approved  this  year  should  put  an  end  to  a  situation  in  which 
dismissal and an increase in unemployment are the only way of adjusting the economy. This 
reform  leaves  workers  and  employers  free  to  agree  to  increase  competitiveness  by 
increasing productivity and/or adjusting wages, with the only obstacles or impediments being 
those laid down by law. 
It is sometimes said that all this has been done too late. Should labour-market reform have 
been carried out five years ago? It certainly should have. Or ten years ago in 2002, when we 
were enjoying the long upswing? It would certainly have been better for Spain. The same can 
be said about financial reform. Why were savings banks not reformed during the good times? 
Why were bank resolution schemes, such as the FROB, not drawn up ready to resolve the 
banking problems created by the upswing? These questions merely lead to gloominess and, 
moreover,  ignore  the  fact  that,  not  only  in  Spain,  but  almost  worldwide,  key  reforms  are 
introduced at the worst times. More encouraging is the principle of better late than never, and 
the  important  thing  is  that  Spain  initiated  the  process  of  bank  restructuring,  now  nearing 
completion,  in  2009,  that  significant  measures  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit  began  to  be 
adopted in May 2010 and that an ambitious labour-market reform was introduced in February 
this  year.  Spain  has  proven  itself  capable  of  making  adjustments  and  reforms  and  this  is 
essential to restore long-lasting upswings and sustainable growth. 
But this reassurance must not lead to complacency. What we have done so far, despite its 
huge importance, is not sufficient. And some of us have the thankless task of pointing this 
out. For example, when each financial reform has been approved it has always been argued 
that the result will be more credit, but although bank restructuring is certainly an absolutely 
necessary condition, we have always seen that it is not sufficient by itself to make credit flow 
again.  We have  to  restructure  the financial system  so  that,  as  in  any  process  of industrial 
adjustment, the resulting banks can generate a healthy profit and be sufficiently solid to meet 
demand  when  the  adjustment  process  is  complete.  However,  credit  will  not  improve  until 
solvent  demand  increases.  Hence  the  importance  of  other  economic  reforms  to  boost 
consumer and investor confidence, such as reducing the budget deficit and reforms, such as 
the  labour-market  one,  to  increase  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  All  these  policies,  and 
others  which,  for  brevity’s  sake,  I  have  not  mentioned  today,  are  essential  to  generate 
solvent  credit  demand  and  to  ensure  that  a  solid  banking  system  can  respond  to  such 
demand. 
Having tried to raise your spirits, I must tell you that, despite the huge effort made so far, we 
are unlikely to see a prompt recovery in the Spanish economy. Emerging from crises caused 
by over-borrowing and competitiveness losses in a monetary union is a very slow process, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
and for that very reason we cannot afford to be complacent. The pace of the changes and 
reforms adopted by this country in recent years has to continue steadily.  
What remains to be done in relation to the current-account balance and bank restructuring 
(to continue with the examples chosen)? 
To improve the current-account balance Spain must continue to improve its competitiveness, 
in  order  to  generate  current-account  surpluses  for  a  number  of  years  and  so  reduce  its 
negative  net  international  investment  position.  Moreover,  this  is  urgent  while  the  worst 
consequence of the euro crisis, i.e. financial market fragmentation, persists.  
As regards bank restructuring, much has been done, but there still remains much to do, not 
only  to  continue  to  repair  the  effects  on  the  banking  system  of  an  economic  crisis  that 
regrettably can still not be deemed to be over, but also to give us a framework for action to 
enable us to combat future crises. I am not going to talk today about what banks must do, 
which is a lot. I will merely give some examples of the tasks outstanding for the authorities.  
With regard to cleaning up balance sheets and levels of capital, the latest reform has been a 
very important step, but nothing in life is final. If the Spanish economy eventually recovers, it 
will have been more than enough, but if the economy deteriorates by more than expected, 
then capital will have to continue to be increased and improved if banks are to remain solid. 
Also, new instruments to increase credit to SMEs will have to continue to be tested. Some of 
these  were  discussed  at  a  workshop  held  by  the  Banco  de  España  in  February  in 
collaboration  with  the  Spanish  National  Securities  Market  Commission  (CNMV).  At  some 
point political decisions will need to be taken in this area. 
Another area of work is to continue to reduce the size of savings bank governing bodies in 
order to avoid any duplication when they have transferred their financial business to banks 
they have set up, which must be stock-exchange listed when above a certain size. A more 
substantial alternative would be a  law requiring savings banks to cease holding significant 
stakes in credit institutions, within a reasonable period, and to invest as they see fit, perhaps 
obtaining higher returns, in order to continue to pursue their welfare aims. 
Yet while, as I have already said, much progress has been made in improving the resolution 
toolkit, the Banco de España needs to continue to be equipped with instruments to enable 
the performance of its supervisory tasks to be quick and simple rather than complicated and 
slow. For this purpose it would be desirable to transfer a significant part of the powers of the 
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Competitiveness in relation to sanctioning, licensing, etc., to 
the Banco de España, in line with what the IMF has been suggesting for some time. Also, the 
FROB needs to be authorised to assume the powers of the shareholders in general meeting 
in  relation  to  banks  taken  under  official  administration  and  legal  requirements  that  delay 
asset  and  liability  transfers  need  to  be  eliminated.  As  for  the  Banco  de  España,  it  should 
equip itself with supervisory instruments to ensure that problems can be promptly corrected 
and it should distance itself from a legalistic system that envisages official administration only 
as the very last resort, when all legal requirements have been violated. Also, although the 
Banco  de  España’s  professional  and  collegiate  decision-making  structure  –  one  of  its 
valuable traditions – must be maintained, it needs to be documented further and made more 
systematic,  and  the  information  that  has  begun  to  be  supplied  on  the  Banco  de  España’s 
website needs to be expanded. 
More important still, however, is the need for the Banco de España’s autonomy in the area of 
supervision  to  continue  to  be  respected  and  for  governments  to  continue  to  resist  the 
temptation  to  interfere  in  its  supervisory  decisions,  while  continuing  to  design  legal 
instruments and to defend the proper use of public resources. The Banco de España must 
continue to maintain a dialogue with governments, not only advising them but also listening 
to them (since nobody has a monopoly on good ideas), although supervisory decisions must 
continue to be based, as up until now, solely on a professional basis. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I have been emphasising today what has been done during these years of crisis by Spain 
(that is to say, everyone), because until our country has regained the trust of the rest of the 
world, the attention of investors will continue to be focused on what all relevant parties have 
done and are doing to correct the imbalances of the Spanish economy. In particular, they will 
be monitoring and assessing the extent of cooperative behaviour to overcome the crisis. 
I’m  going  to  conclude  with  a  few  words  on  Europe,  as  I  believe  our  membership  of  the 
European Union and of the Monetary Union is another good reason for viewing optimistically 
our  possibilities  of  overcoming  the  crisis.  Some  measures  need  no  further  explanation,  as 
they clearly show how Europe has helped us and continues to help us during this crisis. A 
case in point is the decisions we have taken in Frankfurt since the start of the crisis, such as 
interest rate cuts, the unlimited supply of liquidity, purchases of bonds and covered bonds 
and three-year refinancing operations, which, while aimed at resolving problems of the euro 
area as a whole, have proven particularly beneficial for Spain.  
But  there  are  other  less  evident  instances,  such  as  when  Europe  obliges  us  to  use 
competitive procedures to award banks that have been taken over or oversees the granting 
of  public  aid.  Admittedly,  this  makes  bank  restructuring  a  lengthier  and  more  complex 
process, but it should be acknowledged that it helps Spain ensure that sell-offs are open to 
all new investors that may be interested and that the taxpayer’s money is better allocated.  
The  help  of  the  European  institutions  should  likewise  be  appreciated  when,  in  compliance 
with  the  new  economic  governance  framework,  they  obliged  the  Spanish  authorities  to  be 
rigorous in cutting the budget deficit. This has not been to the liking of some but, however we 
view  it,  it  is  rightly  one  more  reason  to  be  confident  about  Spain’s  possibility  of  emerging 
from the crisis. The discipline required by Europe, which may prove uncomfortable and even 
debatable in the short term, has, like monetary discipline, extraordinarily positive effects on 
our economy in the medium term. It is as though Spaniards had taken out insurance so that 
our governments, authorities and companies cannot take decisions that harm Spain in the 
long run.  
While  we  should  be  proud  of  our  many  achievements  these  years  past,  we  must  also  be 
ready to listen to others, particularly and attentively so to the European institutions which, lest 
we forget, have been buying us time so that we can see through our adjustments. It is not the 
time for pessimism, but nor is it for complacency. What we must do is fruitfully use the time 
we have.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
