Ebson Uanguta: Towards a financially literate Namibian society 
Welcoming  and  opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ebson  Uanguta,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Namibia, at the opening of the Bank of Namibia Economic Reporting Workshop, Windhoek, 
12 July 2012. 
 Media Practitioners and participants attending this workshop  
Colleagues from the Bank  
Good Morning,  
It is with great pleasure that I join you this morning to officiate the Bank of Namibia Economic 
Reporting  Workshop  2012.  Allow  me  to  extend  a  special  welcome  to  you,  dear  media 
practitioners; economic/financial journalists who  deemed it important to register and attend 
this  workshop.  Furthermore,  allow  me  to  extend  a  special  welcome  to  our guest  lecturers, 
who will be presenting various sessions over the next two days.  
The  Bank  of  Namibia  Economic  Reporting  workshop  is  one  of  the  Bank’s  significant 
initiatives in driving our country’s vision towards a financial literate Namibian society. In the 
last  decade,  the  increased  complexity  of,  and  levels  of  access  to  financial  products  and 
services has prompted the financial service sector to focus on financial inclusion activities as 
a vehicle towards sustainable development. Within this framework, the Bank of Namibia in 
partnership with the Ministry of Finance and key stakeholders in the financial sector industry, 
has recognised the importance of consumer education and is hard at work to speed up the 
process of financial inclusion.  
With  the  financial  service  industry  becoming  increasingly  complex  and  continuously 
changing, pertinent questions have been asked on what role the financial media play in light 
of  the  world  financial  crisis.  There  is  a  call  for  financial  journalists  to  have  the  ability  to 
interpret  and  process  economic  information  and  thoroughly  comprehend  the  function  of 
central banks as regulators of banks.  
This  is  so  because  your  good  understanding  of  economic  concepts  will  enable  you  to 
accurately  inform  the  business  and  investment  sector  with  relevant  information  and 
associated implications. It is my wish that this engagement will enable you to improve your 
understanding  of  economic  journalism  and  that  it  will  enable  you  to  report  professionally 
using  economic  concepts,  yet  giving  the  reader  or  the  viewer  the  context  necessary  to 
understand such information.  
Similar workshops were presented in 2009 and 2011 respectively, with the endorsement of 
MISA  Namibia.  Both  events  were  well  attended  and  I  am  pleased  to  note  that the  current 
status of financial reporting in Namibia is evident of professional and responsible reporting in 
this  unique  and  intricate  newsbeat.  I  want  to  assure  you  that  the  last  year  comments  and 
suggestions  informed  this  year’s  programme  content.  You  can  therefore  look  forward  to  a 
more informative session on day one that will enable you to understand the context, jargon 
and  terminologies  used  in  the  financial  world,  while  day  two  will  be  more  practical  geared 
towards enable you to improve your interpretative skills.  
Finally, allow me to encourage you to engage with the presenters during this workshop. It is 
a unique opportunity created for you to satisfy your insatiable curiosity on a news beat that 
you  are  passionate  about.  I  hope  that  the  next  two  days  will  represent  a  professional 
investment on your part to sharpen your reporting skills in business and economic reporting.  
It is through your influence on the opinions of the policy makers that you play a critical role in 
articulating and presenting correct information. It is my hope that with this initiative, you will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
become and continue to be instrumental in the Namibian economic sphere and that you will 
be recognised as such.  
Once  again,  I  welcome  you,  and  I  wish  you  success  and  encourage  you  to  be  active 
participants.  
I thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
