Christian Noyer: Euro area’s situation – analysis, challenges and 
solutions 
Lunch-debate by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Montreal  conference: 
“Demographic shifts – threats or opportunities?”, Montreal, 11 June 2012. 
 Prime Minister,  
Governor, 
Mr Chairman,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure and honour to participate in this lunch-debate with you today. I would 
especially like to thank the International Economic Forum of the Americas and its Chairman 
for  organising  this  Montreal  Conference,  which  for  the  past  18  years  has  been  a  major 
international economic event.  
I would also like to take this opportunity to share my analysis of the euro area’s situation, the 
challenges we face and the solutions available to us.  
Before  doing  so, I  think  that  it  would  be  useful to  say  a  few  words  about  the  international 
economic situation.  
At the global level, growth is expected to slow down slightly in 2012 compared with 2011, 
notably due to a moderation in growth in Europe and a little bit also in emerging countries, in 
particular  China.  The  United  States  is  recovering  relatively  rapidly,  but  faces  a  number  of 
challenges, especially with regard to its fiscal situation and the housing market. 
Overall, – and this is one of the things that the crisis has clearly highlighted since 2008 – the 
world’s  economic  areas  are  closely  interlinked  and  problems  end  up  being  shared. 
Consequently, some solutions can only be applied at the international level. This is why the 
G20 has grown in significance since 2008.  
We  need  to make further  progress  in  international  cooperation,  in  particular  to  identify  the 
sources  of  global  financial  imbalances  and  reduce  them  via  the  “framework  for  strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth”  and  to  improve  international  financial  regulation.  As 
regards the  latter,  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  our  twofold  objective:  enhancing financial 
stability while ensuring the financing of the economy.  
I would now like to turn to the situation in the euro area. 
As you know, in 2011, the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area was particularly ferocious, 
spilling over to countries with sound economic fundamentals. 
The first three months of 2012 had shown a few signs of improvement, in particular thanks to 
the Eurosystem initiatives and positive political impulses: pressure on sovereign debt eased 
slightly, and bank financing and money markets recovered somewhat. 
But since April, sovereign debt and banking systems have come under renewed pressure. 
The two main driving factors behind this deterioration are the fiscal problems and difficulties 
in  the  banking  sector  in  Spain  –  but  the  plan  adopted  over  the  weekend  should  respond 
effectively – and, above all, the major political uncertainty in Greece. 
Therefore, there is a tremendous amount of work to do on a number of fronts if Europe is to 
find a durable solution to the crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The challenge for most individual euro area countries is obviously to achieve strong 
fiscal  consolidation  while  ensuring  long-term  growth.  Clearly  for  me,  there  is  no 
contradiction between these two objectives. On the contrary, they are complementary.  
The efforts already made on the fiscal front by the euro area are already bearing fruit: not 
only is the absolute level of the euro area’s deficit half that of elsewhere, but also the pace of 
fiscal  consolidation  is  actually  much  greater.  It  is  clearly  an  asset  for  us  today  and  an 
element of confidence both for the markets and economic agents, which needs to be further 
enhanced. But, by the same token, countries need to create the conditions for a strong and 
sustainable  growth  through  strong  structural  reforms.  Here  as  well,  the  progress  already 
made in many countries is important but more needs to be done, notably with regard to the 
labour and goods and services markets. 
Beyond these national efforts, I believe that what the euro area really needs today is to 
make progress towards a more coherent and integrated economic and financial union. 
Indeed, the crisis has clearly brought to the fore a number of weaknesses in the functioning 
of the euro area and has thus fuelled concerns. 
First, the fiscal discipline mechanism through peer pressure as established by the Stability 
and Growth Pact proved to be weak. Second, the euro area did not equip itself at the outset 
with an instrument for monitoring competitiveness.  
Third, the euro area had not put in place a resolution mechanism before the beginning of the 
crisis.  
I believe that important decisions have been taken on these three points, which should bring 
significant improvements if they are fully implemented:  
– 
Europe  has  considerably  enhanced  its  fiscal  discipline  framework.  The  legislative 
package (the so-called “Six Pack”) entered into force in December and considerably 
reinforces the Stability and Growth Pact: the surveillance powers of the European 
Commission  over  national  budgets  have  been  enhanced,  sanctions  have  become 
quasi-automatic,  the  criteria  for  public  debt  and  public  spending  are  being  more 
closely scrutinised and a new framework for the surveillance of macroeconomic and 
competitiveness imbalances has been put in place. In addition, 25 European Heads 
of State or government signed the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance 
which establishes a comprehensive new “fiscal compact” including a requirement for 
national structural deficit not to exceed 0.5% of GDP. These new rules must now be 
fully implemented by each country.  
Besides, Europe has equipped itself with an instrument to combat crises. At the last 
European  Council  meetings,  it  was  decided  to  bring  forward  the  creation  of  the 
permanent European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to July 2012, and to make it more 
powerful, increasing the lending capacity of the ESM to USD 1 trillion. It is absolutely 
necessary that this strong tool becomes fully operational as soon as possible.  
 I believe that there is another very important reason why the euro area has been so badly hit 
by the crisis; it is because we are a very highly integrated economic area but do not have the 
appropriate  institutional  mechanisms  for  this  integration.  In  particular,  this  explains  the 
contagion effects and the negative feedback loops between banks and States, which have 
made matters much worse in the area.  
Obviously, a good and coherent functioning of the banking sector is absolutely  vital for an 
overall  solution  to  the  euro  area  crisis.  This  conviction  is  based  on  two  fundamental 
observations:  
– 
Appropriate  financing  is  essential  for  our  economies  to  achieve  strong  and 
sustainable growth. In Europe, the banking system is the main source of financing, 
and hence its strength is of crucial importance. However, financial markets naturally 
also play a key role and they should focus on serving the economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Secondly, financial stability  is  critical  not  just for  creating the right  conditions for 
the appropriate financing of the economy. It is also an extremely valuable asset in 
fostering confidence, which has been severely lacking in recent years and is another 
key condition for growth. It is also a vital condition for the effectiveness of monetary 
policy as it allows the normal functioning of transmission mechanisms. In addition, 
given the feedback loop between banks and sovereigns and the potential impact of 
a  financial  crisis  on  a  country’s  fiscal  position,  financial  stability  makes  a  major 
contribution to fiscal stability.  
A smooth functioning of the banking sector is therefore clearly an essential element in the 
resolution of Europe’s problems. As a central banker and supervisor, I see three major tools 
which can help to ensure appropriate financing of the economy and financial stability – both 
of which are essential financial conditions for sustainable growth.  
1.   Financial  regulation  and  supervision  must  be  tailored  to  the  two  objectives  of 
strengthening the financial sector while ensuring an appropriate financing of the economy. Of 
course, after the 2008 financial crisis, the most urgent priority  was to re-establish financial 
stability and bolster resilience to financial shocks. But in the implementation process of the 
new Basel 3 rules, we need to pay the utmost attention to their potential consequences for 
the financing of the economy, especially in view of the much shorter agenda. In particular, 
the new liquidity rules need to be adjusted. In addition, much more progress is now needed 
in the area of “shadow banking”.  
2.   Since the beginning of the crisis, the Eurosystem has constantly provided all possible 
support within the scope of its mandate to help the banking system overcome its difficulties. 
For instance, the idea of the two LTROs was to remove funding pressures in order to allow a 
smoother adaptation to the new rules and difficult environment. Simultaneously, this aimed to 
prevent a major credit crunch that would compromise both the financing of the economy and 
the maintenance of price stability in the area. We will continue to pursue these goals, with no 
concessions to our primary mandate and our independence.  
3.   Beyond this action of the Eurosystem entrenched in the Treaty, the euro area needs a 
new  and  concrete  leap  towards  stronger  financial  integration.  It  is  true  that  we  have 
made  enormous  progress  for  more  regulation  and  created  new  tools,  but  the  different 
episodes of the crisis have demonstrated that a monetary union can be stronger if it relies on 
a financial system whose health is not ultimately dependent on national mechanisms:  
– 
the homogeneous health of the financial system is key for the proper transmission of 
a single euro area monetary policy;  
as long as the euro area’s financial health is vulnerable to problems in one country, 
negative feedback loops between sovereign and banking risks can materialise – this 
is precisely what happened in the euro area; 
in  a  monetary  union,  capital  is  free  to  move  very  quickly  from  one  country  to 
another, 
if  no 
supranational deposit guarantee mechanism is in place. 
incidence  of  “bank  runs” 
thereby  augmenting 
the  potential 
  Therefore, we have to build a truly federal authority in the Euro zone, a structure combining 
the US FDIC’s functions with the ones of the US Federal Reserve System would be a major 
advantage for the future of the euro area. It should have three main powers:  
– 
banking  supervision  (possibly  the  same  kind  of  structure  as  the  Eurosystem  with 
one “head” and decentralised implementation);  
deposit  guarantee,  with  massive  firepower,  provided  that  it  could  collect  a  tax  on 
every  euro  area  bank  and  could  borrow  on  the  markets  with  a  supranational 
guarantee;  
banking resolution (crisis management).  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Of course, such a leap will require numerous steps and the elimination of a large number of 
substantial obstacles. But what it requires most is an unfailing political will from all euro area 
members to progress towards a stronger and more coherent economic and monetary union. 
After  all,  the  greatest  advances  in  the  European  project  have  always  come  in  reaction  to 
crises.  And  we  should  remember  the  prediction  of  Jean  Monnet:  “Europe  was  born  out  of 
crises and will be the solution to these crises.”  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
