Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Financing small- and medium-scale industries in 
Africa 
Keynote speech by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of 
Zambia,  to  the  United  Nations  Economic  Commission  for  Africa  Expert  Group  Meeting  on 
“Financing small- and medium-scale industries in Africa”, Lusaka, 26 June 2012. 
  The UNDP Resident Representative, Ms Khanni Wignaraja;  
Director of UNECA, Southern Region office, Ms Beatrice Kiraso  
The AfDB Representative, Dr Fred Kwesiga;  
Officials from the Ministries of Finance of various countries;  
Officials from various central banks; Development Banks, Commercial Banks 
and other financial institutions;  
Private Sector Representatives  
Participants;  
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
• 
• 
• 
I  would  like  to firstly  express  my  appreciation  to  the  Director  of  UNECA,  Southern  Region 
Office  for  extending  an  invitation  to  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  the  start  of  the 
Experts  Group  meeting  of  Financing  Small  and  Medium  Scale  Industries.  I  commend 
UNECA for this great effort to bring together this assembly of high level officials and experts 
from Government, the financial sector, private sector and academic institutions to discuss the 
vexing problem of enhancing financial flows to the SME Sector in Africa.  
I note from the very elaborate programme for this meeting that you will in the next three days 
cover  a  wide  spectrum of  issues  some  of  which  will  focus  on factors  that  constrain  SMEs 
access to finance  and  some  of  which  will  focus  on  what  needs  to  be  done  to  change  this 
situation. The meeting is, therefore, an opportunity for us to face a number of challenges that 
characterize  this  sector.  These  will  include  revisiting  strategies  and  approaches  to  SME 
financing  currently  in  use  as  much  as  it  will  require  a  review  of  current  institutional 
arrangements through which finance is directly delivered to SMEs, on one hand, and those 
which indirectly obstruct or facilitate this flow of resources, on the other.  
However, I believe that probably the greatest challenge before this assembly is to attempt to 
narrow the gap between analysis of the problem and the implementation of measures and 
actions  that  work.  Meetings,  workshops,  seminars,  etc.  on  SME  financing  are  plenty  at 
national, regional and international levels. Some of you have had the opportunity to attend 
several of these meetings in the past. Indeed, some of you have become experts at talking 
about the subject. Barely two weeks ago, the Bank of Zambia held a financial sector forum 
here in Lusaka at which views of various stakeholders on what needs to be done to address 
binding constraints to the SME sector were considered. The fact that the discourse on SME 
financing continues underpins two significant positions.  
Firstly, it gives recognition to the fact that we are all aware of the potential of this sector in 
generating employment, promoting economic growth and reducing existing poverty levels. In 
low income sub-Saharan African countries, SMEs and micro-enterprises make up about 90% 
of all enterprises. However, due to the various constraints they face, their overall contribution 
to GDP can in some countries be as low as 20% although estimates show that this could be 
scaled  up  to  60%  with  the  greater  realization  of  the  sector’s  potential.  Contribution  to 
employment  can  be  as  high  as  63%.  For  most  low  income  countries,  SMEs  are  the  main 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
source of jobs and income after subsistence agriculture. Particularly significant is that they 
are a great source of livelihood for women who own more than half of SMEs while over 70% 
of  Africa’s  rural  population  survives  through  the  formal  and  informal  SME  sector.  There  is 
little doubt, therefore, that SMEs form a solid basis for sustainable economic development on 
our continent.  
Secondly,  the  continued  discourse  on  SMEs  reminds  us  of  the  possibility  that  we  have 
probably  done  more  talking  about  the  problem  than  fixing  it.  Although  the  development  of 
SMEs  is  varied  extensively  across  Africa,  what  is  clear  is  that  in  most  countries  a  major 
obstacle to their growth is the lack of sustainable and cost effective financial products. South 
Africa  and  Mauritius  in  this  region  and  North  Africa  have  done  a  commendable  job  in 
developing flourishing SMEs sectors. Part of the reasons for success in these countries can 
be attributed to their modern financial systems and clear policies that support the growth of 
the sector. However, the fact still remains that for most African countries, a sustainable way 
of financing SMEs has yet to be found.  
As I mentioned earlier, the programme for this meeting is broad and extensive. But I would 
wish to draw your attention to a number of broad areas of reflection which I believe can help 
in delivering greater finance to the sector.  
The  first  area  is  that  there  is  a  need  to  accept  that  not  all  banks  can  or  should  even  be 
expected to provide SME financing products. The cost structure and skills orientation simply 
make  some  financing  institutions  completely  unsuitable  to  deliver  SME  products  cost 
effectively.  
The implication of this is that greater effort must be placed on developing financial institutions 
that see SME financing as the core business and therefore set out to develop the expertise 
required to finance the SMEs successfully.  
Fairly  often  the  discussion  on  SME  financing  is  reduced  to  two  diametrically  opposed 
positions.  On  one  hand,  SMEs  are  considered  by  banks  as  representing  a  high  risk  and 
therefore,  should  be  avoided  or  only  dealt  with  cautiously  and  at  a  premium  price. On  the 
other  hand,  banks  are  accused  of  being  inflexible  and  risk  averse  and  consequently 
irrelevant to the sector.  
It is important to understand where the truth lies in these two statements in order to advance 
the  cause  of  SME  financing.  Firstly,  it  is  a  fact  that  SMEs  present  higher  credit  risk  than 
well-structured corporate entities. SMEs may not have proper accounting records, may have 
severe  governance  issues  which  undermine  accountability,  have  poor  access  to  markets, 
poor skill levels including financial illiteracy by promoters, lack collateral which the lender can 
rely on in the event of failure, may not even exist in an appropriate legal form and even the 
assessment of the viability of a project might be difficult. Lending to SMEs can be a lenders 
nightmare  for  bankers.  But  it  is  also  true  that  banks  which  are  structured  to  deal  with 
corporates are risk averse and inflexible when they deal with SMEs. Often when they bring 
inappropriate  risk  assessment  tools,  they  may  focus  too  much  on  collateral  rather  than 
project  viability.  They  may  even  regard  SME  financing  as  peripheral  to  their  business. 
Because of their limited knowledge of SMEs, they experience failure which itself reinforces 
the notion that SMEs are risky. What we want are financing institutions that are structured to 
respond  to  the  unique  characteristics  of  SMEs.  Specialised  SME  lending  institutions  are 
more likely to handle the risk problem presented by SMEs as a challenge to be overcome 
with  appropriate  products  and  credit  risk  management  strategies  and  not  as  a  basis  for 
inaction or avoiding the sector altogether. In short, lending strategies which ensure success 
with  corporates  do  not  necessarily  ensure  similar  success  with  SMEs.  Appropriate  SME 
financing institutions must at the very least make lending to SMEs the core business.  
The second area of reflection that I would urge this meeting to consider is that of building 
appropriate  financing  models  that  have  been  shown  to  work  in  Africa  or  other  developing 
countries so that we all benefit from the best practices available. In South Africa, for instance, 
franchising  which  allows  the  use  of  brand  names  and  building  capacity  have  been  an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
important  driver  of  SME  financing  since  it  reduces  the  perceived  risk  of  business  failure. 
Warehouse  receipt  financing  which  guarantee  loans  with  agricultural  stock  are  extensively 
used elsewhere but not as much in Africa. In some countries in Asia, the use of the SME 
cluster model has helped to increase SME financing by building greater confidence between 
lenders  and  SMEs.  The  cluster  model  is  based  on  members  of  an  SME  entity  seeking 
financing  together  and  providing  collective  guarantees  to  financial  institutions.  The  cluster 
also  ensures  credit  compliance  by  members  while  facilitating  constant  interaction  with 
financial  institutions.  Naturally,  one  must  guard  against  the  temptation  to  adopt  other 
experiences  without  serious  reflection  –  but,  what  appears  desirable  is  the  need  to  build 
financing models that are appropriate and therefore can deliver sustainable financing. We do 
not always require to re-invent the wheel in this process.  
The third and last area of reflection for me is that we must understand that the constraints 
that  limit  the  flow  of  finance  to  SMEs  is  sometimes  beyond  the  scope  of  what  financial 
institutions can do or outside the inherent adverse characteristics of SMEs. There are factors 
which  exist  outside  the  financial  system  and  beyond  SMEs  which  nonetheless  affect 
resource flows. These might include poor infrastructure, bureaucracy which makes it difficult 
to  carry  out  business,  an  unattractive  tax  regime  and  unclear  or  unfavourable  government 
policies. Acquiring an appreciation of these factors and appropriately dealing with them can 
help  to  foster  the  efficient  use  of  available  financial  resources  by  SMEs,  increase  their 
success  in  the  application  of  credit  and  therefore  give  positive  feedback  to  financing 
institutions which itself encourages them to lend more to the sector.  
Let me conclude by wishing you all a fruitful three days of deliberations and to reiterate my 
challenge  to  you  to  attempt  narrowing  that  undesirable  gap  between  the  identification  of 
problems and the delivering of practical solutions that will enable the flow of appropriate and 
sustainable  financial  resources  to  SMEs  to  enable  them  to  play  their  wealth  creation  and 
development  role  in  Africa.  For  me,  the  SME  sector  can  be  a  great  engine  for  economic 
development in Africa. Meetings like this can help in making them become just that. But we 
must also go beyond just paying lip service to the sector and show true and real commitment 
to making the sector strong on our continent. I suspect that to go beyond lip service might, in 
some  instances  require  a  paradigm  shift  on  the  part  of  financiers,  governments  and  the 
players in the SME sector itself.  
I thank you for your attention!!! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
