Tongurai Limpiti: Future of Thai banking system – the road towards AEC 
2015 
Keynote address by Ms Tongurai Limpiti, Deputy Governor for Corporate Support Services 
and Banknote Management of the Bank of Thailand, at the IDC Financial Insights, Thailand 
Financial Services Summit 2012, Bangkok, 8 November 2012. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is an honor to join all of you today and I would like to thank the IDC Financial Insights for 
inviting me to deliver a keynote address at this event. 
The title of my remark today is about “Future of Thai Banking System: the Road towards 
AEC 2015”. I think that this issue is appropriate and timely as we are now approaching a new 
face of regional economic integration, or the ASEAN Economic Community, which will come 
into effect in 2015. To be aware of its impacts and to identify company positions and strategy 
in responding to its impacts would be of a great benefit. I hope that this event will provide a 
very good opportunity for us to share experiences and views on the way to move forward. 
With  the  given  time,  I  will  use  this  opportunity  to  touch  on  three  topics  which  are  current 
situation of Thai banking system and the new challenges from AEC, the impacts of AEC on 
financial institutions, and the role of central bank. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
When we talk about Thai banking system, I think it can be claimed, now, that we have safe 
and  sound  banking  sector  with  sustained  profitability,  despite  the  ongoing  global  financial 
crisis and severe flood last year. 
The  financial  institutions  have  robust  risk  management  system.  The  average  capital 
adequacy ratio is highly above the minimum requirement at around 15%. Loans expand in 
line  with  economic  recovery,  while  banks  increase  provision  in  anticipation  of  global 
economy. Loan quality also improves as reflected in the reduction in Non-Performing Loan 
ratio. There is also adequate liquidity in the system. 
In  the  second  quarter  of  2012,  the  banking  system  reported  net  profit  of  49  billion  baht, 
increasing 21% from the last quarter. 
While we have a stable and strong banking system, there are new challenges coming from 
the regional integration of the ASEAN Economic Community in 2015. 
The AEC is not, and has no intention of transforming ASEAN into a European style union. 
What the AEC does aim to do is to “transform ASEAN into a single market and production 
base,  a  highly  competitive  economic  region,  a  region  of  equitable  economic  development, 
and a region fully integrated into the global economy”.1 
The  AEC  blueprint  crystallizes  this  in  its  goal  of  a  single  market  and  production  base  by 
achieving free flow of goods, services, investment, and skilled labor, and freer flow of capital, 
while continuing to reach out to the rest of the world. 
The adoption  of  AEC  will have many implications on financial institutions and central 
bank. In order to make Thai banking sector to stay resilience and competitive in the more 
open market, we need to explore and analyze the impacts of AEC on both practitioner and 
regulator sides. 
                                                
1   Taken from the “Declaration of the ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint”, 20 November 2007 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to talk firstly about the impacts of AEC on financial institutions, and secondly on 
the role of central bank for small economy like Thailand. 
For  financial  institutions,  the  AEC  can  give  both  opportunities  and  challenges. 
Obviously,  financial  institutions  will  benefit  from  market  expansion  and  the  increasing  in 
cross-border  financial  and  trading  activities  as  well  as  revenue  remittance.  However,  the 
AEC will induce higher competition and more risk exposure. 
To maximize benefits and minimize any negative effects, financial institutions need to adjust 
their  business  to  the  changing  environment.  Truly  understanding  customer  demand, 
business culture, and regulatory requirement of other ASEAN countries are inevitable. 
In the midst of this process, there are three words that management may need to take into 
consideration. The keywords are connectivity, innovative, and efficiency. 
• 
Connectivity: the connection that can reach to customers in the region will be an 
important criterion to maintain or increase international competitiveness of financial 
institutions. These can be done through traditional ways of correspondent banking 
or establishing new networks and presence in other countries. 
Innovative: financial institutions need to be able to respond quickly and effectively 
to customer demand, and must not lose sight of the new opportunities from mobile 
banking and other social network. Higher levels of innovation are necessary, while 
still focusing their attention on their own core competencies. 
Efficiency: financial institutions need to deliver financial services with high efficiency 
in  terms  of  cost,  quality,  and  product  availability.  Business  processes,  strategies, 
and supporting systems may need to be revised or reconsidered in order to maintain 
market share and attract new customers. 
  Dealing  with  the  above  factors  is  not  an  easy  task.  At  this  moment,  Information  and 
Communication Technology is perhaps going to be the most powerful catalyst. 
As  a  central  bank,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  faces  the  challenge  of  maintaining  stability, 
encouraging  development,  and  ensuring  financial  inclusion.  All  of  these  roles  are 
interrelated.  Stable  economic  and  financial  system  will  allow  private  sector  to  invest  and 
consume  optimally  which  is  good  for  development.  The  development  in  financial  system 
must meet local needs and done in good pace. Importantly, central bank needs to make sure 
that no one is left behind and, that there are appropriate access to financial services. 
The  introduction  of  AEC  will  have  implications  on  all  functions  of  central  banking,  and  the 
central bank will have to take into account the three roles when performing its functions. 
Today  I  will  focus  on  how  these  roles  have  been  taken  into  account  when  performing  our 
functions in relation to banking system and payment and settlement systems 
In banking system, the Bank of Thailand has always been aware of the momentum towards 
financial  service  liberalization.  We,  therefore,  did  not  neglect  our  roles  in  reshaping  our 
financial  landscape  to  meet  changes  in  the  environment.  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan 
Phase I and II have been launched to prepare  banking sector to get ready for more open 
economy. 
FSMP  Phase  I  focused  on  strengthening  Thai  banking  sector  through  the  policies  of 
consolidation and one presence. In FSMP Phase II, the focuses are on comprehensive risk 
management, cost reduction, and enhancing competitiveness in banking system. 
Further  liberalization  of  financial  services  in  ASEAN  is  being  considered.  The  ASEAN 
central  banks  are  now  discussing  on  what  should  best  constitute  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks 
(QABs), which will be able to operate on a region-wide basis. However, such liberalization 
must be done with great care to ensure stability in each country. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 individuals 
As  we  already  know,  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  the  backbone  of  a modern 
economy.  They  are  gaining  even  more  significance  in  the  period  of  regional  economic 
integration.  This  is  because  they  are  financial  infrastructures  that  facilitate  flows  of 
goods, services, investment, skilled labor and capital. 
Especially for the AEC that already embarked on Free Trade Area, the increase in trade of 
goods among member countries needs efficient payment and settlement systems to support 
their business transactions. The movement of skilled labor also needs payment instruments 
and products that meet and serve their personal needs. 
In  this  part, I  would  like  to  highlight key  considerations for future  development  in  payment 
and settlement systems in response to the ASEAN economic region. 
The first one is Regional Connectivity for which I think many works have been initiated. At 
the  policy  level,  the  ASEAN  Central  Bank  Governors  Meeting  has  endorsed  the  Working 
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (WC-PSS)  since  2010  to  promote  future 
enhancement,  development  and  harmonization.  The  WC-PSS  has  set  a  vision  to  foster 
integrated,  safe,  and  efficient  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the  region  that  enable 
businesses  and 
to  make  or  receive  electronic  payments  with  greater 
convenience. 
In  achieving  its  goals,  the  working  committee  has  identified  the  roadmap  for  regional 
connectivity which is divided into three phases. 
• 
In  Short  Term  (2012–13),  the  roadmap  focuses  on  promoting  standardization  to 
enable  interoperability  and  inter-linkage  among  payment  and  settlement  systems. 
International standards such as SWIFT message or other message standards are 
encouraged to be implemented. 
In Mid Term (2014–15), the roadmap focuses on improving existing infrastructure 
and  payment  environment.  The  improvement  should  meet  economic  needs,  and 
takes the opportunity to standardize the systems to be ready for long term goal of 
regional  integration.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  been  proactive  in  this  aspect. We 
have  already  upgraded  our  cheque  clearing  system 
to 
image-based system, namely ICAS in Bangkok and the Metropolitan areas and we 
will launch the ICAS for the entire country within next year, and the new version of 
BAHTNET system will also be launched next year. In addition, a policy to set up a 
system for  local  switching  (i.e.  a  system for  switching,  clearing,  and  settlement of 
domestic  payment transactions  via  local  debit  card)  has  been  prescribed,  and  will 
come into force within 2013. 
In Long Term (beyond 2015), ASEAN payment and settlement linkage should be 
explored.  Currently,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  exploring  the  potential  of  linking  our 
payment  and  settlement  systems  with  that  of  other  countries,  such  as the  linkage 
with Hong Kong USD CHATS which aims to reduce FX settlement risk. 
The second consideration is new channel of payment and new technology 
Advanced  development  in  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  has  made  it 
possible for money to move faster and more safely. 
Important  development  nowadays  is  ATM  ASEANPay,  operated  by  National  ITMX,  which 
already  connects  ATM  system  between  Thailand  and  Malaysia.  More  connections  will  be 
made  in  the  future,  which  will  help  facilitate  retail  payment  and  money  remittance  across 
ASEAN countries. 
Moreover,  other  payment  channels  and  instruments  such  as  e-banking,  e-payment,  and 
mobile  payment  will  play  an  important  role  in  enhancing  efficiency  and  inclusiveness  of 
financial services. 
from  paper-based 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
To  get  the  real  benefit  from  the  advancement  in  ICT,  we  need  to  educate  and  persuade 
customers  to  change  their  behavior  in  using  other  payment  instruments,  from  cash  to 
non-cash  instruments.  In  addition,  the  central  bank  needs  to  coordinate  with  financial 
institutions  and  service  providers  to  make  electronic  payments  to  be  more  accessible, 
reliable and, of course, available at reasonable price. 
The  third  consideration  is  the  implementation  of  principles  for  financial  market 
infrastructures. 
From the regulatory point of view, the important payment and settlement systems need to be 
appropriately  regulated.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  financial  market 
infrastructures, such as payment and settlement systems and central counterparty, can be 
sources of financial shocks or major channels that shocks are transmitted across domestic 
and international financial markets. 
To  enhance  safety  and  efficiency,  the  principles  for  financial  market  infrastructures  have 
been  prescribed  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  the 
Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 
April 2012 with objectives to limit systemic risk and foster transparency and financial stability. 
In response to the new international standard, the Bank of Thailand intends to adopt these 
principles to our systemically important payment and settlement system which is BAHTNET 
system.  Moreover,  we  will  coordinate  with  other  regulators  to  ensure  that  all  systemically 
important payment and settlement systems are adequately supervised. 
I would like to conclude here that, to join the AEC in 2015 both central bank and financial 
institutions need to have proactive strategies to deal with the changing economic and social 
environments. 
The central bank will play an important role in supporting private sectors and ensuring the 
stability and efficiency of financial system and infrastructures. 
Concurrently, the financial institutions need to rethink and redesign their business processes 
and strategies in order to stay at the forefront of highly competitive environment as well as to 
reap the full benefit of the integrated economic community. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
