V K Sharma: Unearned and unshared prosperity are unsustainable 
Keynote address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International Leadership Symposium on “Rethinking capitalism and globalization”, organized 
by the World Forum for Ethics in Business in partnership with the World Bank Institute at the 
European Parliament, Brussels, Belgium, 30 November 2012. 
 trade-off,  with 
The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1. 
As  is  invariably  the  case  with  any  major  crisis,  the  ongoing  global  financial  and 
economic crisis, including lately, of course, the eurozone crisis, have unleashed a passionate 
debate  over  the  design  of  a  new  architecture  of  finance,  capitalism  and  globalization. 
However, the trouble has been not so much with the inter-temporally evolved architecture of 
finance,  capitalism  and  globalization  as  really  with  how  it  was  actually  worked  in  practice. 
The apocalyptic denouement, almost bordering on a veritable global financial and economic 
nuclear  winter,  happened  not  because  the  existing  systems  and  best  practices  failed  but 
because those responsible for implementing, and enforcing, them failed them! After all, of all 
risks to regulators and regulatees alike, human resources risk is by far the most serious as it 
is  the  source  of  all  risks  as  confirmed  by  the  ongoing  financial  and  economic  cataclysm. 
Effective and credible systems are not about right architecture but about right people for right 
people  can  make  a  wrong  architecture  work  while  wrong  people  can’t  make  even  a  right 
architecture work! This “right people-wrong people” trade-off is substantively, and effectively, 
about  “ethics-expediency” 
the  overwhelming  anecdotal  evidence  of 
“expediency” prevailing over “ethics”! The crux of the matter is what we need is not more, or 
less,  regulation,  but  good  regulation,  and  governance.  This  has  been  the  undoing  of 
regulators/supervisors and financial firms/banks alike. But unfortunately broad-spectrum and 
generic failure of an inertial regulatory and supervisory system worldwide, especially in the 
West, precipitated the unprecedented global financial crisis and the resulting great recession. 
This regulatory  and  supervisory  inertia  and  imperviousness  to  the  early  warning  signals of 
unprecedented underpricing of risk, which were galore, and aplenty, pre-crisis, is graphically 
epitomized  by  the  most  no-holds-barred  acknowledgement  of  this  –  though  it  came  much 
later  only  recently  –  was  when  Donald  Kohn,  former  Vice  Chairman  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  apologized  by  saying,  “The  cops  were  not  on  the  beat,  resulting  in  the  worst 
economic recession and loss of millions of jobs”! At the end of the day, the problem is not not 
knowing  the  problem,  but  knowing  it  and  dithering,  agonizing  over  choices,  temporizing, 
procrastinating  and  doing  nothing  credible,  timely,  tangible  and  decisive  about  it.  In  other 
words, in my considered opinion, we don’t really have to rethink capitalism and globalisation, 
for  paraphrasing  John  Ruskin,  what  finally  matters  is  not  knowing  what  must  be  done  but 
actually doing what must be done and doing it when it must be done!! 
2. 
The  cataclysmic  financial  crisis  has  thrown  into  sharp  relief,  as  never  before,  the 
critical and important role of “asset price” inflation/asset bubbles also, as opposed to that of 
shop floor/products/services inflation alone, as a key variable, in monetary policy response. 
For  what  happened  was  unprecedented  in  that  with  monetary  policy  focused  only  on 
traditional  CPI,  interest  rates  were  kept  low  in  spite  of  exploding  prices  of  assets  like  real 
estate/property,  credit  assets,  equity  and  commodities.  And  this  was  all  made  possible 
because  of  the  huge  pre-crisis  current  account  surpluses  in  China  and  other  Emerging 
Market  Economies  (EMEs),  and  huge  private  capital  inflows  into  EMEs  in  excess  of  their 
current account deficits, getting recycled back as official capital flows into government bonds 
of  reserve  currency  countries,  especially  the  USA,  resulting  in  compression  of  long  term 
yields which, in turn, translated into lower long term interest rates even for the riskier asset 
classes mentioned above. This chasing of yield, due to global savings glut, in turn, led to a 
veritable credit bubble, characterized by unprecedented underpricing of risk as reflected in 
the  all-time-low  risk  premia  with  junk  bonds  spreads  becoming  indistinguishable  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
investment grade debt! Such a low interest rate environment coupled with luxuriant supply of 
liquidity, created enabling environment for excessive leverage and risk taking. This financial 
syndrome was a classical case of “too much” and “too little” – too much liquidity, too much 
leverage,  too  much  complex  financial  engineering,  too  little  return  for  risk,  too  little 
understanding of risks”. This syndrome of too much of arcane rocket science and financial 
alchemy in the financial sector, almost entirely for its own sake to almost complete exclusion 
of the needs of the real sector, created a massive “financial sector – real sector imbalance” 
which,  being,  intrinsically  unsustainable,  culminated  eventually  into  the  now-all-too-familiar 
apocalyptic denouement.  
3. 
Significantly,  the  above  pre-2007  story  of  massive  and  unprecedented  current 
account imbalances was almost replicated in the current on-going eurozone crisis with large 
and persistent current account imbalances between the core, proxied by Germany, and the 
Netherlands, and the crisis-hit periphery, with the surpluses of the core being almost mirror 
image of the current account deficits of the periphery. Indeed, it is noteworthy that current 
account surpluses of the core increased dramatically after the launch of the single currency 
because of significant depreciation of the real exchange rate in the core and appreciation of 
the  real  exchange  rate  in  the  periphery.  Such  large,  and  persistent,  current  account 
imbalances  between  the  core  and  the  periphery  would  not  have  been  possible  but  for  the 
explicit  moral  hazard  of  fixed  and  stable  exchange  rates  created  by  the  single  currency 
because the respective national currencies of the periphery would have depreciated in real 
terms  resulting  in  timely  automatic  rebalancing  of  the  current  account  imbalances! 
Incidentally, but significantly, these current account imbalances between the “core” and the 
“periphery” are, to an extent, the result of post-1999 fiscal convergence to fiscal divergence 
story in the eurozone for, unless, net private savings offset it, fiscal deficit typically tends to 
spill over into current account deficit and, therefore, post-euro launch, there ought to have 
been  a  credible,  effective  and  functioning  institutional  enforcement  mechanism  to  ensure 
ongoing  compliance  on  Maastricht  fiscal  parameters.  Of  course,  this  post-1999  fiscal 
convergence to fiscal divergence story in the “periphery” would not have mattered if, like in 
the case of Japan, net private savings more than offset the comparable net public dissaving 
(fiscal deficit) of –9.5%! So the way out of the current crisis is unwinding these imbalances 
through higher productivity and competitiveness in the periphery relative to the core. This is 
exactly  what  happened  post-crisis  in  the  case  of  unwinding  of  the  imbalances  between 
China, on the one hand, and the United States, on the other, with the United States current 
account deficit halving from almost 6% in 2007 to 3% currently and that of China’s current 
account  surplus  shrinking  steeply  from  10%  in  2007  to  2.6%  currently!  Thus,  in  the 
framework of “unearned – unshared prosperity”, it was the case of “unearned” prosperity for 
the “deficit” periphery and “unshared” prosperity for the “surplus” core! But as in the case of 
China  and  the  United  States,  there  is  some  good  news  that  real  wages  in  Germany  have 
gone up by 3% and those in Greece have gone down by 7%. Going forward, this then holds 
the  promise  of  unwinding  such  imbalances  by  export  of  goods  and  services  from  the 
“periphery” and import of goods and services by the “core”. 
4. 
As  I  said,  these  large  and  persistent  current  account  imbalances  represented 
“unearned”  prosperity  for  deficit  reserve  currency  countries  and  “unshared”  prosperity  for 
surplus countries. Such a global economic order was inherently unsustainable, and unstable, 
from the word go. But the greatest good, and the highest virtue, as it were, of sustainable 
globalization  is  that,  it  does  not  permit,  except  in  the  very  short  term,  “unearned”  and 
“unshared”  prosperity  but  delivers  “sustainable  prosperity”  only  if  they  are  “earned”  and 
“shared”  prosperity!  And  mind  you,  “unearned”  and  “unshared”  prosperity  are  no 
socialistic/egalitarian platitudinal rhetoric but pretty compelling real-politik and geo-economic 
imperatives  given  the  current  irreversibly  globalised  and,  increasingly  integrated,  and 
interdependent,  world.  Sustainable  globalization  is  about  macroeconomic  equilibrium, 
balance  and  harmony. 
to  cosmic 
balance/equilibrium/harmony  where  stars,  suns,  planets,  all  orbit  within  the  inviolable 
discipline of their elliptical orbits which do not permit deviant behavior beyond the shortest 
thing  can  be 
the  whole 
likened 
fact, 
In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the 
longest  distance 
and 
from  suns  and  stars  of  orbiting  planets!  Any  deviant 
behavior/conduct,  inconsistent  with  the  cosmic  harmonious  balance  and  equilibrium,  will 
invite,  and  inflict,  extremely  retributive  backlash;  the  more  severe  and  prolonged  the 
disequilibrium and imbalance, the more wrenching and excruciating will be the resulting pain 
as is currently being experienced, especially in the euro zone, where, it is no brainer to see 
that, in the event of the break-up of the euro, it is the surplus/creditor “core” that has far more 
to lose than the deficit/debtor “periphery”! For if the surplus/creditor “core” exit the euro, value 
of what is left of the euro will be worth much less in terms of national currencies of the exiting 
surplus/creditor  countries.  On the  other  hand,  if  the  deficit/debtor “periphery”  exit,  they  will 
simply default on their euro-denominated debt owed to the surplus/creditor “core” because of 
the  collapse  of  their  national  currencies  against  the  euro!  In  other  words,  in  sustainable 
globalization, there can be both winners, and losers, only in the short term, for such is the 
nature of sustainable globalization that, in the long term, there can only be all winners and no 
losers! To conclude, therefore, if we earn and share, we prosper together, and if we don’t, we 
perish together!! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
