Josef Bonnici: Economic growth in turbulent times 
Address by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the annual 
dinner of the Institute of Financial Services – Malta, Saint Julian’s, 14 December 2012. 
 Hon. Minister, Excellencies, Members of the Institute, Distinguished Guests 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  Malta  Institute  of  Financial  Services  for  extending  this 
opportunity  for me  to address  this  distinguished  audience. Mr  President,  your  Institute’s 
leading  role  in  banking  and  financial  education  in  Malta  is  well  known,  as  are  its 
endeavours  to  establish  forms  of  collaboration  with  other educational  institutions.  As  a 
result,  a  wider  range  of  relevant  courses  are  available  to  professional  staff within the 
financial services industry. 
I understand that a notable development over the last year  was the relationship that you 
established with the Chartered Institute for Securities & Investments as a strategic partner 
for  the  offering  of  specialised  Investment-related  courses.  I  also  note  with  interest  the 
recent introduction of a Masters in Wealth Management, a development which will certainly 
enhance  the  skills  and  expertise  of  many.  This  is  a  relevant  achievement  and  we  look 
forward  to  further  success  in  expanding  your  reach  to  all  members  of  the  financial 
community  through  the  activities  that  your  Institute  organises  and  the  training  facilities  it 
provides. 
The economic crisis in Europe is now in its fifth year, and a number of countries remain in 
various  degrees  of  distress,  while  most  forecasts  continue  to  revise  downwards  their 
output  and  employment  projections.  The  latest  Eurosystem  projections  published  in 
December  2012  indicate  a  small  euro  area  GDP  contraction  of  0.3%  in  2013. 
Deleveraging  goes  on  in  several  member  states  as  banks  continue  to  repair  their 
balance sheets,  limiting  their  lending  activity  and  hence  impeding  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  in  those member states. 
The  build-up  of  these  problems  took  place  over  a  fairly  long  number  of  years,  and  the 
resolution is proving to be a gradual and hesitant process. 
In  this  light,  it  may  be  useful  to  start  by  taking  stock  of  the  general  euro  area  situation 
and then  make a number of related remarks on the domestic economy. 
Retrospective on the euro area 
As is well recognized, the origins of the crisis can be traced back to the excessively high 
public sector debt, slippage in competitiveness, inappropriate banking practices and weak 
bank regulatory environment on both sides  of  the  Atlantic.  The  crisis  has  had  various 
intertwined  dimensions,  each  with  implications  for  the avoidance of similar problems in 
the future. 
One  observes 
to  sovereign  debt 
downgrades  that  in  turn damaged the banks’ balance sheets. The consequences of the 
lack of fiscal discipline were aggravated by the erosion of competitiveness and the failure 
to implement structural reforms. However, in several instances,  banking sector  difficulties 
were the trigger for fiscal  problems.  Indeed, adherence to the Stability and Growth  Pact 
was not a sufficient condition to keep countries out of difficulties. For example, in Ireland 
and  Spain,  banking  sector  difficulties  have  necessitated  bail-outs  by  the  governments 
concerned.  This  led  to  sovereign  downgrades  which  in  turn  increased  the  government 
in  several  countries, 
fiscal  problems 
that 
led 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
borrowing  costs,  in  some  cases  to  unsustainable  levels.  All  these  problems  were 
compounded by instability in financial markets and volatility in sentiment. 
Chart 1 shows that prior to the formation of the monetary union yields started to converge 
– regardless of the fiscal  position  or  economic fundamentals  –  and  then  stabilised  within 
a  fairly  narrow  band  during  the  first  years  of  the  euro  until  the  crisis  of  2009.  Many 
countries failed to reduce the debt to GDP ratio during this period as shown in Chart 2. 
The market’s focus and sentiment changed drastically in 2009, by giving full recognition to 
the  importance  of  fiscal  sustainability,  such  that  yield  spreads  widened  sharply.  Market 
complacency  turned  into  market  volatility,  and  it  is  only  lately  that  this  has  been 
somewhat  mitigated  after  the  announcement  of  the OMT programme, a subject that I will 
come back to later. 
Fiscal excess and inappropriate banking practices were not the only causes of the crisis. 
There  was  also  an  erosion  of  private  sector  competitiveness,  as  shown  by  the  relative 
increase in unit labour costs in several of the weaker economies (see Chart  3).  In many 
countries, the deterioration in competitiveness was the result of wage increases that were 
not matched by higher productivity. 
Fiscal  excesses  in  several  countries  camouflaged  the  erosion  of  competitiveness, 
resulting in a wider deficit in  the  external  trade  accounts,  as  shown  in  Chart  4.  Inside  a 
monetary  union  the  alarm  bells  caused  by current  account  deficits  are  not  as  loud  as 
they  are  when  each  country  has  its  own  currency.  Before  monetary  union,  such 
problems were countered,  with questionable effectiveness, by currency depreciation. But 
inside the monetary union these current account deficits were simply financed by capital 
inflows, largely flowing from the countries in the north to most countries in the periphery. 
Chart 4 also highlights the separation within the euro area between selected countries in 
the  north,  running  a  generally  current  account  surplus,  and  selected  countries  in  the 
periphery  with  a  negative  balance.  The  upper  band  depicts 
the  maximum  and 
minimum  of  the  data  range  for  Germany,  Luxembourg  and  the Netherlands.  Similarly, 
the  lower  range  depicts  the  corresponding  boundaries  for  Cyprus,  Greece,  Italy, 
Portugal and Spain. It is not surprising that those countries in the lower part of the chart 
featured  prominently  in  the  unfolding  crisis.  Eventually,  when  markets  reoriented  their 
focus  towards  economic  unsustainability,  the  flow  of  capital  reversed  direction;  market 
discipline now took the form of capital flight. 
There  is  also  no  doubt  that  financial  institutions  took  on  excessive  risk,  including 
investments  in  complex  and,  as  is  now  well  known,  mispriced  financial  instruments. 
Crucially, the heightened degree of riskiness was not complemented by adequate capital 
buffers. In addition, cross-country debt holdings and linkages between financial institutions 
led to contagion and the spread of systemic risk. 
Moving on to the macroeconomic dimension, it can be observed that in various countries, 
governments  with large  fiscal  imbalances  have  now  resorted  to  the  narrowing  of  such 
imbalances,  through  the  application  of  inevitable  fiscal  consolidation  measures.  These 
corrections have often met strong social  dissatisfaction and political resistance. And yet, 
the budgetary restraint has not always been viewed as adequate from the point of view of 
the  financial  markets  that  seem  to  have  limited  patience  for  the  measures  to  have  a 
discernible  impact  on  fiscal  imbalances.  For  many  governments,  bond  spreads  remain 
wide. 
This  fiscal  restraint  has  also  slowed  down  economic  growth  and  this  in  turn  has 
aggravated  the  budgetary deficit. Chart 5 shows  the deficit as  per cent of GDP  for the 
euro  area  as  a  whole,  along  with  the  corresponding  cyclically  adjusted  ratio.  The  light 
blue  line  in  the  chart  shows  where  the  deficit  would  have  been  without  the  economic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
slowdown that was caused in part by fiscal consolidation. The gap between the two  lines 
illustrates  the  inevitable  contribution  of  the  economic  slowdown  to  the  deficit  ratio. 
Still,  the  relatively  small  size  of  this  gap  post  2009  indicates  that  there  is  a  strong 
structural  element  in  the  fiscal  deficit.  This  explains  why  structural  adjustments  are  so 
necessary. 
In  response,  the  ECB  has  taken  policy  rates  lower  than  any  time  during  its  history  (as 
can be seen in Chart 6).  It  has  also  provided  ample  liquidity  to  the  banking  system,  as 
shown  in  Chart  7,  in  which  the  red  lines represent the rise in the monetary base (which 
consists mainly of central bank provision of bank reserves). However, as I have noted on 
previous occasions,  a large part  of  this liquidity has been deposited back with the  ECB, 
as  reflected  in  considerably  slower  growth  in  loans  (the  blue  lines).  This  is  an 
indication  of  the hesitancy on the part of the banks to buy securities, or to extend loans, 
whether to other banks or to the non-financial sector. 
Some  concern  has  been  expressed  about  the  size  of  the  build-up  of  liquidity  across 
various  economies  that  could  be  mobilized  by  the  banks  in  the  eventual  post-crisis 
expansion  of  loans.  However,  it  must  also  be  noted  that  the  excess  liquidity  can  be 
eventually reabsorbed by the central banks. In any case, it should also be noted that the 
provision  of  additional  liquidity  by  the  ECB  (as  shown  by  the  red  lines  in  Chart  7)  has 
been  somewhat  more  moderate  than  is  true  for  other  major  central  banks  such  as  the 
Federal Reserve, as shown in the chart. 
The  ECB  has  now  gone  a  step 
further  by  announcing  an  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions  programme, designed to repair the link between policy rate cuts and ample 
liquidity provision, on the one hand, and lower borrowing  costs,  on  the  other.  It  is  also 
meant 
that 
compensates investors for the perceived risk of a breakup of the monetary union. 
It ties intervention to strict conditions: it will be used only for countries under an EFSF or 
ESM programme. Transactions are limited to the shorter end of the yield curve, and would 
complement  ESM  intervention  at  the  longer  end.  Moreover,  the  ECB  will  not  take  on  a 
senior  position 
interest  of 
private-sector  investors.  As  is  well  known,  the  announcement  of  the  OMT programme 
has already helped to stabilize the financial markets and reduce sovereign spreads (see 
Chart 1).  It  is  really  equivalent  to  traditional  open  market  operations  that  central  banks 
have long resorted to in order to provide stability and a better functioning of the monetary 
transmission process that can get impaired in certain circumstances. 
redenomination  or  convertibility  premium 
therefore  safeguarding 
the  debt’s  structure, 
the  so-called 
to  counter 
the 
in 
The Maltese situation 
The  Maltese  economy  has  encountered  some  persistent  headwinds.  Still,  the  recession 
observed in the last quarter  of  2011  and  the  first  quarter  of  2012  was  relatively  short 
and  mild.  Since  then,  the  economy  has shown  a  modest  recovery.  During  the  second 
and third quarters of this year, real GDP was up 1.6% on the same period of 2011. 
The  inflation  rate  in  Malta  has  recently  exceeded  that  of  the  euro  area  average.  The 
HICP  measure  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  inflation  stood  at  3.2%  in  October  2012, 
compared  with  a  rate  of  2.5%  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  In  recent  months,  Malta’s 
HICP  inflation  may  have  been  biased  upwards  because  of  methodological  changes 
related  to  the  measurement  of  tourist  accommodation.  Meanwhile  the  RPI,  which  is 
unaffected  by  accommodation  prices,  stood  at  2.9%.  It  is  the  RPI  that  determines  with 
a  lag  the  COLA increase. The core RPI inflation rate, which is a good gauge of persistent 
inflation, stood at 2.0%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
On  the  other  hand,  a  number  of  labour  market  indicators  remain  positive.  As  seen  in 
Chart 8, the most recent LFS unemployment rate is 6.5%, the same as it was on average 
in 2007, prior to the euro area crisis. In fact, Malta’s  unemployment  rate  is  at  the  lower 
end  of  national  unemployment  rates  across  the  euro  area.  Meanwhile  the  latest 
registered unemployment rate stands at 4.2%, in June. 
Malta has avoided the two essential sources of  the Euro area crisis:  the deficit ratio has 
been moving in the right direction while the banking model followed by the core domestic 
banks remained prudent. In Malta,  the core  banks generally  rely on  traditional,  domestic 
sources of funds, specifically retail deposits. Malta’s banks remained largely unaffected by 
the  euro  area  crisis,  averting  the  need for  any  government  assistance  and avoided what 
in other countries became a major source of fiscal overruns and distress. 
Malta  must  position  itself  in  a  way  that  builds  on  the  strengths  of  the  economy  and 
minimises  its  vulnerabilities.  In  doing  so,  it  would  steer  clear  of  the  pitfalls  that  other 
countries  have fallen  into  and  maintain  its  growth  path.  In this  respect,  I  will focus  on  a 
number of important considerations. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  government  spending  can  be  increased  on  a  sustainable  basis  if 
government  revenue  increases  on  the  back  of  a  growing  economy.  Furthermore, 
increased expenditure on pensions and health services must be financed in a sustainable 
way. As the population ages we have to pay sufficient attention to the dynamics that this 
implies,  and  of  the  options  available,  such  that  the  chosen  path  would  not  impinge  on 
economic  growth.  Government  policies  must,  above  all,  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the 
productive  system, promote investment and incentivise entrepreneurial initiative. 
Labour market 
The local higher level of labour  force skills  and qualifications, as well as  its  adaptability, 
have  been  instrumental  in  attracting  investment  in  new  areas  of  activity  and  have 
therefore reduced the vulnerability of the domestic economy to shocks in foreign demand. 
Chart  9  shows  how  Malta’s  wages  compare  with  those  abroad.  On  the  basis  of  the 
purchasing  power  standard  which  measures  wages  by  taking  into  account  the  cost  of 
living, the average Maltese wage ranks towards the middle of  a broad range of  selected 
countries  that  are  shown  in  the  chart.  The  issue  arises  as  to  how  to  increase  living 
standards in a sustainable way, without losing competitiveness. 
One  should  be  mindful  of  the  relationship  between  all  costs  (including  wages)  and 
productivity. A subject that often comes up for discussion is the cost of living allowance or 
COLA. It has to be recognized that in Malta the allowance is determined on the basis of a 
basic or social wage, and COLA is a flat euro amount, granted regardless of the level of 
pay. This limits its impact on competitiveness. 
Nevertheless,  the  award  of  COLA  is  disconnected  from  productivity  gains  and  hence 
may  constrain  firms’ ability  to  respond  to  changing  market  conditions.  It  also  raises  the 
risk of secondary cost increases after an initial price shock, which may come for example 
from an increase in imported prices. It may not be possible to neutralise such increases in 
imported  prices  and  simply  compensate  for  them  in  wages  without  significantly  losing 
competitiveness of the enterprises concerned, especially if our competitors are absorbing 
these external shocks through an internal devaluation. It is relevant to note that the world 
economy  is  going through unusual  times  where  some countries are undergoing internal 
devaluations. Malta cannot afford to be oblivious  of  the  impact  that  these  realities  exert 
on  its  competitiveness.  The  list  of  euro  area  countries  passing  through  significant 
corrections  is  impressive,  namely:  Ireland,  Portugal,  Spain,  Italy,  Slovenia,  Cyprus  and 
Greece. This apart from other non-euro area member states that are also going through 
difficult  and  corrective  changes  in  their  economies.  These  developments  may  place  our 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
competitors  in  an  advantageous  position  once  the  recovery  is  underway,  and  this  will 
raise the bar that must be exceeded if competitiveness is to be maintained and improved. 
Returning  to  the  COLA  issue,  this  should  not  be  imposed  on  collective  agreements  by 
legislation  as  happens  today,  but  really  should  form  part  of  the  negotiation  process. 
Indeed, already a number of collective agreements incorporate the COLA increase, and I 
suggest that this should be the norm. 
It  is  the  whole  wage  that  has  to  be  supported  by  productivity,  and  negotiations  at  the 
firm  level  are  best placed  to  ensure  that  the  balance  between  productivity  growth  and 
wage  increases  is  not  lost.  Otherwise  competiveness  would  be  eroded  and  jobs 
endangered. 
Moreover,  the  COLA  is  not  the  sole  impediment  to  adjustments  in  relative  wages.  In 
particular  one  has  to realize that the minimum wage too constrains wage adjustments. It 
should  be  kept  in  mind  that  this  wage  is  the  legally  set  minimum  compensation  of 
employees  with  limited  or  no  skills,  such  as  school-leavers  who unfortunately have not 
acquired any particular skills. 
Returning  to  the  minimum  wage  issue,  one  commonly  used  criterion  of  the  impact  of 
minimum  wages  measures  the  minimum  wage  relative  to  the  average  wage  level,  and 
then compares it with other countries, as shown in Chart 10. As one can see in the chart, 
the relative minimum wage in Malta is the fourth highest in  the  euro  area,  and  this  may 
impact  the incentive to acquire  additional  skills or  pursue more  advanced education. 
It  is  worth  reflecting  on  the  experience  of  other  countries  in  this  respect.  For  example, 
Slovenia increased the minimum  wage  by  23%  in  2010.  The  IMF,  in  its  reaction  to  this 
increase,  remarked  that  this  will  “hurt employment  in  labour  intensive  sectors  and  put 
upward  pressure  on  the  general  wage  level,  exacerbating already  high  unit labour  cost 
compared to regional peers. The increase is also likely to reduce incentives for workers to 
increase their human capital by compressing the wage differential between unskilled and 
specialized  low-skilled  workers.”1 From  discussions  I have  had  with  officials  from  the 
Central  Bank  of  Slovenia,  it  is  their  considered  opinion  that  the  IMF  as  well  as  the 
Commission  were  right  in  their  assessment.  Indeed,  a  major  reason  for  Slovenia’s 
increased  fiscal  gap  and  loss  of  competitiveness  can  be  laid  at  the  door  of  this  large 
increase  in  minimum  wage  a  few  years  ago.  A  similar  picture  emerges  from  the 
experience of Greece and Cyprus that also had  significant increases in minimum  wages, 
while labour market inflexibilities have contributed to the loss in competitiveness in Spain 
and Italy. 
The  most  sustainable  way  to  raise  living  standards  is  through  structural  reforms  along 
with  investment  in  education  and  physical  capital  (that  is,  through  the  promotion  of 
investment  in  human  and  fixed  capital.) Wage increases are not sustainable unless they 
are financed from higher productivity and economic growth. 
Financial stability 
The  financial  sector  clearly  plays  a  crucial  role  in  the  economy.  This  sector  is  a 
prominent  employer  of trained  professional  staff,  with  financial  and  insurance  activities 
on  their own  employing 7,280  persons or 4.3%  of  the  gainfully  occupied  population  and 
contributing  8.5%  of  gross  value  added  in  2011.  The  gap between these two ratios is a 
sign of the relatively high level of productivity in this sector. 
                                                
1  
International Monetary Fund 2011 Article IV Consultation – Staff Report, May 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
As a matter of fact, as shown in Chart 11, productivity – as measured by the value added 
per employee in the sector – has risen considerably in recent years and in 2011 stood at 
nearly EUR 65,000, significantly more than  the  corresponding  per  capita value  added  in 
the  services sector  in general,  which  stands at  around EUR 34,000. 
Bank  credit  remains the main source of  external funding for  non-financial  businesses  in 
Malta. Moreover, as in most other European countries, bank financing is regarded as the 
main, if not the only, avenue of external financing for SMEs. 
External  funding  is  however  primarily  suitable  for  large  corporates,  given  the  costs  and 
regulatory  requirements  associated  with  debt  issuance.  A  more  active  and  innovative 
debt  market  is  in  the  interest  of the  country’s  economic  growth  potential.  Undoubtedly 
this  needs  to  be  harnessed  through  an  appropriate macro-prudential policy safeguard of 
financial stability. 
Additional sources of financing that deserve further exploration are through the European 
Investment  Bank,  and  in  particular  through  the  European  Investment  Fund.  The  latter 
offers  a  venture  capital  facility  whereby  it  helps  venture  capital  and  private  equity  fund 
managers to provide risk capital to SMEs. Companies can also benefit from the JEREMIE 
programme  (Joint  European  Resources  for  Micro  to  Medium  Enterprises),  which 
promotes  increased  access  to  finance  for  the  development  of  micro,  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises in the EU. 
Over  80%  of  the  balance  sheet  value  of  the  core  domestic  banks  is  funded  through 
customer  deposits,  considerably  higher  than  the  30%  average  in  the  euro  area.2 
Indeed,  customer  loans  extended  by  core  domestic banks continue  to be fully funded 
from customer deposits. 
Meanwhile, Maltese banks’ recourse to Eurosystem funding has been modest, as shown 
in Chart  12,  which measures Eurosystem  funding  as a  proportion  of  the  balance  sheet. 
This in itself is a good sign, reflecting the  absence  of  banking  distress.  Banks must  also 
exercise  caution  in  the  use  of  such  sources.  Although  conditions  are  currently  very 
favourable,  it  must  be  clear  that  such  terms  will  not  last  forever.  Banks  are  thus 
encouraged to continue using such facilities but  not become overly  dependent  on them. 
Business  models which  are  based  on  a  disproportionate  use  of  Eurosystem  funds  are 
not banking models that the Central Bank feels comfortable with. 
However,  the  word  “disproportionate”  is  very  relevant,  since  it  seems  that  some 
Eurosystem funding could be put to a better purpose than lying idle as deposits with the 
Eurosystem. For example, one possible use is to extend  low  cost  credit  for  investments 
that  promote  restructuring  and  competitiveness  and  thus  improve  potential  economic 
growth.  For  instance  in  the  case  of  hotel  upgrading  or  manufacturing  restructuring  to 
higher value added activities, banks could explore areas of growth that would benefit the 
economy and such niche  markets  could  be  kept  distinct  from  existing  uses  of  funds,  to 
avoid  cross-overs  and  refinancing  of  existing  loans.  The  interest  rates  on  such  loans 
may  be  linked  to  the  MRO  rate,  plus  of  course  a  margin  for  credit  risk.  This  would 
provide a clear link to the provision of lower cost funding by the ECB and serve to break 
this apparent barrier in Malta of providing lower cost loans in tandem with ECB policy. 
On this issue of interest rate charges in Malta, it is somewhat paradoxical that despite the 
excess liquidity in the  system,  several  institutions  seem  to  be  competing  through  higher 
deposit  rates  offered  to  customers. Competition  is  healthy  and  certainly  depositors  are 
better  served  by  having  such  competition  leading  to higher returns. 
                                                
2   ECB, Changes in bank financing patterns, April 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However, it would be more appropriate if depositors are more fully aware of the basic fact 
of  finance:  higher  returns  are  generally  accompanied  by  a  higher  degree  of  risk  and 
possible  volatility,  and  depositors  should  be  fully  aware  of  this  fact.  The  deposit 
guarantee scheme should not be exploited to hide this basic fact of finance. 
Furthermore,  higher  deposit  rates  would  require  increased  loan  rates  or  investments 
in  higher  yielding assets.  Both  of  these  carry  risks  which,  in  the  current  lower  interest 
rate  environment,  may  lead  to  greater  risk  being  assumed  than  perhaps  would  be  the 
case  in  normal  circumstances.  It  is  therefore  prudent  for  such  institutions  to  hold  an 
increased  level  of  capital  buffers  so  as  to  compensate  for  the  elevated  risk.  Indeed,  in 
recent discussions which I had with another euro area central bank governor, an approach 
that  his  institution  uses  is  to  require  higher  capital  requirements  when  deposit  rates 
exceed  Euribor  by  more  than  300  basis  points.  This  is  an  interesting  proposal  which 
merits further analysis. 
At  the  international  level,  the  limitations  of  current  regulation  and  supervision  have 
become  more  and  more  evident  with  the  severity  of  the  financial  crisis.  Too  much 
attention  was  focused  on  individual  institutions thereby overlooking the macro-prudential 
risks.  In  reaction  to  this,  European  institutions  and  member  states  have  engaged  in  a 
major overhaul  of bank regulation and supervision, with the objective of making financial 
institutions safe, sound and transparent. 
One  step  towards  effective  early  intervention  is  the  establishment  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism (SSM). This will  endow the  ECB  with  the  ultimate  responsibility 
for  specific  supervisory  tasks  related  to  the financial  stability  of  banks  across  the  euro 
area.  The  need  for  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  arises  from  the  increasing 
interconnectedness  between  financial  institutions  and  financial  markets  across  the  euro 
area,  such  that  problems  that  originate  at  a  national  level  can  quickly  spread  across 
national  borders  and  imperil the  entire  European  banking  system.  A  central  authority  is 
better  placed  to  spot  these  risks.  However,  the  SSM  framework  alone  will  not  be 
sufficient  to  successfully  address  significant  threats  to  financial  stability across the euro 
area, particularly in the light of the possibility of cross-border spill-over effects in the event 
of bank crises and the link between sovereign debt and bank debt. 
The  European  Commission  has  therefore  identified  the  need  for  a  banking  union  to 
strengthen  the  banking sector  and  restore  confidence in the  single  currency,  and  this is 
projected as part of a longer term vision for economic and fiscal integration. 
Hence,  the  idea  goes  beyond  the  SSM  or  single-rule  book.  As  President  Van  Rompuy 
points out in his report entitled  Towards  a  genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  the 
components  of 
this  integrated  financial  framework  have  to  include  not  only  bank 
supervision (as delivered by the SSM), but also bank resolution as well as bank deposit 
insurance.  Vitor  Constancio,  Vice-President  of  the  ECB,  defines the  banking  union  as a 
transfer  to  the  European  level  of  the  regulatory  and  institutional  framework  responsible 
for safeguarding the robustness and stability of the banking sector. 
More  recently,  the  Liikanen  Report  recommends  a  structural  reform  of  the  EU  banking 
sector  to  limit  the likelihood of  banking crises,  to improve the resolvability  of  banks and 
to  protect  taxpayers’  interests.  In  this  respect,  the  Liikanen  Group  concludes  “that  it  is 
necessary  to require legal  separation of  certain particularly risky  financial  activities  from 
deposit-taking  banks  within  a  banking  group.”  This  form  of  separation  is  also  being 
discussed in the U.S. and U.K., although with some variations. 
It  is evident  that  if  this separation  is effected,  the  resilience  of  banks  will  be  enhanced, 
systemic  risk  reduced  and  tax  payers  safeguarded.  The  implications  of  this  proposed 
framework  will  also  have  to  be  taken  into account  by  the  banking  industry  so  as  to 
adjust  the  banking  models  used  to  this  now  safer  but  more constrained model. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Closing an institutional gap 
The  concept  of  sustainability  can  also  be  applied  to  the  funding  of  the  government’s 
capital  expenditure  programme.  In  particular,  the  funding  of  infrastructure  and  public 
utilities through fiscal  resources may also have to be reviewed in light of the public sector 
funding constraints. 
The  domestic  financial  sector  has  witnessed  remarkable  structural  developments  over 
past  years.  However,  there  still  appears  to  be  an  institutional  gap  in  respect  of  the 
financing of certain types of  projects for which the  hitherto  traditional  sources of  funding 
–  commercial  bank  loans  and  government  budgetary  resources  – may  not  necessarily 
remain  the  ideal  financing  avenues  in  view  of  the  new  challenges  facing  the  financial 
system. 
I  firmly  believe  that  a  development  or  promotional  bank  needs  to  be 
established.  Such  a  public  sector  institution  would  be  geared  to  the  promotion  of 
economic activity in its wider sense complementing commercial banks. 
In my speech during the course of last year’s IFS annual dinner, I had made reference to 
the  important  role  that  the  possible  establishment  of  such  a  bank  could  play  in 
promoting  the  economy  and  assisting  the  Government  in  social  and  environmental 
projects. Tonight I would like to elaborate further. 
In my view,  a  promotional  or  development  bank  could  be  instrumental  in contributing  to 
a  more  effective  mobilisation  of  the  substantial  excess  liquidity  characterising  the 
financial  sector  and  to  a  more  efficient  deployment  of  certain  types  of  Government 
assets, especially underutilised real estate. It should also serve as  a  catalyst  to  support 
the  structural,  economic,  social  and  environmental  policies  of 
the  Government, 
particularly in connection with the long term  financing of priority projects. Moreover, there 
are strong indications that  the deceleration in domestic credit  activity in Malta is not  due 
to  any  shortage  of  liquidity in the banking sector but rather to the reluctance on the part 
of banks to extend their exposure beyond certain limits to a number of economic sectors. 
A  promotional  or  development  bank  could  enable  such  sectors  to gain better  access to 
financing  support  that  may  not  be  readily  available  from  other  sources  on  reasonable 
terms. 
A  promotional  or  development  bank  can  thus complement  the  domestic financial  sector 
in  instances  where  free  market  conditions may  appear  to  be  insufficient  to  achieve  the 
desired  public  policy  objectives.  Such  an  institution  would  normally  be  underpinned  by 
certain privileges geared to optimise promotional activities and therefore one would need 
to  ensure  that  the  promotional  operations  of  such  a  bank  would  not  give  rise  to  any 
distortions  in  competitive  conditions  in  the  market.  More  specifically,  it  would  have  to 
ensure  that  its  activities  will  be  fully  in  line  with  EU  State  Aid  regulations  at  the  final 
beneficiary level. 
A  promotional  or  development  bank  would be on similar  lines as in many EU countries, 
particularly Germany, where  such  banks  undertake  very  successfully  at  a  regional  level 
a  role 
the  economy  and  assisting  the  government  in  social  and 
environmental  projects.  Such  banks  have  the  backing  of  a  government  guarantee  and 
thus can  borrow on the basis of  the sovereign rating of  the government either locally  or 
from  supranational  institutions.  In  this  way  such  an  institution  can  serve  to  unlock 
further  the  financial  potential  available  to  spur  competitiveness  and  economic  growth 
without adding to the debt burden of the government. The funding model is based on the 
repayment of loans and thus is on a sustainable path separate  from  that  of  the  national 
debt.  This  is  why  such  loans  raised  by  such  institutions  are  not  captured  under  the 
Maastricht  criteria  of  debt  to  GDP  ratios.  However,  such  an  institution  has  to  be 
managed and administered in a prudent and responsible manner. 
in  promoting 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  Central  Bank  has  been  looking  more  thoroughly  into  this  matter  and  intends  to  put 
forward  its  submissions  to  the  Government  with  respect  to  the  rationale  and  feasibility 
regarding the setting up of such an institution. 
Conclusion: The importance of sustainability 
At a time of recession in Malta’s export markets, the preservation of competitiveness is a 
must,  in  order  to  sustain  continuing  economic  growth.  In  today’s  world,  economic 
sustainability requires the adaptation to an evolving  external environment and  allows  the 
continued  improvement  of  the  standard  of  living  without  jeopardizing  that  of  future 
generations. In the eventual post-recession  world, many of  Malta’s competitors will have 
gone  through  a  restructuring  process  and  would  pose  an  even  stronger  challenge. 
Sustainability has three dimensions. 
First,  a  sustainable  financial  system  requires  a  prudent  business  model  on  the  part  of 
the banks and other financial institutions and a vigilant oversight of these institutions. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  which  is  an  EU-level  body  established 
with  a  mandate  to  oversee  the  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the  financial  system, 
recommended  the  setting  up  of  an  authority  or  body  to  make  recommendations  on 
macro-prudential aspects of the financial system. The Central Bank in its capacity as the 
macro-prudential authority has agreed with the MFSA, to set up a Joint Financial Stability 
Board  which  will  be  formally  constituted  in  a  few  weeks.  The  objective  is  to  enhance 
the  cooperation  between  the  two  bodies  for  the  assurance  of  the  stability  of  the 
financial system.  The  intention  is  to strengthen the resilience of the financial system and 
to mitigate the build-up of systemic risks. To these ends, the Board’s mandate includes the 
development  of  mechanisms  that  would  identify  risks  to  financial  stability,  and  the 
establishment of the necessary macro-prudential policy tools. The Joint Financial Stability 
Board will also be able to make recommendations to the CBM or MFSA boards on macro 
or micro prudential issues, as the case may be. The board is also responsible to follow-up 
on recommendations made by the ESRB. 
Second,  in  the  current  situation,  it  must  be  ensured  that  fiscal  consolidation  is  not 
compromised  and  the commitments  under  the  Fiscal  Pact  are  achieved.  The  room  for 
fiscal  manoeuvre  is  very  limited  at  this present juncture of contraction in the euro area 
economy and the current debt-to GDP levels in the Maltese economy. 
Third,  higher  productivity  allows  sustainably  higher  wages  and  living  standards.  The 
quality of human capital has to evolve to meet the changing needs of both the domestic 
and  export  markets,  and  for  that  purpose  the  educational  system  must  provide  the 
required  skills  and  qualifications  profiles.  For  productivity  to  maintain  its  upward  trend 
there  must  be  a  continuous  upgrading  of  current  investment  and  a  stream  of  new 
investment to maintain the necessary  structural  change to higher  value added activities. 
As  I  have  emphasised  in  various parts of  this presentation,  the  financial  sector  plays a 
crucial  role  in  maintaining  the  momentum  of  change  in  the  economy  and  meeting  the 
financing  needs  of  an  evolving  economy.  In  addition  it  is  also  a  sector  of expansion in 
itself,  with  its  own  dimension  to  the  contribution  of  further  growth.  Current  financial 
stresses in the euro area will also require updating banking business models and ensuring 
that  new  regulatory  requirements  are  met.  Prudent  banking  practices  remain  a 
cornerstone  of  our  present  stability  in  a  period  of  heightened  international  financial 
stresses and strains. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 7 
Chart 7 (cont) 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
