John Murray: The Great Frustration – hesitant steps toward global 
growth and rebalancing 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  New  York 
Association for Business Economics, New York, 27 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
The collapse of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008 triggered a precipitous worldwide 
economic  collapse.  What  had  previously  been  viewed  as  a  passing  bout  of  “financial 
turbulence” was suddenly transformed into a full-blown panic. The U.S. economy, which was 
at the epicentre of the crisis, suffered its most severe downturn since the Great Depression. 
It could have been much worse.1  
Prompt and aggressive countermeasures by fiscal and monetary policy authorities eventually 
helped  to  stabilize  the  situation,  and  output  began  to  recover  toward  the  end  of  2009 
(Chart 1). However, a full four years after the collapse, real economic activity in the United 
States  is  scarcely  above  its  pre-recession  peak,  and  more  than  4.5  million  (net)  jobs  that 
were lost during the crisis have yet to be recovered. U.S. GDP is roughly 10 per cent below 
the level it would have reached had it continued to increase at the same trend rate of growth 
it experienced prior to the crisis (equivalent to more than $1 trillion).2  
Europe’s GDP has yet to return to its pre-recession peak, and is not expected to do so until 
2015 at the earliest. The emerging-market economies (EMEs), including the BRIC countries 
(Brazil,  Russia,  India  and  China),  which  were  growing  at  extraordinary  rates  prior  to  the 
crisis, did much better, but were still affected. Decoupling proved to be illusory. 
Several international institutions and respected researchers warned that recoveries following 
a  financial  crisis,  especially  one  involving  banks  and  real  estate,  were  typically  protracted 
and  painful,  but  few  expected  the  process  to  be  this  slow  and  this  painful.  The  Great 
Moderation of the 1990s and early 2000s was followed by the Great Recession of 2008–09 
and now, what one central bank governor has termed the “Great Frustration.”3 I am not here 
to  depress  you,  however.  My  speech  today  actually  contains  a  message  of  hope.  I  will 
examine  why  the  major advanced  economies  are  where  they  are,  and I  will  then  describe 
what  the  future  might  hold.  My  message  of  hope  does  not  come  with  any  guarantees, 
however. It only points to the possibility of a more positive outcome. In order to reach it, a 
significant degree of enlightened self-interest will be required. 
I will begin with a quick review of the current situation, and compare it with where many of us 
thought,  or  hoped,  we  would  be  today.  I  will  also  show  you  where  we  might  have  been  if 
timely and aggressive corrective action had not been taken. “Be thankful for what you have” 
might be the appropriate epitaph for the Great Recession – it could have been worse. This is 
followed by a discussion of the economic game plan that was laid out by the G-20 leaders at 
a  meeting  convened  by  President  Obama  in  late  2009.  This  G-20  Framework  for  Strong, 
Sustainable and Balanced Growth was designed to deliver what the name suggests.4  
                                                
1   U.S. GDP fell by roughly 4 per cent from peak-to trough, while real economic activity in Europe and Japan fell 
by 6 and 8 per cent, respectively. 
2   This assumes, of course, that the previous trend rate of growth was sustainable. 
3   Remark by Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at a recent private meeting. 
4   For details of the G-20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  third  part  of  my  presentation  assesses  what  has  transpired  since  2009  –  identifying 
those  policy  commitments  that  were  fulfilled  and  those  that  were  not,  highlighting,  in 
particular, the major failings. The fourth and final part of my presentation reviews where we 
need to go from here. That is the uplifting part of what I will say today. 
It’s not good, but it could have been worse 
The U.S. economy, as I noted a moment ago, has passed the peak that it reached just prior 
to  the  crisis,  but  it  is  well  below  where  it  would  have  been  were  it  not  for  the  collapse. 
Unemployment  remains  near  8  per  cent,  compared  with  an  earlier  (and  perhaps 
unsustainable)  trough  of  4.4  per  cent  just  before  the  crisis,  and  is  well  above  consensus 
estimates of the structural or natural rate of unemployment. Excess capacity is judged to be 
in the range of 3 to 4 per cent of potential output. 
Chart 2 shows the state of the U.S. economy over the past five years (the solid red line), and 
where the Bank of Canada projects it will be going over the next two years (the dashed red 
line).  The  upper  and  lower  bounds  of  the  grey  area  represent  the  fastest  and  slowest 
recoveries  of  the  U.S.  economy  following  all  of  the  previous  post-Second  World  War 
recessions. As you can see, the red path is well below the lower bound. 
The  experience  in  Europe  has  been  even  more  disappointing  relative  to  previous  postwar 
recoveries (Chart 3). The outcomes for both the United States and Europe, however, have 
been much better than what was witnessed during the Great Depression (Chart 4). Make no 
mistake: This is where the major advanced economies were heading in late 2008. Indeed, 
output was falling at a far faster rate during this period than in late 1929. Only coordinated 
and exceptional policy measures prevented another Great Depression. 
G-20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth 
By  late  2009,  output  had  started  to  rise  at  a  reasonably  robust  rate  in  many,  if  not  all, 
economies,  and  authorities  were  hopeful  that  the  global  economy  was  on  the  road  to 
recovery. What little fiscal space the major advanced economies had been able to draw on in 
the midst of the crisis had been largely exhausted, however, and many central banks had 
lowered  their  target  interest  rates  as  far  as  they  could  go.  As  a  result,  a  variety  of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  were  deployed,  involving  large-scale  asset 
purchases  and  exceptional  forward  guidance  regarding  the  expected  future  path  of 
short-term  interest  rates.  Although  these  extraordinary  measures  helped  to  stabilize 
economic activity, and reverse the sharp declines, a longer-term strategy was clearly needed 
to restore global growth and put it on a more sustainable footing. 
What came forward from the G-20 was a four-point policy plan, the Framework for Strong, 
Sustainable  and  Balanced  Growth.  Each  point  was  necessary  on  its  own,  but  was  also 
needed to ensure the success of the other three. 
The  first  point  involved  significant  fiscal  consolidation  by  countries  that  had  run  large, 
unsustainable  budget  deficits  prior  to  the  crisis  and  had  seen  them  escalate  even  further 
during  the  recession,  on  the  back  of  falling  revenues  and  rising  expenditures.  Of  course, 
banks and households in many of the same countries were also paying for past excesses, 
hastily deleveraging and working to repair broken balance sheets. 
The  second  point  of  the  Framework  called  for  sweeping  financial  system  reforms.  These 
were designed to rebuild financial institutions and markets in a way that would minimize the 
chances of future crises and make the system better able to withstand any that might occur. 
The  third  point  focused  on  ambitious  structural  reforms  to  liberalize  labour  and  product 
markets and improve governance and institutional arrangements, thereby raising long-term 
efficiency and potential output. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The fourth and final point involved a rebalancing of global demand. Excess domestic demand 
in  countries  with  current  account  deficits  would  be  eliminated  or  reduced  to  manageable 
levels,  and  replaced  by  increased  external  demand  from  other,  surplus,  countries. 
Meanwhile,  surplus  countries  were  expected  to  boost  their  domestic  demand  and  become 
less  reliant  on  export-led  growth  strategies.  Although  these  growth  strategies  had  proven 
amazingly successful in many EMEs, they were often supported by persistent, large-scale, 
foreign  exchange  intervention  and  extensive  capital  controls  intended  to  keep  their 
currencies  undervalued.  With  most  deficit  countries  now  played  out  and  in  the  process  of 
shrinking their demand, this was a strategy that couldn’t continue. Structural reforms in these 
EMEs,  supported  by  more  flexible,  market-determined  exchange  rates,  are  required  to 
sustain growth. 
The good, bad and ugly scenarios 
At  the  outset,  observers  were  cautiously  optimistic  about  the  plan  and,  contrary  to  the 
warnings of Reinhart and Rogoff, believed that this time it might really be different.5 Ideally, 
the appropriate combination of policies would shorten the recovery time and lead to a much 
better  long-term  equilibrium. The  experiences  of  the  five  advanced  countries  that  Reinhart 
and Rogoff had identified in their study, and that had been hit by financial crises earlier in the 
postwar period, would not be prologue to what advanced economies were about to achieve 
through concerted action. 
Regrettably,  the  trajectories  of  both  the  U.S.  and  European  economies  to  date  have  been 
remarkably similar to these five countries (see the blue line on Charts 5 and 6). It would be a 
mistake, however, to assume that this experience represents some sort of immutable path 
toward which economies must necessarily gravitate following a crisis. Such an attitude is too 
defeatist and fatalistic. Good policy can – and does – make a difference. 
It  is  important  to  understand  that  the  four  points  of  the  G-20  Framework  that  I  described 
earlier are mutually reinforcing. The first three points, though they are essential for stable and 
welfare-improving  outcomes  in  the  future,  were  known  to  have  deflationary  effects  in  the 
short to medium term, depressing global demand. The fourth point, the rebalancing of global 
demand, was necessary to counter these sizable headwinds, supporting global growth until 
the positive effects from the other three kicked in. 
In an effort to highlight the costs of policy failure or, stated more positively, the potential gains 
from policy success, economists at the Bank of Canada used their global economy model in 
early 2011 to map out three possible scenarios. Although any econometric model needs to 
be treated with a great deal of caution, this one has proven to be very useful in the past, and 
the  results  were  viewed  as  reasonable  approximations  of  what  one  might  expect  under 
different states of the world.6  
The first scenario, called the “good” one, assumes that everyone does what is necessary to 
fulfill  the G-20  commitments made  in  2009  and at the  three subsequent  leaders’  summits. 
This scenario was not intended to be as good as it gets – a Goldilocks solution – but simply 
good enough to get the job done. The second, or “bad” scenario, assumes that most of what 
was  promised  is  eventually  accomplished,  but  with  a  three-year  delay.  The  third  scenario, 
called the “ugly” one, is a variant of the first two and assumes that only half the job is done, 
at least initially. Fiscal consolidation is undertaken, as is financial sector reform, but several 
                                                
5   C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff, This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2009). 
6   For  more  information  on  the  model  and  the  critical  assumptions  embedded  in  the  scenarios,  see  C.  de 
Resende, C. Godbout, R. Lalonde, É. Morin and N. Perevalov, “On the Adjustment of the Global Economy,” 
Bank of Canada Review (Spring) 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
important structural reforms and a shift toward more flexible exchange rate regimes in some 
EMEs are omitted. 
The  different  growth  trajectories  implied  by  the  three  scenarios  are  evident  in  the  results 
shown in Chart 7. The policy delay embedded in the bad scenario causes world output to fall 
roughly 8 per cent below the level of output that would have been realized under the good 
scenario (or US$6 trillion). Doing half the job, as in the ugly scenario, is even worse, at least 
for the first few years. This is mainly because the deflationary effects of fiscal consolidation 
are front-loaded. 
Where are we now? 
This is all very well, you might say, but how do these model results relate to the real world 
and what we see today? Where are we now, and how are we doing four years after the crisis 
started in earnest? 
The  outcome  in  the  real  world  has  been  decidedly  mixed,  despite  additional  rounds  of 
quantitative easing and other unconventional monetary policy initiatives undertaken by major 
central banks. The deflationary forces in many countries appear to be winning. While global 
growth has not stalled completely, neither is it as strong or as widely distributed as many had 
hoped. 
Fiscal  consolidation,  with  one  or two  notable  exceptions,  is  being  pursued  by  many  of the 
countries that require it. However, there is a risk that market forces (or legislation, as in the 
case of the United States) may be pushing it too quickly in the short run. The International 
Monetary  Fund  and  other  policy  institutions  are  now  recommending  that  consolidation  be 
pursued in a resolute but gradual manner, where possible.7 In other words, don’t overdo it in 
the  short  run,  since  the  fiscal  multipliers  are  believed  to  be  much  larger  than  previously 
estimated. That said, there is a need for some countries, most notably Japan and the United 
States,  to  set  out  credible  longer-term  paths  to  restore  their  fiscal  health.  Their  debt  and 
deficits are on explosive tracks and will only be made worse by demographic forces. 
Financial system reform is where success has been the most evident, despite the ambitious 
nature of the agenda.8 The design phase of the financial reform effort is nearing completion, 
but  full,  timely  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  reforms  will  be  critical.  Peer-review 
mechanisms  have  been  established  to  help  drive  the  process  forward  and  maintain 
cross-jurisdictional consistency in implementation.9 The cross-border challenges involved in 
implementing this reform effort are particularly daunting. 
The report card on structural reform is slightly better than some commentary might suggest, 
but  progress  has  been  extremely  uneven.  The  structural  initiatives  announced  by  some 
countries  lack  ambition  and  are  directed  at  easier,  less  politically  sensitive,  issues.  Many 
other countries, however, whether of their own volition or under duress, are pursuing more 
far-reaching reforms. As one might imagine, many of these are deficit countries, subject to 
intense  market  pressures  or  operating  under  the  surveillance  of  official  support  programs. 
Surplus countries, in contrast, have been less motivated and seem to have adopted a more 
relaxed approach. 
                                                
7   “Coping  with  High  Debt  and  Sluggish  Growth,”  International  Monetary  Fund  World  Economic  Outlook, 
(October 2012). 
8   “Progress of Financial Regulatory Reform,” letter from Financial Stability Board Chairman M. Carney to G-20 
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, 31 October 2012. 
9   T. Macklem, “Raising the House of Reform” (speech to Rotman Institute for International Business, Toronto, 
7 February 2012). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The final critical part of the Framework, the rebalancing of global demand, is where slippage 
has  been  the  greatest,  although  at  first  glance  things  seem  to  have  gone  well.  The  real 
effective exchange rates of several important surplus countries have appreciated, and their 
current  account  balances  have  generally  fallen  (Chart  8).  Export  sales  have  declined  and 
domestic demand now accounts for a larger share of their GDP growth. Appearances can be 
deceiving, however. 
While some legitimate progress has been made in the rebalancing of global growth, most of 
the  “correction”  that  has  occurred  has  been  driven  by  demand  compression  in  the  deficit 
countries.  The  same  is  true  for  the  rising  share  of  domestic  demand  in  many  surplus 
countries.  It  is  not  a  case  of  domestic  demand  growing  significantly  faster  but,  rather, 
declining export sales in the face of falling incomes and aggressive belt-tightening in deficit 
countries (Chart 9). 
In  those  instances  where  surplus  countries  have  increased  their  contribution  to  global 
domestic  demand,  it  has  often  been  concentrated  in  fixed  investment,  which  was  already 
inordinately  high  and  frequently  misallocated.  Investment  as  a  share  of  GDP  in  China,  for 
example,  is  roughly  50  per  cent,  while  household  consumption  is  roughly  35  per  cent  – 
extraordinarily low by any standard and declining over time (Chart 10). When growth returns 
to  the  deficit  countries,  the  current  account  surpluses  of  these  countries  are  likely  to 
re-emerge.  Without  a  conscious  effort  to  rotate  demand  and  support  global  growth,  true 
re-equilibration will be a long and painful process. 
Another apparent sign of progress concerns the path of real exchange rates. In some surplus 
countries,  exchange  rates  have  shown  signs  of  increased  flexibility.  However,  these 
developments are quite limited compared with the movements observed in other, more truly 
flexible,  regimes  (Charts  11  and  12).  They  are  also  much  less  than  fundamentals  would 
suggest is appropriate. Many surplus countries continue to rely on capital controls and active 
foreign exchange intervention to enhance their competitive advantage. 
Taking all of this together, we appear to be trapped in the bad scenario. But if the situation 
continues, it could easily turn ugly. 
This  is  not  to  suggest  that  all  of  the  difficulties  that  we  have  experienced  are  because  of 
failed or partial policy implementation. There are two things worth noting in this regard. First, 
Reinhart  and  Rogoff  are  correct  when  they  assert  that  recoveries  after  a  major  financial 
crisis,  especially  one  that  has  gone  global,  are  different  than  recoveries  from  “normal” 
recessions.  Some  allowance  has  to  be  made  for  this.  Second,  new  shocks  have  hit  the 
global economy since 2008. The earthquake in Japan and the crisis in Europe are the most 
obvious examples, although some would argue that the latter is simply an extension of the 
initial financial crisis. 
Even allowing for these factors, however, there is a sense that we could have done better. 
What needs to be done? 
Can we get back to where we want to be? In a word, yes. What is needed is very similar to 
what  was  first  proposed  and  agreed  in  late  2009,  but  with  some  necessary  modifications. 
The following list is not meant to be comprehensive but simply hits the highlights. 
First the United States must deal with its fiscal cliff. Action is required to bring the budget into 
line. But something with a smoother profile over the next two to three years, coupled with a 
credible long-term track would be preferable to the aggressive tack now in play. 
Second,  Europe  must  set  itself  right.  Certain  things  are  required  just  to  contain  the  crisis. 
These  include  activating  the  Stabilization  Mechanism  to  help  support  sovereign  debt 
re-financing and recapitalize banks, and the Outright Monetary Transactions program, which 
will  help  eliminate  the  risk  of  euro  redenomination  and  improve  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Of course, it will take several years to fully resolve the crisis in Europe. Key elements are 
further  fiscal  consolidation  in  many  countries,  repair  of  the  broken  banking  systems,  deep 
reform in labour and product markets, improved governance, and eventual completion of the 
banking, fiscal and political unions. 
Third,  surplus  countries  that  are  delaying  necessary  global  adjustment  by  frustrating 
necessary 
toward 
market-determined  rates.  In  addition,  they  should  undertake  the  structural  changes 
necessary to boost domestic demand, with particular emphasis on consumption. This would 
allow more of their citizens to realize the full rewards of their labours and improve general 
economic welfare. 
should  move  more 
exchange-rate 
expeditiously 
changes 
Conclusion 
There is an old joke about a lost traveller who asks for directions and is told by a local, “I 
wouldn’t  try  to  get  there  from  here.”  Unfortunately,  we  have  no  choice  about  our  point  of 
departure. It would be easier if we were starting from a better place, but we aren’t. Happily, 
the  original  road  map  established  in  2009  remains  broadly  appropriate.10  More  may  be 
required, since we have lost valuable time and capacity through delay, but the mission is not 
impossible. 
Let us first do what has been promised and then see what remains to be done. The good 
news  is  that  many  of  the  risks  that  we  face  are  related  to  policy  slippage  and  should 
therefore be amenable to policy correction. We have the means. Let us hope that lessons 
have been learned, and that the challenges will be met with renewed determination. 
Thank you. 
                                                
10   Canada, along with India, co-chairs the G-20 Working Group on the Framework, whose mission is to drive 
progress on the agenda. Its current focus is on the key challenges of fostering greater exchange rate flexibility 
in emerging markets, encouraging deeper and more significant structural reforms, and strengthening the fiscal 
commitments. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
