Charles Bean: Central banking in boom and slump 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the JSG Wilson Lecture in Economics, University of Hull, Hull, 31 October 2012. 
 Good  evening!  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  be  asked  to  give  this  year’s  JSG  Wilson  Lecture. 
Professor Wilson  wrote  extensively  on  many  topics  central  to  recent  events,  most  notably 
money  markets,  monetary  policy  and  banking.  Given  these  interests,  it  is  perhaps 
unsurprising  that  the  Bank  of  England  often  fell  under  his  gaze.  Indeed,  in  his  review  of 
monetary policy in the 1960s, he was moved to remark that “the most notable contribution 
[the  Bank  of  England]  has  made  to  the  emergence  of  a  new  climate  is  in  the  matter  of 
publicity and relatively frank speaking” (Wilson, 1966). I hope that I will live up to that pitch 
this  evening,  although  I  aim  to  demonstrate  that  our  recent  contributions  have  been 
somewhat more substantive than mere words! 
Last  Thursday,  we  heard  that  the  UK  economy  grew  1%  in  the  third  quarter.  Yes,  it  was 
boosted by one-off factors relating to the Diamond Jubilee and the Olympics. But, even after 
taking those into account, the figure was stronger than expected. That was welcome news, 
for  the  past five  years  have  not  been  easy.  Following  the  bursting  of the  financial  bubble, 
policymakers  in  the  advanced  economies  have  faced  unprecedented  challenges.  Central 
banks have needed to find new ways to support a financial system under great stress and to 
buttress economic activity. Moreover, the crisis also revealed a major hole in our framework 
for  managing  the  economic  and  credit  cycles.  So  tonight  I  want  to  discuss  some  of  the 
actions  we  have  taken  in  dealing  with  the  crisis  and  subsequent  recession,  as  well  as 
explaining some of the attendant reforms to the policy framework. 
Let me begin by rewinding the clock five years to August 2007 when financial markets first 
seized up. 
UK GDP had grown continuously and at a steady pace for the preceding 64 quarters. And 
consumer  price  inflation  had  been  within  a  percentage  point  of  the  Government’s  inflation 
target  for  every  month  bar  one  since  the  Bank  was  given  operational  responsibility  for 
monetary  policy  in  1997.  Such  stability  was  historically  unprecedented.  But  the  United 
Kingdom  was  not  unique:  other  advanced  economies  also  experienced  a  long  period  of 
unusually benign macroeconomic outcomes. 
The  period  of  unusual  stability  led  households,  businesses  and  especially  financial 
institutions  to  underestimate the  risks  they  were  exposed  to.  Together with  historically  low 
interest  rates,  at  both  the  short  and  long  end  of  the  yield  curve,  that  encouraged  a 
debt-fuelled “search for yield”. The associated expansion in credit is shown for this country in 
Chart 1. Note that the debt of financial sector companies is plotted on a different scale to that 
for households and real-economy businesses; the remarkable feature of this period is not the 
expansion  in  household  or  business  credit,  but  the  huge  increase  in  the  indebtedness  of 
financial companies. A similar picture obtains for many other advanced economies, including 
the United States. This expansion in credit put upward pressure on a range of asset prices, 
including property. 
But macroeconomic factors were not solely responsible for the crisis. Several failings at the 
microeconomic level were also relevant, including: inadequate risk management by financial 
institutions; the use of off-balance sheet vehicles to evade regulatory capital requirements; 
weak standards in loan origination, especially in the US sub-prime market; pay packages that 
encouraged  high-risk  trading  strategies;  and  informational  deficiencies  stemming  from  the 
underlying complexity of new financial instruments (Bean, 2010). Above all, the huge rise in 
financial sector debt I noted a moment ago was associated with a much greater and more 
complex  web  of  exposures  between  different  financial  entities,  increasing  the  risk  that  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
failure in one part of the financial sector would have systemic consequences. Together these 
factors help explain the extreme severity and geographic reach of the crisis. 
In  the  years  preceding  the  crisis,  there  was  some  debate  in  central  banking  circles  as  to 
whether  monetary  policy  should  do  more  to  work  against  a  credit/asset  price  boom,  even 
though  there  might  be  few  signs  of  overheating  in  the  real  economy.  On  one  side, 
economists  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (e.g.  White,  2006),  argued  that 
monetary  policy  was  too  loose  and  should  instead  “lean  against  the  wind”  of  a 
credit/asset-price  boom  in  order  to  reduce  risks  further  down  the  road.  On  the  other  side, 
people such as the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan (2002), doubted the 
feasibility  of  such  an  approach  and  advocated  a  policy  of  benign  neglect  during the  boom 
phase, along with aggressive relaxation should there be a collapse of asset prices. 
As  I  noted  some  years  ago  (Bean,  2003),  such  “leaning  against  the  wind”  is  in  principle 
compatible with flexible inflation targeting: a central bank ought to be willing to undershoot its 
inflation target temporarily, if it believes that it will thereby improve its chances of meeting the 
target  later  on  by  avoiding  a  disruptive  bust.  The  crisis  and  subsequent  Great  Recession 
seem  to  make  this  logic  even  more  compelling.  But  unfortunately,  by  the  time  an 
unsustainable credit boom has been diagnosed, a small increase in policy rates is unlikely to 
do much to cool it. And a large increase is likely to generate unacceptable collateral damage 
to the real economy. 
In a paper for the Federal Reserve’s annual conference at Jackson Hole a couple of years 
ago  (Bean  et  al.,  2011),  I  reported  the  results  of  some  simulations  of  what  might  have 
happened if Bank Rate had been  
200  basis  points  higher  during  the  four  years  before  the  crisis  began.  The  answer  is  that 
while the rise in real house prices over that period would have been less than half as large, 
the impact on overall real credit growth would have been pretty modest, reducing it by only a 
tenth  –  hardly  enough  to  have  a  major  bearing  on  the  magnitude  of  the  subsequent  bust. 
Moreover,  output  would  have  been  some  3  per  cent  lower.  Monetary  policy  on  its  own 
therefore does not seem especially well suited to preventing credit/asset-price booms.  
So the crisis exposed not only the inadequacy of our understanding of the true nature of the 
risks  that  had  built  up  in  the financial  sector,  but  also  the  need for  suitable  instruments to 
deal with them. One of the key reforms in the United Kingdom following the crisis has been to 
establish  a  body  –  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  –  with  the  responsibility  for 
overseeing the stability of the financial system, together with specific powers to achieve that. 
The FPC will exist on a statutory basis once the Financial Services Act has passed into law, 
but has been operating on an interim basis since June 2011. 
The FPC has two objectives. First and foremost, it is charged with identifying, monitoring and 
taking action to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the 
resilience of the UK financial system. But that is accompanied by a secondary goal: subject 
to protecting resilience, it should support the economic policy of the government, including its 
objectives for growth and employment. This formulation mirrors that for the Monetary Policy 
Committee  and  should  ensure  that  the  FPC  approaches  its  primary  objective  of  ensuring 
resilience of the financial system in a way that does not unduly impede economic growth. 
Seven  of  the  members  of  the  Committee,  including  myself,  are  drawn  from  within  the 
financial authorities: the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority (FSA).1 The 
remaining four are external members who bring special expertise and experience and can 
                                                
1   At present they are: the Governor; the two Deputy Governors; the executive directors for Financial Stability 
and  for  Markets;  and  the  Chairman  and  Chief  Executive  of  the  FSA.  When  the  FSA  is  dissolved  into  the 
Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA),  which  will  be  part  of  the  Bank,  and  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority 
(FCA), these last two will be replaced by the heads of the PRA (who will be a third Deputy Governor of the 
Bank) and FCA. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reduce  the  risk  of  the  “group  think”  that  might  arise  in  a  committee  comprised  solely  of 
insiders. There is also a non-voting representative from the Treasury. 
The  powers  of  the  Committee  are  two-fold.  First,  the  FPC  can  issue  recommendations. 
These  could  be  general  recommendations,  for  instance  to  financial  institutions  or  the 
Treasury.  Or  they  could  be  specific  requests  to  the  prudential  or  conduct  regulators  who 
would then be expected to comply with the recommendation or else explain why not. Such 
recommendations might be called for if there are structural developments – for instance, new 
financial instruments – taking place in the financial system that appear to increase the risk of 
financial instability. 
Second,  once  the  Act  has  come  into  force,  the  FPC  will  be  able  to  direct  the  prudential 
regulator  to  implement  changes  to  a  small  set  of  instruments  in  order  to  achieve  its 
objectives.  On  the  basis  of  advice  from  the  FPC,  the  Treasury  is  presently  consulting  on 
those  instruments  (HM  Treasury,  2012).  As  it  stands,  the  current  proposals  include  three 
tools. 
First, there is a countercyclical capital buffer. Under the Basel III capital framework, banks 
will be required to hold a higher level of bank capital relative to their risk-weighted assets. But 
national  regulators  will  be  able  to  require  an  additional  time-varying  buffer  that  can  be 
increased during the upswing of the credit cycle and released during the downswing. Under 
Basel  III,  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  will  be  phased  in  from  the  beginning  of  2016, 
becoming fully effective only at the start of 2019. But the Government has said that it plans to 
use  whatever  flexibility  is  available  to  give  the  FPC  power  over  the  buffer  as  soon  as  is 
practicable. 
There  are two  ways  that  such  an  additional  capital  buffer  mitigates  systemic  risks.  First,  it 
provides a larger cushion against potential losses, so providing greater resilience in the face 
of a bust. Second, the imposition of such an additional capital requirement may also inhibit 
the expansion of banks’ balance sheets, so dampening the upswing of the credit cycle. This 
second mechanism obviously requires the Modigliani-Miller theorem to fail, in the short run at 
least; if it doesn’t then there is no reason for a bank’s management to prefer debt finance to 
equity  finance.  Now  the  most  obvious  reason  why  the  Modigliani-Miller  theorem  fails  for 
banks is the implicit subsidy to debt finance that comes from being “too big (or too complex) 
to  fail”  so  that  taxpayers,  rather  than  creditors,  pick  up  the  tab  if  capital  is  insufficient  to 
absorb  losses.  Recent  and  prospective  regulatory  reforms  seek  to  reduce  the  too  big/too 
complex  to  fail  problem,  but  eliminating  it  entirely  may  be  an  aspiration  too far.  Moreover, 
there  are  likely  to  be  other  frictions  to  raising  capital  which  mean  that  raising  capital 
requirements  will  inhibit  balance  sheet  growth,  providing  traction  for  the  countercyclical 
capital buffer. However, this is an area where empirical evidence is in relatively short supply 
(though for some examples, see: Macroeconomic Assessment Group, 2010; and Aiyar et al., 
2012). 
The second tool is the ability to vary capital requirements by type of asset, allowing the FPC 
to  target  excessive  exuberance  in  specific  sectors.  The  EU  will  permit  national  authorities 
such  discretion  in  regard  to  residential  property,  commercial  property  and  intra-financial 
sector exposures. While this list is clearly not exhaustive, it does include some of the main 
sectors that have historically been most subject to over-exuberant credit growth. 
The  final  tool  is  the  ability  to  set  and  vary  a  minimum  leverage  ratio.  A  leverage  ratio  is 
essentially  just  (a  transformation  of)  the  ratio  of  capital  to  unweighted  assets.  Such  a 
measure  fails  to  allow  for  the  varying  riskiness  of  different  forms  of  lending.  However,  the 
wide  variation  in  risk  weights  across  banks  raises  questions  about  the  reliability  of  those 
risk-weight  models.  Moreover,  as  my  colleague  Andy  Haldane  (Haldane  and  Madouros, 
2012) recently documented, a simple leverage ratio measure does a somewhat better job of 
predicting which banks were more likely to get into difficulties during the crisis than does a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
International  discussions  about 
the  usual  risk-weighted  capital  ratio. 
risk-weighted capital ratio2 (see Chart 2). Given the imperfections of risk-weighting, the ability 
to  impose  a  minimum  leverage  ratio  provides  a  useful  additional  instrument  that  can 
backstop 
the 
implementation  of  a  leverage  ratio  are  still  continuing  and  this  instrument  is  only  likely  to 
become part of the FPC’s toolkit after 2018. 
The  application  of  these  so-called  macroprudential  policies  is  still  very  much  at  the 
developmental stage. When the Bank gained operational responsibility for monetary policy in 
1997, there was a long history of practical experience, together with a vast theoretical and 
empirical literature for us to draw on. That didn’t make setting monetary policy easy, but it 
certainly  helped.  By  comparison,  we  are  still  in  the  Stone  Age  in  respect  of  deploying 
macroprudential policies. There is lots of scope for academia to help us out here, on both the 
theoretical and empirical fronts. 
Even so – indeed, in large part because of that state of relative ignorance – I think one can 
lay out some key principles that should govern the deployment of the FPC’s tools. It will be 
very easy for the future FPC, particularly during long periods of tranquillity, to slip into the 
temptation of neurotically twiddling the dials on its instruments or issuing recommendations 
left,  right  and  centre.  But  what  will  determine  the  worth  of  the  FPC  will  be  whether  it  is 
successful in heading off the really big risks – in other words, avoiding a repeat of the sort of 
crisis we have just experienced. Ensuring resilience, rather than fine-tuning the credit cycle, 
must be the name of the game.  
Second, when the FPC does find it necessary to act, it will need to show resolution in taking 
the  punchbowl  away  as  the  party  is  just  getting  going.  With  recent  events  so  fresh  in 
everyone’s memories, this may not seem much of an issue now. But in a decade or two’s 
time, when recent events have receded into history, such actions will be less welcome. No 
doubt there will be plenty of people willing then to claim that “this time is different” and that 
the  FPC’s  actions  are  unnecessarily  inhibiting  growth.  Moreover,  if  the  FPC’s  actions  are 
successful in avoiding a subsequent financial crisis, critics may claim this as evidence that 
action  was  unnecessary  in  the  first  place.  A  central  role  for  the  FPC  will  therefore  be  to 
institutionalise the memory of this and other financial crises. 
Finally, the FPC’s instruments may sometimes prove relatively ineffective. That is more likely 
to  happen  when  the  problems  lie  beyond  the  regulatory  boundary  in  the  shadow  banking 
sector.  At  such  times,  monetary  policy  may  need  to  act  in  a  supportive  manner,  leaning 
against  the  wind  even  though  that  may  mean  accepting  a  temporary  deviation  of  inflation 
from 
this  will  require  appropriate  co-ordination  between 
two 
Committees. That should be facilitated by their considerable overlap in membership. 
So  far  I  have  focussed  on  how  the  Bank  will  be  able  to  dampen  a  future  boom  and 
strengthen resilience in the face of excessive exuberance in financial markets. Let me now 
turn to what may seem a more timely issue, namely what the central bank can do during and 
after a financial crisis of the sort we are living through. In the first instance, of course, the 
focus has to be on crisis management. That has included: acting as lender of last resort to 
illiquid  but  solvent  financial  institutions;  providing  liquidity  support  through  the  market;  and 
acting as a market maker of last resort when a market becomes dysfunctional. During the 
crisis  we  and  other  central  banks  have  been  forced  to  undertake  a  much  wider  range  of 
actions than we  would  normally contemplate, lending against a broader range of collateral 
and  for  longer  tenors  than  usual,  and  intervening  in  markets  where  we  do  not  usually 
operate. While many of the new facilities were invented on the hoof as the crisis unfolded 
and should become redundant once normality returns, they will nevertheless remain in the 
emergency toolkit in case of future need. 
target.  Achieving 
the 
                                                
2   This  uses  Basel  I  risk  weights,  though  it  seems  unlikely  that  measures  of  risk-weighted  assets  calculated 
under the Basel II or III rules would have performed that much better. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But once the immediate crisis has past, how can central banks foster the recovery? There is 
now  ample  evidence  (IMF,  2009;  Reinhart  and  Rogoff,  2009)  suggesting  recoveries  after 
recessions  associated  with  financial  crises  are  typically  much  more  drawn  out  than  those 
after  “normal”  recessions.  For  instance,  a  study  by  the  IMF  of  122  post-war  recessions 
across  21  countries  finds  that,  on  average,  output  surpasses  its  pre-crisis  peak  around  a 
year  after  the  start  of  a  “normal”  recession.  But  that  average  period  rises  to  2½  years 
following financial crises. And the mean level of output across the 15 recessions associated 
with financial crises is still some 6% below a continuation of the pre-crisis trend some seven 
years  after the  onset  of  the  crisis  (though there  is  considerable  heterogeneity  in  individual 
country experience, as Chart 3 shows). 
Why are downturns after financial crises more likely to result in a prolonged period of weak 
activity  and  elevated  unemployment  –  a  slump,  in  other  words?  There  are,  I  believe,  two 
main  reasons.  The  first  is  the  unduly  sharp  and  sustained  decline  in  confidence. 
Over-confidence  and  underestimation  of  risks  during  the  pre-crisis  boom  gives  way  to 
extreme  caution  and  a  preference  for  safe,  rather  than  risky,  assets  –  a  shock  to  “animal 
spirits”,  if  you  like. When  investment  is  costly  to  reverse,  that  is  likely  to  result  in  a  sharp 
reduction  in  capital  expenditure  (e.g.  Dixit  and  Pindyck,  1994).  Similar arguments  apply  to 
durable  expenditures  by  consumers. The  near-seizure  of  the  international  financial  system 
after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  administered  a  particularly  large  adverse  shock  to 
animal spirits. 
Although  that  event  is  gradually  receding  into  the  past,  it  has  been  superseded  by 
uncertainty  surrounding  the  ability  of  the  euro  area  to  resolve  the  indebtedness  and 
competitiveness problems of the periphery. Substantial policy steps have been taken since 
the  summer,  including  the  launch  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  steps  to  set  up  a 
banking union, and the ECB’s announcement of its willingness to purchase the short-dated 
debt of troubled sovereigns. But it will be a long time before a resolution is complete and the 
consequent uncertainty is likely to weigh on demand for some time yet. 
The  second reason  why  recovery  is  likely  to  be  slow  after  a  banking  crisis,  highlighted  by 
those such as Richard Koo (2003), is that the excess debt and investments built up in the 
preceding period of over-optimism need to be worked off. And that process of balance sheet 
repair  –  by  households,  businesses  and  financial  institutions  –  typically  takes  time  and 
involves  a  period  of  subdued  demand  unless the  spending  of  other,  less  indebted,  agents 
rises to compensate. 
Unlike  some  other  countries  which  saw  substantial  rises  in  house  prices  during  the  years 
preceding the crisis, the United Kingdom did not see a major boom in residential construction 
(Broadbent, 2012). As a result, the overhang of unsold properties needing to be worked off 
was much smaller here than in, say, the United States or Spain. Even so, households that 
had  taken  out  relatively  large  mortgages  might  have  been  more  inclined  to  cut  back  their 
spending  when  conditions  deteriorated  in  2008–9  as  the  financial  crisis  worsened.  Some 
support for this hypothesis is provided in Chart 4, which exploits microeconomic data from 
the Living Costs and Food Survey to examine consumption patterns by income quartile, split 
by the indebtedness of households. It is striking that the sharpest falls in consumption were 
seen  amongst  high  income,  highly  indebted  households,  though  there  may  be  other 
explanations for this too. 
The  most  important  process  of  balance  sheet  repair  is,  though,  taking  place  within  the 
financial sector itself. As we saw in Chart 1, the pre-crisis period saw a considerable increase 
in leverage in the financial sector, leaving banks and similar institutions highly exposed when 
optimism  evaporated.  Bank  funding  costs  and  credit  default  swap  spreads  then  rose 
substantially,  symptomatic  of  investors’  doubts  as  to  whether  they  would  get  their  money 
back (Chart 5). Funding costs have recently fallen back in the wake of policy initiatives, such 
as  our  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme,  though  doubts  still  linger.  So,  quite  independently  of 
any tightening of regulatory requirements, there has been market pressure on banks to make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
balance sheets safer. That, in turn, has encouraged them to direct their supply of loans to 
just  the  more  credit  worthy  borrowers.  Moreover,  elevated  funding  costs  have  also  put 
upward pressure on the loan rates charged to borrowers, offsetting the impact of lower policy 
rates. 
The  drag  from  these  factors  –  heightened  uncertainty  and  de-leveraging  –  has  been 
augmented by two further factors. First, higher prices for oil and other commodities, on the 
back of firm growth in the emerging economies and adverse supply developments, implied a 
deterioration  in  our  terms  of  trade,  imparting  a  further  drag  to  the  growth  in  real  incomes. 
Second, as MPC members noted frequently in the years before the crisis, the composition of 
UK demand needed to re-balance away from domestic demand towards net exports in order 
to shift the current account into balance. On top of that, the financial crisis has most likely 
resulted  in  some  deterioration  of  the  capacity  of  the  financial  sector  to  generate  export 
earnings, creating a need for an additional expansion in the rest of the tradable sector of the 
economy. Generating this shift in the composition of activity requires a real depreciation of 
sterling. While  that  has  happened  –  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  for  sterling  is  almost 
15%  below  its  pre-crisis  level  –  it  will  inevitably  take  time  for  resources  to  transfer  to  the 
tradable  sector from the  domestically-facing  sector.  Moreover,  weak  growth  in  most  of the 
other  advanced  economies  has  not  provided  the  best  of  backgrounds  for  such  a 
re-balancing.  
The  bottom  line  of  all  this  is  that  considerable  real  adjustments  are  called  for.  These  real 
adjustments  –  balance  sheet  repair  and  the  sectoral  reallocation  of  resources  –  inevitably 
take  time.  It  is  against  this  background  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  set.  On  the  one 
hand, a highly stimulatory policy stance can encourage households and businesses to bring 
forward  expenditure,  boosting  demand  and  mitigating  the  destruction  of  the  economy’s 
supply capacity that can result from a prolonged period of weak demand as firms are driven 
out of business and the skills of unemployed workers atrophy. On the other hand, such policy 
can also delay the transition to a new growth path if it slows the process of balance sheet 
repair and inhibits the process of “creative destruction” as unprofitable firms are closed and 
the liberated resources shifted to the expanding sectors. 
Monetary  policy  has,  of  course,  been  highly  stimulatory  here  and  in  other  advanced 
economies since the financial crisis. Not only are policy rates close to their zero lower bound, 
but  the  Bank  of  England,  US  Federal  Reserve  and  Bank  of  Japan  have  all  engaged  in 
large-scale asset purchases of government debt and selected private assets, paid for by an 
expansion  in  bank  reserves  –  what  is  commonly  referred to  as  “quantitative  easing” .  And 
while  their  open  market  purchases  have  typically  been  sterilised,  the  ECB’s  policy  of  full 
allotment in the provision of liquidity means its balance sheet too has expanded substantially 
in size (see Chart 6). 
Quantitative easing is often described as “printing money” but this is somewhat misleading, 
as it conjures up images of Friedman’s monetary helicopter – of which I will say more in a 
moment. Rather, in our case it swaps one liability of the state – gilts – for another – claims on 
the Bank of England in the form of commercial bank reserves. When we buy a gilt from the 
private  sector,  say  a  pension  or  hedge  fund,  we  credit  the  seller’s  bank  account  with  the 
appropriate amount, while their bank simultaneously acquires a claim on us in the form of an 
increase in its reserve account. These reserves bear interest at Bank Rate. As far as a bank 
is  concerned,  reserves  are  a  very  close  substitute  for  holdings  of  short-term  safe  assets, 
such as Treasury Bills.3 
                                                
3   There are two differences compared with a Treasury Bill: first, only banks with reserve accounts can hold bank 
reserves,  whereas  a  Treasury  Bill  is  a  marketable  instrument;  second,  if  a  bank  needs  cash,  say  to  meet 
withdrawals, it can convert its reserve holdings directly into cash, whereas it would need either to sell or repo 
its Treasury Bill holdings in the market. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The aim of quantitative easing is to drive down longer-term yields, when short-term interest 
rates  are  already  at  or  near  their  floor.  It  does  this  by  encouraging  those  who  have  sold 
assets  to  us  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  into  assets  that  are  substitutes.  That  includes 
corporate  bonds  and  equities,  as  well  as  a  variety  of  other  assets.  There  is  a  line  of 
academic thinking that this mechanism will not be effective if private agents “pierce the public 
sector  veil”  and  internalise  the  tax  implications  of  the  change  in  the  composition  of  the 
consolidated public sector balance sheet (Eggertsson and Woodford, 2003). However, event 
studies  of  quantitative  easing  here  (see  Joyce  et  al.,  2011)  and  in  the  United  States  (see 
Gagnon et al., 2011) do suggest that yields on a range of assets have fallen as a result of the 
purchases. That can be seen in the downward pressure on corporate bond yields (Chart 7) 
and the upward pressure on equity prices (Chart 8) during the two rounds of asset purchases 
(marked in grey). So, as yet, we do not seem to be in a liquidity trap in which yields can be 
pushed down no further. 
What  to  my  mind  is  a  more  open  question,  though,  is  the  degree  of  traction  these  lower 
yields have on demand at the present juncture. Looser monetary policy works in large part by 
encouraging households and businesses to bring forward future spending to the present. It is 
plausible,  however,  that  such  intertemporal  substitution  will  be  weaker when  uncertainty  is 
elevated and when banks and some households are concentrating on repairing their balance 
sheets.  For  instance,  a  modest  fall  in  the  cost  of  capital  may  do  little  to  boost  investment 
spending  when  the  environment  is  so  dominated  by  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for 
demand.  To  illustrate  this,  Chart  9  shows  the  results  from  CBI  business  surveys  of  the 
factors  holding  back  investment  spending  at  the  current  juncture.  Uncertainty  about  the 
outlook for demand is far and away the dominant factor. That does not mean that quantitative 
easing is impotent, as demand will still be affected by the wealth effect from the higher asset 
prices, as well as by any related exchange rate depreciation. But I think there are reasons to 
believe  the  effect  of  lower  yields  may  be  weaker  than  usual  at the current juncture (in  old 
speak, the IS curve may be quite steep, even though the LM curve may not be absolutely 
flat). 
The weakness of the recovery has led some people to suggest that we could increase the 
effectiveness of quantitative easing by directing the money used to buy  the gilts to buying 
private sector assets instead, or else to inject purchasing power more directly by passing it 
directly  to  households  in  the  manner  of  Friedman’s  famous  helicopter.  Such  options  can 
always be split into two legs: a fiscal leg, involving some bond-financed public expenditure 
and which ought to be subject to the control of the Chancellor and the Treasury; followed by 
a second monetary, or financing, leg in which the Bank buys the corresponding quantity of 
government debt on the secondary market and is just conventional quantitative easing. 
Viewing  it  this  way  is,  I  believe,  helpful  as  it  allows  one  to  focus  on  the  merits  of  the 
alternative  use  to  which  the  funds  are  put.  For  instance,  the  easiest  way  to  implement  a 
“helicopter  drop”  would  be 
life 
cycle/permanent income model of consumption behaviour suggests that one should expect 
the vast majority of such a temporary windfall to be saved rather than spent. It certainly is not 
the  obvious  way  to  try  to  boost  demand,  unless  one  can  direct  the  additional  income  to 
credit-constrained consumers who are more likely to spend it. In any case, the design of any 
fiscal  intervention  does  not  need  to  be  tied  to  the  question  of  how  the  financing  is  split 
between money and bonds. 
This  leads  naturally  to  a  related  question  which  has  been  the  object  of  recent  press 
commentary, namely should the Bank’s holdings of gilts just be cancelled? The idea is that 
this would relieve the Government of having to levy the taxes to pay both the coupons on the 
gilts and the principal when it falls due. Government debt would fall at a stroke of the pen, 
apparently relieving the future burden on the taxpayer. 
Unfortunately this is not as good an idea as it sounds. Cancelling the gilts would deprive the 
Bank of the assets it needs to sell back to the market in order to suck the bank reserves out 
temporarily.  But 
tax  allowances 
increase 
the 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
when the time comes to unwind the policy. It would also deprive the Bank of the wherewithal 
to pay the interest on the reserves in the meantime, so we would need either to keep Bank 
Rate perpetually at zero or else be willing to continue issuing additional reserves indefinitely 
in  order  to  meet  our  obligations.  One  can  easily  see  how  this  would  eventually  lead  to 
inflation taking off.4 
In any case, it is not really clear why one would want to go down the route of cancelling the 
gilts.  In  undertaking  quantitative  easing,  we  are,  for  a  period,  replacing  part  of  the 
government  gilt  stock  with  a  monetary  liability  paying  Bank  Rate;  cancelling  the  gilts  is 
tantamount  to  making  that  period  indefinite.  In  contrast,  under  present  arrangements,  how 
long that period lasts will depend on macroeconomic conditions. The inflation target dictates 
that we should continue to buy gilts (or other assets), including reinvesting maturing gilts, so 
long as inflation is more likely than not to undershoot the inflation target in the medium term. 
And  it  also  dictates  that  we  should  sell  them  when  inflation  is  more  likely  than  not  to 
overshoot the target. Making gilt sales/purchases contingent on the economic environment 
must surely be the right way to set policy.5 
My first seven years at the Bank coincided with one of the most tranquil periods in British 
macroeconomic history. The past five years since the eruption of the global financial crisis 
have been anything but. It has been a challenging but humbling experience. We knew less 
than we thought. And we forgot some of the lessons of history. As a result of the crisis, we 
have 
in  unexpected  ways,  deploying 
unconventional  monetary  policies  in  alien  circumstances,  and  developing  a  whole  new 
lexicon  of  macroprudential  policies.  Although  it  will  be  some  time  before  the  post-crisis 
adjustment  is  complete,  normality  will  eventually  return.  Hopefully  we  will  then  be  in  a 
position  to  leave  our  successors  both  wiser  and  with  a  better  toolkit  to  deal  with  similar 
challenges in the future. Thank you for your time. 
found  ourselves  providing 
liquidity  support 
                                                
4  
It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Asset  Purchase  Facility,  the  vehicle  through  which  the  gilts  are 
purchased, is indemnified by the Treasury, while the Treasury will also receive any surplus that results from 
the  transactions.  Consequently  the  coupon  payments  on  the  gilts,  net  of  the  interest  on  the  bank  reserves 
used to purchase them, is ultimately owned by the Treasury; they are not “lost” to the taxpayer in any sense. 
5  Making the monetary financing permanent by cancelling the gilts independently of the economic environment 
is essentially a step towards a world of “fiscal dominance”, where fiscal policy constrains monetary policy and 
ultimately determines the price level, as in the classic work of Sargent and Wallace (1981). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 1: Total stock of UK debt by sector(a)
Ratio to nominal GDP
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Ratio to nominal GDP
2.4
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
Financial corporations (left-hand scale)
(b)
Non-financial companies (right-hand scale)
Households (right-hand scale)
0
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
0.0
(a) Includes deposits, bonds and loans but excludes derivatives.
(b) Includes monetary financial institutions, other financial intermediaries and financial auxiliaries, and insurance corporations and pension funds.
Chart 2: Capital and leverage ratios of major global banks(a)
Chart 2a: Risk-based capital ratios, end-2006
Per cent
16
Surviving banks
Failed banks
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Chart 2b: Leverage ratios, end-2006(b)
Surviving banks
Failed banks
Per cent
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Sources: Capital IQ, SNL, published accounts, Laeven and Valencia (2010) and  Bank calculations.
(a) The classification of bank distress is based on Laeven & Valencia (2010), updated to reflect failure or government intervention since 
August 2009.
(b) Total assets have been adjusted on a best-efforts basis to achieve comparability between institutions reporting under US GAAP and IFRS. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Chart 3: Output losses relative to trend after financial crises(a)
Interquartile range-past episodes
Total range - past episodes
Mean
0
1
2
3
4
5
Years from start of crisis
Per cent
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
6
7
8
Sources: IMF and OECD.
(a)  The episodes examined are taken from IMF (2009).
Chart 4: Real consumption of high and low debt households(a)
Cumulative percentage change in 
real consumption since 2005
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
High income/high debt
High income/low debt
Low income/high debt
Low income/low debt
Average
2006
2005
Source: Living Costs and Food Survey.
(a) ‘High income’ households are those in the top 50% of the income distribution.  ‘High debt’ households are 
those with a debt-to-income ratio at or above three.
2007
2008
2009
2010
-20
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 5: UK banks’ indicative long-term funding spreads
Percentage points
4
Senior unsecured spread(a)
Five-year CDS premia(b)
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
3
2
1
0
Sources: Bloomberg, Markit Group Limited, Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) Unweighted average of the spread between euro-denominated senior unsecured bonds and equivalent maturity swap rates for bonds issued 
by the major UK lenders, which have a residual maturity of between two and six years.
(b) Unweighted average of the 5-year CDS premia for the major UK lenders: an indicator of the spread on long-term wholesale bonds.
Chart 6: Central bank balance sheets(a)
Indices: Jan uary 2007 = 100
Federal Reserve
Eurosystem
Bank of England
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Source: Bloomberg.
(a) In local currency.
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Chart 7: Sterling corporate bond yields
Per cent
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
QE1
QE2
Investment grade, non-financial
(left-hand scale)
High yield 
(right-hand scale)
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Source: Bank of America/Merrill Lynch.
Per cent
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Chart 8: International equity prices(a)
Indices: 4 January 2007 = 100
QE1
QE2
Euro Stoxx
S&P 500
FTSE All-Share
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
(a) In local currency terms.
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Chart 9: Constraints on investment spending(a)
Percentages of respondents 
Recessions
Uncertainty about demand
Inability to raise external finance
Cost of finance
Internal finance shortage
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Sources: CBI, CBI/PwC and ONS.
(a) Manufacturing, financial services and consumer/business services surveys weighted by shares in real business investment.  
Companies are asked for factors likely to limit capital expenditure authorisations over the next twelve months.  Financial 
service companies are not asked to distinguish between a shortage of internal finance and an inability to raise external finance, 
so their single response is used for both questions.
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
References 
Aiyar, S, Calomiris, C and Wieladek, T (2012) “Does macropru leak? Evidence from a UK 
policy experiment” Bank of England Working Paper No. 445. 
Bean, C (2003) “Asset prices, financial imbalances and monetary policy: are inflation targets 
enough?”  in  A  Richards  and  T  Robinson  (eds.) Asset  Prices  and  Monetary  Policy,  48–76. 
Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney. 
Bean, C (2010) “The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction”, Journal 
of the European Economic Association, April–May. 
Bean, C, Paustian, M, Penalver, A and Taylor, T (2011) “Monetary Policy after the Fall”, in 
Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Broadbent, B (2012) “Deconstruction”, Speech given at Lancaster University Management 
School. 
Dixit, A and Pindyck, R (1994) Investment under Uncertainty, Princeton University Press. 
Eggertsson, G and Woodford, M (2003) “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal 
Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1. 
Gagnon, J, Raskin, M, Remache, J and Sack, B (2011) “The Financial Market Effects of 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchases”,  International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking, 7(1). 
Greenspan,  A  (2002)  “Opening  Remarks”  in  Rethinking  Stabilization  Policy,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Haldane,  A  and  Madouros,  V  (2012)  “The  dog  and  the  frisbee”,  Speech  given  at  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 36th economic policy symposium. 
HM  Treasury  (2012)  “The  Financial  Services  Bill:  the  Financial  Policy  Committee’s 
at  www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/condoc_fpc_tools_ 
macro-prudential 
180912.pdf. 
IMF (2009) World Economic Outlook April 2009. 
Joyce, M, Tong, M and Woods, R (2011) “The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: 
design, operation and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 51(3). 
Koo, R (2003) Balance Sheet Recession: Japan’s Struggle with Uncharted Economics and 
its Global Implications, John Wiley & Sons. 
Laeven, L and Valencia, F (2010) “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad and 
the Ugly”, IMF Working Paper, 10/146. 
Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010) “Final Report: Assessing the macroeconomic 
impact of the transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements”. Bank for International 
Settlements. 
Reinhart,  C  and  Rogoff,  K  (2009)  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises”,  NBER  Working 
Paper 14656. 
Sargent,  T  and  Wallace,  N  (1981)  “Some  unpleasant  monetarist  arithmetic”,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5.  
White, W R (2006) “Is price stability enough?”, Bank for International Settlements Working 
Paper 205. 
Wilson,  J  S  G  (1966)  Monetary  Policy  and  the  Development  of  Money  Markets,  Allen  & 
Unwin. 
available 
tools”, 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
