Benoît Cœuré: SME financing – a euro area perspective  
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Conference on Small Business Financing, jointly organised by the European Central 
Bank, Kelley School of Business at Indiana University, Centre for Economic Policy Research 
and Review of Finance, Frankfurt am Main, 13 December 2012. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1 
It is a pleasure to welcome you to the conference on “Small Business Financing” organised 
jointly by the European Central Bank, the Kelley School of Business at Indiana University, 
the Centre for Economic Policy Research and the Review of Finance. 
At the ECB, we regard small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) as a crucial component 
of the euro area economy. Indeed, our deliberations on monetary policy systematically take 
into  account  the  financial  health  of,  and  the  growth  prospects  for,  euro  area  SMEs.  In 
particular,  the  financing  environment  and  access  to  finance  for  euro  area  corporates  are 
important  elements  in  our  policy-making  process,  both  for  standard  and  non-standard 
monetary policy decisions. 
To illustrate the importance of small businesses in the euro area, consider the following facts: 
SMEs constitute about 99% of all euro area firms, they employ around three-quarters of euro 
area’s employees, and they generate around 60% of value added. At the same time, unlike 
large  firms  which  are  generally  more  profitable  and  have  access  to  alternative  sources  of 
finance,  such  as  bond  or  equity  finance,  SMEs  are  highly  dependent  on  bank  loans  and 
credit lines. Due to asymmetric information and a higher risk of failure2, SMEs tend to face 
higher  costs  for  bank  finance  and  higher  rejection  rates  than  larger  firms.  While  finding 
customers  –  potentially  due  to  weak  aggregate  demand  –  is  usually  cited  as  a  bigger 
problem  for  SMEs  than  access  to  finance,  it  is  still  the  case  that  they  are  particularly 
vulnerable  to  adverse  real-financial  feedback  loops  or  supply  disruption  in  the  provision  of 
bank credit. 
Nevertheless, the years prior to the financial crisis were a period of smooth transmission of 
monetary policy, and there was little evidence that euro area SMEs were constrained over 
and above levels expected in the context of a sound financial system. 
After mid-2007, however, the costs of finance started to rise and access to finance started to 
deteriorate relative to the pre-crisis period. In some euro area jurisdictions, the financial crisis 
first  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  later  led  to  a  reduction  of  the  supply  of  credit  to  both 
households  and  corporates.  In  particular,  rejection  rates  and  rates  on  granted  loans 
increased, and so did the share of firms citing access to finance as their dominant concern. 
On  average,  loans  extended  to  non-financial  corporations  and  households  have  declined 
more  than  during  previous  crises,  mainly  because  bank  funding  shocks  have  been  larger 
than in the past (Chart 1). The ECB has strived to alleviate funding stress by reducing policy 
rates, as well as by implementing non-standard monetary policy measures to provide liquidity 
to the banking system, where acute stress has occurred. This has also helped to mitigate the 
                                                 
1 
I  wish  to  thank  Alex  Popov  for  his  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
2  Small firms as a rule do not enter into publicly visible contracts with employees, suppliers, or customers, do 
not  issue  securities  that  are  continuously  priced  in  public  markets,  and  do  not  have  audited  financial 
statements. In addition, about a quarter of new small businesses disappear within two years, and more than 
half  disappear  within  four  years.  See:  Berger,  A.,  and  G.  Udell,  2012.  The  economics  of  small  business 
finance:  The  roles  of  private  equity  and  debt  markets  in  the  financial  growth  cycle.  Journal  of  Banking 
& Finance 22, 613–673. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
risks of disorderly bank deleveraging and to ensure adequate credit supply conditions in the 
euro  area. Since  2010,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  aggravated  the  funding  conditions  of 
euro area corporates and SMEs in particular, both by hurting their growth prospects and by 
forcing banks exposed to the sovereign debt of a number of euro area countries to rebalance 
their loan portfolios. By the same token, it is reasonable to argue that by counteracting undue 
risk premia on government bonds, the ECB’s non-standard measures,  such as the OMTs, 
will contribute to restoring access to finance for the private sector. 
Let  me  first  talk  about  the  financial  situation  of  euro  area  SMEs.  Before  the  crisis,  survey 
evidence  indicated  that  the  main  source  of  SME  finance  was  retained  earnings  (around 
two-thirds). 10% was in the form of trade credit from suppliers or customers, and around 10% 
from  external  non-bank  sources.  About  15%  of  SMEs’  capital  investment  and  operating 
expenses were financed with bank loans and credit lines. This average dependence on bank 
financing was as low as 8% in Portugal and as high as 22% in Ireland3, indicating that small 
businesses relied substantially on the smooth functioning of the euro area’s banking sector.  
At the same time, there was a strong increase in credit growth in the euro area following a 
persistent easing of bank lending standards. According to the ECB’s Bank Lending Survey, 
euro area banks steadily relaxed their credit standards for loans or credit lines to enterprises 
during all but two quarters between Q2 2004 and Q3 2007. While the situation was broadly 
similar with respect to housing loans and consumer credit, which contributed to the build-up 
of  housing  bubbles  in  several  euro  area  Member  States,  the  corporate  sector  was  still  a 
substantial  recipient  of  an  overall  euro  area  credit  expansion.  One  of  the  adverse 
consequences  of  this  credit  expansion  was  that  the  euro  area  corporate  sector  had 
accumulated,  on  the  eve  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  considerably  higher  leverage  than 
during the early 2000s (Chart 2). This effect was largely driven by micro and small firms, for 
which financial leverage increased from 0.14 in 2004 to 0.19 in 2007.4 
After August 2007, a sharp reversal of this process was observed. Credit standards on loans 
to  enterprises  tightened  by  on  average  46%  during  each  quarter  between  Q3  2007  and 
Q4 2008 (Chart 3). This process was accompanied by a rapid deleveraging by non-financial 
corporations. Nevertheless, as late into the financial crisis as the second half of 2009, the 
ECB’s  Financial  Stability  Report  singled  out  euro  area  SMEs  as  particularly  vulnerable  to 
further adverse credit market developments, on account of their low profitability and relatively 
high leverage levels.  
The euro area sovereign debt crisis which started in the first half of 2010 and intensified in 
2011  further  contributed  to  the  already  restricted  access  to  bank  finance  by  the  euro  area 
corporates.  While  weakening  demand  resulting  from  deteriorating  growth  prospects  in  a 
number  of  euro  area  jurisdictions  certainly  played  a  role,  tensions  in  sovereign  markets 
affected  the  supply  of  bank  credit  as  well.  Because  potential  losses  on  sovereign  debt 
securities have a direct negative effect on the asset side of the banks’ balance sheets and 
also affect their ability to pledge collateral to secure wholesale funding, the sovereign debt 
crisis  effectively  raised  bank  funding  costs.  To  the  degree  that  higher  bank  funding  costs 
force  banks  to  shrink  and  rebalance  their  loan  portfolio,  there  should  be  a  negative 
relationship between the riskiness of sovereign debt holdings and bank credit supply.  
Recent evidence supports the view that the sovereign debt crisis has had a negative impact 
on  the  supply  of  bank  credit.  For  example,  since  early  2010,  banks  exposed  to  foreign 
sovereign  debt  under  stress  have  been  lending  substantially  less  on  the  syndicated  loan 
market than otherwise similar banks with negligible exposure to foreign sovereign debt under 
stress  (Chart  4).  This  overall  reduction  in  lending  is  not  driven  by  changes  in  borrowers’ 
                                                 
3  See  the  2004  Business  Environment  and  Enterprise  Performance  Survey  by  the  World  Bank  and  the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
4  Financial leverage is defined as the ratio of the sum of debt securities and bank loans to total assets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
demand  and/or  quality  or  by  other  types  of  concurrent  balance  sheet  shocks.  Part  of  the 
effect  is  due  to  the  fact  that  investors  update  their  views  on  the  capacity  of  the  domestic 
sovereign to support the banking system (the bailout channel). In addition to that, syndicated 
lending in the countries that have experienced the highest sovereign debt stress has been 
rebalanced away from domestic lending, reflecting deteriorating profit opportunities at home. 
This is markedly different from the “flight home” effect observed during the 2008–09 financial 
crisis.5 
Syndicated lending, however, targets large non-financial corporations and so studies based 
on such data do not easily lend themselves to conclusions on the effects of the sovereign 
debt  crisis  on  SME  access  to  finance.  Moreover,  large  public  firms  routinely  substitute 
corporate  debt  for  bank  loans,  especially  during  financial  crises,6  a  shock-absorbing 
mechanism  that  is  not  available  to  SMEs.  A  simple  comparison  between  very  small  loans 
(typically to SMEs) and very large loans (typically to large corporations) shows a substantial 
divergence  across  euro  area  jurisdictions  which  has  worsened  since  the  beginning  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis (Chart 5). More detailed information on SME access to finance can also 
be extracted from the ECB’s biannual survey on access to finance of SMEs in the euro area 
(SAFE). The survey suggests that the number of firms citing access to finance as the biggest 
problem they face has increased from less than 15% in the first half of 2010 to 18% in the 
first  half  of  2012  (Chart  6).  At  the  same  time,  firms  do  not  report  an  increase  in  financing 
needs (Chart 7), implying that loan supply factors dominate. 
While this picture is purely descriptive, the SAFE also contains detailed firm-level information 
that allows us to calculate a component of credit constraints which is independent of agency 
problems.  Preliminary  analysis  suggests  that  in  2010  and  2011,  firms  in  countries  whose 
sovereign debt was under stress faced on average a 20% higher probability of being credit 
constrained7 than identical German SMEs. When decomposing the country-level effect into 
effects due to aggregate demand, credit risk, funding costs and the business cycle, the real 
interest rate that firms have to pay for credit stands out as the factor explaining the largest 
share  of  the  cross-country  variation  in  credit  constraints.  Such  an  analysis  based  on  our 
survey  on  SME  finance  indeed  suggests  that  for  each  100  basis  points  by  which  lending 
rates decline, access to finance for euro area SMEs will improve by about 9%. 
Emerging case studies also support the view that, by weighing on bank balance sheets, the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  has  led  banks  to  tighten  credit  supply.  For  example,  micro  evidence 
from bank lending to SMEs in Italy suggests that since the start of tensions in sovereign debt 
markets, lending by banks exposed to sovereign debt has grown by 3 percentage points less 
than lending by unexposed banks, and that the interest rate they charge has been between 
15  and  20  basis  points  higher.  These  effects  are  stronger  for  banks  relying  on  domestic 
interbank funding.8 
The  Bank  Lending  Survey  by  the  ECB  is  another  source  of  information  on  realised  bank 
lending  standards  to  SMEs.  According  to  the  survey,  after  a  period  of  rapid  tightening, 
lending standards across the euro area had stabilised by the end of 2009 and the beginning 
of 2010. However, starting in the second quarter of 2010 credit standards started tightening 
                                                 
5  Popov, A., and van Horen, N., 2012. The impact of sovereign debt exposure on bank lending: Evidence from 
the European debt crisis. ECB mimeo. 
6  For  evidence  from  the  U.S.,  see  Ivashina,  V.,  and  B.  Becker,  2011,  Cyclicality  of  credit  supply:  Firm  level 
evidence, Harvard Business School Working paper 10-107. For evidence from the euro area, see De Fiore, F., 
and H. Uhlig, 2011, Bank finance versus bond finance, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 43, 1399–1421. 
7  A credit-constrained firm is a firm which a) is rejected when applying for a loan, b) receives less than 75% of 
the desired  loan amount, or c) is discouraged from applying because  it believes its loan application  will be 
rejected. 
8  Bofondi, M., Carpinelli, L., and E. Sette, 2012. Credit supply during a sovereign crisis. Bank of Italy mimeo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
again, and in December 2011 overall euro area lending standards to SMEs were twice as 
restrictive  as  two  years  earlier.  This  aggregate  development  hides  important  cross-country 
heterogeneity: for example, over the same period banks in Germany have actually loosened 
lending standards. 
This combined evidence implies that, since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, credit 
supply in the euro area has become segmented. In most countries whose banking sectors 
are  insulated  from  tensions  in  sovereign  debt  markets,  access  to  bank  credit  has  not 
decreased  much  and  credit  standards  have  not  tightened  more  than  what  is  typically 
observed  during  this  phase  of  the  business  cycle.  Conversely,  in  countries  where  the 
banking  sector  has  experienced  large  balance  sheet  shocks  related  to  deteriorating 
sovereign debt, access to bank credit has tightened substantially. Elevated premia in such 
market  segments  have  in  turn  had  repercussions  on  access  to  finance  for  corporates  in 
general  and  for  SMEs  in  particular.  While  growth  prospects  have  deteriorated  too,  and 
consequently  weak  aggregate  demand  may  be  the  dominant  problem  faced  by  euro  area 
SMEs right now, impaired access to finance by the corporate sector in a number of euro area 
countries is clearly a problem that cannot be neglected and will come to the forefront when 
aggregate demand recovers. 
Recognising that the sovereign debt crisis has impaired the smooth transmission of monetary 
policy,  the  ECB  has  responded  vigorously.  First,  it  has  significantly  eased  the  monetary 
policy stance. In July of this year, the ECB cut the main policy rate to 0.75%, the lowest in its 
history, and reduced the interest rate on its deposit facility to zero, in an attempt to reduce 
general market interest rates and to stimulate interbank lending. The ultimate aim of these 
actions is to restore the smooth provision of credit to euro area corporates and households. 
In addition to that, the ECB has embarked on a number of non-standard measures: long-term 
liquidity  provision  up  to  three  years,  enlargement  of  the  collateral  set  to  be  used  in 
refinancing  operations,  direct  intervention  in  the  secondary  market  for  government  bonds 
with the SMP programme, and more recently the announcement of the OMTs. The objective 
of  all  these  measures  has  been  to  help  restore  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and 
address emerging heterogeneity by relaxing the balance sheet constraints of lenders (banks) 
and borrowers (firms and households). In this context, the Eurosystem has supported euro 
area  SMEs  both  directly  and  indirectly,  by  allowing  banks  to  pledge  corporate  loans  as 
collateral  with  the  Eurosystem.  The  goal  is  to ensure  that firms,  and  especially  SMEs,  will 
receive  credit  as  effectively  as  possible  under  the  current  circumstances.  At  present,  the 
ECB holds on its balance sheet approximately €35 billion worth of ABSs with underlying SME 
assets, and approximately €60 billion worth of NFC credit claims. 
Importantly, even though the policy rate is the same for all EA member states, non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  have  benefited  banks  in  jurisdictions  which  have  been  most 
severely  hit  by  the  crisis.  In  this  sense,  the  non-standard  measures  of  the  ECB  have 
addressed the different funding and stress conditions of the banking system in the euro area. 
Liquidity  provisions,  in  particular,  have  helped  banks  to  avoid  disorderly  deleveraging  and 
have mitigated the decline of finance to the real economy. Research evidence suggests that 
liquidity policies, such as the fixed-rate full allotment (FRFA) and the longer-term refinancing 
operations (LTRO), have been associated with a significant economic effect, in that the level 
of  industrial  production  is  2%  higher  and  the  unemployment  rate  0.6%  lower  relative  to  a 
scenario with no such non-standard measures.9 It also confirmed the view that, by providing 
ample liquidity through the FRFA and the LTROs, the ECB has been able, throughout the 
financial crisis, to reduce the costs arising to banks from restricted access to private liquidity 
                                                 
9  Gianone, D., Lenza, M., Pill, H., and L. Reichlin, 2012. The ECB and the interbank market. Economic Journal 
122, F467–F486. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
funding and induce a softening of lending conditions, including to SMEs. This effect has been 
particularly strong in countries with weaker banking sectors.10 
Reactions  from  the  market  so  far  imply  that  the  ECB’s  measures  have  contributed  to 
alleviating  stress  in  sovereign  debt  markets.  The  mere  announcement  of  the  OMTs,  for 
example, has already helped to ease uncertainty in the system. The effect on confidence, a 
key factor for growth, has also been significant, and rightly so. Excessive government bond 
spreads have gone down, corporate bond and covered bond spreads have tightened. The 
latest Bank Lending Survey suggests that  the announcement of the OMTs seems to have 
mitigated the adverse impact of sovereign risk on banks’ funding substantially by enabling a 
number  of  banks  to  regain  market  access,  particularly  in  distressed  countries.  These 
developments are very important for the prospective financing of the real economy. 
Let  me  conclude.  Tensions  in  euro  area  sovereign  markets  brought  the  financial  system 
under stress at a time when it was stabilising in the wake of the global financial crisis. Both 
market and survey indicators suggest that these tensions have resulted in a deterioration of 
bank  lending,  in  particular  to  small  businesses.  Unconventional  monetary  policy  measures 
have so far contributed to mitigating funding stresses in the banking system and disordered 
deleverage. In turn, this has allowed firms and households to maintain access to finance. But 
the non-standard measures have also helped to remove uncertainty and restore confidence. 
The ECB will continue to pay particular attention to the situation of euro area SMEs when 
implementing  its  non-standard  measures.  Nevertheless,  all  actions  from  central  banks, 
although crucial for alleviating frictions and dysfunctionalities in financial intermediation and 
the  transmission  mechanism,  and  also  for  guaranteeing  financial  stability  and  the  sheer 
survival  of  the  system,  cannot  replace  reforms  in  individual  euro  area  countries  aimed  at 
reducing  fiscal  and  external  imbalances  and  creating  an  innovative  and  competitive 
economic environment. Only such reforms can foster sustainable growth and employment in 
the future. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
10  Ciccarelli,  M.,  Maddaloni,  A.,  and  J.-L.  Peydró,  2012.  Heterogeneous  transmission  mechanism:  Monetary 
policy and financial fragility in the euro area. Economic Policy forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Real loan growth, current crisis vs. previous crises 
Chart 1 
Source: DG-E/MP/CMT internal calculations. 
Note: ‘“Big five” crises’ refers to the financial crises in Spain (1977), Norway (1987), Finland 
(1991), Sweden (1991), and Japan (1992), where the starting year is in parenthesis.  
 Chart 2 
Leverage of euro area NFCs 
Sources:  Bureau  van  Dijk  AMADEUS  database  and  DG-E/MP/CMT 
calculations.  
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 
Bank lending standards in the euro area 
Source: ECB’s Bank Lending Survey. 
Chart 4 
Impact of stressed foreign sovereign debt exposure on  
bank syndicated lending 
  Source: Popov and Van Horen, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Spread between lending rates on very small and large loans 
Chart 5 
 
Source: ECB and MIR database. Very small loans are loans of up to €0.25 million, large 
loans are those above €1 million.  
Chart 6 
The most pressing problem faced by euro area SMEs  
(percentage of respondents) 
Source: SAFE. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 7 
Change in external financing needs of euro area SMEs  
over the preceding six months 
Source: SAFE. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
