Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Corporate governance and banking 
regulation in Uganda 
Address by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, to the KCB 
Bank of Board of Directors Retreat, Kampala, 2 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good corporate governance has become increasingly recognised worldwide as essential for 
the efficient functioning of market economies and to ensure that they function in the interests 
of  the  wider  society,  and  not  just  those  with  power  and  wealth.  The  focus  of  corporate 
governance is the manner in which the business and operation of a firm is governed by its 
board of directors and senior management.  
At the core of corporate governance is the relationship between what are often termed the 
“insiders” of firms – dominant shareholders and senior managers – and the “outsiders” who 
include small shareholders, the creditors of the firm, its employees and customers and the 
general public. A key objective of corporate governance is to ensure that the insiders who 
control the management of a firm do not abuse their control and act in a manner which is 
detrimental to the interests of outsiders.  
Good  corporate  governance  is  even  more  important  for  banks  than  it  is  for  non  financial 
firms, for two key reasons. The first is the much greater inherent opacity of the balance sheet 
of banks; it is difficult for outsiders to evaluate the quality of the assets which a bank holds 
and,  therefore,  its  true  financial  position.  Secondly,  the  potential  negative  externalities  of 
bank  failures  are  very  damaging  for  the  economy  and  for  society,  as  was  demonstrated 
vividly by the global financial crisis.  
Corporate  governance  in  banking  has  certain  features  which  distinguish  it  from  corporate 
governance in non financial firms. This is because of the unique characteristics of banks, in 
particular the fact they are very heavily leveraged and that most of their liabilities are owed to 
a large number of atomised depositors who have the most to lose from abusive or negligent 
management. Consequently, a priority of corporate governance in banking is the protection 
of  the  interests  of  depositors.  In  addition,  the  corporate  governance  of  banks  attaches 
particular importance to the veracity of financial information.  
Bank failures in Uganda and the reform of bank regulation 
2. 
In the 1990s and early 2000s, Uganda’s banking industry suffered a number of bank failures. 
Eight banks failed, forcing the Bank of Uganda (BOU) to intervene and resolve them; in some 
cases  the failed  banks were  closed,  in  others they  were  sold  to  new  owners.  The  primary 
cause of most of these bank failures was poor corporate governance. In many of the failed 
banks, a dominant shareholder or group of shareholders was able to exert undue influence 
over  the  management  of  the  bank  which  resulted  in  abuses  such  as  pervasive  insider 
lending. The losses incurred on insider loans were the single most important contributor to 
the collapse of these banks. The Kenyan banking industry was also afflicted by multiple bank 
failures in the 1990s, with poor corporate governance playing a major role in these failures as 
it did in Uganda. Poor and abusive management was allowed to flourish in banks because 
their boards of directors were usually weak, lacking the professional expertise and often the 
independence and incentives to provide any effective oversight of bank management.  
The  bank  failures  of  the  1990s  prompted  the  BOU  and  the  Government  to  strengthen 
banking  regulation.  Parliament  enacted  new  legislation  in  2004  –  the  Financial  Institutions 
Act – which, inter alia, raised minimum bank capital requirements, tightened restrictions on 
insider  lending  and  mandated  the  BOU  to  intervene  promptly  in  failing  banks  before  their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
capital  is  completely  eroded  and  their  depositors  suffer  losses.  The  FIA  also  imposes  a 
ceiling of 49 percent on the share of a bank’s equity which a single shareholder, or a group of 
related  shareholders,  can  hold,  in  order  to  limit  the  influence  of  dominant  shareholders, 
although this ceiling does not apply to shareholdings by reputable parent banks domiciled in 
other jurisdictions with good home country bank regulation.  
But  we  also  recognised  that  statutory  bank  regulation  and  supervision  by  a  public  agency 
cannot be expected, on its own, to guarantee the sound management of banks. Moreover, 
excessively  heavy  handed  regulation,  although  it  might  protect  depositors,  can  also  stifle 
innovation and risk taking in banks, which would be detrimental to economic development. In 
a market economy, the onus for sound management, including the proper management of 
risks,  must  lie  with  the  banks  themselves.  Bank  regulators  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  bad 
bank  managers.  As  such  good  corporate  governance  is  an  essential  complement  to  good 
bank regulation and supervision.  
This  principle  was  made  explicit  in  the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  section  VII  of  which  was 
devoted  specifically  to  providing  a  regulatory  framework  for  good  corporate  governance  in 
financial institutions. The provisions in section VII of the FIA were supplemented by a set of 
corporate  governance  regulations  which  were  issued  by  the  BOU  in  2005.  Uganda’s 
corporate governance regulations were influenced by the guidelines published by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, based at the Bank for International Settlements, which is 
responsible for formulating global standards for bank regulation and governance.  
The corporate governance regulations in Uganda focus on four key themes:  
The fiduciary responsibilities of the Board of Directors;  
The importance of independent oversight of bank management;  
The priority which must be attached to risk management; and  
The need for independent audit functions.  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
I would like to elaborate briefly on each of these themes.  
The role of the Board of Directors 
3. 
Our corporate governance regulations place great emphasis on the fiduciary responsibilities 
which the Board of Directors owes to the bank, its depositors and shareholders and to the 
wider society. The Board collectively must take ultimate responsibility for the performance of 
the bank and for the manner in which it conducts its operations. The directors must lead from 
the top. They must set the strategic policies of the bank and establish its corporate values. 
They must also ensure that a bank’s policies prohibit corruption and conflicts of interest in the 
bank’s  operations.  An  important  function  of  the  Board  is  to  define  clearly  the  duties  and 
responsibilities of each member of the bank’s senior management.  
To  exercise  their  responsibilities,  the  directors  themselves  must  be  of  the  highest  integrity 
and  have  the  professional  expertise  necessary  to  understand  the  nature  of  a  banking 
operation and, in particular, how it differs from that of a non bank company, and what that 
means for the fiduciary responsibilities of the directors. Our regulations also stress that an 
individual  director  cannot  hide  behind  collective  board  responsibility.  Each  director  can  be 
held  individually  responsible  for  any  failings  of  the  bank.  He  or  she  has  a  responsibility  to 
report in writing to the bank regulator – the Bank of Uganda – if he or she has any reason to 
doubt that the bank may not be able to meet all of its obligations to its creditors or may not be 
able to operate as a going concern in the future.  
Independent oversight of bank management 
4. 
Uganda’s corporate governance regulations stipulate a clear demarcation of responsibilities 
between the Board of Directors and the bank management. This is a very important principle. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The Board must be able to exercise oversight of bank management and hold it to account, 
which will only be possible if most of the directors are independent of the bank management. 
This  principle  is  often  violated  in  the  corporate  world  in  this  region,  where  the  distinction 
between  the  respective  responsibilities  of  directors  and  management  is  sometimes  poorly 
understood.  To  ensure  that  the  Board  can  be  independent,  our  corporate  governance 
regulations stipulate that at least half of the directors of a bank, including the Chairperson of 
the  Board,  must  be  non  executive  directors.  The  non  executive  directors  should  not 
participate in any way in the day to day running of the bank.  
Risk management 
5. 
The Board of Directors must take the lead in formulating effective risk management policies 
and  procedures  and  in  monitoring  their  implementation  by  the  bank’s  management.  In 
particular  the  Board  must  ensure  the  bank  has  adequate  capital,  in  terms  of  both  its 
magnitude and quality, to maintain the safe operation of the bank.  
The  corporate  governance  regulations  require  Boards  of  Directors  to  establish  two  Board 
sub-committees for purposes of risk management; a Risk Management Committee and an 
Asset Liability Management Committee. The former is responsible for the general oversight 
of risk management in the bank, while the latter is responsible for setting specific guidelines 
to manage risk, such as single loan exposure limits and loan to capital ratios. The guidelines 
set by the Board or its sub committees must, of course, be consistent with the regulations in 
the FIA where applicable. For example, the Board may approve policies which would raise 
the bank’s capital above the minimum statutory capital requirements, but it cannot set capital 
requirements which are lower than the statutory minimum.  
Audit function 
6. 
Uganda’s banking regulations emphasise the importance of the role played by independent 
internal  and  external  auditors  in  ensuring  good  corporate  governance,  and  in  particular 
ensuring that the bank’s financial statements accurately and fairly reflect the its true financial 
position.  Each  bank  must  have  an  internal  auditor  who  is  independent  of  the  bank 
management and who reports to the audit committee of the Board. The duties of the internal 
auditor including evaluating the accuracy of financial information prepared by the bank’s 
accounting  and  computer  systems  and  monitoring  management’s  compliance  with  the 
policies and procedures of the bank.  
Boards of Directors must use the internal and external auditors as an independent check 
on the information that is provided by the management of the bank. I want to stress that 
the Board of Directors must approve the audited financial statements of the bank, before 
they  are  published;  hence  the  Directors  must  have  complete  confidence  in  the 
competence  and  independence  of  the  auditors  who  have  prepared  the  financial 
statements.  
Conclusions 
7. 
Banks perform a unique role in a modern market oriented economy. When banks work 
well  they  contribute  to  economic  growth  by  allocating  scarce  financial  resources 
efficiently  and  allowing  private  companies  and  individuals  to  undertake  productive 
investments which they could not fund fully from their own resources. When banks work 
badly,  which  is  not  uncommon,  the  damage  is  often  felt  throughout  the  economy;  by 
depositors, firms who need credit and taxpayers. The unique nature of banks provides 
the rationale for prudential regulation. But it is unrealistic to expect that bank regulation 
alone  can  guarantee  the  efficient  and  safe  operations  of  the  banking  system.  Good 
corporate governance is as equally important for sound and efficient bank management 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
as bank regulation. Corporate governance must start with the Board of Directors, setting 
the  overall  strategic  policies  of  the  bank  and  providing  independent  oversight  of  bank 
management.  In  particular,  the  directors  must  understand  clearly  their  fiduciary 
responsibilities.  They  must  ensure  that  the  bank’s  risk  management  is  adequate  to 
ensure its safe operation, so that depositors funds are protected and that the financial 
statements provided by the bank to the regulator and the public are accurate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
