Masaaki Shirakawa: International financial stability as a public good 
Keynote address by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a high-level 
seminar,  co-hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  Tokyo, 
14 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
Once again, it is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to Tokyo on the occasion of the 
annual IMF-World Bank Meetings. 
About two years ago, at the Per Jacobsson Lecture in Basel, my old and respected friend, 
the late Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, offered his insights on how to strengthen the governance 
of the rapidly integrating global economy. 1 Since then, the subject has  been in a corner of 
my  mind.  Today,  I  am  happy  to  co-host  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  a  high-level 
seminar devoted to that topic. 
Many of you here today probably heard Tommaso forcefully present his case, but for those 
members of the audience who were not on hand at that time, I would first like to offer you a 
brief  summary. Tommaso  observed  that  one  of  the  causes  of  the  Great  Financial  Crisis 
was  the  failure  of  national  governments  to  properly  rein  in  market  forces,  which  were  fast 
becoming  global  in  nature. He  saw  that  the  increase  in  cross-border  financial  activities 
required a corresponding increase in the provision of basic facilities or services – supporting 
or  facilitating  those  activities  –  including  prudent  regulation  and  supervision  from  a 
cross-border perspective. Nevertheless, the supply of such facilities or services was deficient 
or  lacking  because  national  governments  inherently  could  not  provide  for  them.  The 
solution, he argued, was to enhance supranational governance of the global economy. 
The Great Financial Crisis and the supply of global public goods 
I.  
As Tommaso and many others have pointed out, the Great Financial Crisis has exposed the 
naïve  simplicity  of  the  view  that,  if  the  economic  policies  of  individual  economies  are 
geared towards domestic economic stability, and private actors are allowed to operate freely 
in such an environment, the global economy would be all right. The painful realization is that 
the  self-correcting  power  of  the  market  goes  only  so  far.  Markets  must  sometimes  be 
nudged, pushed, or even forcefully shoved off their existing trajectory so as to prevent them 
from  running  into  disasters. In  order  to  function  properly,  markets  also  depend  on  things 
that  are  not  provided  spontaneously  by  themselves,  such  as  the  rule  of  law,  respect  for 
private  property,  and  the  safety  and  freedom  of  passage. “Public  goods”  is  the  name 
ascribed to these facilities or services in economics textbooks, and global public goods are 
those needed for the global economy to function properly. 
So,  what  are  the  global  public  goods  that  support  the  functioning  of  the  global  financial 
system? 
One  obvious  but  only  partial  answer  is  the  appropriate  regulation  and  supervision  of 
cross-border  financial  activities.  The  Great  Financial  Crisis  has  demonstrated  that  there 
were  many shortcomings  in  this  area,  and the international  community  has  taken  steps  to 
correct  them. Good  regulation  and  supervision  are  important,  but  by  themselves  are  not 
sufficient.  The  soundness  of 
is  one  building  block  of 
financial  stability.  In  this  sense,  the  international  public  good  supporting  global  financial 
individual  financial 
institutions 
                                                
1  Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso, "Markets and Government Before, During, and After the 2007–20XX Crisis," The 
Per Jacobsson Lecture in Basel, Switzerland, June 27, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
regulation  of 
financial  actors,  and  promoting 
markets is not provided  solely by regulators and supervisors. Various agents, including but 
not  limited  to  central  banks,  ministries,  and  regulatory  boards,  work  together  to  realize  a 
stable  international  financial  environment  through  conducting  prudent  monetary  policy, 
performing  effective 
robust  market 
infrastructures. 
By looking at international financial stability as a public good, we can apply a well-established 
microeconomic analytical framework to it. A public good is a good that is both non-rivalrous 
and non-excludable:  that  is,  one’s use  of a  public  good  does not  reduce the availability to 
others  and  one  cannot  effectively  prevent  the  use  by  others.  Consequently,  two  important 
features of public goods are that they will not be provided if left  solely  to  the  market,  and 
that  they  tend  to  be  consumed  excessively  when  they  are  provided  at  all.  The  latter 
insight  allows  us  to  interpret  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  as  being  the  consequence  of 
overconsumption  of  a  public  good  –  namely,  international  financial  stability.  Financial 
institutions  took  stability  for  granted  and  shouldered  excessive  risks. This  exaggerated  the 
impact  when  the  risks  were  manifested;  markets  could  not  regain stability by themselves 
and had to wait for interventions by the public sector, including the coordinated provision of 
liquidity by central banks. 
Providing global governance in a globalized world 
II.  
In  a  world  where  globalization  is  deepening,  and  where  national  financial  systems  are 
becoming  more  interconnected,  financial  stability  must  increasingly  be  achieved  at  the 
global  level.  To  make  this  happen,  good  governance  at  the  global  level  is  essential. 
Fortunately,  nobody  is  against  strengthening  global  governance  as  a  concept. Everyone 
instinctively  realizes  that  something  must  be  done  to  ensure  the  proper  functioning  of  the 
financial  system,  which  has  expanded  beyond  national  borders  and  has  become  global. 
Unfortunately, progress, though accelerated by the Great Financial Crisis, has still not been 
fast enough. 
Why is this the case? 
Professor  Dani  Rodrik  of  Harvard  University  has  offered  us  an  informative  perspective.2 
He  claims  that  hyperglobalization,  the  nation  state,  and  democratic  politics  cannot  be 
maintained  simultaneously. For  example,  in  recent  years,  the  advances  in  information  and 
communication  technologies  have  enabled  financial  institutions  to  expand  their  activities 
across  borders. As  we  have  seen  recently  in  Iceland  and  Ireland,  such  institutions  could 
get into trouble because of activities outside their home markets. When the government of 
the  home  market  attempts  to  bail  out  these  institutions  without  destabilizing  the  global 
financial  markets,  the  cost  could  be  so  huge  that  it  would  exceed  the  ability  of  the 
home-country  taxpayer  to  pay,  thereby  compromising  democracy.  If  we  wish  to  avoid  this 
outcome,  we  would  either have  to  opt  for  a  democratically elected  global  government  that 
could provide a global safety net, thus compromising the nation state, or opt to restrict the 
global  activities of financial  institutions to the extent manageable  by democratically elected 
national governments, thus compromising globalization. 
Of  the  three  potential  outcomes,  Professor  Rodrik  prefers  the  third  one,  calling  not  for 
hyperglobalization  but  “smart  globalization.”  Many  reasonable  people  would  probably 
agree. In  view  of  the  slow  and  limited  progress  in  strengthening  global  governance,  and 
without any meaningful prospect of acceleration, such a choice seems sensible. 
The problem, however, is that it may be difficult to restrain globalization effectively. The flip 
side  of  overconsumption  of  public  goods  is  insufficient  internalization  of  the  costs  for 
                                                
2   Rodrik, Dani, The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy, W. W. Norton 
& Company, February 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
providing  such  goods.  This  could  imply  that  profit  opportunities  arising  from  globalized 
financial activities may be sufficiently large such that there is a strong incentive to circumvent 
any  restrictions.  At  the  same  time,  the  advances  in  transportation,  and  in  information 
and  communications  technologies,  make  it  ever  easier  for  private  actors  to  dodge 
inconvenient  rules  and  regulations.  From  our  experience,  we  know  very  well  that  the 
ingenuity  of  the  private  sector  in  this  regard  should  never  be  underestimated.  We  all 
remember the Bretton Woods System, which was an attempt at smart globalization, and the 
collapse  of  this  system  offers  us  a  cautionary  tale. Furthermore,  in  a  world  where  public 
and private actors taking part in economic activity are becoming ever more diverse, it would 
be  quite  a  challenge  to  agree  on  what  is  desirable  globalization  and  what  is  not. If,  in 
despair, unilateral action, such as trade bans, mandatory domestic incorporation, or forced 
repatriation, is taken, everybody would become worse off. 
Is there a way out of this predicament? 
If  the  objective  of  global  governance  is  to  secure  global  financial  stability,  and  if  global 
financial stability is a public good, global governance can be analyzed as a microeconomic 
problem  regarding  public  goods.  There  are  well-known  options  to  solving  the  problems 
posed  by  public  goods. The  most  straightforward  is  to  have  the  public  sector  provide  the 
public  goods.  Alternatively,  rules  could  be  established  regarding the consumption  of  public 
goods.  Another  option  is  to  tax  the  consumption  of  public  goods  or  subsidize  the 
production  thereof. There  are  still  other  options,  such  as  changing  the  public  character  of 
the goods by increasing their exclusivity. Not all may be applicable to international financial 
stability, and some may be more easily implemented than others. 
In  view  of  the  discussions  during  various  international  fora  in  which  I  have  participated,  I 
have a feeling that we are making it more difficult for ourselves by opting for the seemingly 
most  obvious  option  –  tasking  the  public  sector  with  providing  international  financial 
stability.  As  Tommaso  observed,  there  is  a  limit  to  what  individual  nation  states  can 
provide as global public goods. A coherent set of public goods provided by a single global 
public  entity  would  be  desirable,  but  there  is  no  workable  way  of  introducing  such  an 
arrangement consistent  with our democratic principles. International organizations are often 
criticized for deficits in democratic accountability. On the other hand, a democratically elected 
world  government  with  the  power  to  tax  is  unthinkable  in  the  near  future.  The  current 
situation in the euro area is an example of this intractable problem. 
We therefore should aim for a more practical approach, combining various options that  are 
known for solving the public good problem. Some public goods, such as effective supervision 
of  globally  important  financial  institutions,  could  be  provided  at  the  national  level. 
Supranational institutions could be asked to take on specific tasks, such as monitoring  global 
financial  developments  and 
risks,  without  undermining 
democratic  principles.  Private  actors  could  be  made  to  follow  certain  rules,  such  as  the 
Basel rules on capital adequacy, which are in fact rules regulating the consumption  of  global 
financial  stability.  It  may  even  be  possible  to  devise  ways  to  influence  the  behavior  of 
these  actors  through  taxes  and  subsidies. For  example,  capital adequacy  standards  could 
also  be  seen  in  this  light,  considering  that  they  would  increase  costs  of  engaging  in 
riskier  behavior.  Some  might  even  argue  for  financial  transaction  taxes  as  an  option, 
though  I  do  not  believe  that  benefits  would  outweigh  the  costs,  such  as  their  impact  on 
market  liquidity.  In  any  case,  we  must  be  willing  to  adopt  a  flexible  and  multi-tracked 
approach to global governance, which should be more adaptable to and consistent with the 
increasingly diverse global landscape. 
identifying  macroprudential 
Global governance and central banks 
III.  
Turning  to  what  central  banks  could  do  in  the  context  of  global  governance,  they  are 
without doubt important actors given their role in monetary, prudential, and payment systems 
policies.  Stable  and  sustainable  growth  in  individual  economies,  which  is  the  ultimate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
objective of central bank policies, is an important building block of a stable global financial 
environment. In times of emergency, as we have seen during the Great Financial Crisis,  the 
coordinated  provision  of  liquidity  by  central  banks  plays  an  important  role  in maintaining 
financial  stability. Central  banks  are  deeply  involved  in  international  rule making as well.  
At  the  same  time,  a  central  bank  is  constrained  by  its  mandate,  which  is  granted  by  the 
nation  state  (or  nation  states  in  the  case  of  the  European  Central  Bank). While  it  is 
independent  of the national  government,  its  actions must  be  accountable,  ultimately to  the 
people  of  the  nation. The  central  bank  must  be  conscious  of  the  legitimacy  of  its  actions. 
Nevertheless, if this prevents it from thinking outside the box, when that is necessitated by a 
changing  economic  environment,  a  good  outcome  cannot  be  ensured. The  gradual  and 
sometimes  spontaneous  evolution  of  central  banking  since  the  middle  of  the  19th  century 
underscores this point. One issue that immediately comes to my mind in this regard is the 
international  spillover  and  feedback  effects  of  monetary  policy.  Global  financial  stability 
would be elusive if these effects were not sufficiently internalized. 
Concluding remarks 
Every  so  often,  we  are  tempted  to  say  that  big  problems  need  big  solutions. The  reality, 
however,  is  that  the  best  big  solution  turns  out  to  be  an  aggregate  of  small  steps. Global 
problems,  therefore,  require  global  solutions,  but  such  solutions  can  be  broken  down  into 
more manageable parts. I hope that all of you find today’s seminar to be such a small but 
important step forward. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
