Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Future of central bank cooperation in Asia, Latin 
America and Caribbean States 
Remarks  by  Mr  Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
BOJ-CEMLA Seminar on Regional Financial Cooperation, Tokyo, 11 October 2012. 
 Introduction: central bank cooperation in Asia 
1. 
Good  morning,  honorable  speakers  and  distinguished  guests.  Welcome  to  the  Annual 
Meetings  of  the IMF/World  Bank  Group,  and  in  particular, to  this  BOJ/CEMLA  seminar  on 
regional financial cooperation, which is one of the most relevant and pressing issues in our 
increasingly inter-connected world. Today, in my remarks, I would first like to touch upon the 
history of cooperation among central banks in Asia, followed by an assessment of what has 
been achieved since the Asian Currency Crisis of the late 1990s, and how this helped Asia 
weather  the  shocks  of the  current global financial  crisis. Then I  will  discuss  the  issues  we 
face today in this post-crisis world. 
The Bank for International Settlement, the BIS, is the first name that comes to mind when 
considering  cooperation  among  central  banks.  The  BIS  provides  opportunities  for  major 
central banks to discuss various issues, including international banking standards and global 
financial stability.1 However, most Asian central banks had to wait until the latter half of the 
1990s to become directly involved in BIS activities.  
It  was  this  circumstance  that  led  the  Bank  of  Japan  to  propose  the  establishment  of  the 
Executives’  Meetings  of  East  Asia  and  Pacific  Central  Banks,  or  the  EMEAP,  which  was 
officially  established  in  1991  with  the  members  of  eleven  economies  of  East  Asia  and 
Oceania.2  The  EMEAP  plays  a  particularly  important  role  in  promoting  the  exchange  of 
opinions among practitioners and the maintenance of a surveillance network. Member central 
banks  share  information  at  the  working  group  meetings  which  cover  financial  markets, 
banking supervision, payment and settlement systems, and information technology. To take 
a prominent example, the Working Group on Payment and Settlement Systems (WG/PSS) 
regularly  updates  its  “Red  Book”,  using  methods  similar  to  those  adopted  by  the  BIS,  to 
explain details of the payment and settlement systems of the member economies. Currently, 
the  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (WG/FM)  is  closely  monitoring  the  impact  of  the 
European sovereign debt crisis upon financial markets in Asia and Oceania. 
Two financial crises and Asian financial markets 
2. 
In the past two decades, member economies of the EMEAP have experienced two financial 
crises:  the  Asian  Currency  Crisis  of  the  late  1990s,  and  the  current  global  financial  crisis. 
However, the impact of these crises was very different: severe in the former, and relatively 
mild in the latter. I believe the difference is partly due to the enhanced cooperation among 
the central banks of the EMEAP member economies. 
                                                
1  The  BIS  provides  secretariat  services  to  various  committees  and  high-level  meetings  of  central  banks  and 
supervisory authorities such as the Financial Services Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 
the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, and the Committee on the Global Financial System. The 
BIS also functions as the study and research center for global finance and economics. 
2  The primary objective of the EMEAP resembles that of the BIS. It is to strengthen the cooperative relationship 
among its members. The EMEAP started as the regular meetings for the Deputy Governors. Since 1996, it 
has developed into a triple layered system similar to that of the BIS, with the Governors’ Meetings, Deputy 
Governors’ Meetings and Working Group Meetings. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The Asian currency crisis highlighted the structural vulnerabilities in the region’s economies: 
first, there was the double-mismatch of currency and maturity in the region’s financial sector, 
and  second,  corporate  finance  remained  highly  dependent  on  banks.  As  a  result,  Asian 
countries were vulnerable to sudden changes in global financial markets and their abundant 
savings were not being mobilized effectively within the region.  
To  rectify  the  problem  of  overdependence  on  banks,  the  EMEAP  started  the  Asian  Bond 
Fund (ABF) initiative to promote local-currency bond markets, a project giving members the 
opportunity  to  invest  in  bonds  in  Asia.  In  parallel,  the  governments  of  ASEAN+3  member 
countries  are  now  implementing  the  Asian  Bond  Market  Initiative  (ABMI)  to  foster 
deregulation and to create an environment conducive to investment. The results have been 
impressive: the local-currency bond markets in Asia have developed significantly, as shown 
in Figure 1, in terms of amount outstanding for both government and corporate bonds. The 
share  of  Asian-currency  bonds  in  global  bond  markets  increased  from  2.1%  at  the  end  of 
1996 to 8.4% at the end of 2011. What is remarkable here is that the presence of foreign 
investors in a number of local-currency bond markets in Asia is rapidly increasing, as shown 
in Figure 2. This can be attributed to the enhancement of the market infrastructure of these 
economies,  not  just  because  of  improvements  in  the  risk/return  profile  of  these  bonds  in 
terms of the creditworthiness of the issuers and the relatively higher yields of the papers. 
Moreover,  there  has  also  been  a  significant  improvement  in  the  problem  of  currency 
mismatch. The share of foreign lenders’ loans denominated in local currencies has increased 
remarkably, as shown in Figure 3, although the maturities of such loans are still one year or 
shorter.  It  is  worth  mentioning  here  that  some  countries  have  implemented  measures 
explicitly to reduce the mismatch. A case in point is the Republic of Korea which obliges local 
banks to hold a certain proportion of short-term foreign currency assets against short-term 
foreign currency debt. 
The  Asian  economies  have  weathered  a  series  of  shocks  starting  from  the  bankruptcy  of 
Lehman  Brothers  to  the  European  debt  crisis  of  today.  I  believe  the  improved  market 
structure described above has contributed to this performance, together with good economic 
fundamentals and the relatively plain business models of banks in Asia. 
Challenges for the future – beyond the boundary of Asia 
3. 
The financial market developments described so far pose new challenges for central bankers 
in Asia. I believe these challenges are also relevant for our colleagues in Latin America and 
Caribbean states. 
The  first  challenge  is  how  to  cope  with  cross-border  capital  flows.  Given  that  the  bond 
markets have developed and that the proportion of non-resident holders has increased, there 
have  been  calls  for  categorical  restrictions  on  cross-border  capital  flows  to  prevent  the 
sudden reversal of portfolio flows that could cause a financial crisis. This problem may be 
particularly  keen  when  the  growth  of  the  bond  markets  is  so  rapid  that  the  market 
infrastructure  fails  to  keep  pace.  In  fact,  there  is  some  evidence  suggesting  a  positive 
correlation  between  the  ratio  of  non-residential  holders  and  the  volatility  of  bond  yields.3 
However,  we  need  careful  benefit-cost  analysis  here  since  such  restrictions  may  impose 
substantial efficiency loss on the country in the long run. What is essential is to strengthen 
market  infrastructure:  for  the  bond  issuer  to  maintain  sound  creditworthiness,  and  for  the 
market to increase its transparency. In fact, in Germany, the share of non-resident holders of 
government  bonds  reaches  almost  sixty  percent,  yet  this  is  not  seen  as  any  cause  for 
concern. 
                                                
3  For example, see Jochen R. Andritzky, “Government Bonds and Their Investors: What Are the Facts and Do 
They Matter?”, IMF Working Paper, June 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  second  challenge  is  to  improve  the  resilience  of  financial  markets  against  financial 
stress,  and  here  collateralized  markets  are  the  key.  While  the  bond  markets  show 
remarkable growth in Asia, the collateralized money markets, including the repo markets, are 
underdeveloped,  except  in  Japan.  In  most  of  the  emerging  market  economies,  repo 
transactions  are  largely  used for the monetary  policy  operations  of the  central  bank,  while 
they are rather rarely used between private market participants. Legal uncertainty regarding 
the effectiveness of collateral has often been pointed to as the main reason for this scarcity 
of  private  repo  transactions.  However,  in  order  to  maintain  the  functioning  of  the  money 
market,  especially  under  very  stressful  conditions,  it  is  essential  to  have  well-functioning 
markets for collateralized transactions, including repos.  
The third challenge is cross-border financial regulations. In particular, this is the issue of how 
Asia,  Latin  America,  and  Caribbean  states  should  respond  to  the  latest  regulatory 
developments in the United States and Europe. There have been moves to extend U.S. and 
European  regulations  beyond  their  domestic  borders  to  be  applied  in  other  jurisdictions, 
based  on  the  argument  of  guaranteeing  a  “level  playing  field”.  A  level  playing  field  is 
undoubtedly important for fairness. Nonetheless, what we really need is a playing field that 
leads to fair competition among financial institutions of different types and backgrounds. The 
regional and functional heterogeneity of Asia, Latin America, and Caribbean states should be 
honored  in  the  appropriate  way.  However,  I  am  also  aware  of  the  danger  of  “spaghetti 
regulations”  once  each  and  every  country  starts  insisting  on  its  own  unique  regulations, 
where  we  end  up  with  extremely  complicated  and  entangled  regulations  with  unintended 
cross-border consequences. As such, we need to formulate a “regional voice” to make sure 
that the global regulatory framework is clear and consistent. 
Last but not least, given the mutual linkages among the regions of Asia, Latin America and 
Caribbean countries, it is all the more important to monitor whether there are any financial 
imbalances in any countries. To achieve this goal, we need to improve not only the credibility 
and the accuracy of our economic data, but also their timeliness. Central banks should play a 
major role in such regional surveillance work and economic data improvement.  
To conclude, I believe candid discussion and collaboration on nuts and bolts issues among 
central bank experts are truly important in the context of central bank cooperation. I hope the 
rewards of our endeavors will be the formulation of fruitful new ideas and the expansion of 
rewarding human networks. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
