Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 26 September 2012. 
 Today, on 26 September 2012, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments,  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate 
unchanged  at  4.0%.  The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  the  monetary  conditions  are 
adequate to meet the inflation target in the medium term and provide the needed monetary 
incentive to support domestic demand and economic growth.  
Let me now proceed with an overview of the economic and monetary developments and key 
issues discussed at today’s meeting.  
 Annual inflation in August was 2.8%, increasing 0.1 percentage points from July.  
Inflation continues to be determined primarily by price rise of foods and oil. Prices of other 
goods  of  the  basket  appeared  relatively  stable  and  provided  low  contribution  to  headline 
inflation.  
According  to  our  estimates,  inflation  reflects  mostly  the  temporary  effect  of  supply  factors 
related  mainly  to  developments  in  global  markets,  as  well  as  the  possible  structural 
movements in the internal market. Against this setting, the inflationary pressures originating 
from the domestic economy appear contained. Weak domestic demand and below-potential 
economic  growth  are  reflected  in  slow  increase  in  production  costs,  anchored  inflation 
expectations and controlled monetary expansion. The Bank of Albania deems that, overall, 
these developments will continue to determine inflation’s performance in the period ahead.  
Indirect  data  on  economic  performance  in  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  the  year 
suggest  positive-but-slow  economic  growth.  The  Albanian  economy  has  capitalised  on  the 
better  performance  of  foreign  demand  and  exports  during  this  period,  while  domestic 
demand has remained weak.  
In  the  absence  of  stimulus  by  the  public  sector,  indirect  data  point  to  weak  dynamics  of 
consumption  and  private  investments.  Hence,  consumers’  higher  prudence  is  reflected  in 
lower consumption and higher savings by Albanian households.  
As  noted  in  earlier  statements,  this  behaviour  reflects  to  a  large  extent  the  correction  of 
consumption levels noted in the economy until the end of 2008. All the same, in the context 
of  the  current  situation  in  the  economy  and  global  financial  markets,  the  consumers’ 
reluctance 
future 
developments. The Bank of Albania deems that the deceleration of consumption in response 
to  uncertainties  about  the  economic  outlook  may  become  a  spiral  with  macroeconomic 
indicators having mutual influence between them. Contraction of consumption is associated 
with downward domestic demand, leading to subsequent slowdown of economic growth and 
lower household income. Our analyses and projections have continuously suggested that the 
macroeconomic  situation  and  the  Albanian  economy  have  sustainable  basis  for  long-term 
development. This reality should be translated into a more realistic behaviour towards higher 
consumption levels in the economy, within the boundaries of solid household budgets.  
to  purchase  durable  goods  reflects  also 
their  uncertainty  about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Likewise,  private  investments  are  considered  as  relatively  low  and  conditioned  by  spare 
production capacities, expectations for ultimate demand for goods and services in the future, 
and  added  prudence  by  banks  to  lend.  In  particular,  private  sector’s  weak  demand  is  also 
reflected in its low demand for loans in the recent months. In response to these developments, 
private sector credit continued to decelerate its annual growth rates to 5.5% in July. The Bank 
of  Albania  has  continuously  provided  the  required  conditions  to  stimulate  crediting.  This 
approach is implemented by easing the monetary policy, injecting continuously liquidity into the 
banking  system  and  establishing  the  proper  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework.  These 
actions  have  led  to  relatively  rapid  growth  of  lek-denominated  loans  against  foreign 
currency-denominated  ones.  Nonetheless,  in  our  view,  businesses  may  cooperate  more 
closely with the banking system. On its side, the banking system should be more flexible and 
pay  attention  to  macroeconomic  and  sectoral  development  perspectives,  while  businesses 
have  investment  opportunities  in  those  branches  of  the  economy  whose  potential  is  still 
unexploited.  
The  third  component  of  aggregate  demand,  public  expenditures,  had  low  contribution  to 
Albania’s economic growth.  
In the first eight months of the year, fiscal policy was consolidative. During this period, budget 
expenditures shrank 0.4%, year-on-year, due to lower growth rates of current expenditure and 
contraction  of  capital  expenditure.  During  the  first  eight  months  of  the  year,  fiscal  revenues 
increased  3.7%,  registering  record-low  growth  rates.  Prudent  expenditure  policies  were 
materialised in budget deficit contraction. In January-August 2012, the deficit was about 29% 
lower than a year earlier, contributing to maintaining long-term fiscal stability. We deem that 
continuing to pursue this policy, oriented towards medium and long-term stability of public debt 
indicators, is necessary and productive given the current condition of financial markets.  
Aggregate demand continued to support economic growth in the second quarter of 2012. Net 
export deficit narrowed 23.9% during this period, reflecting higher exports and lower imports 
than a year earlier. Foreign trade data reveal that the positive impulse is carried forward in July 
as  well.  Year-on-year,  exports  grew  11.6%  during  these  months,  whereas  imports  recorded 
low annual growth rates, namely 1.1%. These developments have led to trade deficit narrowing 
by 5.2%, year-on-year.  
Monetary developments  point to moderate monetary  inflationary pressures on the economy. 
Money supply retained its expansion rates of earlier months, registering 8.4% annual growth in 
July. Its performance reflects the low demand of the domestic economy for monetary assets. 
The performance of financial markets has reflected the improved  liquidity conditions, lower 
risk  premiums  and  inflation  situation  in  the  economy.  Interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market 
went down, transmitting the most recent cut of the key rate in July. Additionally, yields in the 
primary market of government securities continued their descent. Further easing of monetary 
conditions is expected to be transmitted also to interest rates in other segments of the financial 
market, conform to the time lag of monetary policy transmission mechanism. In the improved 
context  of  domestic  financial  markets  and  in  the  presence  of  a  sound  banking  system,  the 
Bank of Albania expects that its earlier decisions to ease the monetary policy will be eventually 
transmitted in full to the economy.  
Projections  for  the  economic  outlook  are  in  line  with  the  baseline  scenario  assessed  in 
previous months.  
Economic activity at home is expected to remain low, conditioned by weak consumption and 
private  investments  as  well  as  limited  space  for  fiscal  stimulus.  Consequently,  inflationary 
pressures remain low and in check, reflected in the performance of inflation expected to range 
close to Bank of Albania’s target.  
 At  the  end  of  the  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key 
interest rate unchanged at 4.0%.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
