Andreas Dombret: The sovereign debt crisis in Europe and its impact on 
the emerging market economies 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  to  the  German-Brazilian  Chamber  of  Industry  and  Commerce,  São  Paulo, 
6 December 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Porto 
Consul General von Kummer 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be speaking here today to the German-Brazilian Chamber of Industry and 
Commerce and I wish to thank you all for your interest. 
São  Paulo  is  the  financial  and  economic  centre of  Latin  America  and, for  that  reason,  the 
Bundesbank  has  been  sending  a  representative  to  the  German  Consulate  General  here 
since 2005. Today, a new representative has taken up office. His tasks will include regular 
reports  to  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Bundesbank,  keeping  it  informed  of  economic  and 
financial  developments  in  Brazil  and  other  countries  in  Latin  America.  This  is  because 
Brazil’s importance for the world economy is growing constantly. In 2011, Brazil overtook the 
United Kingdom as the sixth-largest economy in the world, and it is probably only a matter of 
time before it dislodges France from fifth place. And, after that, Brazil will have Germany in 
its sights. 
Generally speaking, the past few years have seen the weights in the world economy shifting 
significantly in favour of the emerging economies. During the sharp economic slump in 2009, 
the rapidly growing emerging market economies also fulfilled an important stabilising function 
for the global economy. 
Institutionally, the shift in weights was reflected not least by the G7 becoming less important 
and  by  the  G20  rising  to  become  the  central  forum  for  international  fiscal  and  economic 
policy  cooperation.  The  large  emerging  market  economies  are  now  closely  involved  in 
international  cooperation.  The  emerging  economies  will  have  greater  influence  in  the 
International Monetary Fund, too. 
People  in  Brazil  and  other  major  emerging  economies  are  concerned  about  the  ongoing 
financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area.  The  crisis  in  the  euro  area  is  often 
regarded as one of the greatest risks to the world economy. 
In my short speech, I would like to provide a brief outline of the causes and effects of the 
crisis  and  investigate  the  extent  to  which  the  crisis  is  actually  impairing  growth  in  the 
emerging economies. 
Emergence of the crisis and measures to contain it 
2. 
The sovereign debt crisis has been going on for about three years now. It began with Greece 
in May 2010, and Greece remains the most difficult problem case in the euro area. But the 
crisis spread to other euro-area countries. What were the causes of this crisis? 
First  of  all, the  unhealthy  developments  in  the  run-up  to the  crisis  differed from  country  to 
country.  The  common  denominator  was  that  the  countries  in  crisis  failed  to  fulfil  the 
requirements  of  a  monetary  union  in  full.  Countries  belonging  to  the  European  monetary 
union no longer have their own national currencies. Consequently, there is a single monetary 
policy for all the member countries. This means that competitive depreciation; in other words, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
devaluing  the  national  currency  to  offset  losses  of  price  competitiveness  is  no  longer  an 
option. 
For some countries, the introduction of the euro brought significantly lower rates of interest 
than  before  monetary  union.  There  followed  massive  flows  of  capital  into  those  countries, 
but, unfortunately, these capital inflows  were not always put to productive use. Among the 
unhealthy  developments  that  prepared  the  ground  for  the  crisis  were  credit-financed 
excesses in the real estate markets, oversized financial systems, high levels of government 
spending – caused by an overblown machinery of state, for example – and a high level of 
private  consumption.  Added  to  this  were  wage  increases  that  were  higher  than  growth  in 
productivity, which considerably worsened those countries’ price competitiveness. 
Still,  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis,  such  economic 
imbalances  within  the  euro  area  remained  largely  without  consequences.  With  the  crisis, 
however, it suddenly became more difficult to finance the permanent current account deficits 
and  yield  spreads  on  government  bonds  in  the euro  area  increased  sharply  as  a  result  of 
growing  doubts  about  the  sustainability  of  government  finances.  Capital  now  fled  in  the 
opposite direction, into the core economies of the monetary union – above all, Germany. 
In order to combat and contain the escalating crisis, the countries of the euro area as well as 
the European Union set up extensive rescue shields. Besides Greece, Ireland and Portugal, 
too,  took  up  financial  assistance.  A  programme  is  being  negotiated  for  Cyprus  at  present, 
and  Spain  is  receiving  resources  to  recapitalise  its  banking  sector.  The  International 
Monetary  Fund  is  also  contributing  financially  to  what  are  known  as  the  full  programmes. 
This  means  that  Brazil,  too,  is  helping to  stabilise  public  finances  in  the euro  area,  which, 
especially  with  regard  to  Portugal,  is  a  remarkable  development given  the  history  of  these 
nations. 
The  Eurosystem  –  which  comprises  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  national  central 
banks of the euro-area countries – has also assumed a major stabilising function. With key 
interest rates at an all-time low and an ample supply of central bank liquidity, monetary policy 
is  ensuring  that  the  real  economy  is  not  overly  affected  by  the  tensions  in  the  financial 
markets. This strategy has largely been successful so far. 
What  is  important  in  this  context  is  that  we  never  lose  sight  of  the  primary  objective  of 
monetary policy, which is to safeguard price stability. For this reason, we are concerned by 
politicians’ growing expectations of the central bank. Central banks must not conduct fiscal 
policy. 
Impact on Brazil and other emerging market economies 
3. 
The  emerging  economies  are  somewhat  concerned  about  the  monetary  policy  stance  not 
only  in  Europe,  but  especially  in  the  United  States  as  well.  The  Brazilian  President,  for 
example, has given a clear warning about the consequences of a generous liquidity policy. 
She spoke of a “tsunami” of cheap money flooding the world. 
Such  statements  reflect  both  a  fear  of  competitive  devaluation  and  concerns  that  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  could  impair  economic  growth  in  the  emerging  market 
economies.  Some  emerging  economies  are  therefore  considering  the  option  of  tightening 
capital controls to guard against unchecked inflows of capital. 
In  the  Bundesbank’s  view,  measures  restricting  capital  flows  should  be  a  last  resort, 
however; they should be employed only when facing considerable risks and used purely on a 
temporary basis, if at all. It is our firm belief that, over the longer term, the best means of 
preventing  unhealthy  developments  is  efficient  risk  provisioning  and  supervision  of  the 
financial sector in conjunction with a stability-oriented macro policy. 
Negative  spillovers  from  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  to  the  emerging  market 
economies might be generated, above all, by weak economic activity in the euro area. That 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is, at least, an opinion that I often hear expressed at international conferences. More detailed 
analyses  nevertheless  suggest  that  negative  spillovers  via  the  external  trade  channel  are 
fairly limited. For explaining the recent slower pace of economic growth in Brazil and other 
emerging  markets,  other  negative  factors  are,  in  any  event,  more  significant  than  weak 
demand in the euro area. 
The  necessary  processes  of  adjustment  in  the  euro-area  countries  in  crisis  have  led  to  a 
decline  in  their  domestic  demand.  Naturally  enough,  this  is  also  associated  with  lower 
imports.  For  foreign  trading  partners,  this  means  declining  exports  to  the  euro  area.  The 
effects of this on global economic activity should not be exaggerated, however. 
For  one  thing,  a  key  part  of  the  adjustment  is  taking  place  within  the  euro  area  itself  – 
something which  is being felt, not least, by German exporters. For another, exports to the 
euro  area  are  of  relatively  minor  importance  for  most  regions  outside  Europe.  Last  year, 
euro-area  countries  imported  goods  worth  US$  2,340  from  outside  the  euro  area,  which 
corresponds to just under one-fifth of the euro area’s gross domestic product (GDP). In the 
first half of 2012, imports from non-euro-area countries fell by 4 %. 
Looking at the situation the other way round, exports to the euro area account for just 4 % of 
the rest of the world’s GDP. If the emerging and developing countries are combined into a 
single group, the figure is somewhat higher, at 5 %. 
Over the past few years, exports of goods to the euro area have made a positive contribution 
to  economic  growth  in  the  emerging  and  developing  countries,  but  this  stimulus  is  now 
absent. In nominal terms, the lack of this growth impulse explains only about a tenth of the 
current slowdown in growth in the emerging market economies and developing countries. 
For Brazil, the euro area is of even less importance as a sales market. Exports to the euro 
area account for no more than 2 % of GDP. With an export share of 10 % of GDP, Brazil is, 
anyway,  a  rather  closed  economy. With  regard  to  the  currently  quite  marked  slowdown  in 
growth in Brazil, other factors are therefore of greater relevance. 
This significant growth slowdown in the large emerging economies is due mainly to specific, 
home-grown factors. Here in Brazil, the deceleration was especially pronounced in industry. 
One  major  reason  for  the  lull  since  2010  is  the  loss  of  price  competitiveness  due  to  the 
appreciation  of  the  Brazilian  real.  Another  factor,  admittedly,  is  that  real  earnings  in  the 
manufacturing sector have also gone up sharply over the past few years. You all know that 
Brazil  is  not  a  low-wage  country.  As  a  result,  domestic  goods  are  increasingly  being 
substituted by imports. 
The  congested  infrastructure  ranks  as  a  further  structural  obstacle  to  macroeconomic 
development.  The  fact  that  there  are  said  to  be  roughly  as  many  helicopter  taxis  in  São 
Paulo as there are helicopters in all of Germany is due, if nothing else, to your city having 
gained  a  reputation  for  being  faced  with  frequent  traffic  jams.  Logistics  experts  say  that 
deliveries of goods in Brazil take twice as long over the same distance as in China. Whether 
or  not  the  announced  government  investment  programme  to  modernise  the  road  and  rail 
networks will  lead to substantial improvements is something that you are in a much better 
position to judge than I. 
I only wanted to make clear that the direct effects of the euro-area crisis on economic activity 
in Brazil are fairly small and that the causes of the current weakness in growth are primarily 
to be found at home. 
Outlook for the European monetary union 
4. 
While the direct effects may be limited, there is still no doubt that countries outside the euro 
area have a legitimate interest in a rapid resolution of the crisis within the monetary union. 
This  is  because  the  crisis  can  also  have  negative  effects  via  a  confidence  channel,  say, 
through sharp fluctuations in the capital and foreign exchange markets. We, too, are aware 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
that  the  crisis  is  contributing  to  an  erosion  of  confidence  –  confidence  in  the  financial, 
economic  and  monetary  systems.  In  essence,  the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  a 
crisis of confidence. And that is precisely what makes it so dangerous. 
The stabilisation measures I have mentioned will not be enough on their own to strengthen 
confidence in the future of the monetary union again. The member states will have to remedy 
the unhealthy developments that took place prior to the crisis, which I described earlier. To 
achieve  that,  the  member  states  have  to  put  their  public  finances  in  order,  stabilise  their 
banks, and implement structural reforms consistently so that their economies become more 
competitive. We have to make the financial system in Europe more crisis-proof and improve 
financial market regulation. The creation of Europe-wide banking supervision in the context 
of a banking union – if done properly – could play a major part in this. 
In the end, what is crucial is that European monetary union remains a community of stability. 
The institutional foundations of the monetary union have to become more stable. We need a 
sustainable solution. A crisis policy relying solely on measures that have a short-term impact 
would  only  sow  the  seeds  of future  crises.  It  is therefore  in the  emerging  economies’  own 
best interests that the problems in the euro area are tackled at their roots. 
Allow me to conclude: the euro area has to get to grips with its problems and live up to its 
responsibility  as  the  second-largest  economic  area  in  the  world.  The  impression  that  the 
crisis  in  Europe  represents  a  decisive  obstacle  to  growth  for  the  rest  of  the  world  and,  in 
particular,  for  the  emerging  and  developing  countries  is  misleading,  however,  and  diverts 
attention from other problems and weaknesses. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
