H R Khan: Silver linings in the Indian economy 
Address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 5th Annual 
Banking  Conference  on  “The  silver  lining  of  the  Indian  economy”,  organized  by  NMIMS 
School of Banking Management, Mumbai, 6 October 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Dr. Mridul Saggar of the Reserve Bank of India.  
Dr.  Debashis  Sanyal,  Dean,  Dr.  Vrinda  Kamat,  Chairperson  –  MBA  Banking,  Faculty  and 
students  of  the  School  of  Business  Management,  NMIMS  University,  Shri.  M  G  Sanghvi, 
Chairman & Managing Director, Syndicate Bank, Shri S K Jain, Executive Director, Bank of 
Baroda,  distinguished  invitees,  ladies  &  gentlemen.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  amongst 
budding  management  professionals  and  corporate  leaders  of  tomorrow.  In  the  period  of 
gloom and doom for the world in general and India in particular, it is important not to miss the 
bloom.  I  am  therefore  very  happy  to  be  invited  to  speak  on  silver  linings  in  the  Indian 
economy. In bad times the financial markets, the media, the investors and the consumers all 
get accustomed to focus on negative news and the positive news gets ignored. Similarly, in 
good  times,  markets  and  economic  agents  sometimes  run  ahead  of  the  realities  and 
completely  discount  the  negative  news  and  love  to  accept  only  the  good  news.  In  more 
uncertain times, as were recently, sentiments, beliefs and perceptions shift quite fast and do 
matter  for  eventual  economic  outcomes  are  characterized  by  multiple  equilibria.  These 
acquire the characteristics of self-fulfilling prophecy. Yet, in such a period, the economy stays 
in the saddle point if we ignore the bloom, simply because animal spirits are weak. So today, 
my  objective  would  be  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  silver  linings  that  we  can  see  for  the 
Indian  economy  in  the  horizon.  I  would  touch  upon  the  positive  streaks  on  the  aspects  of 
growth, inflation, fiscal and external sector at this juncture, and how these could become the 
turning point for the Indian economy provided we carry forward the momentum and convert 
intentions into actions. 
Recent policy actions start the course correction but momentum needs to be kept 
Recent policy measures taken by the government are very significant. They have started the 
course correction from a point where the Indian growth story was close to getting seriously 
damaged.  However,  for  these  measures  to  succeed  it  is  important  to  keep  up  the 
momentum. More steps and effective implementation over next 2–3 years are necessary to 
fully recoup the lost ground. The economy has been facing serious headwinds as growth had 
slowed down to 5.5 per cent or less for the last two quarters over and above the subdued 
growth  rate  of  6.5  per  cent  for  2011–12,  a  rate  even  lower  than  crisis  period  low  point  of 
6.7 per  cent  growth  in  2007–08.  Our  saving  and  investment  rate  had  also  slipped  since 
2008–09. Gross domestic saving rate averaged 32.7 per cent in three years 2010–11 against 
35.0 per cent in the preceding three years due mainly to fall in public sector saving rate. Our 
gross domestic investment rate averaged 34.1 per cent against 34.9 per cent for the same 
periods  as  corporate  investment  rate  fell  sharply.  Preliminary  estimates  suggest  a  further 
sharp drop in household financial savings in 2011–12 at less than 8.0 per cent of the GDP 
from  more  than  12  per  cent  two  years  back.  Also,  corporate  investment  is  likely  to  have 
declined  further.  With  falling  saving  and  investment,  rise  in  twin  deficits  and  inflation, 
potential  growth  had  also  dropped  by  one  percentage  point  or  more  in  the  post-global 
financial crisis period. As we know, potential growth indicates the rate of growth the economy 
can achieve consistent with stable macro-economic conditions. On the other hand, inflation 
rose sharply to above comfort levels since  December 2009 and averaged 9.5 per cent for 
next 24-months before lowering to sub-eight per cent but still proving to be intransigent. It is 
staying  sticky  at  over  7  per  cent.  Centre’s  fiscal  deficit  had  slipped  during  2011–12  to 
5.8 per cent against the budgeted 4.6 per cent for the year and 4.9 per cent in 2010–11. With 
gross  under-recoveries  of  oil  marketing  companies  working  out  to  over  Rs1.8  trillion  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
0.8 per cent of GDP due to unrevised prices of diesel, LPG and kerosene, there was little 
doubt the centre’s GFD/GDP budgeted estimate would then have overshot by a wide margin. 
Even after the revision of diesel prices and capping of subsidised LPG cylinders, the budget 
imbalances are obvious, underscoring the importance of further fiscal measures to contain 
deficit this year. 
The  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  had  risen  to  an  all-time  high  of  4.2  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
2011–12 and 4.5 per cent of GDP during Q4 of 2011–12. In other words, rising twin deficit, 
slowing growth and sticky inflation provided all the ingredients for a possible economic crisis. 
Noting  this  macro-economic  deterioration,  some  international  credit  rating  agencies  had 
already put India’s sovereign rating on a watch list for an impending downgrade that would 
have pushed India to a sub-investment grade. 
The slew of measures in a span of less than a month should count 
Against this background, the policy actions that were announced in September 2012 should 
be seen as major initiatives to reverse the course of economic growth path in the country. In 
a slew of measures of economic reforms, the government raised diesel prices by ₹5 per litre 
and capped subsidised LPG cooking gas cylinders to six a year per household. It permitted 
foreign direct investment (FDI) in multi-brand retail up to 51 per cent, in aviation sector up to 
49 per cent and in some broadcasting services up to 75 per cent. It also approved sale of its 
minority  stakes  in  four  public  sector  firms  –  Oil  India  (by  10  per  cent),  Hindustan  Copper 
(9.59 per cent), MMTC (9.33 per cent) and Nalco (12.15 per cent) – to raise up to ₹150 billion 
– half its disinvestment receipts target for the year. These measures were followed up with 
an announcement that withholding tax liability will be reduced to 5 per cent from 20 per cent 
for the overseas borrowings /bond issuances for infrastructure sector by Indian firms during 
July 2012 and June 2015. 
A  debt  relief  package  for  the  state  power  distribution  companies  (discoms)  has  now  been 
approved.  Once  implemented  efficiently,  it  can  turnaround  the  investment  scenario  once 
again. This month, a package for the life insurance sector was also worked out. The package 
includes easing investment norms for insurers, faster clearance for new products, easing of 
procedures,  allowing  banks  to  sell  products  of  more  than  one  insurance  company  and 
possibly some tax concessions for the insurance sector. More sector-specific packages could 
follow  allowing  structural  bottlenecks  to  be  removed  without  sacrificing  on  regulatory 
discipline.  The  Cabinet  has  also  cleared  foreign  equity  cap  in  insurance  sectors  at 
49 per cent  through  Insurance  Laws  (Amendment)  Bill,  2008.  It  also  approved  certain 
amendments to the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) Bill, 2011 
that  included  foreign  investment  ceiling  in  the  pension  sector  at  26  per  cent  or  such 
percentage  as  may  be  approved  for  the  insurance  sector,  whichever  is  higher,  may  be 
incorporated  in  the  present  legislation.  Besides,  it  approved  several  other  plans  that  are 
important for  the  economy,  such  as  the  12th  Five  Year  Plan  document  for  taking  it  to  the 
National Development Council (NDC), amendments to the Companies Bill 2011, the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2010 and the Competition Act, 2002. These moves 
show  the  intent  and  the  policy  direction  though  the  ultimate  impact  would  depend  on  the 
political process of law making that follows. There are several unknowns, such as, the timing 
of debates and votes, the floor management on the day of the vote and most importantly, the 
process  by  which  political  differences  are  narrowed  enough  to  see  the  results.  The 
foundation has been laid and one can be confident that the Indian democracy would once 
again stand the test of the time. 
On our part, we certainly think that the slew of economic reforms measures undertaken by 
the government recently would impart a positive momentum to the economy. The Reserve 
Bank  in  its  Mid-Quarter  Review  of  Monetary  Policy  noted  the  likely  positive  impact  of  the 
changes  in  FDI  policy  on  capital  flows  and  over  the  long  run  on  higher  productivity, 
particularly in food supply chains. The Reserve Bank had been consistently arguing for need 
for supply-side  responses  to  help  contain  inflation.  Earlier  in  its  Annual Report released  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
August  2012,  it  had  highlighted  the  urgent  need  to  step  up  non-debt  creating  inflows, 
especially in the form of FDI in view of the wide current account deficit (CAD). It had argued 
for further improving the FDI inflows in sectors such as insurance, retail, aviation and urban 
infrastructure. It had noted that FDI in retail may be particularly helpful in improving supply 
chain  management  through  greater  investment  in  backend  infrastructure,  including  cold 
storage for farm and poultry products. 
Considering  that  these  steps  being  undertaken  paved  the  way  for  a  more  favourable 
growth-inflation dynamics, the Reserve Bank moved to address possible liquidity tightening 
ahead by a pre-emptive 25 basis point cut in its Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) at its Mid-term 
policy  announced  on  September  17,  2012.  CRR  is  also  a  potent monetary  policy  tool  and 
should help in lowering the cost of credit and augmenting its supply, thus improving credit 
flows. The CRR cut was in addition to a 50 basis point policy rate reduction that the Reserve 
Bank  had  effected  in  April  2012  in  anticipation  of  action  for  fiscal  consolidation  and 
supply-side initiatives. 
Several policy measures have been taken in less than a month. When these measures get 
implemented and feed through the system, they would contribute significantly to recovery of 
India’s growth as well as growth potential. Capital flows have recovered and would go a long 
way in restoring confidence for business activity in the country. Growth would start improving 
as  a  result.  Whether  the  recovery  will  be  quick  or  slow-paced  would  depend  on  several 
factors, including global conditions, which at the moment are not very conducive in spite of 
some  positive  news  on  labour  and  housing  markets  in  the  US.  What  is  important  is  that 
recent  actions  by  the  Government  have  reduced  the  macro-economic  risks  and  structural 
impediments. 
Part  of  our  recent  woes  was  self-inflicted  as  inadequate  movement  on  policy  and 
implementation fronts worsened investment climate that had already suffered due to global 
uncertainties  and  cyclical  downturn  in  the  Indian  economy.  This  had  added  an  element  of 
structural retrogression in the Indian economy. The government has now shown its resolve to 
effectively redress this. If steps announced are well-implemented and if we stay on path of 
reforms,  the  economy  would  turnaround  faster  than  what  many  expect.  But  several 
challenges remain and not only policy changes but effective implementation holds the key to 
success. 
The most important challenge would be to further lower the twin deficits by staying on path of 
fiscal  consolidation,  keeping  a  tab  on  private  consumption  demand  and  using  expenditure 
switching policies to lower CAD. Monetary policy would for some more time need to focus on 
inflation while using available space to support growth to the degree it can. Inflation, if left 
unattended  to,  can  play  the  biggest  spoil  sport.  The  rupee  has  already  appreciated 
6.8 per cent against US dollar since the onset of this new wave of reforms on September 13, 
2012. This may help lower inflation somewhat as exchange rate-pass-through takes place. 
However, it is important to understand that exchange rate is neither a first-best solution nor a 
sufficient  tool  for  addressing  the  challenges  of  structural  inflation  that  we  face  today. 
Ultimately, fiscal  policy  would  need  to  work  towards  expediting  supply-side  responses  and 
keeping private consumption demand in reasonable control. Monetary policy would need to 
be cautious in the interim. 
Downward cycle may be bottoming out 
After  a  downturn,  there  are  some  signs  of  green  shoots  that  if  nursed  with  appropriate 
policies, including continuous economic reforms, with an eye on macro-financial stability, can 
pave the way of recovery for the Indian economy. Falling growth was somewhat arrested in 
Q1 of 2012–13. At 5.5 per cent, it was marginally better than in the 5.3 per cent in Q4 of 
2011–12. While this is not a material improvement, when juxtaposed with the recent policy 
measures  there  is  hope  that  growth  would  improve  in  coming  quarters  and  more  so  next 
year.  Rainfall  has  been  deficient  by  8  per  cent  from  the  long  period  average  in  2012 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
monsoon  season.  The  deficiency  during  June  and  July  2012  has  adversely  impacted  the 
Kharif  crop.  However,  good  rainfall  in  August  and  September  have  improved  the  soil 
moisture content and reservoir levels and raised the prospects for a good Rabi crop. As we 
see subsequent rounds of crop estimates, the deficiency of about 10 per cent in case of food 
grains and oilseeds is likely to be reduced, thus providing a further silver lining. 
India  grew  at  a  rapid  pace  with  an  average  growth  of  8.7  per  cent  during  2003–04  to 
2007–08 essentially because investment boomed, especially in infrastructure such as power, 
roads and telecom. In the last three years of this period growth averaged 9.5 per cent before 
the Lehman crisis changed the world. India’s potential growth was assessed at nearly 8.5 per 
cent during this period. India’s growth dropped to 6.7 per cent during 2007–08 due mainly to 
spill  over  from  global  financial  crisis.  India,  however,  stood  out  as  an  island  of  calm  that 
withstood  global  financial  Tsunami.  Its  growth  dropped  less  than  its  peers  and  it  staged  a 
V-shaped recovery clocking 8.4 per cent growth over next two years. However, the euro area 
crisis, the rising structural problems and high inflation combined to bring about a precipitous 
fall  in  India’s  growth.  The  growth  dropped  to  6.5  per  cent  in  2011–12  –  lower  than  the 
crisis-affected  growth  of  6.7  per  cent  in  2007–08.  More  importantly,  growth  has  averaged 
5.4 per cent over last two quarters. 
Is  this  the  new  normal?  There  are  strong  reasons  to  believe  otherwise.  While  potential 
growth may have fallen, we are clearly running a negative output gap with realised growth 
below potential. With current momentum, we can also recoup our lost potential and after a 
few years start growing back at 8–8.5 per cent on a sustainable basis. What is important at 
this stage is to further improve macro-economic conditions by lowering twin deficits and to 
ensure that inflation stays below the threshold at which high growth cannot be sustained. 
Growth came down due to exceptional reasons. Firstly, inflation had stayed high for over two 
years and there is enough theoretical and empirical evidence to suggest that when inflation 
reaches that high and becomes persistent, the costs of deflation in terms of growth sacrifice 
turns out to be large. Part of the growth sacrifice occurs for reasons of monetary tightening 
that high inflation inevitably brings if complete macro-economic destabilization and possible 
hyper-inflation  is  to  be  averted.  Hyperinflation  risk  is  not  something  that  can  be  dismissed 
lightly.  Growth  also  comes  down  for  reasons  beyond  monetary  tightening.  High  inflation 
erodes  consumers’  real  purchasing  power  and  lowers  aggregate  demand.  It  acts  as  a 
regressive  tax  on  poor  and  erodes  their  consumption  base.  Producers  also  postpone 
investment decisions in an era of heightened uncertainty. To contain the high level of inflation 
and  manage  inflationary  expectations,  monetary  policy  in  India  was  tightened  continuously 
since  February  2010  and  these  risks  were  contained  even  though  inflation  still  remains 
perceptibly higher than the Reserve Bank’s comfort. Monetary policy needs to factor in the 
growth-inflation  dynamics  in  a  forward-looking  manner  but  keep  focussing  on  inflation  for 
some more time so that inflation persistence is overcome. This would have a positive spin off 
for  growth  to  recover.  As  we  have  stated  in  the  Mid-Quarter  Monetary  Policy  Review  of 
September  17,  2012,  when  the  policy  initiatives  being  taken  now  by  the  Government 
materialize  into  concrete  action,  monetary  policy  will  reinforce  the  positive  impact  of  such 
actions while continuing to maintain its focus on inflation management. 
Secondly, growth came down because of unfavourable global climate. The euro area crisis 
coming  on  the  heels  of  Lehman  crisis  is  playing  on  animal  spirits.  Global  trade  has 
decelerated  sharply  and  is  impacting  investments.  Indian  industrial  growth  is  found  to  be 
highly correlated with global industrial growth. As we integrate more and more with the rest of 
the world, we have to pay price of globalization even as we reap its benefits. As we have 
observed in this context, global developments affect our economy through commerce, capital 
flows, confidence, commodity price, contamination, currency rates and credit rating channels. 
Global  business  cycles  are,  therefore  impacting  both  investment  demand  and  with  a  lag 
impacting consumption demand as incomes fall and appetite for leverage reduces. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Thirdly,  growth  came  down  in  India  because  investment  climate  was  vitiated  due  to 
emergence  of  serious  structural  bottlenecks  related  to  land,  labour,  regulatory  framework, 
linkages or availability of funding, partly due to elevated concerns for asset quality. Part of 
the  problem  occurred  in  the  mining  sector,  where  judicial  and  executive  efforts to  improve 
governance  have  created  a  sort  of  a  hiatus  in  activity. When  a  clearer  operational  regime 
comes into play businesses would adjust to more normal functioning based on fair returns. 
The  other  part  of  the  problem  was  in  the  power  sector  where  bulk  of  the  54  GW  of  new 
investments capacities created during the 11th Plan turned into potential bad investments as 
coal  was  in  short  supply.  Mitigation  of  the  problem  is  hopefully  in  the  offing.  If  debt 
restructuring of discoms is well executed and coal supplies are quickly ensured, the power 
sector investments can revive in the 12th Plan. New capacity generation can easily match 
and possibly surpass that in the 11th Plan. Power sector can turn out to be a major driver of 
growth once again. As per the plans, the SEB losses are being cut by power tariff revisions. 
Investment revival is possible 
Big steps for reforming power sector are now being taken and can pave the way for revival of 
investment.  The  debt  restructuring  of  discoms  is  being  done  in  an  incentive-compatible 
manner  and  may  not  encourage  moral  hazard  or  regulatory  forbearance.  The  scheme 
contains various measures required to be taken by state discoms and state governments for 
achieving the financial turnaround of the discoms. The restructuring / reschedulement of loan 
are  to  be  accompanied  by  concrete  and  measurable  action  by  the  discoms  /  States  to 
improve  the  operational  performance  of  the  distribution  utilities.  There  may  not  be  an 
immediate  fiscal  impact  for  the  centre,  given  that  its  obligations  under  the  scheme  are 
medium-term in nature, the fiscal impact for the states in the near-term would be the interest 
outgo on 50 per cent of outstanding short-term loans which are to be taken over by them in a 
phased manner. While, a great deal of ground would still need to be covered for operational 
effectiveness  of  the  scheme,  it  does  have  the  capacity  to  reverse  the  falling  fortunes  of 
power sector investments. One hopes that the ticking clock of the potential time bomb of the 
power sector can now be defused. It is worth noting that the accumulated losses of the state 
power  distribution  companies  (discoms)  are  estimated  to  be  about  ₹1.9  trillion  as  on 
31st March, 2011. 
Financial sector can remain robust with efforts to contain newer fragilities 
India has stood out amongst its peers with an enviable record on financial stability. India’s 
gross  non-performing  assets  (NPAs)  of  scheduled  commercial  banks  as  a  percentage  of 
gross advances had declined from 12.7 per cent in 1990-91 to 2.4 per cent in 2010–11. In 
case of public sector banks, this ration had dropped from 14.0 to 2.3 per cent over the same 
period. However, during the recent economic downturn, there has been a sharp deterioration 
in asset quality of the public sector banks (PSBs), as the ratio reversed to 3.2 per cent in 
2011–12. While the NPA levels are still low by historical trends or cross-country comparison, 
newer fragilities were obvious by the high slippage ratio and a spurt in restructuring loans. 
The slippage ratio of the PSBs increased to 5.7 per cent of gross advances by at the end of 
2011–12  from  4.2  per  cent  a  year  ago.  The  recovery  also  slowed  down,  especially  in  the 
stressed sectors. While some of these changes reflect the NPA cycle that generally tracks 
economic cycle, the sectoral bottlenecks also had a role to play in such deterioration. 
There has been movement towards resolving the sector-specific issues, especially in power 
and  aviation.  With  gradual  improvement  in  economic  activity,  the  stress  may  be  further 
reduced  across  all  sectors.  This  will  bring  back  some  of  the  strength  of  the  bank  balance 
sheets  that  had  got  eroded  in  recent  years.  Unlike  many  other  countries,  India  is  a 
bank-dominated  financial  system.  Though  the  role  of  the  financial  markets  has  increased 
over the year, the financing pattern of the corporates suggests that banks account for over a 
fourth of total sources of funds for the corporates. As such, maintaining health of the banks is 
important so that they can nurse recovery by credit expansion with the silver linings already 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
on the horizon. The ratio of bank credit to GDP in India is around 55 per cent, which is much 
below  what is prevalent in many advanced economies. Therefore, the challenge for Indian 
banks is to facilitate the growth of the real sector through financial products and innovations 
subject  to  adequate  safeguards  and  adoption  of  sound  risk  management  policies.  In  the 
Indian context, foreign banks can potentially play a significant supplementing role of resource 
mobilization to fund higher growth, apart from augmenting competition and efficiency among 
the  banks.  For  example,  foreign  banks  still  have  a  lot  of  leeway  available  for  funding 
infrastructure  projects  vis-à-vis  the  prescribed  exposure  limits.  Further,  given  the  higher 
requirements  of  lending  to  the  priority  sectors  under  the  revised  policy  framework,  foreign 
banks  can  bring  in  a  lot  of  innovations  and  better  practices  and  processes  to  lend  to  the 
critical sectors of the economy like the SMEs and agriculture. 
The Reserve Bank has been a conservative central bank that accords very high priority to 
financial  stability.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  focussed  on  the 
implementation  of  the  Basel  III  norms.  It  is  also  training  its  eyes  on  curbing  increasing 
slippage and withdrawing regulatory forbearance that supports it in a phased manner. Some 
transitory  sops  to  infrastructure  loans  in  case  genuine  delays  in  commencement  of 
commercial operations are possible but these should be the exceptions rather than the norm. 
Maintaining financial discipline is of paramount importance and this would certainly demand 
higher  accountability  and  sacrifice  by  the  promoters.  On  Basel  III,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
unveiled  the  broad  course  that  the  banks  need  to  follow.  With  gradual  improvements  in 
market conditions, capital raising options for the banks would steadily improve. It should be 
possible for public sector banks (PSBs) to raise about ₹1.5 trillion of equity over the period of 
a little over 5-years till the end of 2017–18. The shareholders’ value locked in the PSBs need 
to be tapped by innovative means. Stronger banks are in fact needed to support credit flows 
for higher growth in the Indian economy. 
Containment of twin deficits remains a challenge but within our realm 
The impact of the recent governmental measures in reducing the fiscal deficit is not likely to 
be very large. In effect the reduction in diesel and LPG subsidies would amount to marginal 
fiscal  correction  in  the  current  fiscal  year.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  taking  both 
short term measures for moving closer to the budget targets as well as long term steps to 
structurally  correct  the  deficit,  thus  eventually  lowering  the  fiscal  dominance  of  monetary 
policy. Recently, the Kelkar Committee has estimated that GFD/GDP ratio for 2012–13 could 
slip  by  1  percentage  point  to  6.1  per  cent  from  the  budgeted  5.1  per  centif  corrective 
measures are not taken. It has also made several recommendations on fiscal consolidation 
laying down a path to narrow it down to 5.2 per cent in 2012–13, 4.6 per cent in 2013–14 and 
3.9 per cent in 2014–15, when the effective revenue deficit can be brought to zero. Improved 
tax collection, asset sales, pruning of subsidies and rationalization of planned spending holds 
the key to this path. Disinvestments, minority stake sales, higher PSU dividends, hiking urea 
prices and widening services tax net are part of the recommended strategy. The bottom line 
is  that  a  workable  path  to  fiscal  consolidation  is  available  –  be  it  through  the  Kelkar 
Committee or through the rolling targets set following the 13th Finance Commission. What is 
important  is  to  get  there  or  at  least  very  close  to  there  through  sustained  efforts  and  not 
become lax in face of political or electoral cycles. It is expected that the government would 
take further aggressive steps to prevent fiscal slippage this year and complete its borrowing 
programme broadly in line with what was envisaged and without any undue pressures in the 
financial markets. This can make substantial contribution to keeping interest rates low and 
reviving  the  economy.  In  fact,  the  recent  announcement  of  the  Central  Government’s 
borrowing calendar for the second half of 2012–13, which sticks to the budgeted borrowing 
figures  reflect  Government’s  resolve  for  containing  the  Gross  Fiscal  Deficit  (GFD).  It  is, 
however, imperative that further strong measures forfiscal corrections are implemented in the 
rest  of  the  year  broadly  in  line  with  the  Kelkar  Committee  recommendations.  Recent 
appreciation of the Rupee has, besides mitigating the risk of imported inflation, would also 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
greatly aid in containment of GFD by way of reduction in subsidy burden of the Government 
arising out of high Rupee cost of imported oil. 
The  trends  in  the  external  sector  are  also  showing  signs  of  some  improvement  after 
considerable stress witnessed last year. The CAD/GDP ratio declined to 3.9 per cent in Q1 of 
2012–13  from  4.5  per  cent  in  Q4  of  2011–12. While  this  is  a  positive  development,  it  has 
come about as imports contracted in face of growth slowdown and some benefits accrued 
from exchange rate pass-through from rupee depreciation in 2011–12 and in the first quarter 
this year. Macroeconomic and external sector policies would need to still factor in external 
sector  risks  in  the  coming  period,  especially  as  event  risks  emanating  from  global 
developments  remain  significant.  Therefore,  further  efforts  would  be  necessary  to  contain 
CAD and bring it in line with its sustainable level of around 2.5 per cent of GDP. The recent 
reform  measures  have  brought  about  major  change  in  global  investor  perception.  These 
investors  are  now  willing  to  continue  investing  in  India’s  long-term  growth  story.  Another 
silver  lining  is  that  India’s  net  international  investment  position  (NIIP)  that  reflects  the  net 
claims  of  non-residents  on  India  has  improved  with  the  decrease  in  these  claims  by 
US$23.9 billion  over  the  previous  quarter  to  US$220.3  billion  as  at  end-June.  While  this 
largely  reflects the  valuation  changes,  augmentation  of  non-debt  creating flows  in  the  new 
phase of economic reforms would certainly lower external financing risks, thus providing a 
much needed cushion against our external sector pressures. 
We need to convert the silver linings to our advantages 
I would like to conclude by saying that India in the second half of 2012–13 is shaping as very 
different from India in the first half. There are positives emerging across the horizon. This is 
reflected  in  our  currency  movement  that  will  bring  further  positive  spin  offs  by  lowering 
inflation,  fiscal  deficit  and  reducing  corporate  stress.  Growth  could  start  improving  into  the 
next year. Battle against inflation is, however, far from over and we need careful calibration 
of  monetary  and  non-monetary  responses  to  tame  it.  Late  revival  of  monsoon  and  steps 
taken/being  planned  to  improve  the  supply  responses  should  moderate  the  inflationary 
pressure overtime. Stronger fiscal measures on the path envisioned would pave the way for 
sustained recovery. We have seen marginal improvement in CAD. This should not, however, 
lull us into any complacency as the path to its sustainability requires several adjustments. It 
is  equally  important  that  correctives  now  being  put  in  place  do  not  attenuate  regulatory 
prudence  or  deflect  the  focus  away  from  long  term  sustainability  of  the  external  sector  by 
taking a short term view of the proposed solutions for improving capital flows. 
The slew of measures in a short span need to be turned into a habit of well-paced action, 
improved  execution  and  governance  and  credible  commitment  without  backtracking  or 
reversals. A more gradual-paced reforms earlier enabled us to achieve high growth path. In 
the  context  of  steps  taken/planned  for  our  reforms,  one  area  where  we  need  to  focus 
seriously  is  on  communication,  both  internal  and  external.  This  should  encompass 
convincing  our  domestic  constituency  about  the  experience  and  benefits  of  reforms  which 
have to be carried forward for achieving the goals of inclusive growth by having a strong and 
resilient macro-economy. It would also imply meaningful engagement with the international 
rating agencies and investor class. There is no reason to believe that these would not work 
though there are still many a bridge to cross to translate the intentions to deliverables on the 
ground. The silver linings are now visible on the horizon. We need to build upon them and 
implement  our  plans  in  the  right  earnest. The  door  of  opportunity  is  again  knocking  at  us. 
These silver linings lifting the dark clouds are, however, not something as part of our destiny 
but they are within our reach, if we work hard on them with all sincerity to convert them to our 
long term advantages 
Thank you all for giving me this opportunity to share some of my thoughts with you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
