Klaas Knot: Can intensive regulation and MSME financing coincide? 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  at the  Conference  on  “The 
future  of  banking”,  organized  by  the  Financierings-Maatschappij  voor  Ontwikkelingslanden 
N.V. (FMO), Amsterdam, 12 November 2012. 
 Your Royal Highness, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I’m  very pleased  to  be  here  today to  speak  on  this  important  topic:  the  future of banking. 
Today, we will exchange views on the changing banking sector and the role of regulation in 
that sector. And I will share some thoughts on how we can make the banking sector in this 
part  of  the  world  healthy  again.  The  key question I  will  seek  to  answer  is:  “Can  intensive 
regulation and Micro-, Small-, and Medium-sized Enterprise (MSME) financing coincide?” But 
before answering that question, let me first sketch how this intensive regulation came about. 
Over the past few decades, banking in most developed economies has become increasingly 
complex, interwoven, innovative and international. Furthermore, the focus of many Western 
banks has  gradually shifted away from what  their  core task  should have  been:  Namely,  to 
service the real economy and its customers. Instead, these banks increasingly engaged in the 
lucrative business of making money with money. This change of policy created unnecessary 
risks for their entire portfolio. Risks that couldn’t be mitigated by the existing regulations. And 
we all know what problems arose as a result.  
One  of the  answers to those  problems was  more  and  intensified regulation.  Higher  capital 
requirements, minimum liquidity requirements, extra  buffers are  but  a  few  examples of the 
measures  standard-setting bodies  developed.  Most  of  these  measures  are  currently  being 
drafted in national legislation in many countries around the world. Will intensifying regulation 
help solve some of the problems in the developed banking sector?  
Yes, I believe so. 
For,  indeed,  there  was  a  shortage  of  capital  and  liquidity  in  the  banking  sector.  And  the 
leverage was generally way too high, not just for large, international banks. Increasing capital 
buffers; establishing resolution regimes; reducing systemic relevance of banks, are some of 
the important recent initiatives designed to make banks healthier. 
Thanks to these measures, banks will be better positioned to absorb losses and become less 
dependent  on  government  support.  And  thanks  to  these  measures,  trust  in  the  financial 
sector will eventually be restored. I therefore wholeheartedly support these initiatives. 
Of  course  intensified  regulation  will  come  at  a  cost.  For  banks,  profits  will  go  down. 
Generating double digit profits will become an unrealistic target if the underlying real economy 
the bank is servicing does not generate such high profits either. For customers, it means that 
financial  products  and  services  will  become  more  expensive.  And  investors  will  come  to 
realize that investing in a bank is a long-term undertaking, rather than a quick and easy way 
to make money. 
Intensified  regulation will  also  make  some  business  models  less  appealing.  But  let  us  not 
forget that those are exactly the business models we are worried about. Funding an extremely 
long-maturity asset portfolio with very short-term paper used to be quite common for a while 
for many larger banks in developed economies. 
But this is undesirable. 
However,  understandably,  many are  worried  that  this  intensified regulation will  hurt  MSME 
financing.  MSMEs are  generally treated  either  as  corporate or  as  retail  clients.  If  they  are 
treated as corporates, MSME loans may in some cases be considered riskier than loans to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
large corporates. Such as when the MSME loan is provided in a country with a high sovereign 
risk. 
An  ECB  study  published  last  week1  showed  that  access  to  bank  loans  in  the  Euro  area, 
including MSME loans, was becoming slightly more difficult. Moreover, the survey pointed to 
somewhat  higher  rejection  rates  for  loan  applications.  Meanwhile,  the  percentage  of 
respondents reporting access to finance as their main problem remained broadly unchanged. 
The demand for external financing showed even a slight decline. 
I think that regulators and supervisors must continuously evaluate how risky banking activities 
really are. This is a learning process. If by evidence it turns out that some activities are less 
risky than initially considered, we should consider treating such activities more favorably. For 
instance, through lowering risk weights. If they turn out to be riskier, we should treat them with 
more  caution,  whatever  the  activity  concerned,  MSME  loans  included.  To  me  this  is  the 
proper approach to making sure banks are sound and the financial system stable. 
I think, though, that MSME lending will ultimately not  be disproportionately affected. Let  me 
explain this: 
First of all, all new regulation will be phased in only gradually. For some measures even over 
a  period  of  up  to  10  years.  This  should  give  banks,  investors  and  customers,  including 
MSMEs, sufficient time to adapt to the new requirements. In addition, this gradual phasing in 
will also allow the banking sector to benefit again from an economic upturn. This hadn’t been 
possible if the new requirements had come into force with immediate effect. 
Second,  although  the  bar  will  be  raised  for  all  banking  activities,  the  new  regulation  is 
primarily  targeted  at  the  riskiest  activities.  Systemically  important  banks,  trading  assets, 
complex securitizations, those are the type of banks and activities that  will be experiencing 
the highest impact. Those are the activities that will become least appealing to banks. Not the 
traditional, plain vanilla banking business, which includes MSME lending. 
And third, I believe that all new regulation explicitly allows for a proportionate implementation. 
This means that emerging market economies are permitted to use a risk-based approach with 
respect to the tasks of the supervisor and the standards that they impose on banks. Even in 
the latest EU legislation, proposals have been made to ensure that capital requirements for 
MSME financing do not grow as rapidly as those for other banking activities. 
I find it encouraging to learn that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, starting even 
this year, will develop guidance on how to apply such a proportionality principle. For emerging 
markets this guidance is most welcome. 
So altogether I think that intensified regulation, provided it is implemented proportionately, can 
continue to go hand in hand with sufficient MSME financing. In the end, sounder and healthier 
banks will enhance financial stability. This, in turn, will benefit the entire financial sector, and 
hence also the MSME business. 
If  you  ask  me  if  I  think  that  intensifying  regulation  will  solve  all  of  the  problems?  No,  it 
definitely won’t, I’m afraid! 
If only,  because intensifying regulation does not necessarily motivate the banking sector to 
move back towards its core task of servicing the real economy and its customers. Take, for 
example, proprietary trading. This  is  when a  bank trades financial instruments with  its  own 
money instead of its customers’ money, sometimes even following an investment strategy it 
doesn’t advise to its customers. As a result, the bank makes a profit for itself instead of for the 
customers. Such a disconnect between the interest of the bank and that of the customer still 
occurs too often. 
                                                
1 
“Survey  on  the  access  to  finance  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  in  the  euro  area”, 
2 November 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ultimately,  going  back  towards  their  core  task  of  servicing  the  real  economy  and  its 
participants  is  where  the  future  of  banking  lies.  No  bank  will  survive  that  does  not  set  its 
clients’ interests center stage, instead of sales targets or profits. 
I find it encouraging to learn that in many emerging markets clients are still put first. This most 
likely  explains  in  part  why the  banking  sectors  in  many  emerging  market  economies  have 
weathered the financial storm much better than in developed economies. Other factors that 
have  contributed  to  their  stability  is  that  many  banks  in  emerging  market  economies  still 
engage predominantly in plain vanilla banking activities…. …and that they are strongly funded 
by wholesale funding. 
Furthermore, I find it encouraging that banks in emerging market economies have remained 
stable despite the fact that they have used quite innovative ways of banking. Many emerging 
markets  use  ICT  solutions that  are  very advanced.  Such as  mobile  banking,  which  allows 
individuals and MSMEs to access and transfer money without needing to travel to a branch. 
Your  own  country,  governor  Velarde,  may  serve  as  a  fine  example  here.  In  your  country 
branchless  banking  may  have  been  borne  out  of  necessity.  But  in  recent  years,  this  has 
proved to facilitate access to finance for great many MSMEs. 
You have also shown that regulation, even if intensified,  can be designed to accommodate 
these innovative ways of banking while still protecting customers and safeguarding financial 
stability. Customer protection in your country is even set as a top priority. It calls for banks to 
formally assess the financial situation of the client in order to avoid over-indebtedness. Such 
initiatives have vastly helped to establish a solid MSME business and sustainable growth in 
your country. 
I am therefore quite confident that also in developed countries, we shall manage to combine 
intensified  regulation  with  sound  MSME  financing.  And  that  we  shall  also  manage  to 
ultimately  motivate  our  banks  to  move  back  towards  their  core  task  of  servicing  the  real 
economy and their customers. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
Today’s  conference  coincides  with  the  opening  of  the  Dutch  National  Money  Week,  later 
today. During this week, we teach our youngsters how to deal with money in a responsible 
way.  For  today’s  youngsters  create  the  demand  for  financial  products  and  services  of 
tomorrow. And many of them will become entrepreneurs, setting up MSMEs themselves. By 
educating  young  people  in  money  matters,  I  hope  we  can  empower  them  to  shape  the 
banking sector to their  liking and to their demands, instead of merely enabling them to  use 
what banks have to offer. 
I  thank  you  all  for  your  attention,  and  I  wish  to  you  all  a  very  interesting  and  fruitful 
conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
