Robert Ophèle: Micro economic analysis of companies 
Introductory speech by Mr Robert Ophèle, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, 
at the Plenary Meeting of the European Committee of Central Balance Sheet Data Offices 
(ECCBSO), Paris, 18–19 October 2012. 
 Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you in our new conference center. I am delighted to 
receive so many distinguished participants to this meeting, coming from the same universe 
of statistical institutions or central banks – whether they are members of the Eurosystem or 
not – and sharing the same interest for micro economic analysis of companies. 
We  are  very  happy  indeed  to  organise  this  year’s  ECCBSO  regular  meeting  which  will 
enable  you  to  discuss  in  depth  about  the  past  achievements  of your  task  forces  and  the 
prospects,  drawing  possibly  some  kind  of  action plans.  Undoubtedly,  we  need  to  explore 
further  a  number  of  those  issues  where  your  Committee  is  fully  and  often  very 
successfully  involved.  I  am grateful  that  BDF  can  provide,  in  its  turn,  the  opportunity 
to  host  this conference. As you know, Banque de France is one of the co-founders of the 
Committee  and  has  always  shown  its  commitment  by  actively  contributing  to these task 
forces. 
From  my  previous  experiences,  especially  as  head  of  the  Directorate  General  Operations, 
and  presently  also,  as  President  of  the  French  Banking  and 
Insurance  Supervisory 
Authority,  I  measure  what  your  contributions  can  provide  in  operational  terms  (risk 
assessment)  and  also  in  terms  of  analysis  (research,  advice,  BACH  data  base).  The 
works of your Committee, and so to say its affiliates, is useful and I  would like to take the 
opportunity of  this  plenary  meeting  to  encourage  you  to  keep  the  same  stance.  From the 
perspective  of  a  NCB,  your  contributions  are  important  in  so  far  they provide platforms 
for  exchanging  our  thoughts,  our  know-how  and,  last  but  not  least,  for  exchanging  data 
within the  Eurosystem  but also with statistical  institutions,  witness  in  that regard  is all what 
is  being  done  with  the  European  Group  Register  managed  by  EUROSTAT  and  now 
with  the Committee for Monetary Financial and Balance of payment statistics. 
Obviously,  Balance  sheet  and  Profit  &  Loss  information,  or  more  generally information on 
non-financial  companies,  have  a  real  bearing  on  our  institutions  in  line  with  a  twofold 
objective: assessing  individual  companies and  using  aggregated  company  data  to  perform 
macro  economic  analyses or researches. 
First, it  is  important for  micro-analyses  in  the assessment  of individual companies 
using  classic  ratio-based  firm  analysis  methods.  This  can  help  us  to  evaluate  our 
collateral, or portfolios of banks if we are involved in banking supervision. 
But  for  an  NCB  member  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  micro  analyses  have  a  particular 
importance  within  the  European  Credit  Assessment  Framework  if it  is  recognised  as  an 
In-house  Credit  Assessment  System.  Those  NCBs  which  run  an 
ICAS  (currently 
Austria,  France,  Germany  and  Spain)  use  balance  sheet  data  for  the  assessment  and 
prediction  of  default  risk  under  a  set  of  precisely  defined  conditions.  The  ICAS  statute  is 
demanding  but  it  is  worthwhile  because  it  can  play  an  important  role  for  monetary  policy 
operations.  For  this  purpose,  we  need  to  rely  on  a  good  methodology,  commonly 
agreed  and  depending  to  a  large  extent  on  an  ability  to  deliver  a  sound  and  solid 
assessment  of  non-financial  companies.  This  helps  NCBs  to  fulfil  one  of  their  core 
functions,  which  is  the  refinancing  of  commercial banks and we experience that daily. 
On  this  very  important  subject  –  the  ability  to  assess  credit  risk  of  non  financial 
companies as offering a possibility to expand the amount of eligible collaterals – I took note 
that  several  NCBs  are  about  to  join  the  four  present  ICAS: 
the 
is  a  signal  of 
this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
level, 
the  analysis  of 
the  non-financial  sector 
relevance  of  this  mechanism  to  help  the  commercial  banks  to  develop  their  loans 
and,  hence,  support  economic  growth.  Quite  in  line  with  this  subject,  I  would  like  to 
stress  the  quality  of  the  work  that  has  been  done  recently  by  the  Working  Group  Risk 
Assessment,  to  compare  the  various  European  central  Banks’  Internal  Credit  Risk 
Assessment  Systems:  this  is  a  very  topical  issue  which  is  a  good example of what 
your Committee can bring to all of us. 
Second,  information  on  non-financial  companies  is  important  for  analyses  on  a 
macro  level,  e.g.  by  using  aggregated  company  data  to perform economic analyses or 
stress testing experiments. 
On  a  macro 
is  essential  both  for 
policymakers  and  for  central  banks.  From  a  central  bank’s  perspective,  these  analyses 
help  to  ensure  financial  stability,  e.g.  through  performing  different  kinds  of  economic 
analyses  and  stress  tests,  the  latter  having  gained  dramatically  in  importance  in  the 
course of the crisis. 
The work performed by the working groups has thus several major fields of application.  Be 
it  by  trying  to  fathom  new  accounting  standards,  building databases,  or  working  on  the 
model  development  and  default  definitions, the  different  working  groups contribute  greatly 
to  enhancing  our  models and  procedures  and  also,  more  generally  our  micro  economic 
intelligence.  Thus  the  publications  of  the  different  working  groups,  especially  on  the 
ECCSBO  website  can  play  an  important  role  in  consolidating  our  knowledge  but  also 
supporting  works  in  other instances  within all  participating institutions and beyond, because 
we can only gain in keeping an open mind. 
From this point of view, as you know Banque de France has paid particular attention to  the 
continuation of the BACH database, since we were chosen to run it, two years ago, for the 
common  interest  of  the ECCBSO  members and  beyond.  We  are  committed  to  keeping 
it  functioning  properly,  and encourage all initiatives to exploit all those interesting series of 
aggregated  ratios.  Among  the  numerous  researches  that  have  been  made  with  these 
data,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  paper  published  by  two  economists  from the  ECB, Andra 
Buca  and  Philip  Vermeulen,  last  February,  concerning  “corporate  investment  and  bank-
dependant  borrowers  during  the  recent financial  crisis”.  Here  also  at  the  Banque  de 
France,  we  publish  several articles  in our Bulletin extracting valuable  piece  of information 
in the BACH data base. 
Concerning your so-called WG 3, which focuses on IASB methodology and  more  generally 
monitoring  of  listed  groups,  Banque  de  France  is  interested  in  the  new  cooperation 
started  last  year  with  Eurostat.  It will  help  to  identify  more  precisely  European  groups’ 
structure  and especially cross-border groups. But  I understand  that this TF  is  involved  in 
many  other  topics,  of  which  works  on  a  dedicated  data base  (ERICA)  which  can  deliver 
interesting  results.  There  is  a  lot  of work behind this and we can  only  hope  to see  those 
valuable contributions to be well promoted. 
The  same  is  true  for  your  Study  group:  you  are  about  to  release  a  seemingly  very 
attractive  study  on  “net  worth  at  risk”  which  aims  at describing the ability of companies to 
face an external financial shock, with a focus on recent years: it will certainly attract a lot of 
attention when you publish this work. 
As  it  is  time  to  conclude,  I  would  like  first  to  confirm  that  BDF,  a founding member  of 
the ECCSBO, is still very dedicated in all that is related with corporate analysis. 
Your  presence  here today is  certainly the  expression of a  commitment similar  to  our  own 
one;  it  is  a  good  augur  for  your  future  works  and an encouragement for our joint efforts to 
be pursued. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  personally  President  Manuel  Ortega because I  know all 
what you do to keep  the dynamics  of this Committee.  Many  thanks  also  to  all  of  you  for 
being  here  today,  for your  support  and  your  participation  in  this  meeting,  because  I  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
no  doubt  that  you  will  have  fruitful  debates.  If  I  may,  I  would  add  a special thanks for my 
colleagues from the Companies Directorate and for the protocol office, who deployed a lot 
of  efforts  in  organising  this event  for  the  better:  without  their  help  we  wouldn’t  have  been 
able to meet at this venue. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
