Tharman Shanmugaratnam: Opportunities in Asia for long-term growth 
and a look at the role of Singapore’s local banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,  Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Official  Inauguration  of  DBS  Asia  Central,  Marina  Bay  Financial  Centre 
(MBFC) Tower 3, Singapore, 17 October 2012. 
 Mr  Peter  Seah  Lim  Huat,  Chairman,  DBS  Bank Limited  Mr  Piyush  Gupta,  Chief  Executive 
Officer, DBS Bank Limited 
Distinguished Guests, 
It  is  a  real  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  for  the  official  opening  of  DBS’  new 
1. 
headquarters at the MBFC – DBS Asia Central. 
2. 
Established in 1968 as the Development Bank of Singapore, DBS played a key role 
in helping to drive Singapore’s industrialization efforts. As Singapore moved to develop into a 
key  financial  centre  in  the  Asian  timezone,  DBS  also  evolved  into  a  full-fledged  financial 
services group, offering a comprehensive range of products and services. 
3. 
Over  the  last  few  decades,  DBS  has  also  expanded  strongly  into  Asia,  and  has 
established  a  strong  regional  footprint.  Apart  from  its  key  markets  in  Singapore  and  Hong 
Kong, DBS is strengthening its franchise in Southeast Asia (SEA), China, India and Taiwan. 
Today, with its network spanning 12 markets in Asia, DBS is not only a leading bank in Asia 
Pacific but also ranked by some as one of the strongest banks in Asia1. 
Leveraging on opportunities in Asia to anchor long term growth 
4. 
The  global  economy  continues  to  face  many  risks  and  uncertainties.  The 
US economy  has  not  returned  to  pre-crisis  levels  of  output,  the  Eurozone  remains  in 
recession, and emerging economies are starting to show more signs of weakness. Against 
this  backdrop,  Asia  has  been  resilient  but  remains  vulnerable  to  external  shocks. 
Nevertheless,  given  the  region’s  strong  fundamentals,  we  continue  to  be  confident  about 
Asia’s longer term growth potential.  
One bright spot is demand for financing in Asia. Demand for almost every segment 
5. 
of Asian finance is also growing – trade and structured trade finance, cross-border corporate 
lending, infrastructure finance, capital-raising in equity and bond markets, corporate treasury 
services and wealth management. Trade finance is driven by burgeoning Asian trade, which 
is projected to grow at about 8.3% per annum. By 2020, 60% of global trade will have an 
Asian  component.2  Corporate  funding  needs  in  Asia  are  also  growing,  with  57%  of  Asia 
Pacific business leaders expecting their funding needs to increase over the next 2 to 3 years, 
compared to 32% in Europe3. On infrastructure finance, we are familiar with ADB’s estimates 
that Asian infrastructure spending is expected to amount to US$8 trillion from 2010 to 2020. 
6. 
To  meet  this  strong  demand,  there  is  scope  to  broaden  and  deepen  financial 
intermediation in Asia. However, this is likely to take place against some headwinds caused 
by (i) European bank deleveraging (ii) banks’ diminished ability to provide long-term financing 
                                                
1  According to Bloomberg Markets, DBS is 8th in the second annual ranking of the world’s strongest bank in 
2012. 
2  Source: “Trade Transformed: The Emerging New Corridors of Trade Power”, Citibank (Oct 2011) & McKinsey. 
3  Source: “Under Pressure: Funding in an Uncertain World”, Allen & Overy (Oct 2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
6.3. 
6.2. 
arising  from  revised  Basel  capital  rules.  Nevertheless,  we  are  unlikely  to  see  sudden 
dislocation in the Asian financing landscape because of the following: 
6.1. 
First,  Asian  banks  remain  well-capitalised,  and  notwithstanding  cost/deleveraging 
pressures,  international  banks  will  want  to  preserve  their  Asian  franchises  given 
Asia’s stronger growth potential relative to other regions.  
Second,  bank  financing  in  Asia  will  adapt.  Some  banks  have  already  begun  to 
explore  certain  risk-transfer  mechanisms  (e.g.  credit  insurance)  to  continue 
extending credit, while complying with stricter capital rules. Other banks have shifted 
to  “originate  and  distribute”  models  which  allows  them  to  play  a  role  in  long-term 
financing  even  as  they  scale  back  their  provision  of  long-term  loans.  We  expect 
banks in Asia to continually explore new models to remain relevant and constantly 
develop its expertise to meet Asia’s financing demands. 
Third, growing role of non-bank capital to complement bank financing: The signs are 
very  promising.  From  2007-2011,  the  proportion  of  aggregate  capital  raised  by 
private equity growth funds in Asia Pacific has almost doubled from 32% to 62%. On 
debt  markets,  we  have  seen  strong  issuance  activity  in  Asia  Pacific  ex-Japan. 
Almost US$800 billion of bonds were issued in the first three quarters of this year, 
establishing  a  new  high  when  compared  to  the  previous  record  of  about  US$525 
billion over the same period in 20114. Over the longer term, emerging Asia’s bond 
markets are expected to grow 18-fold from US$5 trillion in 2009 to US$90 trillion in 
20305.  
7. 
There is therefore great scope for financial intermediaries in Asia to play a key role 
in  financing  Asia’s  future  growth,  channelling  surpluses  to  meet  the  region’s  needs,  and 
facilitating  closer  integration  of  trade  and  financial  markets  in  the  region.  DBS,  with  its 
extensive  network  in  Asia,  is  well-poised  to  be  at  the  forefront  of  these  trends.   DBS  has 
done well in this respect - for instance, DBS ranks amongst the top 5 mandated arrangers of 
Asia Pacific syndicated loans (ex-Australia and Japan).  In Singapore, DBS is also part of a 
bank  consortium  led  by  Temasek  Holdings  to  provide  long-tenor  financing  to  Singapore-
based corporates in infrastructure projects in Asia Pacific.  
Role of local banks in Singapore’s financial system 
8. 
Even as our local banks like DBS expand into the region to ride on Asia’s growth, it 
is important that they remain deeply rooted in Singapore, their home market. They have been 
and will continue to be a crucial part of Singapore’s financial system. Local banks have an 
important role to play in safeguarding Singapore’s financial stability, particularly in times of 
crisis. To continue to play this role effectively, our local banks should continue to strengthen 
their  systems  of  management,  risk  control,  technology,  operations  and  expertise  as 
businesses evolve. 
9. 
Local banks are also well-positioned to serve the local community, and in particular, 
support the development of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). I was told that DBS 
launched  an  enhanced  Social  Enterprise  Banking  Package  in  July  that  offers  social 
entrepreneurs  virtually  free  banking  transaction  services  and  loans  on  preferential  terms, 
giving them time to focus on building their businesses and pursue social causes. I have met 
some of these social entrepreneurs who have the opportunity to showcase their products and 
services in a dedicated DBS ‘Social Enterprise Corner’ here at DBS’ MBFC headquarters.  
                                                
4  Source: Dealogic. 
5  Source: “Super Cycle Report”, Standard Chartered Bank (2010). The numbers are quoted in nominal terms. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
10. 
Singapore  will  continue  to  evolve  and  grow  its  role  as  an  international  financial 
centre.  The  development  of  the  Marina  Bay  Financial  Centre  (MBFC)  is  a  testament  to 
Singapore’s  commitment  to  support  the  long-term  growth  of  the  financial  industry.  With 
today’s opening of DBS Asia Central, DBS is now one of the largest tenants in the MBFC.  
11. 
As  one  of  the  largest  employers  in  Singapore’s  financial  services  industry  with  a 
headcount  of  over  8000  staff,  DBS  also  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  nurturing  and 
developing  talent.  The  current  MBFC  location  has  allowed  DBS  to  introduce  a  number  of 
initiatives, including its multi-market, multi-year strategic occupancy programme, which aims 
to consolidate relevant teams under one roof to facilitate greater efficiency and productivity, 
enabling the bank to be even more responsive to customer’s needs. I also understand that 
DBS’ new HQ is designed to foster a strong sense of community and collaboration amongst 
DBS’  staff. There  are  spacious  social  hubs  on  each floor  connecting  the  workstations  and 
meeting areas to encourage staff interaction, and all staff get to enjoy 180 degree view of the 
Marina  Bay  area  (not  just  senior  managers).  Importantly,  such  innovative  spatial  design  is 
complemented  by  responsive  workplace  programmes  such  as  flexi-work  hours  to  promote 
work-life balance for DBS’ staff.  
Closing remarks 
Let me again extend my heartiest congratulations to DBS Bank on the opening of 
12. 
your new headquarters. I wish DBS Bank success as you continue to play an active role in 
the local and Asian banking scene. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
