Simon M Potter: Role of central bank interactions with financial markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at New York University’s Stern School of Business, New 
York City, 27 November 2012. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak to you today. Having taught classes at New 
York University (NYU), I know firsthand the quality and analytical rigor of the students and 
faculty. You should all be proud of the excellent curriculum and education you are receiving 
here at NYU. I would like to thank Kim for giving me the opportunity to speak this evening 
and the public service he is providing through his leadership of the center. 
My remarks today will focus on the role of central bank interactions with financial markets. 
Because  of  the  New  York  Fed’s  position  within  the  us  financial  system,  our  staff  is  in 
continuous  contact  with  financial  market  participants,  including  investors,  intermediaries, 
financial market utilities and analysts. Much of this contact occurs through the Markets Group 
at the New York Fed. For most of my professional life prior to becoming head of the Markets 
Group earlier this year, I had been a research economist working at the New York Fed. Like 
many  research  economists,  I  was  trained  to  understand  the  economy  with  mathematical 
models that contain at best a rudimentary description of a financial system. But even in the 
capacity of a research economist at a central bank, my understanding of financial markets 
and the economy was greatly informed by the many types of interactions central banks have 
with financial markets. 
Today I will first reflect briefly on the nature and purposes of central bank interactions with 
financial markets. I will highlight the operational and market monitoring responsibilities of the 
New York Fed Markets Group and how these responsibilities evolved since the onset of the 
financial  crisis  in  2007.  Next,  I  will  share  some  of  my  personal  experience  as  a  research 
economist  at  the  time  trying  to  make  sense  of  the  unprecedented  events  of  the  financial 
crisis through the prism of economic theory, and the lessons I learned. Let me emphasize 
that my remarks represent my personal views and do not necessarily represent the views of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
Pre-crisis central bank interaction with financial markets 
The  Markets  Group  interacts  with  financial  markets  in  several  important  capacities.  It  is 
perhaps  best  known  for  the  role  it  plays  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  by 
conducting  open  market  operations  (OMOs)  at  the  direction  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC). As most of you probably know, in an OMO the central bank purchases 
or  sells  securities  in  the  market  in  order  to  influence  the  level  of  central  bank  reserves 
available to the banking system. The Federal Reserve Act limits the types of securities the 
Federal Reserve may purchase in its OMOs, and under its Authorization for Domestic OMOs 
the FOMC only authorizes transactions in us government securities, which includes Treasury 
and agency securities.1  
The staffs that have direct responsibility for executing OMOs are known as “the Desk.” Until 
late  2008,  the  primary  role  of  the  Desk  was  to  influence  the  daily  federal  funds  rate  by 
adjusting  the  aggregate  level  of  reserves  in  the  banking  system  through  transactions  in 
Treasury securities arranged with designated primary dealers–counterparties operating in the 
                                                
1  For the full Domestic Authorization, see the minutes for the first FOMC meeting of each year. The minutes for 
follows:  http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/ 
the  January  2012  FOMC  meeting  are  as 
fomcminutes20120125.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
government  securities  market.  OMOs  typically  employ  an  auction  format  to  ensure 
competitive  bidding  and  are  structured  in  a  manner  that  minimizes  disruptions  to  market 
functioning. 
The  Markets  Group  has  several  other  critical  transactional  responsibilities  as  well.  It  is 
responsible  for  lender  of  last  resort  activities  in  the  New  York  Federal  Reserve  District, 
operating the discount window as a source of short-term loans for banks in sound financial 
condition but otherwise in need of funding. As fiscal agent of the U.S. Treasury, the Markets 
Group  plays  a  role  in  conducting  Treasury  auctions  and  facilitates  payments  and  other 
financial  services  for  the  Treasury.  The  Markets  Group  also  provides  important  payment, 
custody  and  investment  services  for  the  dollar  holdings  of  foreign  central  banks  and 
international institutions. 
In addition and as a crucial complement to its operational responsibilities, the Markets Group 
has  responsibility  for  monitoring  and  analyzing  financial  markets.  These  activities  serve  to 
support  existing  operations  and  provide  vital  knowledge  as  new  types  of  operations  are 
contemplated.  They  also  supply  an  important  source  of  unique  market  intelligence  for 
policymakers on developments in an array of financial markets that could affect the economy 
or  have  policy  implications.  These  efforts  tend  to  focus  on  understanding  broad  financial 
market  conditions,  expectations  for  monetary  policy  and  the  real  economy,  and  financial 
stability risks. My use of the phrase “market monitoring” is intended to capture much more 
than  following  prices  and  trading  activity  in  asset  markets  and  conversing  with  market 
participants globally about the causes behind market developments, as important as that is. 
It  includes  broader  responsibility  for  analyzing  both  immediate  and  longer-term  trends  in 
global financial markets and linkages among financial institutions, and it rests upon a deep 
understanding  of  the  microstructure  of  financial  instruments  and  markets  and  of  the 
motivations of market participants.2  
By maintaining deep expertise in particular asset classes and detailed knowledge of market 
behavior and infrastructure, the Desk is able to structure and execute operations to achieve 
the  objectives  of  policymakers.  This  deep  expertise  also  enhances  the  quality  of  the 
information and staff assessments about current market developments that is communicated 
to  policymakers  throughout  the  Federal  Reserve  System  through  a  variety  of  briefings, 
conversations and written products. 
Crisis response: change in central bank interactions with markets 
The Markets Group’s monitoring responsibilities and broad array of contacts across different 
market segments were critical to identifying underlying causes of the increased volatility and 
sharp repricing observed across a wide range of financial markets in 2007 and 2008. This 
information contributed to policymakers’ understanding of where and how to target liquidity 
support  measures  beyond  the  traditional  form  of  discount  window  lending  to  depository 
institutions. The temporary liquidity facilities were designed by drawing upon skills across the 
Federal Reserve System including market and operational experts, lawyers, economists and 
accountants. Given the unprecedented shocks to the market and the economy more broadly, 
the facilities had to be set up very quickly – in a matter of days or weeks. These included 
facilities designed to lend to banks and primary dealers to ensure adequate access to short-
term  credit,  such  as  the  primary  dealer  credit  facility  (PDCF)  and  the  Term  Securities 
Lending  Facility  (TSLF).  Other  programs  were  designed  to  lend  directly  to  borrowers  and 
                                                
2  To further this objective, the New York Fed also sponsors a private-sector group of market participants – the 
Treasury  Market  Practices  Group  –  to  support  the  functioning  of  Treasury,  agency  debt,  and  agency 
mortgage-backed securities markets. For further information, see the following: http://www.newyorkfed.org/ 
tmpg/index.html. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investors in critical nonbank markets, such as the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) 
and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF).3 
Since the federal funds rate target reached its effective lower bound late in 2008, the FOMC 
has considered additional ways of providing further policy accommodation. At the direction of 
the  FOMC,  the  Desk  has  designed  and  implemented  asset  purchase  programs  that  have 
greatly expanded the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve and changed the composition of 
the types of assets it holds. Market monitoring and the knowledge of market functioning has 
been  crucial  for  the  effective  translation  of  broad  policy  directives  for  these  purchase 
programs into concrete operational plans. 
In  the  case  of  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)  purchases,  initially  the  Federal 
Reserve used external investment managers, acting at the direction of the Desk, as a means 
of implementing MBS purchases. This was necessary because the Desk had not transacted 
in MBS prior to the crisis and thus did not have either the systems or the market knowledge 
needed  to  execute  purchases  efficiently.  As  the  Markets  Group  staff  developed  the 
operational capacity and analytical expertise, partly by  working closely  with the investment 
managers,  it  began  to  execute  MBS  purchases  and  assumed  full  trading  responsibility  in 
March 2010. Prior to assuming their trading role, staff gained an in-depth understanding of 
the  fundamental  aspects  of  the  MBS  market  and  technical  trading  conventions.  This 
expertise  allowed  the  staff  to  effectively  synthesize  numerous  market  indicators  and  apply 
them  to  its  trading.  For  example,  understanding  supply  and  demand  factors  affecting  the 
MBS market is essential in helping to ensure that operations can be executed smoothly. In 
addition, MBS have an embedded prepayment option, which affects the risk and prepayment 
characteristics  of  these  securities,  and  consequently  the  way  in  which  purchases  of  these 
securities influence policy objectives and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over time. 
The scope of the Desk’s market expertise has had to expand in ways beyond supporting new 
modes  of  operation.  As  the  financial  crisis  revealed  the  importance  of  maintaining  a  wide 
range of financial market knowledge, Desk staff covered a broader set of financial markets 
and  instruments  compared  to  the  pre-crisis  period.  We  also  more  explicitly  focused  on 
linkages  between  markets  and  underlying,  longer-term  trends  that  could  present  financial 
stability  risks  in  the  future.  With  the  expansion  of  monetary  policy  into  less  conventional 
territory, our analysis of monetary policy expectations had to evolve as well, as evidenced by 
an  increasingly  comprehensive  survey  of  primary  dealer  economists  each  FOMC  cycle4. 
Lastly,  our  own  internal  analytical  capabilities  have  also  deepened,  for  instance  with  the 
creation of a portfolio analytics unit to better assess the risks and outlook associated with the 
Federal Reserve’s expanded asset holdings.5  
I  anticipate  that  as  the economic  and  policy  environment  changes, the Desk’s  interactions 
with the market will continue to evolve, both in terms of its operational capabilities and the 
focus  of  its  market  monitoring  and  analytical  responsibilities  needed  to  support  Federal 
Reserve operations and the information needs of policymakers. 
                                                
3  Lending through these temporary liquidity facilities was fully secured, as with the standing discount window 
facility, and almost every facility was designed to provide a useful source of funding during stressed financial 
market  conditions  but  to  be  an  unattractive  source  of  funding  once  markets  returned  toward  more  normal 
functioning. All of the temporary short-term lending facilities had ceased extending new credit by early 2010 
and were closed, although reciprocal swap facilities with foreign central banks were restored later that year, 
and some longer term loans arranged under the TALF remain outstanding. 
4  See  the  following  for  further  information  about  the  Desk’s  Primary  Dealer  Survey,  along  with  historical 
responses:  http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/primarydealer_survey_ 
questions  and  aggregated 
questions.html. 
5  This  staff  unit  produces  an  annual  report  reviewing  open  market  operations  and  other  developments 
follows: 
the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet.  For  a 
list  of  such  reports,  see  as 
influencing 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/annual_reports.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Lessons learned on market interactions through prism of an economist  
From  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  until  earlier  this  year,  I  acted  in  the  capacity  of  a 
research economist at the New York Fed. I want to turn to some of the lessons learned as an 
economist trying to make sense of the crisis through economic theory and how it could be 
easy to misdiagnose the crisis without the multitude of interactions with financial markets that 
I  have  described.  I  will  also  apply  these  lessons  to  the  current  controversy  about  how 
economics  should  move  forward  after  the  crisis.  In  order  to  illustrate  some  of  the  lessons 
learned from the crisis, I offer two different perspectives: first as a research economist trying 
to  make  sense  out  of  the  initial  phases  of  the  crisis  in  real  time  and  mostly  failing;  and 
second  as  a  central  banker  directly  observing  and  trying  to  counteract  the  panic  that  took 
hold of global financial markets in September 2008. My observations will further underscore 
the absolute criticality of a central bank’s interactions with financial markets as a basis for 
properly diagnosing financial disruptions that threaten the economy and developing effective 
remedies. 
In an immediate response to the onset of the crisis in August 2007, the New York Fed began 
to  hold  an  in-depth  discussion  every  afternoon  about  the  day’s  developments.  These 
discussions involved staff from all parts of the Bank and were usually led by Tim Geithner, 
the  president  of  the  New  York  Fed  at  that  time.  In  addition  to  a  summary  of  market 
developments,  prices  and  liquidity  conditions,  staff  would  bring  information  from  across  a 
spectrum  of  financial  institutions  and  market  participants,  the  kind  of  information  that 
throughout  the  crisis  period  would  prove  to  be  invaluable  to  policy  makers.  In  addition  to 
sharing  information  from  across  the  Bank,  discussions  at  these  meetings  would  aim  to 
synthesize  diverse  information  gleaned  from  markets  or  if  no  synthesis  was  available 
generate new questions for the staff to gain intelligence on. 
The basic skills that economists can bring to such meetings are a framing of developments 
based  on  the  efficient  markets  hypothesis,  which  holds  that  financial  markets  will  quickly 
incorporate all relevant information in asset prices, along with an understanding of economic 
fundamentals.  Many  commentators  have  associated  a  blind  faith  in  efficient  markets  by 
market participants and regulators as one of the main underlying causes of the crisis.6 This 
seems an overly simplistic and mostly incorrect characterization. A partially correct aspect of 
this critique is that market discipline failed in the period before the crisis. However, this is not 
a true rejection of the efficient markets hypothesis, as expounded by Gene Fama, but rather 
a failure for incentives to be appropriately aligned.7  
An  efficient  markets  explanation  usually  involves  a  great  deal  of  the  Monday  morning 
quarterbacking:  after  observing  market  moves  that  prove  an  analysis  incorrect,  there  is 
usually  a  tweak  to  this  previous  analysis  prompted  by  the  market  move,  which  does  not 
require  any  substantial  changes  to  an  underlying  view.  To  outsiders  this  might  sound  like 
cheating, but if the efficient markets hypothesis has validity, then unexpected market moves 
always  contain  new  information  over  the  original  analysis.  Indeed,  the  ability  of  individual 
markets to efficiently aggregate diverse sources of information most of the time is why the 
efficient markets hypothesis gained empirical support.8  
                                                
6  See  Adam  B.  Ashcraft  and  Til  Schuermann  (2008),  “Understanding  the  Securitization  of  Subprime 
Mortgage Credit”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Reports  No.  318  (New  York:  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, March) for a discussion of how adverse selection and asymmetric information along with 
poor incentives caused a lack of market discipline. 
7  For  further  discussion  of  the  efficient  markets  hypothesis  and  the  crisis,  see  Eugene  Fama’s  blog, 
“Fama/French Forum” (shared with Kenneth French). In particular, see Eugene Fama and Kenneth French 
(2008), “Q&A: Market Turmoil” Fama/French Forum (Santa Monica: Dimensional Fund Advisors, December). 
8  For a specific example of this phenomenon, see Richard Roll (1984), “Orange Juice and Weather” American 
Economic Review, vol. 74 (December), pp. 861–880. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In normal times, the tension between efficient markets and actual developments is relieved 
by  a  series  of  these  tweaked  explanations  without  any  substantial  changes  to  underlying 
views.  But  as  markets  came  under  increasing  stress  it  made  the  arbitrage  and  liquidity 
assumptions  underlying  efficient  market  explanations  less  tenable.9  Further,  the  signals 
generated in different markets started to disagree markedly. 
One of the basic quandaries at the start of the crisis was the differing perspectives from price 
developments  in  equity  and  fixed  income  markets.  The  fixed  income  and  equity  markets 
were giving very different signals about the outlook for the economy. Fixed income markets 
were indicating an abrupt slowdown in economic activity and through derivatives such as the 
ABX  indices  substantial  credit  losses  on  some  of  the  newly  issued  structured  products 
related to residential  mortgages. The  equity  market  in  contrast  reached a  peak  in October 
2007  indicating  little  evidence  of  such  a  slowdown.  Of  course,  fixed  income  and  equity 
markets have different characteristics but perhaps a more important distinction is the role of 
heterogeneous beliefs and how this might be reflected in asset prices. 
The economics profession has made great strides in its use of expectations in models but 
one  of  the  short  cuts  required  to  produce  these  great  strides  was  the  simplification  to 
homogenous beliefs. For much of the period leading up to the crisis this simplification was of 
no  consequence.  However,  as  we  now  understand  from  sophisticated  analysis  of  models 
with heterogeneous beliefs, it can produce high valuations for certain set of assets and large 
abrupt moves in certain market prices when leveraged positions are unwound.10  
How  does  this  unwind  express  itself  in  real  time  in  the  views  and  actions  of  market 
participants?  First,  the  views  tend  to  become  even  more  dispersed,  as  do  the  views 
regarding  what  the  central  bank  should  do  about  it.  Second,  market  participants  become 
more suspicious of each other and rumors can spread like wildfires. Many participants take 
defensive  actions  which  if  one  is  tracking  market  prices  at  a  daily  frequency  add 
tremendously  to  the  inherent  noise  in  high  frequency  market  moves.11  More  importantly, 
when  the  probability  of  a  failure  of  a  counterparty  starts  to  increase  the  signal  in  market 
prices becomes a mixture of fundamentals and assessments of the likelihood of government 
intervention. 
Elements of all this can be found in classic books such as Kindleberger’s “Manias, Panics 
and Crashes”12 but one would be hard pressed to predict from reading such “classics” the 
importance  of  novations  of  a  derivative  trade  or  additional  collateral  calls  from  a  clearing 
bank to an investment bank for its tri-party book. Yet these were just the kinds of detailed 
market  developments,  often  associated  with  the  plumbing  of  financial  systems  that 
economists at the New York Fed were hearing at the afternoon meetings from New York Fed 
staff interacting with market participants in real time as the crisis progressed. However, since 
financial crises are almost impossible to fit into the standard framework of efficient markets, it 
was  only  after  the  near  failure  of  Bear  Stearns  that  we  as  economists  were  more  able  to 
piece a more accurate story together. One can find a clear and comprehensive description of 
these issues in Darrell Duffie’s book, “How Big Banks Fail.”13  
                                                
9  See  Tobias  Adrian,  Paolo  Colla,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2011),  “Which  Financial  Frictions?  Parsing  the 
Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007–09” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No. 528 
(New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December). 
10  For  example,  see  Alp  Simsek  (forthcoming),  “Belief  Disagreements  and  Collateral  Constraints” 
Econometrica. 
11  For example, see Fischer Black (1986), “Noise” Journal of Finance, vol. 41 (July), pp. 529–543. 
12  Charles P. Kindleberger (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, (New York: Basic 
Books, Inc.). 
13  Darrel Duffie (2010), How Big Banks Fail and What to Do about It, (Princeton: Princeton University Press). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
My  experiences  as  a  central  banker  directly  observing  and  trying  to  think  of  ways  to 
counteract  the  panic  that  took  hold  of  global  financial  markets  in  September  2008  also 
underscore that  published  statistics  and  market  prices  may  at  best  tell  part  of  the  story of 
developments in financial markets and how they might be affecting the economy as a whole. 
These experiences highlight the need of policymakers for real time market intelligence and 
having staffs with operational experience and a solid grasp of market functioning to develop 
appropriate policy responses.14  
Recall  that  in  just  over  four  weeks  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  the  global 
financial  system  experienced  a  panic  of  unprecedented  speed  and  destructive  power. 
Observing the panic up close was a sobering lesson about how quickly a complex financial 
system  can  freeze  up.  Like  the  study  of  economic  history,  knowledge  of  nonlinear  and 
complex dynamics is important to diagnose potential risks in the financial system. However, 
even more so than economic history, the study of complex biological or physical systems do 
not offer actual detailed prescriptions about how best to understand and regulate the current 
global financial system. 
For economists who did not have the opportunity to observe the panic up close as I and most 
of my colleagues had, the developments in this four week period must have been bewildering 
given how widely events on the ground and theory diverged.15  
At the time and at times since, some academic economists have questioned whether bank 
lending to nonfinancial corporations and individuals was really declining during this period in 
ways that posed a threat to the real economy. It is a fact that weekly measures of the stock 
of bank loans were increasing in this panic period. But for those following financial markets 
closely there was a keen awareness of the importance of securitization prior to 2007 and its 
collapse in 2008. More revealing than the stock of bank loans was the amount of loans being 
securitized, which with the exception of mortgages eligible for securitization by Fannie and 
Freddie  fell  effectively  to  zero.  The  TALF  was  designed  to  support  the  return  of  new 
securitization in certain markets. 
Two  facilities  created  earlier  in  2008,  the  TSLF  and  PDCF,  were  set  up  to  deal  with  the 
unwind  of  repo  and  other  trades  between  private  counterparties  as  doubts  about  the 
underlying collateral had increased.16 As discussed by Gary Gorton this unwind was similar 
to a traditional bank run.17 Since much of the credit boom leading up to 2007 was financed by 
                                                
14  These  experiences  also,  however,  underscore  the  need  for  robust  statistics  on  the  financial  system,  and 
efforts  are  underway  at  numerous  task  forces  and  agencies  to  improve  these  statistics.  For  example,  the 
Committee on the Global Financial System (currently chaired by New York Fed President William C. Dudley) 
created an ad-hoc group for the review of statistical proposals in 2010; see Committee on the Global Financial 
System (2012), “Improving the BIS international banking statistics” CGFS Papers No 47 (Basel: Bank for 
International Settlements, November). Similarly, the Financial Stability Board and International Monetary Fund 
are currently undertaking an effort endorsed by G20 finance ministers and central bank governors to address 
financial  market  information  gaps;  see  IMF  Staff  and  FSB  Secretariat  (2011),  “The  Financial  Crisis  and 
Information Gaps” Implementation Progress Report (June). 
15  An example of this bewilderment is V.V. Chari, Lawrence Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe (2008), “Facts and 
Myths  about  the  Financial  Crisis  of  2008”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  Research  Department 
Working  Paper  666  (Minneapolis:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  October).  Note  that  the  current 
posted version is updated from the version as initially published. 
16  These  facilities  were  created  under  Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  which  grants  the  Board  of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  the  ability  to  authorize  emergency  lending  under  “unusual  and 
follows:  http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/ 
exigent  circumstances.”  More  details  are  as 
section13.htm. 
17  For  example,  see  Gary  Gorton  and  Andrew  Metrick  (2012),  “Who  Ran  on  Repo?”  Yale  School  of 
Management  Working  Papers  Series  (New  Haven:  Yale  University,  October),  and  for  a  slightly  different 
perspective,  see  Arvind  Krishnamurthy,  Stefan  Nagel,  and  Dmitry  Orlov  (2012),  “Sizing  Up  Repo”  NBER 
Working Paper 17768 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, January). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
repo-like trades, not only was the unwind affecting the health of broker-dealers, it was also 
restricting the provision of new credit to the real economy. These events were not observable 
in  traditional  banking  statistics.  Indeed  as  banks  brought  assets  back  onto  their  balance 
sheets to provide more traditional forms of funding, it appeared that lending was increasing. 
The decline in interbank lending was also questioned. Again one can find statistical releases 
that  show  that  volumes  in  the  interbank  market  were  high.  But  such  statistics  ignored  the 
significant  decline  in  term  lending  and  most  importantly  did  not  capture  one  of  the  most 
important  stresses  in  unsecured  lending,  the  difficulty  of  foreign  banks  in  obtaining  dollar 
funding.  This  was  fully  appreciated  by  the  staff  within  the  Federal  Reserve  monitoring 
interbank activity on a real time basis. And the policy response to this decline was to open up 
dollar swap lines  with a number of major central banks in conjunction with the TAF in late 
2007.18  The  daily  peak  for  the  amount  of  dollars  swapped  was  $586  billion  on  December 
4th of 2008 giving the swap lines the distinction of being the most heavily used facility. 
As a third example, some economists using statistics on the stock of outstanding commercial 
paper,  argued  that  commercial  paper  issuance  by  nonfinancial  corporations  was  not 
declining sharply at the time nor were rates rising to unprecedented levels. But this type of 
data contains little information about the ability of firms to issue new paper. Moreover, as the 
economy slowed abruptly the need to raise additional funds through new issuance increased. 
It was clear from our market contacts that the commercial paper market was rapidly grinding 
to  a  halt  as  both financial  and  non-financial  institutions felt the  need  to  build  liquidity.  The 
policy response was the CPFF which served as a liquidity backstop to facilitate issuance of 
commercial paper by highly rated firms. 
In addition to showing how publicly available financial statistics in the absence of real time 
market  intelligence  can  sometimes  lead  to  incorrect  diagnoses,  these  three  examples 
demonstrate the importance of detailed information about markets in articulating the precise 
market  failure  that  might  justify  a  government  intervention  and  the  form  the  intervention 
should take given the failure. As noted above, many of the emergency liquidity facilities rolled 
out  in  the  crisis  were  developed  in  a  very  short  period  of  time  by  experts  with  years  of 
experience  in  these  various  markets.  All  of  the  new  facilities  were  designed  to  price  the 
emergency  liquidity  such  that  as  market  stresses  eased,  their  use  would  decline.  This  is 
exactly  what  happened.  Furthermore,  the  most  convincing  evidence  that  the  facilities 
correctly addressed market failures related to liquidity is the fact that none of them lost any 
money.19  
Conclusion 
The past few years have seen important changes in the role of central bank interactions with 
financial markets. Some of the main lessons I take away are: published statistics and market 
prices  only  tell  part  of  the  story  of  developments  in  financial  markets,  at  best;  beliefs  of 
market  participants  and  the  distribution  across  markets  matter,  and  information  on  them 
needs  to  be  collected  and  analyzed  on  a  frequent  basis;  active  operations  in  financial 
markets allow central banks to flexibly respond to unexpected events and understand market 
functioning issues and changes in market infrastructure. Most importantly, the global financial 
                                                
18  The Federal Reserve established swap arrangements with the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Banco Central 
do Brasil, the Bank of Canada, the Danmarks Nationalbank, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, 
the Bank of Japan, the Bank of Korea, the Banco de Mexico, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges 
Bank, the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank. For further 
list  of  FAQs:  http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_ 
information,  see 
swapfaqs.htm. 
following 
the 
19  See Michael Fleming (2012), “Federal Reserve Liquidity Facilities Gross $22 Billion for us Taxpayers” 
Liberty Street Economics (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, November). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
system is constantly evolving and it requires constant monitoring and analysis since it is not 
a self-regulating system. 
The main message I hope to leave you with is while economic and finance education may 
need  to  be  supplemented,  the  analytical  rigor  of  such  an  education  is  indispensable  for 
coming to grips with the complexity and ever changing structure of the global financial and 
economic  system.  Analytic  rigor  is  not  sufficient  by  itself,  however,  since  it  needs  to  be 
combined  with  practical  experience  of  the  actual  workings  of  the  financial  system.  The 
Center for Global Economy and Business gives you many opportunities to start to gain this 
practical experience. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
