K C Chakrabarty: Financial inclusion – issues in measurement and 
analysis 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  Bank  for  International  Settlements-Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Workshop  on  “Financial 
inclusion indicators”, Kuala Lumpur, 5 November 2012. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  A.B.  Chakraborty  and  Shri  Bipin  Nair  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Introduction 
Mr. Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor, Bank Negara Malaysia and Chairman, Irving 
Fisher  Committee,  Mr.  Paul  Van  den  Bergh,  Head  of  Statistics,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS),  senior  officials  from  Statistics  departments  of  Central  Banks  and 
distinguished participants at the Workshop. I am delighted to be here for the Workshop on 
Financial Inclusion Indicators organized jointly by the Bank Negara Malaysia and the BIS. 
The importance of financial inclusion, based on the principle of equity and inclusive growth, 
has  been  engaging  the  attention  of  policy  makers  internationally.  Achieving  universal 
financial  inclusion  is,  indeed,  a  global  objective  and  has  multiple  dimensions.  While  each 
jurisdiction  will,  perhaps,  evolve  its  own  delivery  model,  we  need  to  learn from  each  other 
and implement what is suitable in each constituency.1 
The  Irving  Fisher  Committee  is  engaged  in  statistical  issues  that  are  of  interest  to  central 
banks  worldwide.  As  we  all  know,  Irving  Fisher  was  not  only  a  celebrated  economist  who 
gave us the Fisher equation of money and the theory of real interest rates, he was also a 
pioneer in the development of the theory of index numbers. He once observed “One of my 
chief objects has been to help make economics into a genuine science through careful and 
sound  analysis,  usually  carried  out  with  the  help  of  mathematical  methods  and  statistical 
verification.”2  I  trust  this  workshop  will  help  provide  practical  perspectives  on  the  critical 
dimensions  of  measuring  the  depth  of  financial  inclusion  as  also  help  streamline  data 
availability  and  related  issues.  As  the  program  structure  aptly  notes,  financial  inclusion 
principles and approaches have assumed an increasingly active role at the international level 
in  developing  new  research  agenda,  setting  standards  and  promoting  best  practices  to 
improve financial inclusion. The focus on financial inclusion measurements and data gaps, 
that this Workshop seeks to achieve, is very much timely and important. 
The agenda of this workshop is very appropriate as currently we lack reliable and granular 
data  on financial  inclusion,  which  restricts  our  ability  to  fully  gauge the extent  of  exclusion 
and  the  ground-level  impact  of  the  initiatives  being  undertaken.  We  need  to  work  out 
appropriate data structures and associated analytical frameworks for effective policymaking 
and the standardisation of various approaches at the national, regional and global levels. In 
order to appreciate the measurement and data needs, a broad understanding of the policy 
initiatives is important. Against this background, I propose to briefly focus on: (i) Approaches 
to financial inclusion – some international / national initiatives, (ii) Conceptual framework for 
measurement  and  analysis  of  financial  inclusion,  (iii)  International  initiatives  in  measuring 
financial inclusion and (iv)Indian perspectives. I will conclude with a few remarks. 
                                                
1   Financial  Literacy  and  Consumer  Protection  –  Necessary  Foundation  for  Financial  Inclusion”,  RBI  Bulletin, 
May 2012 
Irving Fisher and Index Number Theory, Discussion paper by Erwin Diewert, February, 2012 
2  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
insurance, 
financial  services 
including  savings,  credit, 
Approaches to financial inclusion 
International initiatives 
The origins of the current approach to financial inclusion can be traced to the United Nations 
initiatives,3 which broadly described the main goals of inclusive finance as access to a range 
of 
remittance  and  other 
banking / payment  services  to  all  “bankable”  households  and  enterprises  at  a  reasonable 
cost.  The  Report  of  the  Centre  for  Global  Development  (CGD)  Task  Force  on  Access  to 
Financial Services (October, 2009)4 has laid down the broad policy principles for expanding 
financial access, including institutional mechanisms, with particular emphasis on the need for 
ensuring data collection, monitoring and evaluation. The G20 Toronto Summit (June, 2010) 
had outlined the “Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion”, which serves as a guide for 
policy and regulatory approaches aimed at fostering safe and sound adoption of innovative, 
adequate, low-cost financial delivery models, helping provide conditions for fair competition 
and a framework of incentives for the various bank, insurance, and non-bank actors involved 
in the delivery of a full range of affordable and quality financial services. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  brought  the  need  for  financial  inclusion  into  greater  focus 
worldwide as it is believed that widespread incidence of financial exclusion was one of the 
factors that precipitated the financial crisis. While spread of financial inclusion is recognized 
through formal financial institutions such as banks, credit unions, post offices or microfinance 
institutions, the approach of keeping some/ all of these entities as a part of the core or as 
support  players,  varies  from  country  to  country.  Besides,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the 
defining principles of financial inclusion, coverage, role and responsibilities of institutions and 
measurement / monitoring requirements have been evolving over the years. 
Financial inclusion – national initiatives 
Several countries across the globe now look at financial inclusion as the means for a more 
comprehensive growth, wherein, each citizen of the country is able to use his/her earnings as 
a  financial  resource  that  they  can  put  to  work  to  improve  their  future  financial  status  and 
simultaneously contribute to the nation’s progress. 
Initiatives  for  financial  inclusion  have  come  from  the  financial  regulators,  the  governments 
and  the  banking  industry.  While  the  banking  sector  has  taken  several  steps  to  promote 
financial  inclusion,  legislative  measures  have  also  been  initiated  in  some  countries.  For 
example,  in  the  United  States,  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act  (1977)  requires  banks to 
offer credit throughout their area of operation and prohibits them from targeting only the rich 
neighbourhood.  The  German  Bankers’  Association  introduced  a  voluntary  code  in  1996 
providing  for  an  “everyman”  current  banking  account  that  facilitates  basic  banking 
transactions.  In  South  Africa,  a  low  cost  bank  account  called  “Mzansi”  was  launched  for 
financially excluded people in 2004 by the South African Banking Association. In the United 
Kingdom, a “Financial Inclusion Task Force” was constituted by the government in 2005 in 
order to monitor the development of financial inclusion. 
The history of financial inclusion in India is actually much older than the formal adoption of 
the  objective.  The  nationalization  of  banks,  Lead  Bank  Scheme,  incorporation  of  Regional 
Rural  Banks,  Service  Area  Approach  and  formation  of  Self-Help  Groups  –  all  these  were 
initiatives  aimed  at  taking  banking  services  to  the  masses.  The  brick  and  mortar 
infrastructure expanded; the number of bank branches multiplied ten-fold – from 8,000+ in 
1969,  when  the  first  set  of  banks  were  nationalized,  to  99,000+  today.  Despite  this  wide 
                                                
3   UNDP website: What is Inclusive Finance and UNDP Blue Book, 2006 
4   Report  of  the  Taskforce  set  up  by  the  Centre  for  Global  Development  (October,  2009),  Co-Chairs  Patrick 
Honohan et al. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
network of bank branches spread across the length and breadth of the country, banking has 
still  not  reached  a  large  section  of  the  population.  The  extent  of  financial  exclusion  is 
staggering.  Out  of  the  600,000  habitations  in  the  country,  only  about  36,000+  had  a 
commercial  bank  branch.  Just  about  40  per  cent  of the  population  across  the  country  has 
bank accounts. The proportion of people having any kind of life insurance cover is as low as 
10 per cent and proportion having non-life insurance is abysmally low at 0.6 per cent. People 
having debit cards comprise only 13 per cent and those having credit cards only a marginal 
2 per cent of the population. 
The  National  Sample  Survey  data  (2002–03)  revealed  that  nearly  51  per  cent  of  farmer 
households  in  the  country  did  not  seek  credit  from  either  institutional  or  non-institutional 
sources of any kind. A number of rural households are still not covered by banks. They are 
deprived  of  basic  banking  services  like  a  savings  account  or  minimal  credit  facilities.  The 
proportion of rural residents who lack access to bank accounts is nearly 40 per cent, and the 
figure rises to over three-fifths in the eastern and north-eastern regions of India. Accordingly, 
our  primary  objective  is  to  take  banking  to  all  excluded  sections  of  the  society,  rural  and 
urban. 
A more focused and structured approach towards financial inclusion has been followed since 
the  year  2005  when  Reserve  Bank  of  India  decided  to  implement  policies  to  promote 
financial  inclusion  and  urged  the  banking  system  to  focus  on  this  goal.  Our  focus  has, 
specifically, been on providing banking services to all the 600 thousand villages and meeting 
their financial needs through basic financial products like savings, credit and remittance. The 
objectives of financial inclusion, in the wider context of the agenda for inclusive growth, have 
been  pursued  through  a  multi-agency  approach.  In  2006,  the  Government  of  India 
Inclusion,5  which  made  a  wide  range  of 
constituted  a  Committee  on  Financial 
recommendations  on  the  strategies  for  building  an  inclusive  financial  sector  and  gave  a 
national rural financial inclusion plan. Government of India has set up the Financial Stability 
and  Development  Council  (FSDC),  which  is  mandated,  inter  alia,  to  focus  on  Financial 
Inclusion and Financial Literacy issues. In order to further strengthen the ongoing financial 
inclusion  agenda  in  India,  a  high  level  Financial  Inclusion  Advisory  Committee  has  been 
constituted  by  RBI.  The  Committee  would  pave  the  way  for  developing  a  viable  and 
sustainable banking services delivery model focussing on accessible and affordable financial 
services,  developing  products  and  processes  for  rural  and  urban  consumers  presently 
outside the banking network and for suggesting appropriate regulatory framework to ensure 
that  financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability  move  in  tandem.  Financial  sector  regulators 
including RBI are fully committed to the Financial Inclusion Mission. I will cover this in more 
detail in a subsequent section.  
the  context  and 
Framework for measurement and data analysis requirements – conceptual issues  
An essential pre-requisite for measurement is to understand the context and framework of 
financial inclusion. Any effort to measure the various dimensions of financial inclusion is not 
possible  without  explaining 
framework.  The  basic 
for 
measurement of financial inclusion should cover some important dimensions. 
First, financial inclusion, financial literacy and consumer protection are the three major planks 
of financial stability. While financial inclusion acts from the supply side, providing the financial 
market/services that people demand, financial literacy stimulates the demand side, making 
people  aware  of  what  they  can  demand.  The  demand  side  issues  in  financial  inclusion 
include knowledge of financial products and services, credit absorption capacity, etc. These 
issues are faced by both developing and developed countries. The supply side issues cover 
financial  markets,  network  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  appropriate  design  of 
framework 
                                                
5  Chairman Dr. C Rangarajan 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
information  needs  can  be  broadly  categorized  as 
products  and  services,  etc.  These  issues  are  mostly  faced  by  the  developing  countries.  A 
framework  for  financial  inclusion  needs  to  take  into  account  various  aspects  such  as  the 
demand and supply side issues; assessment of enabling environment; issues in penetration, 
barriers to financial inclusion, etc. 
Second,  availability  of  appropriate  financial  products,  including  at  the  very  least,  savings 
products,  emergency  credit,  payment  products  and  entrepreneurial  credit  are  important 
aspects  of  financial  inclusion  environment.  Further,  regarding  ease  of  access,  the  various 
dimensions are timely access, distance, pricing and terms & conditions. In addition to this, 
the fairness & appropriateness of products is also an important dimension in the context of 
financial education of customers and for consumer protection. 
Third, the monitoring framework should cover transaction level, customer level and products 
and services level monitoring, at the micro level. In addition, monitoring at the macro level is 
also  an  important  dimension  for  assessment  of  the  outcome  of  policy,  viability  of  delivery 
models, etc. This calls for impact analysis and penetration studies. 
Information needs vary based on progress in implementation of financial inclusion initiatives. 
Accordingly, 
those  needed  at 
Proposal/Definition stage, Environmental stage, Implementation stage, Monitoring stage and 
Overall  Assessment  stage.  Some  of  the  most  basic  indicators  to  measure  access  for 
brick & mortar  structures  include  number  of  branches  per  1000  population  and  number  of 
ATMs  per  1000  sq.km.  On  the  other  hand,  for  alternate  banking  outlets  such  as  the 
Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  based  Business  Correspondent  (BC) 
Model, basic indicators include ratio of branches to BC outlets, number of villages covered 
per  BC,  etc.  While  monitoring  products,  data  on  number  of  products,  types  of  products, 
return  on  products  and  their  related  characteristics  are  important.  At  the  implementation 
& assessment  stage,  it  is  important  to  measure  progress  of  initiatives  through  impact 
analysis and penetration of financial inclusion by studying the growth / changing pattern of 
customers and products, volume of transactions, returns on the products, etc. It is important 
to  note  that  for  macro  and  micro  level  impact  studies,  appropriately  designed  periodic 
surveys would be a useful tool. Surveys are also needed for assessing viability of delivery 
models,  sustenance  of  initiatives,  gauging  the  spread  of  financial  literacy  and  measuring 
barriers to financial inclusion. 
A  robust  financial  inclusion  design  depends  on  a  multiplicity  of  parameters  encompassing 
varied  socio-economic  backdrops  and  feasible  financial  service  delivery  mechanism  that 
would  vary  from  region  to  region.  This  is  particularly  so  for  a  country  like  India,  which  is 
distinguished  by  its  vastness  of  topographical,  demographic  as  also  socio-economic 
diversity.  Like  any  broad  based  financial  system,  financial  inclusion  measures  and 
performance monitoring system require a rich body of performance data and analytics. Many 
a  time,  country  comparisons  brought  out  by  international  bodies  based  on  their  dedicated 
database  dwells  on  much  aggregative  data  comparison  which,  when  seen  granularly, 
bespeaks  a  different  story.  This  is  very  relevant  in  financial  inclusion  analytics,  which 
requires  new  kinds  of  identifiable  indicators  based  on  the  evolving  needs  of  financial 
inclusion plan and program. 
Concepts and definitional issues 
The fact that financial inclusion concepts have different meanings in different parlance has 
often  led  to  difficulty  in using  a  standard  yardstick for  benchmarking  its policy  parameters. 
The  associated  difficulties  are  that  the  targeted  variables  used  for  financial  inclusion  may 
differ  from  one  country  or  organisation  to  another  because  of  different  institutional  set  up. 
Inherent weaknesses in the linkages between the financial inclusion database and welfare 
parameters of the society add to the complexity. Moreover, there are no agreed composite 
measures  of  financial  inclusion  which  could  facilitate  comparisons  across  time  and 
geography.  Therefore,  in  order  to  ensure  consistency  and  accuracy  in  measurement  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial inclusion parameters, it is essential that the parameters concerned are objectively 
defined in the first stage of the measurement process. As a way forward, we need to assess 
financial behaviour and understand where the challenges and opportunities lie for the future. 
To  do  that,  we  need  high-quality,  multi-dimensional,  comparable  financial  inclusion  data 
based on internationally standardized terms and concepts. As such, the measurement needs 
also  include  analytics  for  correct  interpretation  of  data  and  establishment  of  international 
benchmarks. 
Various dimensions of data on financial inclusion 
There  are  several  structural  dimensions  in  the  process  of  building  up  data  on  financial 
inclusion. These include: 
(i)   Measurement  of  the  progress  in  financial  inclusion  initiatives  by  way  of  building  up 
suitable indictors. Such indicators must contain data on access to (supply of) and usage of 
(demand  for)  financial  services  as  well  as  their  coverage  and  penetration.  Measuring 
availability and actual use of deposit accounts, payment services, credit for poor households 
(micro-credit schemes), micro-level insurance products ought to be part of the framework. 
(ii)   The  second  aspect  relates  to  understanding  constraints  or  barriers  for  financial 
inclusion and development of indicators for assessing the same. 
(iii)   Another important dimension is the collection of transactional data on amount of credit 
extended,  deposits  placed,  remittances made,  etc. This  is  important  in  order  to gauge  the 
effectiveness  of  the  financial  inclusion  initiatives.  Merely  opening  of  accounts  without 
ensuring transactions undermines the beneficial impact of the financial inclusion measures. 
(iv)   Finally, diverse data are required to be pooled and benchmarked at international level. 
In this respect, one needs to take a stock of current status of data relevant for building up 
globally applicable indicators. 
Basic  data  covering  both  the  quantitative  and  qualitative  aspects  can  be  obtained  through 
self-reporting  templates  by  the  formal  financial  intermediaries  or  by  means  of  household 
surveys. There is also a need for international benchmarking of financial inclusion indicators 
as  practices 
the  developed  and  developing  economies  can  vary 
considerably. It is necessary to develop standard statistics on a comparable and consistent 
scale  in  order  to  set  benchmarks  and  best  practices  for  structuring  plans  for  financial 
inclusion. 
followed  across 
International databases on financial inclusion indicators 
Financial  Inclusion  is  fast  emerging  as  a  candidate  for  being  a  core  driver  of  sustainable 
long-term economic growth and is, therefore, attracting the attention of central bankers and 
various global developmental and financial institutions. It is, however, emerging that a lot of 
ground  remains  to  be  covered  in  understanding  the  reach  of  the  financial  sector,  and 
particularly, the degree to which vulnerable groups such as the poor, women, and youths are 
excluded  from  formal  financial  systems.  Availability  of  systematic  indicators  of  the  use  of 
different financial services needs to be improved in most economies and consequently, at the 
global level. It is heartening to note that multilateral organisations such as the World Bank 
and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  are  paying  attention  to  the  development  of 
relevant  database,  besides  focussing  on  the  issue  of  financial  inclusion  through  policy 
prescriptions and guidelines. 
The  World  Bank  database,  known  as  the  Global  Financial  Inclusion  database  (Global 
Findex),  provides  survey  based  data  as  part  of  the  annual  Gallup  World  Poll.  The  survey 
conducted  in  2011  covered  at  least  1,000  adults  each  in  148  economies  using  randomly 
selected,  nationally  representative  samples.  The  focus  of  the  Global  Findex  Database 
encompasses  a  set  of  indicators  that  measure  how  adults  save,  borrow,  make  payments, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
and  manage  risk,  stressing  thereby  on  how  a  well-functioning  financial  system  serves  the 
vital purpose of offering savings, credit, payment, and risk management products to people 
with  a  wide  range  of  needs.  Inclusive  financial  systems  allowing  broad  access  to financial 
services, without price or non-price barriers to their use, are especially likely to benefit poor 
people  and  other  disadvantaged  groups.  Without  inclusive  financial  systems,  poor  people 
must  rely  on  their  own  limited  savings  to  invest  in  their  education  or  for  entrepreneurial 
activities,  while  small  enterprises  would  need  to  rely  on  their  limited  earnings  to  take 
advantage  of  promising  growth  opportunities.  This  can  contribute  to  persistent  income 
inequality  and  slower  economic  growth.  Findex  reports  data  in  terms  of  the  proportion  of 
people (of age 15+) for a number of parameters such as (a) who have  saved money  with 
financial  institutions  or  other  sources,  (b)  taken  loan  from  financial  institutions  or  other 
sources, (c) paid for health / agriculture insurance and (d) used cheques / electronic payment 
/  mobile  payment  systems  for  financial  transactions.  The  World  Bank  has  released  a 
research study on the database in April 2012. A snapshot of the data on some indicators for 
select countries is given in Annex 1. The study reveals that: 
i) 50 per cent of adult population worldwide report owning an account with a formal financial 
institution,  but  actual  operation  and  use  of  these  accounts  for  transactions  varies  widely 
across regions and economies.6 And  when one  starts probing the numbers granularly, the 
actual spread of financial inclusion indicators across countries would turn out to be wider. 
ii)  Financially  excluded  populace  is  predominant  in  developing  countries,  where  only 
41 per cent  adults  have  a  formal  account,  with  only  37  per  cent  of  women  having  formal 
account  against  46  per  cent  of  men;  the  gender  gap  widens  further  because  of  varying 
degrees of income inequalities observed among the developing countries. 
iii) The cross country comparison would reveal that bank account penetration, measured as a 
per cent of adult population, varies widely across the countries. In high-income economies, 
account  based  financial  inclusiveness  is  much  higher  with  89  per  cent  adults  having 
accounts  with  formal  financial  entities.  For  India,  account  penetration  is  reported  to  be 
35 per cent7 (43.7 per cent for men and 26.5 per cent for women) while China scored better 
at 63.8 per cent (67.6 per cent for men and 60 per cent for women). South Korea reported 
high  account  penetration  at  93  per  cent,  universality  of  education,  and  particularly,  the 
spread of financial literacy. 
iv)  However,  such  aggregative  nature  of  data  masks  many  critical  performance  related 
information  for  understanding  the  depth  and  granularity  at  sub-national  level.  Another 
speciality of the database (FINDEX) used in the World Bank study is that it is a survey based 
reporting system which may have small sample biases and such constraints are natural for 
household surveys, particularly, when they involve people in the lower rung of the financial 
inclusion pyramid. 
Likewise, the IMF has initiated the “Financial Access Survey” (FAS) in 2009, in an endeavour 
to put together cross country data and information relating to the issue of financial inclusion 
and has published the data in July 2012.8 According to IMF, the FAS is the sole source of 
global  supply-side  data  on  financial  inclusion,  encompassing  internationally  comparable 
basic indicators of financial access and usage. It is the data source for the G-20 Basic Set of 
                                                
6   “Measuring Financial Inclusion”, Policy Research Working Paper, 6025, World Bank. It is based on the first 
round of the Global Findex database based on indicators that measure how adults in 148 economies save, 
borrow, make payments, and manage risk. The indicators are constructed with survey data from interviews 
with more than 150,000 nationally representative and randomly selected adults age 15 and above in those 
148 economies during the 2011 calendar year 
7   RBI Annual Report 2011–12 (p. 88–92) contains the detailed India specific survey findings as per the World 
Bank’s policy Research Working paper and latest status of Financial inclusion in India. 
8  For more, one may refer http://fas.imf.org/ 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial  Inclusion  Indicators  endorsed  by  the  G-20  Leaders  at  the  Los  Cabos  Summit  in 
June 2012. The FAS database currently contains annual data, for the period 2004–2011, for 
187 jurisdictions, including all G20 economies. The FAS data covers data on country-wise 
availability of bank branches and ATMs per 1000 sq.km. and per 100,000 adults, number of 
deposit  and  loan  accounts  with  banks  per  1000  adults  and  deposit-GDP  and  credit-GDP 
ratios. A glimpse of the data is given in Annex 2. 
While such initiatives are most commendable and fill a major data gap at macro level, it has 
to be reckoned that data on financial inclusion is needed at both macro and micro levels. The 
latter can provide distributional characteristics of financial inclusion and is, therefore, crucial 
in  the  context  of  policy  initiatives  and  assessing  their  outcome.  Moreover,  the  IMF  data 
reveals  significant  gaps  at  individual  country  level,  which  needs  to  be  bridged  so  as  to 
improve its utility.  
Data on barriers for financial inclusion 
Even  within  the  existing  set  of  account  based  financial  services,  lot  of  variations  exist  in 
actual  delivery  models  because  of  varied  levels  of  technological  absorption  and  cost  of 
operation. No less binding are the legal and bureaucratic constraints and lack of appropriate 
infrastructure  and  financial  literacy  which  requires  to  be  countered  in  order  to  bring  the 
financially  excluded  segments  within  the  formal  financial  access  network.  For  example, 
identifying  unbanked  segments  for  making  them  bankable  is  a  challenging  task,  be  it 
habitation,  land  ownership  title  or  adopting  a  common  authorised  identification  code. 
Benchmarking the data on constraints hindering progress in the financial inclusion initiatives 
would  immensely  help  in  identifying  common  concerns  and  replicating  successful  ideas 
across  jurisdictions.  In  this  regard,  concerted  international  initiatives  would  help  build  up 
requisite data for good policy making. 
Financial inclusion initiatives in India 
I have already outlined some important milestones in the development of financial inclusion 
policy initiatives in India. A broad definition is adopted as follows: 
“Financial  inclusion  is  the  process  of  ensuring  access  to  appropriate  financial 
products  and  services  needed  by  all  members  of  the  society  in  general  and 
vulnerable  groups  in  particular,  at  an  affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and  transparent 
manner by mainstream institutional players”  
to  offer 
the  ability 
the  suite  of  products  required 
We have adopted a bank led model in India to  introduce a bouquet of products related to 
savings,  payments  &  credit  together.  It  is  recognised  that  only  the  mainstream  banking 
institutions  have 
in 
effective/meaningful  financial  inclusion.  Other  intermediaries  and  technology  partners  such 
as  mobile  companies  have  been  allowed  to  partner  with  banks  in  offering  services 
collaboratively. In this context, it is necessary to point out that MFIs/NBFCs/NGOs on their 
own may not be able to bring about financial inclusion, as the range of financial products and 
services which are considered as the bare minimum for financial inclusion purposes, cannot 
be offered by them. But they play an extremely important role in furthering financial inclusion 
in  the  sense  that  they  bring  people  and  communities  into  the  fold  of  the  formal  financial 
system.9 
Further, the initiatives are technology driven so as to make the financial services deliverable 
in  a  cost  effective  manner,  tailor  made  by  the  market  participants  to  best  suit  their 
requirements. RBI has encouraged the ICT model which would enable banks to overcome 
to  bring 
                                                
9 
“Financial Inclusion and Banks: Issues and Perspectives”, RBI Monthly Bulletin, November 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the  barriers  of  geography  and  ensure  efficient  financial  inclusion.  The  ICT  based  delivery 
model adopted should be technology-neutral to facilitate easy up-scaling and customization, 
as per individual requirements. Against this background, the major initiatives taken by RBI 
include the following: 
i. 
Encouraged the SHG-Bank Linkage Model, one of the largest micro finance models 
in  the  world,  under  which  4.79  million  SHGs  have  been  credit  linked,  covering 
97 million poor households (till March 2012).  
Mandated Commercial Banks including Regional Rural Banks to migrate to the Core 
Banking Platform.  
Substantially liberalised the BC based service delivery model in phases.  
Permitted domestic scheduled commercial banks to freely open branches in Tier 2 
to Tier 6 centres.  
Mandated  banks  to  open  at  least  25%  of  all  new  branches  in  unbanked  rural 
centres.  
Substantially relaxed the Know Your Customer (KYC) documentation requirements 
for opening bank accounts for small customers.  
Encouraged Electronic Benefit Transfer for routing social security payments through 
the banking channel.  
Pricing for banks totally freed; Interest rates on advances totally deregulated.  
Separate programme for Urban Financial Inclusion initiated.  
viii. 
ix. 
Some important features of the strategic initiatives for spreading financial inclusion in India 
included: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
A roadmap for providing banking services covering villages in a structured way. In 
the first phase villages with population above 2000 was targeted. The focus has now 
shifted to villages with population less than 2000.  
Introduction  of  New  Products  –  Making  available  a  minimum  of  four  banking 
products through the ICT based BC model.  
Our  strategy  has  been  to  create  an  ecosystem  comprising  of  a  combination  of 
branches  and  ICT  based  BC  outlets  for  evolving  an  effective  financial  inclusion 
delivery model.  
In order to further facilitate financial inclusion, interoperability was permitted at the 
retail outlets or sub-agents of BCs (i.e. at the point of customer interface), subject to 
certain  conditions,  provided  the  technology  available  with  the  bank,  which  has 
appointed the BC, supported interoperability. However, the BC or its retail outlet or 
sub-agent at the point of customer interface would continue to represent the bank, 
which has appointed the BC.  
Banks  have  been  advised  that  they  may  set  up  intermediate  brick  and  mortar 
structures (in rural areas) between the present base branch and BC locations, so as 
to provide support to a cluster of BCs (about 8-10 BCs) at a reasonable distance of 
about 3–4 kilometers. Such branches should have minimum infrastructure, such as 
a Core Banking Solution (CBS) terminal linked to a pass book printer and a safe for 
cash  retention  for  operating  large  customer  transactions  and  would  have  to  be 
managed  full  time  by  bank’s  own  employees.  It  is  expected  that  such  an 
arrangement  would  lead  to  efficiency  in  cash  management,  documentation, 
resolving customer grievances and close supervision of BC operations.  
The evolution of the BC model comprises of the following four stages:  
 Stage 1 : Mobile Business Correspondents 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
8 
  vii. 
Stage 2 : Fixed Location Business Correspondent Outlets 
Stage 3 : Low Cost Intermediate Brick & Mortar Structures (Ultra Small Branches) 
Stage 4 : Full fledged Brick & Mortar Branches 
Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) for Banks – All domestic commercial banks – public 
and private sector have drawn a Board approved three year FIP starting April 2010.  
The banking system’s three Year FIPs include parameters such as: 
i. 
No.  of  branches  opened,  of  which  the  no.  opened  in  unbanked  villages  and  in 
villages with population greater than or less than 2000  
No. of BC outlets opened  
No. of Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts opened  
No. of emergency credit (OD) provided  
No. of Entrepreneurial credit (KCC/GCC) provided  
Transactions done in the above accounts through Brick & Mortar branches as well 
as through BCs  
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
These initiatives are being closely monitored by the Reserve Bank of India through monthly 
reporting and annual comprehensive review. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Financial inclusion plan – achievements so far 
A  snapshot  of  the  progress  in  certain  key  parameters  in  the  recent  period  (March  2010  – 
June 2012) are given below (Details in Annex 3): 
i. 
Banking  connectivity  to  more  than  1,88,028  villages  upto  June  2012  from 
67,694 villages in March 2010.  
All unbanked villages with population of more than 2000 persons, numbering around 
74,000 are now connected with banks.  
Number of BCs increased to 120,098 from 34,532.  
More  than  70  million  basic  banking  accounts  have  been  opened  to  take  the  total 
number of such accounts to 147 million.  
About 36 million people/families have been credit-linked.  
v. 
In the context of this Workshop it is important to note that there has long been a statistical 
system of capturing both macro and micro-level data on measurement of financial inclusion 
in India, at least in respect of deposit and credit. The database on bank branch network, led 
by scheduled commercial banks in India, give an idea about the reach of the formal banking 
system in the form of an indicative banking penetration measure such as average population 
per branch or number of deposit bank accounts per 1000 population. The data indicates that 
the  branch  network  of  scheduled  commercial  banks  have  increased  during  last five  years, 
registering an improved coverage, in terms of population per branch, from 15,700 to 12,600. 
Among the newly opened bank branches during the year, the share of rural and semi-urban 
branches has gone up between 2007 and 2012. During the same period, there has been a 
marginal improvement in the share of deposit accounts in rural centres and loan accounts in 
semi-urban  (Annex  4).  Such  measures,  however,  do  not  throw  light  on  the  distributional 
aspect  of 
the 
socio-economic spectrum of population. 
There is, therefore, a need to further expand these databases in order to improve their utility 
as monitoring tools and MIS. There is also a lot to learn from the international experiences. 
We  also  need  to  draw  out  a  standardised  set  of  yardsticks  that  we  would  be  using  for 
the  brick-mortar  based  branch  network  across  regions  or  across 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
measuring  achievements  as  well  as  evaluating  the  various  means  to  achieve  the  much 
desired goal. 
Constraints to spread of financial inclusion 
Quite clearly, the task of covering a population of 1.2 billion with banking services is gigantic. 
It is clear that out of 600 thousand villages, centres that could be covered by brick and mortar 
bank branch network are only around 36,000. It is well recognized that there are supply side 
and demand side factors driving inclusive growth. Banks and other financial services players 
are  largely  expected  to  mitigate  the  supply  side  constraints  that  prevent  poor  and 
disadvantaged  groups  from  gaining  access  to  the  financial  system.  Access  to  financial 
products  is  constrained  by  several  factors  which  include  lack  of  awareness  about  the 
financial products, high transaction costs and products which are inconvenient, inflexible, not 
customized  and  of  low  quality.  However,  we  must  bear  in mind  that  apart from the  supply 
side  factors,  demand  side  factors  such  as  lower  income  and  /or  asset  holdings,  financial 
literacy/ awareness issues, etc. also have a significant bearing on inclusive growth. Owing to 
difficulties  in  accessing  formal  sources  of  credit,  poor  individuals  and  small  and  micro 
enterprises  usually  rely  on  their  personal  savings  and  internal  sources  or  take recourse  to 
informal  sources  of  finance  to  invest  in  health,  education,  housing  and  entrepreneurial 
activities. The mainstream financial institutions like banks have an important role to play in 
helping overcome this constraint, not as a social obligation, but as a business proposition. 
The major barriers cited to constrain extension of appropriate services to poor by financial 
service  providers  are  the  lack  of  reach,  higher  cost  of  transactions  and  time  taken  in 
providing  those  services,  apart  from  attitudinal  issues.  In  this  regard,  major  barriers  to 
financial inclusion require to be identified. 
Demand  side  barriers  are  (a)  Low  literacy  levels,  lack  of  awareness  and/or 
i)  
knowledge/understanding  of 
frequent 
micro-transactions;  (c)  Lack  of  trust  in  formal  banking  institutions;  cultural  obstacles  (e.g., 
gender and cultural values). 
ii)   Supply side barriers are (a) Outreach (low density areas and low income populations 
are  not  attractive  for  the  provision  of  financial  services  and  are  not  financially  sustainable 
under  traditional  banking  business  models);  (b)  Regulation  (frameworks  are  not  always 
adapted  to  local  contexts),  (c)  Business  models  (mostly  with  high  fixed  costs);  Service 
Providers (limited number and types of financial service providers) (d) Services (non-adapted 
products and services for low income populations and the informal economy); (e) Age Factor 
(Financial service providers usually target the middle of the economically active population, 
often  overlooking  the  design  of  appropriate  products  for  older  or  younger  potential 
customers. There are hardly any policies or schemes for the younger lot or the old people 
who  have  retired,  as  the  banks  do  not  see  any  business from them);  (f)  Bank charges  (In 
most of the countries, transaction is free as long as the account has sufficient funds to cover 
the  cost  of  transactions  made.  However,  there  are  a  range  of  other  charges  that  have  a 
disproportionate effect on people with low income). 
financial  products; 
Irregular 
income; 
(b) 
Concluding remarks 
Let me now make some concluding remarks on the challenges to financial inclusion and, in 
particular,  the  measurement  challenges.  The  issue  of  expanding  the  geographical  and 
demographic  reach  poses  challenges  from  the  viability  perspectives.  Appropriate  business 
models  are  still  evolving  and  various  delivery  mechanisms  are  being  experimented  with. 
Financial literacy and level of awareness continue to remain an issue and the ICT Based BC 
Model  is  also  taking  time  to  stabilize.  It  calls  for  coordination  of  all  the  stakeholders  like 
sectoral regulators, banks, governments, civil societies, NGOs, etc. to achieve the objective 
of financial inclusion. Challenges of financial exclusion are faced by most countries globally 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  each  country  has  to  develop  its  own  customized  solutions  drawing  upon  its  own 
experiences and those of its peers across the globe. 
On  the  measurement  challenges,  first,  it  needs  to  be  reckoned  that  financial  inclusion 
concepts,  policies,  delivery  models  and  implementation  processes  are  still  evolving.  It  is, 
therefore, essential that the policy for achieving total financial inclusion also keeps changing 
to adapt to the needs of the environment. This poses challenges for measurement of various 
financial  inclusion  initiatives  as  also  their  aggregation  across  activities,  institutions, regions 
and  so  on.  Statistical  analysis  of  performance  of  financial  inclusion  initiatives  and 
development  of  benchmarking  standards  can  be  quite  complex.  Second,  while  existing 
initiatives  in  measuring  financial  inclusion  are  commendable,  there  is  a  need  for  greater 
focus  on  the  micro  and  distributional  dimensions.  Third,  we  should  explore  the  need  to 
change  the  focus  of  present  information  systems  of  banking  business  from  traditional 
accounting  model  to  customer  centric  business  model.  This  would  call  for  expanding  the 
scope of the currently used measures of financial inclusion. 
I would end by once again thanking the organizers for inviting me to this forum which, I am 
sure, will generate valuable debate and insight and come up with practical solutions to the 
measurement challenges faced in the global movement towards financial inclusion. I wish the 
Workshop all success. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Note: Scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
