Zeti Akhtar Aziz: ASEAN – towards a more integrated market 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
19th ASEAN Banking Conference 2012 “ASEAN – towards a more integrated market”, Kuala 
Lumpur, 7 November 2012. 
 As  we  enter  a  new  phase  of  globalisation,  Asia’s  role  in  the  world  economy  is  being 
significantly transformed both in terms of its significance and influence. ASEAN economies 
are very much a part of this process. This trend has become more pronounced following the 
global  financial  crisis.  Five  years  into  the  crisis,  the  world  economy  continues  to  be 
challenged to hold a sustained recovery. The financial sector restructuring and reforms, and 
the  structural  adjustments  being  undertaken  by  the  crisis-affected  economies  will  not  only 
take time to produce results, but in the more immediate term, these efforts will involve costs 
to the economy. 
While  emerging markets  such  as those  in  the  ASEAN  region  are  not  insulated from these 
developments, the region has displayed remarkable resilience during this period. The region 
has  benefitted  from  the  decade  of  restructuring  and  financial  reforms  following  the  Asian 
financial  crisis.  In  addition,  structural  adjustments  undertaken  during  this  period  and  have 
resulted in more diversified economies, in which domestic sources have become increasingly 
important in sustaining growth performance. The region’s more favourable growth prospects 
are also underpinned by the relatively sound fundamentals that include strong external and 
fiscal positions, stable macroeconomic conditions, low unemployment and resilient financial 
systems.  This  has  also  enabled  the  region  to  better  manage  the  large  and  volatile  capital 
flows  that  we  are  experiencing,  thereby  mitigating  its  destabilising  effects  on  economic 
activity.  These  strong  foundations  have  supported  ASEAN  economies 
the 
challenging external developments that have taken place and have well positioned the region 
to realise its full potential as a dynamic growth centre. 
It is my great pleasure to be here to speak at this 19th ASEAN Banking Conference, hosted 
this  year  by  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Malaysia  (ABM)  here  in  Kuala  Lumpur.  This 
Conference takes place at an important juncture for our region, as concrete plans are being 
advanced to achieve an ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by 2015. The AEC Blueprint, 
adopted  by  ASEAN  leaders  in  2007,  envisages  ASEAN  to  become  a  single  market  and 
production base that is characterised by the free movement of goods, services, investment 
and skilled labour, and freer the flow of capital. Despite the recent global financial crisis, the 
drive for this vision to be realised remains resolute.  This is well supported by the prevailing 
strong foundations and the tremendous growth prospects for ASEAN in the medium to longer 
term.  My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  elements  of  the  prospects  for  the  ASEAN 
economies, and the state of ASEAN financial integration and its importance in enhancing the 
regional growth potential. My remarks will conclude with some thoughts on imperatives for 
the banking sector going forward into the future.  
through 
Prospects for ASEAN economies 
ASEAN  is  currently  one  of  the  most  dynamic  and  fastest-growing  regions  in  the  world 
economy.  The  region’s  GDP  is  expected  to  triple  to  USD3  trillion  by  2017  relative  to  a 
decade ago. Economic expansion is expected to be sustained at a rate of 5.8% in the next 
five years, significantly outpacing global growth. In tandem with this, is the notable rise of the 
middle class population. The Asian Development Bank estimates that the share of ASEAN’s 
middle class population is expected to increase to 65% by 2030, consequently contributing to 
altering the global consumer landscape. With a sizeable population of 600 million people, this 
underscores the evolving role of ASEAN as a significant consumer market base with distinct 
needs and increasing purchasing power. Given that the share of the working population in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
ASEAN  is  estimated  to  reach  58%  by  2050,  ASEAN  will  benefit  from  its  demographic 
dividend and abundant workforce. 
An  accompanying  trend  is  the  rise  of  entrepreneurship  in  the  region.  The  emergence  of 
home-grown  businesses  with  prospects  of  becoming  large  national  and  multinational 
corporations  has  generated  attention  and  priority  to  be  accorded  to  supporting  the 
development  of  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises  (SMEs).  Currently,  SMEs  account for 
50%–85% of domestic employment in ASEAN economies and 30–50% to GDP. Given the 
substantial contribution to income and employment generated by this sector, its development 
will  be  vital  in  creating  employment  and  sustainable  long-term  growth  in  the  ASEAN 
economies.  On  the  corporate  front,  local  corporations  and  businesses  have  fared  well  in 
establishing  a  stronger  footprint  in  the  region,  as  evidenced  by  their  expanding  regional 
presence  and  cross-border  acquisition  activity  which  has  increased  from  USD10.9  billion 
during the first half of 2011 to USD26.2 billion for the same period in 2012. This vibrance of 
economic  activity  has  been  well  supported  by  the  continued  access  to  financing  by 
businesses in the region and resilient and strong ASEAN-based financial institutions. 
Finally, ASEAN has also become an attractive foreign direct investment destination not only 
due  to  its  stable  macroeconomic  environment  but  also  due  to  its  market  size  and  the 
abundance  of  natural  resources.  ASEAN’s  proximity  to  major  markets  such  as  China  and 
India  reinforces  its  status  as  an  important  global  value  chain  player  and  a  preferred 
production base for many multinational corporations. In 2010, foreign direct investments into 
the region registered an impressive growth of more than 100% from the preceding year. The 
strong ties between the ASEAN economies are also underpinned by the continued growth of 
intra-regional trade, which now accounts for 25% of ASEAN’s total trade. Going forward, this 
trend  is  set  to  continue.  The  growing  consumer  market  and  the  expansion  of  production 
networks in Asia will continue to be a major driving force in promoting this increased intra-
regional trade. In addition, the measures taken to boost investment, as well as infrastructure 
development will reinforce this trend. 
Regional integration: the ASEAN model 
We stand today on the brink of very exciting times for ASEAN as we draw closer to the vision 
of an ASEAN economic community in 2015. If the AEC vision was aspirational when it was 
first conceived, it is now clearly an imperative. This has prompted an increased momentum in 
efforts to realise an integrated ASEAN economic community, notably by achieving increased 
financial  integration,  higher  levels  of  intra-regional  trade  and  greater  two-way  cross-border 
investment  flows.  Like  most  regional  blocs,  the  integration  process  for  ASEAN  seeks  to 
promote  greater  regional  connectivity  which  will  in  turn  expand  and  reinforce  the  region’s 
growth potential. The region’s integration process however, has followed its own path. Given 
the  diverse  nature  of  our  economies  within  ASEAN,  the  integration  model  adopted  for 
ASEAN  has  been  one  that  focuses  on  (i)  strengthening  preconditions  through  collective 
capacity building to promote more open market access among the economies in ASEAN; (ii) 
progressively  reducing  barriers  to  facilitate  cross-border  trade;  (iii)  developing  the  market 
infrastructure and enabling environment to promote efficient and effective intermediation of 
cross-border  financial  flows;  and  (iv)  establishing  the  appropriate  safeguards  for  financial 
system stability. 
Progressive  financial  integration  through  this  ASEAN  model  has  been  a  strategy  that  has 
augured well for the region, allowing for the greater integration at a pace that is based  on 
readiness  and  strength  of  the  financial  sector.  Since  2007,  ASEAN  has  achieved 
considerable progress in its efforts to deepen financial integration. ASEAN has undertaken 
gradual and sequenced liberalisation of identified financial services sub-sectors through the 
ASEAN Framework Agreement on Services (AFAS). Five rounds of negotiations have been 
concluded, with the sixth round of negotiations expected to be concluded by next year. In the 
area of financial markets, an Implementation Plan for an Integrated Capital Market has been 
developed  to  enhance  market  access,  linkages  and  liquidity.  ASEAN  has  also  made 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
significant advancements in the areas of supporting financing for infrastructure development, 
as reflected by the establishment of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund in 2011. 
Notwithstanding these developments, a crucial driver for greater financial integration within 
the core of ASEAN financial systems is the banking sector. ASEAN banks have a significant 
role  in  supporting  the  financial  integration  process.  Over  the  recent  decade,  we  have 
witnessed the rising prominence of ASEAN financial institutions within the region, driven by 
the  growing  business  fundamentals  in  the  region  and  the  strengthened  capacity  of  the 
financial  institutions.  ASEAN  commercial  banks  are  predominant  mobilisers  of  financial 
funds, as our experience shows, the banking sector is the most matured component in the 
financial  sector  of  most  jurisdictions.  The  banking  sector  therefore  serves  as  an  important 
conduit  to  increase  connectivity  among  all  ASEAN  nations  and  in  fostering  financial 
integration. 
Towards this end, the ASEAN central banks have endorsed the ASEAN Financial Integration 
Framework in 2011 and are in the final stages to launch the framework for banking sector 
integration.  This  will  pave  the  way  for  a  more  meaningful  presence  of  qualifying  ASEAN 
banks within the region, while promoting regional financial stability. Recognising the diversity 
of ASEAN economies and the varying stages of financial sector development, the framework 
allows flexibility for ASEAN countries to participate in the integration process based on their 
readiness  and  willingness.  Under  the  framework,  qualifying  ASEAN  banks  that  have  the 
capacity and that are well managed will serve as the regional standard bearers, and will be 
accorded more flexible access into regional markets. Greater flexibilities will also be given to 
facilitate  the  regional  expansion  plans  of  qualifying  ASEAN  banks  to  become  important 
conduits  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  region.  Tremendous  opportunities  can  be 
harvested  from  this  new  framework.  Hence,  I  welcome  and  look  forward  to  the  greater 
participation by financial institutions from all ASEAN countries in this process. 
Imperatives for banking sector going forward 
At this juncture, let me turn to imperatives for the banking sector going forward. There is a 
fundamental  rethinking  of  banking  by  the  international  community  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
recent global crisis. These are both driving and shaping the raft of reforms at the global level. 
I  would  like  to  touch  briefly  on  four  developments  which  could  serve  as  a  foundation  for 
sustainable  banking  in  the  medium  and  longer-term.  First,  is  for  reduced  complexity  and 
increased transparency in the banking sector. Consistent with the more traditional banking 
models  in  this  region,  there  are  now  increasing  calls  for  a  return  to  basic  banking  and  its 
clear separation from higher risk-taking activities. This is part of the broader efforts to create 
a  safer  global  financial  system  where  markets  and  institutions  are  more  transparent,  less 
complex, and less leveraged than they are today. 
While the banking sector in ASEAN has not reached the degree of complexity observed in 
the  advanced  economies,  the  region  has  to  be  mindful  of  the  consequences  as  financial 
institutions evolve to become increasingly regional in orientation. Indeed, such growth must 
be commensurate with the capacity and capability of both the financial institutions and the 
regulators to manage and oversee the associated risks. Strengthened supervisory intensity 
and effectiveness, a core component of the financial sector reforms, is an essential pillar to 
check  against  unfettered  innovation  and  risk-taking  behaviours  and  promote  strong 
incentives  for  prudent  risk  management.  ASEAN  will  have  to  pursue  an  outcome  that 
facilitates innovation and efficiency, without resulting in undue risks and unwanted costs on 
both the financial system and the overall economy. 
Second,  is  the  stronger  focus  on  more  responsible  and  sustainable  financial  business 
practices.  Following  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  there  is  a  stronger  international 
emphasis 
risk-aligned  mechanisms,  particularly  on  compensation 
frameworks,  which  provide  incentives  for  financial  innovation  and  growth,  while  not 
compromising financial stability. This includes the increased pressure on financial institutions 
for  appropriate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the 
international 
and regulators to have incentive systems, governance, accountability and controls to address 
the  issues  of  over-emphasis  on  short  term  performance,  reckless  risk-taking  and  the 
pervasive  conflict  of  interests.  In tandem  with  this,  is  the  stronger focus to  spur  consumer 
activism as a means to encourage more responsible and sustainable business practices. It is 
in this area that financial institutions can have an important role in creating positive conduct 
and behaviours among financial participants in the industry, as well as contributing towards 
uplifting the state of financial education and consumer awareness. 
Third,  is  the  strengthening  of  boards’  effectiveness  and  accountability,  and  sound 
governance  of  financial  institutions.  Following  the  crisis,  i.e.  the  global  financial  crisis, 
corporate governance practices in the financial industry have come under significant scrutiny. 
There have been increased expectations on the management, boards of financial institutions 
and  on  regulators  to  significantly  improve  governance  practices,  particularly  in  the  area  of 
risk  management  policies  and  procedures.  At 
level,  substantial 
enhancements  have  been  made  to  standards  on  corporate  governance.  The  growing 
expansion of ASEAN banks in the region, must therefore be accompanied by an increased 
emphasis  for  the  boards  and  senior  management  of  financial  institutions  to  provide  the 
leadership  and  oversight  of group-wide  risks  arising from  cross-border  operations. Greater 
diversity  of  boards  to  appreciate  cultural  nuances  and  competitive  dynamics  in  different 
markets will hence be key to support sustainable cross-border operations of the institutions. 
Fourthly,  is  reinforcing  buffers  to  withstand  future  shocks.  This  is  a  key  area  of  the 
international reform package that aims to significantly raise the resilience of the international 
financial system and to promote sound risk-taking activities. The standards will see financial 
institutions holding larger amounts of capital, including buffers which can be drawn down as 
losses  occur.  At  the  same  time,  the  standards  will  also  require  banking  institutions  to 
significantly strengthen their liquidity and funding positions. Collectively, these standards aim 
to  strengthen  the  banking  institutions’  ability  to  continue  to  support  orderly  credit 
intermediation,  particularly  during  periods  of  instability.  While  carrying  more  equity  entails 
greater costs of capital for banks especially in the short-term, this investment will support a 
more stable financial system and overall global economy as well as build the confidence of 
consumers and investors, particularly during periods of stress. 
In  view  of  these  imperatives,  this  is  a  timely  juncture  for  the  industry  to  reflect  and  take 
charge of the efforts to rebuild and strengthen the foundations for more sustainable finance. 
Critical to this is the realisation that the creation of long-term shareholder value is consistent 
with,  and  not  at  odds  with  prudent  risk taking  and  responsible  business  practices.  Indeed, 
financial institutions with a regional footprint in ASEAN have the potential to contribute to the 
development  of  the  financial  systems  in  countries  where  they  operate.  There  will  be 
tremendous payoffs to be reaped from pursuing such sustainable strategies. Such long-term 
commitments to ASEAN will not only contribute to mutually reinforcing regional growth, but 
will become an important source of stability to the region. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude  my  remarks.  There  is  less  than  three  years  to  achieving  the  2015 
ASEAN aspirations. While many challenges remain, ASEAN is well positioned to collectively 
strive ahead towards the shared vision of a one ASEAN market. The financial industry has 
an important role in realising this vision, through its market conduct, business strategies and 
participation  in  domestic  and  regional  collaborative  initiatives.  This  conference  provides  an 
excellent  strategic  platform  for  the  ASEAN  industry  to  come  together,  share  ideas  and 
develop  a  greater  understanding  on  the  important  issues  towards  building  a  stronger 
foundation  for  sustainable  growth  in  ASEAN.  On  that  note,  I  wish  you  an  engaging  and 
productive conference. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
