Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Big shift – traversing the complexities of a new world 
Luncheon address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Khazanah Megatrends Forum 2012: “Big shift – traversing the complexities of a new world”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 2 October 2012. 
 The global economy has now entered into a period of slower economic growth despite the 
significant  and  wide  ranging  pro-growth  policies  that  have  been  implemented  across  the 
world. Why then has the world not been able to achieve a sustained long-lasting recovery? 
What has been holding back this prospect? In addition, the rapid and significant changes in 
the global environment have also brought with them new demands and new challenges. Our 
understanding  of  the  factors  that  are  containing  the  global  growth  prospects  and  the 
consequence of the new environment will better position us to face the fundamentally new 
landscape and to manage its consequent challenges. 
Let me first thank Khazanah for the invitation to speak at this Khazanah Megatrends Forum. 
The  topic  on  the  Big  Shift  that  is  being  experienced  in  the  world  today  is  indeed  highly 
relevant. While the international and national attention is currently focused on the immediate 
challenges  of  the  global  environment,  equally  important,  however,  is  to  recognise  the 
long-term changes that will reshape our future. The first part of my remarks today will focus 
on  the  immediate  challenges  of  the  global  economy,  taking  into  account  the  fundamental 
factors that are likely to affect the growth outlook. The second part of my remarks will touch 
on the key imperatives to best prepare us for the new global landscape, so as to be better 
positioned to succeed and survive in this new environment. 
Policy-makers in the world economy have continued to be confronted with policy challenges 
since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  While  the  policy  responses  have  focused  on 
addressing  the  origins  of  the  crisis  –  on  the  extensive  build-up  of  excesses,  the 
over-leverage and over-indebtedness of the private and public sectors, the breakdown in the 
functioning of financial markets, the loss of competitiveness, and the loss in confidence in the 
financial system and the economy, the concern now is on achieving a sustained economic 
recovery that is accompanied by job creation. Half a decade into the crisis, and this has yet 
to  be  achieved.  In  the  recent  months,  the  global  economy  has  again  experienced  a 
broad-based moderation in growth from an already modest pace. This has stemmed largely 
from  the  renewed  weakness  of  the  economic  recovery  in  several  of  the  major  advanced 
economies. 
In the United States, the significant monetary accommodation, reinforced by the large scale 
financial market interventions and the significant fiscal stimulus during the early stage of the 
crisis,  has  averted  an  economic  depression,  but  it  has  not,  however,  brought  about  a 
sustained recovery. In Europe, an economic contraction is being experienced, resulting from 
the combination of fiscal austerity, tight credit conditions, and the continued uncertainty and 
volatility  in  the  financial  markets.  While  important  progress  has  recently  been  made  in 
Europe on the arrangements that will contribute to containing significant high-risk events, and 
in  paving  the  way  towards  a  more  sustainable  and  integrated  European  region,  its 
immediate-term effects on economic recovery is likely to be limited. 
There  are  several  factors  that  are  containing  the  potential  for  sustained  growth  in  these 
economies.  This  can  be  classified  into  seven  categories.  Firstly,  is  the  gradual  process  of 
unwinding the excesses that had been built up over several years. These include the high 
degree of indebtedness by households, the financial sector and the public sector. Secondly, 
is  the  significant  long-term  structural  adjustments  that  are  needed  to  regain  relative 
competitiveness. This will involve greater efficiency and innovation within existing industries, 
and  the  shifting  of  resources  out  of  industries  in  which  these  economies  no  longer  have 
comparative  advantage,  into  new  industries  which  have  comparative  advantage. While  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
limited  policy 
fourth  category  of 
the  governance  arrangements 
factors  concerns  economic  and 
flexibility.  Monetary  policy  accommodation  has  resulted 
former may result in economic gains, it may not necessarily be accompanied by increased 
employment,  and  the  latter  may  result  in  temporary  economic  dislocation  and  increased 
unemployment.  Thus,  even  if  such  policies  were  to  yield  results,  they  may  not  produce  a 
robust  recovery  of  economic  activity  and  a  reduction  in  unemployment  in  the  short  and 
medium term.  
The third is the need for the introduction of new institutions and the transformation of existing 
institutions  to  render  them  relevant  to the  changed  environment. While existing  institutions 
may  need  to  be  transformed,  merged  or  even  dissolved,  new  institutions  may  need  to  be 
established  to  facilitate  management  of  the  new  environment.  The  same  will  hold  true  for 
businesses  if  they  are  to  remain  competitive,  and,  in  particular,  if  they should  venture  into 
new areas and across borders.  
The 
financial  management. 
Macroeconomic  policies  in  most  of  these  economies  have  been  pursued  to  the  limit, 
rendering 
in 
substantially low interest rates which have been brought down to near zero levels, while the 
cumulative  fiscal  expansion  during  the  period  2007–2009  has  amounted  to  an  average  of 
four per cent of GDP. In addition, are the potential intended or unintended consequences of 
the international regulatory reforms. The reforms have focused on building a stronger global 
regulatory  framework  and  raising  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system.  While  still  in  their 
early stage of implementation, concerns have been raised on their implications on the cost 
both to the financial intermediation process and to the real economy. 
An  important  change  in  our  environment  both  at  national  and  international  level  is  the 
increased  inter-connectedness  within  the  financial  system  and  the  global  economy.  This 
greater  inter-connectedness,  and  hence  the  greater  inter-dependence,  requires  having  in 
place 
these 
arrangements  have  not  been  put  in  place  both  at  the  national  and  international  levels.  In 
addition,  corporations  or  organisations  in  this  new  environment  can  no  longer  function  by 
departments  or  sections,  but  as  an  integrated  organisation.  This  also  requires  new 
governance arrangements. For an economy or a financial system, we have seen how a crisis 
in one segment was thought to be confined, but it had pervasive consequences on the entire 
financial system and the economy.  
Sixth,  is  that  despite  the  increased  connectivity  of  the  world,  as  exemplified  by  the  swift 
spread  of  the  financial  crisis  and  economic  shocks  throughout  the  global  economy  and 
international  financial  system  in  2008,  the  institutional  arrangements  for  the  cross-border 
dimension of policy-making have yet to reach the levels commensurate with the degree of 
economic and financial integration in the world. 
Finally,  the  response  to  the  crisis  needs  to  be  comprehensive.  While  addressing  the 
weaknesses and lapses is important, equally important is the enabling environment for the 
measures  to  yield  results.  Pro-growth  policies  are  vital  for  this  purpose.  During  the  Asian 
financial  crisis,  Malaysia  gave  equal  attention  to  financial  sector  resolution  to  restore  the 
financial  intermediation  process  and  thus  credit  supply.  Equally  emphasis  was  placed  on 
addressing the problems of borrowers. Debt restructuring and mechanisms for support were 
put in place for the corporate sector, small and medium-scale enterprises and the household 
sector. This supported growth of the economy and at a fraction of the cost of the financial 
sector resolution.  
In this current environment, the emerging economies are challenged by both the weakening 
global  growth  and  the  spillovers  arising  from  the  policy  actions  in  the  major  advanced 
economies. While continuing to register reasonable economic growth, the momentum of the 
growth has moderated in most emerging economies, affected by slowing external demand 
and uncertainty in the financial markets. Nevertheless, current ongoing shifts occurring in the 
emerging  economies  have  contributed  to  sustaining  our  economies.  It  is  the  growing 
importance of domestic demand in most of the emerging economies in Asia that is creating a 
for  greater  coordination.  Fifth 
that 
is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
huge cumulative domestic market, and this is resulting in greater regional integration with an 
increase  in  intra-regional  trade.  Greater  regional  and  inter-regional  integration  of  the 
emerging  economies through the  proliferation  of  interlocking  networks  of  trade,  investment 
and finance, has contributed to provide mutually reinforcing support to economic activity in 
the emerging economies.  
In Malaysia, the decline in external demand while affecting overall growth, has been partially 
offset by stronger domestic demand, following the robust resumption of private consumption 
and  investment  activities,  and  the  diversification  of  exports  to  the  regional  economies.  In 
addition, the wide-ranging reforms implemented since the Asian financial crisis have resulted 
in  strengthened  financial  intermediaries  and  a  more  developed  financial  system.  This  has 
allowed  for  the  economy  to  better  intermediate  the  volatile  cross-border  flows  without 
disruption to the financial system. In addition, Malaysia’s economic flexibility has allowed us 
to shift resources from industries in which we no longer have comparative advantage to new 
areas of growth. It is these factors that will continue to underpin the positive growth outlook of 
the Malaysian economy into the near to medium term. 
Key Imperatives to prepare for the new global landscape  
The changing global landscape presents significant new challenges for both the developed 
and emerging economies. Important is to be well-positioned to manage the new risks and to 
build the necessary capability and capacity to have the agility and flexibility to adjust to the 
rapidly  changing  conditions.  As  the  emerging  economies  aspire  towards  achieving  higher 
levels  of  income  and  living  standards,  a  different  path from that  which  led  the  way  for the 
advanced economies will now need to be considered. The current global financial crisis and 
the Asian financial crisis have provided us with many important lessons that should form the 
underpinnings for our business models and our policies for growth and development. A key 
priority of policy should be to balance the need of ensuring sustained stability while having in 
place the necessary foundations to secure long-term development.  
Avoiding  and  preventing  the  build-up  of  excesses  is  a  critical  imperative.  The  recent  crisis 
has forcefully shown that markets cannot be exclusively relied on to rein in excesses. Market 
discipline  needs  to  be  complemented  by  policy  interventions  to  effectively  manage  the 
build-up of imbalances in the financial sector and in the economy. In the financial system, 
this involves putting in place more comprehensive regulatory frameworks, complemented by 
enhanced  surveillance  arrangements  and  relatively  more  intrusive  supervisory  oversight.  It 
also  involves  having  wide-ranging  policy  tools,  including  macro-prudential  policies,  to 
mitigate  and  manage  the  risks  emanating  from  excesses  in  the  financial  system.  As  the 
experience in the advanced economies has shown, the source of imbalances can arise in a 
number  in  segments  of  the  economy,  including  from  the  household,  the  financial  and  the 
public  sectors.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  prudence;  to  ensure  that  growth  is 
underpinned by sustainability and not excesses. A further lesson is to build buffers during the 
good times to better position us to withstand future shocks. 
Equally  important  for  policy  in  the  emerging  economies  is  to  put  in  place  the  necessary 
foundations  for  long-term  growth.  This  involves  few  areas  of  significance.  The  first  is  to 
create  a  competitive  environment  that  allows  for  greater  economic  flexibility.  This  includes 
reforms  for  a  sequenced  and  gradual  removal  of  distortions  prevailing  in  the  economy, 
lowering the costs of doing business, and to streamline the involvement of the public sector 
in businesses. The second is to accord importance to investments in modern infrastructure, 
and  to  enhance  technological  readiness  that  will  enable  the  economy  to  prepare  for  the 
changing economic and financial landscape.  
Another area of significance is to ensure balanced and inclusive development. Indeed, in the 
emerging  economies,  this  is  becoming  increasingly  urgent  as  the  benefits  of  rapid 
development have not been evenly distributed, and income inequality has risen further even 
in  the  developed  economies.  Going  forward,  economic  empowerment  will  increasingly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
depend  on  access  to  technology,  high  quality  education,  healthcare  and  social  security 
systems.  Equally  important  is  greater  financial  inclusion.  Without  policy  intervention,  the 
trend  towards  greater  inequality  could  potentially  intensify.  In  Malaysia,  many  of  the 
necessary policy strategies for long-term growth in these areas of significance are already at 
various stages of implementation, with considerable progress being made in certain areas.  
As the technological gap between the emerging and the advanced economies converges, it 
will become increasingly critical for an emerging economy such as Malaysia to transition from 
growth  based  on  capital  accumulation,  to  growth  based  on  productivity  improvements.  In 
addition,  the  rising  global  inter-connectedness  characterised  by  the  emergence  of  highly 
intricate networks such as the increase of global manufacturing supply chains, increases the 
susceptibility of industries to both cascading failures, as well as to the rapid re-orientation of 
business  competitiveness  through  disruptive  innovations  such  as  in  the  mobile  computing 
industry or the possible rise of additive manufacturing. To advance forward in this direction, 
human  capital  development  is  pivotal.  It  leads  to  greater  value  creation,  enhanced 
technological  readiness  and  the  capacity  to  innovate  and  adapt  –  all  of  which  are  key  for 
firms  to  operate  in  the  new  landscape.  Productivity  is  thus  not  only  a  function  of  physical 
technology,  but  of  talent  development,  including  leadership  development,  given  the 
increasing dynamic and complex environment.  
In the area of regional collaboration and cooperation, the Asian region is well ahead in the 
areas  of  surveillance  arrangements,  financial  safety  nets  and  crisis  management.  These 
frameworks  and  arrangements  were  established  in  the  period  of relative  stability  since  the 
Asian financial crisis. The establishment of regional arrangements and platforms, including 
the building of regional financial infrastructures and markets, is not only aimed at facilitating 
the  efficient  intermediation  of  financial  resources  in  the  region,  but  also  at  safeguarding 
financial  stability  in  the  region.  This  trend  paves  the  way  for  coordinated  policy  actions  to 
manage and mitigate the risks and vulnerabilities to the region. Given our diversities, there is 
also tremendous opportunity for the private sector, in particular in ASEAN, to integrate further 
in the areas of trade, investment and finance, and to leverage on the respective comparative 
advantage that exists in the region. 
Conclusion 
While we could best prepare for the future using all the knowledge that we currently have, 
the transition towards the new landscape will continue to be paved with uncertainty and new 
challenges.  Further,  there  will  be  increasing  complexity  in  the  functioning  of  the  global 
economy  and  the  international  financial  system.  In  this  environment,  perhaps  the  best 
compass for policy-makers and businesses is one that is centred on principles; in particular, 
on  ethics  and  integrity. Recent  experiences  in  the  advanced  economies  have  put  this  into 
question.  This  needs  to  be  restored.  The  next  generation  of  policy-makers  and  leaders  in 
business will be defined not by the power they hold and the amount of wealth they amass, 
but  by  the  stewardship  they  exercise  in  serving  the  people  and  the  responsibility  they 
demonstrate to their communities. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
