Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Capital market education – a tool for market 
development and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the First National Convention of the Capital Market Institute of the 
Philippines, Manila, 30 October 2012. 
 Capital Markets Institute of the Phils. (CMIP) Chairman- Reynaldo Nograles, President- Leo 
Quinto,  officers  and  members;  distinguished  speakers;  special  guests;  fellow  workers  in 
government and in BSP; ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
At the outset, allow me to congratulate the Institute for holding its 1st National Convention. 
Anyone  who  has  tried  to  push  an  idea  or  an  initiative  forward  realizes  early  on  the  great 
difficulties  one  endures to  start  off.  Many  good  ideas  have  perhaps  fallen  by  the  wayside, 
unable to remain viable in a market of competing ideas and differentiated approaches. 
Yet  as  one  gets  to  that  first  milestone  of  success,  there  is  that  immediate  realization  that 
moving beyond the last success is in fact the enduring challenge. It may be hard to start but 
it is more difficult to stay relevant by keeping on moving forward. 
As I look around this national convention, I must say that the Capital Market Institute of the 
Philippines has indeed moved well past your initial milestone of success. This day no longer 
stands simply as a reunion of your past graduates of the Investment Teaching Accreditation 
Program. It manifests how far and how wide your efforts have had an impact.  
Let me then congratulate the leadership of the CMIP, the members and the graduates of the 
Capital Markets Investment Teaching Accreditation Program. 
Challenges of financial education in capital markets 
Having gone this far, the task now is to set our sights forward. In thinking about the financial 
education needs of capital markets and investments, the hurdles ahead do take on specific 
dimensions.  
Foremost  of  these  challenges  is  the  fact  that  our  targeted  constituents  cut  across 
17 administrative  regions,  are  of  different  faiths  and  speak  several  dialects.  That  diversity 
should surely tell us that the learning interventions for Apayao up north may be different from 
those which will be extended to the Zamboanga Peninsula down south.  
In addition, there are capacity and needs differences across the regions. The latest Family 
Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES 2009) provides us with useful lens through which we 
can view the saving – and thus investing – capacity of families. 
It  tells  us  for  example  that  roughly  90  percent  of  the  total  saving  is  generated  by  only 
30 percent of families. The numbers then paint a rather narrow base since nearly 13 million 
families  out  of  the  estimated  18.4  million  families  could  only  provide  10  percent  of  total 
saving. 
In practice, this means that the cash flows are different across regions, and the preferences 
differ from person to person.  
These hurdles may seem daunting but I assure the CMIP that you are not alone. The BSP 
faces the same challenges in our own Economic and Financial Learning Program. Like you, 
we believe in the advocacy of financial learning. And like you, we appreciate the difficulties of 
pursuing such a learning campaign within the context of the nuances of our market and our 
stakeholders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financial  education  program, 
Capital market development and financial stability 
Although  the  difficulties  are  defined,  the  consequences  from  not  pursuing  a  financial 
education  campaign  are  even  less  enticing.  Financial  education  creates  the  platform  for 
raising  responsible  market  agents,  who  are  able  to  look  beyond  their  own  bottom  lines. 
Without  an  appropriate  national 
the  development  of 
stakeholders  who  can  make  well-informed  financial  decisions  who  can  then  take  the  “the 
next step” from being cash hoarders to become savers and ultimately to become investors 
who  will form the capital base for sustained economic growth will be a  slooooww process. 
And if our country is to take advantage of opportunities at this time and move up the global 
economic ladder, we need to accelerate this process!  
But  while  financial  education  is  a  challenging  objective  on  its  own,  there  are  equally 
important goals that must be considered as well. These objectives include the development 
of the capital market and achieving financial stability. 
We  all  know  that  developing  the  capital  market  provides  both  the  “buy  side”  and  the  “sell 
side”  of  the  market  with  choices.  For  the  “buy  side”,  choices  to  reflect  its  longer-term 
investment needs. And for the “sell side”, choices to adjust product offerings to where there 
is felt need. Developing the capital market, alongside financial education, makes the meeting 
of an informed risk-responsive investor and a responsible product provider efficient.  
The development of the capital market is also critical because it relieves the pressures off the 
spot  market.  The  capital  market  is  the  anchor  that  filters  the  intra-day  and  the  day-to-day 
volatilities  of  the  cash  market  into  underlying  longer-term  trends.  Investors,  providers  and 
regulators need not react to every market blip. Instead, decisions can be premised on long-
term  signals,  filtering  all  the  shorter-term  noise  in  the  process.  A  well-developed  capital 
market provides this avenue for users and sources of long-term funds.  
But  capital  market  development  is  itself  not  the  end  goal.  That  delicate  balance  between 
servicing needs in a dynamic cash market and the developmental nature of a thriving capital 
market creates a measure of financial market stability. 
In  a  narrow  sense,  the  absence  of  forces  that  can  instigate  financial  market  instability  is 
certainly  always  welcome.  However,  under  today’s  prudential  framework  and  policy 
perspective, the term “financial stability” takes on the broader context of mitigating the build 
up and spread of systemic risk. 
This  elevates  the  issues  to  a  much  higher  plane  because  the  recent  and  on-going  global 
difficulties  as  well  as  the  ensuing  international  reform  agenda  are  all  about  the  ability  of 
economies to contain systemic risks. 
At the BSP, we take financial stability quite seriously. We have created a high-level Financial 
Stability Committee (FSComm) which I have the pleasure to chair.  
With me in this committee are six of the most senior officers of the Bangko Sentral. In this 
committee, we pro-actively  look into possible pressure points that may be brewing but are 
still not evident in the headline data. From the ability of banks to take on stressed conditions, 
to  potential  channels  of  risk  from  internal  and  external  shocks  as  well  as  the  impact  of 
international reforms, all of these are taken up at the Financial Stability Committee. 
Conferences on financial stability are constantly being run and the agenda can take several 
days.  We  can  certainly  do  that  here  in  the  Philippines  as  well  and  we  look  forward  to 
engaging all stakeholders. But let me reserve that for another time and another place. 
For  now,  I  simply  wish  to  point  out  that  neither  developed  capital  markets  nor  mitigated 
systemic risks are possible unless we have a well-informed public and market agents who 
look beyond the bottom line. Both of these must stem from a financial education campaign 
that  nurtures  the  awareness  of  the  general  public  while  developing  responsible  market 
agents. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have deliberately painted on a larger canvass the various big dots 
which we believe currently define the market landscape. The dots must and do connect. 
But unlike the pictures that we used to draw by connecting the dots many, many moons ago, 
we collectively have the ability to shape the landscape that make up the dots. 
With the favourable sentiments towards the Philippines and its financial market, it is tempting 
to be lost in the glory of the accolades. While we have worked hard and over long hours to 
achieve  these  developments, the  real  challenge for  all  of  us must  be  in  providing  a  better 
tomorrow to future generations. 
The BSP has long held the view that financial education, financial inclusion and consumer 
protection form the triumvirate that holds the key. Each mutually reinforces the other. 
While financial inclusion and consumer protection do require regulatory intervention, financial 
education will have to be a commitment that all of us puts forward. 
CMIP  has  already  invested  itself  into  this  agenda  by  pursuing  a  passion  that  became  an 
advocacy that is now a program. The Institute has taken great steps but it cannot end here. 
Let  us  use  this  1st  National  Convention  as  a  springboard  for  setting  milestones  of 
performance going forward. Will you simply want to have more graduates of the CMITAP? Or 
will you measure yourselves against what the graduates themselves can do individually and 
collectively as part of the CMIP family?  
How  do  you  pay  forward  the  investment  that  you  have  made  for  yourself?  How  does  this 
investment  pay  off  when  working  with  your  students,  interacting  with  office  colleagues  or 
operating with fellow market practitioners? 
How  can  CMIP  contribute  to  the  development  of  the  Philippine  capital  market  in  resolving 
longstanding  issues?  How  will  you  ensure  financial  stability  knowing  that  your  individual 
actions may have macro-prudential consequences? 
There are many questions that can be raised. What is clear is that the answers must come 
from you, just as other stakeholders must have their own answers.  
Pause and take time to recognize what you have already achieved. But I enjoin all of you to 
use that success as a commitment to a better tomorrow. 
I  do  not  have  any  doubt  in  our  collective  ability  to  make  a  better  tomorrow  for  future 
generations.  I  also  am  firm  in  my  belief  that  financial  education  is  a  key  element  in 
developing markets and instilling systemic stability. 
CMIP  has  taken  major  strides  forward  to-date.  And  I  look  forward  to  hearing,  seeing  and 
being part of your future successes. 
Maraming salamat po. Mabuhay ang CMIP. Mabuhay ang ating bansang Pilipinas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
