Benoît Cœuré: What can monetary policy do about inequality? 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  International  Day  for  the  Eradication  of  Poverty,  Intergroup  “Extreme  poverty  and 
human 
rights,  Fourth  World  Committee”  event,  European  Parliament,  Brussels, 
17 October 2012. 
 I would like to thank Ana Lamo, Jirka Slacalek, Frank Smets and Oreste Tristani for their contributions to these 
remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
Members of the European Parliament, Professor Banerjee, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the European Parliament for inviting me to participate in this panel. 
Economic growth has sharply reduced the incidence of poverty in “developed” economies. In 
Europe,  it  is  one  of  the  great  achievements  of  the  Single  Market  and  of  Economic  and 
Monetary Union (EMU) to have delivered growth and job creation over a prolonged period, 
contributing to this objective. The euro area has created about 14.4 million new jobs since 
1999, compared with approximately 10.7 million in the United States. Nevertheless, the past 
five  years  have  been  a  time  of  hardship,  owing  to  the  financial  and  economic  crisis.  The 
Great Recession of 2008–09 and the subsequent crisis in the euro area have dented growth 
in  our  economies,  pushing  millions  of  workers  into  unemployment  or  forced  inactivity,  and 
adversely  affecting  living  standards  for  our  entire  population.  Moreover,  they  have  left  a 
shadow  of  uncertainty  over  long-term  growth  prospects  and  run  the  risk  of  creating  a  lost 
generation. 
I  would  like  to  bring  to  this  discussion  a  central  banker’s  perspective  on  the  theme  of 
inequality.  Inequality  is  a  cause  for  concern  for  all  European  institutions,  since  social 
cohesion  is  one  of  the  statutory  objectives  of  the  EU.  For  the  ECB,  the  question  naturally 
arises as to whether monetary policy can make a difference, and whether it is mandated to 
do so. Musgrave and Musgrave’s traditional description of the functions of economic policy1 
can help to explain the role of monetary policy in the economic constitution of EMU. The task 
of the  ECB  under the Treaty  on the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  is  to  ensure  price 
stability in the medium term. It thus focuses on income and wealth stabilisation rather than on 
the  allocation  of  economic  resources,  or  on  redistribution.  In  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa’s 
concise words, monetary policy is focused on stability rather than on efficiency or equity. This 
should be the starting point of any discussion of the role of monetary policy in addressing 
inequalities. 
Does  this  imply  that  inequalities  are  irrelevant  for  central  bankers?  Not  at  all,  as  first, 
monetary  policy  may  have  an  impact  on  inequalities,  and  second,  stability  is  conducive  to 
equity. To the extent that it stabilises economic activity, monetary policy can help shield from 
poverty the lowest income classes of society, especially during recessions.  
I will address these two issues in turn, starting from a few facts on the rise of inequality in 
recent years. I will maintain that preserving price stability over the medium term is the best 
contribution that monetary policy can make to economic stability. The ECB has achieved this 
goal  throughout  the  crisis,  thanks  to  its  standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy 
measures.  Our  recent  decision  to  undertake  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  can  also  be 
seen  in  this  context,  to  the  extent  that  it  helps  to  restore  confidence  in  the  integrity  and 
irreversibility of the single currency. 
                                                
1  Musgrave, R. and Musgrave, P. (1989), Public Finance in Theory and Practice, McGraw-Hill. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Inequality/poverty is a cause for concern also in the euro area 
It  is  well  known  that  the  relationship  between  inequality  and  growth  is  complex  and  not 
necessarily  monotonic.2  On  average,  inequality  in  developed  economies  has  increased  in 
recent years. The Gini coefficient, a standard measure of income inequality that ranges from 
0 (when everybody has identical incomes) to 1 (when all income goes to only one person), 
stood  at  an  average  of  0.29  in  OECD  countries  in  the  mid-1980s.  By  the  end  of  the  last 
decade, it had increased by almost 10% to 0.32. It rose in 17 of the 22 OECD countries for 
which long-term data series are available. Of the eight euro area countries for which we have 
data, inequality increased in five, changed little in two and declined in one. Thus, although 
incomes  remain  more  unequally  distributed  in  the  United  States,  the  data  suggest  that 
inequality is also on the rise in the euro area.  
The  increase  in  inequality  since  the  1980s  largely  reflects  a  faster  increase  in  household 
incomes  at  the  top  of  the  income  distribution.3  More  precisely,  greater  inequality  in  labour 
income,  which  represents  about  three-quarters  of  total  income  across  the  working  age 
population,  emerges  as  the  most  important  driver  of  household  income  inequality.  In 
particular, most of the microeconomic studies find a continuous and sharp increase in wage 
dispersion in Anglo-Saxon countries over the last 30 years.  
Microeconomic evidence is, however, mixed across countries. In countries such as Sweden 
and  Spain,  inequality  has  followed  a  downward  trend  over  the  same  period  of  time.  In 
Germany  and  Italy,  the  changes  in  wage  distribution  are  more  erratic  and  do  not  show  a 
clear upward or downward trend.4  
Developments  in  labour  participation,  which  also  affects  labour  income,  are  more 
heterogeneous across countries. It is also difficult to find clear patterns in developments in 
capital income inequality, owing to measurement difficulties.  
How wages evolve over the business cycle depends both on the reasons why growth moves 
up and down, and on the way the labour market is organised.5 At first sight, a rigid labour 
market  may  appear  to  shield  the  poorest  from  economic  shocks,  as  wages  will  not  easily 
adjust downwards in a recession. However, the lack of reaction of wages is a clear symptom 
of  an  ill-functioning  labour  market,  leading  to  a  costly  and  prolonged  adjustment  in 
employment. Taking into account fluctuations in wages and unemployment, a typical finding 
in several countries is that inequality in earnings at the bottom of the distribution tends to rise 
during  recessions.6  Moreover,  households  that  do  not  receive  labour  income  face  even 
higher hurdles when labour markets do not function well and protect insiders at the expense 
of  outsiders. What  this  means  is  that  the  poor  suffer  most  in  relative  terms  in  and  after  a 
recession. In fact, the pain they suffer does not fully disappear once the recession is over 
owing to the persistence of unemployment and the malfunctioning of labour markets.  
With regard to developments since 2007, recent research finds marked differences across 
countries  depending  on  whether  they  have  also  experienced  large  corrections  in  house 
                                                
2  See Simon Kuznets (1955), “Economic Growth and Income Inequality”, American Economic Review, 45: 1–28. 
3  See OECD (2011), Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising. 
4  See, for example, a number of recent country studies published in a special issue of the Review of Economic 
Dynamics on “Cross Sectional Facts for Macroeconomists” (see Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(1), 2010). 
5  See, for example, Blanchard, Olivier and Wolfers, Justin (2000), “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the 
Rise  of  European  Unemployment:  The  Aggregate  Evidence”,  Economic  Journal,  Royal  Economic  Society, 
Vol. 110(462), pages C1-33, March. 
6  See Fatih Guvenen, Serdar Ozkan and Jae Song, (2012), “The Nature of Countercyclical Income Risk”, NBER 
Working  Papers  18035,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Inc.,  for  new  evidence  from  the 
United States. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
prices.7 Nevertheless, for most OECD countries for which data are available, there is thus far 
little evidence of changes in household income distribution in the two years following the start 
of  the  downturn,  from  2007  to  2009.  Once  more  data  become  available,  however,  larger 
changes  can  be  expected  over  the  coming  years,  especially  in  countries  like  Spain  that 
suffered a severe slump in the housing market and massive job losses in the construction 
sector, mostly for temporary workers.  
Taken together, these factors suggest that unemployment remains a crucial determinant of 
inequality and poverty. There is a need for a comprehensive strategy to support job creation 
and  ensure  that  the  unemployed  are  employable.  In  the  global  economy,  the  comparative 
advantages  of  European  economies  rest  very  much  on  human  capital  and  skills.  Active 
labour market policies and investment in higher education are the most powerful instruments 
at the disposal of governments to counter rising inequality and to foster employment.8 This 
leads  to  a  simple  policy  message.  At  a  time  when  fiscal  policies  are  being  reorganised  in 
European countries, reflecting the crucial need to restore the sustainability of public finances, 
it  is  essential  that  the  composition  of  fiscal  adjustment  preserves  governments’  ability  to 
invest in skills and recreate comparative advantages in their economies, and that they are 
supported by mobilisation of EU instruments. 
Can monetary policy affect inequality and poverty?  
But let me now return to the contribution that the central bank itself can make to reducing 
inequality  and  poverty.  Is  there  evidence  that  monetary  policy  affects  inequality?  I  will 
discuss  this  question  from  two  perspectives:  first,  the  immediate  distributive  effects  of 
monetary  policy  and  inflation;  and  second,  the  benefits  of  macroeconomic  stability  for  the 
more vulnerable. 
Because monetary policy is transmitted through many channels, direct and indirect – interest 
rates both current and expected, credit extension, asset prices – and because households 
differ  in  many  respects  –  with  regard  to  socio-demographic  factors,  such  as  age  and 
education, as well as economic variables, such as income, wealth, employment status and 
housing  status  –  monetary  policy  does  not  affect  all  households  in  the  same  way.  Many 
channels through which monetary policy affects individuals in different ways may be at work, 
and it is a daunting task to disentangle and quantify these channels empirically. 
Inflation has a direct effect on income inequality through changes in the real (i.e. consumer 
price-adjusted) valuation of financial and non-financial assets. Clearly, an unexpected fall in 
interest  rates  and  an  increase  in  inflation  tend  to  hurt  savers  and  benefit  borrowers  –  the 
mechanism  John  Maynard  Keynes  referred  to  as  the  “euthanasia  of  the  rentier”.9  Careful 
studies  based  on  US  data  demonstrate  that  inflation  hits  in  particular  richer  and  older 
households,  which  hold  the  bulk  of  the  economy’s  wealth  and  whose  asset  holdings  are 
typically imperfectly insured against surprise inflation.10  
Can this evidence be interpreted as suggesting that the higher inflation is, the lower income 
inequality  will  be?  Or  that  higher  inflation  should  be  pursued  as  a  way  to  reduce  income 
inequality? My answer is no, because inflation is also particularly harmful to the poorest parts 
of  the  population.  First,  poorer  households  tend  to  hold  a  larger  fraction  of  their  financial 
wealth in cash, implying that both expected and unexpected increases in inflation make them 
                                                
7  See also Stephen P. Jenkins, Andrea Brandolini, John Micklewright and Brian Nolan (forthcoming), The Great 
Recession and the Distribution of Household Income, Oxford University Press. 
8  OECD (2011), op. cit. 
9  See John Maynard Keynes (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, Chapter 24. 
10  See  Matthias  Doepke  and  Martin  Schneider  (2006),  “Inflation  and  the  Redistribution  of  Nominal  Wealth”, 
Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 114(6), pages 1069–1097, December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
even poorer. In addition, monetary policy shocks and surprise inflation can have an impact 
on inequality through other sources of income. Income from labour and the unemployment of 
less-skilled  workers  tend  to  be  adversely  affected  to  a  disproportionate  degree  during 
recessions. All in all, recent studies suggest that a higher inflation rate is accompanied by 
greater  income  inequality.11  At  the  same  time  research  on  the  US  data  finds  that  also 
contractionary  monetary  policy  actions  appear  to  increase  inequality  in  earnings  and  total 
income.12 A stability-oriented monetary policy, which aims to smooth the cycle and reduce its 
amplitude, ought therefore to cushion the impact of negative shocks on poorer households.  
However,  it  is  not  only  the  extent  of  income  and  wealth  shocks  that  affects  consumers’ 
welfare,  but  also  the  fluctuation  in  their  consumption  expenditure.  All  households  are  not 
equal in this respect. Some of them are able to insure against wealth shocks and can thus 
mitigate  the  adverse  consequences  of  such  shocks  for  their  well-being.  But  poorer 
households have limited or no access to the financial system (let alone to financial markets) 
and do not have adequate buffers in the form of precautionary savings. Consequently, their 
consumption  and  welfare  are  particularly  vulnerable  to  adverse  shocks.  Even  if  all 
households were hit by negative shocks to the same extent, poorer, less-insured households 
would suffer from more volatile consumption and lower welfare. 
Studies  of  these  effects  have  so  far  focused  almost  exclusively  on  the  United  States  and 
their findings may not be applicable to the euro area, where countries are characterised by 
different tax/benefit systems and different institutions, and where households do not access 
financial markets in the same way. We in the Eurosystem are aware of the need for more 
empirical research at the household level and, partly for this reason, we have been collecting 
such  data.  Our  “Household  Finance  and  Consumption  Survey”  (http://www.ecb.int/home/ 
html/researcher_hfcn.en.html)  documents  the  extent  of  wealth  heterogeneity  and  the 
structure of household balance sheets across the euro area member countries. To enhance 
the  analysis  and  understanding  of  issues  such  as  whether  and  how  different  households 
react to shocks in different ways, the data will be made available to researchers in early 2013 
together with a detailed public report on the results. 
Finally,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  monetary  policy  can  impact  geographical  inequalities, 
insofar as it contributes to smoothing unevenly distributed shocks to households’ wealth and 
income across countries or regions. The ECB’s non-standard measures, as described below, 
have limited the risk of negative feedback loops at country level within the euro area, arising 
in particular from the tight link between the creditworthiness of banks and of sovereigns, and 
more  recently  from  the  unjustified  perception  of  a  risk  of  euro  break-up.  To  this  extent, 
monetary policy has helped cushion the impact on the crisis on the less well-off households 
in jurisdictions under financial stress. 
Price stability and economic stability: the role of ECB measures 
There is a broader point on the relationship between monetary policy and the fight against 
poverty, a point that I would like to stress now. Social equality is better served by economic 
stability. A large body of theoretical and applied academic literature and the experience of 
the past decades indicate that monetary policy’s best contribution to economic stability is to 
maintain price stability. Moreover, credible central banks have a comparative advantage in 
                                                
11  See Albanesi, Stefania (2007), “Inflation and inequality”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, Vol. 54(4), 
pages 1088–1114, May, for evidence from 47 advanced and developing countries. 
12  See  Olivier  Coibion,  Yuriy  Gorodnichenko,  Lorenz  Kueng  and  John  Silvia  (2012),  “Innocent  Bystanders? 
Monetary  Policy  and  Inequality  in  the  U.S”,  NBER  Working  Papers  18170,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, Inc. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
this area, as the return to price stability becomes possible at lower costs in terms of output 
volatility.13  
The available empirical evidence supports the view of a complementarity between price and 
economic stability at the aggregate level. Price stability appears to be conducive to economic 
growth, low unemployment and subdued income volatility. Recent developments in the main 
advanced  economies  in  terms  of  volatility  of  inflation  and  GDP  growth  confirm  this  insight 
and show that there has been no trade-off between the two variables.14 Volatility has been 
low in both variables in the euro area by comparison with other major economies. 
The  crisis  period  is  illustrative  of  this  complementarity.  After  2007,  output  and  inflation 
volatility increased everywhere, but the combination remained more favourable in the euro 
area, which suggests that the recent policy easing aimed at checking deflationary risks also 
helped  to  sustain  the  economy.  The  ECB  responded  boldly  to  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman 
Brothers and to the subsequent crisis with a sequence of cuts in the policy interest rate and a 
range of measures such as fixed rate liquidity provision with full allotment, the extension of 
the  list  of  eligible  collateral,  very  long-term  refinancing  operations  and,  most  recently,  the 
Outright Monetary Transactions. The ultimate justification for such measures was the need to 
pre-empt negative inflationary pressures and avoid a collapse in money and credit creation. 
By achieving this goal, the measures helped to cushion the effects of the financial crisis on 
the real economy.  
Existing studies are consistent with the hypothesis that ECB measures were instrumental in 
preventing  deflation  and  in  containing  the  fall  in  economic  activity  at  the  height  of  the 
recession.15  Among  our  early  non-standard  measures,  the  switch  to  fixed  rate  tender 
procedures  with  full  allotment  appears  to  have  been  especially  effective.  Had  the 
unprecedented  increase  in  the  demand  for  liquidity  following  the  financial  crisis  not  been 
accommodated by unlimited liquidity supply from the ECB, money market rates would have 
increased strongly. A larger fall in credit growth would have ensued. Estimates suggest that 
the euro area inflation rate would have been about 1 percentage point lower and the GDP 
level would have been more than 2% lower by the first half of 2010. 
From  a  broader  perspective,  our  non-standard  measures  have  prevented  more  adverse 
economic  outcomes  by  helping  in  particular  the  euro  area  countries  which  were  most 
affected by the crisis, and by preventing a halt in the flow of credit especially to small and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  According  to  the  latest  survey  conducted  by  the 
Eurosystem, in the second and third quarters of 2011 access to finance remained one of the 
most  pressing  problems  for  SMEs,  which  continue  to  rely  mostly  on  banks  for  external 
financing.  Maintaining  a  flow  of  credit  to  SMEs  was  particularly  important  because  they 
employ 72% of the euro area’s labour force and have significantly higher gross job creation 
(and destruction) rates than large enterprises. 
Conclusions  
Let me conclude.  
I have focused on the narrower question of whether inequality can be affected by monetary 
policy.  More  evidence  has  to  be  collected  before  we  can  produce  robust  stylised  facts. 
                                                
13  See, for example, Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy: A 
New  Keynesian  Perspective”,  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  American  Economic  Association,  vol.  37(4), 
pages 1661–1707, December. 
14  See Stephan Fahr, Roberto Motto, Massimo Rostagno, Frank Smets and Oreste Tristani (2011), “A monetary 
policy  strategy  in  good  and  bad  times:  lessons  from  the  recent  past”,  Working  Paper  Series,  No  1336, 
European Central Bank. 
15  Fahr et al. (2011), op. cit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
However, it is clear that, by ensuring price stability over the medium term, monetary policy 
also  contributes  to  broader  economic  stability.  During  recessions,  it  also  has  stabilising 
effects on employment and poverty.  
This role of monetary policy has been especially important during the crisis. An increase in 
the overall demand for liquidity by banks – when unmatched by the central bank – can cause 
a  downward  spiral  in  asset  prices,  a  credit  crunch,  bank  failures  and  a  severe  recession. 
Deflation  accompanies  these  phenomena.  The  Great  Depression  –  a  combination  of 
recession, deflation and bank failures – is a clear historical example of what can happen if 
central banks fail to provide liquidity to the financial system. The monetary policy measures 
taken by the ECB have helped to avoid a collapse in money and credit and to eliminate the 
spectre  of  the  Great  Depression.  They  have  not  only  avoided  a  collapse  of  the  financial 
system, but also, and more importantly, prevented a surge in unemployment and poverty in 
the euro area. In so doing, we have proven that the three objectives of stability, efficiency 
and equity are mutually supportive, and that the ECB can effectively contribute to containing 
inequalities within its Treaty mandate. 
I thank you for your attention.  
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
