Jens Weidmann: “There is no point in trying to dress up the facts” 
Interview  with  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  in  the  Neue 
Zürcher Zeitung, published on 26 September 2012. 
 In  an  interview  with  Neue  Zürcher  Zeitung,  Bundesbank  President  Dr  Jens  Weidmann 
explains why he was the only member of the ECB Governing Council to vote against the new 
bond  purchase  programme.  He  raises  his concerns  about  monetary  policy  taking  on fiscal 
tasks and draws conclusions for his own position. 
At Spain’s bond auction last week, the yield on its ten-year government bonds stood 
at 5.66%, compared with 6.65% before the ECB announced its new government bond 
purchase programme. Is the new programme such a success that it is already having 
an impact before it has even been implemented? 
The announcement has of course affected the markets; other measures have had a similar 
impact in the past. No one would dispute that a central bank can temporarily influence yields 
by announcing its intention to intervene in the markets. But we cannot measure the success 
of central bank policy by short-term reactions on the markets. 
You  were  the  only  member  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  to  vote  against  the  new 
programme.  In  the  past  it  seemed  that  several  other  members  of  the  Governing 
Council  were  also  sceptical  of  government  bond  purchases.  What  changed  their 
minds – suddenly leaving you in a minority of one? 
I’m sure I’m not the only member of the Governing Council who has misgivings about setting 
up a government bond purchase programme. Although most Council members backed the 
programme, I have the impression that some of my colleagues share my concerns.  
Did you vote against the government bond programme on principle or because you 
believe that it simply won’t work?  
I see a number of arguments against the programme. They include stability policy principles 
and the question of whether the central bank has a democratic mandate for a measure of this 
kind.  The  programme  spreads  liability  risk  among  euro-area  taxpayers.  That  is  something 
only parliaments are allowed to do, and the rescue packages are the right tools for the job. 
Central  bank funding  must  not  become  entrenched  as  a  catch-all  solution  to  all  our  woes. 
And  then  there’s  the  question  of  whether  the  programme  ultimately  does  more  harm  than 
good.  If  central  bank  assistance  eases  the  pressure  on  politicians  to  push  ahead  with 
reforms, that could hinder and delay the process of overcoming the crisis.  
And that, in turn, undermines the credibility of monetary policy. 
If  the  central  bank  moves  into  that  kind  of  territory,  it  could  become  ensnared  by  its  own 
policy and forfeit some of its credibility. 
Why were you unable to convince the other Governing Council members with those 
arguments? 
Most of my colleagues were evidently convinced that these concerns, while justified, could 
be  addressed  by  designing  the  programme  appropriately. They  certainly  did  take  my 
arguments and concerns on board – even though my overall assessment of the programme 
still ultimately differs from theirs. 
ECB President Mario Draghi has cited disruptions in monetary policy transmission as 
the reason for setting up the new programme. That does indeed seem to be a problem; 
the ECB’s most recent interest rate cut failed to reach some euro-area countries. Do 
you  also  believe  that  there  are  disruptions  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We have been hearing that argument ever since the first government bond programme was 
launched  in  2010,  and  yet  we  are  still  talking  about  disruptions  in  the  transmission 
mechanism  today.  So  my  question  is:  faced  with  structural  problems  such  as  a  lack  of 
competitiveness and a loss of confidence in some countries’ public finances, are government 
bond  purchases  really  the  right  tool  for  repairing  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism? 
But you agree with the diagnosis? 
Our  monetary  stimuli  are  still  being  transmitted,  but  our  monetary  policy  is  not  currently 
reaching all euro-area countries in equal measure. That fact is connected, not least, with the 
lack  of  credit  demand  in  some  countries  and  the  deleveraging  process  in  their  banking 
systems.  Yet  these  adjustments  are  all  appropriate  and  necessary  to  enable  these 
economies to stand on their own two feet again.  
Do government bond risk premiums actually reflect the fundamentals at all any more 
or are they partly down to the irrationality of the markets? 
Ideas about what is a fair interest rate level based on the fundamentals differ very widely and 
have  a  large  subjective  component.  However,  I  wouldn’t  say  that  the  markets’  actions  are 
completely  irrational  at  present;  they  are  based  on  concerns  that  the  reforms  in  some 
countries could grind to a halt. These reforms and, above all, the question of whether they 
will  actually  be  pursued in  the future  have  a major  impact  on  the growth  outlook  and  thus 
also on credit risk.  
So it would be best for the ECB to do nothing, to simply wait for the storm to pass?   
Not making government bond purchases certainly  wouldn’t imply that the Eurosystem was 
merely waiting for the storm to pass. In fact we have already done a great deal: the interest 
rates are at a historic low, the banks have access to unlimited liquidity, the collateral regime 
has been loosened several times, the ECB has already purchased government bonds and 
covered bonds. The Eurosystem has taken a whole range of steps, but we must not ask too 
much of monetary policy.  
ECB President Mario Draghi has said explicitly that the euro is irreversible and ruled 
out a return to the drachma or the lira. Is it the ECB’s job to maintain the euro area and 
the euro in their current form? 
Our job is to maintain the euro as a stable currency within our mandate. We cannot and must 
not dispute political decisions regarding the composition of European monetary union. The 
central  banks  were  not  the  ones  who  decided  which  countries  would  adopt  the  single 
currency. Only democratically elected bodies can make those kinds of decisions.  
So the ECB’s financial stability mandate does not mean that it has to do everything in 
its power to save the euro? 
There  is  of  course  a  close  link  between  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Even  so,  price 
stability  takes  clear  precedence  for  the  ECB  –  it  is  our  primary  objective.  Our  financial 
stability  mandate  is  secondary  to  this  aim  and  is  not  a  blank  cheque.  Central  banks 
themselves cannot guarantee some of the conditions which allow them to fulfil their tasks; 
these  conditions  must  be  ensured  by  the  governments  of  the  member  states.  The  central 
banks’ mandate also has its limits in this context. 
If the ECB had not set up the government bond programme and politicians had done 
too  little  to  remedy  the  problems,  causing  the  crisis  to  escalate,  wouldn’t  the  ECB 
have had to intervene anyway to stabilise the financial system?  
I  don’t  believe  that  the  system  would  have  collapsed  if  the  ECB  had  not  set  up  the 
government bond programme. In the past, many euro-area countries coped with yields of 7% 
or more – not just for new bond issues but also on average. Today, the affected countries 
could likewise ride out higher yields on new issues for a certain length of time. In the present 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
took  exceptional  measures 
situation, it is vital to do what is necessary to ensure that investor confidence improves and 
risk premiums fall. We have to ask ourselves whether central bank bond purchases create 
the right incentives. The rescue packages can help us to buy time where necessary. 
That  sounds  like  an  argument  for  the  kind  of  conditionality  built  into  the  new  ECB 
programme: acting only when governments have initiated reforms. 
If  one  does  choose  to  embark  on  a  programme  of  that  nature,  credible  and  strict 
conditionality provides a certain degree of protection.  
Is  this  a  good  way  of  sending  the  ball  back  into  the  politicians’  court  so  that  they 
finally do their homework?  
It would seem so at first glance – but we mustn’t overlook the risks involved. Monetary policy 
is  in  danger  of  becoming  dependent  on  political  decisions,  and  it  is  unclear  whether  it  will 
then be able to free itself from the clutches of fiscal policy. This ultimately binds monetary 
policy into the rescue packages. In addition, conditionality has to be credibly enforced; that 
remains the main challenge. 
What  about  the  risk  of  the  ECB  itself  incurring  losses  as  a  result  of  the  new 
government bond programme? 
That’s another problem. One of the principles of our monetary policy is that our transactions 
should  entail  the  least  risk  possible.  Yet  the  Eurosystem  will  take  on  substantial  risks  by 
making these purchases.  
The  Swiss  National  Bank  also 
in  exceptional 
circumstances  by  introducing  a  floor  on  the  Swiss  franc’s  exchange  rate  with  the 
euro.  
It  makes  no  sense  to  compare  the  SNB’s  exchange  rate  floor  with  the  Eurosystem’s 
government  bond  programme.  The  euro-franc  floor  does  not,  for  example,  spread  risks 
among taxpayers of different countries, while the Eurosystem’s programme does.  
The Swiss are now debating how to exit the minimum rate regime. What is the ECB’s 
exit strategy for the government bond programme? 
That point will be crucial to ensuring credible conditionality and is currently under discussion. 
The ECB will probably soon be given an additional mandate for banking supervision. 
How do you view this development?  
In principle, the banking union – which encompasses European-level banking supervision – 
is a useful addition to European monetary union. Its main aim is to ensure that the euro-area 
financial system is more stable in the future, and that will also benefit the euro area’s single 
monetary policy. However, I see the banking union as a project for the future and not as a 
solution to the current problems. A communitisation of legacy balance sheet burdens would 
be  tantamount  to  a  transfer  payment  and  should  not  be  concealed  under  the  cloak  of  the 
banking union.  
But making the ECB responsible for banking supervision is not the only conceivable 
option. Aren’t you concerned about the ECB having conflicting objectives? 
That  is  a  crucial  issue  and  it  also  featured  very  prominently  in  the  debate  on  supervisory 
reform in Germany. We need a clear separation between supervision and monetary policy to 
ensure that there are no points of conflict with central bank independence and the objective 
of price stability. 
How do you view the ECB’s institutional framework in light of recent events? Is the 
“one man, one vote” principle for monetary policy decisions still right?  
The principle is right as long as monetary policy does not take on substantial fiscal tasks. If 
we return to traditional monetary policy, this will cease to be an issue. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
How do you view the issue of transparency? Should the minutes of Governing Council 
meetings be published?  
Central banks manage a public good and should therefore be accountable to the public for 
their actions – all the more so if they are operating at the limits of their mandate. They then 
have an even greater obligation to explain that they have looked at the risks and side-effects 
of their policies. But transparency is not simply a matter of publishing minutes.  
Is that something you would oppose? 
That  depends  on  the  proposal.  I  see  little  reason  not  to  disclose  more  of  the  arguments 
discussed by the Governing Council – without naming individual Council members.  
Why is it that the usual confidentiality of Governing Council meetings was loosened in 
your  particular  case,  with  Mario  Draghi  stating  quite  openly  that  you  opposed  the 
government bond programme?  
I  have  no  problem  at  all  with  his  frankness.  As  I’ve  said,  I’m  convinced  that  more 
transparency is a good thing, especially in the present situation.  
Germany’s Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble appears to disagree. He accuses you 
of undermining the ECB’s credibility by being so open about your views.  
The  general  public  are  well  informed  –  we  owe  it  to  them  to  be  frank.  A  central  bank  is 
credible if it takes people seriously and provides them with truthful information. There is no 
point in trying to dress up the facts. 
But isn’t it frustrating for you being convinced that your position is right but unable to 
persuade the Governing Council to come round to your view? 
Discussions  can  evolve  and  progress.  I  wouldn’t  rule  out  seeing  more  support  for  my 
arguments in the future.  
How do you envisage your future role within the ECB Governing Council?  
Despite  all  the  commotion  about  government  bond  purchases,  it  would  be  very  wrong  to 
imagine that I’m always in the minority  with my views in the Governing Council, or indeed 
that the Bundesbank is always in the minority within the Eurosystem. The majorities on many 
other issues are very different, and on some there is no dissent within the Council at all. That 
is  precisely  why  I  find  it  so  important  to  garner  support  for  my  position  on  controversial 
issues. 
In  view  of  your  current  crusade,  can  you  see  why  your  predecessor  Axel  Webel 
eventually decided that enough was enough and resigned? 
I  do  understand  his  very  personal  decision,  and  also  that  of  Jürgen  Stark.  But  I’m  in  a 
different situation. I took on this position after Weber resigned, which meant that I knew what 
I was letting myself in for. That means I have to accept that interviewers will invariably ask 
when I’m going to resign. But resigning is not an option for me because I’m convinced that I 
can do most to ensure a stable euro in my current position.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
