Mario Draghi: Interview with Financial Times 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in Financial Times, 
conducted  by  Mr  Lionel  Barber,  Financial  Times  editor,  and  Mr  Michael  Steen,  Frankfurt 
bureau chief, in Frankfurt on 11 December 2012, published on 14 December 2012. 
 The following is an edited transcript of the interview. 
FT Do you think when historians look back, that they will say this was the year that the euro 
was rescued? 
MD This year will in my view be remembered as the year when the long-term vision for the 
euro and the euro area was re-launched. The June summit, especially, was a key event. It’s 
also the year when euro area governments achieved substantial progress in adjusting their 
economies. And it’s the year when the ECB has stepped in to remove tail risks.  
FT Why was the June summit so important? 
MD The June summit was important because, for the first time in many years, it laid out a 
medium-term vision for a genuine economic and monetary union, made by four pillars: fiscal 
union,  the  so-called  banking  union,  economic  union  and  political  union,  endorsed  by  the 
leaders. That was an important milestone. 
FT This was the extension to the Maastricht framework that had proven to be inadequate?  
MD Exactly. The leaders built on Maastricht with a stronger fiscal discipline. In the euro area 
a  country  cannot  pursue  its  economic  policies  in  a  completely  independent  way,  ignoring 
their  implications  for  other  member  states.  This  was  one  of  the  main  conclusions  of  that 
summit. Sovereignty is something that needs to be shared.  
FT Was the June summit the precondition for OMT? 
MD  No,  the  decision  for  OMT  was  meant  to  pursue,  within  our  mandate,  our  objective  to 
deliver price stability. The removal of tail risks related to unfounded fears regarding the euro 
was essential to fight fragmentation of the euro area markets. And that has been important 
because  with  fragmentation  –  I’ve  stressed  this  many  times  –  we  are  not  in  a  position  to 
deliver price stability for the euro area as a whole.  
FT When did it become clear that you had to take that step as a central bank? 
MD Clear visible signs of fragmentation had been with us since the second half of last year, 
gradually leading to a euro area-wide credit crunch by year-end. Then the ECB conducted 
the  two  LTRO  operations,  which  removed  another  type  of  risk,  namely  the  possibility  of  a 
banking crisis caused by lack of liquidity. They had a very powerful effect of calming financial 
markets for some time. But then, by the end of April this year, we saw all types of spreads 
widening again, and the amount of short positions against the euro picking up. These signs 
made  clear  that fragmentation  had  reached  points  beyond  which  we  would  not  be  able  to 
deliver price stability. 
FT  I’m going  to  explore  this  crucial  approach,  which  you  adopted  on  OMT  and  which  you 
clearly said, one, that it would be conditional. And, two, that you were acting within the ECB 
mandate. But before I do that, I just want to turn the reel back to when you started and ask 
you about strategy, because it seems to me that you have had a strategy. You may not have 
been convinced that you could save the euro, or, at least, re-launch the euro, but you had a 
strategy. Is that right, or have you more improvised? 
MD There certainly was a deep reflection going on in the months before, both in the ECB and 
in the Governing Council, about how to cope with this fragmentation. The objective was and 
still  is  to  restore  a  financially  integrated  monetary  area.  The  OMT  was  the  result  of  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reflection.  The  first  element  of  which  was  the  acknowledgment  that  we  were  in  what 
economists  call  a  “bad  equilibrium”,  namely,  a  situation  in  which  you  have  self-reinforcing 
expectations that, if left on their own, produce disruptive outcomes. It’s a vicious circle that 
we had to break, but we should never forget how we found ourselves in that “bad equilibrium” 
to begin with, and that was because during the previous ten years several governments of 
the  euro  area  pursued  economic  policies  which  were  either  plainly  wrong,  or  they  were 
simply missing, in a world that was changing fast.  
FT But the crucial point is that this was a different quality of intervention and approach from 
earlier years in the ECB. You said it will be conditional and unlimited, whereas earlier it was 
limited and unconditional. 
MD That’s the difference between the OMT and the SMP.  
FT But did you say, look, we understand, historically and politically, why it’s been limited and 
unconditional,  but  this  isn’t  working. We  have  to  move  beyond  that. Was  that  you  arguing 
that, or do you think that was within the ECB, everybody understood it? 
MD  There  was  a  sense  among  us  that  the  SMP  had  run  out  of  steam  in  terms  of  its 
effectiveness. 
FT  All  the  top  financiers  were  saying  that  they’ve  got  to  have  unlimited  ECB  capacity.  Of 
course, but the conditionality was crucial for winning support within the Governing Council, 
but even more important in Berlin. 
MD  The  decision  was  taken  in  total  and  full  independence.  Certainly,  conditionality,  in  a 
set-up like ours, is essential for two reasons. One is that it’s a form of a credit enhancement 
in the bonds issued by the country that applies for OMT because the more it will comply with 
conditions, the more creditworthy will be its bonds. The second reason is that with any type 
of intervention, moral hazard has to be avoided and fiscal discipline, in particular, has to be 
ensured. That’s why conditionality is crucial, but it is only a necessary condition because in 
any  event 
the  state  of  monetary 
fragmentation. Let’s not forget our objective is fight financial fragmentation and deliver price 
stability. 
FT Let me just go back to the political element. I respect what you’re saying about the ECB’s 
paramount independence, but, at the same time, you’re not monks in cells. You don’t sort of 
deliberate within the monastery and come up with something. 
MD Today most central banks are independent, headed by non-elected officials, and quite 
powerful. This set-up is acceptable only if independence is limited by the mandate. That’s the 
framework that legislators have given us – independence limited by our mandate. That’s why 
we  are  so  keen  about  respecting  the  mandate,  because  that’s  the  true  guarantee  of  our 
independence,  which  especially  in  the  euro  area  set-up  is  crucial  for  our  credibility.  And 
credibility is essential for delivering price stability.  
FT  Surely  it’s  also  important  for  you,  though,  that  politically  you’re  seen  to  be  within  your 
mandate. 
MD Certainly and that’s why the ECB should be transparent and accountable.  
FT  Returning  to  the  question  of  conditionally,  there  are  important  critics,  particularly  in 
Germany, who say that it removes the incentive of governments to act. How do you counter 
that?  
MD Quite the contrary. Conditionality makes sure that governments will make the necessary 
reforms and maintain fiscal discipline. 
FT Let me rephrase the question. How can you restore enduring confidence if there is a high 
level  of  conditionality?  I’m  talking  about  a  kind  of  resolution  of  the  crisis,  and  if  the 
conditionality is too tight, too severe, governments don’t act and, therefore, nothing happens. 
the  Governing  Council  assesses 
independently 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
MD The assessment of conditionality is primarily in the hands of the European Commission, 
the ESM, and the IMF. But also do not forget that the ultimate assessment of whether to act 
or not is entirely in the hands of the Governing Council.  
FT  You  announced  the  programme;  there  was  immediately  a  favourable  reaction  in  the 
markets,  remarkable.  Many  people  assumed  then  that  the  governments  would  apply,  but 
they haven’t. What conclusions did you see? 
MD The purpose of the OMT is to remove the tail risks. It’s up to the governments to decide 
upon  a  programme.  We  never  took  a  stance  which  was  proactive  in  the  sense  of 
encouraging  governments  or  discouraging  governments  to  apply.  Let’s  not  forget  that  the 
ESM is tax-payers’ money, the decision over which should be taken by governments and by 
national parliaments. And the same is true for the potential applicants’ reforms and budget 
consolidation. The role of the ECB, in that stage, should be on the back stage, not front line. 
It’s up to the governments to decide.  
FT Again, let’s just step back a minute. It’s been a tumultuous, extraordinary year. You have 
been a leading player in this drama. There are others, obviously. Chancellor Merkel, Mario 
Monti. What were the moments that stick out in your mind? Let’s just look where you said the 
risks are really high and we need to act, if you think about that in the blur of events. 
MD  The  speech  in  London  on  26  July  was  such  a  moment.  If  you  look at  the  verbatim,  it 
doesn’t say anything that’s outside our mandate. But indeed it’s an especially strong speech 
that makes a firm statement on the preservation of the euro. 
FT It was a very, very firm statement. How did you come up with that wording? “Whatever it 
takes... And, believe me, it will be enough,” – with a dramatic pause before. 
MD Again, there was a sense that we had to overcome the limitations of the SMP, and make 
sure that the signal to the market would be proportionate to the gravity of the situation. That’s 
actually what is behind that statement. 
FT Did you rehearse the pause? 
MD No, I’m not really that theatrical. But the situation at this moment was clearly showing 
that  tail  risks  were  increasing.  So  my  intervention  was  made  important  by  the  very  critical 
situation that was evolving. 
FT You intended to have a reaction in the market. Was that your intention? 
MD What I thought was that the markets should know what our stance was. This was the 
objective of this speech. It was meant to be absolutely clear about our determination. I also 
made  the  point  that  it  was  not  only  our  determination  but  it  was  also  our  leaders’ 
determination to carry out the June summit conclusions. I said that markets underestimated 
the leaders’ determination and the amount of political capital they have invested in the euro. 
This is what I said first and then added that it’s our intention to be firm and to do whatever it 
takes but within our mandate.  
FT And, just to be really clear, you did not clear that speech, those remarks with anybody 
outside in the capitals? 
MD No, absolutely not. 
FT So that was a seminal moment. What was the moment in 2012 where you felt perhaps a 
sense of some relief? Without over-confidence, but that maybe the mood had shifted. 
MD Was there such a moment? 
FT I was hoping you’d say that. 
MD That’s what I feel like. 
FT I just want to come back to this question of public opinion, which is very important. When 
did you decide and why did you decide to go to the Bundestag? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
MD In an interview with Süddeutsche Zeitung the journalists asked whether I would speak in 
the  Bundestag  if  I  were  to  be  invited,  to  explain  better  in  Germany  what  we  do  and  our 
intentions are. I responded that if I was invited, I would be ready to go. A few days after the 
interview I received the invitation from President Lammert. There was a genuine interest from 
the Bundestag to know in greater detail about our policy decision, at the time controversial in 
Germany, but applauded in the rest of the world. 
FT  There’s  a  serious  point  about  German  public  opinion.  Do  you  think  it’s  become  more 
euro-sceptical this year, with all the difficult economic circumstances? 
MD  The  difficult  economic  circumstances  are  everywhere  in  the  euro  area  and  this  might 
have caused a different sense of perception of the euro. These are very serious moments. 
When I’m asked whether I can persuade the German public opinion, I say that I don’t know. 
But I know that we have the duty to explain, and we are really working very, very hard on that 
front. Hopefully the results will follow. And this holds true for the all euro area public opinion. 
FT  You  can  see  it  in  Britain  where  it’s  moving  towards  questioning  membership  of  the 
European Union. Can we perhaps turn now to the question of what comes next – economic 
growth  and  the  adjustment  process?  So,  while  it  is  true  that  current  account  deficits  are 
shrinking  and  governments  are  doing,  in  many  ways,  courageous  things,  they’re  passing 
reforms, there’s  still  the question  of  economic growth. What  is  your  prognosis for the  next 
12 months? 
MD  Last  week  we  published  our  new  staff  projections,  showing  the  beginning  of  a  slow 
recovery in the second part of next year. We have a serious situation in front of us. At the 
same time, there are some encouraging signs. The spreads are tighter than they were four 
months ago. Liquidity conditions are better, banks and corporates are funding themselves. 
Bond  issuance  has  restarted.  And  for  the  public  sector,  the  distressed  countries  have 
basically  completed  all  their  sovereign  funding  plans.  Furthermore  we  think  that  our  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  will  find  its  way  into  the  economy  in  the  coming 
months. That’s why we’re saying that we may see a recovery in the second part of the year. 
Also, at some point, one will see the benefits of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. 
So far we’ve only seen the contractionary effect of the fiscal consolidation. We haven’t seen 
yet  the  positive  effects  of  structural  reforms  because,  obviously,  they  take  effect  with  a 
certain lag. And third, we will be seeing a more buoyant world growth, which will help sustain 
exports of the euro area. 
FT Are you bullish of America if they get through the fiscal cliff? 
MD I’m confident they will find an agreement. 
FT And even beyond that with shale gas revolution, re-shoring, property market recovered. 
They’ve fixed their banks. 
MD I think they are well poised for a positive outcome. It’s interesting though that until two 
months ago when people were asked about the major source of uncertainty and risk in the 
world, the answer was the euro crisis. And now it’s the fiscal cliff. 
FT  Just  going  back  to  the  forecast  you  were  talking  about.  Those  are  actually  a  pretty 
dramatic  downward  revision.  And  this  better  mood  in  financial  markets  is  pretty fragile,  as 
Mario Monti’s resignation shows. It just sounds like you’re painting the picture of the glass 
being half full when that might be a bit on the optimistic side. 
MD Indeed it’s a significant revision downward. At the same time, the medium term outlook 
for price stability hasn’t changed in any dramatic way. And you see these positive signs in 
the soft data coming out.  
FT There are many critics of fiscal consolidation as you know. I know you’ve talked about this 
before. But is it problematic as the ECB to be pushing the case for it so hard, particularly in 
countries like Spain and Greece where this is causing real human misery, given, as you said 
before,  you’re  unelected  and  you  have  to stick closely  to  your  mandate. If  there  is  no  risk 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
over  the  medium  term  for  price  stability,  maybe  there  is  a  case  to  say  there’s  too  much 
austerity right now. 
MD We’re fully aware that the economic situation in several countries, not only Spain and 
Greece, is very serious, and we are not underestimating the difficulty of the situation at all. 
Let’s not forget that the reason why fiscal consolidation became central for the policy advice 
of the ECB is because one can’t have systems built on debt and deficits that the financial 
crisis  has  shown  to  be  unsustainable.  And  there  has  been  progress.  To  give  up  now,  as 
some  suggest,  would  be  tantamount  to  waste  the  great  sacrifices  made  by  the  citizens  of 
Europe. 
FT Yes, and what about the Martin Wolf critique that adjustment is a two-way process and 
that while the austerity should be pursued rigorously in the peripheral countries, the creditor 
countries must also adjust. They must also do their bit, which, in effect, means a somewhat 
more expansionary policy to counteract… 
MD First of all one must stress that inflation is not a policy tool. One doesn’t toy with inflation. 
Especially in an area made up by several sovereign states. The second point is that – in our 
institutional  set-up  –  if  you  had  to  choose  one  policy  objective  that  would  be  to  increase 
competitiveness. The countries that have been successful in adjusting and in reforming have 
mitigated the short-term contractionary effects of fiscal policies. Countries that can actually 
manage this policy combination have a chance to reduce the difficulties that come from fiscal 
consolidation. 
FT Are you thinking about Italy? 
MD No, I’m thinking about Ireland. 
FT  A  couple  of  other  questions,  one  is  the  banking  union  because,  in  addition  to  all  the 
questions  that  we’ve  just  discussed,  these  huge  challenges  for  the  eurozone  and  for  the 
ECB,  now  you’re  going  to  have  to  take  on  the  extra  responsibility  of  supervision  of  at  the 
least the large banks in the eurozone. Is the institution ready for this? Are you ready for this? 
MD We will be ready. After the Council Regulation will enter into force, it’d take about a year 
to  set  up  organisation  of  the  SSM.  There  have  been  many  discussions  on  how  fast  we 
should  move  and  how  broad  should  be  the  scope.  One  has  to  remember  that  we  are  a 
passive actor. We are in the hands of our legislators. It’s clear that we  want to move  in a 
timely  fashion,  but  it’s more  important to move  well.  And  we  intend  to take  the  time  that’s 
needed for that. 
FT Would one of the things about doing it right be that you need there to be some sort of 
European-wide  bank  resolution  scheme  in  place  before  you  take  over  the  supervision, 
otherwise  you’re  in  a  situation  where  you’re  nominally  in  charge  of  supervising  all  these 
banks. If one of them needs to be wound up, for whatever reason, you’re completely at the 
mercy of the local supervisor and the local arrangements. You don’t actually have the powers 
to do anything. 
MD  A  European  Resolution  Authority  is  an  important  complement  to  the  SSM,  and  it  will 
likely be in place by the time the SSM takes up its responsibilities. But even in its absence, 
the single supervisor’s assessment of the possible non-viability of a bank would be such a 
strong statement that it would likely trigger the national government’s policy response. 
FT A personal question, it’s a human question, here you all this incredible pressure on you. If 
you had to think of a few people in the world, you’re definitely in the top five who’ve got most 
pressure from all the places, trying to hold this together. How do you cope with that, number 
one? And, number two is there anything that surprised you after being in this place for one 
year? 
MD The way to cope with these pressures is to never forget that they are part of the set of 
responsibilities that one carries with this job, responsibilities to deliver price stability; to take 
policy decisions that affect the welfare of millions of people.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
I really can’t answer your second question because to say that something has surprised you, 
you have to be able to look back and say, oh, that thing actually surprised me. And this is not 
the way I function. I look forward, being naturally inclined to focus on the future. At least I 
think. But you should ask my colleagues too. 
FT Anything to add? 
MD I’d like to give you this quote of Professor Zygmunt Bauman, a Polish sociologist who 
has  become  best known for  his  analyses  of  postmodernity  and  consumerism.  It  has to  do 
with  the  fact  that  you  don’t  lose  sovereignty  when  you  share  it,  but  you  actually  regain  it. 
Countries  with  high  debt  and  deficits  should  understand  they  have  lost  sovereignty  a  long 
time  ago  over  their  economic  policies  in  a  globalised  world.  Working  together  in  a 
stability-oriented union actually means to regain sovereignty at a higher level. 
FT They’ve lost it to the markets? 
MD  Yes.  And  sharing  common  rules  for  them  actually  means  to  regain  sovereignty  in  a 
shared way rather than pretending to have sovereignty they’ve lost a long time ago. That’s 
the point. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
