Rundheersing Bheenick: Review of the year gone by and reflections on 
the present and future outlook 
Statement  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
8 October 2012. 
  
This year, the Bank celebrates its 45th year in the service of the country, which itself 
prepares to celebrate the 45th anniversary of its accession to independence in March 2013. 
Looking back over these eventful 45 years, I can see a country that has radically transformed 
itself and its economy, with the Bank of Mauritius (BoM) having continuously reinvented itself 
to  be  part  of  this change  process.  At the  Bank’s foundation  in  1967,  there  was  one  major 
industry, sugar. Today, the economy is well-diversified, with many pillars of growth. We have 
lived  through  times  when  the  import  cover  was  less  than  a  week,  unemployment  hovered 
around 20 per cent, and our countrymen were emigrating in large numbers in search of jobs, 
and inflation reached 42 per cent. Today, our reserves represent 5 months of import cover; 
we  have  an  unemployment  rate  of  around  8  per  cent,  with  23,000  migrant  workers  in  our 
country; inflation has declined to less than 5 per cent today. 
At the time of independence, the rupee was tied to the British pound at a fixed parity 
 
under  the  “Sterling  Exchange  Standard”.  It  was  then  pegged,  first  to  the  IMF’s  Special 
Drawing Rights, and subsequently to a basket of currencies reflecting the trade pattern of the 
country,  before  moving  to  a  floating  regime.  Prior  to  the  late  1980’s,  monetary  policy  was 
implemented  through  reserve  requirements,  ceilings  on  commercial  bank  credit  and 
administered  interest  rates.  Today,  after  a  free  float  for  nearly  two  years,  we  have  a 
managed float, with BoM interventions limited to smoothing excess volatility of the rupee and, 
since  June  2012,  also  combating  unwarranted  currency  appreciation. The  Monetary  Policy 
Committee (MPC), set up in 2007, formulates and determines our hybrid inflation-targeting 
monetary policy. Our financial sector was underdeveloped at the time of independence when 
we had only five banks. Today, our banking sector has 21 banks and 216 bank branches, 
eight  non-bank  deposit  taking  institutions,  ten  money-changers  and  six  foreign  exchange 
dealers. We now have a radically different financial landscape, with parallel changes in the 
supervisory, regulatory and oversight functions of the Bank of Mauritius. 
 
Let me come back to the present day and to the year under review. This is the fifth 
year of my governorship. I cannot help wonder by what twist of fate I found myself entrusted 
with the exalted responsibility of steering the Central Bank at such a defining moment in its 
history.  My  five  years  as  Governor  have  coincided  with  the  global  financial  and  economic 
crisis. They have been five challenging years which have tested my mettle relentlessly. Alas, 
no dénouement to this crisis is in sight. The crisis will last a while and will continue to pose 
considerable challenges for the Bank for quite some time. 
 
The unending saga of the euro debt crisis, and the spreading distress beyond the 
Eurozone periphery, heightens the risk of a second European recession in three years. The 
succession of temporary and temporizing solutions which we have seen, fail to come to grips 
with the underlying problems. Markets are unimpressed. I am convinced that, in the absence 
of  an  agreed  long-term vision  for the  area  with  a  full fiscal  union,  the  Eurozone  will  hurtle 
from  crisis  to  crisis.  Economic  activity  lost  momentum  in  many  advanced  and  emerging 
market  economies  and  their  growth  forecasts  have  been  consistently  revised  downwards. 
The  effects  were  also  felt  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets,  leading  the  US  dollar,  with  its 
safe-haven  status,  to  appreciate  against  the  euro.  The  weak  outlook  for  global  economic 
activity quelled inflationary pressures. Unemployment was at exceptionally high levels in the 
US and worsened in Europe. Against this background, most major central banks continued to 
implement expansionary monetary policies and breached the limits of monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In  the  following  paragraphs,  I  will  review  the  main  policy  actions  taken  over  the 
 
The  unpredictable  conditions  prevailing  in  the  global  environment  led  the  Bank  to 
experiment  with  innovative  policies  within  our  mandates  of  price  stability  and  financial 
stability. Of particular concern to us was the fact that some of our key markets were facing 
recessionary conditions. We felt it important to step up coordination with the Treasury and we 
held regular consultations with various stakeholders to ascertain the appropriateness of our 
responses. This modus operandi gave us added flexibility and enabled us to react faster and 
to act pre-emptively and thus contributed to maintain a fair degree of stability and confidence 
in the economy. 
 
Our economy grew at a rate of 3.9 per cent in 2011, a commendable performance 
when viewed in the context of the sharp global economic downturn. Most of the key sectors 
of the economy recorded positive growth rates. At a time, when most countries have been 
seeing  their  ratings  downgraded,  Moody’s  Investors  Service  upgraded  Mauritius’s  foreign- 
and local-currency government bond ratings to Baa1 from Baa2, with a stable rating outlook 
in  June  2012.  Inflation  was  on  a  declining  trend  and  the  rate  of  unemployment  remained 
virtually unchanged. Our public sector debt to GDP ratio has hovered below 60 per cent over 
recent years. This is no mean feat for a small open island economy like ours. 
 
The  banking  sector  continued  to  expand  and  recorded  solid  profits  in  spite  of  the 
difficult  global  conditions.  In  the  financial  year  ended  30  June  2012,  profits  after  tax 
increased to Rs12.6 billion from Rs11.9 billion in the previous financial year. Banks held high 
levels of capital — the capital adequacy ratio of the banking sector stood at 15.9 per cent at 
end-June 2012. The ratio of non-performing loans to total loans (NPL) for domestic assets 
increased from 4.3 per cent at end-June 2011 to 5.1 per cent at end-June 2012. The NPL for 
overseas assets of the banking sector moved from 0.6 per cent to 1.5 per cent. The overall 
NPL ratio stood at 3.1 per cent at end-June 2012, up from 2.3 per cent at end-June 2011. 
 
period. 
• 
After four years of operating experience, we reviewed the functioning of the MPC. 
We enhanced transparency with the publication of the minutes of the MPC meetings 
and  the  pattern  of  individual  votes  beginning  with  the  MPC  meeting  of  December 
2011. Legislative amendments severed the formal links of the MPC with the Bank’s 
Board of Directors. The MPC was reconstituted in March 2012, with four members 
from the Bank and five external to the Bank, including two foreigners. 
 
The focus of monetary policy continued to be the maintenance of price stability while 
ensuring a balanced and orderly economic development. I maintained a regular dialogue with 
stakeholders, as much to gain deeper understanding of the domestic economic outlook as to 
foster better understanding of the Bank’s policy stance. Our monetary policy framework has 
gained in credibility and we have been successful in anchoring inflation expectations. 
 
During  the  year  under  review,  the  year-on-year  and  headline  inflation  measures 
showed signs of moderation, at 3.9 per cent and 5.1 per cent, respectively, as at June 2012. 
The monetary policy stance was eased as from the second semester of 2011 on concerns 
over the intensification of the euro debt crisis and its implications for the domestic economy. 
• 
The Bank introduced two bold measures in June 2012, in close coordination with the 
Treasury, to minimize the fallout from the euro debt crisis and the global economic 
downturn on the domestic economy. The measures targeted the sectors particularly 
vulnerable to the declining external demand in key markets. 
 
We  embarked  on  a  programme  to  build  up  our  foreign  exchange  reserves,  the 
Operation Reserves Reconstitution. This also helped us to reduce the growing misalignment 
of the rupee in relation to fundamentals, as confirmed by the studies conducted by the IMF. It 
resulted in an increase of our gross official reserves from Rs81.5 billion at the end of June 
2011  to  Rs86.7  billion  at  the  end  of  June  2012,  thereby  raising  our  import  cover  from 
4.6 months  to  4.9 months.  As  this  report  goes  to  the  press,  an  adjustment  of  around  4  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 per cent would have been noted in the exchange rate of the rupee as measured by MERI . 
And we are well on the way to achieve the target of 6 months of import cover that we have 
set ourselves. 
 
The second measure was the Special Line of Credit in Foreign Currency. It was a 
path-breaking move for a small, but innovative, central bank, prepared to use its own balance 
sheet in a pre-emptive bid to bail out exposed sectors ahead of troubled times. Through this 
measure, the Bank went to the rescue of economic operators which were directly affected by 
the  mismatch  between  the  currencies  in  which  their  earnings  were  denominated,  mostly 
euros, and their outstanding debt in rupees. We were giving to highly-leveraged operators a 
unique tool to restructure their debt so that they would end up with healthier balance sheets. 
We were particularly concerned by the impact of euro-generated debt-servicing difficulties of 
operators on the balance sheets of banks. 
 
Since the project was launched, the terms and conditions of the line of credit have 
been reviewed to enhance their flexibility. We have lengthened the maturity and increased 
the margin to make it more attractive for the intermediary banks. However, there has been a 
slow  take-up;  out  of  the  amount  of  EUR600  million  earmarked  for  this  project,  only  an 
amount of EUR8.9 million has been utilized so far. 
• 
We launched the Cheque Truncation System, which provides for the Bulk Clearing 
System for low-value electronic transactions, in September 2011. The next step in 
the modernization of the payments system will be the implementation of a National 
Switch on which work is proceeding. 
In April 2012, we introduced the depository system for Government securities that 
provides  for  a  strict  deliver-versus-payment  mechanism  for  the  issue  of  such 
securities.  This  mechanism  is  aimed  at  eliminating  settlement  risks  and  is  in 
accordance with the recommendations of the Bank for International Settlements for 
securities settlement.  
We broadened the coverage of the Mauritius Credit Information Bureau to include 
insurance companies, non-bank deposit taking institutions, and utility providers, as 
well  as  the  Central  Bank  itself.  Thus,  a  comprehensive  picture  of  the  aggregate 
indebtedness of the prospective borrowers is now available, and this should, under 
normal circumstances, curb the level of non-performing loans in the system.  
We increased the efficiency of the financial markets through the conduct of single-
maturity auctions of Treasury Bills and by holding frequent auctions during the week. 
We eliminated paper bids at auctions and moved to a platform where participants 
can submit their bids online. 
 
We enlarged the spectrum of instruments by introducing a 273-Day Treasury Bill as 
from  October  2011.  We  introduced  single-maturity  auctions  as  from  November  2011  to 
enable  the  Government to  determine  its  debt  profile.  New  benchmark  securities  — 3-Year 
Treasury  Notes  and  5-Year  Bonds  —  were  issued  to  enhance  liquidity  in  the  secondary 
market.  We  finalized  preparations  for  trading  these  benchmark  securities  on  the  Stock 
Exchange  to  create  a  proper  bond  market for  Mauritius.  Concurrently,  the  issue  of  2-Year 
and 4-Year Treasury Notes was discontinued in 2012.  
• 
The Bank continued its efforts to issue new guidelines and improve existing ones, 
the 
incorporating 
international  best  practices  as 
recommended  by 
the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  The  latest  guideline  to  have  been  issued 
(August  2012) 
is  the  Guideline  on  Corporate  Governance  after  prolonged 
consultation with the industry.  
latest  developments 
international  standard-setting  bodies  such  as 
in 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 The  Bank  actively  participated  in  both  regional  and  continental  fora  such  as  the 
COMESA  Committee  of  Central  Bank  Governors,  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank 
Governors of SADC, and the Association of African Central Banks (AACB). 
Since  February  2012,  the  Bank  is  a  member  of  the  Sub-Saharan  Regional 
 
Consultative Group of the Financial Stability Board, which operates under the aegis of the 
Bank for International Settlements. 
 
In 2011, I had the honour to co-chair on behalf of fellow-Governors the two separate 
inaugural Joint Meetings between Central Bank Governors and Ministers of Finance for both 
COMESA  and  SADC.  I  also  co-chaired  the  first  meeting  of  the  SADC  Peer  Review  Panel 
held in October 2011 in Mauritius. 
The Bank hosted the 34th Committee of Central Bank Governors of SADC in April 
 
2012  and  the  19ème  Conférence  des  Gouverneurs  des  Banques  Centrales  des  Pays 
Francophones  in  May  2012.  In  August  2012,  I  acceded  to  the  Vice-Chairmanship  of  the 
AACB and the Bank will be hosting the 37th Assembly of Governors in August 2013. 
• 
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  the  settlement  bank  for  the  Regional  Payment  and 
Settlement System (REPSS) of the COMESA. REPSS went live on 3 October 2012. 
I am delighted that this project in which the Bank has been closely involved since 
2007  has  finally  come  to  fruition.  REPSS  is  expected  to  stimulate  intra-regional 
trade.  I  sincerely  hope  that  it  will  live  up  to  expectations,  and  stakeholders  and 
commercial banks will make full use of this system.  
Our financial system continues to grow steadily, with total banking assets (Segment 
A) representing 107.7 per cent of GDP at end-June 2012. On 6 September 2012, we 
granted  our  21st  banking  licence.  This  new  addition  to  our  financial  landscape 
demonstrates the continuing interest of new operators in our banking sector.  
In June 2012, we set up a Task Force on Unfair Terms to look into the terms and 
conditions  of  financial  contracts.  We  hope  to  come  up  with  a  Public  Consultation 
Document  by  the  end  of  the  year.  We  are  working  simultaneously  on  the 
simplification of loan agreements. These initiatives of the Bank aim at improving the 
efficiency of financial services.  
I have on various occasions expressed my concern over the declining saving rate in 
the country. In an attempt to address the issue, the Bank proposes to provide the 
public  with  a  new  asset  class  in  which  to  invest.  The  Gold  Bar  Project,  as  the 
initiative  has  been  named,  aims  at  broadening  the  range  of  savings  products 
available to the public while promoting a savings culture. As from November 2012, 
the Bank will be offering for sale a range of Minted Gold Bars of 10g, 50g and 100g, 
with or without storage in the Bank’s vault. The selling price of these Gold Bars will 
be set as close as possible to the price of gold on the international market. Investing 
in these gold bars would be an excellent hedge against inflation.  
In  recent  years,  financial  stability  has  moved  to  the  top  of  the  agenda  of  central 
banks. We have fully endorsed this new focus. After an upgrading of our banking 
supervisory framework which allowed us to implement Basel II as from March 2008, 
the Bank is now envisaging to implement Basel III. A consultative paper outlining the 
proposals of the Bank will be issued for consultation by the end of October 2012. 
Our banks have remained strong during the global financial crisis. The higher capital 
requirements of the Basel III framework will further enhance their ability to function 
under conditions of stress and help protect depositors.  
The Deposit Insurance Scheme is currently in its final stages after a lengthy process 
which involved intensive consultation with the banking industry and study visits by 
our officers to other jurisdictions. This additional safety-net will reinforce the stability 
of our financial system.  
     4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Another issue that requires our attention is that of domestic systemically important 
banks, the so-called D-SIBs. I had drawn attention on several occasions to the fact 
that at least two of our banks have developed into big complex institutions, with the 
potential  of  posing  a  threat  to  the  financial  system  in  case  of  failure.  We  are 
currently working on a framework for the monitoring of such institutions which will be 
required  to  simplify  their  structures  and  maintain  additional  capital,  and  possibly 
write living wills. I am very pleased to note that already two banks, as well as one 
financial conglomerate, have taken the cue and are restructuring their operations so 
that they end up with leaner structures. 
I am pleased to announce that the net profits of the Bank rose from Rs258.4 million 
for the financial year ended 30 June 2011 to Rs395.3 million for the current financial 
year. The sustained improvement in the performance of the Bank was attributable 
mainly  to  a  combination  of  operational  efficiency  and  a  prudent  diversification 
strategy with respect to reserve management. 
 
In  2011,  there  was  a  noteworthy  change  in  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  2004  with 
significant impact on the accounts of the Bank. This provision allows the Bank to credit to the 
Special Reserve Fund all unrealized gains, arising from the valuation of investments held by 
the Bank, instead of treating them as distributable income, which forced the Bank to liquidate 
portfolio assets, which it would have been more prudent to keep, to distribute as profits. 
 Words of appreciation 
 
I am deeply indebted to all those who have supported me during my two tenures of 
office.  I  thank  Dr  The  Honourable  Navinchandra  Ramgoolam,  GCSK,  FRCP,  our  Prime 
Minister, for entrusting me with the responsibility of leading the Central Bank at this fraught 
period of its history, and for giving me his support all through. 
 
I have had very cordial relations with Honourable Charles Gaëtan Xavier-Luc Duval, 
GCSK,  Vice-Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development,  and  we 
have  been  able  to  join our  efforts to keep the economy  on  an  even  keel.  My  appreciation 
goes to the Honourable Minister and his team. 
I thank the Chairmen and the Chief Executive of the Mauritius Bankers Association, 
 
the  Chief  Executives  of  banks,  and  all  the  stakeholders  for  their  active  involvement  and 
participation  in  meetings  which  helped  us  develop  a  fruitful  collaboration  and  mutual 
understanding on the direction that our financial sector and economy need to take. 
 
I thank my close collaborators, particularly my two Deputy Governors, the Head of 
the Governor’s Office, and the staff of my Policy Unit, for their support all the year through. 
Last but not least, I thank the Staff of the Bank for their support and dedication, particularly 
those who have been behind the scene. Without their unflinching support and commitment, I 
would not have been able to function. To all of them, I dedicate the Award of Central Banker 
of  the  Year  2012  –  Africa,  bestowed  upon  me  by  The  Banker  Magazine,  of  the  British 
Financial Times newspaper group, at the beginning of the year. 
Looking ahead 
 
Looking  ahead,  we  need  to  be  vigilant  against  inflation  –  which  is  our  overriding 
objective.  But  the  challenging  environment  compels  the  Bank  to  continuously  change  the 
way in which it functions. Monetary policy has played its role and will continue to do so. But it 
has its limitations, and expectations are sometimes beyond what it can possibly achieve. We 
will pursue on our path of innovative policies. We view our mandate in a wider perspective in 
which  other  considerations  such  as  protection  of  consumer 
interests,  governance, 
transparency,  competition  and  communication  are  assuming  greater  importance.  This 
broader macroprudential focus will enable us to stabilize the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 
My  final  message  to  my  compatriots:  The  time  has  come  for  us  to  change  our 
mindset.  As  I  have  said  before,  a  crisis  is  too  good  to  waste.  Our  country  should  dare 
measure up to more advanced economies. I am pleased to note that the views expressed 
lately by the Bank on the need for structural reforms has gained consensus. All stakeholders 
— public, private sector, civil society — should collaborate to move the country forward to 
new levels of development through more equitable and inclusive growth.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
