Benoît Cœuré: Reviving credit growth in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Paris Europlace International Financial Forum “Growth and investment opportunities in 
Europe”, Paris, 11 July 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Jean-Francois  Jamet  for  his  contributions  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the 
opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like first to thank Paris Europlace for inviting me to speak today.  
Every year, this conference offers the opportunity to take a closer look at the challenges for 
the European financial sector that have been thrown up by the crisis.  
They come under three headings: deleveraging, fragmentation, recession. And all three are 
interrelated. 
As banks, households and governments deleverage, some economies in the euro area are 
being  affected  more  than  others.  Financial  conditions  across  the  monetary  union  have 
diverged significantly, and resulted in large cross-country dispersion in loan dynamics. 
Financial 
fragmentation,  uncertainty  and  a  subdued  macro  environment  have  also 
manifested themselves in a contraction of investment, which is currently the most important 
drag on growth in the euro area. In the first quarter of 2013, investment in the euro area was 
22  %  below  its  pre-crisis  level  in  2007  Q2.  This  year,  the  European  Commission  expects 
investment to further contract by 2.6%, or 0.5% of euro area GDP. 
So, if the principal answer to the crisis is a return to growth, a core concern has to be how to 
revive credit provision in all parts of the euro area. 
I  will  today  discuss  in  turn  the  role  of  three  key  factors  in  that  respect:  monetary  policy, 
Banking Union and financial market structure. 
The role of monetary policy 
Let me start with the role of monetary policy. 
Throughout  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  played  an  important  role  to  ensure,  within  its  price 
stability  mandate,  the  proper  financing  of  the  euro  area  economy  in  a  context  of  subdued 
credit dynamics. 
First,  we  have  reduced  our  main  interest  rates  to  historic  lows.  We  have  narrowed  the 
interest rate corridor to 50 basis points which helps reduce fragmentation between banks that 
rely  on  ECB  liquidity  and  those  that  can  borrow  in  the  interbank  market.  And  last  week, 
unanimously, the Governing Council took the important step to introduce forward guidance 
within our two pillar monetary strategy. We expect the key interest rates to remain at present 
or lower levels for an extended period of time. Consistently, liquidity will remain ample. 
Second, we have introduced a series of measures to ensure that banks can pass on these 
low interest rates in the real economy, in particular where they are needed the most. These 
include providing as much liquidity as they need to euro area banks, reviewing our collateral 
framework, lengthening the maturity of our operations to three years when euro area banks 
were facing severe funding stress, and removing redenomination risks in financial markets 
through our announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT). 
These  measures  have  resulted  in  a  significant  reduction  of  financial  fragmentation  in 
practically all market segments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
For example, since the OMT announcement, spreads on investment grade corporate bonds 
fell  by  70  basis  points  in  the  euro  area,  while  spreads  on  high-yield  corporate  bonds 
decreased by around 300 basis points1. The cost of both deposit and bond funding for banks 
has  also  fallen  significantly.  In  addition,  banks’  reliance  on  Eurosystem  funding  has 
decreased,  as  reflected  in  the  repayments  to  date  of  60%  of  the  circa  EUR  500  billion 
injected  in  net  terms  into  the  banking  system  by  our  two  very  long-term  refinancing 
operations. Target2 balances have been reduced by EUR 320 billions, or nearly 30%, since 
their peak level of July 2012. 
However, the improvement in financial conditions has not yet been fully reflected on the real 
side  of  the  economy.  Loans  to  households  are  stagnating  and  credit  to  non-financial 
corporations is receding. There is still significant heterogeneity between financing conditions 
in  stressed  and  non-stressed  countries.  While  the  ECB  cut  it  main  refinancing  rate  by 
50 basis point in the twelve months before end-May 2013, the rate charged by banks on non-
financial corporations went down by 25 basis points in Spain and less than 20 basis points in 
Portugal.2 
This reflects the fact that monetary policy is only one factor that matters for financing of the 
real economy. Another crucial factor is confidence in the banking sector. 
The role of Banking Union 
Euro area large and complex banking groups have increased their median core Tier 1 capital 
ratio from 8.3% at the end of 2009 to 9.6% at the end of 2011 and 11.1% in the first quarter 
of this year, and their leverage has improved considerably, mainly through capital increases. 
Yet, price-to-book ratios remain less than 1 for many institutions. This reveals persistent lack 
of trust by financial market participants in their true solvency positions and their underlying 
asset quality. 
Banking Union is a key part of restoring that trust. 
How  governments  intervene  in  systemic  banking  crises  is  critical.  Bank  restructuring 
measures  that  provide  banks  with  incentives  to  liquidate  or  restructure  bad  loans,  while 
allowing  for  sufficient  recapitalisation,  significantly  accelerate  the  recovery  from  recessions 
related to banking crises.3 
This suggests that Banking Union can help boost credit provision through two key channels. 
First, by increasing transparency over the quality of banks’ assets, which is key to distinguish 
strong from weak banks and hence remove the concerns hanging over the whole banking 
sector. 
Second,  by  ensuring  that  banks  that  are  not  in  position  to  lend  can  be  restructured  or 
resolved without creating financial instability. 
These  two  channels  correspond  to  the  two  main  elements  of  Banking  Union:  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
The SSM should be established later in 2013 and start operating twelve months later as a 
single system, with a common supervisory manual applying to all participating banks, and the 
                                                
1  See the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin of June 2013, “Box 4: Recent developments in spreads on corporate bonds 
issued by euro area non-financial corporations”. 
2  Rates on outstanding loans to non-financial corporations over 1 and up to 5 years. Respectively from 3.8% to 
3.55% and 5.2% to 5.03%. Source: ECB. 
3  Van Wijnbergen, S., and Homar, T. (2013), “Recessions after Systemic Banking Crises: Does It Matter How 
Governments Intervene?”, Duisenberg school of finance - Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper. According to 
this paper bank restructuring reduces expected recession duration by a half. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ECB  directly  supervising  larger  banks.  Generally,  the  SSM  should  reduce  concerns  over 
hidden  losses  by  creating  common  oversight  of  risks  in  the  euro  area  banking  sector  and 
reducing regulatory forbearance.  
Specifically,  before  the  ECB  takes  over  its  tasks  as  single  supervisor,  it  will  undertake  a 
rigorous balance sheet assessment of the banks it will directly supervise, including an asset 
quality  review.  The  assessment  will  be  undertaken  together  with  national  supervisory 
agencies and, as needed, with external consultants. In case it reveals capital shortfalls, it is 
the  responsibility  of  the  banks  to  raise  capital  themselves.  As  acknowledged  by  the 
European Council, public backstops will ensure that any remaining shortfalls are filled. Such 
backstops can be provided at national or, as last resort, at euro area level. 
Regarding the SRM, the legal framework for resolution contained in the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive (BRRD) creates a stronger set of tools for winding down failing banks in 
the future. By ensuring that bail-in must precede bail-out, the BRRD achieves a level playing 
field  and  reduces  financial  fragmentation  linked  to  the  strength  of  national  budgets. 
Moreover,  in  the  transition  to  the  BRRD,  and  as  of  next  month,  new  State  aid  rules  will 
require  the  burden-sharing  of  losses  by  shareholders  and  creditors,  if  resolution  actions 
involve  public  funds.  This  will  ensure  that  shareholders  and  creditors  are  the  first  to  bear 
losses, and not the taxpayers. 
But it is key, particularly for cross-border banks, that there is a strong central authority that 
can use these tools in a swift and impartial manner. The ECB has been clear that we need a 
single  European  resolution  authority  and  a  single  resolution  fund  as  a  fundamental 
complement to the SSM. I welcome the proposal of the European Commission in this respect 
and will assess it in detail. The plan that the SRM comes into force in 2014 and can start its 
operations as from January 2015, when the BRRD enters into force, is also welcomed. 
Banking Union is about restoring the single market for capital. European companies should 
be able to tap a single pool of savings to fund their global expansion.  
Banking  Union  will  ensure  that  the  funding  cost  of  a  bank  depends  on  the  quality  of  its 
assets,  not  on  the  jurisdiction  in  which  its  headquarters  are  located.  There  might  be 
fundamental  reasons  why  Portuguese  SMEs  do  not  borrow  under  the  same  terms  as 
German  SMEs.  But  they  should  borrow  under  the  same  terms  from  Portuguese  and  from 
German banks.  
The role of market structures 
However, even if Banking Union can reduce financial fragmentation across countries, it may 
not,  by  itself,  be  sufficient  to  reduce  it  within  countries  –  as  epitomised  by  the  significant 
mark-up on loans paid by SMEs compared with larger firms. 
Indeed, according to the results of the ECB survey on the access to finance of SMEs in the 
euro  area,  conducted  in  February-March  2013, 16%  of  SMEs  (that  is more  than  2  million) 
report access to finance as their main problem. Furthermore, interest rate spreads on SME 
loans compared with those for large non-financial companies have widened to an average of 
40 basis points since 2010. 
This  links  to  the  third  factor  in  restoring  credit  provision:  improving  market  structures,  in 
particular to help specific sectors like SMEs. 
The  ECB  has  supported  the  EIB  and  European  Commission  in  examining  the  constraints 
hindering the development of securitisation instruments for SME loans and the revival of the 
ABS market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
We  welcome  the  on-going  work  by  the  Commission  and  the  EIB  on  joint  risk-sharing 
instruments to support SME lending, which would combine the EU budget resources with the 
EIB and the EIF lending capacity4. The European Council has supported this initiative and 
called for these instruments to begin operating in January 2014. In parallel, a more balanced 
regulatory  treatment  for  ABS,  acknowledging  the  past  credit  performance  of  these 
instruments, would ensure a level playing field with other securities regarding risk, rating and 
maturity. 
The ECB can support the revival of the ABS market, provided that the risk to the Eurosystem 
is controllable, and the underlying instruments are simple and transparent. But it cannot be a 
substitute for market mechanism, nor can it subsidise risk taking of market participants. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me now conclude.  
Reviving credit growth is one of the most pressing challenges for the euro area today, but it 
can only be achieved by all actors playing their part. 
The role of banks has been reduced after the crisis, and the euro area will probably move 
towards a more balanced financing mix, with a greater role for arms’ length finance based on 
capital markets. Being more balanced, this model would be more resilient. But the euro area 
is and will remain a bank based economy. In fact, there are essential constituencies, namely 
SMEs  and  households  that  still  obtain  credit  almost  exclusively  from  banks.  Accordingly, 
there  can  be  no  sustained  recovery  without  a  healthy,  competitive  and  prudent  banking 
system.  Cleaning  up  the  banks,  as  was  done  at  an  early  stage  in  the  US,  is  not  merely 
desirable, it is a condition to finally emerge from the crisis and move on. 
The ECB can help reduce divergences in bank funding. But governments have to ensure that 
banks are properly capitalised and that their balance sheets are cleaned up. 
Similarly, the ECB can help support the economy and improve the macroeconomic outlook. 
But  governments  have  to  introduce  the  structural  reforms  that  are  essential  to  open  up 
investment  opportunities,  and  without  which  banks  will  not  sustainably  alter  their  risk 
assessments.  
Low interest rates and improved financial market conditions may give a sense that reforms 
can  be  deployed  over  extended  periods  of  time.  But  reforms  are  a  matter  of  urgency. 
Deleveraging,  fragmentation  and  recession  weight  on  the  most  vulnerable  in  society,  in 
particular on the youth. Time lost increases the risk of a permanently lower rate of growth 
and of a lost generation. 
In  other  words,  the  key  to  reviving  growth  and  investment  in  the  euro  area  is  for  each 
stakeholder to take responsibility for what it can change, within its mandate – and then just 
do it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
4  See  European  Investment  Bank  –  European  Commission  (2013),  “Increasing  lending  to  the  economy: 
implementing the EIB capital increase and joint Commission-EIB initiatives”, report to the European Council, 
27–28 June 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
