Jörg Asmussen: The future of global economic governance 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Hertie School of Governance, Berlin, 22 February 2013. 
 Dear Mr. Feldmann,1 
Dear Dean Anheier, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
I  am  glad  to  be  here  in  Berlin  today  at  the  Hertie  School  of  Governance  on  the 
occasion of the launch of the Governance Report 2013 and to share with you some 
thoughts on the future of global economic governance. 
It  has  now  become  commonplace  to  say  that  we  live  in  a  “flat  world”,  a  world 
characterised  by  ever-growing  interdependence  and  interconnectedness.2  The 
integration of emerging market economies into the global economy, along with lower 
transportation costs and technological change has led to unprecedented increases 
in the circulation of goods, labour, capital and information around the world. 
Insofar as the world today has so profoundly changed, it is unsurprising that today’s 
global  challenges  are  also  markedly  different  from  those  of  barely  one  or  two 
decades ago. 
  The  globalisation  of  production  chains  is  just  one  example  of  these  profound  evolutions. 
Products  are  no  longer  “made  in  Germany”  or  “made  in  France”.  They  are  “made  in  the 
world”.3 
The  2011  natural  and  nuclear  disaster  in  Japan  has  shown  how  much  countries  are  now 
connected  in  ways  that  are  far  stronger  than  previously  thought.  As  we  have  learned,  the 
impairment  of  a  few  factories  in  just  one  country  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  policy 
choices in other countries, as we see here in Germany, on an entire industry worldwide and, 
ultimately,  on  the  global  economy.  This  new  picture  is  so  striking  that  the  methodology  to 
measure  trade  is  being  recast  in  terms  of  the  value  added  each  country  brings  to  the 
production chain. 
This  may  have  important  policy  implications,  for  instance  on  the  debate  about  global 
imbalances. 
Formal and informal international institutions have been created since the aftermath of the 
Great  Depression  to  manage  the  challenges  arising  from  ever  closer  global  economic 
integration. The IMF and the World Bank since 1944, the G7 since the 1970s, the WTO since 
the 1990s are all part and parcel of this global economic governance system. The outbreak 
of the global economic and financial crisis in 2008 has now brought the G20 at the centre of 
global economic governance. 
The key question now is whether today’s global economic governance is tuned to a world 
where challenges have become truly global in many aspects, an evolution which the global 
financial crisis has only accelerated. You are perhaps familiar with Zhou Enlai’s answer to de 
Gaulle when he once asked him his opinion on the impact of the French Revolution of 1789. 
                                                 
1  
2   See T. Friedman (2005), The World is Flat, A Brief History of the Twenty First Century, Farrar, Straus and 
I would like to thank Arnaud Mehl and Isabel Vansteenkiste for their valuable input in preparing this speech. 
Giroux. 
3   See for instance WTO (http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/miwi_e/miwi_e.h). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 1.  
“Too early to say” was his reply. Barely four years after the outbreak of the global economic 
and financial crisis, you will not be surprised if my answer today remains tentative, too. 
In  my  view,  despite  the  important  and  significant  progress  already  made,  global  economic 
governance still falls short of meeting the scale of today’s challenges. 
First and foremost this is because it is still largely driven by national considerations, but also 
because  the  evolutions  that  have  occurred  since  the  crisis  still  leave  some  key  issues 
unresolved. These pertain to the leadership, coherence, efficiency and legitimacy of global 
economic governance. The discrepancy between the reality of today’s interdependences, the 
challenges they create, and the capacity of sovereign governments to agree on how to deal 
with them remains significant. 
In  the  remainder  of  my  speech  today,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  these  aspects  by 
considering 
 
the  challenges  created  by  the  onset  of  the  crisis  for  the  traditional  foundations  of 
global economic governance; 
the salient evolutions in the latter and their limitations; and 
how global economic governance could be strengthened going forward. 
Challenges created by the onset of the global economic and financial crisis 
for the traditional foundations of global economic governance 
The main reason why global economic governance today remains largely dependent on local 
considerations is that it is still founded on the principle of national sovereignty. 
The  Westphalian  order  of  1648,  which  sacralised 
the  principle  of  sovereignty  of 
Nation-States, remains at the core of international economic relations today.4 More than three 
centuries  after  the  peace  of  Westphalia,  global  economic  governance  still  results  for  its 
largest part from decisions of sovereign states. 
Any meaningful collective decision that helps address pressing global policy issues requires 
a  consensus  between  sovereign  nations,  which  still  results 
from  – often  difficult – 
compromises. 
Global  economic  relations  hence  remain  mostly  inter-national  rather  than  transnational  or 
supranational.  In  other  words,  global  governance  is  still  in  essence  the  globalization  of 
national  governance5.  It  crucially  depends  on  the  ability  of  sovereign  nations  to  find 
consensual solutions to the common challenges they face and on their willingness to stick to 
their agreements. 
Within  the  G20,  for  instance,  advanced  economies  cannot  be  forced  to  implement  the 
commitments they made at the Toronto Summit of 2010 to halve fiscal deficits by this year 
and  stabilise  debt  ratios  by  2016,  if  they  are  reluctant  to do  so.  Nor can  emerging  market 
economies be forced to move more rapidly towards market-based exchange rates. 
Even in global trade relations, which are policed by WTO rules, the preferred solution in case 
of disputes is not to resort to the WTO’s system of dispute settlement, but for the countries 
concerned to discuss their problems and settle disputes by themselves.6 
                                                 
4   See H. Kissinger (1994), Diplomacy, Simon & Schuster. 
5   See the speech by P. Lamy entitled “Global governance requires localising global issues”, Oxford, 8 March 
2012. 
6   See H. Horn, L. Johannesson and P. Mavroidis (2011), “The WTO Dispute Settlement System 1995–2010: 
Some Descriptive Statistics”, IFN Working Paper No. 891. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
For  many  years,  even  centuries,  the  Westphalian  principles  seemed  to  provide  a  stable 
system as power – meaning the ability to get things done – and politics –meaning the ability 
to  decide  which  things  need  to  be  done –  were  conjoined  in  the  institutions  of  the 
Nation-State. 
Global stability was guaranteed insofar as global policy making was steered by one global 
leader, or hegemon, such as the US for the largest part of the 20th century. Then, from the 
1970s  the  world’s  leading  industrialised  economies  became  increasingly  associated  to  the 
management of global economic and monetary affairs through the G7. 
This gathering has been based on common interests and values, such as democracy, the 
market economy and floating exchange rates. 
The  2008  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  has  sent  a  large  shock  wave  through  this 
traditional system, however, for two main reasons. 
First, it has accelerated the rise of the “Rest” relative to the “West”, to paraphrase Samuel 
Huttington.  Its  impact  was  felt  most  strongly  in  advanced  economies,  while  emerging 
economies – barring Central and Eastern Europe – have remained less affected. 
It  has  hastened  the  emergence  of  China,  Brasil  and  India  as  leading  engines  of  global 
economic  growth.  It  has  given  them  greater  legitimacy  to  hold  an  important  role  in  global 
policy making. There is no clear hegemon any more able to centrally steer the process. 
Second,  the  2008  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  has  made  more  visible  the  gap 
between power and politics created by globalisation.7 As interdependences and international 
spillovers have steadily grown, power, i.e. the ability to address today’s most pressing policy 
challenges,  such  as  international macroeconomic  cooperation,  global  imbalances,  financial 
regulatory reform or protectionism has partly evaporated from the Nation-State to the global 
level. But politics, i.e. legitimacy in taking decisions, remains largely local and national, as it 
was before. 
We  have  seen  a  similar  gap  between  power  and  politics  in  the  European  debt  crisis: 
Developments  in  single  Member  States  where  ultimately  not  controllable  by  the  sovereign 
nation state anymore and they created spill-over effects on other Member States through a 
number of channels in the internal market. 
Member states lacked the power to tackle the problems while at the same time, institutions at 
the  European  level  to  fill  this  gap  were  either  missing  or  the  working  methods  were 
inadequate  for  crisis  management.  We  have  made  remarkable  progress  in  enhancing  the 
governance structures in Europe in 2012 and in closing the gap between power and politics. 
The ESM is fully functioning, we have improved the working methods of the Eurogroup and 
we  are  working  on  a  banking  union.  Still  much  needs  to  be  done  in  enhancing  European 
governance in the next years following the four Presidents’ report. 
Most importantly from my perspective, we have to strengthen democratic legitimacy on the 
European level and thus the role of the European Parliament. 
2.  
Salient evolutions in global economic governance since the onset of the crisis 
and their limitations 
Global  economic  governance  has  not  remained  immobile  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis. 
Importantly, it has become more inclusive, notably through the ascent of the G20. It has been 
reformed to account for the growing importance of emerging market economies in the global 
economy. I was involved in G20 meetings of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
since this forum first met in Berlin in 1999 and I also served as the Chancellor’s Sherpa in the 
                                                 
7   See Z. Baumann (1999), In Search of Politics, Stanford University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Cannes  Summit  in  2011.  Nobody  participating  in  the  first  gathering,  which  took  place  less 
than 1 kilometre from where we meet today, would have anticipated the role this forum would 
gain in global governance within one decade. 
The  upgrade  of  the  G20  from  a  Finance  Ministers’  to  a  Heads-of-State  level  in  November 
2008 strengthened its political profile even significantly further and we have seen a similar 
development  on  European  level  from  a  finance  ministers’  format  –  the  Eurogroup –  to 
leaders’ level – the Euro Area Summits. 
This “upgrade” of the G20 to the leaders’ level led to its elevation to the status of premier 
forum  for  international  economic  cooperation  at  the  Pittsburgh  Summit  of  2009.  The 
membership  of  other  key  international  fora  has  been  extended  to  overlap  with  that  of  the 
G20, such as that of the Financial Stability Board, which plays an active part in strengthening 
the  international  financial  architecture  and  global  financial  stability.  IMF  quotas  and 
governance  have  been  adjusted  in  2010  to  raise  the  voting  shares  and  representation  of 
large dynamic and emerging market economies. 
And the largest of these economies (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) now meet 
regularly  at  the  level  of  Leaders  to  discuss  issues  of  common  interest  since  the 
Yekaterinburg Summit of 2009. 
The G20’s promising start has unfortunately been followed by more mixed results. The first 
three  G20  Leaders’  Summits  of  2008–09  (Washington,  London  and  Pittsburgh)  led  to 
important  achievements.  Concerns  that  the  global  economy  was  on  the  verge  of  the  most 
severe  downturn  since  the  Great  Depression  helped  forge  agreements  on  a  joint 
macro-policy  response,  on  increasing  IMF  resources  and  on  a  financial  repair  and  reform 
agenda. 
The Seoul Summit of 2010 proved less ambitious, although the IMF quota and governance 
reform was then widely regarded as a welcome step. 
Since then, the G20 has lost further momentum with the Cannes and Los Cabos Summits 
delivering more modest results, putting in questions the G20’s effectiveness and by this its 
credibility. 
This loss of momentum is to an important extent due to a waning sense of urgency. At the 
height  of  the  global  economic  and  financial  crisis  in  2008–2009,  G20  Leaders  collectively 
agreed on the root causes of the problems and on the urgency and course of action needed 
to overcome the crisis. Since the global economy stepped back from the brink, progress has 
slowed down as world Leaders feel less pressured to strike deals. As a result, some have 
noted that “active involvement” has moved into “passive avoidance”.8 
Hence  global  economic  governance  as  we  know  it  today  seems  to  be  well  equipped  to 
manage  a  global  crisis.  But  it  is  less  effective  during  normal  times,  which  also  lessens  its 
ability to prevent future crises. 
Four  interconnected  dimensions  of  global  economic  governance  account  its  lack  of 
effectiveness outside crisis periods: 
Its leadership: The G20 lacks clear leadership. Uncertainty as to which country or countries 
could emerge stronger from the crisis is blurring global leadership, insofar as a new global 
governance regime is the product of a “consensus of the winners”, as once argued by former 
Brazil President Cardoso, pointing to the case of the US and its allies after World War II.9 
                                                 
8   See IFANS brief 2011–32. 
9   See  the  quotes  from  former  Brazil  President  Cardoso  in  N.  Berggruen,  Intelligent  Governance  for  the  21st 
Century, p. 157. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  prevalence  of 
large  ones.  Given 
Its coherence: the shift from the G7 to the G20 has increased the representativeness of the 
leading forum for international economic cooperation at the cost of increasing the diversity of 
values and interest expressed at the negotiation table. Differences in views on issues like the 
Doha trade talks or climate change are such that they are rarely tabled for discussion in G20 
meetings anymore, because chances for progress are thin. 
Some  go  as  far  as  claiming  that  the  crisis  would  have  created  a  “zero-sum”  world,  one  in 
which one country’s gains are increasingly considered as another’s losses.10 They point to 
tensions  on  global  imbalances  between  external  surplus  and  deficit  economies,  on 
international financial spillovers arising from the effect of monetary policy easing in advanced 
economies  and  reserve  accumulation  in  emerging  economies,  on  trade  and  financial 
protectionism, as substantiating their view. 
Its efficiency: the legitimacy gained by the G20, relative to the G7, has come at the cost of an 
efficiency  loss.  Consensus  is  easier  to  find  in  small,  informal  gatherings  rather  than  in 
heterogeneous, 
the  Westphalian  principle  of 
sovereignty,  a  premium  remains  on  “naysayers”  which  can  block  decisions.  Agreement  on 
the smallest common denominator remains prevalent. 
Its  legitimacy:  the  G20  suffers  from  a  lack  of  legitimacy  in  two  respects.  From  a  global 
perspective,  it  still  excludes  over  80%  of  the  countries  in  the  world  which  some  see  as 
weakening its legitimacy as the global economic rule setter. 
From  a  domestic  perspective,  the  fact  that  the  G20  might  appear  distant  to  citizens  is  not 
helpful to strengthen its legitimacy given, as it has been observed, that it is intrinsically linked 
to local proximity.11 Given the current set up, G20 decisions are often difficult to convey and 
explain at the domestic level. 
As a result, some pessimists have argued that we would now live in a “G-zero” world.12 
I do not share such a pessimistic view. Despite its limitations, the G20 remains an essential 
instrument for global economic cooperation. There is no viable or obvious alternative to the 
G20. In many policy fields a return to the G7 is not an option. Moreover, there is no shortage 
of global challenges in need of a global response, just think of trade and protectionism, the 
still not completed financial reform agenda or climate change. 
Accordingly, we need no new institutions or bodies for global governance. Instead, the G20 
should develop further into what it was meant to be from the outset: the premier forum for 
international economic cooperation. 
How the G20’s role in global economic governance can be strengthened 
3.  
How could this be done? Let me give you some pragmatic suggestions that have been made 
as to how the G20 could be taken forward. 
In  the  long  run,  stronger  global  economic  governance  might  require  to  partly  adapt  the 
traditional  Westphalian  principles  whereby  global  governance  is  still  in  essence  the 
globalization of local governance. 
This  is,  as  I  understand,  in  the  spirit  of  one  of  the  proposals  made  in  the  Hertie  School’s 
Governance  Report  2013,  with  the  notion  of  “responsible  sovereignty”,  i.e.  “an  exercise  of 
                                                 
10   See G. Rachman, “Zero-Sum World”, Financial Times, 22 October 2010. 
11   See the speech by P. Lamy entitled “Global governance requires localising global issues”, Oxford, 8 March 
2012. 
12   See I. Bremmer and N. Roubin (2011), “A G-Zero World”, Foreign Affairs, Vol. 90, Issue 2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
sovereignty respectful of the sovereignty of other nations… that anticipates the limitations of 
“going it alone” while foreseeing the benefits of joint action”.13 
The  debt  crisis  in  Europe  has  painfully  shown  the  limits  of  national  sovereignty.  I  am 
convinced  that  sharing  sovereignty  on  the  European  level  means  ultimately  regaining 
sovereignty for the Member States and that this may also hold true in a global context in a 
longer term perspective. 
For  responsible  governance,  the  G20  might  need  first  and  foremost  to  develop  a  set  of 
common values at the international level in the name of which action could be taken. 
Second,  some  have  argued  that  the  G20  could  establish  a  permanent  secretariat.14  This 
would ensure continuity in agenda setting. There have been recent examples since the crisis 
of informal structures that have been usefully formalised, such as the shift from the Financial 
Stability Forum to the Financial Stability Board. 
These ideas might give a sense of direction towards which to steer the G20 in the long run, 
but they are not easily implementable in the near term. In the near term, the ability to deliver 
results,  the  credibility,  and  therefore  the  legitimacy,  of  the  G20  could  be  strengthened  by 
improving existing processes. I see here three important avenues. 
First,  it  is  important  for  the  G20  to  increase  the  accountability  and  transparency  of  its 
decision-making  process.  Vague  goals  and  non-measurable  objectives  leave  too  much 
scope for interpretation and reduce credibility. 
Recently  some  progress  has  been  made  on  agreeing  on  more  concrete  objectives.  More 
recently,  no  later  than  last  week  in  Moscow,  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank 
Governors agreed to adopt an assessment process on the implementation of the structural 
reform commitments. However more efforts need to be undertaken in this regard. 
Second, a more focused and concise and operational agenda might also be helpful. Since its 
inception, G20 meetings’ agendas have gradually expanded. They now encompass a wide 
range  of  global  policy  themes  which  go  beyond  macro  policy  coordination.  While  in  some 
cases,  this  has  been  helpful  in  engaging  e.g.  developing  countries,  in  a  structure  with  an 
annual  rotating  Presidency  and  without  a  permanent  secretariat,  it  is  difficult  to  make 
progress on an ever increasing number of issues in a meaningful way. 
Finally, it has been also suggested that the G20 could enhance its legitimacy by relying more 
on 
institutions  and  engaging  current  non-members  on  an 
issue-by-issue basis, rather than by expanding its membership overly, which could dilute its 
effectiveness.15  Greater  involvement  of  international  organisations,  whose  membership  is 
universal, could significantly increase the legitimacy of decisions taken at the G20. Involving 
countries  which  are  currently  not  a  member  of  the  G20  on  an  issue-by-issue  basis  could 
equally improve its legitimacy. Currently, the G20 presidency can invite some non-members. 
However,  the  selection  process  remains  ad-hoc.  Using  more  objective  criteria  to  involve 
certain non-member on issues for which they are of systemic relevance could be useful in 
this respect. 
To  conclude,  the  2008  global  and  financial  crisis  has  shown  the  need  for  more  global 
solutions. Global leaders have shown their ability to respond to this need. 
international 
financial 
                                                 
13   See Hertie School of Governance, Governance Report 2013, Overview, p. 3. 
14   See for instance C. Bradford, J. Linn, P. Martin (2008), Global Governance Breakthrough the G20 Summit and 
the Future Agenda, Brookings policy brief series, No. 168. 
15   See P. Subacchi and S. Pickford (2011), Legitimacy versus Effectiveness for the G20: A Dynamic Approach to 
Global Economic Governance, Chatham briefing paper. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Looking  ahead,  the  work  is  not  completed.  It  is  now  entirely  up  to  all  of  us  to  keep  the 
momentum going and to ensure global economic governance lives up to prospects laid down 
already by late Henry Ford 
Coming together is a beginning 
Staying together is progress 
Working together is a success 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
