Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Finance 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  before  the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 6 June 2013. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Canada’s commitment to Canadians is to promote the economic and financial 
welfare  of  our  country.  One  way  we  do  this  is  to  communicate  our  objectives  openly  and 
effectively and stand accountable for our actions. 
So  I  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  come  before  you  this  morning  to  share  the  Bank’s 
perspective. Kindly note that today is day four on the job for me – I trust you will forgive me if 
there are any details I haven’t yet become familiar with. That said, I look forward to hearing 
your views and taking your questions, and I will answer them to the best of my ability. 
The common  denominator  that ties together  all of the  Bank’s  work  is confidence. Through 
our actions and our words, what the Bank of Canada delivers is confidence in our currency; 
confidence in our role as fiscal agent for the federal government; confidence in our banking 
system; and confidence in the value of money. 
This is familiar ground to all of us here today. I don’t propose to delve into the details of the 
Bank’s functions. Rather, I will discuss the current context in which we are operating and how 
that is influencing the Bank’s work of delivering confidence. In short: what are the challenges 
that we are facing? And, how do they affect the business of the Bank? 
Today's global context 
It is now almost six years since the start of the global financial crisis. Given the near-collapse 
of  the  global  financial  system  and  the  dramatic  plunge  in  global  demand,  it’s  perhaps  no 
surprise that we haven’t yet returned to normal economic conditions. 
The global economy continues to struggle. Most advanced economies are still facing credit 
stresses and record-low interest rates. Many central banks continue to use unconventional 
means to provide stimulus, and governments are doing everything they can to manage their 
respective debt situations. 
Clearly, the global economy is still in recovery. Global economic activity is expected to grow 
modestly  this  year  before  strengthening  over  the  following  two  years.  But  this  is  not  a 
recovery in the usual sense. It’s more like a postwar reconstruction. It will require sustained 
and focused efforts to rebuild global economic potential. 
Allow me to talk about how, in this context, the Bank of Canada delivers confidence. 
Delivering confidence 
Delivering confidence in our currency 
Let me start with confidence in our currency which, for many Canadians, is our most tangible 
work.  Every  bank  note  in  the  wallets  of  Canadians  is  the  product  of  specialized  and 
sophisticated  expertise. We have  nearly  200  people  –  physicists,  chemists,  engineers  and 
other  experts  –  who  design,  test  and  distribute  bank  notes  across  Canada.  We  also 
communicate  with  retailers,  financial  institutions  and  the  public,  and  work  with  law 
enforcement to deter counterfeiting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The stakes are high when it comes to counterfeiting, not only in direct losses to Canadians, 
but also the loss of confidence that it creates in the use of bank notes. 
The challenge of counterfeiting is significant. There was a time, in 2004, when counterfeiting 
in Canada was at a historic peak – and high by international standards. I’m sure many of you 
remember  seeing  signs  posted  in  stores  saying  that  $100  or  $50  bank  notes  were  not 
accepted. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  introduced  enhanced  security  features  and  worked  closely  with  law-
enforcement  agencies,  the  RCMP,  and  the  courts,  as  well  as  financial  institutions  and 
retailers,  to  bring  those  counterfeiting  rates  down.  And  we  succeeded.  Even  before  the 
introduction of our new polymer bank notes, counterfeiting rates had been reduced by 90 per 
cent. 
But it’s important to remember that staying ahead of counterfeiters is a constant challenge. 
We must always be proactive. 
That is why the Bank launched a new series of polymer bank notes that are safer, cheaper, 
and  greener.  Safer,  because  of  sophisticated  security  features,  including  holography  and 
transparency, that make these new notes harder to counterfeit and easier to verify. Cheaper, 
because they last at least 2.5 times longer than paper-based notes. This means that fewer 
notes will need to be printed, making the series more economical. 
And greener, because over the life of the series, fewer notes produced means fewer notes 
transported. And when they do need to be replaced, the notes will be recycled in Canada. 
With these new notes, Canadians can have full confidence in their currency. 
Delivering confidence in our funds management 
The second area of our focus is much less visible to most Canadians. As the fiscal agent of 
the  federal  government,  the  Bank  of  Canada  provides  advice  and  administers  the 
government’s  debt  and  reserves  –  and  demonstrates  global  leadership  in  these  realms. 
Innovative work is being done, for example, to reduce the reliance on external credit-rating 
agencies in the management of the government’s assets and liabilities. 
There is a lot of money at stake. In 2012, the Bank managed Government of Canada daily 
cash balances averaging about $17 billion. We also managed, on behalf of the government, 
official international reserves amounting to about US$69 billion. 
Delivering confidence in our financial system 
As with any plumbing system, we tend to take notice only when things go wrong. Through 
the  crisis  and  since,  the  Bank’s  work  has  meant  that  the  resilience  of  Canada’s  payment 
clearing  and  settlement  system  has  been  maintained  at  a  very  high  level,  ensuring  that 
Canadians  can  have  confidence  that  the  economy  is  supported  by  solid  financial  market 
infrastructures. 
Financial  stability  at  home  is  necessary,  of  course,  but  not  sufficient.  The  crisis  made  it 
abundantly  clear  that  the  global  financial  system  needed  remodelling  –  and  the  Bank  of 
Canada has been at the forefront of global reform work. 
Canada has also made good on our G-20 commitments. Among other reforms, we have put 
in place Basel III capital standards ahead of schedule. We have made significant strides on 
other market infrastructure reforms, which we can address in detail during our discussion. 
These  are  real  accomplishments,  and  our  financial  system  is  stronger  as  a  result.  But  we 
must  not  lose  momentum,  here  in  Canada  or  on  the  international  stage.  More  work  is 
required to end the phenomenon of institutions that are too big to fail, including recovery and 
resolution plans for banks. And countries need to address the issue of shadow banking to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ensure  that  systemically  important  financial  institutions  operating  outside  the  perimeter  of 
regulation come broadly into line with their regulated counterparts. 
Delivering confidence in monetary policy 
Finally, confidence is clearly important for the conduct of monetary policy. 
Monetary  policy  in  Canada  is  supported  by  a  governance  structure  that  instills  confidence 
and ensures that Canadians, through their government, have a say in setting the monetary 
policy  framework.  Importantly,  the  structure  also  ensures  the  independence  of  the  central 
bank to make the right policy decisions to achieve our inflation target. 
Canada’s monetary policy framework is a good one. After a tremendous amount of research, 
Canada adopted an inflation-targeting regime in 1991. Since 1995, the target has been 2 per 
cent. We recognized early on that a commitment to hold inflation absolutely steady at 2 per 
cent was unrealistic. Shocks to the economy must be taken into account. So the framework 
is  designed to keep total  CPI  inflation  at the  2  per  cent  midpoint  of  a  target range  of  1 to 
3 per cent over the medium term. It bears mentioning that the target is symmetrical. We care 
just as much about inflation falling below as we do about it rising above the target. The Bank 
raises or lowers its policy interest rate, as appropriate, in order to achieve the target typically 
within a horizon of six to eight quarters – the time that it usually takes for policy actions to 
work their way through the economy and have their full effect on inflation. 
Over the past couple of decades, the average rate of inflation has been very close to target. 
Even  during  the  global  economic  and  financial  crisis,  our  commitment  did  not  waver.  The 
inflation  target  is  sacrosanct  to  us  and  has  become  a  credible  anchor  for  the  inflation 
expectations of Canadians. 
A  key  component  of  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  inflation-targeting  framework  is  a  flexible 
exchange rate. While the exchange rate is influenced by such variables as commodity prices, 
relative inflation rates, and relative interest rates, its value is determined in currency markets. 
The credibility earned by the Bank over the past twenty years allows us to take advantage of 
the flexibility inherent in the framework with respect to the amount of time it takes to return 
inflation  to  target.  The  recent  turmoil  tested  the  limits  of  our  flexible  inflation-targeting 
framework.  Nonetheless,  the  inflation  expectations  of  Canadians  remain  well  anchored, 
proving  that  our  framework  is  secure  and  working.  But  it  also  informs  us  that  we  need  to 
validate those expectations to maintain our credibility. 
This brings me to a discussion of the domestic context. 
The context in Canada 
The severity of the global economic and financial crisis meant that the recession it triggered 
in  Canada  was  different  from  any  other  postwar  recession.  Canada  experienced  a 
particularly deep contraction of investment and exports, as business confidence plummeted 
along with global demand. 
In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  proved 
highly  effective  in  supporting  robust  growth  in  domestic  demand,  particularly  household 
expenditures,  which  grew  to  record  levels.  Yet,  as  effective  as  it  has  been,  with  domestic 
demand now slowing, the limits of this growth model are clear. 
What’s  less  clear  is  the  rebuilding  process  underlying  the  necessary  rotation  of  growth 
toward net exports and business investment. While the Canadian economy as a whole has 
recovered  from  the  recession,  thanks  to  domestic  demand,  the  depth  and  duration  of  the 
global  recession  delivered  a  direct,  sharp  blow  to  Canadian  business.  In  many  cases, 
temporary  plant  shutdowns  were  not  sufficient  to  match  the  fall  in  demand.  Some  firms 
permanently downsized their operations. Others simply closed their doors. Large job losses 
resulted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In effect, the recession caused a significant structural change in the Canadian economy. The 
level  of  our  country’s  productive  capacity  –  in  other  words,  its  potential  –  dropped,  as  the 
Bank  noted  in  April  2009.  Standard  macroeconomic  models  don’t  really  capture  these 
dynamics. 
Just as the financial crisis triggered an atypical recession, the recovery cycle is unusual. The 
rotation of demand will require more than just the ramping up of production. The sequence 
we can anticipate is the following: foreign demand will recover; our exports will strengthen 
further;  confidence  will  improve;  companies  will  invest  to  increase  capacity;  existing 
companies will expand and new ones will be created. 
In short, we need to see the reconstruction of Canada's economic potential, and a return to 
self-sustaining, self-generating growth. 
This sequence may already be underway. 
We are now seeing signs of recovery in some important external markets, notably the United 
States and Japan, and there is continued growth in emerging-market economies. The Bank 
expects that the gathering momentum in foreign demand should help lift the confidence of 
Canada’s  exporters. This  is  critical for  Canadian firms to  boost their  investment to  expand 
their productive capacity. 
Conclusion – confidence in words, as well as actions 
The Bank has a role to play nurturing that process, to the extent possible within the confines 
of our inflation-targeting framework. There is no conflict between nurturing this and our need 
to get inflation up to the 2 per cent target. 
In monetary policy, actions are critically important, but words, too, matter a great deal. We 
can bolster confidence by explaining the forces at work in our economy, our projections for 
what’s  ahead,  and  our  monetary  policy  response.  And  we  help  nurture  confidence  by 
listening to businesses, to labour groups, and to industry associations in order to expand our 
understanding of what’s happening in the real economy. 
We must always remember that beneath our economic and financial statistics and analysis 
are real people, making real decisions that can lead to bad outcomes as well as good ones. 
Those decisions are hard to make any time, but when uncertainty is high and confidence has 
not been fully restored, they can be even more difficult. A lack of confidence can mean that 
such decisions are postponed – and that opportunities are lost. 
To help engender confidence, an active engagement with Canadians must be a cornerstone 
of  the  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  not  least  of  which  is  a  continuing  dialogue  with  this 
committee. 
With that, I thank you for listening. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
