Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance – the new regulatory challenge 
Introductory remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
book launch of “Islamic finance – the new regulatory challenge, 2nd edition”, Kuala Lumpur, 
22 July 2013. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  afternoon  to  witness  the  launch  of  the  second  edition  of 
“Islamic  Finance:  The  New  Regulatory  Challenge”.  As  the  Islamic  financial  industry 
transitions into a new era of growth and development in this post-crisis world, the evolving 
regulatory reforms that are taking place to strengthen the resilience of the financial industry 
has  presented  wide  ranging  challenges  in  the  implementation  of  the  reforms  and  in  also 
ensuring a more inclusive and stainable growth. The various dimensions of these regulatory 
challenges  and  its  impact  on  Islamic  finance  are  captured  in  the  publication  that  is  being 
launching today. 
It  is  indeed  a  more  challenging  time  for  financial  regulators  and  policymakers  worldwide. 
Priorities for strengthening financial stability and growth are now focused on achieving global 
financial systems that serve the needs of the real economy. Driven by concerns to ensure 
that banking institutions are more robust against mutil-faceted and more complex dimensions 
of  risks  going  into  the  future,  regulatory  efforts  are  being  directed  at  significantly 
strengthening the capital and liquidity structures of banks, and ensuring that there is better 
alignment between risk-taking behaviours and long-term viability as well as ethical conduct. 
At  the  centre  of  the  reforms  have  been  the  Basel III  reform  package,  principles  for  risk-
aligned compensation structures and improving the consistency of regulatory regimes across 
the  different  parts  of  the  financial  system,  including  the  shadow  banking  institutions. 
Significant  work  is  also  progressing  to  strengthen  resolution  regimes  and  financial  safety 
nets,  particularly  in  a  cross-border  context.  Given  the  specificities  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions, the implementation of these reforms require a careful examination of the different 
implications that they present for individual institutions and the system as a whole. 
We  are  now  witnessing  wave  of  the  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  as  the  role  of 
Islamic finance has expanded to become significantly more globalised. This has resulted in 
domestic  Islamic  financial  systems  to  become  more  inter  connected  and  with  the 
consequence that integrated, risks are more rapidly transmitted across the financial system. 
Building  on  the  foundations  that  have  been  put  in  place  with  the  adoption  of  prudential 
standards  introduced  by  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  in  the  key  areas  of 
capital  adequacy,  risk  management,  corporate  governance  and  Shariah  governance,  the 
regulatory,  supervisory  and  legal  frameworks  will  need  to  reflect  the  growing  cross-border 
dimensions  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  increased  connectivity.  Of  priority  will  be  efforts  to 
strengthen  the  cross-border  regulatory  and  supervisory  cooperation  arrangements  in  the 
relevant  jurisdictions  and  to  strengthen  further  the  international  financial  infrastructure  for 
Islamic finance. As we advance forward, this will be of great importance to promote stability 
and confidence in the more challenging international environment. 
A key area for cooperation that is being advanced relates to the provision of a robust liquidity 
management infrastructure for Islamic finance. This is an important imperative to ensure the 
resilience  and  stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system,  as  well  as  to  reduce  the  cost  of 
intermediation. A significant regulatory challenge remains in terms of having efficient cross-
border liquidity risk management in the Islamic financial system, due to the lack of short-term 
Shariah  compliant  instruments  in  international  currencies.  A  chapter  in  the  book  describes 
the  regulatory  response  to  the  issue  of  liquidity  risk  facing  Islamic  financial  institutions, 
including  the  important  role  of  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation 
(IILM) in facilitating cross-border liquidity management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
With these changes set to re-define the financial landscape going forward with far reaching 
implications, the publication of this book is both timely and relevant. Six years from its first 
edition  in  2007  which  made  an  important  contribution  to  the  literature  on  the  regulation  of 
Islamic  finance,  this  second  edition  captures  the  diverse  range  of  current  information  and 
updates arising from the regulatory issues in a post-crisis global economy. Reviews on the 
various  characteristics  of  risks  faced  by  Islamic  financial  institutions  will  improve  the 
understanding and examination of the implications of current and new reform initiatives for 
the  regulation  and  supervision  of  Islamic  finance.  In  view  of  the  requirement  for  growth  of 
Islamic financial transactions to be linked to real economic sectors, salient issues on stronger 
corporate governance and more efficient human resource management are discussed in a 
pre-concluding chapter of the book. 
Renowned industry practitioners and academicians have contributed to the book, providing 
deep insights, perspectives and views that are supported by practical experiences which will 
be  invaluable  to  those  who  wish  to  understand  the  critical  regulatory  issues  in  Islamic 
finance. Contributions by the two respected co-editors who have extensive knowledge on the 
subject and are internationally recognised for their academic publications on Islamic finance, 
completes the book as an indispensable reference for all. 
It  is  hoped  that  in  addressing  the  implications  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  on  the 
regulation of Islamic financial services, this book will provide further clarity and understanding 
on the multi-dimensional goals of policymakers and regulators in ensuring that the resilience 
of  the  Islamic  financial  system  and  its  core  tennets  are  aligned  with  the  evolving  global 
regulatory developments. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate the two co-editors for 
their  invaluable  contribution  in  enriching  the  body  of  authoritative  information  on  the 
regulation of Islamic finance. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
