Yaseen Anwar: Operational risk management in Pakistan – issues and 
challenges 
Opening remarks by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the SBP 
Conference  on  Operational  Risk  Management  organised  by  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan, 
Karachi, 7–8 February 2013. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen! 
Thanks for participating in this well timed conference on operational risk. The conference is 
part  of  SBP’s  ongoing  efforts  to  promote  the  culture  of  awareness  on  critical  issues  that 
demand the attention of the financial services industry. 
In  the  local  context,  credit  market  and  liquidity  risks  have  been  the  subjects  of  much 
discussion. Financial institutions have made significant progress in the management of these 
risks and Pakistani banks have considerably improved their processes for identification and 
management  of  credit  and  market  risk  exposures.  By  contrast,  it  is  relatively  difficult  to 
measure  the  level  of  operational  risk  exposures  on  an  enterprise  wide  level.  The  global 
financial  crisis  has  also  demonstrated  the  cost  of  operational  risk  failures.  It  has  been 
observed  that  in  several  instances,  the  mitigation  or  transfer  of  credit  and  market  risks 
actually gives rise to operational risk. 
Accordingly,  operational  risk  is  gaining  prominence  and  coming  close  to  credit  risk  as  the 
foremost safety and soundness challenge to the financial institutions. It is imperative for our 
banks  to  develop  requisite  capacities  to  manage  their  operational  risks,  collect  their  loss 
data,  implement  risk  indicators  and  set  aside  capital  to  cover  potential  operational  risk 
losses. 
Operational  risk  is  about  instilling  proper  risk  behavior  at  each  level  of  an  organization. 
Informal  operational  risk  management  frameworks  have  been  in  place  in  our  industry. 
However,  these  informal  frameworks  are  undocumented,  lack  consistency  and  do  not 
provide desired level of assurance to senior management or regulators. Thus, it is necessary 
for risk managers to develop awareness of operational risk and effectively use the emerging 
management techniques. 
Under the traditional approach of managing operational risk, the focus has largely remained 
on  protecting  the  risk  of  loss  of  capital  through  insurance.  Banks  have  relied  on  internal 
controls and audit functions. The increased use of technology in executing transactions have 
necessitated  banks  to  focus  more  on  core  banking  solutions,  IT  security  and  business 
continuity  programs. While  the  traditional  approach  has  its  own  merits,  there  is  a  pressing 
need that banks modify their fragmented approach of operational risk management in favor 
of  a  much  more  comprehensive  governance  and  management  framework.  A  framework 
comprising  of  clearly  defined  roles  and  responsibilities  along  with  reporting  procedures.  I 
hope that this conference will promote active discussions on this issue. 
Against this background, I am pleased to deliver the opening address in which I will cover 
three main areas. First, I will begin by offering my view on operational risk management – the 
issues  and  challenges.  Next,  I  will  discuss  Basel  Accord  treatment  of  operational  risk  and 
emergence of sound principles on the topic. Finally, I will talk about some of the regulatory 
developments  &  supervisory  expectations  to  strengthen  the  operational  risk  management 
within our banking sector. 
Operational risk has always existed as one of the core risks in banking. But what constituted 
operational risk was never agreed until the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 
came up with a definition. For this reason, Basel Accord may rightly be credited for promoting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  discipline  of  operational  risk  which  recognized  it  as  a  significant  risk  and  prescribed 
capital charge to protect against operational risk losses. 
The BCBS defined operational risk as – “the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed 
internal  processes,  people  and  systems  or  from  external  events”.  While  the  definition  has 
determined  four  sources  of  operational  risk  (i.e.  people,  processes,  systems  and  external 
events), there are a number of ways in which operational risk can actually manifest itself. It 
could  be  a  failure  of  control  function,  major  system  breakdown,  rogue  trading,  accounting 
scam,  regulatory  penalties,  internal/  external  fraud,  diminishing  number  of  qualified  staff, 
terrorist attack, floods, earth quakes etc. 
Since the scope of operational risk encompasses the entire organization and covers several 
dimensions. We, as banking professionals, need to consider the following points in defining 
any strategy to manage and mitigate operational risk. 
• 
The source of operational risk is from the day to day activities of a bank. For this 
reason, operational risk management must initiate from the business unit level. 
There  is  misconception  that  operational  risk  management  is  solely  about  internal 
controls. Banks are good in minimizing high frequency low severity risk events but it 
is  often  low frequency  high  severity  events  that can  jeopardize  the  existence  of a 
bank. Hence we need to identify and analyze predictive key risk indicators and use 
scenario analysis to simulate the impact of irregular events. 
Good operational risk management is about finding and correcting the real cause of 
the incidents and not about the effects or observed events. Thus, while maintaining 
the history of losses is important for capital modeling, we need to realize that two 
identical  events  may  have  entirely  different  underlying  causes.  As  a  result,  every 
operational risk event requires deeper investigation. 
Operational  risk  management  is  all  about  instilling  proper  risk  behaviors.  Thus 
changes in culture and governance needs to be institutionalized. 
   I believe these challenges can be overcome if banks adopt a systematic approach like the 
one  prescribed  by  the  Basel  Committee.  Let  me  briefly  talk  about  the  spectrum  of 
approaches offered by Basel Accord to calculate operational risk capital charge. 
Under the two simple approaches (i.e. Basic Indicator and Standardized Approaches), gross 
income  is  used  as  a  proxy  for the  scale  of business  operations. This  suggests  that  banks 
with  higher  gross  incomes  are  relatively  bigger  in  size  and  have  more  operational  risk 
exposure.  However,  it  is  often  argued  that  gross  income  is  not  always  a  perfect  proxy  for 
operational risk since it may fluctuate with the business/ economic cycle. Nevertheless, in the 
absence  of  any  other  proxy,  income  is  being  used  due  to  its  simplicity,  comparability  and 
reduced capital arbitrage opportunity. 
Another  approach  offered  under  Basel  II  is  the  Advanced  Measurement  Approach  (AMA), 
wherein  banks  can  develop  their  own  internal  assessment  techniques.  Unfortunately,  the 
quantitative  techniques  for  measuring  operational  risk  are  evolving  and  there  is  no  broad 
consensus on the modeling methodologies of operational risk. 
Thus, it can be said that the quantitative approaches offered under Basel Accord are still in 
the  process  of  refinement.  However,  this  is  all  the  more  reason  for  banks  to  focus  on 
qualitative requirements depending on the regulatory approach they intend to follow. In the 
past  one  decade,  the  awareness  of  operational  risk  has  improved  and  resultantly  the 
principles  for  sound  management  of  operational  risk  have  emerged.  Banks  need  to 
incorporate  these  internationally  agreed  principles  while  implementing  any  operational  risk 
management 
the  Governance,  Risk 
management environment, role of supervisors and business resilience. 
framework.  These  principles  mainly 
focus  on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I will now outline SBP’s expectation on the integrated components of the overall framework 
for managing operational risk across the enterprise. 
Sound internal governance forms the foundation of an effective operational risk management 
Framework. It is necessary that those at the top of the organization should take the lead in 
establishing  a  strong  risk  management  culture.  The  board  of  directors  needs  to  regularly 
review  the  framework  and  ensure  that  senior  management  is  actively  monitoring  the 
effectiveness of risk management and controls. For this purpose, the board should establish 
a management structure based on clear lines of responsibility, accountability and reporting. 
The  board  should  set  the  bank’s  risk  appetite  through  the  approval  of  operational  risk 
management  policy.  SBP  expects 
from 
management to the monitor the operational risk profile of the bank in a proactive manner. 
The role of senior management is to implement the operational risk management framework 
as  approved  by  the  board.  Senior management must  ensure  that  all  its business  activities 
are adequately staffed having necessary experience and technical skills. The remuneration 
policies should also be consistent with the approved risk appetite. Managers should not be 
rewarded solely on the basis of profits, but audit findings and compliance status should also 
be considered while deciding bonuses and compensations. 
Sound operational risk governance practices rely mainly on the following lines of defense: 
i. 
that  boards  should  seek  periodic  reports 
Business  line  management  is  the  first  line  of  defense  against  operational  risk. 
Business line management is responsible for identifying and managing risks in the 
products,  activities,  processes  and  systems  for  which  they  are  accountable.  It  is 
important  that  clearly  documented  and  regularly  updated  operating  manuals  are 
readily available to all employees. Segregation of duties needs to be ensured. It is 
also necessary that operational staff must have necessary skills and training so that 
they can fulfill their duties. 
A separate independent operational risk management function is the second line of 
defense  and  has  become  a  good  practice. 
Independent  operational  risk 
management  function  would  assist  management  to  understand  and  manage 
operational risk. The function should be responsible to assist in establishing policies 
&  standards  and  coordinate  with  various  businesses/  risk  management  activities. 
The  function  assesses,  monitors,  and  reports  operational  risks  as  a  whole,  and 
ensures  that  the  management  of  operational  risk  in  the  bank  is  as  per  approved 
strategy/ policies. 
Independent validation and verification is the third line of defense in the governance 
structure. It serves as a challenge function to the other two lines of defense. Internal 
audit  or  any  independent  group  of  qualified  staff  may  conduct  these  independent 
reviews. Since internal audit reports to the board audit committee therefore the audit 
function should also provide assurance to the board regarding effectiveness of the 
operational  risk  management  framework.  Senior  management  should  seriously 
investigate the findings of audit to set up a risk culture in the bank. 
ii. 
iii. 
The next principles focus on Risk management environment, it outlines the bank’s approach 
to  the  identification,  assessment,  monitoring,  control  and  mitigation  of  risk.  Banks  need  to 
use  various  tools  for  proactive  operational  risk  management.  These  tools  include  audit 
findings, analysis of internal and external loss data, risk control and self assessments, key 
risk indicators, scenario analysis, comparative analysis etc. I am pleased to know that lively 
discussions on these tools will follow in the coming sessions. 
SBP  is  cognizant  of  its  responsibilities  with  regard  to  sound  operational  risk  management 
frameworks  in  banks.  SBP  will  continue  to  play  its  role  in  ensuring  effectiveness  of 
established frameworks in banks. We expect each bank to develop and continuously improve 
its  risk  management  and  control 
location,  size, 
framework  depending  on  nature, 
sophistication, complexity of business operations and approved risk appetite. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In order to have comprehensive and current information on operational risk, SBP will expand 
its existing reporting mechanism. SBP is working on a two prong strategy; one is to update 
the existing instructions on frauds & forgeries with the purpose to further strengthen the fraud 
risk management and monitoring in banks. On the second front, Guidelines on operational 
risk  data collection  will  be  issued  to  enhance  the  scope  of  loss  data gathering  in  line  with 
Basel II requirements and to provide the industry a minimum set of instructions for consistent 
recognition of losses and their reporting to a centralized data consortium. These projects are 
at  an  advanced  stage  of  consultation  with  the  industry.  These  guidelines/  instructions  will 
help banks improve their operational risk management processes. 
Information  security  and  business  continuity  are  becoming  the  top  supervisory  concerns. 
Banks need to monitor IT security risks and respond to security breaches in a timely manner. 
Banks  need  to  devise  and  test  their  business  continuity  plans  to  ensure  they  are  able  to 
operate on an ongoing basis in the event of severe business disruption. The plans must be 
based  on  different  types  of  worst  case  scenarios  like  inaccessibility  of  bank’s  facilities,  IT 
infrastructure or a pandemic event. 
Let me sum up the key message of this address. For sound management of operational risk, 
we need to inculcate a risk culture within the organization with open communication channels 
between business lines and control functions. There is a need for close cooperation between 
banks  and  SBP.  We  are  all  on  the  learning  curve;  therefore  exchange  of  ideas  is  very 
important  in  capacity  building  for  operational  risk management. I  hope  this  conference  will 
provide  a  good  opportunity  to  exchange  our  thoughts  on  the  subject  and  learn  from  each 
other’s experiences. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
