Benoît Cœuré: The way back to financial integration 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Conference on “International financial integration and fragmentation. Drivers and policy 
responses”, organized by the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee and the Bank of Spain, 
Madrid, 12 March 2013. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Bernd  Schwaab,  Simone  Manganelli  and  Lorenzo  Cappiello  for  their  contributions  to  this 
speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
Dear Governor Linde, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to start by thanking the Banco de España for having invited me to speak at this 
conference. It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Madrid. 
In my speech I would like to discuss the reasons for the current state of fragmentation of the 
euro area and ways to remedy this situation, including through the completion of the banking 
union. The point I will make is that financial integration is desirable for an efficient allocation 
of resources in our economy, but that it will have to assume a different form to also ensure 
stability is delivered. To this end, I will elaborate on two interrelated issues. 
First, I will consider past and current developments in the degree of financial integration in 
the euro area. The Financial Integration Reports of the ECB have documented quite clearly 
that financial integration had steadily improved until the financial crisis erupted. The degree 
of financial integration then decreased in a number of market segments, although there have 
been signs of improvement recently. 
In  the  second  part  of  my  speech,  I  will  discuss  how  progress  in  financial  regulation  and 
supervision can also benefit financial integration in Europe, in addition to making the financial 
system more resilient. I will also argue that a less volatile cross-border source of finance, and 
hence a different quality of financial integration, could have avoided the considerable decline 
in the degree of financial integration during the crisis. For instance, a more integrated retail 
banking system could have mitigated the sudden stops in cross-border funding flows during 
the  crisis,  and  could  have  enhanced  risk  sharing  when  it  was  most  needed.  The  building 
blocks  of  the  banking  union  could  potentially  not  only  reverse  the  trend  of  financial  “de-
integration” in the euro area but also increase the quality of integration. I will finally suggest 
that, in addition to bank funding, arm’s length financing through capital markets will have a 
stabilising role. 
1. 
Integration vs. convergence, and rationales for broad financial integration in 
Europe 
Before  commenting  on  current  developments,  let  me  first  explain  what  I  understand  by 
financial integration, and how integration is different from mere convergence in asset prices 
or yields. In the Eurosystem, we define financial integration as a situation whereby there are 
no  frictions  that  discriminate  between  economic  agents  in  their  access  to  –  and  their 
investment of – capital, particularly on the basis of their location. This means that financial 
integration is achieved when there is equal market access, de facto and de jure. In such a 
setting  one  would  also  expect  to  see  significant  cross-border  holdings  of  financial  assets, 
along with a convergence of asset prices and yields across borders. The latter follows from 
the law of one price, provided that these assets have similar cash flows and are affected by 
similar  risk  factors.  This  means  that,  when  we  observe  a  differentiation  of  yields  across 
borders, this observation, in itself, is not sufficient evidence of market fragmentation. It may 
just mean that markets are pricing different risks. Similarly, different interest rates on loans to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
SMEs  located  in  different  countries  can  reflect  different  productivities.1  Conversely,  the 
well-known  convergence  of  sovereign  yields  across  countries  in  the  euro  area  to  very  low 
levels before the financial crisis did not, in itself, imply market integration. The bottom line is 
that convergence of prices does not necessarily mean integration; it is a necessary but not a 
sufficient  condition.  In  my  discussion  today,  I  will  therefore  refer  both  to  price-based 
indicators and quantity-based indicators of cross-border holdings. 
Surely, most economists would agree that international financial integration is by and large 
beneficial.2 This is for several reasons. First, stable, integrated and adequately supervised 
markets  facilitate  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources  both  over  time  and  across  national 
borders,  enabling  investors  to  fund  profitable  investment  opportunities  whenever  and 
wherever  they  arise.  Second,  financial  integration  allows  the  inter-temporal  smoothing  of 
consumption in response to occasional income shocks, and the diversification of households’ 
financial assets, protecting their revenue against shocks to their labour income. This second 
reason is of special importance in a monetary union, where the stability of the single currency 
requires  adequate  risk-sharing  mechanisms  through  goods,  labour  and  capital  markets. 
Third,  a  higher  degree  of  financial  integration  enhances  competition  among  financial 
institutions  as  well  as  among  financial  market  infrastructures  and  reduces  the  costs  of 
financial intermediation. 
While international financial integration is beneficial, it is vital in the case of the euro area. A 
highly integrated financial system is necessary to ensure that the impulses coming from our 
monetary policy diffuse homogeneously through financial markets across the euro area as a 
whole. 
The  financial  crisis  made  clear,  however,  that  unchecked  financial  integration  also  poses 
risks to financial stability. It increases financial complexity, the risk of cross-border contagion 
and the risk of sudden stops in capital flows. These risks are particularly pronounced in the 
absence  of  a  strong  institutional  framework.3  Such  risks  have  been  illustrated  both 
internationally and within the euro area in the recent years of crisis. 
Financial integration in Europe: salient facts and figures 
2. 
Let me now turn to financial integration in Europe. 
Overall, the degree of financial integration has progressively increased in the euro area since 
the introduction of the euro. However, the financial crisis of 2007 to 2010 and the subsequent 
euro area sovereign debt crisis reversed this trend to some degree.4 For the reason I gave 
earlier,  these  developments  have  been  particularly  problematic  for  the  Eurosystem.  I  will 
refer to these developments when discussing the effects that the banking union should have 
on more and better financial integration. Let me show you some indicators. 
                                                 
1  See G. Moëc (2013), “The trouble with SMEs – no quick fix”, Deutsche Bank research note, 8 March. 
2 
In  non-OECD  countries,  the  welfare  gains  of  international  capital  mobility  are  however  found  to  be  much 
smaller than those of a take-off in domestic productivity, see P.O. Gourinchas (2006), “The Elusive Gains from 
International Financial Integration”, Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 715–741. 
3  See  Fecht,  F.,  Grüner,  H.  P,  and  P.  Hartmann  (2007),  “Welfare  Effects  of  Financial  Integration”,  CEPR 
discussion  paper  No.  6311,  1–35,  and  Fecht,  F.,  Grüner,  H.  P.,  and  P.  Hartmann  (2012),  “Financial 
integration, Specialization, and Systemic Risk”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 88(1), 150–165. 
4  See the ECB’s Financial Integration Report (2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 An  integrated  money  market  is  important  to  ensure  a  balanced  transmission  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy stance. It is also the market segment in which the financial crisis first began 
in  August  2007.  The  money  market  has  become  increasingly  impaired,  especially  across 
borders. The standard deviation of EURIBOR rates across countries within the euro area has 
moved  consistently  above  the  corresponding  standard  deviation  within  domestic  borders. 
This  is  a  sign  that  market  participants  are  demanding  an  extra  premium  to  lend  to 
counterparties  located  in  other  countries.  This  premium  rises  when  market  conditions  are 
tense. During the crisis, this was the case for both one-month rates and 12-month rates. As a 
consequence of the interbank market stress, the ECB had to step up its intermediation role, 
reacting  with  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  such  as  a  fixed-rate  full-allotment 
liquidity policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
There is a similar phenomenon in the overnight unsecured money market and the secured 
money market. The latter is usually more resilient in times of crisis. A significant rise in price 
differentiation in repo markets has occurred as market participants have increasingly taken 
“correlation risks” into account: the pricing of risk has become much more dependent on the 
geographic  origin  of  both  the  counterparty  and  the  collateral,  in  particular  when  these  are 
from the same country. An additional sign of risk aversion is that market participants have 
shifted from the unsecured to the secured market. 
 Let me now address cross-border lending by banks. Looking at price-based indicators, we 
see  two  different  phases;  first,  until  2007,  a  gradual  convergence  across  countries  of  the 
rates that banks charged for new loans to non-financial corporations. And then, from 2008 
onwards,  a  considerable  reversal  of  that  trend.  Cross-sectional  variation  is  particularly 
pronounced for smaller loans up to €1 million. Of course, higher credit risk in lending to firms 
from some countries in recession explains some of the observed cross-country variation, and 
higher rates on smaller loans may also be an indication of higher risk and of the agency cost 
of monitoring smaller projects. 
Quantity-based indicators point to a relatively slower pace of financial integration in the retail 
banking sector before the crisis. Overall, outstanding cross-border loans to the non-financial 
sector in other euro area countries increased by only a few percentage points over the last 
decade. For sure, the process of financial integration in retail banking – though steady and 
significant – was particularly slow. On the positive side, the reversal of that trend during the 
crisis  has  also  been  more  muted  than  in  other  market  segments.  The  evidence  points 
towards a slow erosion of the earlier slow progress toward financial integration.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 In 2010, at the outset of the sovereign debt crisis, only three relatively small countries were 
strongly  affected.  Later  on,  however,  the  bond  yields  of  larger  countries  also  came  under 
pressure. A stark differentiation across sovereign bond yields is clearly visible from the chart. 
Does  such  stark  differentiation  imply  market  fragmentation,  or  are  markets  merely  pricing 
different  quantities  of  risk?  To  answer  that  question,  it  helps  to  get  a  complementary 
perspective from quantity-based indicators. 
Cross-border holdings of government bonds by euro area monetary and financial institutions, 
as a ratio to their total holdings of securities, have been on a declining trend since 2006. The 
ratio  has  now  returned  to  the  levels  observed  before  the  beginning  of  the  third  stage  of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  reason  for  the  initial  decline  in  2006  in  the  share  of 
government  bond  holdings  was  portfolio  reallocation  to  corporate  bonds  and  probably  to 
international assets as well. The decline later on during the crisis was most likely due to an 
increased  propensity  of  banks  to  hold  domestic  government  bonds.  This  is  problematic, 
because it reflects an increased risk link between the sovereign and the domestic banking 
system. We also see that European investment funds held less European debt as the debt 
crisis intensified. 
The  renationalisation  of  government  bond  holdings  and,  more  generally,  of  safe  financial 
assets  is  also  reflected  in  the  Eurosystem  collateral  that  is  posted  by  the  Eurosystem’s 
counterparties. Counterparties increasingly tend  to post collateral from  their home  country. 
This  creates  the  risk  of  negative  feedback  loops  at  country  level,  with  a  higher  perceived 
credit risk causing a drop in asset valuation and strains in the funding of local banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
   in 
the 
Allow  me  to  summarise  the  discussion  so  far.  We  have  seen  pronounced  financial 
de-integration 
in  cross-border  banking  activity,  and  a 
renationalisation  of  bond  holdings  during  the  crisis.  All  of  these  developments  are 
problematic  from  the  perspective  of  the  Eurosystem,  not  the  least  because  they  exhibit 
strong pro-cyclical features at local level in euro area countries. Once unleashed, financial 
de-integration can be self-reinforcing. If left to its own devices, as we saw in the first half of 
interbank  market, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2012, de-integration can lead to expectations of disintegration – a euro break-up, which the 
ECB had to counteract by announcing the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs). 
There  have  been  signs  of  receding  financial  fragmentation  since  the  summer  of  2012, 
following  the  announcement  of  OMTs,  visible  signs  of  adjustment  in  euro  area  economies 
and government commitments to a stronger euro area governance. This can be seen in a 
number  of  important  market  segments.  The  median  absolute  deviation  of  the  spread 
between the ten-year government bond yield and the corresponding swap spread declined 
by  about  one-third  between  July  2012  and  February  2013.  Euro  area  banks  received  a 
cumulated €164 billion capital inflow from non-euro area investors between August 2012 and 
end-January 2013, in sharp contrast with the €21 billion cumulated outflow between January 
and July 2012. As a rough measure of the fragmentation of bank funding markets across the 
euro  area,  Target2  balances  have  declined  by  about  €200  billion  since  their  peak  in 
mid-2012.  To  give  but  one  example,  the  Target2  balance  of  the  Banco  de  España  has 
declined  by  about  one-quarter  since  August  2012.  On  the  lending  side,  the  dispersion  of 
lending  rates  to  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs)  also  declined,  but  by  considerably  less 
than the dispersion of monetary financial institutions’ (MFI) funding rates. For example, the 
median  absolute  deviation  of  NFC  lending  rates  has  fallen  from  5.6%  in  the  first  seven 
months  of  2012  to  4.4%  since  then.  This  provides  ample  evidence  of  receding  financial 
fragmentation. But there is no room for complacency, as the overall level of fragmentation 
remains high, and the disconnect between the dispersion of MFI funding and lending rates 
reveals a persistent difficulty in monetary policy transmission. 
During the financial crisis, it also became painfully apparent that cross-border capital flows 
are subject to sudden stops, in particular in the interbank market. As soon as counterparty 
risk emerged, banks became reluctant to lend one to another. Sudden stops would not have 
materialised in that extreme way if integration had occurred in different market segments that 
are less sensitive to information and counterparty credit risk.5 In particular, cross-border retail 
banking was relatively limited before the crisis, both in terms of extending credit lines through 
bank  branches,  and  in  terms  of  building  cross-border  bank-client  relationships.  Had  such 
retail  banking  activity  been  more  spread  out,  banks  would  have  found  it  more  difficult  to 
suddenly withdraw funding from jurisdictions under stress. As a consequence, there would 
have been less retrenchment to national jurisdictions, a higher degree of risk sharing during 
times of crisis, and hence a lesser need for the Eurosystem to take an intermediation role. 
The banking union and what it can do for financial integration 
3. 
In the second part of my speech, I would like to assess how to invert the trend of financial de-
integration. I will argue that the banking union will help us move towards an environment of 
more and better financial integration. 
It  is  clear  to  us  that  a  strong  and  independent  supranational  supervisor  will  contribute 
significantly to the smooth functioning of the monetary union and to restoring confidence in 
the  banking  sector.  Regaining  such  confidence,  in  turn,  is  also  key  to  reversing  financial 
fragmentation and restarting fully functioning cross-border markets. 
The main objective of the banking union is to build an integrated framework that safeguards 
financial stability and minimises the cost of bank failures. Indeed, the banking union, together 
with the new regulatory standards, will help to mitigate the financial stability risks which arise 
when markets become more integrated and which the previous regulatory and supervisory 
framework failed to avert in the period leading to the crisis. 
A complete banking union requires four building blocks. 
                                                 
5  See, for example, F. Heider, M. Hoerova, and C. Holthausen (2009), “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market 
spreads: The role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Paper, 1126. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The first building block is the establishment of a single rulebook. Such a single rulebook now 
exists  with  the  agreement  reached  on  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  IV.  The  single 
rulebook  sets  guidelines  for  capital,  liquidity  and  compensation  policies,  and  contributes 
significantly to creating a level playing field for financial institutions across borders. 
Second,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  will  enforce  supervision  consistently 
across the participating Member States. The SSM will be a mechanism composed of national 
competent authorities and the ECB, with the possibility of non-euro area Member States also 
taking part. The process of establishing the SSM is under way, with the Council’s proposal 
forming the basis for the current discussion at the European Parliament. 
A  third  element  of  the  banking  union  will  be  the  establishment  of  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  (SRM)  and  a  Single  Resolution  Authority  (SRA).  The  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism would build on the harmonised resolution framework, as provided for in the draft 
Bank  Resolution  and  Recovery  Directive,  and  on  the  existence  of  a  single  resolution  fund 
financed  by  the  industry.  It  would  enable  prompt  and  coordinated  resolution  action, 
specifically  where  cross-border  banks  are  concerned.  For  there  to  be  a  complete  banking 
union  there  has  to  be  a  credible  fiscal  backstop.  Any  call  on  this  backstop  should  be 
compensated ex post by levies on the financial industry. Indeed, the SRM is not about bailing 
out  banks  with  public  money.  Instead,  it  is  about  minimising  the  use  of  public  money.  A 
credible backstop will be very important in respect of one goal of the banking union project in 
particular: mitigating the negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns. 
Looking further ahead, the fourth element of the banking union should be the establishment 
of  a  common  system  of  deposit  protection.  This  framework  should  enable  the  national 
deposit  guarantee  schemes,  built  on  common  EU  standards,  to  interact  with  the  SRM.  A 
European deposit guarantee will undoubtedly be important in the future to ensure depositor 
confidence in the robustness of all European banks. 
I see at least four main ways in which the European banking union, when fully implemented, 
can support broad and stable financial integration in Europe. 
First, achieving both financial stability and financial market integration may not be possible 
under national financial policies, or at least much more difficult. This is the so-called “financial 
trilemma” of Schoenmaker (2011),6 which states that policy-makers can only choose two out 
of the following three objectives: financial stability, financial integration and national financial 
policies,  such  as  bank supervision  and  resolution.  One  of  these  has  to  give  way.  National 
financial  policies  fail  to  recognise  the  externality  generated  by  cross-border  banks  in 
difficulty.  As  a  result,  they  generate  under-provision  of  supervision,  then  of  capital  for 
troubled  banks  with  a  cross-border  and/or  systemic  component.  In  addition,  national 
supervisors may more easily be subject to regulatory capture. Both facts undermine financial 
stability.  By  setting  the  incentives  correctly,  a  fully-fledged  banking  union  permits  an 
internalisation of this externality, making sure that banks strengthen their capital and liquidity 
on sunny days and can continue to lend on rainy days. 
Second, the Single Supervisory Mechanism can address cross-border externalities typically 
neglected  by  national  supervisors  and  thus  contribute  to  reversing  the  retrenchment  and 
market  fragmentation.  Since  the  start  of  the  sovereign  crisis,  countries  with  sound 
fundamentals  have  been  accumulating  savings  rather  than  channelling  funds  to  countries 
under  stress  through  inter-bank  or  intra-bank  capital  markets.  During  crises,  supervisors 
acting  within  their  national  mandates  may  encourage  domestic  banks  with  subsidiaries 
abroad to repatriate capital and liquidity, if a subsidiary is located in a country under stress. 
Conversely,  they  may  encourage  the  domestic  subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks  not  to  send 
                                                 
6  See D. Schoenmaker (2011), “The Financial Trilemma”, Economic Letters, Vol. 111 (1). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
funds  to  their  parent  banks  located  in  countries  with  high-risk  premia.7  In  the  context  of  a 
strictly national supervisory system, this is rational behaviour, given that the objective of the 
national supervisory authorities is the stability of the domestic financial system. That does not 
mean it is an optimal behaviour, as it is not conducive to the stability of the euro area system 
as  a  whole  and  ignores  the  possibility  of  adverse  feedback  from  instability  elsewhere.  An 
authority  acting  within  a  European  mandate,  however,  would  not  penalise  cross-border 
lending in that way, leading to less financial retrenchment and renationalisation of funding. 
Third, the financial crisis has shown that sovereign credit risk and the health of the financial 
system  are  closely  related.  In  some  countries,  weak  sovereign  finances  have  fed  into  the 
domestic financial system, while in others the reverse has been the case. The introduction of 
a Single Supervisory Mechanism and a Single Resolution Mechanism will help to break this 
deadly embrace. Severing the risk link between the sovereign and its banking system is key 
to  maintaining  financial  integration  in  times  of  crisis,  to  limiting  pro-cyclicality  and  to 
counteracting the re-nationalisation of bond holdings. 
Fourth, large banks that grow bigger and expand across borders could also be inclined to 
take  on  more  risk,  due  to  the  moral  hazard  ensuing  from  the  “too-big-to-fail”  issue.  The 
possibility of being resolved – which may not be perceived as credible at national level, but 
which may be possible at supranational level within the SRM – would contribute to containing 
such  moral  hazard,  and  hence  in  addition  decrease  the  risk  of  an  adverse  loop  between 
sovereign debt and the banking system. Together with the special treatment of systemically 
important  financial  institutions  in  the  new  regulatory  framework,  the  Single  Resolution 
Authority  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  are  therefore  important  when  it  comes  to 
containing  the  contagion  risk  and  systemic  risk  that  naturally  increases  within  a  more 
integrated banking system. 
Finally,  further  development  of  cross-border  retail  lending  prompted  by  the  banking  union 
would  reduce  vulnerability  to  sudden  stops  in  wholesale  funding  markets.  The  creation  of 
truly pan-European banks should be driven by business decisions, but it will be encouraged 
by the establishment of the single rulebook and of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, and 
later  on,  of  a  common  system  of  deposit  protection.  It  should  then  be  accepted  that  the 
location  of  banking  activities  within  the  euro  area  will  be  determined  only  on  the  basis  of 
efficiency arguments, not of industrial policy. Then, and only then, will the link between banks 
and sovereigns be irreversibly severed. 
The need for a balanced financing mix 
4. 
My remarks have so far addressed the re-integration of bank lending flows. While re-starting 
integrated  inter-bank  and  intra-bank  capital  markets  is  clearly  indispensable,  significant 
financial  intermediation  does  not  occur  through  traditional  financial  institutions.  The  role  of 
arm’s length finance, i.e. intermediation through financial markets, is not to be neglected, and 
the integration of the respective markets matters. Let me give two examples. 
First,  a  more  integrated  European  market  for  corporate  bonds  may  help  firms  to  raise 
financing when banks are in deleveraging mode. Indeed, recent evidence from the euro area 
and  the  US  suggests  that  corporate  bond  financing  was  an  important  substitute  for  bank 
financing during the financial crisis, when banks were unwilling or unable to lend,8 but such 
substitution  has  not  been  operating  uniformly  in  all  countries.  The  development  and 
                                                 
7  See D. Gros (2012), “The Single European Market in banking in decline – ECB to the rescue?”, in Banking 
union for Europe: Risk and Challenges, VoxEU.org, 12 April 2012. 
8  See  F.  De  Fiore  and  H.  Uhlig  (2011),  “Bank  finance  versus  bond  finance”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and 
Banking,  43(7),  1399–1421,  and  Adrian,  Colla,  and  Shin  (2012),  “Which  financial  frictions?  Parsing  the 
evidence of the financial crisis of 2007–09”, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
interconnection  of  European  corporate  bond  markets  is  particularly  beneficial  from  this 
perspective. 
Second, equity financing across borders, such as FDI flows and equity portfolio investment, 
is  generally  considered  to  be,  relatively  speaking,  a  more  stable  source  of  financing.9  The 
experience  of  the  crisis  has  cast  serious  doubt  on  the  role  of  debt  as  a  solution  to  moral 
hazard. The value of equity is sensitive to the underlying quality of assets, whereas debt is 
only  sensitive  to  the  risk  of  bankruptcy.  Equity  holders  balance  upside  and  downside  risk 
equally and equity can therefore be fairly priced even in an environment where little is known 
about  the  risk  of  firms,10  and  where  company  risk  and  country  risk  prove  difficult  to 
disentangle. In addition, cross-border flows of short-term debt are not always conducive to 
efficient  risk  sharing  and  have  a  greater  destabilising  potential  than  equity  flows.11  Finally, 
given the critical need to elevate their growth potential, euro area countries crucially need to 
promote innovation and the entry of new participants into markets, which can be supported 
by  financial  instruments  such  as  venture  capital.12  A  more  integrated  market  for  equity 
financing would support rebalancing and growth in euro area economies. 
What I am suggesting is not that Europe should abandon its intermediated model of financing 
but that it complements it more – in the context of a structural deleveraging of the banking 
system  –  with  alternative  sources  of  finance.  The  financing  of  SMEs,  which  will  be  at  the 
heart of Europe’s effort to increase its productivity, because they are a source of innovation, 
can be usefully supported by a more vibrant securitisation market. Still, SME financing will 
continue to crucially rely on bank lending. Europe needs a healthy, competitive and prudent 
banking  sector.  Therefore,  banks  should  continue  to  adjust  their  balance  sheets  and 
strengthen  their  capital  to  recreate  a  capacity  to  take  risk  and  lend  to  companies  and 
households,  within  and  beyond  national  borders.  Removing  credit  risk  from  the  banks’ 
balance  sheet,  as  was  done  at  an  early  stage  in  the  US,  can  speed  up  this  process  – 
provided that governments are willing and able to take this risk, individually or jointly. 
Let me raise a final point. A better quality of financial integration would also mean providing a 
framework in which cross-border capital flows go towards their most productive uses. This 
has not always been the case in the euro area. Since the introduction of the euro, we have 
seen  euro  area  capital  flows  go  from  “healthier”  (core)  countries  to  “weaker”  (or  poorer, 
peripheral) countries. This is superficially in line with what economic theory would suggest: 
capital flows go from richer to poorer countries, where it earns a higher return owing to lower 
levels  of capital  per  worker.  Indeed,  capital  was  flowing  “downhill”,  and  there  is  no  “Lucas 
paradox” in the euro area as there is in the global economy.13 However, in many instances, 
capital flows went into the very inappropriate sectors, fuelling asset or housing price bubbles 
instead  of  going  to  more  productive  uses.  It  is  my  hope,  at  least,  that  improved  financial 
supervision,  in  particular  supervision  with  a  macro-prudential  and  systemic  focus,  together 
                                                 
9  See  Hausmann,  R.,  and  E.  Fernández-Arias  (2001),  “Foreign  Direct  Investment:  Good  Cholesterol?”,  in 
“Foreign  Direct  Investments  versus  other  flows  to  Latin  America”,  edited  by  de  Macedo,  J.  B.,  and 
E. V. Iglesias. 
10  See N. Halov and F. Heider (2011), “Capital Structure, Risk, and Asymmetric Information”, Quarterly Journal 
of Finance, 1, 767–809. 
11  See Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform (2012). “Banks and Cross-border Capital Flows: 
Policy  Challenges  and  Regulatory  Responses”,  published  online  at  http://www.brookings.edu/research/ 
reports/2012/09/ciepr-banks-capital-flows. 
12  See A. Popov, “Does private equity investment spur innovation? Evidence from Europe”, ECB Working Paper, 
1063,  and  “On  the  real  effects  of  private  equity  investment:  Evidence  from  new  business  creation”,  ECB 
Working Paper, 1078. 
13  See R. Lucas (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”, American Economic Review, 
80,  92–96,  and  P.O.  Gourinchas  and  O.  Jeanne  (2007),  “Capital  Flows  to  Developing  Countries:  The 
Allocation Puzzle”, NBER Working Paper, 13602. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
with  a  stringent  enforcement  of  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure,14  can  help  to 
alleviate such cross-border misallocations in the future. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Let me conclude. Although still preliminary, the recent signs of financial re-integration across 
several  financial  market  segments  have  the  potential  to  be  self-reinforcing  and  unleash 
virtuous dynamics. The creation of a fully-fledged banking union can set incentives for more 
and  better  financial  integration,  in  a  way  that  will  make  the  euro  area  banking  sector  less 
vulnerable  to  fragmentation  along  national  borders  and  reduce  pro-cyclicality  in  euro  area 
economies. On top of being conducive to a more stable financial system, it will thereby be 
conducive to a more efficient allocation of resources. For once, there is no trade-off between 
efficiency and stability.  
                                                 
14  See  online:  European  Commission  >  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs  >  EU  economic  governance  > 
Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
