Jwala Rambarran: Improving financial consumer protection 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and 
Tobago,  at  the  2013  Annual  Breakfast  Meeting  of  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman 
(OFSO), Port of Spain, 26 April 2013. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen, On  behalf  of  the  Central  Bank, I  extend  a  sincere  welcome  to  the 
tenth Annual Breakfast Meeting of the Office of Financial Services Ombudsman (OFSO). The 
OFSO’s  tenth  anniversary  celebration  comes  at  a  time  when  the  global  financial  crisis 
highlighted the significant risks that weak financial consumer protection poses to stability of 
the world’s financial system. The consumer as depositor, policyholder, saver and borrower is 
the central actor in the financial marketplace. Worldwide, some 150 million new consumers 
join the financial market each year. Yet, ironically, the consumer’s voice is often the weakest 
and, very often, is not heard. For this reason, the international community has increased its 
focus  on  how  to  better  protect financial  consumers. The  G20  has  adopted  nine  High-level 
Principles for Financial Consumer Protection. Of immediate relevance to the Ombudsman’s 
Office  is  Principle  9,  which  speaks  to  consumers  having  access  to  adequate  complaints 
handling  and  redress  mechanisms  that  are  accessible,  affordable,  independent,  fair, 
accountable, timely and efficient. 
The World  Bank  has  also  released  its  Good  Practices  for  Financial  Consumer  Protection. 
The  Good  Practices  are  intended  to  be  used  primarily  as  a  diagnostic  tool  to  answer  the 
question,  “How  does  a  country’s  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for  financial  consumer 
protection compare to international practice?” Our own recent financial turmoil arising from 
the  failure  of  CLICO,  CLICO  Investment  Bank  and  the  Hindu  Credit  Union  suggests  that 
financial consumer protection, financial literacy and financial education are key priorities for 
regulators. As many of you are aware, tin is the traditional gift of the tenth anniversary. Many 
explanations  abound  as  to  why  tin  was  chosen  as  the  gift  for  the  tenth  anniversary.  One 
explanation is that the flexibility of tin represents the flexibility of a good relationship, the give 
and  take  that makes  a  relationship  strong.  Another  explanation  relates  to  the  use  of  tin to 
stop  corrosion  and  thus  keep  food  safe.  In  this  meaning,  tin  symbolizes  preservation  and 
longevity. Whatever the meaning, it is clear that the Ombudsman’s Office has demonstrated 
the good qualities associated with tin and can claim many successes over its ten years of 
operation. Some of these achievements are as follows: 
• 
The OFSO remains the only financial ombudsman scheme in the Caribbean and is a 
respected member of the International Network of Financial Services Ombudsman 
Schemes. 
Of  the  230  banking  complaints  which  qualified  for  review  under  its  Terms  of 
Reference,  the  OFSO  resolved  an  impressive  98  per  cent  over  the  period  2003–
2012. More than 45 per cent of these complaints, which were directed toward issues 
related  to  accounts  transactions,  card  services  and  loans  and  credit,  were  settled 
within 90 days; 
Of  the  2,076  insurance  complaints  which  qualified  for  review  under  its  terms  of 
reference, the OFSO resolved an equally impressive 97 per cent over 2005–2012. 
At  least  two-thirds  of  these  complaints,  mainly  relating  to  undue  delay  in  settling 
claims, inadequate settlement and denial of claims, were settled within 90 days; 
Creation of the Ombudsman’s Office has catalyzed banks and insurance companies 
into  strengthening  their  own  internal  dispute  resolution  mechanisms  to  better 
address customers’ complaints. More than one-quarter of the complaints handled by 
banks  were  resolved  by  agreement  between  the  two  parties.  In  the  case  of 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
insurance  companies,  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  complaints  were  resolved  by 
agreement between the insurers and clients. 
The OFSO has, therefore, earned the right to begin the transition to a more prominent role in 
the country’s financial architecture. 
Against this background, the Central Bank and the OFSO commissioned Mr. David Thomas, 
who  served  as  Chairman  of  the  International  Network  of  Financial  Services  Ombudsman 
Schemes and was the Chief Ombudsman of the Financial Ombudsman Service in the United 
Kingdom,  to  prepare  a  report  on  upgrading  the  existing  regime  of  financial  consumer 
protection in line with international best practice. We have received the Draft Report entitled 
“Financial Services Ombudsman in Trinidad and Tobago: A Strategy for the Future.” 
The study highlights several issues which we need to take into account in crafting a financial 
ombudsman  scheme  that  complies  with  the  fundamental  principles  of  independence, 
fairness,  clarity  of  scope  and  powers,  effectiveness  and  efficiency,  and  accessibility, 
transparency and accountability. Please allow me to elaborate on what I consider to be some 
of the critical design issues, going forward. 
Perhaps the first and most critical design issue relates to changing the voluntary nature of 
the Financial Services Ombudsman regime to one under-pinned by legislative authority. The 
voluntary nature of the Ombudsman scheme has restricted the jurisdiction of the Office to a 
narrow list of complaints to which banks and insurance companies have agreed. In thinking 
about  the  statutory  backing  for  the  Ombudsman’s  Office,  it  may  be  necessary  to  have  a 
flexible  legal  framework  where  the  foundations  are  enshrined  in  law,  but  scope  and 
operational  arrangements  are  set  in  regulations.  Independent  governance  is  a  second, 
critical  design  issue.  Ideally,  the  Office  of  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  should  be 
independent of consumers and of the financial services industry, whose disputes are being 
handled.  In  deciding  cases,  the  Ombudsman  also  needs  to  be  independent  of the  Central 
Bank, because the Ombudsman is acting as an alternative to the courts. So it is helpful for 
the  Ombudsman  Office  to  have  an  independent  board,  with  a  balanced  membership 
reflecting persons with an understanding of regulation, the financial industry and consumer 
protection.  A  third  design  issue  revolves  around  the  coverage  of  financial  businesses.  A 
significant  number  of  complaints  received  by  the  Ombudsman  are  outside  its  Terms  of 
Reference.  The  Office  received  409  banking  complaints  which  were  outside  its  Terms  of 
Reference  in  2003–2012,  179  more  than  the  qualified  banking  complaints  it  received  for 
review. In 2011–2012, the Office received 1,173 enquiries regarding complaints outside the 
banking and insurance sectors. 
Many  complaints  which  fall  outside  the  Ombudsman’s  Terms  of  Reference  relate  to  bank 
fees  and  pricing  of  bank  products  and  services,  lapsed  insurance  policies,  insurance 
premium charged, personal injury for motor vehicle accidents, credit union shares and loans, 
and  general  pain  and  suffering.  Expanding  the  Ombudsman’s  mandate  to  include  credit 
unions, the Unit Trust Corporation, pension schemes and mutual funds would go a long way 
in strengthening the credibility of the scheme. Finally, in order to deliver on this expanded 
mandate the OFSO would need to be better resourced with the skill sets and talent as its 
jurisdiction  and  workload  grows.  The  staff  complement  in  the  Ombudsman’s  Office  are 
currently  seconded  from,  or  approved  by,  the  Central  Bank.  Once  a  statutory  Financial 
Services  Ombudsman  is  established  the  Ombudsman  would  appoint  the  staff  who  would 
work for the Scheme and not be seconded from the Central Bank. The Central Bank and the 
OFSO will be reviewing the Draft Report. Once finalized and accepted, the Final Report will 
form the basis for a Proposed Policy Document (PPD) on upgrading the regime of financial 
consumer  protection.  The  PPD  will  serve  as  the  starting  point  for  initial  discussions  and 
consultations  with  key  stakeholders  in  the  financial  services  industry.  Subsequently,  a 
revised PPD will be used to finalize the various policy provisions of draft legislation relating to 
a  statutory  Financial  Services  Ombudsman. We  anticipate  the  entire  process  to  run  for  at 
least one year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to conclude by congratulating Ms. Suzanne Roach, the 
current  Financial  Services  Ombudsman,  her  predecessors,  and  their  respective  staff,  for 
shaping a formidable institution over the past decade. I would also like to thank BATT, ATTIC 
and the THA for their unstinting support for the Ombudsman scheme. I certainly look forward 
to the Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman assuming a more prominent role in the 
country’s financial strategy over the next decade. I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
