Yves Mersch: Opening of the “New Face of the Euro” exhibition 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  opening  of  the  “New  Face  of  the  Euro”  exhibition,  Bank  of  Spain, 
Madrid, 25 March 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
On  behalf  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  I  would  like  to  warmly  welcome  you  to  today’s 
event  and  thank  you  for  having  accepted  our  invitation.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  thank 
Mr Restoy for his kind words. I am very pleased that you have offered to host the “New Face 
of the Euro” exhibition in the Sala Chaflán of the Banco de España. 
The exhibition focuses on the new series of euro banknotes. They will start to appear in May 
this year. Then the new €5 banknote enters into circulation. The hologram and watermark of 
this note show a portrait of a woman from the classical world. But it’s not Cybele, who you 
can see just outside this building. I realise the madrileños among you could be disappointed. 
It’s  Europa,  a  figure  from  Greek  mythology.  And  that’s  why  the  new  series  is  called  the 
Europa series.  
But the exhibition covers more than that. It’s a chance to learn about the money we have all 
been using for more than a decade now. A whole generation is growing up that has known 
no other currency. So younger visitors to the exhibition might be curious to see the peseta 
and the other currencies on display here that perhaps their parents have told them about. 
And they will surely enjoy the kids’ corner, which offers a more playful way to learn about the 
euro. 
The banknote denominations – from €5 to €500 – show examples of buildings and bridges in 
different  architectural  styles  down  the  ages.  They  aim  to  highlight  the  common  cultural 
heritage of Europe. And the new notes with the new element seek to strengthen that sense 
of belonging and commitment to Europe. 
One of the main tasks of the central banks in the euro area is to ensure the integrity of euro 
banknotes.  This  means  we  have  to  steadily  develop  the  notes  to  stay  ahead  of 
counterfeiters. So the Europa series has some new and enhanced security features. They 
will be even more difficult to counterfeit.  
Over  a  period  of  several  years,  the  Europa  series  will  gradually  replace  the  first  series  of 
euro banknotes. These new notes will be just as easy to recognise and to check.  
Our single currency is a key step within the on-going process of European integration. The 
euro banknotes have become the most visible symbol of that process. The euro has become 
moreover a symbol of solidarity in times of crisis, with the euro area assisting countries that 
have  to  go  through  tough  but  necessary  adjustments.  With  the  support  of  their  European 
partners the Spanish authorities have been decisive in embarking on a financial adjustment 
programme  that  has  helped  to  clean  the  balance  sheets  of  the  weakest  banks  and 
recapitalised them with fresh funds. This has laid the foundations for a revival of the flow of 
credit to the real economy. Allow me a personal remark, that I have the greatest respect for 
the Spanish people who are experiencing hard times but are sticking to their commitments 
and responsibilities.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I sincerely hope that you will enjoy visiting the New Face of the Euro 
Exhibition. Without further ado, it is a pleasure for me to declare the exhibition open. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
