Sabine Lautenschläger: European Monetary and Financial Union – what 
is needed in terms of banking supervision? 
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
symposium  on  “Central  banking  –  Where  are  we  headed?”,  in  honor  of  Stefan  Gerlach’s 
contributions  to  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  (IMFS),  organized  by  the 
IMFS and the House of Finance, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 7 February 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
We come together today to honour Professor Stefan Gerlach’s contribution to the Institute for 
Monetary  and  Financial  Stability.  Stefan  has  certainly  proven  time  and  again  to  be  an 
outstanding scholar who is able to connect theoretical considerations with the requirements 
of reality. And reality is what is needed, especially in times of stress like these. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  crisis  we  are  experiencing  is  without  doubt  the  most  extensive 
and worst economic crisis of recent decades. I would not miss it at all; but as we have to 
endure it, we should all look to fulfil the original meaning of the word “crisis”, which is “turning 
point”. And to reach this turning point in the positive sense of the term, we need to seize the 
opportunity and use the lessons learnt to make the financial system and the monetary union 
more resilient. 
With regard to the banks as one important part of the financial system, we have made some 
important progress so far. Banks have to comply with higher capital and liquidity standards; 
the  requirements  for  adequate  internal  control  systems  and  an  appropriate  governance 
structure have also been tightened substantially. Furthermore, the requirements to be met by 
supervisors have changed significantly, too. 
The fiscal and economic state of affairs of the EMU’s member states is improving as well. To 
achieve further progress at the national level, governments need to adhere to their decisions 
to increase investor confidence and economic competitiveness with fiscal consolidation and 
structural reforms. 
And  we  have  seen  some  progress  regarding  the  architecture  of  Europe’s  financial 
supervisory system – even if one might ask whether it is sufficient with respect to the risks 
and liabilities increasingly shared at the European level. National governments seem to have 
no great wish to give up major parts of their sovereignty, with one exception in my view. Over 
recent months,  the  European  governments  have  agreed  on  a  European  banking  union  or, 
more specifically, a banking supervisory set-up at European level. 
The Bundesbank welcomes the proposal. It has the potential to improve banking supervision 
and to help strengthen financial stability and the institutional framework of monetary union. I 
would like to focus on this “Single Supervisory Mechanism” in my speech and talk about the 
“why” and the “how” of such a European banking supervisory set-up. 
European banking supervision – the “why” 
2.  
European banks are financially interconnected to a marked degree. Thus, national banking 
crises  do  not  stop  at  national  borders  but  tend  to  spread  across  countries.  From  this 
perspective, a Single Supervisory  Mechanism is a natural response. Compared to national 
supervision it would operate on the basis of more comprehensive information and with the 
benefit of cross-border comparison. Thus, it would enable us to pinpoint risks which threaten 
the banking system or emanate from it more easily and at an earlier stage. Furthermore it 
would lessen the risks national supervisors are exposed to: sometimes national supervisors 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
are too set in the ways of their supervisory systems and run the risk of being overprotective 
towards banks for national reasons. 
In  terms  of  the  current  crisis,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  might  also  be  a  way  of 
resolving  one  problem  that  has  become  apparent:  the  close  link  between  banks  and 
sovereigns. 
If  a  lot  of  banks get  into  trouble  at  the  same time,  possibly  owing  to  a  large  asset  bubble 
bursting,  financial  stability  as  a  whole  is  threatened.  The  government  then  often  has  no 
option but to step in if it wants to prevent a complete meltdown. But, as we all know, such a 
rescue can place a huge burden on public finances. From a more general perspective, this 
point is backed up by an empirical study brought out by Professor Gerlach in 2010, which 
shows  that  risks  in  the  banking  sector  indeed  translate  into  higher  spreads  for  sovereign 
debt.1 
But banking crises do not only place a burden on public finances. Conversely, weak public 
finances  can  destabilise  banks  –  directly  through  their  exposure  to  sovereign  bonds  or 
indirectly through worsening macroeconomic conditions. 
What  are  the  implications  of  these  insights?  It  follows  from  them  that  loosening  the  links 
between banks and sovereigns is vital if the euro area is to be made more stable. 
But how do we get there? 
First, pinpointing excessive risk concentrations is essential. A European banking supervisor 
can weaken the nexus between sovereigns and banks by monitoring and putting a brake on 
the  build-up  of  excessive  risks,  whether  in  specific  economic  sectors  or  in  government 
financing – even if this can only be done in medium term. 
Second, in order to insulate banks from weak public finances, we need not only appropriate 
supervision  but  also  suitable  regulation;  regulation  that  will  prevent  banks  from  taking  on 
excessive  risk  through  state  financing.  Such  regulation  should,  for  instance,  include  upper 
limits for lending to governments. It should also encompass appropriate capital backing for 
government bonds – which is another proposal made by Stefan Gerlach, incidentally. 
But  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  suitable  regulation  are  just  two  elements  of  a 
banking  union,  and  there  are  also  other  means  available  for  severing  the  link  between 
sovereigns and banks. The third tool in this respect is a European recovery and resolution 
mechanism for banks that has access to “European” funds. In this context, it is necessary 
that  any  such  mechanism  ensure  that  investors  are  first  in  line  to  bear  the  risk  of  their 
investment  decision.  Taxpayers  must  be  spared  the  burden  of  other  people’s  investment 
decisions – at the national level and even more so at the European level – for as long as 
there is no proper balance between liability and control. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have very briefly highlighted a few arguments in favour of European 
banking supervision – the “why”, so to speak. Now, let us take a look at the “how”. 
European banking supervision – the “how” 
3. 
The  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  see  wide-ranging  banking 
supervisory functions being transferred to the ECB. At least seventeen countries will give up 
their sovereignty in supervisory matters to the ECB; the ECB will be directly responsible for 
the supervision of the most systemically important banks domestically and at European level. 
Nevertheless,  national  legal  systems  and  national  market  structures  will  still  be  of  utmost 
importance  for  the  welfare  and  success  of  these  banks.  Given  the  multitude  of  different 
                                                
1   S  Gerlach,  A  Schulz,  G Wolff  (2010),  Banking  and  Sovereign  Risk  in  the  Euro  Area.  Centre  for  Economic 
Policy Research, Discussion Paper, No 7833. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
supervisory traditions, legal systems and people involved in supervision, the SSM will only be 
successful  if  appropriate  governance  and  transparent  cooperation  and  task-sharing  are 
installed. 
One of the “hot” topics when swiftly organising a banking supervisory function for the ECB is 
future  cooperation  between  the  ECB  and  the  national  supervisors. Organising  a  European 
banking  supervisory  mechanism  in  such  a  short  time  firstly  means  building  upon  existing 
structures. Secondly, supervision  will only be successful if the ECB is able to benefit from 
cross-border  comparisons,  taking  into  account  the  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic 
knowledge  and  experience  of  national  central  banks.  Even  if  interconnectedness  between 
banks was and still is one of the major issues of the last five years, a crisis usually originates 
in national developments. Remember the US subprime real estate market and its effects on 
globally active banks. Thus, it will be essential to combine the knowledge of global, national 
and  regional  economic  conditions,  infrastructure  and  legal  systems  with  knowledge  about 
banks’  business  and  risk  profiles,  governance  structures  and  control  systems.  In  short, 
setting up a new European supervisor within a year or so is extremely ambitious, but doable. 
However,  with  regard  to  the  governance  structure,  there  is  a  problem  that  cannot  be  fully 
resolved under the current framework – the strict separation of monetary policy from banking 
supervision within the ECB. Such a separation is not possible without amending the ECB’s 
institutional framework as enshrined in primary law – a step that has been carefully avoided 
so far. 
With  the  goal  of  strictly  separated  functions  in  mind,  the  current  proposal  establishes  two 
new bodies within the ECB: first, a Supervisory Board with representatives from the ECB and 
from national authorities; second, a mediation panel which includes one member from each 
country that participates in the Single Supervisory Mechanism. Now, what are the tasks of 
these two bodies? 
The  Supervisory  Board  submits  proposals  for  supervisory  decisions  to  the  Governing 
Council. The Governing Council, in turn, can only agree or disagree, but will not be able to 
amend  these  proposals.  If  the  Governing  Council  disagrees,  it  will  be  up  to  the  mediation 
panel to resolve differences of opinion. The panel will decide by simple majority whether to 
accept the proposal in its original form or not. 
And in order to actually separate the two functions, it would be imperative for the Supervisory 
Board to have the final say in all supervisory decisions. However, under prevailing primary 
law,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  must  have  and  will  have  the  last  word  on  banking 
supervisory decisions. 
There are additional problems I would like to focus on: because of prevailing primary law it is 
at  least  a  questionable  idea  for  the  Governing  Council  to  be  able  only  to  accept  or  reject 
decision-making  proposals  from  the  Supervisory  Board,  but  to  be  unable  to  influence  the 
proposals.  If  the  Governing  Council,  consisting  of  the  ECB  board  members  and  the 
governors of the EMU central banks, is responsible for supervisory actions, it also has to be 
in a position to shape the measures being taken. 
Additionally, the independence of the ECB and its Governing Council would be restricted if it 
were obliged to regard the decision of the mediation panel as binding. 
The  problems  I  have  just  set  out  highlight  the  crucial  importance  of  a  principle  which  the 
founders of the Eurosystem were keen to safeguard: the independence of the ECB, and of its 
governors. If the governments decide to mandate the ECB with additional tasks, this basic 
principle still applies, as long as the treaty is not changed. Thus, if the ECB is mandated with 
banking  supervision,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  will  be  the  one  deciding  on  all 
relevant supervisory matters, as long as there are no changes in primary law. This implies 
that – following a common principle of reason – those responsible for a decision need to be 
able to shape that decision. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Conclusion 
4. 
Let me sum up my main points. The Single Supervisory Mechanism is a good step forward 
towards improving the European institutional framework. There is no doubt about that. 
However, the envisaged institutional set-up needs to take into account a basic feature of the 
Eurosystem – the independence of the ECB and of the members of the Governing Council. 
Hence I am not only looking forward to working with my supervisory colleagues within the 
SSM, but also to reading the final regulation governing the new system. Thank you for your 
attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
