Jörg Asmussen: Intervention in a panel on “The future of Europe” 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the IIF (Institute of International Finance) 2013 Spring Membership Meeting, Paris, 
26 June 2013. 
 Mr Prot, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak on this panel. 
As  the  central  bank  of  the  euro  area,  Banking  Union  is  of  key  concern  to  the  ECB.  It  is 
essential  to  increase  confidence  in  the  euro  area  banking  sector,  to  reintegrate  financial 
markets, and to improve the transmission of our monetary policy. It is therefore among the 
most important issues for the euro area today. 
While  Banking  Union  comprises  a  number  of  regulatory  and  legislative  initiatives,  at  the 
moment there are two key priorities. 
First, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
Second,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  operating  under  the  legal  framework 
established by the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). 
A  common  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  while  important,  is  something  more  for  the  longer-
term. 
Let me say a few words on each of these elements, and how they fit together. 
Starting with the SSM, we expect the Regulation to be approved by the European Parliament 
in September and for the ECB to take over supervisory responsibilities one year thereafter. 
In the meantime, preparatory work is underway involving close cooperation between the ECB 
and the national authorities that are competent for supervision. The work includes mapping 
the  euro  area  banking  system,  developing  the  supervisory  model  and,  perhaps  most 
topically, preparing the comprehensive assessment of all banks that will come under direct 
ECB  supervision.  This  is  required  by  the  Regulation  and  will  apply  to  around  130  to 
140 banking groups operating in the euro area. 
The assessment will involve an Asset Quality Review and Balance Sheet Assessment to be 
conducted by the ECB in the first quarter of 2014. This will then feed into the overall stress 
test to be conducted by EBA, in cooperation with the ECB, in the second quarter of 2014. 
Our  objective  is  for  the  SSM  to  start  with  a  clean  slate  and  to  restore  credibility  in  the 
European  banking  sector  after  two  previous  stress  tests  failed  to  do  so.  We  are  therefore 
aiming for the assessment to be as rigorous as possible. 
It  is  clear  that  the  results  of  the  Asset  Quality  Review  and  stress  test  may  require 
recapitalisation or other means of support for weak banks. If banks cannot raise new capital 
themselves, the fiscal backstops which can be tapped if needed will be national budgets and 
the existing ESM facilities. Direct bank recapitalisation via the ESM will – with the exception 
of very rare and unlikely cases – only be available once the SSM is fully operational.  
However, building the SSM’s credibility requires more than just transparency on banks’ asset 
quality.  Markets  also  need  to  be  confident  that,  in  the  future,  the  supervisor  can  “pull  the 
trigger” on banks that are failing or likely to fail. This means that there must be a mechanism 
that can wind down banks without causing financial instability. And this is why the SRM is 
also an essential element of Banking Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In our view, the SRM should comprise of a European resolution authority backed by a single 
resolution fund. The rationale for this mainly concerns dealing with large, cross-border banks. 
For resolving these institutions, a central authority that can make swift, impartial decisions is 
key.  Moreover,  we  need  shared  resources  at  the  European  level  to  avoid  protracted 
wrangling between national governments on how to share the costs of resolution.  
These resources, however, would not come from the taxpayer. The resolution fund would be 
financed provided by ex ante risk-based levies on the banking sector. In the build-up phase, 
any  public  support  would  be  recouped  by  additional  ex  post  levies  on  banks.  This  is 
consistent  with  the  emerging  consensus  in  Europe,  also  reflected  in  the  BRRD,  that  the 
financial sector itself should pay for the cost of crises. 
Indeed, when the relevant provisions of the BRRD enter into force, bail-in will be used as the 
primary  tool  to  recapitalise  banks  falling  below  minimum  supervisory  levels.  It  is  therefore 
important that we agree on an approach to bail-in that allows some but limited flexibility to 
ensure financial stability, while still providing an ex ante pecking order and clear rules. Global 
investors need certainty about the rules of the game in Europe. 
As regards the date when the BRRD will enter into force, I believe that starting as early as 
2015 will provide more clarity and legal certainty for investors than delaying the new regime 
until 2018. And since market participants will most likely anticipate the new rules even if the 
later date is chosen, we may as well aim at 2015 for the BRRD to enter into force. 
Why is a common deposit guarantee scheme not also on the agenda? The reason is that a 
strong resolution framework lessens the need for it, at least for the medium-term. 
Under BRRD, banks will have to maintain a minimum level of liabilities that are eligible to be 
bailed-in, meaning shareholders and creditors will absorb the majority of losses. Moreover, it 
seems very likely that BRRD will contain a depositor preference rule, with insured deposits 
given  the  highest  priority.  This  means  that  only  in  extreme  cases  will  deposit  guarantee 
schemes have to pay out. National arrangements, harmonised under the Deposit Guarantee 
Scheme Directive, should therefore be sufficient. 
Taken together, these two elements – the SSM and the SRM – form a robust foundation for 
Banking Union. It is essential that we make progress on each in parallel. 
Thank you. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
