Anselmo Teng: Brief overview of Macao’s economy in 2012 
Speech by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the Macau 
Association of Banks (ABM) Spring Festival Luncheon Gathering, Macao, 26 February 2013. 
 The Honourable Mr. Tam Pak Yuen, Secretary for Economy and Finance, MSAR, 
The  Honourable  Ms.  Gao  Yan,  Deputy  Director,  Liaison  Office  of  the  Central  People’s 
Government, 
The Honourable Mr. Ye Yixin, Chairman of the Macao Association of Banks, 
Honourable Friends of the Banking Sector, 
Honourable Guests, 
In the Chinese tradition, the New Year carries a special connotation; fire crackers bid farewell 
to the past year while the old couplets are replaced to greet new things. We see the Year of 
the Dragon off and greet the new Year of the Snake. On behalf of AMCM, I would like to take 
this  opportunity  of  greeting  the  new  Year  of  the  Snake,  to  wish  the  MSAR  a  harmonious 
community,  prosperous  business.  Moreover,  thriving  business  opportunities  will  fall  on  the 
banking  sector  and  our  practitioners  will  elevate  to  a  higher  level  in  their  ladder  of  career 
advancement. 
In  the  past  year,  although  adversely  affected  by  outside  environmental  factors,  the  overall 
economy of Macao has scored flying colours again under the cooperation of all sectors of the 
community. The banking sector has exhibited stable development, another record has been 
created.  It  has  never  been  better.  According  to  initial  statistics  available:  as  at  the  end  of 
December 2012, total assets of the banking system stood at MOP796.2 billion, a year-on-
year increase of 21%; total deposits amounted to MOP554.2 billion, a year-on-year increase 
of 32.7%; total loans outstanding were valued at MOP407 billion, a year-on-year increase of 
26.2%. Although bank assets never cease to grow, the quality of assets has remained fine, 
non-performing  loan  ratio  was  only  0.19%  while  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  (CAR)  stood  at 
14.6%, basically tier one core capital. Liquidity ratio was maintained at a rather high level. 
For 2012 as a whole, total profits of the banking system amounted to MOP5.7 billion, a year-
on-year increase of 25%. 
The recent trend shows that the international financial situation is displaying clearer signs of 
recovery.  It  is  however  noted  that  there  are  still  hidden  external  uncertainties.  We  should 
continue  to  pay  attention,  stay  vigilant  and  exercise  our  prudence.  We  should  be  well 
prepared  to  take  on  the  risks  and  adverse  effects  arising  from  external  environmental 
changes. They may inflict harms on our economy and financial system. 
As the financial regulator, AMCM keeps supervising banks operating in the MSAR so as to 
maintain security and stability of the Macao financial system. All along, our supervisory work 
has had the support and coordination of friends of the sector. As such, 
I  duly  represent  AMCM  to  express  our  candid  appreciation  to  our  practitioners  for  their 
support and cooperation and their incessant endeavour in maintaining the financial stability 
and healthy development of Macao. 
Looking  forward,  AMCM  will  implement  its  duty  in  accordance  with  the  legislations  to 
maintain  the  stability  and  security  of  the  system,  continue  to  enhance  the  financial 
regulations to cope with the needs of market development and alignment with international 
supervisory requirements. On the other hand, it will prompt the industry to further develop by 
actuating  its  practitioners.  It  will  actively  participate  in  regional  financial  cooperation, 
particularly the deepening Guangdong-Macao financial cooperation, with a view to exploring 
wider  business  scope  and  higher  innovative  vision.  In  this  way,  we  can  further  exploit  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
special  features  and  competitive  edges  to  realize  our  own  growth  and  development  while 
contributing  to  the  continued  stability  and  prosperity  of  the  Macao  financial  sector  and 
promote appropriate diversification of the economy of Macao. 
Again, I duly represent AMCM to wish you progress in the Year of the Snake, good health, 
prosperous business and happy family. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
