Mario Draghi: The euro, monetary policy and reforms 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  receiving  an 
honorary  degree  in  political  science,  LUISS  (Libera  Università  Internazionale  degli  Studi 
Sociali) “Guido Carli” University, Rome, 6 May 2013. 
 My first grateful and fond mention goes to Guido Carli. My gratitude goes to the university 
that  bears  his  name,  to  its  Rector,  Professor  Massimo  Egidi,  to  its  Senatus  Academicus, 
which has honoured me with this title, and to Professor Messori for his kind words, as well as 
to the entire academic body of this university. 
financial  crisis, 
The origins of the crisis in the euro area 
Until  a  few  years  ago  monetary  policy  was  considered  a  textbook  discipline,  almost  a 
mechanical skill involving the implementation of computational applications by conscientious 
experts. In the period known as the Great Moderation, from the middle of the 1980s to the 
beginning  of  the  global 
inflation  had  been  brought  under  control. 
Macroeconomic volatility was contained and this was a source of great pride for all central 
bankers. Some foresaw a future of genteel and honourable oblivion for monetary policy. This 
is no longer the case. The experience of the first five years following the crisis shows that all 
central  banks  have  adjusted  their  monetary  policies  along  hitherto  unexplored  lines:  some 
have been abandoned and no new paradigm has yet been formulated, the wish is to put an 
end  to  the  emergency  and  return  to  normality  where  the  rules  are  based  on  a  well-
established discipline of long standing, but it is not known with any certainty what reality will 
emerge  in  the  long term.  Furthermore,  although the  precise  shape  of monetary  policy  has 
always been influenced by the respective institutional and historical context – consider the 
varying “mandates” of the central banks – the various forms that the crisis took in different 
parts  of  the  world  reinforced  this  correspondence  between  the  specific  institutional  and 
financial contexts and the monetary policies pursued in them. 
In the euro area, the extraordinary success of the single currency concealed for years the 
risks that were building up. The governments of the Member States considered themselves 
free from previous constraints: with the exception of Germany and a few other countries, they 
delayed  structural  reforms  that  could  have  redressed  the  competitiveness  of  obsolete 
economic structures to meet the challenges of relentless globalisation; they undermined the 
limits  introduced  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  jeopardising  their  own  credibility  as 
partners in a Monetary Union.  
In  the  years  preceding  the  crisis,  this  Union  began  to  divide  countries  with  positive  trade 
balances  and  sound  budgets  from  those  with  growing  budget  deficits  and  external  deficits 
financed by private credit flows increasingly sourced from the first group of countries and not 
used  for  investments  to  increase  competitiveness,  but  rather  to  finance  unproductive 
spending, or property bubbles. No one ever imagined that the Monetary Union could become 
a  union  divided  between  permanent  creditors  and  permanent  debtors,  where  the  former 
would perpetually lend money and credibility to the latter. 
A  profound  change  in  the  governance  of  the  Union  became  necessary,  with  new  rules 
whereby the solidarity clamoured for had as its counterpart the transfer of national powers. 
But this too was delayed and its urgency was downplayed in the face of the requirements of 
a purported national sovereignty which was in reality weakened by globalisation and growing 
levels of public debt. 
The  global  financial  crisis,  which  swiftly  and  dramatically  increased  market  perceptions  of 
risk, rudely awakened all the actors from this long, complacent amnesia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The external deficits, budget deficits and levels of public debt of the countries in the second 
group  fast  became  unsustainable  once  they  were  no  longer  financed  externally  and  in 
particular by the rest of the Union, the inadequate governance of which was then laid bare. 
This  brief  scrutiny  of  the  origins  of  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area  shows  how  the  response of 
economic policy cannot be other than composite: in it, monetary policy plays an important but 
by no means exclusive role. 
The crisis and the ECB’s monetary policy  
The epicentre of the crisis in the initial phase was liquidity, an economic measure that had 
been neglected by the theory for many years since a lack thereof seemed so unlikely. The 
day after Lehman Brothers collapsed, the money markets stopped functioning. The liquidity 
required by banks to refinance their maturing assets suddenly became extremely scarce. 
Generally speaking, banks borrow at short-term or very short-term from savers with a strong 
preference for the immediate availability of funds, or for “liquidity”. If savers suddenly refuse 
to roll over their deposits with the banks, the banks then attempt to discontinue the credit that 
they supply to the economy. If this is not possible owing to long maturities, banks seek to 
liquidate first of all those assets in their portfolio that are traded on the market at known and 
verifiable exchange prices, in an effort to avoid insolvency. But a sudden financial retreat by 
many  financial  institutions  simultaneously  cannot  occur  without  generalised  financial 
suffering, and without banks incurring substantial capital losses. 
Asset  prices  fall  rapidly  and  bank  capital  declines.  The  interbank  markets  dry  up.  The 
economy loses an indispensable mechanism for generating income and allocating resources, 
namely the intermediation of savings. 
In  a  second  phase  beginning  in  2011,  the  lack  of  credit  to  the  more  vulnerable  sovereign 
issuers  became  the  centre  point  of  the crisis. The  euro  area governments  responded  with 
actions that, while individually effective, revealed the political unsustainability of a Union in 
which the countries that pay and the countries that receive are always the same. Sovereign 
debt in the euro area is no longer risk-free: it depends on the sovereign and the quality of its 
policies. This process, beneficial in and of itself, revolutionised the risk structure on which the 
functioning  of  the  European  financial  markets  was  based  for  so  many  years.  In  addition, 
without a single Union government and economic policy, it led to an abnormal increase in 
risk  premia,  which  reached  systemic  proportions.  Premia  were  no  longer  based  on  the 
creditworthiness of borrowers, which  was admittedly shaky for reasons already mentioned, 
but rather could only be explained by the manifestation of expectations regarding the end of 
the euro. 
Risk premia and non-standard measures  
But what are risk premia?  
The compensation required on a long-term financial contract must be at least equal to what 
could be obtained with a short-term contract that is continuously renewed until the end of the 
term.  Long-term  investors  require  a  return  that,  at  the  very  least,  establishes  financial 
equivalence  between  the  two  strategies.  But,  in  general,  equivalence  is  not  enough. 
Creditors expect additional compensation for the risks they take on relating to not being paid 
back promptly. These risks are varied and the markets attach a price – or risk premium – to 
each one. The pure risk relating to postponing the availability of capital for a period of time is 
compensated by a term risk premium. The risk that a creditor is forced to liquidate a long-
term financial investment before maturity in difficult market circumstances is compensated by 
a liquidity risk premium. Finally, the risk that the borrower does not meet his/her repayment 
obligations  at  the  end  of  the  contractually-agreed  term  is  compensated  by  a  credit  risk 
premium. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In a period of deep financial crisis, the increase in all risk premia is, as I mentioned, out of 
proportion because market participants are no longer willing or able to bear them. 
The non-standard measures adopted by the central banks in the larger countries in the five 
years  since  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis  can  be  identified  according  to  the  type  of  risk 
premia they were intended to tackle. 
For example, the large-scale purchasing of assets, or quantitative easing, carried out by the 
Federal Reserve System affects the term risk premium. The main aim of quantitative easing 
is to reabsorb the quantity of term risk held in the economy as a whole and thereby compress 
its price – the corresponding risk premium. 
The  ECB  initially  adopted  non-standard  measures  primarily  aimed  at  cutting  the  financial 
premium linked to liquidity risk. At the dawn of the crisis, shortly after the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers in 2008, the liquidity risk in the interbank market shook to its foundations the very 
structure of the payment system. This catastrophic risk led to an exceptional reassessment 
of the liquidity risk premium on credit between transactors. In this context, the ECB took the 
place of the interbank market, which had cut off its supply of short-term and very short-term 
credit to banks. The ECB subsequently changed its own instrument for providing banks with 
liquidity,  adopting  a  system  whereby  it  supplied  unlimited  credit  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  – 
known as the fixed rate full allotment policy. In this way, the ECB allowed banks to refinance 
their assets using its own credit, rather than through asset fire sales in the market. A situation 
in which sound and solvent banks became insolvent was thus avoided. 
In order to reassure banks that access to central bank liquidity would indeed be extended in 
line with their refinancing needs in the medium term, we extended the maturity of our credit 
lending from the standard three months pre-crisis, to six months after the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers, to one year by mid-2009 and, finally, to three years at the end of 2011.  
From the second half of 2011, we witnessed the emergence of a new source of stress, which 
has been defined as the risk of “redenomination”, resulting from the potential exit of a country 
from the euro or even from the potential collapse of the single currency. A particular form of 
credit  risk  premium  was  associated  with  these  possibilities,  which  was  unrelated  to  the 
assessment  of  a  borrower’s  solvency  but  which,  in  fact,  came  about  owing  to  unfounded 
concerns regarding a systemic breakdown in the euro area. The ECB therefore launched the 
OMTs (Outright Monetary Transactions), a monetary policy instrument aimed at eliminating 
the financial risk premium caused by this specific systemic risk.  
OMTs allow the ECB to buy sovereign bonds with a remaining maturity of up to three years 
in the secondary market, where necessary in order to remove the risk of “redenomination” 
(i.e. the risk related to concerns about the end of the euro) from the financial markets. The 
bond-issuing governments which request the activation of OMTs agree, in conjunction with 
the  European  authorities  and,  if  possible,  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  on  a 
recovery  programme  to  address  macroeconomic  and  structural  weaknesses.  This  is  a 
necessary, but not sufficient, condition as the ECB has full discretion to decide on the start, 
continuation  or  suspension  of  OMTs.  Furthermore,  the  excess  liquidity  created  by  these 
purchases will be reabsorbed by the ECB. 
The conditionality associated with the programme to which governments and the European 
authorities  agree  is  a  crucial  element  in  being  able  to  preserve  monetary  policy 
independence.  It  is  important  in  providing  the  ECB  with  adequate  assurance  that 
interventions supporting sovereign debt bond prices do not mutate into financial subsidies for 
unsustainable national policies in the medium term.  
By  way  of  drawing  a  parallel  between  OMTs  and  our  standard  liquidity  operations:  as  the 
credit  provided  to  banking  counterparties  cannot  be,  and  must  not  be,  interpreted  as  an 
injection  of  capital  into  failing  banks;  in  the  same  vein,  under  OMTs,  in  compressing  the 
premium  for  the  risk  of  “redenomination”,  the  ECB  cannot  and  does  not  intend  to  provide 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
financial support to governments which reinstate solvency conditions which have not already 
been approved ex ante.  
In both cases, the ECB’s non-standard measures were triggered by the need to restore the 
functioning of monetary policy transmission channels, first by reducing liquidity premia and 
then by reducing the redenomination risk premium. 
Diverging financing conditions in the euro area 
Throughout the two phases of the crisis – the banking crisis and the sovereign debt crisis – 
our  approach  to  liquidity  provision  was  elastic,  with  adjustments  made  in  response  to 
demand  for  support  from  banks  more  severely  affected  by  market  pressures.  At  first,  this 
demand was widespread across large parts of the euro area. In 2008 and 2009, those banks 
more exposed to sectors and activities under stress were ostracised by the market, no matter 
where  they  were  based.  Then,  in  the  second  phase  of  the crisis, the  obstacles  to  liquidity 
provision became linked to territory. The banking sector and financial market in the euro area 
gradually fragmented along national borders. These borders separate banking sectors which, 
irrespective of the intrinsic quality of their intermediaries, are considered robust, because the 
country in which they are based is able to cope with a banking crisis, from those considered 
to  be  fragile,  where  the  markets  consider  this  capacity  to  be  lacking.  These  borders  thus 
separate  countries  that  are  competitive  and  have  sound  balance  sheets  from  those 
characterised by fragile balance sheets and a lack of capacity for growth.  
The measures decided on by the ECB (fixed rate full allotment, LTROs, OMTs, assessment 
and  quality  of  collateral,  guidance  on  the  duration  of  fixed  rate  full  allotment)  helped  to 
overcome, to a large extent, this fragmentation that characterised the funding of the banking 
system until mid-2012. The dispersion in the growth rate of bank deposits has now returned 
to 2007 levels.  
Progress on the lending front has been much slower. In the first group of countries, we are 
generally seeing normal or accommodative financing conditions for firms and households. In 
the  second  group,  we  are  seeing  a  persistent  tightening  of  credit,  possibly  decreasing  in 
intensity  in  some  countries,  with  retail  bank  loan  rates  that  are  much  higher  than  those 
applied  by  banks  located  in  the  first  group  of  countries  and  more  stringent  collateral 
requirements for loans.  
The ECB’s recently published “Survey on the access to finance of SMEs in the euro area”1 
provides a clear picture of the difficulties this sector, so crucial for the euro area economy, 
finds itself in. Among the principal causes for concern cited by the SMEs interviewed, access 
to  credit  was  second  only  to  the  difficulties  encountered  in  finding  customers  for  their 
products. The obstacles to obtaining credit (linked to the refusal to grant credit) persist, and 
represent  one  of  the  main  factors  of  heterogeneity  between  countries  in  the  euro  area, 
though they are not confined to those countries under stress. In fact, in addition to SMEs in 
Greece,  Ireland  and  Spain,  a  large  number  of  SMEs  operating  in  The  Netherlands  are 
encountering significant obstacles (around 45% of the firms surveyed). These figures reflect 
the  considerable  heterogeneity  in  borrowing  conditions,  as  also  shown  by  the  most  recent 
bank lending survey. 
This fragmentation is all the more troublesome in an economy such as that of the euro area, 
in which financial intermediation is bank-based for at least three-quarters of firms’ financing. 
And  it  penalises  all  the  more  those  enterprises,  often  of  a  small  or  medium  size,  which 
depend more heavily on the banking system. This is particularly serious considering that this 
sector employs around two-thirds of workers in the euro area.2 
                                                
1  http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/accesstofinancesmallmediumsizedenterprises201304en.pdf 
2   Eurostat defines SMEs as enterprises with fewer than 250 employees. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Banks are not lending for a number of reasons: lack of funding, investment alternatives, lack 
of  capital,  risk  aversion.  The  ECB  has  done  a  great  deal  on  the  first  two  fronts,  providing 
liquidity  and  reducing  the  redenomination  risk  premium  on  government  bonds.  We  cannot 
subsidise governments by buying their bonds, and we cannot subsidise bank shareholders 
by removing the need for them to strengthen their balance sheets by means of necessary 
recapitalisation  measures.  We  can  do  little  directly  to  reduce  the  risk  aversion  which  is 
holding back bank lending. In other financial systems, a large share of credit is transmitted to 
the economy via capital markets; financial assets are traded on the basis of known, verifiable 
prices and are often subject to ratings. A central bank that wished to try to reduce the risk 
premia  on  such  assets  would  not  face  great  operational  obstacles.  In  the  euro  area,  the 
capital market is much smaller, and a central bank that wished to intervene would have to 
purchase from the banking system the loans the latter had made to the economy, for which 
there is only a very limited market. This would be a very complex undertaking, even without 
taking  into  account  the  institutional  context  which  would  necessarily  involve  intervention  in 
17 countries. 
But the ECB has taken a number of measures on this front too. Banks have for some time 
been able to use credit claims as collateral when obtaining funding from the ECB. And we 
should  not  underestimate  the  effectiveness  of  traditional  monetary  policy  when  general 
conditions  change.  As  mentioned,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  cut  interest  rates  to 
0.5% at its last meeting, bringing them to a historic low after eight months in which they had 
been unchanged at 0.75%. This is because macroeconomic weakness is now also affecting 
parts of the euro area in which the transmission of monetary policy had never been an issue, 
and also because we are seeing some signs that fragmentation is receding with regard to 
lending in some of the euro area countries experiencing stress. 
In this regard, national measures can also be effective, as already put into practice in some 
countries,  with  the  involvement  of  governments,  public  banks  and  development  agencies. 
The ECB has launched initiatives with the EIB and the European Commission with the aim of 
reducing the fragmentation of lending in the euro area. 
We must not forget the extraordinary progress made on this front by the European Council in 
bringing  together the  national  supervisory  systems  in  a  single  European  mechanism  –  the 
management  of  which  has  been  assigned  to  the  ECB  –  and  in  creating  a  European 
mechanism for the resolution of banks. These initiatives will go the furthest in breaking the 
link between banks and sovereign debt which is behind the current fragmentation. 
But we should not forget that growth is currently weaker in some countries than in others, 
and not just because credit is scarce. It was weaker even before the crisis, notwithstanding 
often turbulent growth in public spending, because structural weaknesses were not tackled. 
In the wake of the crisis, the burden of this failure is now being felt by all of us. 
Structural reforms for growth and more solidarity in society  
The reforms aim to untie the knots that curb competitiveness and suffocate growth. Effective 
promotion  and  safeguarding  of  competition;  an  adequate  degree  of  flexibility  in  the  labour 
market that is properly distributed across the generations; the cutting of government red tape 
that is an obstacle to growth; human capital that is equipped to face the challenges posed by 
global competition; and a better environment – these are all fronts on which, despite recent 
progress, much remains to be done, albeit to varying degrees across individual countries. 
Fiscal policies must follow a sustainable path, separate and distinct from cyclical fluctuations. 
Without  this  prerequisite,  lasting  growth  is  not  possible.  Particularly  for  countries  with 
structurally high levels of public debt, rather than temporarily high levels as a result of the 
current crisis, this means not slipping back from the goals already achieved. Let us not forget 
that,  in  an  institutional  context  in  which  the  solvency  of  sovereign  states  is  no  longer  an 
established fact and the governance of the Union is still incomplete, when a country’s public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
finances lack credibility its banks are quickly cut off from the rest of the euro financial market 
in the absence of private sector credit in that country: this is what we are now seeing.  
However,  to  mitigate  the  inevitable  recessionary  effects  of  fiscal  consolidation,  the 
composition of such measures must favour the reduction of current public spending and of 
taxes,  particularly  in  a  context  such  as  in  Europe  where  taxation  is  already  high  by 
international standards.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  lasting  growth  is  essential  for  reducing  unemployment,  particularly 
among young people. In some European countries youth unemployment has reached levels 
that damage people’s faith in prospects for a decent life and which risk giving rise to extreme 
and destructive forms of protest.  
Output growth was essential for the success of the European social model. The extraordinary 
economic growth during the so-called “Golden Age” – namely the thirty years that followed 
the Second World War – allowed a significant improvement in the material wealth of a large 
portion of the European population.  
At the same time, this wealth strengthened the growth process. At that time the foundations 
were laid in Europe for modern welfare systems aimed at protecting individuals against the 
risk  that  unemployment,  illness  or  old  age  could  lead  to  a  deterioration  in  their  living 
standards. It is in part thanks to these instruments that the financial crisis and the recession 
have not had the same devastating social effects as the Great Depression.  
Many years ago Rudi Dornbusch said, exaggerating rather, that Europeans were so rich they 
could afford to pay everybody for not working. This is no longer the case, but we do not wish 
to lose the solidarity which inspired that model in such very different times. Therefore, today 
we must adapt that model in line with the changes that demographic dynamics and the new 
environment  of  global  competition  demand.  This  must  be  done 
to  reduce  youth 
unemployment, increase consumption and preserve the very essence of welfare.  
Another aspect of growth sustainability, in a European context, that I would like to draw your 
attention to today is that of income distribution. 
For  almost  twenty  years  there  has  been  a  trend  towards  a  higher  concentration  of  family 
income  in  Europe  to  the  detriment  of  the  poorest  households,  as  statistics  published  by 
Eurostat show.  
A more equal share in the fruits of the production of national wealth helps foster a culture of 
saving  and,  therefore,  of  collective  involvement.  A  sense  of  being  an  integral  part  of  a 
country  and  of  having  a  stake  in  its  economic  future  strengthens  social  cohesion  and 
encourages  individual  economic  behaviour  that  leads,  in  the  aggregate,  to  economic 
prosperity for all.  
There are a number of tools governments can use to achieve this aim, but first of all social 
cohesion  must  be  sought  by  removing  the  barriers  which  limit  individuals’  opportunity  to 
pursue their goals and which allow family background to dictate life choices. In eliminating 
vested interests in a non-competitive system, structural reforms are more than just a tool for 
growth creation. By encouraging everyone to be involved in the process of production, they 
ensure  that  the  drive  for  a  more  equal  income  allocation  is  not  the  task  of  state-led 
redistribution alone. In this way, reforms aim to harness individual potential to the growth of 
the economy.  
Nevertheless, looking to the not-too-distant future, national virtues – while indispensable for 
strengthening  solidarity  among  Member  States along  the  way  –  won’t  be  enough  to  make 
Europe a goal all its citizens can consider their own.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It  will  also  be  necessary  to  introduce  reforms  that  further  reduce  the  barriers  between 
individual  Member  States,  in  particular  to  the  development  of  a  single  European  labour 
market,  and  that  affirm  the  principle  of  solidarity,  as  proposed  recently  in  the  “Four 
Presidents’ Report”.3 
To build, with passion and vigour, a shared future in which the conditions for growth are more 
favourable, in which all citizens feel that their skills are fully valued, in which individual well-
being goes hand in hand with collective well-being. We are all working today, each within our 
own mandate, to achieve that goal.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
3  Herman Van Rompuy (in collaboration with José Manuel Barroso, Jean-Claude Juncker and Mario Draghi), 
“Towards a genuine economic and monetary union”, 5 December 2012, http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/ 
focuson/crisis/documents/131201_en.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
