Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Using geospatial mapping to further the National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy 
Keynote address by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at 
the  launch  of  the  result  of  the  GIS  mapping  of  financial  access  points  in  Nigeria,  Lagos, 
8 July 2013. 
 Introduction 
1.  It  is  indeed  my  pleasure  to  be  delivering  the  keynote  address  at  this  occasion  of  the 
launching of the Geospatial mapping of Financial Institutions in Nigeria in conjuction with the 
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). 
2. The Nigerian National Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS) was launched in October, 2012 
and  the  overall  target  outlined  in  the  strategy  is  the  reduction  of  the  number  of  adults 
excluded from access to financial services from 46.3% in 2010 to 20% in 2020. As a member 
of the Alliance for Fianancial Inclusion (AFI), this is in line with our Maya declaration in 2011. 
3. The broader aim of the target is that of the proposed 80% adult Nigerians to be included, 
at  least  70%  would  be  in  the  formal  sector,  with  specific  targets  for  services  such  as; 
payments, savings, credit, insurance and pensions outlined as well. 
4. Achieving these targets will require the collaborative efforts of all the stakeholders in the 
financial industry, and with this in mind the Central Bank of Nigeria has approved a number 
initiatives centered around improving inclusion some of which include; The development of 
Agent  Banking  Guidelines,  and 
to 
encourage Financial Institutions to reach out to under served segments, the development of 
a Consumer Protection Framework under a newly set up Consumer Protection Department 
and a National campaign to promote Financial Literacy. 
tiered  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)  requirements 
Geospatial mapping 
5. As part of our efforts to implement our National Financial Inclusion Strategy, the BMGF at 
the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) Global Policy Forum in 2012, made a commitment to 
support  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  (CBN)  in  the  actualization  of  set  out  targets  in  the 
strategy. 
6.  The  gates  BMGF  identified  certain  areas  for  collaboration  with  the  CBN  based  on  their 
assessment of Nigeria's needs with respect to Financial Inclusion as well as the capacity of 
their  partners.  These  areas  include;  Geo-  Spatial  Mapping,  Capacity  building  initiatives  for 
the  Shared  Services  Office  (which  drives  the  Shared  Services  initiatives  including  the 
Cashless Nigeria Policy) and Capacity building Support for the Financial Inclusion Secretariat 
(which would drive the implementation of the NFIS). 
7.  Brand  Fusion  Marketing  L.t.d  was  contracted  by  BMGF  to  carry  out  the  Geo-Spatial 
Mapping of financial institutions which is essentially the provision of GPS Coordinates and 
other relevant parameters on all financial outlets and touch points across the country. The 
survey was commissioned and completed and the findings will be presented today. 
The importance & potential uses of geospatial mapping 
8. I have had the privilege of being given a demonstration of the tool as developed from the 
results of the  excercise and would like to commend the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 
Brand  Fusion  Marketing  L.t.d  and  SpatialDev  and  all  others  involved  in  the  collection, 
collation and analysis of this report for an excellent job which provides an important tool not 
only for the financial industry but for consumers and policy makers as well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
9. The potential uses of a tool like this are limitless and the Central Bank of Nigeria is excited 
to be partnering with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation on this project which will act as a 
catalyst in the realization of the targets outlined in our National Financial Inclusion Strategy. 
10. It is important to note, that Financial Inclusion efforts rely largely on data based evidence 
which is why tracking the progress of our National Financial Inclusion Strategy needs to be 
data driven. This tool as developed by BMGF will go a long way in providing the necessary 
support for gathering, monitoring and analysing data as we move to the implementation of 
the Strategy. 
11. The interactive mapping tool which has been developed is able to provide consumers of 
financial  services  in  the  area  with  the  ability  to  find  financial  access  points  within  a  5km 
radius  of  any  point  on  the  map.  This  Proximity-based  approach  reflects  geographic 
distribution  of financial  access  points  creating  an  ease  of  access  to  live  information  of  the 
services provided by the access points. 
12.  It  is  also  important  to  note  that  the  statistics  provided  from  this  mapping  will  enable 
Nigeria measure certain indicators and compare them across several countries providing for 
country by country comparison on progress of our inclusion efforts. 
13. The visual display of data makes it easy to see and measure evolution over time while 
using  the  tool  to  mark  progress  toward  channels  and  products  targets  under  the  National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy (NFIS). 
14. Apart from the baseline and trend analysis which could be used to measure and monitor 
progress of increased products and channels against the set targets under FI Strategy, GIS 
mapping will provide supply side data that could be used to monitor the effectiveness of other 
government initiatives. 
Next steps 
15. The Central Bank of Nigeria is very pleased to be partnering with the Gates foundation 
and  looks  forward  to  the  next  phase  of  the  project.  It  is  imperative  that  going  forward,  a 
determination  is  made  of  additional  information  that  may  be  relevant  to  our  inclusion  and 
regulation efforts that are not already accounted for in this round. 
16. Other non-conventional financial access points should be captured and included in the 
report  such  number  of  people  and  value  of  transactions  that  pass  through  motor  parks, 
markets and such other hubs where financial activities are carried out to help determine the 
general level of activities in the informal financial sector. 
Conclusion 
7.  In  conclusion,  I  believe  that  we  are  taking  a  very  important  step  here  today  and  the 
partnership between the Central Bank of Nigeria and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
will go a long way in ensuring that our efforts to realize the targets set are a success. I look 
forward to a continued collaboration. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
