G Padmanabhan: Random payment system issues of systemic relevance 
for the new year 
Keynote address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, to 
the Bankers’ Club, Thiruvanathapuram, 2 January 2013. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Smt  C  S  Kar  and  Saswat  Mahapatra  in  the  preparation  of  the  address  and  the 
comments/suggestions  on  the  draft  by  S/Shri  G  Mahalingam,  S  Ganeshkumar,  A  Madhavan  and  Smt  Radha 
Somakumar gratefully acknowledged. 
It is always a pleasure to be in God’s own country to welcome the New Year. I am thankful to 
the Bankers Club of Thiruvanathapuram for affording this opportunity by inviting me over. I 
also deem it a privilege to be addressing the Bankers of the state which recently captured the 
imagination of the nation when one of the districts – Ernakulam – was declared as the first 
financially included district in the country. I am aware of the enormous efforts put in by the 
bankers  in  the  State  under  the  stewardship  of  our  Regional  Director  Shri.  Salim 
Gangadharan. Congratulations to the entire banking community of the State. 
The year that went by was quite challenging for the financial sector. The worsening of the 
sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the unsteady recovery in the USA had posed significant 
risks to emerging markets like India, with domestic factors playing a major role-perhaps in 
balance  a  more  decisive  role  in  shaping  the  course  of  Indian  financial  markets  which 
remained volatile. As current account deficit burgeoned and reached a record high, debate 
on  the  contributory  role  of  gold  imports  intensified.  Without  getting  into  the  thick  of  the 
debate, let me state two things. First, the argument that a central bank which had diversified 
its  own  assets  into  gold  has  no  moral  right  to  preach  against  investment/import  of  gold  is 
missing an important point. A central bank diversifying its dollar reserves into gold is entirely 
different from private agents in a country having capital controls investing in gold as it has the 
same  effect  of  allowing  such  assets  to  be  held  in  foreign  currency!  It  has  to  be  clearly 
recognised  that  the  Central  bank  undertakes  the  onerous  responsibility  of  managing  the 
forex reserves of the country with the objectives of safety, liquidity and return in that order 
and  investment  in  gold  is  in  pursuit  of  these  objectives!  In  the  case  of  private  savers,  by 
stashing away his savings in gold, the economy stands to lose the benefit of accumulated 
savings which can go a long way in adding to the GDP of the country. Second, given the 
insatiable lure for gold in the country, it is imperative that we introduce gold linked products 
which  results  in  the  existing  gold  in  bank  lockers  getting  converted  as  financial  products 
rather than unabated import of gold, if we are to find a sustainable solution for our current 
account problems. 
Moving on, as we welcome what appears to be another year of turbulence for the markets, 
and when the Indian banking system is readying to adopt Basel III norms even in the face of 
growing NPAs, I thought it fit to discuss certain important issues relating to payment systems. 
You  will  appreciate  that  the  payment  systems  all  over  the  world  including  in  our  country 
functioned  efficiently  even  while  the  crisis  was  crippling  the  markets.  The  issues  that  I 
propose to flag are of relevance to all stake holders using the Indian payment system. 
Decline of cheques – a myth or a must? 
The  growth  in  electronic  payments  (in  volume  terms),  in  recent  years  is  quite  heartening 
when one sees that the share of electronic payments as a percentage of total payments have 
grown  from  15%  in  2003–04  to  48%  in  2011–12.  Despite  this,  in  absolute  terms  cheque 
volume continues to be high (52% of total payments), even though the growth is showing a 
declining trend. While this high cheque volume could be attributed to overall growth in the 
economy and the consequent growth in financial transactions, it is nonetheless desirable that 
transactions in electronic form increases at an increasing rate rather than being contended 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with transactions through cheques increasing at a decreasing rate. It would also be desirable 
to migrate the existing cheque usage to an electronic form in view of the benefit which would 
accrue to both the payer and payee of the cheque which in turn has a positive impact on the 
economy as a whole. 
In fact, the “Payment Systems in India – Vision 2012–15” talks about drawing up a strategy 
for  disincentivising  usage  of  cheques  above  a  certain  threshold  limit  by  customers  and 
corporates which may include prescribing a cut off limit for cheques cleared through clearing 
house arrangements. As announced in the “Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy” we 
are in the process of preparing a Discussion Paper on the methods aimed at disincentivising 
the issuance and usage of cheques in India and placing this paper in the public domain for 
comments. 
Before  coming  to  the  challenges  and  strategies  for  moving  paper  based  transactions  to 
electronic mode, let me touch upon the need for doing so. As we all know, cheques when 
compared to electronic payments are less efficient for various reasons – it has high printing 
and processing costs, requires manual interventions in the form of encoding and keying in 
cheque  details,  poses  significant  reconciliation  challenges  in  terms  of  payables  and 
receivables,  needs  to  be  preserved  for  longer  period  as  per  legal  and  regulatory 
requirements, has longer clearing and processing cycle etc., in addition to having inherent 
liquidity and credit risks. In contrast, electronic payments eliminate these inefficiencies and 
provide a faster, efficient, secured mode of transactions at a fraction of the cost. Electronic 
payments, where they are “credit-push” based imply that credit, liquidity and systemic risks 
are  substantially  reduced,  and  there  is  also  adequate  certainty  on  funds  availability  to  the 
beneficiary.  Despite  these  perceived  virtues,  physical  instruments  are  still  preferred  by 
people  as  they  can  be  “seen”  and  therefore  more  “trustworthy”  as  compared  to  unseen 
electronic  transactions  happening  in  seconds!  Here  the  challenge  for  the  bankers  is  to 
change this mindset through training and education of customers. 
Several  studies  have  been  undertaken  on  the  cost  and  benefits  of  cheques  vis-à-vis 
electronic  payments.  A  study  undertaken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  in  2007–08 
pegged  the  average  payment  cost  of  cheques  (for  consumers,  merchants  and  ﬁnancial 
institutions)  at  AUD7.69,  as  compared  to  AUD1.21  for  credit  cards  and  AUD  0.67  for 
EFTPOS.1 The UK Payment Council in its report “The Future of Cheques in UK” (2009) has 
indicated that the costs of electronic alternatives are at least one third lower than the cost of 
cheques. The report also estimates that the closure of the cheque clearing could lead to cost 
savings for the UK (for financial  institutions and corporates) up to £1 billion per annum by 
2018.Studies by Humphrey, Willesson, Bergandahl & Lindblom (2003)2 found that migration 
away from paper-based payment methods was one of the key factor that contributed towards 
reduction  in  bank  operating  costs  (a  24  per  cent  reduction,  accounting  for  $32bn)  across 
Europe  from  1987–1999.  Back  home,  studies  by  the  Indian  Banks’  Association  have  also 
revealed  that  the  costs  relating  to  paper  based  instruments  are  relatively  higher  than 
electronic  modes  although  the  former  is  less  efficient  as  well.  To  summarise,  the  key 
conclusion from several studies3 is that there is a social business case for moving away from 
paper based instruments. That’s why several jurisdictions such as UK, Canada, Ireland and 
Australia have drawn or are in the process of drawing the roadmaps for managing declining 
cheque usage in their jurisdictions. 
However, this is easier said than done. Consumer habits which have been ingrained over the 
years  do  not  change  as  quickly  as  changes  in  technology  take  place.  So,  even  if  newer 
                                                
1  Reserve Bank of Australia – “Payments Costs In Australia” (page 117). 
2  Quoted in “Cheques Working Group Report” November 2006, Office of Fair Trading, UK. 
3  Some of the studies have been quoted in the report “Target 2013: Modernising Payments in Ireland” prepared 
by National Irish Bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
electronic forms of payments are introduced, widespread adoption of such modes takes time. 
Many users – including the Government – may also be apprehensive of using a “new” mode 
of  payment  and  as  such  may  resist  the  movement  from  their  “comfort  zone”  (of  using 
cheques).Issuing  of  cheques  does  not  cost  money  (most  banks  offer  some  number  of 
cheques leaves free of cost), whereas some charges have to be paid for initiating electronic 
payments. Given the lack of awareness, cost considerations may override safety and speed 
considerations. 
Recognising the complexity of the challenge, any strategy to discourage the use of cheques 
by  individuals  as  well  as  institutional  users  has  to  have  a  multi-pronged  approach 
encompassing  cost  and  time  considerations,  incentives  for  use  of  electronic  modes  of 
transactions and disincentives for the use of paper-based instruments. However, the decline 
of cheque usage has to be carefully managed so that the unwarranted ramifications such as 
slippage  to  cash  based  transactions  and  inconvenience  to  vulnerable  segments  of  the 
customers having no access to alternative electronic modes of payments are avoided. 
Why expand CTS if cheques are to be discontinued? 
As you may be aware, gird CTS in Chennai now covers 43 clearing locations encompassing 
the  states  of  Tamilnadu,  Kerala,  Karnataka,  Andhra  Pradesh, West  Bengal  and  the  Union 
Territories  of  Puducherry  and  Chandigarh.  Pan-India  roll  out  of  CTS  is  expected  to  be 
completed by December 2013. Questions are being raised on the need for expansion of grid 
CTS  for  improving  the  efficiency  of  paper  based  clearing  given  the  focus  of  the  Vision 
Document towards electronic payments. Let me try to address these questions. 
First, the paper-based clearing continues to be the dominant mode of retail payments in the 
country  constituting  52%  in  terms  of  volume.  It  is  also  widely  accepted  that  consumer 
behaviour  does  not  change  as  quickly  as  changes  in  technology.  This  being  the  case, 
despite our objective of electronification of payments, requirements for safety and efficiency 
enhancements in paper-based clearing cannot be ignored. 
Second, even though Speed clearing hastens the process of cheque collection as compared 
to  outstation  cheque  collection,  it  pre-supposes the  presence  of the  drawee  bank  (at  least 
one  branch)  in  the  clearing  house  location  which  could  be  a  limitation.  In  comparison, 
grid-based CTS, is a superior system as it encompasses a larger geographical area and the 
chances of drawee bank not having presence in the grid location is significantly reduced. 
Third, grid CTS would provide significant cost savings both to the system operators as well 
as the system participants. From a systemic perspective consolidation of clearing locations 
into a few grids would  minimise the cost of replacement of aging MICR machines and the 
related AMC costs. Banks will benefit from economies of scale as the grid CTS obviates the 
need for establishing inward cheque processing infrastructure at various clearing locations. 
Further, once local clearing houses are subsumed into the grid, the settlements which are 
now spread across clearing locations would be subsumed into a single settlement, thereby 
significantly reducing the liquidity requirements (opportunity cost included) for the banks. The 
CTS  will  also  result  in  other  benefits  in  terms  of  reduction  in  the  cheque  processing  fee, 
reduction  in  operational  overhead,  elimination  of  clearing  differences  and  reconciliation 
issues etc. 
Fourth,  as  long  as  physical  instruments  cannot  be  realistically  wished  away  even  in  the 
medium term scenario, it is economically sensible to leverage on technology to reduce the 
recurring processing costs, though it might involve a onetime capital expenditure. 
There are a few challenges as well. The CTS implementation and the model adopted in India 
do not have a parallel elsewhere in the world and the features aimed at security and safety 
need  to  be  addressed  optimally.  This  is  the  reason  behind  the  directive  to  all  banks  to 
migrate to the use of a uniform standard for the CTS cheques. Further, there is an increase 
in the responsibilities of the collecting banker when compared to the non-CTS scenario. A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
change in the mindset of the staff of banks is also a vital necessity, and this would transcend 
to the ultimate customer too. While it is heartening to note the positive outcomes in all these 
areas, we must recognize that full scale achievement of these would take time. 
Entry of non-banks in payment system – a mirage or a threat? 
It is quite discernible in many payment services that non-banks have made in-roads into an 
area  that  was  once  considered  the  exclusive  domain  of  banks.  Traditionally,  banks  alone 
played  an  important  role  in  holding  deposit  funds  (store  of  value)  and  providing  payment 
services (medium of exchange). With significant developments in technology going hand-in-
hand  with  the  growing  demand  for  faster  and  more  efficient  payment  services  by  users, 
banks  no  longer  find  it  possible,  viable  or  even  necessary  to  offer  the  whole  range  of 
payment  services  (end-to-end)  by  themselves,  when  the  same  could  be  outsourced  and 
offered more cost-effectively. These reasons coupled with the growth potential have led to 
the entry of non-banks into the payment services area. 
Some  of  the  reasons  for  the  almost  ubiquitous  presence  of  non-banks  in  the  payment 
services  area  could  be  (a)  the  changing  consumer  behaviour  with  increasing  demand  for 
more  efficient  and  faster  systems  (b)  advancements  in  technology  which  has  greatly 
facilitated  innovations  in  payment  services  (c)  trend  for  out-sourcing  –  possibly  due  to 
objectives  of  reduction  in  capital  investment  by  banks  when  the  same  task  can  be 
outsourced on a fee-basis (d) financial inclusion drives where non-banks are also playing a 
significant role especially in the field of mobile banking etc. 
Given the fact that this trend is gaining strength, particularly in retail payments, the role of 
banks  vis-a-vis  non-banks  merits  some  closer  examination.  Especially,  the  aspect  of 
cooperation between the two or the lack of it needs some introspection. In India, despite the 
poster-product of M-pesa in Kenya and other African country models led by MNOs, we have 
consciously  chosen  the  path  of  a  bank-led  model.  Further,  it  would  also  be  interesting  to 
debate whether outsourcing is in itself a type of cooperation or is it just a paid service? Is 
there a level-playing field or is one partner the dominant one? And how would systemic risk 
be  addressed  when  there  are  players  whose  core  business  may  only  be  relating  to  the 
payment system offered by them and any misdemeanor in this area may well affect the entire 
customer base of the entity concerned? 
I am raising these issues here because they are very pertinent for the future and also raise 
concerns for regulation. While healthy competition between banks and non-banks could have 
positive  repercussions  on  the  provision  of  cost-effective  and  efficient  payment  services  to 
users, it could also have negative impact in case of non-transparent processes and charges 
structure  as  well  as  issues  pertaining to the continued  sustenance  of the  services  offered. 
Further, increased risks, if any, due to presence of non-banks in payments area also needs 
to be better understood and managed. 
Is the time ripe to review the role of the payment intermediaries? 
RBI  has  been  aware  of  the  critical  role  played  by  the  “intermediaries”  in  the  e-commerce 
arena.  The  intermediaries  provide  “platform”  for  acceptance  and  processing  of  payments 
across multiple electronic payment channels. They offer payment aggregation services to a 
large  number  of  businesses  (small  to  large),  governments,  utilities,  banks,  insurance 
companies,  etc.  They  act  as  payment  aggregators  by  obviating  the  need  for  a  merchant/ 
organization  to  set-up  and  manage  a  multiplicity  of  relationships  with  different  financial 
institutions – viz. banks, networks, wallets, prepaid issuers, etc. for accepting payments. Over 
the  years  the  volume  and  value  of  transactions  handled  by  the  intermediaries  have  grown 
manifold.  Reportedly,  there  are  the  intermediaries  who  handle  daily  volumes  of  6–7 lakh 
transactions for values Rs 150 to Rs.200 crore. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Though  these  entities  at  present  are  not  authorised,  they  have  been  advised  to  follow 
directions  on  protection  of  customer  funds.  The  growing  importance  of  intermediaries 
warrants  a  review  of  the  extant  oversight  mechanism.  Some  of  the  areas  which  need 
attention are the need for intermediaries to provide complete and transparent information to 
the  customers  on  the  success/failure  of  transactions;  uniform  and  standard  practice  for 
refunds  to  the  customers  for  failed/cancelled  transactions  and  related  customer  service 
issues. Another area of concern is the operational risk that such entities may pose. As the 
customers, merchants and financial institutions depend on the intermediaries for payments/ 
collections any disruption can negatively impact the payment system. While some of the big 
merchants  have  “substitutability”  or  “interoperability”  arrangement  in  the  form  of  payment 
gateway  switching  system,  others  fully  depend  on  one  intermediary.  This  underscores  the 
importance of the operational risk being effectively addressed by the intermediaries. 
Given  the  above,  the  need  to  continue  with  the  existing  light  touch  regulations  vis-a-vis  a 
focused oversight including authorisation for such of those entities which have a significant 
presence  in  the  market  would  need  to  be  explored.  Further,  the  intermediaries  perform 
certain  niche  functions  which  may  not  qualify  to  be  part  of  the  core  businesses  of  banks. 
When  specialization  and  efficiency  are  existent,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  allow  such 
intermediaries to play their roles, but with the added covenants relating to safety, business 
continuity, risk reduction and sustenance. 
Do we need a payment industry council / association encompassing all stakeholders? 
The payment landscape in India  was for long primarily dominated by banks. Legislation of 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 paved the way for entry of non-bank payment 
system operators. The payment system milieu covers an entire gamut of stakeholders like 
banks,  non-bank  payment  system  operators,  technology  providers,  outsourcing  agencies, 
network providers, intermediaries, customers, government etc. The increasing complexities 
in payment system demands that all the stakeholders work in tandem and collaborate. In the 
Indian  scenario,  the  co-operation  and  co-ordination  among  stakeholders  is  more  critical 
considering the fact that a significant section of the society is under-banked or unbanked. For 
example  for  mobile  banking  to  leapfrog  it  is  essential  that  banks  and  MNOs  co-operate. 
Similarly, growth of PoS transactions would require co-ordination among merchants, banks, 
card networks etc. 
Against  this  backdrop  the  need  for  an  industry-level  association  open  to  all  stakeholders 
needs to be evaluated. There are several such association/payment councils like European 
Payment  Council  (EPC),  UK  Payment  Council,  Australian  Payments  Clearing  Association 
(APCA)  Payments  Association  of  South  Africa  (PASA),  to  name  a  few,  which  provide  the 
necessary  platform  for  partnerships,  collaboration,  advocacy,  and  awareness  around 
payments  eco-system  in  their  respective  domains.  In  the  Indian  context,  the  Indian  Banks 
Association  represents  the  banks  but  does  not  have  representations  from  non-banks  and 
other stakeholders. It is true that there are small associations such as in the cards sector, but 
these are not all-pervasive across payment systems as a whole. 
Industry-wide payments council/association will provide an excellent platform to brainstorm, 
collaborate  and  drive  new  technology  proliferation,  and  thereby  bring  forth  innovative 
solutions  to  create  a  robust  payments  infrastructure.  The  need  for  such  a  co-operative 
platform was touched upon in the “Payment Systems Vision 2012–15” which stated that the 
feasibility  of  forming  a  standard  setting  body  under  the  overall  guidance  of  RBI  with 
representation  from  IBA,  IDRBT  and  other  stakeholders  would  be  examined  and  taken 
forward. 
How will the White Label ATM (WLA) scheme help expand ATM network in India? 
Deployment  of  ATMs  in  India  is  witnessing  a  30%  y-on-y  growth  in  the  last  few  years. 
However,  the  deployment  is  largely  restricted  to  the  urban/metro  areas  while  locations  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Tier III  to  VI  areas  have  not  witnessed  much  ATM  presence.  Further,  when  compared  to 
other countries the per capita ATM deployment in India continues to lag. Given the recent 
policy initiatives in Financial Inclusion, it is expected that a large number of bank accounts 
would  be  opened  in  Tier  III  to  VI  centres  triggering  a  demand  for  basic  banking  services 
including  convenience  banking  through  ATMs.  Thus,  there  is  a  need  for  expanding 
deployment of ATMs to increase availability and access especially in the rural areas. 
Some of the reasons that were being attributed to the low deployment as indicated above 
were  high  cost  of  deployment  and  operation,  inadequate  support  infrastructure,  large 
requirement  of  human  resources  etc.  The  WLA  concept  exemplifies  the  benefits  of 
partnership between banks and non-banks in building the payment infrastructure. The banks 
need not lock their funds since the capital investment is undertaken by the WLA operator and 
the  operator  gets  a  fee  plus  other  charges  for  every  transaction  from  the  bank  which  has 
issued  the  card.  RBI  is  in  the  process  of  authorising  the  first  set  of  non-bank  entities  for 
operating WLAs. 
WLA scheme is a watershed initiative for bank and non-bank partnership in payment space. 
However,  the  success  would  depend  on  how  well  the  banks  and  non-bank  entities 
complement each other. The efforts of non-banks to create ATM infrastructures need to be 
complemented by banks by bringing the financially excluded into the ambit of banking and 
issuing  them  cards,  besides  providing  a  mutually  beneficial  cash  management  and 
settlement of transactions services. Further, banks and non-banks need to act in tandem in 
redressing  customer  grievances  relating  to  failed  transactions.  RBI  would  be  closely 
monitoring the progress and proactively intervening when warranted. 
issues  mainly  revolve  around 
Consumer protection in electronic payments – a peek through the looking glass or a 
Pandora’s Box? 
Having raised the issues of discouraging the use of cheques, moving to electronic platforms 
of payments, and the entry of non-banks into the payment domain, I also need to discuss 
one other important issue regarding “consumer protection and rights” in payments. Just as it 
is  well-understood that consumer  behaviour  does  not  change  easily  or  quickly,  it  is  also a 
moot point that some of the main underlying factors influencing customer choice relates to 
how transparent and secure the system is and how confident the customer is about getting a 
fair treatment in case of complaints / grievances. Often, the doubts the customer has about 
getting a “raw deal” tilts the scale towards traditional payments – cash or cheque – just so 
that the customer wants to “avoid the hassles” about failed transactions occurring in a media 
(online, electronic) that is unfamiliar to him/her. 
Consumer  protection 
fraudulent  and/or  unauthorised 
transactions,  unauthorised  or  excessive  charges,  failed  transactions  –  non-delivery  and 
rejections, late delivery  of transactions, and disputes arising out of any or all of the above 
and complaint redressal. The catch is, as any banker would vouch for, while good consumer 
experience  may  not  necessarily  make  for  a  second  or  repetitive  use  of  the  medium,  bad 
consumer experience certainly creates a bitter feeling. 
Even globally, it can be said that the need for and the discussion about consumer protection 
in  electronic  payments  is  a  relatively  new  phenomenon  as  compared  to  cheques.  Under 
cheques,  consumer  protection  is  provided  by  the  nature  of  the  banker-customer  contract, 
which is not imposed by either of the parties but has been historically defined by “practice” as 
a  series  of  common  law  cases  (which  is  true  in  most  countries).  However,  with  the 
introduction  of  electronic  funds  transfer  systems  and  also  the  entry  of  non-bank  entities, 
many contractual terms and conditions began to be imposed on consumers who often ended 
up  bearing  all  the  losses  for  unauthorised  transactions.  Gradually,  many  regulatory 
developments  have  taken  place  with  the  objective  of  enhancing  consumer  trust  in  online 
payments including addressing the issue of disproportionate charges for services rendered, 
limiting  consumer  liability  etc.  For  instance,  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Consumer  Protection  Act,  2010  requires  the  Federal  Reserve  to  establish  standards  for 
interchange fees that are reasonable and proportional to the cost of processing debit card 
transactions, the EU Directive on Payment services in the internal market (Directive 2007) 
provides rules on transparency, timing of payments and information requirements (including 
rights  and  obligations  of  users  and  providers  of  payment  services,  liability  rules  etc.),  EU 
Directive on Consumer Rights 2011 (to be implemented by December 2013 by all member 
states)  aims  to  harmonise  consumer  protection  in  particular  relating  to  purchase  of  digital 
content products and in cross border transactions. 
How  are  we  placed  in  terms  of  consumer  protection  and  responsibilities  of  banks  and 
customers  in  an  electronic  banking  environment  where  physical  transaction  is  replaced  by 
electronic transaction, physical trail is replaced by electronic trail, and a physical signature is 
replaced with a digital one? How can we define the roles and responsibilities of banks and 
customers  in  such  an  environment  to  achieve  a  win-win  situation  for  all?  Is  the  customer 
really aware of his/her rights and responsibilities, or does the “fine print” put all the liability on 
the  customer?  Does  the  regulatory  requirement  of  “authorisation”  provide  a  sufficient 
safeguard  for  users  of  electronic  payments?  Are  the  existing  Consumer  Protection  Act, 
Banking Ombudsman Act, and other grievance redressal mechanisms really up to handling 
issues  arising  out  of  payments  systems  arena  which  is  increasingly  getting  electronic?  Or 
does  the  law  need  to  be  strengthened  further  while  focussing  exclusively  on  consumer 
protection issues arising out of electronic transactions? Is there a need to dovetail Consumer 
protection with Consumer awareness as well since there is a lot of synergy between these 
two  requirements?  For  instance,  even  as  the  RBI  is  taking  steps  to  make  Card  Present 
transactions more secure, customer awareness can go a long way in enhancing customer 
protection  while  using  Magstripe  cards  at  a  POS  terminal.  A  simple  case  in  point  is  how 
many of us really pay attention to the fact whether the merchant is checking the signature on 
the card during a transaction at the POS terminal? Today, matching the signature on charge-
slip with that on the card is perfunctory. Should not this become a more serious exercise? I 
would encourage the Bankers’ Club to arrange a Round Table to debate on these issues and 
come up with a technical paper. 
As I conclude, let me also take this opportunity to provide some inputs on two other areas 
which  will  see  vast  improvements  in  large  value  payments  as  well  as  bring  in  additional 
messaging  avenues  –  I  am  referring  to  the  Next-Gen  RTGS  and  the  proposed  entry  of 
SWIFT for domestic messaging in India. 
The existing RTGS system was commissioned in 2004. The volume of RTGS transactions 
have  grown  over  the  years  and  currently  settles  approximately  a  volume  of  around  3 lakh 
transactions a day. This raised issues of scalability of the existing RTGS system which was 
developed to handle a volume of 50,000 per day. Further, it is a well known fact that RTGS, 
being a gross settlement system, is liquidity intensive system. 
The  next  generation  RTGS  (NG-RTGS)  is  structured  to  be  equipped  with  liquidity  saving 
features,  an  advanced  gridlock  resolution  mechanism,  increased  security  measures, 
operational  reliability,  business  continuity  and  be  compliant  with  international  standards.  It 
would encourage inter-operability with alternative systems. The new system would endorse 
(a) the latest technology; (b) high scalability and flexibility to adapt to changes in the financial 
environment and other requirements; and (c) enhance accessibility to cope with changes in 
the financial environment, such as globalisation of financial transactions and networking of 
settlement infrastructures. It has been decided to adopt ISO 20022 message formats in the 
NG-RTGS system. 
Currently, there is only one messaging solution – SFMS available for domestic messaging. In 
order  to  have  an  alternate  messaging  infrastructure,  SWIFT  has  been  accorded  an 
in-principle  approval  for  domestic  messaging  with  specific  terms  and  conditions.  The 
participants would have the option to choose multiple channels to route the transactions to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the central server in the Bank. The multiple channels are INFINET / SFMS, SWIFT and the 
Internet. 
One must recognise that payment systems have become a dominant factor affecting our day 
to day lives and has the potential to spur economic growth as well. Coupled with its capability 
to be omnipresent and have a plethora of players with varied backgrounds and interests, the 
need to ensure safe, secure and efficient payment systems gains importance. It is this task 
which  the  Reserve  Bank  is  now  concentrating  upon.  Like  effective  teams  which  achieve 
success in their efforts, the various players in the payment systems space also need to work 
in  unison,  with  the  ultimate  objective  of  ensuring  customer  satisfaction.  It  may  be  good  to 
pause  and  examine  in  an  unbiased  manner  whether  this  has  been  achieved  or  not.  If  the 
level  of  achievement  is  not  substantial  enough,  then  we  need  to  work  out  strategies  for 
ensuring  that  they  are  achieved.  For  instance,  how  do  we  move  away  from  cash 
transactions?  Can  we  for  instance  try  this  at  petrol  bunks  across  the  country?  Can  we 
implement  wireless  POS/mobile  POS  across  the  country  for  replacing  all  cash-on-delivery 
payments to electronic payments, be it cooking gas or pizza delivery? I recall that more than 
two  decades  ago,  it  was  this  state  which  witnessed  the  introduction  of  new  players  in 
transferring  payments  from  the  Gulf  –  the  private  exchange  houses  which  played  a  very 
specific role which was required at that point of time. Today, as the country is looking with 
great  expectations  for  innovations  in  payment  systems,  can  we  look  forward  to  an  encore 
from  the  southernmost  state  of  the  country?  Can  the  payment  system  operations  in  the 
God’s own country function qualitatively and in terms of customer delight invoke even God’s 
envy? 
Thank you for your attention. Once again, wish you all a wonderful New Year.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
