Ardian Fullani: Bank of Albania’s work progress, 2012 results, and 
challenges for the future 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Parliamentary 
Commission on Economy and Finance, Tirana, 9 April 2013. 
 Honourable Chairman, 
Honourable Deputies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to start by expressing my great appreciation for this opportunity to present to you, 
on behalf of the Bank of Albania, the central bank’s work progress and results over the past 
year. Also, this meeting will let us share our opinions about recent economic and monetary 
developments, and touch upon the challenges, which, in Bank of Albania’s opinion, deserve 
attention in the future. 
Right from the start, I would like to emphasize that the Bank of Albania succeeded in fulfilling 
its legal responsibilities in 2012. Consumer prices remained stable, as depicted by the 2% 
average inflation rate during the year. The financial system soundness also improved at both 
macro and micro levels. 
The  major  objectives  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  were  achieved,  despite  adverse  internal  and 
external  environment,  and  shocks  posed  to  Albanian  economy  over  this  period.  Their 
achievement  reflected,  to  a  great  extent,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  cautious  monetary  policy, 
regulatory measures and our policy of banking supervision. They were favoured by ongoing 
improvement  of  the  financial  payment  infrastructure,  prudential  and  efficient  liquidity 
management  operations,  and  transparent  communication  with  the  public.  The  whole  our 
work was supported by qualitatively improved financial literacy of the public, analytical study 
of several phenomena, matters of interest for the development of the country, and production 
of  financial  statistics  conform  to  international  standards.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  emphasize 
that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  a  serious  and  important  player  in  Albania’s  integration 
project, completing and updating all its legal responsibilities and institutional commitments. 
Honourable Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In my speech, I will address the key issues of the Annual Report, focusing on main directions 
of Bank of Albania’s work over the past year. I will start my speech with our work and results 
in fulfilling the primary objective: achieving and maintaining price stability. 
 Economic developments, price stability and monetary policy in 2012 
1. 
As I said in the introduction of my speech, the year 2012 was another difficult year for the 
Albanian economy. Weaknesses in our financial and trading partners were manifested in a 
low demand for Albanian exports, tight financing conditions for foreign capital, and elevated 
uncertainty among economic agents. Also, the public and private sector domestic demand 
remained weak in the Albanian economy. 
Besides these factors, two other specific shocks hit the economic activity over the past year. 
Hence, bad weather in the first quarter was reflected into a sluggish activity in construction 
and  export  over  the  period.  The  banking  system’s  response  to  new  and  tighter  regulatory 
measures provided by the European Banking Authority (EBA) was the other shock of higher 
importance and influence. Direct impact of this shock on financial markets, and especially on 
government  securities  market  was  about  2%  of  GDP.  However,  their  indirect  impact  was 
even greater. As in other countries of the Central and Eastern Europe, banks originating from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  euro  area  countries  adopted  a  more  conservative  behaviour,  manifested  in  further 
slowdown of lending during the year. 
As  a  result,  the  Albanian  economy  slowed  further  over  the  past  year,  leaving  spare 
capacities in the labour and capital markets. 
This development was associated with low increase in wages and producer costs and was 
reflected in slightly increased consumer prices. Supply shocks were few and of low intensity 
over  the  past  year,  inflationary  expectations  remained  anchored  and  liquidity  position  was 
favourable to keep inflation in check. This balance of factors was materialized in low annual 
inflation rates and the annual consumer price rise eased to 2.4% at end-2012. 
Low  inflationary  pressures  and  lack  of  fiscal  stimulus  made  room  for  further  easing  of 
monetary policy in 2012. The Bank of Albania cut the key interest rate three times, to 4.0%, 
from  4.75%.  The  monetary  conditions  were  eased  to  stimulate  the  domestic  demand  and 
create better conditions for meeting the medium-term inflation target. 
Also,  the  Bank  of  Albania  increased  significantly  the  liquidity-providing  operations  in  the 
banking  system  to  calm  down  financial  agents,  control  the  rising  interest  rate  trends  and 
ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  markets.  In  general,  our  efforts  resulted  effective  in 
managing  the  liquidity  problems,  however  tighter  funding  conditions  faced  the  Albanian 
economy in both public and private sectors. This tendency reflects, to a great extent, the risk 
aversion in financial agents and markets. Addressing it will be our main challenge over the 
next year. 
Back  to  economic  development.  Official  data  show  that  the  economic  growth  for  2012 
remained  positive  but  slower  than  in  the  previous  year.  According  to  INSTAT  data,  gross 
domestic  product  grew  by  1.6%  in  2012,  supported  by  boosted  activity  in  services  and 
agriculture sectors. 
Meanwhile,  the  industrial  sector  remained  stagnant,  while  the  construction  sector  shrank, 
reflecting  the  weak  domestic  demand  and  specific  sector-related  problems.  Though  to  a 
lesser extent, the economic growth was supported mainly by external demand and increased 
exports. On the other hand, despite the stimulating monetary policy, the domestic demand 
appeared  weak.  This  weakness  reflects  the  reluctance  of  consumer  and  businesses  to 
consume  and  invest,  and  the  limited  space  for  increasing  public  spending.  In  general,  the 
Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  these  determinants  of  economic  growth  will  continue  to  be 
present even over the next quarters. The low degree of existing capacity utilization affected 
the  labour  market.  The  pace  of  increase  in  employment  slowed  down,  though  the 
unemployment rate has remained 13.3% over more than one year. 
Rising exports and slowing imports brought about 13.8% decline in current account deficit. 
Although the capital and financial account inflows fell by 11.3% in annual terms, the overall 
balance of payments resulted positive and the Bank of Albania’s foreign-exchange reserves 
increased  over  the  past  year.  The  current  level  of  this  reserve  is  in  accordance  with  our 
operational adequacy rates and could pay for 4.5 months of imports of goods and services. 
Improvement of the structural current account deficit should be one of our long-term policy 
objectives;  it  helps  in  maintaining  the  financial  stability  of  our  country  and  increasing  the 
country¡¦s resilience to foreign shocks. 
Fiscal policy was generally consolidating in 2012. Budget deficit dropped by 1.2% in annual 
terms,  estimated  at  3.4%  of  GDP,  or  down  by  0.3  percentage  points  from  a  year  earlier. 
Current account deficit narrowed due to reduced public expenditures, which fell by 0.3% on a 
year  earlier.  Similarly,  public  revenues  dropped  by  0.2%  in  annual  terms,  reflecting  the 
cyclical condition of the economy. 
On the other hand, public debt exceeded 60% as a percentage of GDP, reflecting the higher-
than-projected rise in budget deficit and the increase in public guarantees. Bank of Albania’s 
attitude to this problem has always been transparent: maintaining public debt at sustainable 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  harmless  levels for the  Albanian  economy  and  preserving financial  market  confidence 
regarding the Albanian public debt should remain the primary objective of the fiscal policy. 
Monetary indicators performed in line with real-economy ones, slowing down in 2012. Low 
demand of businesses and households for bank loans and tight lending standards led to poor 
performance  of  credit  to  economy.  Its  annual  growth  dropped  to  2.4%  at  year-end.  Poor 
credit performance was present in all its segments, by purpose of use. Meanwhile, foreign-
currency loan continues to shift to lek loans. Shifting household savings from bank deposits 
to public debt securities was a striking financial development over the past year. 
This trend led to increase in financing the budget deficit by households and decline in this 
financing by the banking system. 
Financial  market  liquidity  position  and  risk  premium  performance  conditioned  the  pass-
through  of  easing  monetary  policy  to  financial  markets.  Key  interest  rate  cuts  were 
immediately  reflected  in  the  interbank  market  and  in  lek  deposit  market,  but  their  pass-
through to government securities markets and to lek credit was more limited, mainly due to 
developments  I  mentioned  earlier.  However,  lek  intermediation  cost  dropped  in  2012  and 
increase  in  lek  intermediation  created  grounds  for  better  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
signals  to  economy  during  the  current  year.  Finally,  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  the 
exchange rates were generally calm due to a balanced ratio of the foreign-currency supply 
and demand. 
In operational aspect, the Bank of Albania upgraded the infrastructure of its role as a lender 
of last resort to commercial banks. 
Due  to  this  work,  the  Regulation  “On  the  liquidity  supporting  loan”  was  reviewed  and 
approved, stipulating an appropriate framework to support banks that are temporarily illiquid. 
Also, the Bank of Albania reviewed its regulation on the required reserves of banks, raising 
their flexibility in the manner of holding it and creating more opportunities in increasing the 
banking sector’s exposure to the economy. 
 Another important aspect of the central bank’s functions is the banking system supervision 
and regulation, which contributed significantly to strengthening of the financial stability. In the 
following, I will focus on performance of some key indicators and banking system risks, as 
well as on the most important developments in supervision, licensing, legal and regulatory 
framework. 
Banking supervision and financial stability 
2. 
Banking  sector  assets  to  GDP  accounted  for  87.9%  at  end-2012,  up  by  3.1%  on  a  year 
earlier. Profit improved, leading to improved indicators of Return on Average Assets (RoAA) 
and Return on Average Equity (RoAE). At end-2012, the banking system capital adequacy 
ratio was 16.2%, increased on a year earlier. At system level and for each individual bank, 
this indicator remained above the 12% minimum requirement. 
Supervision has aimed at assessing and monitoring the risks posed to the banking system. 
Special attention has been paid to monitoring the loan portfolio quality and the systemic risks 
stemming from lending, as well as to their actual or potential effects on the degree of banking 
system capitalisation. The banking system exposure to credit risk increased in 2012. 
The ratio of non-performing loans to total loans was 22.5% at year-end, from 18.8% a year 
earlier. However, the share of non-performing loans secured by collateral was larger than a 
year earlier, accounting for about 81% of the non-performing loan portfolio. Also, the banking 
system increased the loan loss provisioning by 31%. Liquidity indicators improved in 2012.  
The ratio of liquid assets to short-term liabilities was 36.7%, being above the minimum level 
for  both  the  lek  and  foreign  currencies.  Deposits  were  the  main  source  of  financing  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
banking activity and the parent-bank lines of credit decreased significantly compared to end-
2011.  The  reduced  dependency  on  parent-bank  financing  in  Albania  is  a  positive 
development that has increased the domestic banking system’s resilience to foreign shocks. 
The banking system is hedged against market risks. Our estimates point to a banking system 
that is slightly exposed to interest rate risk. It is also slightly exposed to direct effects from 
exchange rate volatility and its foreign-currency open position is obviously below our limits. 
The banking system continues to be exposed to indirect exchange rate risk due to foreign 
currency loans granted to borrowers whose income is not in foreign currency. 
The control on operational risk improved in 2012, by improving the framework of procedures. 
The  banking  system  has  the  necessary  technological  infrastructure  to  meet  the  regulatory 
requirements, hence ensuring that the activity is carried out even in extreme circumstances. 
Transparency and publication of information continue to be in focus of the Bank of Albania, 
as important pillars to protect customer and foster discipline in market competition. 
Aiming to enhance transparency and boost competition among banks in the market, on July 
2012,  the  Bank  of  Albania  started  publishing  on  its  website  the  interest  rates  and  banks’ 
commissions  on  their  products.  However,  we  are  well  aware  that  there  is  still  room  for 
improvement  in  reference  interest  rate  used  in  credit  contracts  and  in  the  information  that 
banks publish on their websites. 
Addressing the prevention of money laundering and of terrorism financing was an important 
part  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  process  in  2012.  Besides  improving  the  regulatory 
framework  in  line  with  the  new  Law  and  EU  standards,  we  have  also  strengthened  our 
cooperation  with  the  Department  of  Money  Laundering  Prevention  and  have  fostered  the 
supervisory process of financial institutions. On-site and off-site examinations revealed that 
entities  have  taken  appropriate,  preventive  measures  and  have  established  a  proper 
infrastructure to identify and report suspicious cases. 
The year 2012 highlighted important developments in the area of financial activity licensing. 
Hence, two branches of foreign banks turned into their subsidiaries, reducing the risk of their 
exposure to parent-bank risks, enhancing their independence and the control level exercised 
over  them  by  the  Bank  of  Albania.  An  important  change  was  also  the  transfer  of  100% 
shares  of  the  Emporiki  Bank  from  Emporiki  Bank  of  Greece  to  IUB  Holding  France, 
contributing  to  long-term  and  stable  development  of  the  banking  industry.  Finally,  in  2012, 
the number of non-bank financial institutions and the range of financial products and services 
provided in the market by the financial system increased. 
In  2012,  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  of  the  banking  system  underwent  important 
changes. The Bank of Albania and the Deposit Insurance Agency, taking into consideration 
the European Union regulatory alterations, prepared relevant amendments to the Law “On 
Deposit Insurance”. 
In line with EU directives, the base of contributors to insurance scheme expanded, including 
the  savings  and  loan  associations.  Also,  the  formulas  for  calculating  compensation  were 
clarified  and  simplified.  The  Assembly  of  the  Republic  of  Albania  approved  the  related 
amendments on 26 July 2012. The adoption of the new Regulation “On the establishment, 
licensing and functioning of the bridge bank” improved significantly the regulatory framework 
on  bank  management  in  the  event  of  bankruptcy.  Other  important  regulatory  amendments 
and  improvements  took  place  on  bank  management,  risk  management  and  related 
structures, supervision decisions, as well as insurance and re-insurance activity. 
 Besides the main directions of the Bank of Albania’s work described above, I would like to 
dwell on some other activities of our work. These activities not only help us fulfil our legal 
responsibilities, but also serve the development of the financial system and market economy 
in Albania. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3. 
Other activities of the Bank of Albania 
Money issuance 
The Bank of Albania has the exclusive right to issue and circulate our national currency and 
to  oversee  and  ensure  banknote  and  coin  quality.  One  of  the  biggest  investments  of  the 
Bank of Albania to guarantee our currency’s integrity is the construction of the new building 
of Currency Issue Centre, which started operating in 2012. The closed and automated cycle 
of controlling processing, packaging and shredding of banknotes takes place in this building. 
Soon  professional  expertise  on  banknotes  and  coins  suspected  to  be  counterfeit  will  be 
made, hence fulfilling one of the obligations of the Albanian state in view of the Stabilisation 
and Association Agreement. 
Foreign-exchange reserve management 
Holding  and managing Albania’s  foreign-exchange reserve  to  preserve financial  stability  of 
the economy is another constitutional function of the Bank of Albania. 
The  gross  foreign-exchange  reserve  was  up  by  EUR  65  million  in  2012,  registering 
EUR 1.972 million at the end of December 2012. 
Payment system 
Fulfilling its legal duty, the Bank of Albania promotes smooth functioning of payment systems 
to support the monetary policy implementation and maintain financial stability. During 2012, 
Lek interbank transactions were cleared and settled timely, efficiently and safely, conform to 
rules  and  procedures  of  both  systems  (ARCH  and  AIPS).  Also,  several  regulations  and 
manuals were reviewed and drafted, consisting in strengthening the supervision and further 
developing the Albanian payment system. 
Improvement of statistics 
The year 2012 pointed to improved statistics as a legal responsibility of the Bank of Albania. 
During this year, a model was drafted to improve the balance of payments statistics and the 
international  investment  position,  aiming  to  approximate  the  national  statistics  system  with 
the ECB and ESCB standards. Also, the objectives under the IPA-2009 project on “Regional 
statistical  cooperation  programme  for  the  Balkans  countries”  were  successfully  completed 
and project coordinators have commended the Bank of Albania. 
Other (research, human resources, communication and transparency, integration process) 
In addition to fulfilment of legal duties, the Bank of Albania is committed to attaining other 
objectives that help in completing a modern central bank’s role in economy. Bank of Albania 
intensified its research and academic activities in international arena during 2012. Worth of 
note is the 10th International Conference on “Monetary Policy: From the past to the present”, 
which  was  coordinated  with  other  activities  in  the  framework  of  the  100th  anniversary  of 
Albania’s Independence. 
Also,  through  the  Institute  of  Economic  Studies,  we  have  promoted  the  broad  interest  of 
Albanian and foreign researchers, and have organised two regional workshops. 
Since some years ago, the Bank of Albania has put on focus of its development plan, the 
improvement of bridges of communication with the public and enhancement of transparency. 
During 2012, we continued to complete the published information and diversify it according to 
target audience. We built up contacts with the media and intensified our efforts in financial 
education,  aiming  to  increase  financial  literacy  and  clearly  transmit  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
messages. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  was  an  active  participant  in  fulfilment  of  obligations  arising  from  the 
SAA,  Central  European  Free  Trade  Agreement,  and  other  national  commitments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
International  authorities  have  assessed  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  work  progress  as  positive. 
Regarding institutional issues, the European Commission, International Monetary Fund and 
World Bank have given the Bank a maximum score. 
 Dear Members, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Completing my speech, allow me to highlight some problems which have conditioned and will 
condition  the functioning  of  Albanian  economy  and financial  markets. We  deem that  these 
problems require prior attention and cautious solution. 
First,  the  integration  of  the  Albanian  economy  with  the  European  financial  systems  and 
markets  implies  that  shocks  and  swings  to  our  financial  and  trading  partners  are  soon 
transmitted  to  the  Albanian  economy.  The  medium  and  long-term  outlook  of  the  Albanian 
economy is related to that of our trading partners. Global market ups and downs increase or 
decrease  the  economic  activity  in  the  country.  Overall,  the  integration  process  remains 
beneficial to the Albanian economy, but it poses challenges as well. 
Therefore, I would like to emphasise that the Albanian economy and financial system should 
pay  more  attention  to  global  market  developments;  our  structural  reforms  should  aim  at 
increasing  resistance  to  their  swings,  while  our  economic  policies  should  be  cautiously 
oriented toward long-term global trends. 
Secondly, the country’s financial stability should be seen as a duty of all and not as an issue 
of one or some institutions. The financial stability is a public good that serves the long-term 
development of a country. Recent global developments have proven that the financial system 
is a highly integrated mosaic; its stability has many dimensions and it is determined by the 
interplay of many segments and stakeholders. Therefore, I would like to reiterate my appeal 
for finding a political consensus that would enable the establishment of a fiscal rule, which 
serves the maintaining of long-term sustainability of public finances and investors’ confidence 
in the Albanian economy. 
Third,  the  reform  of  social  and  health  insurance  systems  is  another  important  aspect  that 
remains problematic for the long-term stability of the country. Deficits resulting from them are 
upward and may substantially affect fiscal parameters in the future. This reform should open 
the  way  to  development  of  relatively  backward  segments  of  the  financial  system,  those  of 
private  pension  and  insurance  funds.  This  would  really  contribute  to  expanding  and 
deepening the financial market in Albania. 
Fourth, sticking to financial stability, I would like to bring to your attention the changes in the 
code  of  civil  procedure  relating  to  easing  of  collateral  execution.  Further  to  the  package 
launched recently by the Bank of Albania and the letter I sent a few days ago to the major 
parties  in  the  Assembly,  I  would  appeal  once  more  for  their  approval  at  an  earlier  time 
possible. 
It is a set of proposals that we and international experts regard indispensable for the stability 
of the banking system, guarantee of deposits and recovery of credit to economy. 
Finally,  the  long-term  development  of  Albania  and  the  policies  and  strategies  supporting  it 
deserve  greater  attention.  The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  confident  in  the  long-term 
development prospects of the country. These prospects are favoured by natural resources 
and low labour costs, but above all, they must rely on our opportunities and abilities to be 
integrated into the value-added chain of the European economies. The road ahead is long 
and  arduous.  In  short  and  medium  term,  it  needs  political  will  and  wisdom  to  carry  out 
reforms,  and  increased  attention  to  issues  of  Albania’s  macroeconomic  and  financial 
soundness. 
In the long term, the structure of the Albanian economy should be more aligned with those of 
the  European  countries;  economic  growth  should  be  based  more  on  production  factors 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
productivity,  and  Albanian  businesses  should  pay  more  attention  to  finding  and  exploring 
new markets. 
Being  heedful  and  aware  of  the  challenges  ahead,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  started  to 
analyse new tools and techniques to fulfil its mission. Pinpointing the economic slowdown as 
the main risk facing the Albanian economy and financial system, and assessing the role of 
bank  credit  to  economy,  on  March  2013,  the  Bank  of  Albania  adopted  a  set  of  macro-
prudential  measures  oriented  toward  promoting  lending  and  lowering  banking  system  risk. 
Briefly, these measures consist in easing capital requirements to boost credit, easing liquidity 
requirements, reducing provisions for restructured loans, and increasing capital requirements 
for assets abroad above the rates required by the Bank of Albania. 
These  temporary  measures  are  another  sign  of  our  willingness  to  accomplish  the  mission 
and our legal duties. 
 Concluding,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  2012  Annual  Report  and 
Financial Statements are presented to you. I remain open to any questions or remarks. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
