William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Whitman School of Management at Syracuse University, 
Syracuse, New York, 27 September 2013. 
 Good  afternoon.  I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  at  Syracuse  University.  It  is  always  a 
pleasure to speak with the different communities that make up our region, and it is especially 
gratifying  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  with  you,  our  future  leaders.  So  thank  you  for 
inviting me. 
My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at 
the grassroots level of our economy. Earlier on this trip, I met with government and business 
leaders in Buffalo, Rochester and Syracuse to learn about some of the challenges the region 
faces as well as the collaborative efforts being taken to further economic development. The 
agenda for these visits is always packed, but that’s part of the point – to meet with a diverse 
array of representatives in order to get a comprehensive picture of economic conditions in 
the region and a fuller understanding of the major issues and concerns. This is our fourth trip 
to Upstate New York in the past few years and recent trips have also taken us to Northern 
New Jersey, the boroughs of New York City, Long Island, and Fairfield County, Connecticut. 
My outreach trips complement the ongoing efforts of the New York Fed to assess conditions 
in  the  upstate  New  York  economy  and  throughout  our  District.  We  monitor  economic 
performance on a monthly basis through our indexes of economic activity and our survey of 
New  York  State  manufacturers. We  also  get  important  input  on  economic  conditions  from 
meetings with our Upstate Advisory Board, whose members are major leaders in the upstate 
economy. We have constructed a consumer credit panel that allows us to better understand 
the financial  condition  of  homeowners  and  students,  and  conduct  a  bi-annual  poll  of  small 
businesses  to  understand  their  credit  needs  and  availability.  The  results  of  the  latter  have 
helped inform a series of clinics that we have conducted to help small businesses take the 
next step to access capital and identify new sources of funding. 
As I mentioned earlier, we are always eager to engage with students, and our commitment to 
our  region  includes  a  series  of  educational  programs  worth  highlighting.  First,  Math x 
Economics, which encourages students attending Title 1 schools to consider preparing for a 
career  in  finance  or  economics.  And,  second,  our  yearly  Fed  Challenge  competitions,  in 
which teams of students from high schools and colleges in the District take on the roles of 
the  members  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  and  debate  what  is  the 
appropriate next step for U.S. monetary policy. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues fully engaged with the communities 
we represent. 
Next, I’ll review recent developments in the national and regional economy, and at the end of 
my talk will be happy to answer any questions you have about the economic outlook. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
National economic conditions 
Let  me  begin  by  taking  stock  of  where  we  are  at  the  moment.  Then  I  will  address  my 
expectations for the performance of the economy over the remainder of 2013 and into 2014. 
According  to  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  which  determines  the  timing  of 
economic recessions and expansions, the current expansion began in mid-2009, more than 
four years ago. However, the expansion has been subdued so far, as the average annual 
growth rate of real GDP has been just 2.2 percent over the past four years. While that growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
rate is near most FOMC participants’ estimates of the U.S. economy’s longer-run growth rate 
as well as those of many outside analysts, a more rapid pace of growth likely is necessary to 
reduce  meaningfully  the  significant  economic  slack  that  developed  during  the  Great 
Recession. 
Consistent  with  the  modest  pace  of  economic  growth,  improvement  in  labor  market 
conditions  has  been  slow.  Even 
though  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  by 
2.7 percentage  points from  its  peak  of  10  percent  in October  of  2009, there  are  still  many 
people  that  want  jobs  but  are  not  counted  as  unemployed  because  they  are  not  actively 
looking  for  work.  An  alternative  measure  of  labor  market  conditions,  the  employment  to 
population  ratio,  which  is  not  influenced  by  changes  in  the  number  of  these  workers,  has 
shown limited improvement. Job loss rates have fallen, but hiring rates remain depressed at 
low levels. Taken together, the labor market still cannot be regarded as healthy. Numerous 
indicators, including the behavior of labor compensation, are all consistent with the view that 
there remains a great deal of slack in labor markets. 
Nevertheless, as I have stated in earlier speeches, I see persuasive evidence of improving 
underlying fundamentals for much of the private sector of the U.S. economy. Key measures 
of household leverage have declined and are now near the lowest levels they have been in 
well over a decade. Household net worth, expressed as a percent of disposable income, has 
increased  back  to  its  average  of  the  previous  decade,  reflecting  rising  equity  and  home 
prices  and  declining  debt.  Banks  have  eased  credit  standards  somewhat  recently  after  a 
prolonged period of tightness. As a result, we are now experiencing a fairly typical cyclical 
recovery of consumer spending on durable goods. For example, light-weight motor vehicles 
sold  at  a  seasonally-adjusted  annual  rate  of  nearly  16.1  million  in  August,  close  to  the 
number sold in 2007. 
Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with 
underlying demographic trends, it now appears that we have worked off the excess supply of 
housing built up during the boom years of the last decade. Existing home sales remain on an 
upward trend, and a widely followed national home price index is up around 12 percent over 
the  12  months  ending  in  July.1  Indeed,  anecdotal  reports  suggest  that  this  higher-than-
expected increase in home prices is due to a lack of homes for sale. 
However,  a  number  of  risks  to  the  outlook  are  evident.  Long-term  interest  rates,  including 
mortgage rates, have risen significantly since early May. Since then, we have seen a sharp 
drop  in  refinancing  mortgage  applications,  a  more  moderate  but  significant  decline  in 
purchase mortgage applications and fairly flat housing starts and new home sales. Although I 
do  not  anticipate  that  the  rise  in  long-term  rates  will  lead  to  a  downturn  in  housing,  these 
developments do suggest that higher mortgage rates have cut into the upward momentum of 
the housing sector. We will need to monitor upcoming data closely to assess more fully the 
impact of higher rates on the housing recovery. 
Another risk is that federal fiscal policy could exert further restraint on the economy during 
the  rest  of  this  year  and  in  2014.  It  is  difficult  to  assess  how  much  of  the  contractionary 
effects  from  sequestration,  for  example,  have  already  occurred,  or  still  remain  ahead.  A 
related issue is the high degree of uncertainty about fiscal policy. In coming weeks, Congress 
will  be  considering  how  to  fund  the  government  for  the  next  fiscal  year  and  will  also  be 
debating what to do about the debt limit. This creates uncertainty about the fiscal outlook and 
may exert a restraining influence on household and business spending. 
One  other  risk  to  highlight  is  the  global  economic  outlook.  Even  though  the  euro  area 
appears to have begun to grow again after a protracted recession, growth in that area is still 
expected  to  be  fairly  weak  at  best.  In  addition,  growth  in  many  of  the  largest  emerging 
economies  has  slowed,  and  some  of  the  countries  with  large  trade  and  current  account 
                                                
1   Based on the CoreLogic home price index including distressed sales. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
imbalances have seen their financial markets and currencies come under pressure. If growth 
abroad were to slow, this could impede the growth of U.S. exports and this could result in 
less strength in manufacturing production and employment in the U.S. 
Thus, returning to an analogy I have used in previous speeches, I see the economy in a tug-
of-war between these headwinds and underlying fundamental improvement, with a great deal 
of uncertainty over when the improvement in the underlying fundamentals will prevail. 
In the end, my best guess is that growth for all of 2013, measured on a Q4/Q4 basis, will be 
near the post-recession average. But I believe a good case can be made that the pace of 
growth will pick up some in 2014. The private sector of the economy should continue to heal, 
while  the  amount  of  fiscal  drag  should  subside.  I  also  expect  that,  despite  the  near-term 
concerns,  growth  prospects  among  our  major trading  partners  will  improve  next  year.  And 
this combination of events is likely to create an environment in which business investment 
spending  will  strengthen.  However,  the  notion  that  the  economy  will  grow  more  swiftly 
remains a forecast rather than a reality at this point. 
Turning  to  the  inflation  outlook,  total  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures  (PCE)  deflator,  has  fluctuated  recently  with  short-term  movements  in  energy 
prices, but it continues to run below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent. Core inflation, 
that  is,  excluding  food  and  energy,  slowed  in  late  2012  and  early  2013  to  well  below 
2 percent, although it has shown signs of stabilizing in the last couple of months. 
A decomposition of core inflation reveals that the most recent slowing of inflation has been 
largely  confined  to  core  goods,  whereas  the  rate  of  increase  of  core  services  has  been 
relatively  steady.  Such  was  not  the  case  in  2010  –  the  previous  instance  of  a  significant 
slowing of inflation. In addition, inflation expectations so far have remained relatively stable at 
levels  somewhat  above  the  current  inflation  rate.  This  should  help  prevent  an  undesirable 
further drop in inflation relative to our 2 percent objective. Thus, I anticipate that inflation will 
firm further in the months ahead and move toward the FOMC’s longer-run objective. Still, the 
FOMC  recognizes  that  inflation  persistently  below  2  percent  could  pose  risks  to  economic 
performance. 
As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this forecast. Moreover, 
there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will be monitoring U.S. 
and global economic conditions very carefully and will adjust our views on the likely path for 
growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly in response to new information. 
So what does this all portend for monetary policy? As you are aware, at last week’s meeting 
of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  we  made  no  changes  to  our  monetary  policy.  In 
particular, the Committee decided to continue purchasing long-term Treasury securities and 
agency  mortgage-backed  securities  at  a  monthly  pace  of  $45  billion  and  $40  billion, 
respectively.  The  FOMC  statement  reaffirmed  the  Committee’s  intention  to  “continue  its 
purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy 
tools  as  appropriate,  until  the  outlook  for  the  labor  market  has  improved  substantially  in  a 
context of price stability.”2  
We  also  reaffirmed  our  forward  guidance  with  respect  to  the  federal  funds  rate.  The 
statement notes that the Committee “decided to keep the target range for the federal funds 
rate  at  0  to  ¼  percent  and  currently  anticipates  that  this  exceptionally  low  range  for  the 
federal  funds  rate  will  be  appropriate  at  least  as  long  as  the  unemployment  rate  remains 
above 6–1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more 
than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-
term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.”3  
                                                
2   Federal Open Market Committee statement, September 18, 2013. 
3   Federal Open Market Committee statement, September 18, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One noteworthy question that emerged following the meeting was why the Committee did not 
begin to reduce the pace of asset purchases. Although I can’t speak for the Committee, I can 
provide some reasons for my own decision. 
To begin to taper, I have two tests that must be passed: (1) evidence that the labor market 
has shown improvement, and (2) information about the economy’s forward momentum that 
makes me confident that labor market improvement will continue in the future. So far, I think 
we have made progress with respect to these metrics, but have not yet achieved success. 
With respect to the first metric, we have seen labor market improvement since the program 
began  last  September.  Over  this  time  period,  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to 
7.3 percent from 8.1 percent. However, at the same time, this decline in the unemployment 
rate overstates the degree of improvement. Other metrics of labor market conditions, such as 
the hiring, job-openings, job-finding rate, quits rate and the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio, 
collectively indicate a much more modest improvement in labor market conditions compared 
to  that  suggested  by  the  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate. In  particular,  it  is  still  hard  for 
those who are unemployed to find jobs. Currently, there are three unemployed workers per 
job opening, as opposed to an average of two during the period from 2003 to 2007. 
With respect to the second metric – confidence that the economic recovery is strong enough 
to generate sustained labor market improvement – I don’t think we have yet passed that test. 
The economy has not picked up forward momentum and a 2 percent growth rate – even if 
sustained  –  might  not  be  sufficient  to  generate  further  improvement  in  labor  market 
conditions.  Moreover,  as  I  noted  earlier,  fiscal  uncertainties  loom  very  large  right  now  as 
Congress considers the issues of funding the government and raising the debt limit ceiling. 
Assuming  no  change  in  my  assessment  of  the  efficacy  and  costs  associated  with  the 
purchase program, I’d like to see economic news that makes me more confident that we will 
see continued improvement in the labor market. Then I would feel comfortable that the time 
had come to cut the pace of asset purchases.4  
Regional economic conditions 
Let  me  now  turn to  economic  conditions  in  the region. The  upstate  New  York  economy  is 
continuing to grow, but at a pace somewhat slower than the national economy. In part, this 
reflects the fact that the U.S. economy is recovering from a much deeper and more severe 
recession  than  Upstate  New  York.  As  the  national  economy  continues  to  heal,  places  like 
Upstate New York, which didn’t see a huge boom and bust in housing and their economies 
before the Great Recession, don’t have as much ground to make up. 
But the region’s slow economic growth during the recovery also reflects the re-emergence of 
historical  trends  –  Upstate  New  York  hasn’t  tended  to  perform  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the 
country  during  economic  expansions.  Like  many  economies  in  the  Northeast,  Upstate  has 
tended to grow slowly in recent decades, as the population has shifted to other parts of the 
country and the once dominant manufacturing industry has shrunk considerably. 
These  same  trends  are  playing  out  in  the  Syracuse  area.  Like  Upstate  New  York  more 
generally,  the  recession  in  Syracuse  was  not  as  deep  as  the  nation’s.  However,  the 
Syracuse  area  experienced  a  deeper  recession  than  Upstate  as  a  whole,  losing  about 
13,000  jobs  during  the  downturn.  The  area’s  recovery  has  lagged  behind  Upstate.  So  far, 
Syracuse has gained back less than half of the jobs that it lost. 
Recent  job  growth  has  been  led  by  the  region’s  education  and  health  sectors.  Together, 
these  sectors  have  added  stability  to  the  local  economy  and  provided  a  foundation  for 
growth. Over the past several years, during both recession and recovery, these sectors have 
added about 1,000 jobs each year to the local economy. The leisure and hospitality sector, 
                                                
4   For  more  thoughts  on  the  monetary  policy  outlook,  I  refer  you  to  the  speech  made  earlier  this  week: 
Reflections on the Economic Outlook and the Implications for Monetary Policy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as well as the retail sector, has also been a solid source of job growth for the area. However, 
as you probably well know, job losses in the region’s manufacturing industry have weighed 
against  these gains.  About  9,000  manufacturing  jobs  have  been  lost  since  the  start  of  the 
Great Recession. And, while a slow jobs recovery began in the nation’s manufacturing sector 
in 2010, Syracuse has continued to lose these jobs in recent years – a painful process for the 
area to continue to endure to be sure. 
Nonetheless, these trends have resulted in a more diversified economy. In fact, the share of 
workers employed in the metro area’s manufacturing sector is now just 8 percent, just below 
the nation’s 9 percent share. The private education and health sectors have emerged as the 
largest industries, and now employ one in five  workers. So, the face of the local economy 
has  changed  dramatically  through  a  somewhat  painful  restructuring  process.  But  I  believe 
this process is reaching its conclusion, and the resulting more diversified local economy is 
providing a strong foundation on which Syracuse can build going forward. 
Hence my interest in the collaborative efforts of the business, academic and health sectors to 
further economic growth. These efforts capitalize on the strengths of the region and may well 
be  a  good  way  to  further  economic  development  not  only  in  Syracuse  but  in  Buffalo  and 
Rochester  as  well.  Each  metro  area  has  a  strong  university,  a  strong  health  sector  and  a 
business  community  all  eager  to  find  ways  to  leverage  local  assets  and  boost  economic 
development. 
Looking forward, I believe that the colleges and universities in Syracuse will help drive the 
region’s economy in the years to come. Syracuse can build on these assets by continuing to 
make partnerships between industry and higher education a high priority. When companies 
and  universities  work  together,  they  can  become  a  powerful  engine  for  innovation  and 
economic  growth.  These  collaborations  are  a  key  ingredient  to  helping  improve  the 
competitiveness of local businesses, the universities themselves, and their regions, and we 
should take every opportunity to exploit these partnerships as much as possible to unleash 
their full potential. 
College graduates finding jobs 
Let me finish off by saying a few words about the value of education. There is no doubt that 
the  Great  Recession  and  sluggish  recovery  that  followed  has  made  it  difficult  for  many 
people to find jobs. I’m sure many of you here today are worried about finding a good job 
after you graduate, and you may be wondering whether going to college will turn out to have 
been a good investment. 
Let me reassure you, despite the weak labor market conditions that have prevailed since the 
Great  Recession,  the  benefits  of  a  college  degree  remain  significant.  Research  we  have 
undertaken at the New York Fed clearly shows that young people with a college degree are 
more likely to have a job and they tend to earn higher wages than those without degrees – 
and this is true even for those who may be underemployed initially when they first enter the 
labor market after graduation. In fact, our research finds that to some extent, it has always 
proved  challenging  for  college  graduates  to  transition  into  the  labor  market,  even  during 
economic  expansions,  but  as  time  passes,  and  the  graduate’s  experience  grows,  the 
transition generally gets accomplished successfully. Although it is true that the labor market 
has been more difficult for college graduates in recent years, I am confident that most will 
find  work  and  transition  into  higher-skilled  jobs  as  they  gain  experience  and  as  the  labor 
market improves. 
Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
