Stanley Fischer: Major trends in the global economic crisis and its 
impact on Israel 
Highlights of remarks by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the 
panel  “Major  trends  in  the  global  economic  crisis  and  its  impact  on  Israel”,  Herzliya 
Conference, Herzliya, 14 March 2013. 
 I  have  been  asked  to  talk  about  the  relationship  between  what  is  happening  in  the  global 
economy and its impact on Israel. One has to do that, because we are a small economy, with 
a  very  small  GDP,  about  1.5  percent  of  that  of  the  United  States.  We  are  a  very  open 
economy,  we  export  about  40  percent  of  our  product,  the  value  added  of  exports  equals 
about 25 percent of GDP – either way, we are very open to exports and imports, and we are 
even more open, possibly, to the global gap between our interest rates,  which are heavily 
affected by what happens in the rest of the world. Our interest rates are higher relative to the 
United  States,  relative  to  Europe,  and  money  comes  here  to  take  advantage  of  the  high 
rates, and that created an appreciation of the shekel – that has big effects for us. We cannot 
allow the interest rate gaps to get too large…So this is the world in which we live. 
On  the  real  side  what  is  happening  in  the  global  economy  is  that  the  US  economy  is 
emerging  from  the  crisis.  One  of  the  key  things  which  differentiates  the  United  States’s 
economy from the European economies is that the US very rapidly dealt with the financial 
system.  Treasury  Secretary  Geithner  took  a  big  risk  by  subjecting  the  American  banks  to 
stress tests. But you better know the truth about the state your financial system is in. 
The US looks better now because the housing sector is recovering, it looks better because 
unemployment  has  started  coming  down  in  a  serious  way  and  it  looks  better  because  the 
banking  sector  is  stronger,  the  automobile  sector  is  recovering,  and  there  is  enormous 
change in the energy sector which is taking place extremely rapidly. 
There is a slowdown in East Asia, in growth rates, both in India and in China. In China, let’s 
say their growth has slowed from 10 percent to 8 percent, but the economy that is growing at 
8 percent a year is more than double its size of ten years ago, so the 8 percent growth in 
today’s Chinese economy adds far more to global demand than the 10 percent growth of the 
Chinese economy of 10 years ago. 
It remains true that the center of the global economy is moving eastwards, to where it was 
200  years  ago,  from  which  it  was  temporarily  displaced  by  the  Industrial  Revolution  and 
that’s  a factor, one  of many  factors that  we  in  Israel  have  to  take  account  of,  as  we  think 
about how the rest of the world affects us. 
There was a European theory that you should get 1–2 countries out of the Eurozone, so that 
the other countries would realize it could happen to them, but they’ve given that up for a very 
good reason – if you start a process like that it could really get out of hand. But they made 
that decision that they wanted to save the euro. Mario Draghi made the decision; he said that 
the European Central Bank would do what it had to do to save the euro. Well what it has to 
do is clear – provide some way of providing support directly to governments. Find some way 
of  keeping  the  finances  of  governments  more  or  less  whole.  We  should  understand  that 
Greece in the end defaulted on its debt in a negotiated way. Not every government has to be 
forgiven its debt, but it has to be guaranteed support in negotiations over its problems. In any 
case, Europe is in a recession; over the next year we’ll probably see slightly better growth 
than we were expecting to have in the second half of 2013. 
On the capital markets side, interest rates have been low for a very long time. That situation 
will  continue  until  we  begin  to  see  signs  of  growth  or  signs  of  inflation.  In  1994  the  Fed 
changed its monetary policy from being very expansionary, and it raised rates unexpectedly 
and  caused  a  temporary  slowdown  in  global  growth,  because  people  were  simply  caught 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
unawares. That should not happen now. The Fed has been telling everybody that it’s got to 
be ready for a change like this. By the beginning of 2015 interest rates should possibly begin 
to rise. 
I won’t go into the argument on currency wars, or if there aren’t currency wars. It is a simple 
fact, whatever the motivation, that interest rates are zero, it’s a simple fact that it’s harder for 
us to deal with an environment in which global interest rates, in countries which account for 
more than half of global GDP, are essentially zero, but that’s not a fact that we’re going to 
change by complaining. 
So what do we do in the Israeli economy? 
At the ceremony when I got this job, in the house of the president, in May 2005, I said that 
this is a strong economy, they said I didn’t understand it. But this is a strong economy – it 
has been through more shocks, including military campaigns, the resignation of the person 
responsible for changing the economic strategy in 2003 – then-Finance Minister Netanyahu, 
in  August  2005,  the  change  of  Prime  Minister  after  the  stroke  of  Prime  Minister  Sharon, 
Hamas  winning  the  Palestinian  elections,  in  July  2006  the  Second  Lebanon  War  –  I  can 
continue  listing  more  events  –  but  the  Israeli  economy  faced  all  of  them  impressively  and 
growth continued at a rapid pace. It also went through the global crisis very well. 
Where does all this come from? It comes from good fundamentals. Part of that is the banking 
system that is strong; it’s a very conservative banking system, and people mostly don’t like 
that, they wish the banks would take more chances, until something happens, then they wish 
they  hadn’t  taken  chances.  So  in  2008  and  2009  our  banks  were  heroes  for  having  been 
conservative,  by  2010  the  heroism  effect  had  worn  off  already,  and  the  public  was 
complaining – which is what the public does about banks around the whole world. But it is 
important that our banking system continues to lend, but continues to lend taking account of 
risks. 
If I can say something I’ve said more than once before, we are accused very frequently of 
supporting stability of the banks over stability of the consumers. The short answer is, we take 
care of stability of the banks because we care about consumers. In the United States, and in 
other countries, we have recently been witness to a banking crisis. We had such things in 
Israel as well in the 1980s. I am certain Israeli citizens who remember the crisis of the 1980s 
would not want to find themselves in such a crisis again, and that they are happy about the 
fact that we have not been forced to deal with such a crisis since then. That should continue 
to be the situation. 
The short run situation of the Israeli economy is very good except in one respect. I’ll give you 
the  very  good  part  first.  Unemployment  is  at  a  30-year  low,  the  balance  of  payments 
essentially is balanced, inflation is a little below 2 percent, which is the center of the target 
range, banks are still in good shape, poverty is actually declining – though no politician gets 
credit for that, and increasing participation in the labor force, a larger and larger share of the 
population  has  been  going  out  to  work,  which  is  not  to  say  there  aren’t  problems  in  the 
Haredi and Arab sectors, just that more are beginning to go out to work. What is not good is 
the forecast for the budget. 
If the government sticks to its budget constraints, which are the expenditure rule, the taxes it 
has in place, and the deficit target of 3 percent of GDP, it will have an expansionary budget, 
or  approximately  a  neutral  budget.  Everyone  is  aware  of  the  “budgetary  axe”,  but  that  is 
relative to what they were promised, it is not relative to what has been passed. The promises 
add up to an increase of 10 percent. It will be difficult politically to cut them. However, if we 
don’t get the budget straightened now, it will be very difficult to do so later, and we will find 
ourselves doing things that are inconvenient and inefficient. It is therefore very important to 
stick to the budget targets and not to postpone the problem to a later stage. 
In  the  long  term,  we  must  deal  with  the  problem  of  poverty  and  with  the  problem  of  labor 
force  participation  which  is  concentrated  in  the  Arab  and  ultra-Orthodox  sectors.  We 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
obviously  have  challenges  in  the  field  of  education  and  in  dealing  with  bureaucracy. 
Obviously,  there  is  the  security  situation,  it  is  very  important  that  we  reach  a  peace 
agreement with our neighbors, and I hope that all sides will be prepared for this soon. 
If you would have said a decade ago that the United States, and even Israel, would become 
energy exporters, people would have told you it was crazy. If you would have asked in 2003, 
is  the  next  global  crisis  going  to  be  a  result  of a  massive  financial  collapse  in  the West,  I 
would have said there was no chance. We have to be ready for unexpected events, and it is 
therefore  very  important  to  us  to  build  up  ample  economic  reserves.  I  am  not  just  talking 
about foreign exchange reserves. I am also talking, for instance, about budgetary reserves. 
We need a budget which, if we do need to increase expenditure, does not get into immediate 
difficulties. We must avoid populism – when difficult decisions are put off to next year, they 
are generally put off the following year as well. The book “Start-Up Nation” describes, even if 
a little exaggeratedly, the extraordinary development of Israeli high-tech. The continuation of 
this development, which should be accompanied by the proper policy steps on the part of the 
government, will be able to lead to the success of the Israeli economy in the coming years as 
well. 
I would like to relate to the parting gift that Aharon Fogel wanted to offer me (to change the 
Bank of Israel law so that the growth, employment and financial stability targets would have 
the same level of priority as price stability). I hope that this gift does not come into being. The 
members  of  the  Monetary  Committee  take  the  Law  into  account,  as  well  as  the  way  it  is 
worded  and  the  order  of  priorities  among  the  various  goals  of  the  Bank  of  Israel.  If  we 
change  this  rule,  we  will  have  more  inflationary  periods  and  more  recessionary  periods. 
There are enough things that need to be fixed in Israel, but regarding the Bank of Israel Law, 
I think that the saying “If it isn’t broken, don’t fix it,” is applicable. 
People  who  preceded  me  spoke  about  the  issue  of  government  efficiency.  According  to 
international  surveys,  the  Israeli  government  is  not  the  most  effective  government  when 
compared  internationally.  Let  us  look  for  instance  at  the  housing  market.  We  all  want  a 
situation where prices don’t increase but the supply of housing does. This can only happen 
on one side – on the supply side. It is through the supply side that it would be possible to 
increase  the  quantity  while  lowering  prices.  The  government  has  understood  this  and  has 
tried to cause this to happen. It has presented various plans, but the desired result has not 
come to pass. We need to think of ways to streamline government ministries. The problem in 
the civil service is the political incentives. The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Defense 
are apparently efficient ministries, but there are many ministries that are not. Public service 
workers are high-level workers. We do not have the British tradition of “Yes, Minister”. The 
turnover among Directors General is frequent because the political system is not stable. The 
current Minister of Finance has had the longest term of office since that of Pinchas Sapir, 
and this is the exception. 
The fiscal rule was formulated in order to reduce the public debt burden. The law states that 
it  is  possible  to  increase  the  growth  rate  in  government  expenditure  as  long  as  there  is  a 
decrease in the debt-to-GDP ratio. When we reach 60 percent, government expenditure will 
begin to grow in line with the growth in GDP according to the current formulation of the rule. 
However, I believe that we must strive for a lower debt than what is set out in the Maastricht 
rules. We are in the midst of a very complex situation, and like I said before, we must build 
up reserves in various areas, and among other things, we must make sure that we can raise 
money  in  the  markets  if  it  becomes  necessary.  When  the  global  crisis  broke  out,  the 
Australian  government  was  able  to  allow  itself  to  spend  immense  sums  because  its  debt 
burden  before  the  crisis  was  very  low.  If  we  enter  a  recession,  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  will 
jump,  and  we  will  find  ourselves  in  a  situation  where  the  government  cannot  finance  the 
deficit at a reasonable rate of interest, like the situation in 2003. We must be in a situation 
where we can deal with various problems, even if we don’t know whether those problems will 
actually take place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
If we must increase defense expenditures because it is vital to the future of the country, as 
some  people  claim,  we  will  need  to  pay  for  it,  through  an  increase  in  taxes.  I  don’t 
understand  those  who  say,  for  instance,  that  “we  have  needs  in  education,  so  we  must 
increase  the  deficit.”  If  we  have  such  needs,  then  we  must  finance  them,  mainly  through 
taxes. I don’t think that the defense budget can continue increasing at the rate it has for the 
past  few  years.  Which  brings  me  back  to  what  I  said  about  the  importance  of  a  peace 
agreement. When people say that there is no partner for a peace agreement, that is always 
true: you need two to tango, and it is very important to start this tango. 
Regarding  monetary  policy,  the  interest  rate  is  a  tool  that  affects  the  entire  economy. We 
cannot use the interest rate in order to solve the housing problem. We must obviously take 
the  problems  in  housing  into  account.  But  if  there  are problems  in  a  certain  area,  and the 
central bank’s tools are not sufficient to handle these problems, someone else has to deal 
with it. In such a case, we are talking about increasing supply, which is currently in the realm 
of responsibility of the Israel Lands Administration and planning authorities. 
We have tried various foreign exchange regimes over the years. My experience shows that, 
regardless of the exchange rate regime we are in, there will always be times when we will 
want  to  have  other  regimes  and  systems.  However,  experience  shows  that  it  is  always 
correct to allow the exchange rate to change based on market forces. Everyone is impressed 
by the success of the Swiss in strengthening the exchange rate and preventing it from falling 
below 1.2 Swiss francs to the euro. From the day that decision was made, they purchased 
foreign currency totaling about 50 percent of their GDP. We also purchased a lot of foreign 
currency, but we aren’t near those levels. The difference between us and them is that their 
interest rate is 0 percent, so holding foreign currency does not involve any financial cost on 
their part, as long as they aren’t forced to retreat from the exchange rate they set. Up to this 
point, they are enjoying a “free lunch” – until the day comes when they will need to pay. I 
believe that our monetary policy was, at the bottom line, successful. 
The alternative presented in this conference regarding the deficit, of 3.5 percent of GDP, is 
ambitious.  It  will  be  necessary  to  raise  taxes,  and  I  share  the  sense  that  we  need  to  be 
cautious  in  this  context.  The  median  worker  in  Israel  does  not  pay  taxes. When  taxes  are 
raised, they want to raise them only for the rich. But there aren’t as many rich people in Israel 
as  people  think.  Taxing  those  around  the  median  will  lead  to  the  collection  of  a  lot  of  tax 
since there are many people around the median. From a political standpoint, it is easier to 
increase taxes on the rich than on the middle and lower levels. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
