Mario Draghi: Introductory statement at the Congreso de los Diputados 
de España 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  at  the  Congreco  de  los  Diputados  de  España 
(Meeting with Members of Parliament), Madrid, 12 February 2013. 
 Dear President Posada, 
Honourable Members of Parliament, 
I would like to thank you most warmly for your kind invitation to appear before this chamber 
of Parliament. 
As President of the European Central Bank (ECB), it is an honour to have this opportunity to 
discuss  the  big  challenges  facing  the  euro  area  economy  and  to  explain  the  major  policy 
actions that we are taking in response to those challenges. 
After  outlining  what  we  have  done,  I  will  be  very  keen  to  hear  your  views  –  on  Europe’s 
economy, on ECB policies and on the future design of our economic and monetary union. By 
the end of this session, I hope that we will have reached a good mutual understanding – one 
that will allow us, within our respective institutional mandates, to make further progress on 
the twin challenges of strengthening our union and returning to sound and stable growth. 
Over the past few years, we have seen how deeply the economies of the euro area countries 
are interconnected. It is an emphatic reminder of how economic policies in one country have 
significant effects on other countries. 
As the democratically elected representatives of the Spanish people, you are responsible for 
domestic  economic  policy.  Yet  in  the  exercise  of  those  duties,  just  like  all  national 
parliaments  in  the  euro area,  you  influence  the functioning  of  our  economic  and  monetary 
union as a whole. As the President of the European Council Herman van Rompuy has said, 
national parliaments have become European institutions. It is important that we all recognise 
these mutual interests. 
In  my  introductory  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  three  topics:  the  state  of  the 
economy,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  the  longer-term  vision  for  our  economic  and 
monetary union. I will then be happy to hear your views and take your questions. 
Adjustment in the euro area economy 
Let me begin with the overall situation. As you know, the euro area economy is undergoing 
an  important  adjustment.  This  process  is  necessary,  but  it  is  particularly  painful  and 
protracted  in  those  areas  where  past  misalignments  of  policies  created  vulnerabilities. 
Particular difficulties stem from the large imbalances of highly indebted sectors and unsound 
public finances in some euro area countries. 
But  we  are  seeing  the  first  positive  results  of  the  adjustment.  For  example,  euro  area 
countries have almost halved their fiscal deficits from 6.2% of GDP in 2010 to an estimated 
3.3% in 2012. Excluding interest payments, the primary deficit of the euro area as a whole is 
virtually  zero.  This  contrasts  with  the  United  States  and  Japan,  which  recorded  primary 
deficits of around 6% of GDP in 2012. 
Several euro area countries are addressing their external imbalances, among them Spain, 
whose  current  account deficit fell  substantially  –  from  almost  10%  in  2008  to  about  1%  in 
2012. According to the latest data, your country’s exports have increased notably – by about 
20% in volume between 2009 and last year. There has been a similar increase in Portugal 
and, to a somewhat lesser extent, in Ireland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Over  the  same  period,  the  share  of  exports  in  GDP  increased  by  around  10  percentage 
points in Spain, Ireland and Portugal. Exports are providing a strong positive contribution to 
real economic growth. These economies are also seeing a fall in unit labour costs, which will 
improve their competitiveness and provide a platform for sustainable growth. 
Notwithstanding these signs of improvement, the adjustment has not yet had a visible impact 
on people’s daily lives. Frustration in some parts of the population is thus understandable. 
Reform efforts take time to reveal their full beneficial effects – and they must reach a critical 
mass before they lead to a fundamental turnaround in economic prospects. 
The top priorities on the reform agenda remain correcting misalignments and restoring the 
capacity of the economy to create value, incomes and jobs. Governments must persevere on 
the path towards sound and stable growth. National parliaments are key contributors to this 
process, notably in effective communication to the public of the ultimate goals. 
In  saying  all  this,  I  am  acutely  aware  of  the  significant  social  costs  that  the  adjustment 
entails,  especially  for  those  who  have  lost  their  jobs.  I  am  very  conscious  of  this  human 
dimension of the recession, particularly the difficulties facing many of your constituents. But 
the reforms should not be seen in isolation: they aim to create stronger, better functioning 
and, yes, also fairer economies, for the benefit of all citizens. 
Countries undertaking painful but necessary reforms should not feel that they have been left 
to fend for themselves. Creating a more stable and prosperous future for Europe is the goal 
that unites all euro area countries. To make progress, we need a shared sense of direction, a 
sense of cohesion across countries and a sense of solidarity within societies. 
The shared sense of direction is expressed in laying the foundations for sustainable growth. 
In some countries, this implies re-orienting the main engines of growth towards productive 
sectors.  It  also  implies  regaining  competitiveness  by  containing  or  reducing  costs  via  a 
combination of accelerated productivity and wage restraint. 
The sense of cohesion is expressed in the single market, the single currency and common 
European institutions to ensure good governance and, when needed, mutual assistance and 
support. 
The sense of solidarity within societies should be expressed by ensuring that the burden is 
not borne disproportionately by certain sectors or groups of people. 
The ECB’s monetary policy 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  specific  policy  actions  that  the  ECB  has  taken  in  response  to  the 
challenges to the euro area economy. 
There are two key elements. The first has been to reduce our key interest rate to 0.75%, a 
level previously unseen in virtually all euro area countries. The interest rate in the overnight 
interbank market is now even lower, close to zero. 
The  second  element  has  been  to  give  banks  unrestricted  access  to  central  bank  funding 
through both our short- and long-term operations. This policy meant that banks did not have 
to  shrink  their  balance  sheets  unnecessarily  at  a  time  when  market  funding  became 
unavailable  or  excessively  costly.  It  prevented  a  potential  deflationary  scenario,  thus 
ensuring  delivery  on  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro 
area. 
At the same time, the policy has alleviated funding constraints for banks that decide to renew 
or extend their loans to firms and households. This removes one obstacle to growth. Since 
three quarters of firms’ external finance in the euro area comes from banks, we need them to 
be delivering a sound supply of credit to support investment and job creation. 
We  have  provided  banks  with  assurance  that,  with  adequate  collateral,  they  can  draw 
unlimited volumes of central bank liquidity at our key interest rate. We effectively stood in for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  interbank  market:  when  that  market  stopped  functioning,  our  actions  allowed  banks  to 
continue  lending.  The  overall  size  of  our  refinancing  operations  increased  from  less  than 
€450 billion before the crisis to more than €1.2 trillion at its peak. 
We have also provided banks with assurance that they can rely on our refinancing operations 
for  extended  periods.  The  maximum  maturity  of  these  operations  increased  from  three 
months  to  three  years.  Without  the  two  three-year  refinancing  operations  launched  in  late 
2011 and early 2012, there could have been a major credit crunch. 
Through these measures, the ECB has decisively addressed the liquidity pressures faced by 
euro area banks. Here in Spain, for example, the liquidity support extended to the banking 
system  currently  corresponds  to  a  quarter  of  the  country’s  GDP,  about  eight  times  what  it 
was before the crisis. 
To  ensure  delivery  on  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  of  safeguarding  price  stability,  it  was 
essential to create an environment in which liquidity is not an obstacle to credit creation. But 
liquidity is not the only factor determining banks’ capacity and willingness to lend to firms and 
households. There are two additional factors: banks’ availability of capital; and the general 
perception of risk in the economy. 
Provision of capital is not among the tasks of a central bank. It is the task of shareholders to 
ensure  that  banks  are  solvent  and  able  to  sustain  their  core  business.  When  the  private 
sector is unable or unwilling to provide capital, it is for the fiscal authorities – governments 
and parliaments – to decide whether and how to act. 
Here in Spain, the authorities have been proactive, even in strained conditions, embarking on 
an ambitious financial adjustment programme with the assistance of their European partners. 
The programme – which is proceeding on schedule – has removed from the balance sheets 
of  the  weakest  banking  institutions  the  troubled  assets  that  had  been  a  drag  on  their 
business. The programme has recapitalised these institutions with fresh funds and laid the 
foundations for their return to health and active lending. 
The general perception of risk is the third determinant of credit. Just like any other central 
bank, the ECB cannot control microeconomic risk – how banks assess whether a potential 
borrower will fail to repay a loan. 
Microeconomic risk is related to the conditions prevailing in the specific sector in which a firm 
operates or to the firm’s cost structure and capacity to innovate and create value. It is the 
role  of  structural,  sectoral  and  fiscal  policies  to  facilitate  the  reallocation  of  resources  to 
activities that have real economic value. 
For its part, the ECB is actively contributing to a reduction in macroeconomic risk: by firmly 
stabilising inflation expectations, it provides a nominal anchor for the economy as a whole. 
This is important for all lending and borrowing decisions, particularly the financing of longer-
term investment projects. 
Our  decision  last  summer  to  prepare  for  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  in 
government bond markets can be seen in this light. OMTs are designed to focus on bonds 
with  a  remaining  maturity  of  up  to  three  years,  aiming  to  keep  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  stable  by  avoiding  a  highly  damaging  breakdown  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy. 
The  ECB  can  only  consider  OMTs  if  there  are  major  problems  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy and if there is strict and effective conditionality attached to an appropriate 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) programme. 
There are two reasons for this conditionality framework. First, OMTs are a backstop against 
destructive  speculation.  They  are  not  a  subsidy  for  government  financing.  OMTs  should 
remove  only  the  part  of  the  interest  rate  at  which  governments  borrow  that  is  due  to 
unfounded expectations of destructive scenarios for the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But our interventions are conceivable only if the risk of fiscal dominance is firmly excluded. 
This  requires  certainty  that  governments  will  maintain  fiscal  discipline  and  that  continuous 
reforms  will  correct  underlying  weaknesses.  Only  strict  and  effective  conditionality  can 
generate that kind of assurance. 
The second reason for conditionality is that an ESM programme is a catalyst for reform. It 
can  change  the  economic  prospects  of  a  country  towards  a  higher  growth  potential, 
complementing monetary policy in its efforts to support the economy. 
In  the  past  few  months,  we  have  seen  a  gradual  easing  of  financial  conditions.  Credit 
spreads on sovereign and corporate bonds have fallen. Equity prices have recovered. Banks 
have regained market access. And money has flowed back into European debt markets. 
ECB  policies  have  played  a  pivotal  role  in  this  improvement,  as  has  resolute  action  by 
governments, parliaments and the private sector. All should persevere in these efforts with 
confidence. The  ECB, for  its  part,  will  continue  to  safeguard  price  stability,  as  it  has  done 
over the past 13 years. 
The longer-term vision 
Let me turn briefly to the longer-term vision for Europe. As you know, it is widely understood 
that  our monetary  union  needs  to  be  complemented  by  a financial  union,  a fiscal  union, a 
genuine economic union and eventually a deeper political union. 
The most urgent project – financial union – is taking tangible shape. The ECB is expected to 
become the single supervisor for a large part of the euro area’s banking sector. We stand 
ready  to  launch  our  internal  preparations  as  soon  as  the  European  Parliament  and  the 
European Council reach an agreement on the legislation. 
The proposal for a single resolution framework is also in the pipeline. Taken together, these 
two reforms will re-establish confidence in the euro area’s banking sector. 
It  is  also  essential  that  we  complete  economic  union  by  creating  the  conditions  for  each 
country to find its place in the open market economy that is the euro area, and to exploit its 
comparative advantages to generate jobs and growth. 
This  is  the  meaning  of  a  well-functioning  economic  union.  And  it  will  only  happen  if  we 
restore competitiveness across the euro area, if we improve the functioning of product and 
labour markets, and if we invest in skills and innovation. 
The idea of “mutually agreed contracts for competitiveness and growth” or “reform contracts” 
could  be  very  helpful  here  by  targeting  policy  actions  in  areas  that  are  key  to  restoring 
competitiveness.  We  would  also  benefit  from  a  thorough  review  of  product  and  labour 
markets to ensure that they are compatible with the functioning of monetary union. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. We have begun this year with a more stable financial environment. This 
has  been  achieved  through  concerted  reform  efforts  by  governments  and  parliaments  and 
decisive actions by European institutions. 
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, all national parliaments in the euro area influence 
the  functioning  of  our  economic  and  monetary  union.  Spain  plays  a  prominent  role  in  this 
process. 
Throughout  the  current  phase  of  economic  adjustment,  communication  between  European 
and national policy-makers and consensus-building efforts within domestic constituencies are 
of critical importance. This is the best way to safeguard our future collective prosperity. 
Thank  you  for  your  attention.  I  will  now  be  pleased  to  hear  your  views  and  take  your 
questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
