Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy: Compliance and anti-money laundering 
Speech by His Excellency Dr Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy, Vice Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  (SAMA)  ,to  the  Fifth  Annual  Gathering  on  “Compliance  and  anti-money 
laundering”, Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, Institute of Banking, Riyadh, 26–27 March 2013. 
 Dear Audience, 
 
It  gives  me  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  those  who  have 
participated in the preparation for this gathering. I also would like to extend my thanks to the 
colleagues at the Institute of Banking and the speakers to this gathering. 
Dear Audience, 
 
The  continued  holding  of this  gathering for  the fifth  year  confirms  the firm  conviction 
held by all of us of the risks that the crime of money laundering poses to the global economy. 
It also reflects the Kingdom’s commitment to combat money laundering, and its support of 
the measures taken against it, and the implementation of the best international practices in 
this field. The discussion of this gathering derives its importance from the increasing trend 
towards  globalization,  easing  restrictions  on  international  cross-border  movement  of 
commodities and services and the revolution of communication and information technology. 
Dear Audience, 
Money laundering operations have witnessed a quantum leap at the global level over 
 
the  last  years.  This  was  reflected  in  the  various  and  diversified  methods  used  in  their 
implementation,  expanding  the  volume  this  type  of  crime.  Developed  and  developing 
countries  suffer from this  crime.  However,  such  crimes  are  more  common  in  counties  that 
have  weak  security,  or  suffer  from  weak  economy  and  weak  judicial  and  supervisory 
systems. 
 
Among the most prominent negative effects of this phenomenon is the flight of money 
abroad,  with  production  losing  its  most  important  element,  namely,  capital,  hindering 
production of goods and services, raising unemployment and reducing savings. As a result, 
investors lose confidence in the economic system and the legislation governing it, creating 
an  anti-investment  environment.  All  this  will  be  reflected  on  economic  growth  and  the 
standard of living of society. Money laundering may also result in the availability of liquidity in 
quantities  not  commensurate  with  the  increase  in  production  of  goods  and  services,  thus 
increasing inflation and decreasing the purchasing power of the currency. Money laundering 
affects  the  country’s  position  and  its  reputation  among  international  bodies,  and  may  give 
misleading economic indicators. From the social point of view, it is significantly dangerous as 
it  leads  to  non-productive  classes  acquiring  illegal  proceeds  at  the  expense  of  productive 
classes, increasing the gap between social classes. Moreover, It increases the opportunities 
of spreading corruption and bribery. 
Dear Audience, 
 
I  would  like  to  commend  the  fruitful  coordination  and  cooperation  between  the 
appropriate  entities  of  ministries,  security  and  judicial  authorities,  and  financial  and 
non-financial institutions for combating money laundering. I would like to present a briefing 
on accomplishments achieved during the last year, the most important of which were: 
The  Kingdom  achieved  tangible  progress  in  its  AML  procedures,  in  the  framework  of  the 
follow-up process that followed the Mutual Assessment Process. The Kingdom submitted the 
First Follow-up Report to the MENAFATF in February 2012. The report includes the new and 
updated  legislations  issued  and  the  actions  taken  to  cope  with  the  implementation  of  all 
international standards and practices issued recently. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 
that 
finalized 
line  with 
international 
legislation  was 
the  national  AML 
to  cover  many  domestic  and 
The Kingdom amended the Anti-Money Laundering Law issued by Royal Decree No. (M/31) 
dated  11/5/1433H 
requirements  and 
developments.  Its  Implementing  Regulation  was  updated  as  well.  Here,  I  would  like  to 
highlight 
international 
developments and standards. 
The  Kingdom  hosted  a  number  of  conferences,  symposiums  and  training  courses  on 
combating money laundering. The most important of which  was the Fifteenth MENA-FATF 
General  Meeting  held  in  April  2012  in  Jeddah.  In  September  2012,  the  Investigation  and 
Public Prosecution Authority, in cooperation with MENA-FATF, also hosted a symposium on 
“the  Role  and  Responsibility  of  Public  Prosecution  Agencies  and  Judicial  Organs  in 
Combating  Money  Laundering  and  Terrorism  Financing”.  In  September  2012,  SAMA,  in 
collaboration with the Secretariat General of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of 
the  Gulf,  organized  a  workshop  on  Updating  FATF  Recommendations  to  Combat  Money 
Laundering, Terrorism Financing and Weapons Proliferation. 
All  supervisory  authorities  in  the  Kingdom,  including  SAMA,  continued  their  efforts  in 
performing  periodical  inspections  in  the  area  of  anti-money  laundering  over  entities  under 
their  supervision  in  accordance  with  the  concept  of  the  risk  ratio  standard  to  increase 
efficiency of control and supervision operations and benefit from the capabilities available in 
various fields to ensure the application of instructions and regulations. 
Dear Audience, 
 
Bearing  in  mind  the  risks  posed  to  our  economy  by  Money  Laundering  and 
emphasizing  its  supervisory  and  control  role,  SAMA  issues  continuous  instructions  and 
updates  regulations  and  guidelines  to  cope  with  domestic,  regional  and  international 
developments. We stress here the necessity of compliance with regulations, standards and 
instructions  related  to  Anti-Money  Laundering;  the  implementation  of  policies  to  monitor 
operations;  and  reporting  Money  Laundering  activities  to  thwart  any  attempts  aimed  at 
abusing  banks  and  money-changers  operating  in  the  Kingdom  as  channels  to  pass  illegal 
transactions. 
Dear Audience, 
 
The positive results achieved by the Kingdom are an incentive and impetus to all of us 
to  keep  on  executing  development  plans  and  work  continuously  to  combat  Money 
Laundering crimes, safeguarding the soundness of our national economy with all its financial 
and  non-financial  sectors  against  adverse  impacts.  The  Kingdom  will  not  hesitate  to 
undertake  all  measures  and  means  to  attain  the  highest  levels  of  quality  and  to  meet 
International  Anti-Money  Laundering  standards.  I  would  like  reiterate  the  importance  of 
cooperation among relevant domestic, regional and international entities, intensifying efforts 
and exchanging technical information and expertise to detect, monitor and pinpoint  Money 
Laundering operations. 
 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  reaffirm  the  importance  of  continued  training  and 
development  of  human  resources  working  in  this  field  to  insure  that  they  have  necessary 
skills and to keep them acquainted with developments. 
 
successful gathering.  
Thank  you  for  your  attention  and  I  welcome  you  all  once  again,  wishing  you  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
