Charles Bean: Global aspects of unconventional monetary policies 
Panel  remarks  by  Mr  Charles  Bean,  Deputy  Governor  for  Monetary  Policy  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson 
Hole, Wyoming, 24 August 2013. 
 Since  the  demise  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  the  subsequent  exceptional  contraction  in 
demand  in  2008–9,  central  banks  have  not  only  expanded  the  range  of  their  liquidity 
operations in order to restore financial stability, but also adopted a range of unconventional 
monetary  measures  in  order  to  raise  aggregate  demand  once  short-term  policy  rates  had 
reached  their  effective  lower  bound.  Those  measures  include:  large-scale  purchases  of 
government  bonds  and private  securities (quantitative  easing);  selective  actions  to  support 
the flow of credit; and guidance over the future path of policy rates. 
While I believe these policies helped the advanced economies to avoid some of the worst 
downside  scenarios,  they  have  proved  controversial  –  particularly  quantitative  easing  – 
provoking plenty of criticism, both at home and abroad. Before I turn to the particular focus of 
this conference, namely the global consequences, let me say a few words on the domestic 
costs and benefits. 
Some have questioned whether quantitative easing works at all. In both the United Kingdom 
and the United States, central bank reserves pay the policy rate and are consequently close 
substitutes for Treasury bills. The only differences are that just banks can hold reserves and 
reserves can be turned straight into cash at the central bank, whereas Treasury bills would 
have to be sold or repo’d out first. Under Ricardian equivalence, quantitative easing of the 
sort undertaken by the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve should then be irrelevant 
because  private  agents  internalise  the  tax  implications  of  the  associated  changes  in  the 
consolidated public sector balance sheet. 
I think the empirical evidence from the growing number of event studies and the like strongly 
suggests that this is not the case and that market imperfections give the policy traction by 
reducing term premia. This, I believe, was particularly true during the worst of the post-crisis 
recession, though it may have become less so as markets have returned towards normality. 
That is reinforced by recent market movements in response to heightened anticipation that 
the Federal Reserve will shortly begin to taper its purchases. 
A more serious objection is that they are simply the wrong policy to deal with the problem at 
hand.  Low  policy  rates  and  quantitative  and  credit  easing  all  seek  to  encourage  the 
intertemporal  switching  of  spending  from  the  future  to  the  present.  But,  according  to  the 
critics,  that  just  leads  to  further  debt  accumulation  and  is  inimical  to  the  adjustment 
necessary  to  unwind  the  excesses  of  the  pre-crisis  period  (see  Rajan,  2013,  for  a  lucid 
exposition of this view). 
The  distinction  here  is  between  policies  that  are  designed  to  bolster  deficient  aggregate 
demand and those that facilitate the necessary reduction in indebtedness and unwinding of 
the misdirected investments – most obviously in housing and construction – made before the 
crisis. The latter requires balance sheet repair of households and banks, including the writing 
down of debts that cannot be plausibly repaid and the closure of unviable businesses. That in 
turn allows resources to be reallocated to where they can be used more productively. 
Now there is some validity to this critique. Bolstering aggregate demand through sustained 
low  interest  rates  and  quantitative  and  credit  easing  will  indeed  tend  to  work  against  the 
desired  rebalancing  of  demand  away  from  consumption  towards  saving  and  net  exports  – 
this is what the previous Governor of the Bank of England christened the “paradox of policy” 
(see  King,  2009).  And  the  present  period  of  low  interest  rates  may  indeed  allow  some 
businesses to survive that do not have a viable long-term future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But against that, it is easier for households, businesses and banks to repair balance sheets 
when demand is strong than when it is weak. A sustained period of weak demand may also 
push many businesses that are perfectly viable in the long run into insolvency, especially if 
the supply of credit is impaired. And a long period with underutilised resources may cause 
durable  damage  to  the  supply  capacity  of  the  economy  through  a  variety  of  hysteretic 
mechanisms, such as skill atrophy on the part of the unemployed and foregone opportunities 
for learning by doing. 
In any case, to me this sets up a false dichotomy. There are both Keynesian and Hayekian 
dimensions to the post-crisis environment. A “two-handed” approach is called for, in which 
supportive aggregate demand policies on the one hand are complemented by policies that 
facilitate  the  necessary  restructuring,  particularly  of  the  banking  sector,  on  the  other.  So 
rigorous  evaluation  of  the  assets  on  banks’  balance  sheets,  followed  by  recapitalisation, 
should  be  the  order  of  the  day  (see  Tucker,  2013,  for  a  similar  perspective).  The  United 
States  has  been  a  model  in  this  regard.  In  Europe,  we  have  lagged  a  little,  but  are  now 
catching up. In the United Kingdom, the Prudential Regulation Authority, at the instigation of 
the  Bank’s  Financial  Policy  Committee,  has  required  several  of  our  major  banks  to 
strengthen their capital buffers against potential losses. And, in the euro area, the European 
Central Bank is about to undertake an in-depth health check of banks’ balance sheets. 
Of  course,  there  are  some  risks  attached  to  pursuing  such  accommodative  monetary 
policies.  Quantitative  easing  can  threaten  future  financial  stability  if  it  leads  investors  into 
excessively leveraged positions in the search for higher yields. Moreover, a long period of 
low interest rates can lead people to overestimate the debt they can safely manage if interest 
rates were to normalise. Central banks must be alive to these risks and deploy appropriate 
prudential tools in mitigation. 
Furthermore, if central banks do seek to sustain demand, it can dull the incentives for private 
agents and governments to undertake the necessary adjustments and reforms. Such moral 
hazard  has  surfaced  from  time  to  time  in  the  euro  area  during  the  past  couple  of  years. 
Accommodative  monetary  policy  can  buy  time,  but  it  is  a  policy  best  suited  to  filling  in  a 
temporary hiatus in demand, not a long-lived shortfall: it is a bridge, not a pier. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  international  consequences  of  these  unconventional  monetary 
policies.  There  are  several 
interrelated  channels  of  propagation.  First  and  most 
contentiously, they may put downward pressure on the exchange rate, a purely “beggar-my-
neighbour”  channel.  It  was  that  which  prompted  Guido  Mantega,  the  Brazilian  Finance 
Minister, to charge advanced economy central banks with engaging in a “currency war”. 
Central banks in other countries may then respond by setting lower policy rates in order to 
lessen the appreciation of their currencies. One way to see whether this has happened is to 
look at the departures from what a standard Taylor rule would imply; the evidence surveyed 
by He and  McCauley (2013) suggests that Asian central banks have indeed shaded down 
their policy rates in response to looser US policies. 
Further down the yield curve, large-scale asset purchases will reduce yields not only in the 
markets where the purchases are made, but also in the markets for substitute assets through 
portfolio balance effects. There are several papers that find the lower bond yields from the 
large-scale asset purchases of the major central banks have translated into lower yields in 
other local currency bond markets that are integrated into global bond markets. For instance, 
Neely  (2010)  finds  evidence  of  significant  spillovers  from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  LSAPs  to 
other advanced economy sovereign bond markets, with yields falling on average by around 
half the associated fall in US 10-year yields, while Moore, Nam, Suh and Tepper (2013) find 
that emerging economy government bond yields fell by around a sixth. 
In addition, capital flows out of the stimulating jurisdiction can encourage an expansion in the 
supply of credit and also a switch into foreign currency denomination if the local currency is 
expected  to  appreciate.  Unless  well  managed,  that  can  lead  to  increased  financial 
vulnerabilities  further  down  the  road.  Yet  the  results  of  Fratzscher,  Lo  Duca  and  Straub 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
(2013)  on  the  respective  impacts  of  different  tranches  of  the  Fed’s  quantitative  easing 
suggest that these flow effects have not always operated in the same direction. In particular, 
they find that the first phase, QE1, triggered portfolio rebalancing out of emerging economies 
into US equity and bond funds – perhaps reflecting the role of QE1 in reducing tail risks in 
the United States – while the opposite occurred under QE2. 
Finally, to the extent that the unconventional policies are successful in their aim of boosting 
activity in the originating country, they will generate aggregate demand spillovers onto other 
countries through increased demand for imports. 
It should be obvious from this discussion that the spillovers from unconventional monetary 
policies are diverse in nature and ambiguous in overall sign. But from the point of view of the 
world as a whole, there has to be a strong presumption that these unconventional monetary 
policies have been expansionary. And  with the  world economy still suffering from deficient 
global  aggregate  demand  and  underutilised  resources  that  surely  has  to  be  a  good  thing. 
That said, I would not  wish to underplay the difficulties that some recipient countries have 
faced in absorbing large inflows of relatively short-term capital in a safe fashion. 
The presence of these complex spillovers has led to suggestions that monetary policies need 
to  internalise  these  spillovers  and  be  better  co-ordinated  (see  e.g.  Committee  on 
International Economic Policy and Reform, 2011). While I can accept the logic of this, I am 
afraid I  do  not think  we know  nearly  enough  about the magnitude  –  or even  the  sign  –  of 
these spillovers to make this a viable option. The best we can probably aspire to is directing 
monetary policies to achieving domestic price stability in a sensible manner and seeking to 
communicate our policy intentions as clearly as possible. 
Let me finish with a few words on the exit from unconventional monetary policies. While it 
may  still  be  a  way  off,  we  know  it  will  come  eventually.  And  the  recent  market  volatility 
prompted by heightened expectations of imminent tapering in the rate of asset purchases by 
the Federal Reserve has provided a salient reminder that it may not be smooth. Moreover, 
although  the  adoption  of  accommodative  policies  was  synchronised  across  the  advanced 
economies,  the  heterogeneous  nature  of  the  recovery,  with  the  United  States  leading  the 
way and Europe bringing up the rear, means that exit is unlikely to be synchronised, which 
will complicate matters. 
The  international  spillovers  mentioned  earlier  can  obviously  be  expected  to  operate  in 
reverse  on  exit.  And  indeed,  we  have  just  seen  such  synchronised  increases  in  long-term 
sovereign  bond  yields  internationally,  together  with  capital  outflows  from  emerging 
economies and associated downward pressure on their currencies. But for these countries, 
the greatest danger during exit will probably lie in the risk of future financial sector disruption 
if outflows expose currency mismatches on bank and corporate balance sheets. 
For advanced economies, particularly those lagging behind on the road to exit, there is a risk 
that  market  participants  see  tightening  moves  in,  say,  the  United  States  as  indicating  that 
tightening  is  imminent  elsewhere.  Although  synchronised  movements  in  bond  rates  is 
unsurprising  given  the  high  degree  of  substitutability  between  relatively  safe  sovereign 
bonds, synchronisation at the short end of the yield curve is not warranted if cyclical positions 
differ. 
Such  concerns  prompted  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  to  push  back  against the  recent  upward 
movements in the short end of the yield curve in our respective policy statements in July. The 
MPC took this further at our latest meeting by offering explicit forward guidance on the future 
path of policy rates and asset purchases. The guidance is similar to that already adopted by 
the Federal Open Market Committee, but differing in details that reflect the different position 
of the  UK  economy. In particular,  we  signalled our  intention  not  to  countenance tightening 
policy until unemployment has fallen to at least 7%. In addition, while our guidance is subject 
to  two  price  stability  overrides  similar  to  those  of  the  Fed  relating  to  internal  and  external 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
measures  of  inflation  expectations,  we  have  also  added  a  financial  stability  override 
determined by our Financial Policy Committee. 
This guidance is intended primarily to clarify our reaction function and thus make policy more 
effective,  rather  than  to  inject  additional  stimulus  by  pre-committing  to  a  time-inconsistent 
“lower  for  longer”  policy  path  in  the  manner  of  Woodford  (2012).  While  such  a  time-
inconsistent policy may be desirable in theory, in an individualistic committee like ours, with a 
regular turnover of members, it is not possible to implement a mechanism that would credibly 
bind future members in the manner required. 
Nevertheless,  by  reducing  uncertainty  about  our  behaviour,  we  are  aiming  to  encourage 
households and businesses to spend and invest. The knowledge that monetary policy will not 
be tightened until the UK’s fledgling recovery is secured should boost confidence. Moreover, 
it should reduce the likelihood that the present expansionary monetary stance is withdrawn 
prematurely through an upward movement in market interest rates. Short-term yields have 
moved  up  since  our  announcement  on  a  string  of good  news  about  the  economy,  but the 
unemployment  threshold,  by  serving  as  a  reminder  of  just  how  much  growth  is  needed  to 
regain  lost  ground,  should  temper  the  extent  of  any  tightening.  Indeed,  for  that  reason, 
guidance  is  potentially  more  valuable  during  exit  than  during  entry.  Finally,  given  the 
uncertainty  about  the  causes  and  durability  of  the  recent  exceptional  weakness  in 
UK productivity growth, it also provides a robust framework within which to test the scope for 
economic expansion without jeopardising price or financial stability. 
While guidance – and good central bank communication more generally – will be important 
during exit, I doubt very much that good central bank communications alone can ensure that 
it will be completely smooth. When a central bank’s reaction function is not well understood, 
market interest rates tend to respond to policymakers’ actions in response to economic data. 
But when the reaction function is well understood, market interest rates will instead respond 
earlier  as  the  economic  data  unfolds.  Although  there  are  benefits  to  the  market  more 
accurately  anticipating  a  given  policy  decision,  because  the  data  are  likely  to  evolve  in  an 
imperfectly predictable fashion, so will market interest rates and asset prices. 
In sum, then, exit will be challenging, both for the central banks in the countries withdrawing 
stimulus and those in other countries that will be affected by the international spillovers. But 
we  do  have  the  luxury  of  knowing  that  it  will  come  eventually  and  can  plan  for  it 
appropriately.  And  when  it  does  come,  it  should  be  against the  background  of  a markedly 
better economic outlook in the advanced economies. That itself would be a most welcome 
change. 
Thank you!  
References 
Committee  on  International  Economic  Policy  and  Reform  (2011).  Rethinking  Central 
Banking, Brookings Institute, Washington DC. 
Fratzscher,  Marcel,  Marco  Lo  Duca  and  Roland  Straub  (2013).  “On  the  International 
Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing”, European Central Bank Working Paper #1557. 
King, Mervyn (2009). Speech to Confederation of British Industry, Nottingham, 20 January. 
He, Dong and Robert McCauley (2013). “Transmitting Global Liquidity to East Asia: Policy 
Rates,  Bond  Yields,  Currencies  and  Dollar  Credit”,  mimeo,  Bank 
for  International 
Settlements. 
Moore,  Jeffrey,  Sunwoo  Nam,  Myeongguk  Suh,  and  Alexander  Tepper,  (2013). 
“Estimating the Impacts of the U.S. LSAPs on Emerging Market Economies’ Local Currency 
Bond Markets”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report #595. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Neely,  Christopher  (2010).  “The  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchases  had  Large  International 
Effects”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper #2010-018D. 
Rajan,  Raghuram  (2013).  “A  Step  in  the  Dark:  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  after  the 
Crisis”, Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, Bank for International Settlements, 23 June. 
Tucker, Paul (2013). “A New Regulatory Relationship: The Bank, the Financial System and 
the Wider Economy”, Speech at the Institute for Government, London. 
Woodford, Michael (2012). “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest Rate Lower 
Bound”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
