Jwala Rambarran: The housing market in Trinidad and Tobago 
Remarks by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the official launch of the Home Ownership Booklet “Opening the door to your own home – a 
guide to home ownership”, Port of Spain, 30 April 2013. 
 First,  I  wish  to  thank  you  all  for  accepting  our  invitation  to  the  official  launch  of  the  latest 
publication from the Central Bank’s National Financial Literacy Program, “Opening the Door 
to Your Own Home: A Guide to Home Ownership.”  
As we all know, buying a home is not only an important financial commitment, but it is also 
an emotional one. For many persons, owning a home is a significant milestone in one’s life, 
symbolic  of  independence  and  the  coming  of  age  into  adulthood.  At  the  national  level, 
affordable and quality housing is critical to improving a country’s standard of living.  
According  to  the  2000  Population  and  Housing  Census,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  a  high 
homeownership rate. Of the 343,180 households in Trinidad and Tobago, 77 per cent were 
homeowners. 
However, the dream of owning a home is posing a serious challenge to many of our citizens, 
especially  those  in  the  low-income  group  who  are  unable  to  afford  a  mortgage  sufficient 
enough to buy a quality home. About 13 per cent of households rented or leased a house 
from  the  private  sector  while  about  2  ½  per  cent  rented  or  leased  a  house  from  the 
government. Close to 7 ½ per cent of households were renting free or squatting.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  please  allow  me  to  briefly  provide  some  other  information  on  the 
housing market, which are indeed sobering.  
According to a January 2009 Information Memorandum from the Housing and Development 
Corporation  (HDC),  there  is  an  acute  shortage  of  housing  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  About 
107,000 applications for housing are on the database held by the Ministry of Housing in a 
country with a population of 1.3 million people. The Information Memorandum indicated that 
a large number of applicants fall into one of the following categories:  
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Unfortunately, there is a paucity of data on the operations of the HDC, making it difficult to 
determine whether the housing application situation has worsened or improved since 2009. 
This  lack  of  data  extends  to  information  on  the  demand/supply  dynamics  related  to  new 
housing units.  
Estimates from the Bank’s Research Department suggest that Trinidad and Tobago began 
this decade with a housing shortage overhang of around 50,000 units. With continued strong 
growth in annual housing demand and a significant slowdown in supply, the housing situation 
is likely to worsen in the future.  
Conservative  estimates  suggest  that  the  housing  shortage  overhang  could  reach  at  least 
80,000  units  at  the  end  of  the  next  ten  years.  More  than  half  of  this  massive,  unsatisfied 
demand  for  housing  will  come  from  low-income  groups  who,  according  to  the  latest 
2008/2009 Household Budgetary Survey, earn under $3,999 per month. 
Affordability  is  a  main  explanation  of  the  housing  shortage  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  The 
median price for a 3-bedroom house (with land) increased from $237,770 in 1993 (when the 
economy had stabilized after almost a decade of negative growth) to $721,481 in 2003 (just 
Cannot afford a mortgage (pure rental necessary).  
Can only access the “rent-to-own” facility.  
Can only access a mortgage between $100,000 and $150,000.  
Require a level of subsidy from the State. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
before  the  economy  was  about  to  experience  its  third  energy  boom).  At  the  end  of 
September  2012,  the  median  price  for  a  3-bedroom  house  jumped  to  $1.0  million.  If  this 
trend continues, the median price for a 3-bedroom house could reach about $1.3 million by 
the end of this decade.  
The volume of available housing finance may also limit access to homeownership. The total 
mortgage  funding  required  to  meet  the  annual  demand  for  housing  units  is  projected  at 
around $30 billion by the end of this decade. By comparison, the total value of real estate 
mortgage lending currently stands at just over $12.5 billion. Commercial banks account for 
around two-thirds of outstanding mortgage loans while the TTMF holds another one-fifth of 
mortgages granted in the country. 
For  these  reasons,  successive  administrations  have  been  grappling  since  1965  to  make 
housing more easily accessible and more affordable for citizens of Trinidad and Tobago. The 
state has entered the housing market through various means including through large scale 
programs for the construction of new houses (especially on prime agricultural lands), rent to 
own programs, national settlement programs such as squatter regularization, and providing 
highly subsidized mortgage and construction financing.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, it stands to reason that, if we are to make any meaningful dent in the 
acute national housing shortage, then we need to fundamentally rethink our national housing 
policy. What is the true extent of housing demand? How do we balance unsatisfied housing 
demand with the need for food security? Does it make sense to keep on building new houses 
to  sell  to  those  who  cannot  afford  them?  What  innovative  housing  finance  solutions  are 
available?  
Here  at  the  Central  Bank,  we  are  also  conscious  of  the  homeownership  challenges facing 
our staff. It is my deep belief that “no member of the Central Bank family should be without a 
home.” We  are,  therefore,  actively  considering  a  range  of  options  to  help  our  staff  realize 
their dreams of owning their own homes. 
Beyond  these  walls,  we  are  also  determined  to  impart  relevant  financial  education  to 
members  of  the  public  in  simple  and  effective  ways,  so  that  they  can  have  a  deeper 
appreciation and understanding of what is required for them to own a home.  
In this regard, the Central Bank has produced a number of publications seeking to educate 
the  public  on  issues  related  to  homeownership  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  In  2007,  we 
published the “The Residential Mortgage Market in Trinidad and Tobago”. Following that the 
NFLP  issued  a  publication  entitled  “Protecting  Your  Shelter:  Understanding  Property 
Insurance”.  
Additionally, we introduced the Mortgage Market Reference Rate in 2011 to strengthen the 
transparency  and  disclosure  regime  around  mortgage  interest  rates.  This  policy  was 
prepared in consultation with the Bankers Association of Trinidad and Tobago. 
Conclusion 
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  am  pleased  to  launch  this  booklet,  which  treats  with 
three most important approaches to accessing shelter – purchasing of property, building a 
house, and entering into a rental agreement. This booklet reflects the critical inputs of various 
stakeholders in the mortgage market. In particular, I thank the TTMF, HMB, the HDC and the 
Ministry of Legal Affairs for their unstinting support to the Bank on this important initiative, 
and I look forward to working with them on future projects.  
 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I  would  also  like  to  convey  special  thanks  to  the  Editorial  Committee  and  the  staff  of  the 
NFLP, Legal and Corporate Communications Departments for their various contributions to 
the production of this booklet.  
In  the  not  too  distant  future,  perhaps  we  can  all  realize  our  dreams  of  opening  the 
doors to our own homes. And do remember a good home must be made, not bought.  
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
