Barry Whiteside: Fiji’s Chinese renminbi trading platform 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of ANZ 
Fiji’s Chinese Renminbi Trading Platform, Suva, 25 February 2013. 
 Salutation 
H.E. Huang Yong (Ambassador of the Peoples Republic of China) 
Mr Vishnu Mohan (ANZ Bank, Chief Executive Officer Pacific & Fiji) 
Mr Li-Gang Liu (ANZ Chief Economist, Greater China) 
Distinguished Guests 
Management and Staff of ANZ Bank 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good evening and a belated Gong Xi Fai Chai (Happy Chinese New Year). 
Introductory remarks 
Let me first thank Mr Mohan for the kind invitation to officiate at this launch of your Renminbi 
(RMB) Trading Platform. This is another milestone event for Fiji and indeed for the Pacific, as 
ANZ  will  be  the  first  commercial  bank  in  our  region  to  offer  RMB  transfers.  I  am  told  that 
following  the  Fiji  rollout  a  similar  process  will  be  facilitated  for  ANZ  Papua  New  Guinea, 
Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.  
We have been closely following the developments on the RMB internationalisation and it has 
now come to our shores. We also have a special interest in the RMB as China is now our 
fifth largest trading partner, having recently dislodged Japan from that position. 
Deregulation of the financial system and new products 
I can recall the Reserve Bank initially embarking on a path towards deregulating the financial 
system in the early 1980s to encourage innovation and make the market more efficient. As 
such, we always welcomed the introduction of new financial products and services into the 
market  as  well  as  new  players,  provided  they  met  our  requirements.  The  rapid  global 
technological advancements over the last decade continue and we do not intend to be left 
too far behind. 
Today’s  event  and  launch  is  one  more  example  of  one  of  our  long  time  financial  players 
maintaining  its  pace  of  innovation.  More  and  more  services  and  products  are  now  being 
made available to make banking efficient and more accessible to the public. In Fiji we have 
seen  the  introduction  of  ATMs,  EFTPOS,  phone  banking,  internet  banking,  SMS  banking, 
FijiClear or real time settlements and foreign exchange hedging to name just a few services. 
Some innovations are more visible than others. We of course take all these in our stride and 
often wonder how we ever managed without them. The horror is that we are getting close to 
the  day  when  we  will  spend  more  time  with  our  smart  phones  than  with  our  partners, 
because they do more for us! 
Jokes  aside,  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  ANZ  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  a  number  of  the 
changes I have mentioned here in Fiji. It was also the first bank in our modern era to roll out 
direct banking services to the rural communities and the first lending institution to introduce a 
SME-focussed  product  line  following  the  announcement  of  Government’s  SME  Credit 
Guarantee Scheme. ANZ is also playing its part in our overall financial inclusion drive to take 
banking to the unbanked.  
Let me also add that ANZ Fiji has been continuously assessed by the Reserve Bank as a 
sound and resilient bank with strong capital and earning base as well as holding the largest 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
market share. It is known for its compliance with international prudential standards. The fact 
that it has recently moved its Pacific Regional Office to Fiji also speaks volumes for the faith 
this bank has in our country. 
Chinese economy & Fiji-China relationship 
Ladies and gentlemen, I will not delve in detail on the rapid growth in the Chinese economy 
and its emergence as a major player on the global stage. This was more than adequately 
covered by ANZ’s Chief Economist, Mr Liu, in his presentation this morning. However, it is 
important to highlight that China’s economy is the second largest in the world and also that 
China surpassed the United States last year to become the world’s biggest trading nation, 
with total annual flows reaching US$3.9 trillion. In this regard, the RMB is clearly expected to 
play a greater role in international economic and financial activities.  
Since  2009,  the  Government  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  and  its  central  bank  have 
been  progressively  deregulating  and 
the  country’s  currency.  This 
liberalisation  of  the  RMB  presents  business  opportunities  and  has  seen  a  surge  in  RMB 
offshore  deposits,  RMB  bonds  issuance  and  trade  payments  through  Hong  Kong,  the 
premier offshore RMB business centre. More than 10 percent of China’s cross-border trade 
is now settled in RMB with over 70 countries already doing business in the currency. 
Fiji  has  a  long-standing  cordial  relationship  with  China,  having  established  diplomatic 
relations in 1975. China is becoming an increasingly important bi-lateral trade partner. Our 
trade  with  China  has  increased  almost  ten-fold  from  F$35  million  in  2000  to  over 
F$300 million in 2012. As I highlighted earlier, it is now one of our top five trading partners. In 
September  last  year,  the  Fijian  Government  signed  three  agreements  with  the  People’s 
Republic of China to expand economic and technological cooperation and offer concessional 
loans for infrastructure projects. 
internationalising 
ANZ’s RMB currency exchange & benefits to Fiji 
Today’s  launch  of  the  RMB  currency  exchange  is  therefore  timely  and  a  step  in  the  right 
direction for Fiji. ANZ Bank’s new facility will enable trade and investment between Fiji and 
China to be directly settled in RMB. I have been informed that in this first phase of the rollout, 
customers will be able to negotiate Spot FX rates and Forward rates for hedging purposes. I 
also note that over the next 6 months ANZ will introduce further RMB-denominated products 
such as trade finance instruments (including Letters of Credit) and RMB deposit accounts. 
We at the Reserve Bank are excited by this initiative for a number of reasons. First, the RMB 
trading platform will allow local businesses an opportunity to negotiate improved commercial 
terms as Chinese suppliers who currently invoice in US dollars will no longer need to build in 
a  FX  margin.  Both  Fiji  businesses  and  consumers  should  benefit  from  the  removal  of  the 
extra conversion costs associated with denominating transactions in US dollars.  
Secondly, Fiji businesses can now access a wider pool of mainland suppliers as we will now 
have the flexibility to pay in their local currency.  
The third possible benefit is that Chinese investors into Fiji can now convert RMB directly into 
Fiji dollars. This new initiative will also greatly assist Government and statutory corporations 
that have RMB denominated loans to make repayments in a more straight forward and cost 
effective way without first converting to US Dollars.  
Finally, as you are all aware, Fiji’s exchange rate is pegged to our five major trading partners’ 
currencies.  Even  though  China  is  now  one  of  the  top  five  trading  partner  countries,  its 
currency  is  still  not  part  of  our  exchange  rate  basket  as  almost  all  trade  with  China  is 
currently denominated in US Dollars. However, with the introduction of this trading platform 
and  likely  increased  trade  settlement  using  the  RMB,  there  is  the  strong  possibility  of  the 
Chinese currency being part of the Fiji dollar basket in the not too distant future.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Economic update 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  remains  bullish  on  our  economic  prospects  and 
supports the notion underpinning the 2013 National Budget that the fundamentals are being 
laid and the best is yet to come. Throughout 2012 domestic demand had been buoyant and 
investment continued to pick up. As a result, our labour market is finding some traction. 
However we are always prone to the threat of natural disasters and Cyclone Evan showed 
that we must not be complacent. There also continue to be risks on the external front with the 
recent downward revisions in global growth.  
Despite  the  downside  risks  the  Reserve  Bank’s  twin  objectives  of  low  inflation  and  a 
comfortable  level  of foreign reserves  presently  remain  intact.  Inflation fell  to  1.5  percent  in 
December then blipped upwards to 3.2 percent in January following Cyclone Evan. Our end-
year  expectation  is  around  3  percent.  Foreign  reserves  are  currently  at  $1.6  billion  or 
sufficient to pay for just under 5 months of imports of goods and services. 
Before  I  close  I  would  just  like  to  mention  that  the  credit  rating  agency  Moody’s  recently 
upgraded  Fiji’s  credit  rating  outlook  from  ‘negative’  to  ‘stable’,  citing  improved  fiscal  and 
macroeconomic outcomes and the stability of Fiji’s external payments position. This is now in 
line with the rating and views of another agency, Standard & Poors, and puts a positive spin 
on our economic outlook. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  taken  up  a  lot  of  your  time  and  it  is  my  great  pleasure  to 
launch  ANZ’s  Renminbi  trading  platform  today.  I  hope  all  local  businesses  that  have  links 
with the Peoples Republic of China will explore doing business in RMB from now onwards. 
Once again, my sincere thanks for inviting me here today. I congratulate Vishnu and his ANZ 
Bank Team for this initiative and I wish you every success as you roll out your new product. 
Shieh shieh, thank you and Vinaka Vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
