Andreas Dombret: Financial systemic risk – the national and 
international dimension of macroprudential policy 
Public  lecture  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies (ICMB), Geneva, 
12 February 2013. 
 The case for macroprudential policy 
1. 
Dear Prof. Wyplosz, 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Recently,  The  Economist  reported  that,  more  than  a  millennium  ago,  this  very  city  was 
destroyed  by  a  tsunami  which  came  off  of  Lake  Geneva.  Today,  we  are  coping  with  the 
fallout of a different storm: A financial one that took place in 2007 but has its roots in earlier 
years. Ever since, systemic risk and macroprudential policy are at the top of the agenda of 
policymakers, regulators and central bankers, and for good reason. 
I  appreciate  very  much  having  been  invited  today  to  share  my  thoughts  on  why 
macroprudential policy is of such vital importance. I will touch on its broader implications at 
both the national and the international level. Therefore, most of my comments are generally 
applicable,  but  allow  me  to  voice  some  thoughts  on  the  current  debate  in  the  European 
Union. 
The  financial  crisis  has  made  it  clear  that  systemic  risk  with  its  implications  for  financial 
stability was not given enough attention in the past. We have learnt the painful lesson that we 
have  to  put  the  financial  system  on  a  sounder  footing,  and  we  need  to  draw  the  right 
conclusions from the global financial crisis. The costs of inaction have been high, and doing 
nothing  is  simply  not  an  option.  Thus,  our  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  has  to 
adapt to this insight and take a more systemic view. In this regard, let me suggest that one 
could draw a somewhat simplifying analogy to nature. 
In nature, species or populations have to adapt to their environment in order to survive. In an 
evolutionary system, continuous development is vital merely in order to maintain the fitness 
of an organism relative to the system with which it is co-evolving. 
Similarly, the financial sector as well as regulation and supervision may be considered as a 
system that is evolving over time. Its different players are continuously interacting with one 
another  and  must  adapt  to  change  in  order  to  succeed.  In  the  same  way  as  financial 
institutions respond to legal constraints, the regulator has to take their reactions into account 
and set the right incentives to safeguard financial stability. 
All players in a functioning financial system need to respond to new developments so that a 
balance  can  be  maintained.  From  this  angle,  the  financial  sector  can  be  seen  to  have 
become more globalised, more complex and more integrated. You will agree that therefore 
regulation constantly has to adapt to keep up with its changing environment. 
Adopting a systemic view is paramount. With this I mean it is of paramount importance to 
take due account of the external effects of individual actions and of their repercussions within 
the financial sector and, ultimately, of their implications for the real economy, sovereigns and 
taxpayers. In this sense, macroprudential policy provides a framework for thought and action, 
for deciding how much resilience we want and how much we are willing to pay for it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
National dimension: goals and interactions with other policy areas 
2. 
But  why  do  we  need  a  distinct  policy?  Would  it  not  be  enough  to  take  system-wide 
implications  into  account  in  other  policy  areas  such  as  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  or 
microprudential supervision? 
There are two main arguments why a specific macroprudential policy is called for and both of 
them I find important. 
One  is  set  out  by  Nobel  laureate  Jan  Tinbergen  in  his  contribution  “On  the  Theory  of 
Economic Policy”: achieving a number of goals requires an equal number of instruments. For 
example, setting the interest rate is effective when targeting a specific goal such as inflation. 
However,  using  one  instrument  to  try  to  achieve  multiple  goals  inevitably  impairs  the 
effectiveness  of  that  instrument.  So  even  though  the  interest  rate  impacts  on  financial 
stability, it is likely to clash with the objective of ensuring price stability. Moreover, it may be 
too blunt to achieve this policy goal, especially in a monetary union when risks originate from 
regions or sectors whose economies are not developing in sync. 
The  second  argument:  each  policy  area  only  should  have  goals  that  are  not  mutually 
conflicting. Would  it  be  wise  to  make  the  Transport  Ministry  responsible  for  environmental 
protection? Or would it not be more sensible to have an Environment Ministry in charge of it? 
Assigning potentially conflicting goals to different policy areas ensures that each policy area 
is committed to its task. 
Therefore, an independent macro-prudential policy safeguarding financial stability is needed 
and  should  be  equipped  with  its  own  instruments.  More  precisely,  there  are  two  main 
objectives of macroprudential policy, which should be distinguished carefully. 
First, it should provide a framework and rules that give the market participants appropriate 
incentives. This holds true in normal times but especially when crisis management measures 
have to be applied. 
Second,  macroprudential  policy  is  about  prevention.  It  puts  in  place  instruments  to  keep 
systemic risk from building up over time. This can happen during times of exuberance when 
instruments  have  to  be  tightened.  But  it  also  can  be  necessary  during  downturns  when 
previously  accumulated  capital  or  liquidity  buffers  can  be  released.  Other  instruments  are 
designed to prevent spillover to other parts of the economic system. 
In order to achieve these two objectives successfully, macroprudential policy has to take into 
account  interactions  with  other  policy  areas.  This  is  because  different  policy  areas  might 
reinforce  or  counteract  each  other.  Coming  back  to  my  previous  words,  let  the  following 
situation serve as an example: while environmental policy is trying to reduce traffic pollution, 
at  the  same  time  transport  policy  is  promoting  enhanced  mobility  and  infrastructure 
improvements by having new roads built. 
The  same  issue  about  reinforcing  and  counteracting  effects  applies  to  the  interaction 
between monetary policy and macroprudential policy. 
In the short run, a potential conflict between the two policy areas cannot be ruled out. This 
might  be  the  case  if real  and  financial  developments  diverge, for  example  when  monetary 
policy should be tightened but the financial system is stressed. Or it could happen when an 
economy is undergoing periods of high productivity growth, which reduces inflation but at the 
same time may trigger irrational exuberance in financial markets. This, for example, was the 
case during the dotcom bubble at the turn of the century. 
However, once a longer-term perspective is taken, tensions tend to disappear. Over such a 
time horizon, price stability and financial stability are complementary. Monetary policy needs 
a functioning transmission process and a healthy financial system in order to be successful, 
while price stability is a key precondition for financial stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Similarly, there are interactions between macroprudential policy and fiscal policy. They are 
interrelated  because  banks  hold  a  large  quantity  of  their  own  government’s  debt  in  many 
countries.  Unsustainable  public  finances  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  rating  of  sovereign 
bonds  and  thus  on  banks’  balance sheets.  As a  consequence,  waning  market confidence, 
losses  and  strained funding  conditions  can  be detrimental  to the  resilience  of  the financial 
system as a whole. 
Fiscal policy can also impact on financial stability through tax incentives. Just think of the role 
that tax incentives play in the overheating of real estate markets, for example by promoting 
owner-occupied housing through overly generous tax deductions for mortgage lending rates. 
Or think of the widespread preferential treatment of debt over equity. Thus, macroprudential 
objectives may sometimes conflict in the short run with political objectives pursued by means 
of tax policy. 
Even so, by setting the right incentives, taxation also can be a useful tool for safeguarding 
financial  stability.  Some  activities,  such  as  excessive  short-term  funding,  represent  a 
systemic  risk  and  could  be  curbed  by  an  appropriate  levy.  This  would  make  them  more 
expensive and thus less attractive for market participants. 
Finally, macro- and microprudential policy can crucially impact on one another. Both aim to 
enhance resilience and ensure stability. However, one focuses on single entities, while the 
other looks at the system as a whole. And even if the tools employed often work in the same 
direction, they may not always be perfectly aligned. 
Microprudential  regulation  sometimes  favours  investment  in  certain  “safe”  asset  classes. 
However,  this  may  conflict  with  financial  stability  concerns  as  common  exposure  could 
involve systemic risk. Awareness of spillovers and feedback effects is a very important first 
step.  It  also  fosters  the  understanding  that  both  policies  should  complement  each  other. 
Achieving  microprudential  objectives  depends  on  a  stable  financial  system.  Conversely,  a 
stable financial system builds on sound individual institutions. 
In  my  home  country  Germany,  a  new  institutional  setup  for  macroprudential  policy  takes 
these  interactions  between  policy  areas  into  account.  A  Financial  Stability  Committee  has 
been  established;  it  comprises representatives  from the  Bundesbank, the federal  Financial 
Supervisory  Authority  and  the  German  Finance  Ministry.  Together,  they  are  in  charge  of 
designing  consistent  macroprudential  policies.  By  involving  different  institutions,  this  setup 
ensures a comprehensive point of view. 
Similarly, other countries will set up their own national macroprudential framework and take 
decisions  regarding  their  financial  system.  Thus,  measures  will  be  adopted  at  the  national 
level  but  will  also  have  an  impact  across  borders.  Therefore,  macroprudential  policies  will 
have  to  take  spillovers  into  account.  Equally,  market  participants  must  learn  about  the 
macroprudential policies of different jurisdictions. This thought leads me directly to my next 
topic: banking union and macroprudential policy. 
Banking union and macroprudential policy 
3. 
In a financially integrated area such as the EU, spillover effects from one country to another 
are especially pronounced. Any national policy that affects financial stability might have an 
impact not only at home but across borders, too. This holds true not only for any measure 
taken but also for measures not taken. 
Furthermore, the developments of the last years have dramatically shown the perils of the 
sovereign-banking nexus. The proposal for a banking union in the EU can be seen as a step 
towards better addressing spillover effects and disentangling sovereign and banking risks. 
The banking union will start with a single banking supervisor. With a common set of rules on 
microprudential regulation, a European supervisor will be best placed to ensure a common 
supervisory practice. This is to avoid forbearance or a policy of “too little too late”. Inaction 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
can  lead  to  severe  problems  in financial  institutions  and  contagion  in the financial  system. 
Moreover, a European supervisor helps to preserve a level playing field, which is essential to 
the single market. 
However,  as  envisaged  by  the  banking  union,  a  common  resolution  scheme  should  soon 
complement a single banking supervisor. First of all, it will ensure that owners and creditors 
bear  the  risk  of  their  investment.  A  common  resolution  scheme  would  also  avoid 
inconsistencies  and  frictions  that  could  otherwise  arise  between  a  single  supervisor  and 
national resolution authorities. Ultimately, it could significantly improve the way in which we 
cope  with  failing  internationally  active  banks.  Their  orderly  recovery  or  resolution  is  a  key 
element  of  financial  stability  and  cross-border  effects  play  a  crucial  part  in  it.  A  common 
resolution  scheme  will  also  help  to  reduce  negative  spillover  from  the  banking  sector  to 
governments.  Should  public  backstops  be  necessary  to  fund  the  resolution  of  banks 
governed by the single supervisory mechanism, a burden-sharing agreement will have to be 
in place. 
A  banking  union  surely  contributes  to  financial  stability.  But  it  is  not  a  panacea.  Current 
financial risks in national banking systems developed under national supervision. Thus, the 
ultimate responsibility is national. Any other solution would be a fiscal transfer and should be 
treated as such, including obtaining the obligatory democratic legitimacy. 
Setting up a banking union and a single European supervisor also touches on institutional 
questions.  Furthermore,  it  requires  us  to  work  out  how  the  new  set-up  will  relate  to 
macroprudential policy. 
Regarding  the  institutional  framework,  it  must  be  ensured  that  the  conferring  of  any 
supervisory powers on the ECB does not call into question the independence of monetary 
policy and the central bank’s mandate for price stability. But I will not, at this point, go into 
further detail about the design of the banking union. Instead, I would like to expand briefly on 
the relationship between a banking union and macroprudential policy. 
In  contrast  to  the  common  set  of  rules  of  microprudential  regulation,  the  essence  of 
macroprudential policy is to detect, assess and respond flexibly to a build-up of systemic risk 
wherever and whenever it occurs. Even with a banking union, cyclical patterns in the euro 
area  will  vary  to  some  extent.  Under  a  single  monetary  policy,  regionally  differentiated 
macroprudential policies are vitally needed to combat systemic risk. 
But who should be responsible for implementing macroprudential policies? 
the 
On 
macroeconomic costs of a systemic crisis are borne largely nationally, it seems reasonable 
to assign national authorities the responsibility to cope with the changing nature of systemic 
risk. Furthermore, a granular understanding of the national economy and the financial system 
is  needed.  National  policies  will  involve  implementing  specific  measures,  such  as  the 
countercyclical capital buffer, sectoral risk weights or capital or liquidity surcharges. 
On the other hand, national authorities may sometimes be biased towards inaction. Or they 
do not fully take into account spillover effects, whose potential costs have to be shared in a 
banking  union.  This  might  be  addressed  by  assigning  the  power  to  tighten  national 
macroprudential  policies  to  the  European  level.  Indeed,  in  December  2012,  European 
finance ministers agreed to confer this power to the single banking supervisor. 
At  present,  the  European  Union  already  has  an  independent  body  responsible  for 
macroprudential oversight: the European Systemic Risk Board. Within its framework, there 
are  established  rules  for  the  interplay  between  European  and  national  authorities.  This 
includes accountability on a “comply or explain” basis. As opposed to the single supervisory 
mechanism,  the  ESRB  comprises  all  27  EU  member  states.  It  also  is  not  confined  to  the 
banking sector but rather addresses the entire financial system. 
for  national  authorities.  Given 
there  are  arguments 
the  one  hand, 
that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The responsible parties now have to figure out how to fit the macroprudential aspects of the 
banking union and the ESRB together. While it is too early to know what the final setup will 
look like, the ESRB will certainly not become obsolete. It plays, and will continue to play, an 
important role in coordinating policies. 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  return  to  the  analogy  I  used  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech. 
Macroprudential policy can be understood as a framework for responding to needs that have 
arisen because of the way the financial sector has developed. Thus, macroprudential policy 
seeks  to  restore  the  balance  in  the  financial  system  populated  by  market  participants, 
regulators and supervisors. 
Unlike in evolution, the objective has been set. Nevertheless, to achieve the desired goals, 
interactions with other policy areas as well as cross-border spillovers still have to be taken 
into  account.  As  a  consequence,  market  participants  themselves  will  have  to  adapt,  to 
comply with new regulatory requirements and to develop their own responses to a changing 
environment. 
Some  responses  might  turn  out  to  be  unnecessary  for  a  healthy  economy.  But  former 
Fed Chairman  Paul  Volcker  was  taking things to  extremes  when  he  said,  “The  only  useful 
banking innovation was the invention of the ATM”. Other innovations, however, are beneficial 
to the development of our financial system, and those should be the ones that survive. 
The potential failure of the financial system can come with a huge price tag for society. For 
this very reason, a stable system is essential. Macroprudential policy will have a key part to 
play in this, and national macroprudential responsibilities are about to be assigned in many 
countries. Appropriate instruments now need to be developed and implemented; we will have 
to “walk the talk”. This will be a major challenge for some time to come. 
Thank you very much for your attention to the topic which is close to my heart. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
