Andreas Dombret: Challenges for financial stability – policy and 
academic aspects 
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Joint Conference of the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Technical University 
Dresden and the Journal of Financial Stability, Dresden, 17 January 2013. 
 2012: An “annus horribilis” or an “annus mirabilis” or neither? 
Your Magnificence Professor Müller-Steinhagen, 
Mister State Minister Doctor Beermann, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  turn  of  the  year  gives  me  the  chance  to  relate  my  discussion  of  some  of  the  future 
challenges for financial stability to a résumé of the previous year. Please allow me to do this 
from a European perspective and let me start with a seemingly innocent question: Will 2012 
go down in history as an “annus horribilis” or rather as an “annus mirabilis”, or neither? 
The answer to this question is less trivial than it appears at first. Let’s look to the origins of the 
words “annus horribilis” and “annus mirabilis”. To see this please note that the originator of the 
“annus horribilis”, Queen Elizabeth, used it to describe her feelings about the year 1992. 
At the time, her Majesty was talking about, among others, the fire at Windsor Castle, but one 
might also read it as a comment about what happened in the financial sector in 1992 when 
the markets forced the UK to leave the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. More recently, 
the Queen’s remarks sound as a comment about the financial and economic development of 
2012. Please also note that many people use the metaphor of a large-scale fire to explain the 
economic term of a “systemic” event. 
Thus her Majesty is worth quoting in more length: “1992 is not a year on which I shall look 
with undiluted pleasure. In the words of one of my more sympathetic commentators it has 
turned  to  be  an  ‘annus  horribilis’.  I  suspect  that  I  am  not  alone  in  thinking  it  so.  Indeed  I 
suspect  that  there  are  very  few  people  or  institutions  unaffected  by  the  last  months  of 
worldwide turmoil and uncertainty.” 
According to various measures 2012 was a year of considerable systemic tensions. Indeed, 
the indicators were approaching – but did not quite reach – the sad levels seen in the second 
half of 2008 and in the first half of 2009 – which was without doubts a very difficult period in 
the financial and economic history. Therefore, one might be tempted to classify 2012 as an 
“annus horribilis”. 
I  wish  to  challenge  this  view.  Will  2012,  with  hindsight,  possibly  go  down  in  history  as  an 
“annus  mirabilis”?  Absurd,  you  may  think.  But  on  second  thought  this  notion  seems  less 
absurd than it first appears. 
Let us not forget that the famous poem of John Dryden entitled “annus mirabilis” was inspired 
from major events in the year 1666. A very difficult year, to put it mildly, a year in which the 
Great Fire destroyed 80% of the city of London. The fire spread so rapidly due to the city’s 
narrow streets and the “interconnectedness” of houses. 
The battle to stop the fire was considered to have been won by two factors: the strong east 
winds  died  down,  and  the  Tower  of  London  garrison  used  gunpowder  to  create  effective 
firebreaks to stop the fire from spreading further eastwards. Dryden’s view was that God had 
performed miracles for England. The King promised to improve the streets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Well, some may say, so it is in 2012. The fire in the financial markets was stopped by the 
ECB, by the two firewalls EFSF and ESM as well as by the governments announcing that 
they would improve the financial system. Thus 2012 is an “annus mirabilis”. 
But as you know, miracles need to be acknowledged either by the pope or by the scientific 
community. So let us check whether a miracle was at work in 1666. And what I am going to 
say now about 1666 can be understood as a metaphorical warning about what could happen 
if we do not draw the right policy conclusion from the events of 2012. 
Despite  numerous  radical  proposals,  London  was  rebuilt  using  essentially  the  same  street 
plan which was in use before the fire. So the miracle is that nothing similar to the Great Fire 
has happened in the following years. 
The  lesson  of this  story  is  quite clear. The financial  system  needs  better  rules than  in  the 
years preceding the crisis. 
We  need  a  resilient  financial  system.  We  need  a  strong  supervision.  We  need  effective 
macroprudential instruments. We need to know how these instruments will work, which is a 
challenge  for  the  scientific  community  as  well  as  for  macroprudential  policy  makers. 
Otherwise, we would be putting our trust in a miracle. 
And we need to understand the complicated interactions between the financial and the real 
economy, which is the topic of your conference. 
Links between the financial system and the real economy 
Take, for example, the LTROs which provided banks with liquidity for a period of three years. 
These  LTROs  have  made  the  links  between  the  public  and  the  banking  sector  in  some 
countries  closer,  not  wider  meaning  that  the  system  is  even  more  vulnerable  to  systemic 
contagion than before. 
Another example is the issue of deleveraging and forbearance. 
In Europe, many banks’ balance sheets are too large. Most of you probably agree that it is 
necessary for these banks to shrink their balance sheets. At the same time, some fear that 
deleveraging cuts off corporations from their financing sources. 
From  a theoretical  viewpoint,  however,  a  distinction  needs  to  be made between  good  and 
bad  deleveraging.  Good  deleveraging,  for  instance,  means  scaling  back  the  exposure  to 
other  financial  intermediaries  whereas  bad  deleveraging  means  that  lending  to  the  real 
economy is being reduced. 
The problem with this view is that, in practice, the distinction is not at all so clear-cut. The 
issue  becomes  even  more  complicated,  when  we  additionally  introduce  the  concept  of 
forbearance, i.e. postponing the act of declaring a doubtful loan to be a doubtful loan. 
What  is  the  best  response  to  this  issue?  The  first  answer  is  transparency.  At  this  point, 
transparency is more easily said than done. But we need it, particularly in the context of a 
banking union and possible bank recapitalisations. And transparency is especially important 
with a view to legacy assets and forbearance of the problem banks. 
How  do  we  proceed further?  Repairing the  banks’  balances  sheets  and injecting  capital  is 
one answer. However, some fear that repairing balance sheets has procyclical effects and 
could damage the availability of credit for the real economy. In my view, however, repairing 
balance sheets will have a long-term positive impact on potential output growth more than 
offsetting the possible short-term cyclical effects. 
The limits of state interventions 
I often hear that the banks were responsible for the crisis. But can governments do better? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  you  know,  one  reason  for  the  financial  crisis  was  the  use  of  risk  models  based  on 
assumptions, which concentrated on expected values rather than tails. Peter Bernstein, the 
financial  historian  from  the  US,  illustrated  this  point  by  citing  the  anecdote  of  a  Moscovite 
professor  of  statistics,  who  refused  to  go  to  the  air-raid  shelter  during  World War  II  bomb 
attacks. The  professor  argued:  “See,  Moscow  has  seven  million  inhabitants. Why  should  I 
expect to be one who will be hit?” His neighbours were astonished, when he came back to 
the  shelter  the  next  night.  Now  the  professor’s  argumentation  was:  “Moscow  has  seven 
million inhabitants and one elephant. Last night the elephant was hit.” 
If  regulators  and  banks  essentially  use  the  same  models  for  their  risk  management,  why 
should we expect a better financial stability outcome? Of course, one solution is to improve 
our models. But I do not think that this is the end of the story. 
I  rather  believe  that  regulators  can  do  better  if  they  acknowledge  their  own  limitations. 
Regulators should employ the market mechanism to find the best risk management tools. In 
an ideal world the market is a discovery process. First, each individual agent knows better 
what is good for him. But at the end of the discovery process – in theory – we will get the 
best risk management tools, if – and this “if” is the decisive word here – if banks with weak 
risk  management  processes  are  allowed  to  fail,  having  to  leave  the  market.  This  is  one 
reason why resolving the “too-big-to-fail”-problem needs to be a top priority on the regulatory 
agenda. 
As far as I can judge, we are only beginning to understand how well-established instruments 
like the capital ratio work and what effect they have on the banks’ behaviour. And there are 
other new macroprudential instruments where our knowledge is even more limited. 
Take the counter-cyclical buffer. The idea is simple and compelling. When the regulators identify 
a bubble developing, this buffer is activated, thereby leading banks to reduce their lending. If all 
works well, this buffer prevents the exuberances altogether, or at least mitigates it. 
However,  it  is  not  clear  how  the  buffers  should  be  calibrated  in  order  to  achieve  better 
financial  stability.  Moreover,  not  much  is  known  about  possible  time  lags.  In  the  worst 
situation,  these  buffer  effects  are  not  counter-  but  pro-cyclical.  Things  become  even  more 
complicated  if  different  instruments  are  applied  at  the  same  time.  As  you  can  easily  see, 
there are many questions waiting to be answered, many problems waiting to be resolved. 
When I think about what we know how macroprudential instruments work, traffic lights come to 
my  mind.  To  prevent  pedestrians  from  crossing  the  street  when  the  traffic  light  is  red  the 
authorities actually installed buttons that pedestrians could press to shorten the red phase. And 
it turned out to be a success: fewer pedestrians crossed the street when the lights were red. 
However, what the pedestrians did not know was that pushing the buttons had no effect on 
the duration of the red phase. 
Please  do  not  misunderstand  me:  I  do  not  believe  that  macroprudential  instruments  are 
useless.  Quite  the  contrary  is  true.  What  I  want  to  highlight  is  that  we  cannot  expect  to 
prevent all future crises from happening. It is an illusion to believe that we can finetune our 
instruments such that they have exactly the effect we want them to have. Recently, Otmar 
Issing  wrote  in  the  Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung:  “The  attempt  to  prevent  each  kind  of 
crisis  is  just  as  hopeless  as  harmful.  …  The  guiding  principle  of  the  market  paradigm  of 
action  and  liability  for  the  consequences  (of  these  actions)  should  be  valid  without 
exemption.”  Taking  this  into  consideration,  the  effects  and  the  interdependence  of 
macroprudential instruments may turn out to be a very fruitful research area. 
To  sum  up,  every  intervention  in  the  market  needs  to  be  justified  by  market  failures, 
something that, unfortunately, is not hard to find in many areas of the financial system. There 
is no guarantee, however, that governments can do a better job. But at least the state has an 
incentive  taking  into  account  the  negative  externalities  of  banks’  decisions  and  thus  to 
minimise tax payers’ losses. When the state is aware of its own limitations there is a good 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
chance that the outcome will be better than one in which the financial system is left to its own 
devices. 
Newton’s “annus mirabilis” 
There  was  one  famous  scientist  for  whom  1666  was  indeed  an  “annus  mirabilis”.  Isaac 
Newton  made  revolutionary  inventions  and  discoveries  in  calculus,  motion,  optics  and 
gravitation.  As  such,  1666  was  later  referred  to  Isaac  Newton’s  “annus  mirabilis”.  It  is  the 
year when Isaac Newton was said to have observed an apple falling from a tree and hit upon 
gravitation.  He  afforded  the  time  to  work  on  his  theories  due  to  the  closure  of  Cambridge 
University. In his own words: “All this was in the two years 1665 and 1666, for in those days I 
was in the prime of my age of invention, and minded mathematics and philosophy more than 
at any time since.” 
Nowadays,  Newton’s  experience  might  inspire  you  to  invent  and  discover  macroprudential 
mechanisms  which  policy  makers  could  put  to  appropriate  use  in  practice.  Then  the  year 
2012 might, in hindsight, turn out to have been a genuine “annus mirabilis”. 
I wish you all a very successful conference. Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
