Ravi Menon: Financial cooperation between China and Singapore 
Congratulatory remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore,  at  the  inauguration  of  ICBC  Singapore  RMB  Clearing  Bank,  Singapore, 
2 April 2013. 
 Mr Jiang Jianqing, ICBC Chairman, 
Mr Dai Bing, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
1.  I  am  happy  to  join  you  at  this  morning’s  ceremony  inaugurating  the  Industrial  & 
Commercial Bank of China as the Renminbi clearing bank in Singapore. 
2.  Today’s  event  marks  a  key  milestone  in  the  financial  cooperation  between  China  and 
Singapore.  It  is  the  fruit  of  a  strong  and  substantive  collaboration  between  the  Monetary 
Authority of Singapore and the People’s Bank of China.  
• 
MAS extended Qualifying Full Bank (QFB) privileges to ICBC and Bank of China in 
October 2012 as part of the China-Singapore Free Trade Agreement.  
PBC then named ICBC Singapore as the RMB clearing bank in Singapore.  
Last month, MAS and PBC doubled the size of their bilateral currency swap facility 
from  RMB150  billion  to  RMB300  billion.  The  scope  of  the  swap  facility  was 
expanded to allow MAS to provide RMB liquidity to banks in Singapore. 
 3.  Singapore  is  the  first  regional  financial  centre  outside  Greater  China  to  have  a  RMB 
clearing bank. Offshore RMB activities in Singapore will be underpinned by the strong and 
growing trade flows between the region and China.  
• 
• 
• 
Singapore’s bilateral trade with China exceeds US$80 billion.  
Trade between ASEAN and China is at a record US$400 billion.  
This  large  and  growing  cross  border  trade  will  fuel  greater  RMB  trade  settlement 
activity in Singapore over time.  
The RMB clearing bank will be an important channel for RMB liquidity to circulate between 
Singapore and China.  
4. Singapore’s deep and liquid capital markets will be able to support RMB financing needs 
in the region. We have already seen companies here issuing RMB-denominated bonds. The 
Singapore  Exchange  has  announced  that  it  is  ready  to  quote,  trade,  clear  and  settle 
RMB-denominated  securities.  We  can  expect  the  range  of  RMB-denominated  product 
offerings to expand, as regional corporates raise RMB financing through bond issuances and 
equity listings, to tap on the strong investor base in the region.  
5. There will also be strong and growing demand for RMB trade services. There is a critical 
mass of international trading companies based in Singapore that will demand such services. 
With  the  new  RMB  clearing  arrangements,  we  can  expect  financial  institutions  based  in 
Singapore  to  reach  out  to  local  and  regional  corporates  and  investors,  and  encourage 
greater participation in the offshore RMB market.  
6. MAS is delighted to have ICBC Singapore as our RMB clearing bank. ICBC Singapore has 
considerable experience in RMB business and is well placed to launch a reliable and efficient 
RMB clearing service. With the QFB privileges it now enjoys, ICBC is committed to growing 
its  business  in  Singapore.  I  understand  that  among  other  things,  it  intends  to  designate 
Singapore as its Southeast-Asian hub for RMB business and will make Singapore its wealth 
management hub covering Southeast Asia and South Asia.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
7. ICBC and Singapore can together play a big role in promoting the greater use of the RMB 
for trade settlements and other economic activities within Asia, and particularly in Southeast 
Asia.  
8. I congratulate ICBC for its commencement as Singapore’s RMB clearing bank. Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
