Peter Praet: Economic adjustment in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Institutional Money Congress 2013, Frankfurt am Main, 27 February 2013. 
 I would like to thank Arthur Saint-Guilhem, Melanie Ward-Warmedinger and Niels Bünemann for their contribution 
to the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to share some thoughts with you on what has been achieved and 
what remains to be done in the process of addressing the economic challenges we are faced 
with in the euro area. I will give you a central banker’s view on the role of monetary policy in 
managing  the  current  crisis,  but  I  will  also  extend  my  discourse  to  cover  the  broader 
institutional landscape, including some thoughts on what policy-makers in other fields than 
monetary policy could contribute to improve the euro area’s resilience. Today, I will focus on 
three points: 
First,  the  European  Central  Bank  –  together  with  the  national  central  banks  of  the 
Eurosystem – has acted forcefully within its mandate, in order to counteract any risks to price 
stability stemming from the crisis. The ECB’s monetary policy during the crisis has invoked 
both  standard  instruments  such  as  interest  rate  changes  and  non-standard  instruments  to 
ensure that the standard instruments would have the intended effects. 
Second, the most distressed countries within the euro area have embarked on a correction of 
their policies. This correction is painful and requires perseverance of all responsible parties. 
The reward should be positive results that are now in fact tentatively observable. 
Third,  governance  reforms  at  the  level  of  the  euro  area  and  the  European  Union  at  large 
have contributed to an improvement of the foundation for a better performance in future, and 
this work is still in progress. 
The multi-layered crisis 
When  looking  at  the  crisis  as  it  has  developed  since  2007,  it  can  be  helpful  to  use  the 
metaphor of an iceberg. In each phase of the crisis we have discovered new layers, from the 
visible tip of the iceberg to the dangerous ice cliffs that linger under the surface – and which, 
in the economic context, have emerged in the subsequent phases, each time proving to be 
larger than previously thought. This has challenged policy-makers to acknowledge the real 
dimensions of the problems, and to adjust their response accordingly. 
The tip of the iceberg – the liquidity crisis – was revealed in mid-2007 when the US mortgage 
market,  which  lay  at  the  basis  of  a  complex,  tangled  web  of  globally-held  financial 
derivatives, took a sharp down-turn. This triggered the first case of what we have later come 
to describe as “frozen” interbank-markets around the world, quite a fitting extension of the 
iceberg metaphor. The underlying cause was a spike in counterparty risk, due to the obscure 
distribution of exposures to the risks in the market for subprime mortgages. 
The  second  layer  of  the  iceberg  –  dissipating  bank  solvency  –  became  overwhelmingly 
apparent  in  September  2008  when  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed.  This  seminal  event 
unleashed a sudden re-pricing of risks, leading to a severe financial crisis. The consequence 
was a sharp downturn in private investments and consumer demand, and the result of that 
was a sizeable fall in economic activity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The third layer of the iceberg – the sovereign debt crisis – emerged in the beginning of 2010, 
when  the  true  scale  of  the  dis-connection  between  some  countries’  official  debt  and  their 
capacity to generate income to service the debt became clear to everyone. In all fairness, I 
remind you that central banks in general and the ECB in particular had pointed to this risk 
long before the sovereign debt crisis erupted. The re-pricing of risks escalated, it spread from 
banks to the sovereigns and back to the banks, reflecting an adverse feedback-loop between 
banks and their respective home country. 
The  feedback-loop  was  composed  of  three  elements  to  varying  degrees  in  the  affected 
countries: (i) some banks’ solvency was under pressure due to their high exposure to their 
home  country’s  sovereign  debt.  Decreasing  value  of  the  debt  necessitated  write-offs  and 
eroded  bank  capital;  (ii)  lower  market  value  of  government  bonds  also  strained  liquidity, 
given the widespread use of these bonds as collateral for funding in the private repo market, 
a  prime  source  of  non-retail  financing  for  banks;  (iii)  faced  with  a  fragile  banking  system, 
some governments had to spend public money on keeping otherwise insolvent banks afloat. 
This was a full-blown twin banking and sovereign debt crisis. But it did not affect all euro area 
countries in the same way. Instead of the convergence and financial integration we want to 
see  in  a  monetary  union,  we  were  witnessing  increasing  heterogeneity  and  financial 
fragmentation  within  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  many  countries  neglected  the  need  for 
structural  reforms.  They  faced  severe  competitiveness  deficiencies  and  therefore  built  up 
substantial  current  account  deficits.  Tensions  in  financial  markets  made  the  financing  of 
these deficits more difficult. And this set the stage for hopefully the last layer of the iceberg. 
In  the  summer  of  2012  the  hitherto  loose  talk  of  a  possible  break-up  of  the  euro  area 
translated into investors’ fears, then panic, and manifested itself in what we call a perceived 
redenomination  risk,  or  in  other  words:  an  exorbitant  widening  of  the  spreads  in  yields  on 
government bonds issued by stressed countries as opposed to those issued by the hard core 
of the monetary union. 
Monetary policy response to the crisis 
Let me now describe in more detail how the ECB has responded to these crisis elements. 
First of all, I’d like to underscore that we are well aware of both the power and the limitations 
of  monetary  policy  instruments.  Monetary  policy  can  help  bring  about  a  smooth  economic 
adjustment, but this can only be done in order to fulfil the primary objective, to maintain price 
stability in the euro area. The ECB responds to the price stability symptoms of the crisis, not 
to  its  fiscal  and  structural  root  causes.  Seen  from  the  perspective  of  the  authorities 
responsible for fiscal and structural policies, monetary policy can buy time for reforms that 
become  effective  with  some  time  lag,  monetary  policy  can  alleviate  the  macroeconomic 
duress that past policy mistakes can inflict on citizens, but it cannot substitute for reforms. 
The ECB’s response was composed of two types of measures, standard and non-standard. 
Standard  measures  activate  those  instruments  we  have  also  used  before  the  crisis  to 
achieve price stability, primarily changes in short-term interest rates. After the intensification 
of the global financial crisis in September 2008 – the second layer of the iceberg – the ECB 
reduced its main interest rate from 4.25% in the summer of 2008 to just 1% in May 2009. 
This was a series of rate cuts that was unprecedented in speed and size over such a short 
time-span. 
However, the third and fourth layers of the crisis also posed a threat to the effectiveness of 
such standard measures. In normal times, monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the 
real economy – where goods and services are produced, bought and sold – via the interest 
rate channel. Reductions in the rate at which banks can borrow from the central bank are 
supposed  to  feed  through  to  the  complete  range  of  retail  interest  rates  (loan  and  deposit 
rates  for  bank  customers)  as  well  as  market  determined  interest  rates  (e.g.  yields  on 
corporate or sovereign bonds) and a wide spectrum of prices of non-fixed income assets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But  during  the  crisis,  the  interest  rate  channel  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism  was  jammed,  initially  because  the  interbank  market  was  dysfunctional,  then 
because  illiquidity  and  fear  led  financial  players  to  be  less  willing  to  make  use  of  price 
differentials  between  different  maturities.  In  response,  the  ECB  engaged  in  a  sequence  of 
non-standard measures to restore a proper transmission of the monetary policy signals. The 
first action was to conduct lending operations through a fixed rate tender procedure with full 
allotment.  This  means  that  banks’  demand  for  liquidity  would  be  fulfilled  without  any  other 
limit  than  the  constraint  coming  from  the  need  to  post  eligible  collateral  for  the  loans.  In 
response to the seizing up of term lending, it was also decided to provide more liquidity with 
longer maturity than the usual one-week and three-month operations. In order to allow banks 
to mobilise a larger share of assets for refinancing purposes, the Eurosystem expanded the 
set of assets that could serve as collateral for central bank credit. 
Belonging  to  the  same  family  of  tools  are  the  two  3-year  Longer  Term  Refinancing 
Operations  that  were  announced  a  little  more  than  a  year  ago,  also  to  address  a  funding 
crunch in solvent banks. 
As  a  further  step  to  address  the  banks’  funding  problems  and  the  deep  financial 
fragmentation within the euro area, the instrument of intervening in securities markets was 
launched. This tool has been available to the ECB since the inception of the third stage of 
Economic and Monetary Union in 1999, but it was not until 2009 that it was actually used. 
The first action of this type was the purchase programme for bank-issued covered bonds. In 
May 2010 the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) took effect, in conditions in which the 
collapse  in  the  markets  for  securities  issued  by  distressed  governments  threatened  a 
renewed  wave  of  chain  defaults.  The  SMP  programme  was  finally  superseded  by  the 
so-called Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), announced in September 2012 but so far 
not activated. I will talk more about the OMT later. 
The standard measures have definitely served their purpose, to maintain price stability. And 
it  is  undisputable  that  the  non-standard  measures  have  helped  repair  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism by alleviating funding pressures in banks and thus complementing 
standard measures. 
At the same time, I want to emphasise that these monetary policy measures cannot address 
the root causes of the crisis. The longer we carry on with a highly accommodative monetary 
policy,  characterised  by  extremely  low  interest  rates  and  excess  liquidity  in  the  banking 
system,  the  more  we  will  see  a  phenomenon  manifesting  itself  with  greater  and  greater 
evidence. I am referring to what used to be known as “instrument instability” in policymaking: 
the need to apply larger and larger doses of the same policy interventions only to see their 
macroeconomic influence becoming more and more tenuous. Monetary policy is a relatively 
blunt  instrument  that  will  not  in  itself  change  the  fundamental  course  of  economic 
developments, when imbalances are plural and lie outside its sphere of responsibilities. 
The causes of the crisis are to be found in the policies that led to an accumulation of huge 
imbalances  in  several  euro  area  member  states.  In  some  countries  imbalances  occurred 
because of imprudent fiscal policies, not least surging expenditures in a fast-growing public 
sector or spending on social transfers or excessive reliance of fiscal structures on revenue 
sources  that  evaporated  quickly  as  the  crisis  destroyed  the  income-generating  capacity  of 
entire sectors. In other countries we saw a strong increase in the indebtedness of the private 
sector, reflecting lower financing costs and easier access to finance. This latter development 
was in some cases fuelled by imprudent bank lending practices. 
On top of that, banking supervision and regulation did not always mitigate the destabilising 
tendencies. Being in the hands of national authorities, banking supervision sometimes had a 
bias towards allowing more risk taking and credit growth in the supervised institutions that 
were operating in competition with banks from other jurisdictions. Consequently, there were 
cases when banks did not develop sufficient capital and loss buffers in good times, and they 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
were not sufficiently discouraged from investing heavily in government bonds issued by their 
own home country. 
Again, I think you will agree with me that the root causes for the crisis – as I have described 
them – cannot be addressed by monetary policy instruments. At most, the central bank can 
foster a smooth adjustment. It must never lose sight of its primary mandate, maintaining price 
stability. And even if the central bank “buys time” for the governments, there is a risk that this 
will  delay  or  postpone  the  actions  that  are  needed  in  terms  of  fiscal  consolidation  and 
structural reforms. 
Let me give two examples: 
First,  expectations  that  interest  rates  will  remain  low  for  a  long  time,  and  that  abundant 
liquidity will be provided, might weaken the incentives for banks to downsize operations and 
repair their balance sheets. In the absence of a tough banking supervision they could delay 
the  recognition  of  losses  and  keep  non-performing  loans  on  their  books  for  longer  than  a 
realistic  assessment  of  their  profitability  and  viability  would  suggest.  On  the  side  of 
governments, the same expectations for low interest rates could weaken incentives to reduce 
public sector deficits. 
Second,  the  perception  that  the  central  bank  will  always  “pick  up  the  pieces”  might  give 
incentives  to  excessive  risk-taking  and  high  leverage.  Even  in  good  times  that  perception 
could discourage sound fiscal policies and prudent financial behaviour. 
In the design of non-standard measures and in its communication, the ECB has taken great 
care  not  to  give  such  adverse  incentives  to  either  banks  or  governments.  The  following 
elements, among others, serve as proof: 
 
The  non-standard  measures  are  temporary  in  nature.  Some  of  them  will  expire 
automatically, if not renewed. On top of that, we have all the necessary instruments 
to reverse the current situation of abundant liquidity provision. 
The mandate of the ECB as stipulated by the Treaty has an unambiguous focus on 
price stability. In combination with the ECB’s monetary policy strategy it provides a 
clear  guidepost  and  has  proved  effective  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  over 
time. 
The monetary policy strategy gives a prominent role to the monetary analysis which 
captures  money  and  credit  developments  and  ensures  a  symmetric  reaction  to 
financial forces. 
The  design  of  the  tool  called  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  creates  the  right 
incentives  for  governments  to  improve  their  performance  with  respect  to  fiscal 
prudence and structural reforms. 
   I will expand a bit further on this fourth point. OMTs will only be activated in cases where the 
benefiting  country  has  signed  up  to  strict  and  effective  conditionality  attached  to  an 
appropriate European Financial Stability Facility/European Stability Mechanism (EFSF/ESM) 
programme.  They  can  also  be  considered 
for  Member  States  currently  under  a 
macroeconomic  adjustment  programme,  but  only  once  they  have  regained  bond  market 
access. 
This type of conditionality actually protects the independence of the ECB and empowers the 
ECB in its monetary policy function. It protects and empowers our policy action because it 
re-constitutes an institutional environment in which solvency is not a problem and the quality 
of  our  credit  is  guaranteed.  You  see:  we  conduct  our  monetary  policy  primarily  through 
temporary lending to banks. While doing so, we rely on solvency legislation to ensure that 
our  counterparties  are  sound  and  capable  to  repay  our  credit.  However,  while  banks  are 
subject  to  solvency  regulations,  governments  –  due  to  sovereign  immunity  –  are  not.  We 
therefore  need  a  super-national  structure  which  guarantees  that,  should  an  OMT  be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activated,  government  solvency  –  fiscal  sustainability  and  macroeconomic  viability  –  is  in 
place  and  sufficiently  constraining  –  national  policies.  This  is  why  we  need  programme 
conditionality and multilateral surveillance as a precondition to initiate OMT. 
Moreover, the design of OMTs entails interventions only in the short end of the government 
bond market – up to three years’ time to maturity – and they will be fully sterilised, meaning 
that we would absorb all amounts of liquidity injected by OMTs. 
Early results of economic adjustment 
Now  I  will  turn  to  the  “green  shoots”  of  a  nascent  recovery  that  can  already  be  observed. 
Almost six years down the road since the start of the financial turmoil that turned into a crisis, 
many euro area countries have experienced a significant, but to date still partial, correction of 
external and domestic imbalances. 
Substantial  progress  can  be  seen  most  clearly  in  the  development  of  current  account 
balances.  In  the  programme  countries  –  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal  –  current  account 
balances have improved by more than 7 percentage points (relative to GDP) between 2008 
and 2012. In Spain the current account has improved even more dramatically. Much of this 
was driven by an inevitable drop in domestic demand, but we have also seen strengthening 
exports in a global environment that is not really buoyant. This indicates that the countries’ 
efforts to rebalance their economies are starting to bear fruits. 
Part of this picture is also the partial reversal of previous losses of competitiveness, but here 
the  pace  of  progress  varies  across  countries.  Ireland  has  performed  very  well,  with 
accumulated  unit  labour  costs  falling  by  18  percentage  points  relative  to  the  euro  area 
average. Greece, Portugal and Spain have seen a 10 percentage point relative improvement 
so far. In some other countries in need of strengthening competitiveness we are still waiting 
for  the  correction  to  become  apparent.  And  in  yet  other  countries,  notably  some  of  the 
countries that joined the euro area more recently, we have actually seen an incipient loss of 
competitiveness.  It  is  important  that  these  countries  take  a  lesson  from  the  mistakes  of 
others. 
Fiscal balances have shown strong improvements. For example, Greece’s structural primary 
balance (that is, the fiscal balance adjusted for cyclical developments, interest payments and 
one-off  factors)  is  estimated  by  the  Commission  to  have  improved  by  more  than 
13 percentage points. I acknowledge that the concept of cyclical adjustment is surrounded by 
large  uncertainty  in  real  time,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  quite  a  lot  of  progress  has  been 
made. 
At  the  same  time  it  is  positive  to  see  that  the  general  upward  trend  in  private  sector 
indebtedness has been halted, both in the household and the corporate sector. 
Last but not least, the structural reforms have gathered pace, possibly under the imperative 
of the crisis. The programme countries have taken many initiatives to make their economies 
more  flexible  and  market-oriented,  thus  sowing  the  seeds  for  better  performance  in  the 
future.  These  efforts  include  pension  reforms,  the  fight  against  tax  evasion,  simpler  and 
better tax revenue services, optimisation of tax structures and – not to be underestimated – 
politically difficult labour market reforms. 
All  of  these  developments  give  reasons  to  be  cautiously  optimistic  about  the  prospect  for 
crisis-ridden  countries’  return  to  a  path  of  sustainable  growth,  productive  investments  and 
creation  of  new  jobs  with  more  social  security  than  has  been  experienced  in  the  past  few 
years. The severe recessions and increases in unemployment in some euro area countries 
were  caused  by  many  years  of  misguided  policies  and  lack  of  reforms  that  could  have 
strengthened the growth potential. 
Cautious optimism does not entail a naïve expectation that the “land of milk and honey” is 
just  around  the  corner.  Historical  experience  teaches  us  that  the  cocktail  of  an  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
downturn and a financial crisis is usually associated with a prolonged recession and losses of 
jobs and welfare. Most structural reforms take time to generate positive effects, and some of 
the countries in distress are still saddled with rigidities in the markets for goods, services and 
labour.  High  nominal  rigidities,  for  example,  induce  a  pattern  of  adjustment  to  shocks  that 
falls  disproportionately  on  employment  and  production  volumes.  Countries  must  progress 
with a deep-seated structural reform agenda to address the existing rigidities, reduce costs to 
firms, and to increase competitiveness. 
To prevent – and indeed reverse – job losses, the downward adjustment of both prices and 
wages need to be stronger in those areas where unemployment is still high, and where this 
adjustment has not taken place due to structural or institutional factors. If this goes hand in 
hand with a continued consolidation of public sector budgets, then the cautious optimists will 
be  vindicated  through  a  chain  of  reduced  uncertainty,  renewed  investor  and  consumer 
confidence, better access to funding and a return to robust and sustainable growth. 
Reforms at the European level 
Domestic reforms are important, but we also have work to do at the level of the euro area 
and the European Union. Much has already been done by way of strengthening fiscal and 
macroeconomic governance of the euro area. In EU jargon we talk about the “six-pack” and 
the “two-pack”, of which the former entered into force already in December 2011, and on the 
latter a final agreement was reached just last week (“trilogue agreement” on 20 February). 
These packages of legislation included the reform of both the preventive and corrective arms 
of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP),  the  new  minimum  requirements  for  national 
budgetary frameworks, the new Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP), and a stronger 
enforcement mechanism through new financial sanctions, under both the SGP and the MIP. 
The  two  additional  regulations  that  are  just  about  to  be  adopted  will  further  strengthen 
surveillance of euro area countries. 
Rather than talk about what has already been achieved I would like to sketch out the further 
improvements  that  are  in  the  pipeline,  in  particular  in  the  area  of  financial  regulation  and 
supervision. 
One  of  the  structural  flaws  that  exacerbated  the  crisis  was  that  supervisory  policies  often 
failed  to  prevent  excessive  risk-taking  in  the  financial  sector.  Supervisory  decisions  at  the 
national level did not always take their potential effect across national borders into account. 
More fundamentally, supervisory decisions were “microeconomic” in nature, concentrating on 
the  financial  health  of  individual  institutions  rather  than  on  systemic  impact  at  the 
“macroeconomic” level. 
The recognition of these fault lines led to the creation of two institutional bodies that are or 
will  be  closely  associated  with  the  European  Central  Bank  in  Frankfurt:  the  European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  The  ESRB 
addresses  shortcomings  in  the  macro-prudential  policies,  while  the  SSM  will  ensure  a 
uniform and consistent supervision of all banks in the euro area. 
Better  supervision  will  benefit  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  because  a  stable  financial 
system  is  a  prerequisite  for  the  proper  transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals  across  the 
euro area. Effective bank supervision is conducive to a stable macroeconomic environment 
with a stable price level. And strong supervision will minimise moral hazard concerns when it 
comes to crisis intervention. 
The SSM is an important first step towards a genuine banking union. But more must follow. 
Another indispensable element is a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) that will be able to 
ensure swift and orderly resolution – and, if need be, the closure – of non-viable banks with 
minimum recourse to taxpayers’ money. In addition to the SRM it would be highly desirable 
to establish a deposit insurance framework built on common EU standards. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
We have experienced challenging times but are laying a solid foundation to build on. Signs of 
stabilisation  are  becoming  more  and  more  frequent,  and  we  continue  to  expect  a  gradual 
recovery  in  the  course  of  2013.  The  same  expectation  was  expressed  in  the  European 
Commission’s Winter Forecast released on Friday last week. 
These  somewhat  better  prospects  are  primarily  due  to  policy  changes  in  the  field  of  fiscal 
and structural policies at the national level as well as in the European Union. For sure, the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  the  process  by  maintaining  an  accommodative 
monetary  policy  stance  and  by  fostering  improved  financial  market  confidence.  As  host  of 
both the ESRB and soon also the SSM, the ECB is committed to playing a positive role in the 
further  development  of  the  euro  area  as  a  well-structured  and  stability-oriented  part  of  the 
global economy. We call on the euro area’s governments to keep up the efforts to undertake 
still necessary reforms, while acknowledging what has already been achieved. 
Adjustment of such a magnitude as was needed to address the crisis is a long haul, and I am 
confident that we are on the right track to get there. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
