Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The Eurozone crisis and its impact on 
Africa’s economy 
Presentation by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
COMESA (Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa) Policy Organisation Meeting, 
Kampala, 20 November 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The Eurozone crisis is part of a much broader economic and financial crisis that has afflicted 
the global economy since 2008. The global crisis is manifested primarily in slow economic 
growth and the fragility of financial systems. Global economic growth has fallen by about two 
percentage points in the five years since the crisis began in 2008 compared to the preceding 
five years (table 1). The need to reduce very high levels of debt in both the public and private 
sectors has impeded economy recovery in the advanced economies. 
 Table 1 
Real output growth in the world and growth in world trade (percent) 2004–2013 
  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013 
        proj  proj 
4.9  4.6  5.3  5.4  2.8  –0.7  5.1  3.8  3.3  3.6 
World 
3.1  2.7  3.1  2.8  0.1  –3.7  3.0  1.6  1.3  1.5 
Advanced Economies 
2.2  1.7  3.2  3.0  0.4  –1.8  2.0  1.4  –0.4  0.2 
ow Euro Area 
7.4  6.2  5.3  5.6 
Emerging and Developing Economies 7.5  7.3  8.2  8.9  6.0  2.8 
5.3  5.1  5.0  5.7 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
7.1  6.2  6.4  7.1  5.6  2.8 
6.5  6.3  10.8  8.4  8.7  7.3 
Uganda 
5.9  6.7  3.4  5.0 
11.2  8.0  9.1  7.7  3.0  –10.7 12.6  5.8  3.2  4.5 
World Trade 
2012 and 2013 are projections 
Uganda data pertains to the fiscal year 
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook, except for Uganda where it is the Uganda Bureau of Statistics 
 
Although all regions of the world have suffered a slowdown in economic growth as a result of 
the economic and financial crisis, the Eurozone is one of the regions hardest hit; its economy 
has gone back into recession this year, its banking system is very fragile and countries on 
the periphery of the Eurozone have unsustainable levels of public debt. The slower economic 
growth has also affected world trade. In the five years prior to the start of the economic crisis, 
world trade volumes expanded at an average of 8 percent per annum, but this growth fell to 
only 3 percent per annum in the last five years. The slowdown in the growth of world trade is 
one of the main channels through which the economic problems of advanced economies are 
transmitted to developing economies. 
The short term prognosis for the global economy is not propitious. The October 2012 edition 
of  the  World  Economic  Outlook,  published  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF), 
forecasts  only  a  very  modest  recovery  in  global  economic  growth  in  2013,  to  3.6  percent 
compared to 3.3 percent in 2012. The IMF warns that the outlook is very uncertain and that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the risks for a serious global slowdown are alarmingly high. The continued difficulties facing 
the advanced economies are not especially surprising, given that the economic crisis had its 
genesis in a systemic financial crisis. Historically, major financial crises have had large and 
long lasting negative effects on economic growth. 
The medium to long term prospects for the global economy are also very uncertain. A report 
released last week by the Conference Board, one of the leading economic forecasters in the 
United States, forecasts that economic growth in both advanced and developing economies 
will  be  weak  through  to  the  middle  of  the  2020s.  The  Conference  Board  forecasts  global 
growth of only 3 percent per annum during 2013–2018 and then only 2.5 percent per annum 
during 2019–2025. 
2. 
What are the implications of the global economic crisis for African 
economies? 
The  health  of  the  global  economy  matters  profoundly  for  African  economies,  especially 
because of its impact on their balance of payments. The weaknesses in the global economy 
and  especially  the  slowdown  in  the  growth  of world  trade  have  constrained  Africa’s  export 
growth while inflows of donor grants have stagnated and private capital flows have become 
more volatile. The current account balances of sub-Saharan African (SSA) economies have 
worsened  markedly  since  the  onset  of  the  global  crisis,  from  an  average  surplus  of 
0.7 percent  of  GDP  during  2004–08  to  a  projected  average  deficit  of  3.3  percent  of  GDP 
during 2012–13.1 The deterioration of the current account affects both oil exporters and oil 
importers alike. The IMF forecasts a further rise in the average current account deficit of SSA 
economies to 3.9 percent of GDP by 2017. 
Slower  growth  of  exports  and  larger  current  account  deficits  will  be  detrimental  to  the 
development of SSA economies for two reasons. First, exports are an engine of economic 
growth  and  economic  transformation.  Fast  growing  developing  economies  almost  always 
have successful export sectors. Secondly, larger current account deficits must be financed 
with capital account surpluses. Given that official finance (such as concessional loans from 
international financial institutions) is projected to be flat over the medium term, larger capital 
account surpluses will only be possible if there are substantial increases in net private capital 
flows, increases which are at best uncertain because of the difficulties facing the advanced 
economies from where most of these flows originate. Moreover, even if larger net inflows of 
private capital can be attracted to SSA countries to finance current account deficits, private 
capital flows are likely to be volatile because of the fragility and turbulence on global financial 
markets, which itself will be a source of instability for the macroeconomy. 
The policy implications for African economies 
3. 
To thrive in a much more difficult global economic environment, SSA economies will have to 
prioritise measures to promote stronger export growth and to diversify their export markets 
away from the traditional markets in advanced economies which face a prolonged period of 
slow  growth.  I  want  to  highlight  three  sets  of  strategic  policy  reforms  which  I  believe  can 
contribute to these objectives across a broad range of SSA economies, if not necessarily in 
all of them. These reforms pertain to the real exchange rate, regional trade and agricultural 
modernisation. 
The real exchange rate 
Many empirical studies have established a robust relationship between economic growth and 
export growth in developing countries and their real exchange rates. Overvalued and volatile 
                                                
1  These data and forecasts are from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook, October 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
real exchange rates are very damaging for export industries and thus for private investment 
in these industries. Hence macroeconomic policy in Africa should aim to achieve stable real 
exchange rates which are, at the very least, not overvalued, and preferably are undervalued, 
to shift incentives in favour of private investment in traded goods industries. 
Sustaining more depreciated real exchange rates over the long term will only be possible if 
domestic absorption falls relative to GDP (so that trade deficits are reduced). This requires 
increased  domestic  savings  rates.  Because  private  savings  rates  are  very  difficult  to 
influence in the short term through public policy, the burden of raising domestic savings rates 
will  initially  fall  on  the  public  sector.  Public  savings  must  rise  which  means  that  public 
consumption,  and  especially  spending  on  public  administration,  which  is  not  usually  very 
productive, must be curtailed. 
Intra-regional trade 
To  achieve  sustained  export  growth  over  the  long  term,  African  exporters  will  have  to 
diversify  away  from  the  slow  growing  traditional  export  markets  in  advanced  economies. 
Regional trade offers promising prospects for diversification. Although Africa’s intra-regional 
exports have expanded more than four-fold since the turn of the century, they still comprise 
only 9.6 percent of the continent’s total exports, which is much lower than the corresponding 
share  in  other  developing  regions  such  as  Latin  America;  hence  there  should  be 
considerable scope for expanding intra-regional trade over the long term. 
Regional economic integration is a goal of many countries in Africa, including those in East 
Africa  which  have  established  the  East  African  Community  (EAC)  and  a  broader  group  of 
countries  which  are  members  of  the  Common  Market  for  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa 
(COMESA). The EAC has implemented a customs union, removing tariffs on intra-EAC trade 
and imposing a common external tariff. However, non tariff barriers (NTBs) to intra-regional 
trade  remain  pervasive  in  the  region,  some  of  which  have  been  retained  for  protectionist 
reasons,  despite the fact  that  the  removal  of  all  NTBs that  are  applied  in  a  manner  which 
restricts trade is an objective of the EAC Customs Union Protocol. NTBs include restrictions 
pertaining  to  the  “rules  of  origin”  of  imports,  sanitary  and  phyto-sanitary  measures  and 
technical barriers to trade involving the application of product standards and regulations in a 
discretionary manner. A forthcoming World Bank report, which examines how to harness the 
potential of regional trade and integration, found that Uganda and Kenya impose significantly 
more NTBs on their imports than many other SSA countries.2 NTBs are a particularly serious 
obstacle  to  the  expansion  of  food  exports  within  Africa,  with  the  consequence  that 
agricultural development is stymied and the continent is becoming ever more dependent on 
food imports from outside Africa. Hence the removal of NTBs should be a priority for African 
governments.  
Agricultural development and food trade 
Africa’s trade balance in agricultural products has deteriorated alarmingly over the last three 
decades.  In  the  1980s,  Africa  had  a  small  trade  surplus  with  the  rest  of  the  world  in 
agricultural  products,  but  it  now  has  a  trade  deficit  of  approximately  $22  billion.  The  main 
reason why Africa is now incurring trade deficits in agricultural products is that the growth of 
domestic food production has been weak, at about 2.7 percent per annum over the last three 
decades, and has failed to keep pace with the increase in demand for food on the continent. 
Africa  has  the  potential  to  expand  agricultural  production  and  close  its  trade  deficit  in 
agricultural products, but this will require substantial investments to raise productivity and to 
commercialise agriculture among the smallholder farmers. Smallholders both dominate food 
                                                
2 
“Uganda Economic Update: A Renewed Growth Momentum, Harnessing the Potential of Regional Trade and 
Integration”, World Bank, Kampala, 2012.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
production on the continent and generate much higher yields per acre than larger farms, an 
advantage  which  will  become  increasingly  important  as  land  availability  becomes  a  more 
binding constraint to output growth in Africa. As a result, it is not conceivable to envisage that 
African agriculture can be modernized and production increased by ignoring the continent’s 
smallholder farmers  and  focusing  instead  on  large farms. The  priority  of  agricultural  policy 
should  be  to  support  smallholder  farmers  to  adopt  good  agricultural  practices  and  to  sell 
more of their output on the market, which then enable them to begin using more purchased 
farm inputs and improved farm technologies. Agricultural policy should focus on the provision 
of  public  goods  and  services  to  smallholders,  in  particular  the  provision  of  efficient 
agricultural  extension  services  and  improving  the  network  of  rural  feeder  roads  to  allow 
smallholders to access markets. Agricultural and rural development  will also require public 
investment in rural infrastructure, especially rural electrification, schools and health centres. 
Because of the natural barriers to international food trade (transport costs are high), many 
African food producers are potentially competitive on the regional market even if they cannot 
compete on international markets. Consequently, expanding opportunities for intra-regional 
trade  cam  make  an  important  contribution  to  the  commercialisation  of  food  production  in 
Africa.  Although  some  individual  African  countries  are  likely  to  remain  net  food  importers, 
some  of  the  neighbours  could  supply  their  import  needs  competitively  if  domestic  policies 
support  agricultural  modernisation  and  if  the  NTBs  to  intra-regional  trade  which  I  have 
already mentioned are removed. 
Conclusions 
4. 
The  deleterious  effects  of  the  global  economic  and  financial  crisis  are  likely  to  remain  a 
feature  of  the  world  economy for many  years  to  come.  Developing  countries  in  Africa  and 
other  regions  of  the  world  will  have  to  adjust  to  a  much  less  benign  global  economic 
environment than was the case in the years leading up to the crisis. The weaknesses in the 
global  economy  will  make  it  much  harder  to  sustain  strong  export  growth  and  to  mobilise 
foreign  savings  to  fund  large  trade  deficits.  To  adjust  to  this  more  difficult  external 
environment,  African  economies  will  have  to  live  with  smaller  trade  deficits,  which  implies 
constraining  the  growth  of  consumption  and  prioritising  policies  which  can  support 
sustainable export growth. Stable and undervalued real exchange rates, if sustained over the 
long term, can help to promote investment in export industries. Opportunities to expand intra-
regional trade will only be realised if the ubiquitous non tariff barriers are removed. Finally, 
prioritising  the  modernisation  of  smallholder  agriculture  can  support  exports  and  reduce 
Africa’s large trade deficit in agricultural products.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
