Dimitar Bogov: Impact of international regulatory cooperation on the 
Republic of Macedonia 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, at the 36th meeting of the European Banking Federation, Skopje, 7 June 2013. 
 Distinguished participants to the 36th European Banking Federation Associates’ Meeting, 
Dear Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me wish you a very warm welcome at today’s meeting. The topic I want to dedicate my 
welcoming  speech  on  is  international  regulatory  cooperation.  The  banking  system  in  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia  is  predominantly  foreign-owned  and  consists  mostly  of  either 
subsidiaries  of  foreign  banks  or  of  banks  owned  by  foreign  portfolio  investors.  Foreign 
ownership has assisted banks in their efforts to follow sound market practice, develop and 
maintain high credit standards and receive encouragement and advice from their larger and 
longer  established  parent  institutions.  The  global  financial  crisis  and  Eurozone  debt  crisis 
have not fundamentally changed this relationship. Nevertheless, these exceptional crises do 
constitute  a  real  challenge  for  international  and  global  banking.  The  Vienna  Initiative,  the 
framework  to  safeguard  the  financial  stability  of  emerging  Europe,  has  been  valuable  in 
raising  awareness  that  the  deleveraging  process  in  developed  Europe  should  not  unduly 
restrict operations of bank subsidiaries in emerging Europe. 
In this context, it is important to note that even before the crises stroke, deposits raised in the 
Macedonian banking system by the predominantly foreign-owned domestic banks were lent 
by those same banks to borrowers in the Republic of Macedonia. As a rule, foreign funding, 
excluding equity and reserves, did not exceed 10% of all sources of financing of the banking 
sector.  There  has  always  been  a  difference  amongst  individual  banks,  a  reflection  of  the 
different strategies for funding and acquiring sources, yet the overall importance of foreign 
funding is not in its percentage, but in its long-term nature. This is the premise on which the 
good business relations between parent banks and subsidiaries is based. When the crises 
stroke the relative importance of domestic deposits in financing the claims on Macedonian 
borrowers actually increased. 
In the Republic of Macedonia the ratio of loans to domestic GDP is still 47–50%, while the 
ratio of deposits to domestic GDP is around 55%. These ratios in the developed world tend 
to  be  above  100%,  which  shows  the  potential  for  growth.  Similarly,  the  ratio  of  household 
debt,  including  mortgages,  to  household  disposable  income,  is  around  25%,  substantially 
lower than most countries at a similar level of development, also offering opportunities for the 
banking sector. 
Regulatory capital allocation, on average, is 17%, more than two times the legal minimum of 
8%. The high capitalisation of banks means they have the capacity to take losses and do not 
need to evergreen existing loans, but lend to new customers that are more likely to borrow. 
Strong capital ratios are one of the bright spots of the Macedonian economy. 
The Macedonian banking sector comprises 16 banks. This is still a somewhat high number, 
given the country’s population, and above all, the similarity of products banks are offering. 
Further mergers and acquisitions may have a positive  impact on cost management, which 
will in turn make it easier for economies of scale to be achieved. On the other hand, domestic 
mergers and acquisitions are unlikely to involve a cutback in foreign ownership. Enhanced 
cooperation  amongst  regulators  and  supervisors  from  home  and  host  supervisors  is  thus 
essential to the continuing stability of the system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Yet there exists no precise definition what international regulatory cooperation is. Most of the 
time, it brings to mind the system of committees and working groups meeting in Basel, at the 
Bank for  International  Settlements.  The  international  regulations  which  are  the  outcome  of 
the Basel system, comprise among other documents, Basel III, the bold new guidelines at 
the core of which is the concept of risk-weight; some assets are riskier than others and this 
should be reflected in the percentage of capital that should be held against them. For credit 
risk, this riskiness is taken to depend on the obligor, i.e. it is taken that savers and investors 
are almost inherently more averse to obligations of some entities than to obligations of other 
entities. This approach is not new, but an enhancement of the existing Basel I and Basel II 
infrastructure. 
Most  of  the  criticism  directed  at  Basel  III  is  that  higher  capital  ratios  will  have  an  adverse 
impact on lending because of the high opportunity cost of holding capital. In the economies 
of  emerging  Europe,  including  South  East  Europe,  this  criticism  is  heard  less  often,  given 
that foreign ownership implies that decisions on capital increases are made at the group or 
parent level. More generally, the proposition that an increase in capital leads to a reduction in 
lending  is  often  not  validated  by  the  facts.  The  cost  of  bank  equity,  the  compensation  an 
investor  requires  for  a  bank,  falls  as  the  bank’s  safety  and  soundness  improve.  As  equity 
investors  are  last  in  the  priority  structure  in  case  of  a  possible  bankruptcy,  higher  capital 
allocation is likely to increase the confidence in the whole banking sector, which is also an 
aim of the Basel system. 
To  conclude,  the  Basel III  document  is  an  important  milestone  in  development  of 
international financial regulation. It has both a regulatory and constitutive dimension: on the 
one hand, it operates as a further development requiring central banks and other regulators 
to behave in accordance  with its principles in order to strengthen financial stability; on the 
other hand it establishes even firmer the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision as the pivot 
of  international  regulatory  cooperation  centred  on  the  concept  of  risk-weight.  But  Basel III 
also  invites  the  question  of  a  perhaps  different  representation  of  entities  taking  part  in  its 
consultative  phases.  In  this  context,  it  is  a  logical  next  step  that  supervisory  colleges 
encompassing  home  and  host  central  banks  and  regulators  from  this  region  cooperate  in 
having  a  greater  input  in  the  Basel Committee’s  deliberations.  Not  only  will  this  make 
everyone  more  aware  of  the  variety  of  banking  practices  that  exist  in  this  region,  but  in 
conferring together at a senior level, during and between college meetings, central bankers 
and supervisors will secure a reasonable agreement between all parties as the best course 
on Basel III implementation. 
The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia continues to be committed to the adoption 
of the  principles  and frameworks  contained  in  the  Basel guidance  papers.  In  adopting this 
commitment we take care that implementation is adjusted to our circumstances. In order for 
individual  rules  not  to  harm  the  bank  business  in  hand  specifically,  and  the  economy  in 
general, overall regulation should allow the wise exercise of judgement or discretion by the 
banks applying it and by the regulator overseeing that application. 
I wish you, the European Banking Federation Associates’, a successful Meeting today and a 
pleasant stay in the Republic of Macedonia.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
