Christian Noyer: The euro area is getting stronger 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  International 
Financial  Forum,  “Post-crisis  growth  and  investment  opportunities  in  Europe”,  New  York, 
22 April 2013. 
 Mr Chairman,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am very pleased to have this opportunity to speak to you here in New York.  
I’d  like  to  offer  you  some  views  about  the  euro  area  from  both  a  short-  and  long-term 
perspective.  
I’ll start with Cyprus. This was certainly a traumatic episode. Obviously, the decision process 
was  not  optimal.  And  the  adjustment  effort  requested  from  the  country,  while  absolutely 
necessary,  was  totally  unexpected  by  the  population.  As  a  result,  many  observers  have 
interpreted the Cyprus crisis as a sign of fragility and uncertainty about the euro.  
In fact, it’s quite the opposite. Imagine if the situation in Cyprus had occurred nine months 
ago.  Most  likely  it  would  have  resulted  in  a  new  wave  of  turbulence  in  euro  sovereign 
markets, with interest rate increases and strong capital flows out of the periphery. This was 
not the case. There was no contagion, and no spill-over effects from Cyprus to other euro 
area countries. During the first quarter of 2013, when the Cyprus crisis developed, long-term 
interest  rates  in  Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland  actually  declined  by  around  270,  120  and 
130 bps, respectively. In the case of Spain, yields decreased by 70 bps, while in Italy, they 
decreased by 30 bps.  
This  is  the  first  time  in  three  years  that  a  major  crisis  in  one  euro  area  country  has  not 
affected others. This sends an important message. The euro area is more robust today than 
it was a year ago. While challenges remain, the actions taken have increased our resilience 
to internal and external shocks.  
Before I move on to other areas of progress, I would like to say a few more words on Cyprus. 
First,  the  financial  support  provided  by  the  euro  area  countries  and  the  IMF  was  very 
substantial, up to EUR 10, 000 for every Cypriot citizen. This should put to rest the claims 
that the country was unfairly treated and discriminated against. Second, the commitment to 
protect insured depositors has been maintained in the euro area and, in fact, is strengthened 
as a result of recent events. Last but not least: Cyprus is a unique case. This was an extreme 
situation  of  moral  hazard  with  big  depositors  looking  for  abnormal  yields  in  the  domestic 
banking system. And it justified an exceptional treatment. Cyprus is neither a precedent nor a 
template for future crisis management. It is also important to state that such a banking model 
has no place in the euro area. And such a situation would not have existed had the banking 
union been in place.  
This brings me to some broader issues and the progress made in restoring the euro area's 
robustness and integrity.  
Nine months ago we had reached a degree of market fragmentation that was threatening the 
integrity of the euro area. Spreads on peripheral sovereigns were at an all-time high; private 
capital  flows  from  core  to  periphery  countries  had  all  dried  up,  financial  conditions  were 
increasingly  diverging. The  same  borrower  was  faced  with  very  different  conditions  across 
countries.  
As  everybody  knows, the  introduction  of  the OMT, following  President Draghi's remarks  in 
July  2012,  marked  a  major  change.  The  measures  taken  have  restored  confidence, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
eliminated the tail risks of convertibility and reversed the dynamics of market fragmentation. 
The  process  of  repair  of  financial  intermediation  is  making  significant  progress.  In  recent 
weeks,  non-euro  area  investors  have  returned  to  debt  and  equity  markets  in  stressed 
countries.  Deposits  flows  have  also  reversed  from  core  to  periphery  where  repatriation  by 
domestic households has been significant. Target 2 balances, which measure the degree to 
which  financial  intermediation  compensates  for  insufficient  private  capital  flows,  have 
receded by 20% since last summer.  
The second transformational change has been the Banking Union. Never in its history, has 
the EU been able to agree upon and implement a major reform so quickly. A year ago, the 
issue  was  not  even  on  the  table. Then,  last  June,  leaders made  a  decisive  step.  Through 
days and night of hard work and negotiations, a detailed agreement was finally reached in 
December.  
It is hard to overstate the benefits that banking union will bring. It will break the link between 
sovereigns  and  their  banks.  It  will  stop  those  negative  feedback  loops  that  have  such 
perverse effects in times of stress. It will ensure that credit conditions in the euro area will not 
depend  on  where  you  are  but  on  who  you  are,  which  is  what  should  be  expected  of  an 
efficient financial market.  
The governance structure we have adopted will guarantee that, while the Governing Council 
will keep the decision power, there will be no conflict of interest between monetary policy and 
banking  supervision.  On  the  contrary,  more  consistent  supervision  across  the  euro  area 
should allow for the early detection of potential risks and imbalances and, ultimately, improve 
the transmission of monetary policy.  
Today  the  first  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  being  constructed:  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism. This is a fundamental first step and its rapid implementation is a major success 
for the euro area.  
But alone it cannot achieve all the objectives of a banking union. That is why we must rapidly 
construct  its  two  other  pillars:  a  supranational  bank  resolution  authority  (the  European 
Commission  is  due  to  deliver  a  draft  text  on  this  topic  before  the  summer)  and  a  unified 
deposit insurance system.  
Naturally,  in  the  current  situation,  there  are  some  dark  spots.  One  major  concern  is  the 
stagnation of bank credit, which especially affects SMEs. Overall, the improvement in banks’ 
funding situation, has not led to increased lending to the non-financial private sector, which 
has  declined  in  recent  months.  Admittedly,  part  of  this  weakness  is  due  to  low  demand 
factors.  And  here  also,  some  fragmentation  can  be  observed.  Among  countries:  credit 
distribution  is  more  active  in  Germany  or  France  than  in  Italy  or  Spain.  And  among 
borrowers:  big  corporates  can  issue  at  very  favourable  rates  while  at  the  same  time,  too 
many  SMEs  are  deprived  of  necessary  financing.  This  divergence  is  a  source  of  concern, 
especially since, in our economies, SMEs play  a dominant role in fostering innovation and 
employment.  
This  situation  may  not  reflect  a  weakness  specific  to  the  euro  area.  In  all  advanced 
economies,  banks  are  engaged  in  a  process  of  balance  sheet  repair  and  deleveraging. 
Recent numbers show major advances for European banks in their efforts to strengthen their 
capital base, in line with Basel III requirements and, in particular for big international banks, 
quite  comparable  to  capital  strengthening  in  US  banks  (when  differences  in  accounting 
standards are neutralized). To put it simply, in the euro area, banks are responsible for 80% 
of  total  financial  intermediation,  twice  as  much  as  in  the  US.  Consequently,  the  impact  is 
much stronger on the real economy.  
What  can  central  banks  do?  Our  actions  are guided  by  the following  elements. Inflation  is 
firmly  under  control.  Policy  rates  are  very  low.  In  practice,  most  central  banks  today  are 
operating close to the zero lower bound. Therefore, their actions are focused, in all advanced 
economies,  on  making  sure  that  the  impact  of  their  decisions  is  felt  in  all  parts  of  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economy.  In  other  words,  they  aim  to  ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism is working.  
Let us now turn to fiscal policy. In all advanced countries, and primarily in the US, the fiscal 
stance  is  being  hotly  debated.  As  we  all  know  since  Musgrave  has  introduced  his famous 
distinction, fiscal  policy  has  three  dimensions: stabilization,  allocation  and  distribution. In  a 
post crisis environment, governments are struggling to find the right mix.  
Today, what constitutes a “growth-friendly” fiscal policy? Discussion has sometimes focused 
on the stabilization aspect, and more specifically, on one important, but limited feature: the 
so-called “fiscal multipliers” which are set out to measure the impact of a change in the fiscal 
balance  on  GDP.  This  narrow  standpoint  focuses  on  the  negative  impacts  of  fiscal 
consolidation, especially when the output gap is significantly negative, as is now the case. 
However, we need to take a broader perspective and take into account the effects of fiscal 
policy  on  consumer  and  investment  confidence  as  well  as  on  the  efficient  allocation  of 
resources.  Where  could  the  gains  come  from?  To  answer  this  question,  it  is  important  to 
consider  the  interactions  between  the  fiscal  stance  and  debt  markets.  Surely,  a  growth-
friendly strategy is one that minimizes the risks of major financial disruptions in the future, 
that  does  not  impede  the  smooth  functioning  of  financial  intermediation  and  that  does  not 
block the transmission of monetary policy. In several countries of the euro area, sovereign 
spreads  are  still  at  penalizing  levels.  In  so-called  “core”  countries,  including  France,  the 
situation is different with historically low interest rates. While, in some cases, this reflects the 
consolidation achieved in fiscal accounts, there are also other temporary factors at work. Low 
interest rates are the product of low growth expectations in the short run; and they also result 
from  exceptionally  accommodative  global  monetary  and 
liquidity  conditions.  This 
environment offers a unique window of opportunity to consolidate and bring public debt to a 
more appropriate level.  
Ultimately,  growth  in  the  euro  area  will  depend  on  the  ability  to  undertake  the  necessary 
structural reforms and enhance competitiveness. The euro area, like all advanced economies 
is  facing  a  double  challenge.  First,  it  must  absorb  the  consequences  of  the  crisis,  resorb 
financial imbalances, eliminate excessive indebtedness and restore the normal functioning of 
capital markets. And second, it must adjust to the deep changes taking place in the world 
economy. Looking past current difficulties, it is clear that the euro area is well equipped to 
confront the challenges of the 21st century. With 370 million consumers and high purchasing 
power, it remains the biggest market in the world. It is also the most economically integrated 
area, with highly qualified manpower and very good infrastructures. Too often, however, euro 
area countries are prevented from reaping the benefits of their position by the rigidities that 
have  accumulated  over  time,  during  the  periods  of  easy  growth.  Now,  the  international 
environment  is  more  challenging:  new  and  powerful  competitors  have  emerged  and 
comparative advantages are shifting. There is no alternative to adjustment.  
Already, the crisis has produced significant reforms in many countries, with the downsizing of 
the public sector, changes in labour regulation and more competition in goods markets. We 
have  seen  a  significant  improvement  in  cost  competitiveness  as  measured  by  unit  labor 
costs (ULC): between 2008 and 2012, in the three program countries (Greece, Portugal and 
Ireland)  cumulated  ULC  growth  stood  about  12  percentage  points  below  the  euro  area 
average, thanks either to  wage cuts, to productivity gains, or to both. The current account 
balances as well clearly show a strong correction. In the three program countries the current 
account balances in percent of GDP improved by more than 9 percentage points between 
2008  and  2012.  In  Spain  the  current  account  deficit  improved  by  more  than  7  percentage 
points  over  the  same  period.  Part  of  the  adjustment  has  been  driven  by  a  contraction  in 
domestic  demand.  However,  in  Ireland,  Spain  and  Portugal  export  performance  has  been 
very  strong  compared  with  the  pre-crisis  period.  In  total,  the  euro  area  generated  a  trade 
surplus of more than 1% of its GDP in 2012 compared with around zero in previous years. 
We expect this surplus to continue in the coming years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In France, successive governments have reformed pension regimes, introduced measures to 
reduce labour costs (the competitiveness pact) and increased flexibility in the labour market. 
These are first steps in an ongoing effort to restore competitiveness and rebuild an export 
base. These measures must be pursued and amplified.  
Let  me  conclude.  The  last  three  years  have  been  the  most  difficult  for  Europe  since  the 
creation of the European Union. It is certainly too soon to say that the crisis is over. Current 
trends, however, are positive and the euro area looks today much stronger than it did a year 
ago. Current projections point to a return to positive growth in the second half of 2013 and in 
2014.  There  are  numerous  signs  that  efforts  undertaken  in  the  last  two  years  are  bearing 
fruit. Significant changes have been made to euro area governance, both by strengthening 
fiscal frameworks and improving crisis management mechanisms. Much remains to be done. 
But  if  we  keep  on  the  right  track,  we  will  emerge  from  the  crisis  better  equipped  to  take 
advantage of the opportunities offered by our common currency. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
