Benoît Cœuré: Duration risk in the financial system 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at “The Global Borrowers and Investors Forum 2013 – a Euromoney Conference”, London, 
25 June 2013. 
 I wish to thank Gerhard Rünstler, Christoffer Kok and Matthias Sydow for their contributions to these remarks. I 
remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  at  this  Euromoney  conference.  Today  I’d  like  to 
consider the impact that volatile interest rates may have on the financial system.  
Let  me  state  quite  clearly  that  I  do  not  intend  to  drop  any  hints  about  a  change  in  the 
monetary policy stance in the euro area in the near future. A reversal would not be warranted 
by current economic conditions. Economic growth is projected to remain weak this year and 
inflation is expected to remain clearly below 2% for the euro area as a whole. The various 
non-standard measures that have been introduced by the ECB to support monetary policy 
transmission in certain market segments will stay in place as long as necessary, and there 
are other measures, standard and non-standard, that we can deploy if warranted. Therefore, 
at the current juncture, there should be no doubts that our “exit” is distant and our monetary 
policy is and will remain accommodative. 
However,  these  conditions  are  not  permanent;  interest  rates  will  eventually  increase, 
triggered  by  a  tightening  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  by  an  unwinding  of  global  risk 
appetite, and/or by other external events. The recent bout of volatility in global fixed income 
markets is excessive in view of the current economic conditions, but it can serve as a useful 
reminder that such developments cannot be dismissed lightly.  
In  fact,  since  the  Great  Depression  a  number  of  financial  crises  have  occurred  after  a 
prolonged period of exceptionally easy monetary conditions. Some of you may remember the 
events  of  1994,  when  even  a  gradual  shift  in  the  monetary  policy  after  a  low-rate  period 
triggered severe turbulence on bond markets. For the United States, this concern was raised 
in a recent speech by Federal Reserve Governor Jeremy Stein.1 He concluded that there are 
signs  of  a  fairly  significant  pattern  of  “reaching-for-yield”  behaviour  in  US  corporate  credit 
markets.  However,  he  also  commented  that  leverage  in  the  short-term  financing  of  credit 
remained modest and therefore the potential for systemic harm would be relatively limited. 
These developments trigger several questions: First, what are the channels through which a 
low interest rate environment can affect the financial system’s exposure to risk? Second, how 
sensitive  are  the  balance  sheets  of  euro  area  financial  institutions  to  duration  risk?  Third, 
how  should  regulatory  and  macroprudential  policies  be  designed  to  avoid  the  negative 
implication of rising interest rates? And what can be the role of standard and non-standard 
monetary policies to mitigate unwarranted volatility along the road?  
I will structure my remarks along the following lines. First, I want to review some of the recent 
literature  on  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  the  risk-taking  behaviour  of 
financial  institutions,  the  so-called  risk-taking  channel  of  monetary  policy.  Second,  I  will 
present some evidence on the on-going search for yield in corporate bond markets. Third, I 
will also address specific challenges related to the fragmentation of the euro area financial 
markets. Fourth, I will draw upon forward-looking solvency analysis results published in the 
ECB’s  most  recent  Financial  Stability  Review  to  discuss  some  of  the  consequences  of 
                                                 
1   See Stein, J. C., 2013, Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses, speech 
held at a research symposium at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 7 February 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
various risks related to a re-emergence of risk aversion in several market segments. Finally, I 
will discuss the policy implications.  
The risk-taking channel of monetary policy 
One concern arising from a low interest rates environment is that the associated search-for-
yield may induce excessive risk-taking behaviour by financial institutions. 
The  recent  crisis  has  rekindled  the  idea  that  prolonged  lax  monetary  policy  can  lead  to 
financial instability what has been termed “the risk-taking channel” of monetary policy. There 
are four broad arguments which I would like to briefly discuss: asset substitution, search for 
yield, pro-cyclical leverage, and expectations of monetary policy reaction.2 
 
The asset substitution argument derives from standard portfolio theory, and it holds 
that  a  lower  yield  on  safe  assets  will  lead  to  a  decrease  in  their  weight  in  bank 
portfolios.  Banks  adjust  their  portfolio  until  risk-adjusted  returns  on  risky  and  safe 
investments are again equalised. This results in a lower share of safe assets. 
A  related  mechanism  operates  through  the  search  for  yield.  Financial  institutions 
with  long-term  commitments  (such  as  pension  funds  and  insurance  companies) 
need  to  match  the  yield  they  promised  on  their  liabilities  with  the  return  on  their 
assets. When interest rates are high, they can generate the necessary revenue by 
investing  in  safe  assets.  When  rates  are  low,  they  are  forced  to  invest  in  riskier 
assets to continue to match the yield on their liabilities.3  
Assume now that financial institutions target constant or perhaps even pro-cyclical 
leverage  ratios.  If  monetary  easing  boosts  asset  prices,  then  bank  equity  will 
increase and banks will respond to the fall in leverage by increasing their demand 
for assets. This reaction reinforces the initial boost to asset values, and so on. The 
result of this “leverage channel” is a more fragile banking system.4 
Finally,  monetary  policy  could  also  affect  risk-taking  through  the  expectation  of  a 
strong  policy  response  to  negative  shocks.  Since  the  1990s,  central  banks  have 
repeatedly  provided  liquidity  to  financial  markets  following  market  tensions.  This 
channel  has  sometimes  been  called  the  “Greenspan  put”.  Of  course,  it  can  be 
objected that the asymmetric pattern of booms and busts in asset prices prompts an 
asymmetric monetary policy response. But it remains true that central bank liquidity 
provision, while necessary in crisis time, can distort the price signals and therefore 
the incentives of financial market participants. Financial players can afford to take ex 
ante extra risks, as they can rely on central banks to mitigate the consequences in 
case those risks materialise ex post.  
   The  bottom  line  of  these  four  arguments  is  that  lax  monetary  policy  has  the  potential  to 
reduce the market price of risk and thereby trigger a higher degree of risk-taking by financial 
institutions.  Some  recent  empirical  studies  by  ECB  staff  members  lend  support  to  these 
ideas.5,6 
                                                 
2   See, e.g., de Nicolò G. et al., 2010, Monetary Policy and Bank Risk Taking, IMF research department mimeo. 
3   See Rajan, R.G., 2005, Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? Proceedings, Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, August, 313–69. 
4   See Adrian T. and Shin H.J., 2009, Money, Liquidity. and Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Staff Report No 360. 
5   One study used the volatility index (VIX) to test for the dynamic links between monetary policy, stock market 
volatility and risk aversion. It finds that lax monetary policy decreases risk aversion in the stock market after 
about  nine  months.  This  effect  is  persistent,  lasting  for  more  than  two  years.  Moreover,  monetary  policy 
shocks appear to account for a significant proportion of variation in risk aversion. See Hoerova M., Bekaert G., 
Lo Duca M., 2013, Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Of course, under certain circumstances, reducing the market price of risk and freeing up the 
risk-taking capacity of financial institutions is actually an outcome desired by monetary policy. 
Consider, for instance, the various non-standard monetary policies undertaken globally after 
the  financial  crisis  broke  out  in  2009.  They  were  designed  to  remove  risk  from  balance 
sheets so as to avoid destructive fire sales and at the same time to enable banks to continue 
providing credit to the real economy by taking new risks.  
The  concern  is,  however,  that  persistent  liquidity  sows  the  seeds  for  market  turmoil. 
Unexpected  events  such  as  a  shift  in  monetary  policy  or  a  change  in  economic  growth 
prospects will inevitably affect the yield curve. Since banks carry out maturity transformation 
by  borrowing  short  and  lending  long,  and  there  are  limits  to  their  ability  to  hedge  against 
interest rate risk, the result could well be an abrupt unwinding of risk-taking positions, putting 
financial market under renewed stress. 
These  risks  are  further  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  banks  operating  under  asymmetric 
information and limited liability will tend to take more risk than is socially optimal, since they 
do  not  internalise  the  losses  they  may  eventually  impose  on  taxpayers.  A  clear  and 
consistent framework for bank recovery and resolution, including “bail-in” rules with a clear 
pecking order and limited exemptions, will be conducive to a stricter monitoring of risks by 
bank creditors.  
In  fact,  as  I  mentioned  before,  many  of  the  most  severe  financial  crisis  since  the  Great 
Depression  broke  out  after  prolonged  periods  of  exceptionally  easy  monetary  conditions. 
Apart from the 2009 financial crisis, similar developments occurred in relation to the burst of 
the New Economy bubble in 2001, the collapse of LTCM in 1998, and the burst of the bond 
market bubble in 1994. 
Search for yield in bond markets 
Let me now turn to the current situation by showing you some evidence on the search for 
yield  in  the  euro  area,  taking  corporate  bond  markets  as  an  example.  (CHART  1)  Let  me 
start with some recent developments in European bond markets. Since early 2012, we have 
seen pronounced shifts towards bond holdings in investment funds and a general decline in 
yields across all risk categories. As Chart 1 shows, equity holdings of euro area investment 
funds  slightly  declined  compared  with  2011,  whereas  net  flows  into  fixed  income  funds 
increased substantially.  
(CHART 2) As in the US, the search for yields in corporate bond markets in the euro area 
has  intensified  in  recent  months:  corporate  bond  spreads  are  at  historical  lows.  Chart  2 
compares  the  historical  evolution  of  yields  on  high-yield  bonds  with  default  probabilities. 
Yields  are  generally  back  to  pre-crisis  levels,  but  default  probabilities  are  still  significantly 
higher.  One  noticeable  exception  is  provided  by  German  corporate  bonds,  which  have 
reverted to low default probabilities. The decline in yields of high-yield bonds is even more 
remarkable as the supply of those bonds has been shooting up recently. Total issuance of 
euro area non-financial corporate debt in 2012 was 60% higher than issuance in 2011, and it 
remained strong in the first months of this year. The share of high-yield debt in total issuance 
rose  from  one-quarter  in  2012  to  one-third  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013,  above  the  average 
recorded from 2006 to 2012.  
Overall the evidence for the euro area on corporate bonds parallels the one for the US and 
the two markets appear closely linked to each other. As I have discussed before, an abrupt 
                                                                                                                                                      
6   Another  study  found  similar  effects  for  loans.  Low  short-term  interest  rates  soften  credit  standards  for 
household and corporate loans, but especially for mortgages. This softening can be amplified by securitisation 
activity  and  weak  supervision  of  bank  capital  and  is  more  pronounced  if  policy  rates  remain  low  for  a 
prolonged period. See Maddaloni, A. and Peydró, J.-L., 2012, Bank risk-taking, securitization and low interest 
rates, ECB Working Paper No 1248. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
unwinding  of  these  searches-for-yield  –  perhaps  triggered  by  highly  leveraged  investors 
rushing for the exit – would be a source of concern for financial stability. However, the extent 
of the risk also depends on the degree of maturity transformation and the stability of funding.  
Specific challenges in the euro area  
The unwinding of search-for-yield may emerge as a global phenomenon. However, there are 
specific issues related to the current heterogeneity of economic and financial conditions in 
the euro area. Let me focus on government bond and money markets. 
(CHART  3)  Euro  area  government  bond  markets  have  appeared  resilient  recently.  The 
dispersion of yields was low in the first quarter of 2013, and volatility remained close to its 
2009 (pre-sovereign debt crisis) levels. Pivotal developments in reversing the deteriorating 
trend  in  confidence  included  the  ECB’s  announcements  on  the  Outright  Monetary 
Transaction (OMT) programme and European leaders’ commitment to establishing a banking 
union,  along  with  noteworthy  national  developments,  including  the  recapitalisation  and 
restructuring of the Spanish banking sector.  
These  are  all  positive  developments,  but  there  is  certainly  no  room  for  complacency. 
Progress towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union should be confirmed along the 
lines  of  President  Van  Rompuy’s  report,  starting  with  clear  and  predictable  rules  for  bank 
resolution and with the establishment of a single resolution mechanism, complementing the 
single supervisory mechanism as the second pillar of the banking union.  
The continuation of the current low level of government bond spreads cannot be taken for 
granted,  and  countries  efforts  towards  sustainable  fiscal  positions  should  thus  continue 
unabated. A sudden re-pricing of risks may lead to an increase in spreads, despite the on-
going  fiscal  consolidation  efforts,  and  even  more  so  in  countries  where  consolidation  has 
been  delayed.7  This  would  put  renewed  pressures  on  governments  and  revive  the 
fragmentation  of  euro  area  bond  markets.  One  possible  strategy  to  mitigate  this  risk  is  to 
increase  the  average  maturity  structure  of  the  debt,  but  the  best  remedy  is  to  cut  on  the 
quantity of risk by swiftly improving government solvency.  
Money  markets  have  also  been  affected  by  the  low  rate  environment,  but  an  increase  in 
short term interest rates may have an ambiguous impact. Since 2010, we have observed a 
significant decline in activity in these markets. Trading volumes in overnight interbank loans 
continued to decline in 2012 and are at very low levels by historical standards, some 60% 
below pre-crisis levels.  
This  may  not  only  reflect  continued  fragmentation,  but  also  the  effects  of  ECB  liquidity 
operations,  which  have  partly  replaced  market  activities.  In  principle,  there  are  various 
reasons for assuming that a rise in policy rates would revive interbank market activity. First, 
very low levels of interest rates may drive financial intermediaries, such as the money market 
funds, out of the market. Second, institutions without access to the deposit facility have to 
place funds with Eurosystem counterparties at interest rates below the deposit facility rate. At 
the current very low rates, these institutions may try to withdraw the funds from the accounts 
with  their  custodian  bank,  thereby  reducing  the  supply  of  funds  and  potentially  increasing 
banks funding costs,. Therefore a rise in the policy rate may help to revive money markets, 
by bringing back important financial intermediaries. 
At the same time, as I have argued before, higher rates may negatively affect the balance 
sheet positions of some banks. If this reintroduces asymmetric information in the interbank 
                                                 
7   This is best understood if one decomposes the risk premium into a price and a quantity of risk. The quantity of 
risk reflects the country-specific economic and fiscal situation. The price of risk instead reflects the general 
conditions on financial markets. Even if the quantity of risk remains constant, an increase in the price of risk 
may lead to a generalised increase in spreads. See, e.g., Manganelli, S and Wolswicjk, G, 2009, What drives 
spreads in the euro area government bond market?, Economic Policy, 58: 191–240. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
market  and  adverse  selection  through  the  exclusion  of  less  reputable  counterparties,  the 
current  market  fragmentation  and  relatively  low  trading  volumes  may  persist  or  even  be 
magnified. Funding costs in the wholesale market may increase asymmetrically across euro 
area  constituencies.  Here,  the  best  remedy  is  to  restore  full  confidence  in  bank  balance 
sheets through appropriate supervisory action. 
A quantitative assessment of the impact of selected macro-financial scenarios 
Let me turn to the final part of my presentation and look at some quantitative assessments of 
the various risks related to the current low-interest-rate environment. These assessments are 
based on the regular forward-looking solvency analyses conducted at the ECB. (CHART 4): I 
would like to discuss the results for four scenarios including a current baseline scenario. The 
three  alternative  scenarios  are  related  to  a  possible  return  of  risk  aversion  and  a  rise  in 
interest rates in various market segments:  
1. 
A worsening of the sovereign debt crisis. This scenario assumes a permanent rise in 
euro  area  long-term  sovereign  bond  yields  due  to  low  growth  and  delays  in  the 
implementation of fiscal and structural reforms. The increases are country specific 
and range from zero impact to 370 basis points across countries. Further effects on 
the  entire  yield  curve  and  other  asset  prices,  notably  equities,  are  taken  into 
account.  
Funding  stress  scenario.  This  scenario  assumes  the  emergence  of  funding 
difficulties for banks in stressed countries that would arise from deposit outflows and 
reduced  access  to  wholesale  funding  markets.  This  would  imply  higher  interbank 
and customer loan rates. It would also induce banks to restrain their lending in order 
to comply with loan-to-deposit ratio targets - also in the light of the upcoming Basel 
III liquidity requirements.  
Increased  risk  aversion.  This  scenario  investigates  the  risks  arising  from  a  global 
unwinding  of  the  search  for  yield.  It  assumes  an  abrupt  increase  in  investor  risk 
aversion worldwide, which results in stock price declines and a marked increase in 
corporate  bond  spreads,  thereby  raising  interest  rates  in  the  more  risky  market 
segments.  This  would  trigger  a  recession  in  the  United  States  with  negative 
implications for the global economic outlook.  
2. 
3. 
The details of these scenarios and the underlying methodologies are discussed in detail in 
the  latest  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review  from  May  2013.  Just  let  me  say  that  they  are 
designed  to  account  for  a  number  of  transmission  channels  and  the  size  of  the  shock  is 
based on historical evidence.  
(CHART 5) The scenarios generate a rich set of results, but let me focus on the implications 
for bank capital. Under the baseline scenario, the core Tier 1 capitalisation of euro area large 
and  complex  banking  groups  would  increase  from  11.2%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012  to 
11.3% by the end of 2014.  
Certainly, with regard to the findings of the adverse scenarios, they crucially depend on the 
implementation details of the individual scenarios. Nevertheless, we observe that a scenario 
configuration involving a rise in interest rates and asset price declines would in general tend 
to exert a negative influence on banks’ solvency positions.  
This  being  said,  the  decline  in  the  large  and  complex  banking  groups  core  Tier  1  capital 
ratios under the adverse scenarios is found to be relatively mild, which is a sign of resilience 
among the largest euro area banks also reflecting significant capital raising efforts in recent 
years.  Specifically,  the  average  core  Tier  1  capital  ratio  would  decline  by  0.4  percentage 
points in the funding stress scenario, by 0.6 in the sovereign debt crisis scenario and by 1.1 
in the global risk aversion scenario. However, the average numbers mask some dispersion 
across euro area countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
This  analysis  is  focused  on  the  banking  sector.  The  situation  in  the  euro  area  insurance 
sector differs somewhat. Insurance companies are also to some extent exposed to risks from 
shifts  in  sovereign  bond  yields  and  global  risk  aversion.  Forward-looking  analysis  of  the 
assets and liabilities of the euro area insurance sector indicates that the impact of these risks 
would remain limited due to comfortable capital buffers. For the euro area insurance sector, 
low yields on highly rated government bonds can constitute a solvency risk in the medium 
term. This holds in particular for those jurisdictions where a market-consistent approach to 
the treatment of liabilities is pursued. In this case, balance sheets are not only squeezed by 
the  low  profitability  of  assets,  but  also  by  the  high  value  of  liabilities.  Although  currently 
limited to only a few euro area countries, the liability effect will gain in importance on the eve 
of the introduction of the Solvency II regime. 
Conclusion and lessons for policy 
Let me conclude. 
Monetary  policy  has  to  support  the  economic  recovery  while  avoiding  another  build-up  of 
excessive  financial  imbalances,  and  there  should  be  no  trade-off  between  these  two 
objectives. 
The monetary policy stance of the ECB will remain accommodative for as long as needed, 
and we will  look with an open mind at standard and non-standard monetary policy tools if 
warranted by the outlook for price stability. In particular, we have to ensure that our effective 
monetary policy stance, as measured, among other indicators also by the term structure of 
money market rates, remains aligned with the Governing Council’s assessment, and with the 
outlook for price stability. 
The  financial  system  should  however  be  able  to  operate  under  a  different  constellation  of 
yields. The current period of low interest rate should be used to prepare for it. A number of 
actions are needed, that cut across policy domains and in many cases will take time to bear 
results. They should be high on the policy agenda. 
Let me highlight three of them, for which monetary policy cannot substitute. 
First,  bank  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  should  be  sufficient  to  withstand  a  normalisation  of 
yields in all market segments. In Europe, this can be achieved within the framework of the 
banking union. Before the start of the single supervisory mechanism, the ECB and national 
supervisory agencies will conduct a balance sheet assessment that provides a health check 
of  euro  area  banks,  with  adequate  peer  review  and  drawing  as  necessary  on  third-party 
expertise. A comprehensive stress testing exercise will then be launched in cooperation with 
the  European  Banking  Authority  that  covers  a  wide  range  of  scenarios.  Prior  to  these 
exercises, a credible backstop facility needs to be in place that can address potential capital 
shortfalls in banks’ balance sheets.  
Second,  regulatory  measures  aimed  at  curtailing  excessive  bank  leverage,  mitigating 
duration  risk  and  avoiding  excessive  maturity  transformation  are  needed  to  complement 
capital  adequacy  rules. Both  the  leverage  ratio and  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  (NFSR)  of 
Basel  III  are  still  under  review,  but  the  leverage  ratio  will  be  disclosed  from  2015  and  the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  remains  committed  to  introducing  both  ratios  as 
minimum  requirements  in  2018,  subject  to  a  review  period  and  proper  calibration.  I  look 
forward to the outcome of the relevant work of the Committee. 
Third,  governments  that  are  lagging  in  their  effort  to  consolidate  debt  and  deficits  should 
keep  in  mind  that  the  current  levels  of  yields  cannot  be  taken  for  granted  and  that  yield 
normalisation  could  take  place  in  a  differentiated  way  across  jurisdictions,  renewing  the 
fragmentation of euro area capital markets. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
