Deepak Mohanty: Efficacy of monetary policy rules in India 
Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Delhi 
School of Economics, Dehli, 25 March 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Abhiman Das and Binod Bhoi in preparation of this paper is acknowledged. 
I thank Professor Pami Dua for the opportunity to interact with this distinguished gathering of 
professors and young scholars. The Delhi School of Economics has a formidable reputation 
world  over  in  teaching  and  research  in  economics.  I  will  be  speaking  on  the  subject  of 
monetary  policy  rules,  not  only  because  it  relates  to  my  area  of  work,  but  it  offers 
considerable scope for research. 
My  scheme  of  presentation  is  as  follows.  First,  I  begin  by  giving  you  a  snapshot  of  the 
evolution of monetary framework in India to contextualise how short-term interest rate has 
emerged  as  the  key  operating  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Second,  I  briefly  focus  on  the 
debate on rule versus discretion in the conduct of monetary policy. Third, I present simple 
Taylor rule estimates for India covering the recent period of 2001–2013 reflecting greater use 
of interest rate as an instrument of monetary policy. I will conclude with some thoughts on the 
way forward. 
Monetary policy operations 
Let  me  briefly  highlight  the  evolution  of  monetary  policy  operating  framework  in  India,  to 
place  our  discussion  on  interest  rate  rules  in  perspective.  In  India,  as  in  most  countries, 
monetary policy framework has evolved in response to and as a consequence of financial 
developments, openness and shifts in the underlying transmission mechanism. The evolution 
of monetary policy framework in India can be seen in phases. In the formative years during 
1935–1950, the focus of monetary policy was to regulate the supply of and demand for credit 
in  the  economy  through  the  bank  rate,  reserve  requirements  and  open  market  operations 
(OMO). In the development phase during 1951–1970, monetary policy was geared towards 
supporting plan financing. This led to introduction of several quantitative control measures to 
contain  consequent  inflationary  pressures.  While  ensuring  credit  to  preferred  sectors,  the 
bank  rate  was  often  used  as  a  monetary  policy  instrument.  During  1971–90,  the  focus  of 
monetary policy was on credit planning. Both the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) and the cash 
reserve  ratio  (CRR)  were  used  to  balance  government  financing  and  the  attendant 
inflationary pressure. 
Subsequently, structural reforms and financial liberalisation in the 1990s shifted the financing 
paradigm  for  the  government  and  commercial  sectors  with  increasingly  market-determined 
interest  rates  and  exchange  rate.  By  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  in  its  liquidity 
management operations, the Reserve Bank was able to move away from direct instruments 
to indirect market-based instruments. Starting in April 1999, the Reserve Bank introduced a 
full-fledged  liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF).  It  was  operated  through  overnight  fixed  rate 
repo and reverse repo in November 2004. This process helped to develop interest rate as an 
instrument of monetary transmission. This framework was reinforced in May 2011 when the 
weighted average overnight call money rate was explicitly recognised as the operating target 
of monetary policy and the repo rate was made the only one independently varying policy 
rate (Mohanty, 2011)1. 
                                                 
1  Mohanty, Deepak (2011): “How does the Reserve Bank of India conduct its Monetary Policy?” Reserve Bank 
of India Bulletin, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Chart 1: The new LAF framework is based on 
explicit interest rate targeting  
 The new operating framework illustrated in Chart 1 with the modified LAF assigns a greater 
weight  to  the  interest  rate  channel  of  monetary  transmission.  This  means  that  once  the 
Reserve Bank changes policy repo rate, it should quickly impact the overnight interest rate 
which is the operational rate and then transmit through the term structure of interest rates as 
well as bank lending rates. Increasing importance of this channel was also evident from the 
mix  of  instruments  of  policy  actions.  Over  the  years,  in  comparison  with  CRR,  the  use  of 
interest  rate  instruments  such  as  the  Repo  rate  by  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  more 
frequent,  except  for  the  year  2008–09,  which  was  the  peak  of  the  global  financial  crisis 
(Chart 2). 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Rule versus discretion 
As the Reserve Bank has started explicitly targeting overnight interest rate as the operational 
objective  with  the  instrument  of  policy  repo  rate,  there  are  relevant  questions  those  arise: 
How that interest rate should be determined? Should it broadly follow a rule or should it be 
based on the central bank’s discretion? The debate about rule versus discretion is as old as 
monetary economics. This issue received added impetus as the monetary system transited 
from gold standard to fiat money. When Kydland and Prescott (1977) in their seminal article 
presented  the  time  inconsistency  argument  in  favour  of  rules,  the  debate  became  even 
sharper2.  Subsequently,  Taylor  (1993)  demonstrated  how  even  in  the  practical  world  of 
monetary  policy  making,  the  monetary  policy  reaction  function  could  be  modeled  as 
predetermined rules with superior policy outcome3. Let me briefly touch upon the pros and 
cons of rule-based monetary policy before turning to the formulation of Taylor rule. 
A number of reasons have been advanced in the literature as to why rule-based monetary 
policy  could  be  more  effective.  First,  a  rule  towards  a  credible  commitment  by  the  central 
bank to maintain price stability can reduce the inflation bias from monetary policy. Second, 
rules enhance economic efficiency by reducing uncertainty about future policy. Third, rules 
help  policymakers  avoid  pressures  from  special  interest  groups  and  facilitate  action 
consistent with long-run goals. Fourth, rules facilitate communication, promote transparency 
and increase accountability. 
Similarly, there are arguments against application of rules. First, the economic system is too 
complex  to  be  characterized  by  any  rule.  Second,  the  same  rule  may  not  work  over  the 
business  cycle.  Third,  rule-based  policy  reduces  the  flexibility  to  respond  to  exogenous 
shocks.  Fourth,  rules  do  not  allow  for  policy  surprises  which  may  be  desirable  for  policy 
effectiveness under certain circumstances. Fifth, rules are ill suited to developing economies 
characterized by underdeveloped financial markets and rapid structural transformation. 
In practice, it is difficult to come across central banks, which explicitly spell out their policy 
rules. However, for modern central banks, empirical assessments and policy evaluations are 
increasingly based on rules ever since Taylor’s influential paper. In empirical work, original 
Taylor rule is modified and extended in a variety of ways for adapting to specific country set 
up  and  evolving  monetary  framework.  These  include  forward-looking  Taylor  rule,  Taylor-
McCallum type rule, non-linear framework for addressing asymmetric behavior of monetary 
policy and time-varying nature of its parameters. 
Taylor rule 
Taylor rule is an interest rate feedback rule for a central bank for setting short-term interest 
rates to achieve both its objectives of stabilizing the economy and achieving price stability as 
economic conditions fluctuate. This could be expressed as: 
                                                 
2  Kydland,  Finn  and  E.  Prescott  (1977):  “Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of  Optimal  Plans”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (3), 473–492. 
3  Taylor,  J.B.  (1993):  “Discretion  versus  policy  rules  in  practice”,  Carnegie-Rochester  Conference  Series  on 
Public Policy, 39, 195–214. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 The  rule  recommends  that  short-term  interest  rate  should  be  changed  according  to  the 
deviation  of  inflation  from  its  predetermined  target  and  output  from  its  potential  level. 
Essentially, the combination of inflation and output gap should determine what should be the 
appropriate policy rate that would return the economy to its potential level without causing 
inflation. If these goals are in conflict in the sense that inflation is above its target and the 
economy is growing below its potential or vice versa, the rule provides guidance on how to 
balance these competing considerations in setting an appropriate level for the policy interest 
rate. 
While β and γ could be estimated from data, Taylor assumed those as 0.5 each. In a sense it 
assigns  equal  weights  to  both  inflation  and  growth  objectives.  This  is  a  reasonable 
assumption  considering  that  most  central  banks  are  concerned  both  with  inflation  and 
growth. These dual objectives are built into many central bank statutes, including that of the 
US. He also additionally assumed that desired level of inflation for the US was 2 per cent per 
annum and the equilibrium real policy rate was 2 per cent per annum. Taylor (1993) showed 
that a simple monetary policy rule, where the US Fed raises the interest rate if inflation rate 
exceeds  a  2  per  cent  implicit  target  or  if  real  GDP  growth  is  higher  than  its  potential, 
describes quite well the actual path of the Fed funds rate between 1987 and 1992. 
The linear framework of Taylor rule is, however, criticized by many on the ground that central 
banks have asymmetric preferences for interest rate smoothing depending on the direction of 
their  monetary  policy  stance.  In  addition  to changes  between  discretionary  and  rule-based 
policy  regimes,  economic  theory  provides  several  reasons  for  deviating  sometimes  from  a 
symmetric  and  linear  policy  rule  framework  (Gerlach,  2000)4.  An  accepted  way  of 
  gradually 
representing  such  behaviour  in  literature  is  to  assume  that  actual  interest  rate  it
adjusts  to  the  desired  rate  as:  ίt  =  ρit-1  +(1-ρ)  ίt*,  where 
  captures  the  observed 
smoothing of the policy rate by the central bank, i.e., the smoothing parameter. Substituting 
this in the original Taylor rule formulation in (1), the modified Taylor rule with smoothing takes 
the form as: 
It may be noted that equation (2) is not linear in parameters and hence parameters ρ, α, β 
and γ are estimated from the observed data by non-linear least square method. 
                                                  
4  Gerlach,  S.,  (2000):  “Asymmetric  Policy  Reactions  and  Inflation”,  Working  Paper,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Estimates for India 
In  India  there  has  not  been  much  research  on  monetary  policy  rules  partly  because  the 
underlying  monetary  framework  largely  relied  on  direct  and  quantity  based  instruments. 
Moreover,  the  commercial  interest  rate  structure  was  highly  regulated  till  recently.  In  the 
Indian  context,  Singh  (2010)  estimated  Taylor  rule  using  annual  data  for  the  period  
1950–2009 and observed a shift in policy response towards inflation gap since the 1990s.5 
Patra and Kapur (2012) estimated a forward-looking exchange rate augmented Taylor rule 
and found a high degree of interest rate smoothing.6  
Empirical estimation of Taylor Rule will require a priori determination of three parameters: the 
desired level of inflation, potential output and equilibrium real policy rate. These parameters 
are country-specific, and hence need to be estimated. 
First, in the mid-1980s the Chakravarty Committee (1985)7 had suggested a tolerable level of 
inflation of 4.0 per cent per annum to facilitate changes in relative prices necessary to attract 
resources  to  growth  sectors.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  current  assessment  suggests  that  the 
threshold level of inflation for India is in the range of 4.4–5.7 per cent, implying a mid-point 
rate of 5.0 per cent (Subbarao, 2013).8 Drawing on the research in the Reserve Bank, the 
desired level of inflation rate in terms of year-on-year variation in the wholesale price index 
(WPI) is assumed at 5.0 per cent. The actual inflation rate, however, has remained above 
this threshold level in the post-crisis period (Chart 3). 
Chart 3: Inflation in the post-crisis period 
has remained above the desired rate 
                                                  
5  Singh, Bhupal (2010): “Monetary Policy behaviour in India: Evidence from Taylor-Type Policy Frameworks”, 
Reserve Bank of India, Staff Study, SS (DEAP): 2/2010. 
6  Patra, M. D. and M. Kapur (2012): “Alternative Monetary Policy Rules for India”, IMF Working Paper, No.118, 
IMF. 
7  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (1985):  Report  of  the  Committee  to  Review  the  Working  of  the  Monetary  System 
(Chairman: Sukhamoy Chakravarty). 
8  Subbarao, D (2013): “Is There a New Normal for Inflation?” Speech delivered at the Bankers’ Club, New Delhi 
on March 8, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Second, the potential output growth is estimated by using the Hordrick-Prescott (HP) filter. 
The estimated potential output is broadly comparable to the Reserve Bank’s assessment that 
India’s potential output may have dropped from 8.5 per cent during the high growth phase of 
2003–08 to 8.0 per cent in the post-crisis period to around 7.0 per cent in 2012–13 (Chart 4). 
Chart 4: Potential output is estimated to have been 
moderated in the post-crisis period 
   to 2012–13:Q3
Third, the determination of the neutral real policy rate is a complex issue as it is not observed 
in real time. One way is to derive it from a comprehensive general equilibrium model of the 
Indian economy. Another simpler, though not very satisfactory, way of deriving it is from the 
Taylor  rule  estimate  itself.  The  empirical  estimate  from  the  two  alternatives  of  Taylor  rule 
estimated by us suggests it to be in the range of 0.5–0.9 per cent covering a longer period 
  which encompassed the recent bout of high inflation. The 
from 2000–01:Q1
implicitly derived number from the high growth and low inflation phase of 2003–08 works out 
to 1.1 per cent per annum (Table 1). For the purpose of this exercise we have assumed it to 
be 1 per cent. Combined with our first assumption of desired level of inflation of 5.0 per cent, 
it will imply that the neutral nominal policy rate could be assumed around 6.0 per cent per 
annum. 
 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Table 1: While growth moderated inflation remained high in the post-crisis period 
Indicators 
GDP Growth 
WPI Inflation 
Repo Rate 
Real Repo Rate 
2003–08 
average 
8.6 
(1.1) 
5.6 
(1.0) 
6.7 
(0.7) 
1.1 
(1.3) 
2008–09 2009–10 2010–11 2011–12  2012–13 
6.7 
8.1 
7.4 
–0.7 
8.6 
3.8 
4.8 
1.0 
9.3 
9.6 
5.9 
6.2 
8.9 
8.1 
–3.6 
–0.8 
5.0* 
7.4^ 
7.9 
0.5 
(Per cent)
2008–13
average 
7.0  
(1.8) 
7.2 
(2.2) 
6.7  
(1.4) 
–0.5 
(1.8) 
^Apr–Feb.    
Figures in brackets are standard deviations. 
*Advance Estimates.  
 
Following these three key assumptions, empirical analysis is done in two stages. In the first 
stage, we have estimated the Taylor rule from the observed data with and without interest 
rate smoothing. In the second stage, we have simply used the original Taylor Rule assuming 
inflation and output gap coefficients at 0.5 each. Our empirical analysis is based on quarterly 
 with average overnight call money rate as the 
observations from 2000–01:Q1
measure of short-term interest rate. The results suggest greater weight on inflation, evident 
from the level of statistical significance and correctness of the sign of the parameters, in the 
standard formulation. But interest smoothing becomes dominant in the alternative formulation 
alongside a significant weight on inflation. In this formulation, although the output gap has the 
expected sign, it turns out to be statistically insignificant. However, the explanatory power of 
the equation improves substantially as compared with the standard formulation (Table 2). 
 
 to 2012–13:Q3
Table 2: Parameter estimates of Taylor rule 
Equation 
1. Estimated Standard Taylor rule 
ρ 
 α 
r* 
β 
γ 
4.68 
(0.00) 
1.92 
(0.34) 
0.93 
0.25 
(0.02) 
0.72  
(0.06) 
–0.26
(0.05) 
0.23 
(0.67) 
R2 
0.21 
0.66 
0.52 
0.75 
(0.00) 
2. Estimated Taylor rule with  
smoothing  
Assumptions: 
(i) Period of observations: Q1:2000–01 to Q3:2012–13. 
(ii) Desired inflation rate (π*) = 5%.  
(iii) Potential output estimated by HP filter.  
(iv) r* = α + (β-1) πt* for given values of desired level of inflation at πt*. 
Note: Figures in bracket indicate p-values.  
 
Given  the  estimated  neutral  rate  of  interest,  desirable  inflation  rate  and  potential  output 
growth, we have calculated the level of interest rate implied by the standard Taylor rule with 
equal  weight  of  0.5  to  both  inflation  and  output  gap.  The  trend  in  estimated  interest  rate 
implied by Taylor rule showed periods of significant departure from the actual call money rate 
trajectory. But the deviation was more pronounced in the post crisis period which has since 
been  narrowed  in  2012–13.  Interestingly,  there  was  close  correspondence  between  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
implied Taylor rule interest rate and actual overnight call money interest rates during the high 
growth phase of 2003–08 (Chart 5). 
Chart 5: Greater divergence in interest rate post-crisis 
We  also  compare  another  measure  of  gap:  interest  rate  gap  as  the  difference  between 
quarterly  average  overnight  call  rate  and  interest  rate  obtained  from  the  Taylor  rule,  and 
inflation  gap  as  the  difference  between  quarterly  average  inflation  rate  and  target  inflation 
(Chart 6). It showed statistically significant inverse correlation which implies that higher the 
deviation of policy rate from that implied by the simple Taylor rule, higher is the deviation of 
inflation from its desired level.9  
                                                  
9  Correlation coefficient of –0.78 which was statistically significant at 1 per cent. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6: Interest rate gap mirrored inflation gap 
 Moreover, in the crisis period, the gap had widened which has since narrowed in 2012–13. 
Additional  diagnostics  suggested  bi-directional causality  between  the  interest  rate  gap  and 
inflation  gap.  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  gap  was  narrower  during  the  high  growth  phase  of 
2003–08. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The Taylor rule has been extensively used to understand the interest rate 
setting  behaviour  of  central  banks  across  the  world.  Recent  empirical  work  including  the 
simple  characterisation  I  have  presented  here  suggests  that  a  Taylor-type  rule  could  be  a 
useful additional tool in understanding the interrelationship among growth, inflation and policy 
interest rate as the interest rate channel of monetary transmission strengthens. At the same 
time, it should be emphasised that Taylor rule has its limitations as exclusive emphasis on 
interest rates with the neglect of other variables may not be optimal for an emerging market 
economy like India. In my presentation if I have raised more questions than provide answers, 
I would have succeeded in my intention. There is a need for further research to enhance our 
understanding of appropriate interest rate structure which is conducive to price stability in the 
medium- to long-term. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
