Benoît Cœuré: Revisiting the European social contract 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the European Conference at Harvard “Europe 2.0 – taking the next step”, Cambridge MA, 
2 March 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Jean-Francois  Jamet,  Johannes  Lindner  and  Jonathan  Yiangou  for  their  contributions  to  this 
speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  attend  the  European  Conference  at  Harvard.  I  will  argue  in  my 
remarks  that  the  management  of  the  current  crisis  is  at  least  as  much  about  social 
stabilisation  as  it  is  about  economic  stabilisation.  At  the  heart  of  the  crisis,  there  is  the 
challenge of redefining the social contract to safeguard the sustainability of Europe’s social 
economy model. This model, set out in the Maastricht Treaty, notably aims to promote “social 
justice”, “solidarity between generations” and “solidarity among Member States”.1 In my view, 
in  order  to  ensure the  sustainability  of  the  social  contract  and to fulfil  its  promises  both  at 
national and European level, we need three elements: (i) a broad consensus on the definition 
of  fairness,  the  forms  of  solidarity  and  the  conditions  attached  to  it;  (ii)  an  institutional 
architecture ensuring its legitimacy and stability; and (iii) effective policy instruments. 
As I will strive to show, a redefinition of the social contract in Europe is essential if we are to 
restore the sustainability of public policies as well as trust in the state’s ability to positively 
influence economic outcomes. In other words, it is a matter of enhancing the sustainability of 
national social contracts in a reshaped European framework. Such an evolution will inevitably 
change  the  organisation  and  role  of  the  state,  as  well  as  the  institutional  architecture  of 
Economic and Monetary Union. But this does not mean moving away from the concept of the 
European social market economy. It means preserving it and consolidating it for the future. 
Threats to the European social contract 
The Great  Recession  – as  it  is  often called  –  did  not just  have  dire  consequences for the 
economy  as  a  whole.  It  also  resulted  in  a  threat  to  social  cohesion,  straining  the  social 
contract in its different dimensions. 
The economic crisis has disproportionately affected the more vulnerable social groups. Low-
skilled and young workers were the hardest hit, with a youth unemployment rate of more than 
24% in January 2013 in the euro area as a whole (and as high as 55.5% in Spain and 38.7% 
in  Italy).  There  are  signs  of  a  growing  mismatch  between  worker  attributes  and  job 
requirements across a number of euro area countries, consistent with an outward shift in the 
aggregate  euro  area  Beveridge  curve  –  i.e.  a  higher  level  of  unemployment  is  associated 
with  a  given  level  of  vacancies.  Future growth  depends  on  human  capital  being  cultivated 
and expanded. That is threatened if too many workers remain unemployed for too long and 
lose their employability. The fiscal crisis has also endangered solidarity between generations 
by  calling  into  question  the  ability  of  governments  to  raise  enough  revenues  to  afford  the 
services they provide to the older generation. Finally, the crisis is exerting visible strains on 
the relationship among the people of Europe, with nationalist temptations that do not help to 
achieve a consensus on cooperative solutions or to allow a return to stability and growth. 
                                                
1  See  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2010:083:0013:0046:en:PDF,  Treaty  on 
European Union, Article 3(3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
A  rebalancing  is  inevitable  and  is  now  under  way,  but  it  is  taking  its  toll.  The  longer  that 
rebalancing  takes,  the  higher  the  social  costs.  So  it  is  crucial  that  a  sense  of  urgency  is 
maintained both at national and at European level. 
The  national  level  is  still  central  to  the  definition  of  the  social  contract.  Seen  from  within 
Europe,  social  contracts  vary  between  Member  States  because  of  history  and  political 
preferences. Seen from further afield, however, it is apparent that there are common values 
in, and common challenges to, these national social contracts. We recognise explicitly those 
common  values  and  sought  to  have  them  reflected  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  They  include 
freedom,  peace,  democracy,  tolerance  and  –  vital  from  a  social  perspective  –  solidarity. 
Upholding  those  values  faces  similar  challenges  across  the  continent,  in  particular  the 
sustainability of public policies, which are an expression of the social contract. 
Europe is also a political union: the social contract exists both within countries and across 
countries. The  EU  can  in fact  be regarded  as  perhaps the most  ambitious  example  of the 
philosophical theories that underpin the social contract. As Thomas Hobbes remarked in his 
Leviathan2,  sovereign  states  are  established  to  regulate  social  interactions  and  avoid  the 
“war of all against all” that would prevail without the rule of law. States, however, compete 
with  each  other  and  therefore  may  even  resort  to  arms  in  the  absence  of  a  supranational 
body  imposing  social  contract  laws.  As  was  recognised  by  the  Nobel  Peace  Prize,  the 
European  project  was  the  key  to  ensuring  that  European  states  would  move  from  war  to 
peace.  States,  in  Europe,  pursued  Kant’s  dream  of  constitutionalising  international  law  to 
achieve  lasting  peace3.  The  doubts  I  mentioned  above,  as  well  as  some  stirrings  of 
nationalism  and  protectionism,  show  that  this  dream  is  today  at  risk.  The  social  contract 
needs revisiting. 
The  EU  and,  to  an  even  larger  extent, the  euro  area  have  gone  beyond  a  combination of 
political  and  economic  freedoms  with  a  set  of  common  rules  and  policies  regulating  the 
internal  market.  As  a  result,  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  have  started  evolving  from  a 
microeconomic and legal construct to a fully-fledged economic union. The European social 
contract  and  the  national  social  contracts  thus  no  longer  only  complement  each  other: 
decisions  at  European  level  are  having  an  increasing  impact  on  national  economic,  social 
and political outcomes, while the externalities of national decisions are also getting larger. 
In this context, the relationship between the European and national social contracts needs 
careful consideration. It can no longer rely on a “permissive consensus” and must rest on an 
institutional  architecture  that  is  both  effective  and  legitimate.  Moreover,  as  people 
increasingly  see  the  impact  of  policy  decisions  with  European  relevance  on  individual 
outcomes,  it  needs  to  be  emphasised  that  they  –  and  not  only  the  Member  States  –  are 
partners in the European social contract. The contract will therefore need to involve citizens 
as much as Member States by making European political institutions more accountable. And 
the  absence  of  a  European  demos  cannot  justify  opposition  to  this  project.  Political 
fragmentation is the outcome, as much as it is the cause, of an impaired social contract. 
The sustainability imperative 
John Maynard Keynes famously said: “The long run is a misleading guide to current affairs. 
In  the  long  run  we  are  all  dead”.4  And  yet  societies  live  in  the  long  run.  Today’s  choices 
influence tomorrow’s outcomes, just as yesterday’s decisions affect today’s situation. This is 
even  truer  in  a  low-growth,  low-  interest-rate  environment,  which  increases  the  discounted 
value of tomorrow’s costs and benefits. The importance of the long run was widely shown by 
                                                
2  Th. Hobbes, Leviathan: Or the Matter, Forme, and Power of a Commonwealth Ecclesiasticall and Civil, 1651. 
3  See J. Habermas, Zur Verfassung Europas. Ein Essay. Suhrkamp Verlag, 2011. 
4  J.M. Keynes, “The Theory of Money and the Foreign Exchanges”. A Tract on Monetary Reform, 1924. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  crisis.  It  was  doubt  about  the  accumulation  and  sustainability  of  debt  which  caused 
Greece and then Ireland and Portugal to lose access to markets and which associated the 
same risk with other Member States. And it is doubt about the stability of the political system 
as well as its ability to adopt legitimate, effective and sustainable public policies that worries 
citizens in many euro area countries. 
This  accumulation  of  debt  has  taken  the  form  of  financial  asset  bubbles  and/or  a  drift  in 
public  debt,  depending  on  the  Member  State.  Warnings  on  the  long-run  sustainability  of 
public  finances  were  legion  long  before  the  crisis  erupted.  The  build-up  of  untenable 
promises  is  not  unique  to  Europe:  the  gap  between  public  spending  and  nominal  GDP 
growth was even larger in the US and Japan – where the average growth rate in government 
spending exceeded the average nominal GDP growth rate by 1½ and 2 percentage points 
respectively  –  than  in  the  euro  area,  where  this  difference  only  amounted  to  around  
one-quarter of a percentage point. 
In this sense, the crisis propelled us 20 years into the future: it revealed the unsustainable 
character  of  the  unchecked  accumulation  of  excessive  liabilities  in  the  private  and  public 
sectors.  It  forces  us  to  confront  challenges  today  that  we  thought  we  had  more  time  to 
address. It has made the challenge even more daunting by debasing the pool of wealth that 
can be tapped to fund the social model. IMF projections for growth in advanced economies 
incorporate marked-down estimates for potential output relative to pre-crisis trends by 10% 
or more.5 Such debasing calls for even bolder action to restore sustainability. 
In this respect, a central bank can help to mitigate the impact of the crisis, but the steps it 
takes cannot be a permanent substitute for resolute action by governments. The central bank 
can buy time for political bodies to act, but it cannot buy enough time for them not to act. 
In the crisis, the ECB’s continued commitment to price stability and the integrity of the euro 
has been one of the few elements of certainty in a highly volatile and uncertain environment. 
This commitment to monetary stability is not only grounded in its economic merits but is also 
a  cornerstone  of  the  social  contract.  It  protects poorer  households from  the  dire  effects of 
inflation on purchasing power. It ensures that no redistribution of wealth takes place that is 
unsanctioned  by  democratic  processes,  which  is  exactly  what  inflation  does.  And  it 
buttresses political stability by avoiding the social unrest that unchecked inflation can cause. 
Yet buying time is not indefinitely affordable. There is a cost to any delay in reforms. For as 
long  as  entry  barriers  hinder  competition,  as  long  as  scarce  budgetary  resources  are  not 
channelled to support job creation and innovation, and as long as the burden of adjustment is 
disproportionately  borne  by  the  weakest  in  the  society,  these  rigidities  will  not  allow  any 
rebasing of growth on a sustainable footing. 
Just as long-term issues caused short-term problems, it is only by working on stabilising our 
economies and societies over the long term under an agreed contract that EU members will 
return  to  sustainable  growth.  Formulating  a  vision  of  our  common  future,  rooted  in 
democratic deliberation, is an urgent priority. It will provide an anchor for, and will enhance 
both the  efficiency  and  legitimacy  of,  actions  to confront the  crisis.  Last December’s “Four 
Presidents’ report” on the future of Economic and  Monetary Union provides a blueprint for 
such a long-term vision. 
Rebalancing the social contract 
As political institutions are facing tough choices now because of the unsustainable policies of 
the past, the question of the distribution of the adjustment burden has become key. It implies 
                                                
5 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 1, October 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
a redefinition of the social contract both at national level and at European level. What is at 
stake is nothing less than the sustainability of the European social market economy. 
Within countries 
The social contract first needs to be rebalanced within each country along two dimensions: 
between generations and within generations. 
Excessive liabilities, even if supported by the market, imply a transfer of wealth from future 
generations  to  the  current  ones  –  a  move  that  is  decided  unilaterally  by  the  current 
generation. Seen from this perspective, fiscal constraints on governments do not appear as a 
loss of sovereignty but rather as the condition for preserving this very sovereignty over time. 
Likewise, stronger prudential rules are not a restriction on credit for productive investment, 
but a check on excessive risk-taking that would otherwise lead to financial instability. 
On  the  fiscal  front,  effectively  balancing  the  social  contract  between  generations  means 
creating  room  for  stabilising  policies  in  future  downturns  and  protecting  the  coming 
generations by forcing the distributional debate to take place in the present. This balancing 
act focuses on the quality of public expenditures and implies that deficits are justified only to 
the extent that they deliver sufficient returns in terms of future fiscal revenues (through public 
investment  supporting  total  factor  productivity,  for  instance,  or  through  the  countercyclical 
impact of automatic stabilisers). 
On the financial front, redefining the social contract between generations means realigning 
today’s incentives so that tomorrow’s fiscal policy is not threatened by financial dominance. 
Bailing out banks with taxpayers’ money is indeed both unfair and a factor of moral hazard. A 
closer  link  therefore  needs  to  be  restored  between  the  responsibility  that  arises  out  of 
excessive leverage and the costs associated with deleveraging. 
The social contract also needs to be rebalanced between the generations alive today. There 
is  ample  room  for  a  debate  on  the  distributional  impact  of  fiscal  and  economic  decisions. 
Fairness,  a  concept  which  has  a  particular  resonance  in  this  university  thanks  to  John 
Rawls6, is a legitimate objective: solidarity can help to ensure that economic progress for the 
many  is  not  achieved  at  the  expense  of  impoverishing  the  least  fortunate  households  or 
depriving them of their right to equal opportunities. A reduction of rents and entry barriers, 
which notably disadvantage younger men and women on the labour market, is in that sense 
fully  consistent  with  the  objective  of  fairness,  while  also  making  the  economy  more 
competitive by setting the right incentives. 
National social contracts will continue to differ depending on the distributional choices made 
by each constituency. But Europeans now have to recognise that such choices need to be 
fully in line with the sustainability imperative. 
Across countries 
What  does  the  social  contract  mean  at  European  level?  Here  again,  there  are  two 
dimensions to consider: a horizontal and a vertical dimension. 
The  horizontal  dimension  concerns  the  rights  held  and  responsibilities  borne  by  each 
Member State vis-à-vis its partners. The vertical dimension concerns the contract that exists 
between individual citizens and the European Union. Both need to be redefined in the light of 
the crisis. 
The European social contract primarily binds all Member States of the European Union in the 
pursuit of the EU’s objectives, as laid down in the Treaties. I will focus here on another and 
even more demanding contract, the one that binds the euro area countries. Sharing a single 
                                                
6  J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Harvard University Press, 1971. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
currency creates tight links between markets and a high potential for contagion. This means 
that,  at  the  horizontal  level  between  euro  area  members,  there  is  an  obligation  to  respect 
what  Isaiah  Berlin  called  the  concept  of  “negative  liberty”  –  to  conduct  economic  policies 
individually within limits that do not impinge upon the liberty of the other countries. There is 
another obligation to establish institutions and instruments that preserve the stability of the 
system  taken  as  a  whole.  This  is  an  implicit  social  contract  which,  before  the  crisis,  was 
believed to be largely self-enforcing – if not by countries themselves, then by the discipline of 
financial markets. That this assumption was misplaced is now part of history. 
So it is now clear that the contract between states has to be enforced more explicitly, by a 
stronger  “neutral  judge”.  If  there  are  to  be  open  markets  and  a  shared  currency  between 
countries,  there  also  have  to  be  stronger  common  rules  –  and  a  stronger  European 
Commission to enforce them. The strengthening of the euro area governance framework that 
has taken place in recent years is based on this understanding. The rules governing fiscal 
sustainability  have  become  tougher,  with  more  powers  given  to  the  Commission.  For 
instance, the new fiscal compact requires all Member States to run a balanced budget over 
the cycle, similar to the responsibility of individual states in this country. Under the recently 
adopted  “two-pack”  legislation,  the  Commission  will  have  to  sign  off  on  national  budgets 
before they are approved by parliaments. This is a more intrusive role than the US federal 
government has vis-à-vis the states. Fiscal policies are at the centre of the contract because 
trust in the currency requires trust in the sovereign. Prolonged fiscal profligacy results in an 
impotent central bank and a debased currency. But the social contract is not only about fiscal 
policy. As the founding fathers of the euro very well understood, there is no monetary union 
without an economic union. 
But to a certain extent, this aspect of the social contract between Member States was always 
understood, just not respected. Why should it be different now? The crisis is one explanation. 
But it is also the case that the incentives for Member States to abide by and enforce the rules 
have fundamentally changed. Before the crisis, the ultimate punishment for unsound national 
policies was believed to be default, in line with the principle of “no bail-out” enshrined in the 
EU  Treaties.  But  we  have  seen  during  the  crisis  that  the  mere  prospect  of  euro  area 
countries failing creates negative and possibly self-fulfilling feedback loops, at great cost to 
the  euro  area.  Without  a  European  budget  with  a  stabilising  role,  there  have  to  be 
mechanisms  for  mutual  support  in  the  euro  area.  And  as  a  condition,  there  have  to  be 
stronger economic governance and mutual control. 
The  basic  premise  of  the  new  social  contract  between  euro  area  countries,  then,  is  that 
countries  have  to  abide  by  the  rules  of  the  community,  and  when  they  do,  they  become 
eligible for mutual support. Euro area governments have earmarked €700 billion for countries 
that get into difficulty, a sum which can be lent against strong conditionality. And we are now 
seeing this concept being further developed before countries get into difficulty via the new 
idea of “reform contracts”. Countries can decide to undertake difficult structural reforms and 
receive financial incentives in return. This benefits both parties to the contract by preserving 
the national character of the decision, while protecting the wider euro area by reducing long-
term risks emanating from misguided economic policies. 
However,  a  binding  contract  between  Member  States  is  only  needed  where  national 
preferences  still  play  a  strong  role.7  For  instance,  it  is  necessary  to  work  through  reform 
contracts because countries have different approaches when it comes to labour relations or 
unemployment  benefits,  based  on  their  own  histories  and  cultures.  But  where  national 
preferences  play  a  weaker  role,  it  makes  sense  to  shift  policies  straight  to  the  European 
level. Then we do not need to set rules and create incentives, because decisions are out of 
the  hands  of  national  authorities.  This  is  the  vertical  dimension  of  the  social  contract  in 
                                                
7  See Ch. Tiebout, 1956, “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures”. Journal of Political Economy, 64:416–424. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Europe  that  I  mentioned  earlier  –  directly  between  the  European  level  and  the  ordinary 
citizen. 
Examples of this direct relationship include the regulatory roles of the EU: protecting people 
from the negative effects of monopolies, regulating against harmful products, and negotiating 
suitable trade agreements. The EU also plays a role in redistributing resources from richer to 
poorer  regions  through  the  cohesion  funds,  although  these  amount  to  only  0.36%  of  the 
Union’s GDP. 
Where the social contract between the European Union and its citizens needs to be reformed 
is in three areas. 
First, as I already noted, where there is a role for national preferences, there is still a role for 
Europe to monitor national reform processes, facilitate policy learning and mobilise European 
instruments  (such  as  the  European  budget,  the  European  Investment  Bank  and  structural 
funds) in support of national policies8. 
Second, those policies that belong naturally at European level should be placed there. The 
clearest example of this is the banking union. It is obvious that banks within a single currency 
area should be governed by the same rules, supervised in a consistent way, and wound up, 
if necessary, without pushing individual sovereigns into bankruptcy. It is also the best way to 
avoid the cost of financial sector excesses falling on taxpayers. This arrangement would also 
include  the  stabilisation  mechanisms,  such  as  the  ESM,  needed  to  ensure  that  the  single 
currency area can resist extraordinary shocks. In addition, it could include, one day, common 
financial  instruments,  provided  that  control  is  exerted  by  the  European  level  over  national 
budgets, under the scrutiny of the European Parliament. 
This leads me to the third area. The EU needs to find ways to improve its legitimacy. People 
in Europe generally feel disconnected from EU decision-making and question whether their 
voice  is  being  heard.  The  “European  public  space”  is  notably  underdeveloped.  Decision-
making  has  become  more  intergovernmental  in  the  crisis,  often  bypassing  the  European 
Parliament. And this democratic deficit will only be exacerbated as the European level gains 
new  powers  in  the  ways  I  described  above.  In  other  words,  if  we  are  to  strengthen fiscal, 
financial and economic union in Europe, we have to strengthen political union as well. 
We already have a significant degree of political union in Europe – after all, we have been 
building the EU for more than 60 years. We have a European Parliament, which is directly 
elected on a proportional basis, like the House of Representatives here. We have a Council 
of  Ministers,  which  represents  the  individual  Member  States,  like  the  Senate.  And 
increasingly, we see that national parliaments are becoming more and more involved in EU 
decision-making, for instance, by conducting greater scrutiny of Europe’s crisis management 
or the content of European legislation. 
The  problem  comes from  the fact  that  these  bodies  are  not  seen  as  coherent  by  citizens. 
People  do  not  know  who  really  represents  them  in  Europe.  Is  it  their  Prime  Minister?  Is  it 
their Member of the European Parliament? Is it their local representative? Instead, they see a 
process controlled by elites with no truly democratic credentials. And this is, in fact, far from 
the  truth:  as  I  just  showed,  there  are  many  ways  in  which  elected  representatives  are 
involved in European decisions. 
The  social  contract  between  the  EU  and  its  citizens  needs  to  be  rebalanced  therefore  in 
various  ways:  by  connecting  people  more  directly  with  the  political  process  at  European 
level; by making the European Parliament more relevant to peoples’ lives; by giving national 
parliaments  a  more  explicit  role  in  holding  European  decision-makers  to  account;  and  by 
                                                
8  See  Iain  Begg,  Social  policies  after  the  crisis,  ELIAMEP-Bruegel  conference:  Economic  Governance  in  the 
Eurozone and the EU: Drawing lessons from the crisis, Cape Sounio, Athens, Greece, 10–13 June 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
airing  the  debates  on  the  future  of  Europe  more  widely  and  transparently  in  the  public 
sphere. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  rebalancing  the  social  contract  also  means  rebalancing 
growth. For instance, eliminating rents and arbitrary barriers to entry is fair and at the same 
time  frees  up  growth  potential.  Re-anchoring  fiscal,  financial  and  economic  sustainability 
would allow governments to use fiscal policy counter-cyclically, to reduce interest payments 
and  to  reduce  risk  premia,  thereby  allowing  monetary  policy  impulses  to  work  better,  and 
freeing  fiscal  resources  that  can  be  used  for  the  public  good.  Likewise,  balancing 
sustainability  and  solidarity  within  Member  States  and  at  European  level  can  restore 
investors’ confidence in the capacity of the EU and the euro area to resolve their problems. If 
this is achieved, the collective response to the crisis will have protected the sustainability of 
national social contracts while reinforcing the effectiveness and legitimacy of the European 
contract. It will have demonstrated that Europeans can live up to the motto of the European 
Union, and remain “united in diversity”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
