Christopher Kent: Reflections on China and mining investment in Australia 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia, Perth, 15 February 2013. 
 I would like to thank James Bishop and Tom Cusbert for valuable assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
I would like to thank CEDA for the invitation to speak here today. Let me also express my 
gratitude  by  saying  that  we  continue  to  learn  a  lot  about  the  mining  industry  through  our 
many liaison contacts in Western Australia, and I’m guessing that includes a number of you 
here in the audience. 
I thought this would be a good chance to reflect on two important developments that have 
stood out in my mind over the past year. One is what’s been happening in China. The other, 
which is closely related, is the change to the outlook for mining investment in Australia. Both 
have an important bearing on the economy here in Western Australia. 
China’s economic development 
China’s  economic  development  has  been  truly  remarkable  by  any  measure.  For  three 
decades now it has sustained growth at an average of around 10 per cent per annum. China 
now  accounts  for  a  substantial  and  increasing  share  of  global  economic  activity.  Over  the 
past 10 years, it has almost tripled its share of the global economy to become the second 
largest economy after the United States.1 China now uses a large share of the global output 
of commodities, not only because it’s a large economy, but also because it makes relatively 
intensive  use  of  raw  commodities.  This  reflects  the  high  rate  of  investment  in  China  as  it 
adds  rapidly  to  its  stocks  of  capital  and  housing.  One  driver  of  this  has  been  the  rapid 
urbanisation of China. This requires the construction of new housing and places of work, as 
well as transport, communications, power, and water storage and treatment facilities. 
Graph 1 
                                                
1  Figures are projections for 2012, based on market exchange rates, from the IMF World Economic Outlook, 
October 2012. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
China now uses about half of the world’s production of iron ore, coking coal and thermal coal. 
Not  surprisingly  then,  the  growth  of  China  has  seen  the  price  of  Australia’s  commodity 
exports rise to unprecedented levels. Accordingly, Australia’s terms of trade – the price of our 
exports relative to the price of our imports – started rising rapidly from the mid 2000s to an 
historic peak in late 2011 (Graph 1). This has led to a dramatic increase in investment in the 
resources sector in Australia. Even though the terms of trade have declined since then, they 
remain well above their level of a decade ago. 
The decline in Australia’s terms of trade since late 2011 coincided with a slowing in the pace 
of  China’s  economic  growth  and  a  degree  of  concern  about  its  near-term  outlook.  So,  for 
much of the past year we have been looking for signs that China’s growth might stabilise. A 
broad  range  of  indicators  suggest  that  this  has  now  occurred,  with  economic  conditions 
improving  through  the  second  half  of  2012,  and  the  national  accounts  data  indicating  that 
growth is running at around 8 per cent in year-ended terms (Graph 2). 
Graph 2 
 Still,  the  path  of  growth  in  China  has  not  been  a  smooth  one,  and  China  will  continue  to 
experience cyclical variation in economic conditions that will need to be carefully managed. 
Such  cycles  will  have  important  implications  for  the  prices  of  commodities  because  of  the 
size and makeup of China’s economy. Changes in commodity prices will in turn influence the 
outlook for the resources sector in Australia. I’ll come back to this issue in a few minutes. For 
now though, let me turn to the question of what rate of growth China might be able to sustain 
in the years ahead. 
Prospects for Chinese growth 
A gradual slowdown in the trend growth rate of China’s economy is to be expected as the 
process of economic development runs its course. What the path for trend growth will look 
like though is very hard to know. One way to think about this is to break China’s productive 
capacity into its key elements – its supply of labour, its stock of capital and how productively 
it can combine these to produce goods and services. 
The  growth  rate  of  the  labour  force  is  perhaps  the  easier  of  these  elements  to  forecast 
because  it  is  driven  by  slow  moving  and  relatively  predictable  demographic  forces.  The 
working-age population for the country as a whole is expected to peak sometime around the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
middle of this decade. Absent a significant increase in the rate of labour force participation, 
including by older workers, this implies less growth in the overall labour force (and eventually 
some  decline).  However,  perhaps  the  more  important  question  is  what  will  happen  to  the 
growth of the urban workforce. This is critical because urbanisation is the means by which 
relatively unproductive labour in the rural sector finds its way to more productive activities in 
urban centres where much of the capital resides. It seems that urbanisation still has a way to 
go – particularly in the  central and western regions of the country (Berkelmans and Wang 
2012) (Graph 3). Nevertheless, the pace of urbanisation is likely to slow over time. 
Graph 3 
 Growth of the capital stock is also likely to slow, in part because there has already been a 
substantial rise in the capital stock as a share of labour, but also because households are 
likely to want to consume an increasing share of the country’s rising income. Even so, the 
capital stock per worker is only a small fraction of the US level so there is clearly scope for 
continued rapid growth in China’s capital stock. 
Perhaps  the  greatest  source  of  uncertainty  though  is  the  speed  with  which  the  level  of 
productivity in China will approach that of the advanced economies. History suggests that as 
a country draws a little closer to the “productivity frontier” it often becomes more difficult to 
sustain  the  same  pace  of  productivity  growth.  It  tends  to  get  a  little  harder  to  pursue  the 
reforms that help to drive productivity growth. Those reforms that yield the best returns, and 
are the easiest to pursue, have already been done; the low hanging fruit has already been 
picked.2  In  a  similar  vein,  it  is  easier  to  emulate  –  and  even  improve  upon  –  a  range  of 
production  processes  that  have  long  been  in  use  somewhere  else  in  the  world.  But  it  is 
harder  to  adopt  newer,  more  advanced,  technologies  and  efficient  ways  of  organising 
production  processes  across  a  wide  range  of  activities,  including  the  provision  of  services 
(which account for a substantial share of economic activity in advanced economies). Still, by 
                                                
2  Lardy (2012) and the World Bank (2012) emphasise further reforms of banking and financial markets more 
generally, hukou reform and liberalisation of energy prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
any reasonable estimate, China remains a long way from the productive frontier. So there is 
considerable scope for it to continue to catch up with the advanced economies.3 
A range of estimates for potential output growth have been constructed based on predictions 
of these three elements of production. The OECD (2012) predict that potential output growth 
for China will decline from around 10 per cent seen during the 2000s, to 9½ per cent in 2013, 
and  then  gradually  to  5  per  cent  by  2025.4  Last  year,  the  Chinese  authorities  themselves 
lowered the official growth target from 8 to 7½ per cent, though the economy had for years 
consistently overshot even the higher target. 
Another  way  we  can  try  to  gauge  the  potential  output  of  the  economy  is  to  look  at  the 
relationship  between  growth  and  inflation.  The  idea  is  that  high  and  rising  inflationary 
pressures tend to follow a period when demand is growing faster than potential output, and 
vice versa. Over recent years, inflationary pressures have tended to ease in China whenever 
growth slowed substantially towards 8 per cent or lower, and conversely, around 2010, we 
saw inflation pressures building when growth was turning up to around 10 per cent or higher 
(Graph 4). Moreover, this was a growth rate that did not appear to cause undue inflationary 
pressures  in  the  mid  to  late  2000s.  Taking  all  of  this,  and  noting  also  the  behaviour  of 
inflation  more  recently,  suggests  that  potential  output  growth  might  be  somewhere  around 
the current growth rate of GDP of about 8 per cent. 
Graph 4 
Implications for demand for commodities 
The prospects for Chinese demand for commodities will depend not just on the growth rate of 
the economy, but also on the composition of that growth. 
                                                 
3 
IMF (2012) data imply that output per worker is only about 15 per cent of that in the United States. Also, GDP 
(PPP) per capita for China is one-quarter of the average of advanced economies (IMF 2012). 
4  Other estimates are broadly consistent with these, although the estimates in Lee and Hong (2010) are lower 
with  a  2011–2020  average  of  6  per  cent  in  the  baseline  scenario  and  7  per  cent  in  a  scenario  with  more 
substantial reform. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  growth  in  China,  and  elsewhere  in  the  world,  was  slowing  through  2012, growth  in the 
demand for steel slowed, leading to sharp declines in the spot prices of iron ore and coking 
coal  from  July  through  to  early  September.  But  through  2012,  the  more  accommodative 
stance of financial policies and increased public spending in China have helped to support an 
increase in the growth rate of investment in infrastructure and dwellings and thereby helped 
to stabilise growth of the economy overall (Graph 5). 
Graph 5 
 Graph 6 
  In line with the stronger outlook for infrastructure investment and residential construction, the 
demand for steel has picked up. The price of steel in China has increased by around 20 per 
cent since its low point in September last year; the spot price for coking coal has also picked 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
up a little over recent months (Graph 6). The spot price for iron ore has increased by around 
four times as much from its low point last year. In part, this appears to reflect recent efforts 
by Chinese steel mills to rebuild their inventories and most observers don’t expect iron ore 
prices to be sustained at current high levels. 
Residential construction has been a key source of demand for steel in the Chinese economy. 
It currently accounts for around 15 per cent of total steel use. By our estimates, the quantity 
of steel used in residential construction has roughly doubled over the past eight years. This 
has  been  driven  by  urbanisation  and  rising  incomes,  which  in  turn  drive  the  demand  for 
newer, larger and higher-quality buildings. While we would not expect growth to continue at 
such a rapid rate, steel use from this sector is not expected to peak for some years. 
Of course, we should not overlook other sources of demand for steel. An obvious one is the 
expansion in rail networks. The demand for steel for this purpose looks likely to continue to 
grow strongly, with much work yet to be done to develop rail links both between and within 
cities. Indeed, the Ministry of Railways plans to increase spending in 2013, and maintain this 
at high levels in 2014 and 2015. This is but one example of the still considerable scope for 
China  to  add  to  its  infrastructure,  which  underpins  a  range  of  forecasts  for  Chinese  steel 
production to continue to grow for another decade and a half.5 
In short, with a lower rate of trend economic growth, Chinese demand for commodities will 
grow  somewhat  less  rapidly  than  in  the  past.  But  the  expectation  is  that  it  will  still  grow 
strongly  for  quite  some  time.  And  because  the  Chinese  economy  is  so  much  larger  now, 
even a somewhat slower rate of growth represents a large quantity of new demand for raw 
materials. To help understand the importance of this point, it is worth looking at the example 
of steel production, which increased by about 9 per cent in 2011. This was equivalent to an 
extra 58 Mt of steel output. In 2004, the much higher growth rate of about 23 per cent was 
equivalent to only 50 Mt of extra output. 
The outlook for mining investment in Australia 
Despite the potential for further growth in the demand for commodities, from China and other 
developing economies, we expect commodity prices to gradually decline over the next few 
years.  This  reflects  the  extra  supply  generated  by  the  substantial  amount  of  mining 
investment  underway  in  Australia,  and  elsewhere.  Nevertheless,  commodity  prices  are 
expected to remain at what are historically high levels for a considerable period. 
The very high price for bulk commodities has helped to drive mining investment in Australia 
to around 8 per cent of GDP currently, some four times larger than its long-run average. This 
has  led  to  a  significant  increase  in  the  share  of  economic  activity  accounted  for  by  the 
resource sector since the mid 2000s. While the share of the workforce directly employed in 
the  business  of  mining  has  doubled  since  then,  it  remains  relatively  modest  (at  around 
2½ per cent). However, there has been a substantial spillover of activity to other parts of the 
economy,  including  to  a  wide  range  of  businesses  that  help  mining  companies  to  extract 
resources  or  to  build  up  their  capital  infrastructure.  The  Bank  will  soon  publish  some 
research providing estimates of the contribution of mining and mining-related activity to GDP 
and  employment  (Rayner  and  Bishop,  forthcoming).  This  work  suggests  that  the  resource 
sector as a whole currently accounts for around 18 per cent of GDP, with about a third of this 
owing  to  resource-related  activities.  Similarly,  the  resource  sector  accounts  for  almost 
                                                
5  Rio Tinto and UN projections suggest a peak in 2030. Projections by the Bureau of Resources and Energy 
Economics (BREE) show demand increasing through to 2025. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
10 per cent of employment, with a bit more than two-thirds of this owing to resource-related 
activities.6 
The sharp fall in bulk commodity prices from the middle of last year prompted mining firms to 
reassess their expenditure and the viability of some investment projects that had been under 
consideration.  Some  uncommitted  projects  were  deferred.  Much  exploration  activity  was 
curtailed. Spending on machinery and equipment was scaled back significantly. And some 
existing  operations  were  shut  down,  primarily  smaller,  older,  higher-cost  coal  mines.  This 
turnaround  in  sentiment  came  about  in  part  because  lower  prices  reduced  cash flows  and 
external  financing  became  harder  to  come  by,  making  it  more  difficult  to  finance  resource 
investment. The recent sharp rise in iron ore prices, as best we can tell, has not yet made 
much of a difference to investment plans, presumably because the price is not expected to 
stay at its current high level. 
As you are all no doubt well aware, a large share of mining investment currently underway in 
Australia  is  in  the  liquefied  natural  gas  (LNG)  sector.  LNG  projects  require  significant 
investment over a 3–5 year period, and a very long period of production to recoup the initial 
investment. As a result, commitments to invest in these projects are made on the basis of 
long-term contracts signed with the buyers of LNG (with those buyers often even taking an 
equity  stake  in  the  project).  For  this  reason,  investment  in  LNG  has  been  resilient  to  the 
significant changes in sentiment affecting other parts of the resource sector. 
Of greater concern for LNG projects are rising costs, which reduce the returns on projects 
underway and reduce the prospects of future expansions. Some of what has been reported 
as higher costs by mining companies reflects the appreciation of the Australian dollar. Some 
companies had budgeted for these projects in US dollar terms at a lower exchange rate than 
we  face  currently.  Still,  there’s  no  denying  that  costs  have  increased  over  time  even  in 
Australian dollar terms. 
Graph 7 
                                                 
6  The  estimates  for  GDP  and  employment  shares  of  the  resource  sector  as  a  whole  in  the  mid  2000s  are 
10 per cent and almost 5 per cent, respectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Graph 8 
 We  can  try  to  look  at  some  data  from  the  Australian  Bureau  of  Statistics  to  gain  some 
understanding of changes in costs over time, although it will not pick up important differences 
across  different  projects  in  different  industries.  There  is  evidence  in  the  aggregate  data of 
higher inflation of wages in the mining industry, and across Western Australia more generally 
(Graph 7). While the growth of these wages has picked up a little recently, this is unlikely to 
be  sufficient  to  account  for  the  magnitude  of  some  of  the  cost  overruns  being  reported. 
Nevertheless, the level of wages in the mining industry remains relatively high, though this 
reflects the relatively high capital-to-labour ratio in this industry (Graph 8). 
One  plausible  explanation  for  at  least  some  of  the  cost  overruns  is  logistical  problems 
affecting a number of projects. It seems that the engineering challenges for some projects 
are  even  more complex  than  initially  thought. There  are cases  of  projects taking  longer to 
complete,  and/or  requiring  more  investment  to  bring  them  to  fruition.  In  other  cases,  the 
scope of the project may have changed. All of these things can alter the profile for mining 
investment by affecting both the timing and the amount of expenditure. 
Graph 9 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
So, what’s been the net effect on the outlook for mining investment overall of these changes 
in sentiment, timing, scope and costs? As best we can tell, mining investment now appears 
likely to reach a peak a bit earlier – sometime this year – and at a lower level – of around 
8 per cent of GDP – than we had earlier expected (Graph 9). This is broadly consistent with 
the  latest  ABS  survey  of  firms’  capital  expenditure  plans,  which  shows  that  in  the  mining 
sector, the growth of nominal investment in 2012/13 was revised from around 40 per cent to 
20  per  cent  from  the  June  quarter  2012  survey  to  the  September  quarter  release  (after 
adjusting for the realisation ratio). 
Like all forecasts, the profile for mining investment is subject to considerable uncertainty. We 
cannot be sure about when the peak will occur, nor can we be sure about the pace at which 
mining investment will decline as a share of GDP. This will depend not just on the outcome of 
decisions regarding uncommitted projects, but also the rate of progress on existing projects 
and the extent and nature of any further cost overruns. 
Notwithstanding this uncertainty, there is still a large amount of work in the pipeline, and so 
mining investment is likely to remain quite elevated for a time. And as mining investment tails 
away, we’ll increasingly move into the operational phase of the mining boom. This is when 
exports will increase significantly in response to all of the investment that’s been undertaken. 
Strong growth of iron ore, coal and LNG exports has been evident for some time now, but 
further  strong  growth  is  anticipated,  particularly  for  LNG,  which  is  expected  to  grow  much 
more rapidly starting from around 2015 (Graph 10). 
Graph 10 
 The  revised  outlook  for  mining  investment  and  our  predictions  for  bulk  commodity  exports 
have  been  incorporated  into  our  latest forecasts for  economic growth  in  the Statement of 
Monetary Policy published last week. Our expectation is that growth of economic activity will 
be a little below trend over 2013 before picking up a little in 2014. These forecasts assume 
that  growth  from  sources  outside  of  the  resource  sector  picks  up  gradually,  so  we’ll  be 
looking  closely  for  signs  of  this  over  the  months  ahead.  Looking  further  ahead,  as  I  have 
suggested in my remarks about China’s economy, Australia is well placed to benefit from the 
ongoing development there as well as in other developing economies in the region. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
References 
Berkelmans L and H Wang (2012), “Chinese Urban Residential Construction to 2040”, RBA 
Research Discussion Paper No 2012-04. 
Bureau  of  Resources  and  Energy  Economics  (2012),  Australian  Bulk  Commodity  Exports 
and  Infrastructure  –  Outlook  to  2025.  Available  at  <http://www.bree.gov.au/documents/ 
publications/_other/Export-Infrastructure-Report.pdf>. 
IMF  (2012),  World  Economic  Outlook,  October.  Available  at  <http://www.imf.org/external/ 
pubs/ft/weo/2012/02/weodata/index.aspx>. 
Lee JW and K Hong (2010), “Economic Growth in Asia: Determinants and Prospects”, ADB 
Economics  Working  Paper  Series  No  220.  Available  at  <http://www.adb.org/sites/ 
default/files/pub/2010/economics-wp220.pdf>. 
Lardy  NR  (2012),  Sustaining  China’s  Economic  Growth  after  the  Global  Financial  Crisis, 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC. 
OECD  (2012),  “Medium  and  Long-term  Scenarios  for  Global  Growth  and  Imbalances”,  in 
OECD  Economic  Outlook,  Vol  2012/1,  OECD  Publishing,  pp  191–224.  Available  at 
<http://www.oecd.org/berlin/50405107.pdf>. 
Rayner V and J Bishop (forthcoming), “Industry Dimensions of the Resource Boom: An Input-
Output Analysis”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013-02. 
Rio  Tinto  (2012),  “Outlook  for  Metals  and  Minerals:  Half  Year  Results  2012”,  8  August. 
Available 
<http://www.riotinto.com/documents/FinancialResults/120808_Outlook_for_ 
Metals_and_Minerals_-_half_year_results_2012.pdf>. 
World Bank (2012), China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-Income 
Society,  Conference  Edition,  The  World  Bank,  Washington  DC.  Available  at 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/China-2030-complete.pdf>. 
United  Nations  Development  Programme:  China  (2010),  China  and  a  Sustainable  Future: 
Towards  a  Low  Carbon  Economy  and  Society,  China  Translation  and  Publishing 
Corporation, 
<http://planipolis.iiep.unesco.org/upload/China/ 
China_HDR_2009_2010.pdf>.  
Available 
Beijing. 
at 
at 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
