K C Chakrabarty: Compliance function in banks – back to the basics 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
launch of certificate programmes on compliance function and training, Mumbai, 12 July 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri R. Kesavan in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Mr.  S.N.  Ananthasubramanian,  President,  Institute  of  Company  Secretaries  of  India 
(ICSI);Mr.  Allen  Pereira,  Director,  National  Institute  of  Bank  Management  (NIBM);  Dr.  R. 
Bhaskaran,  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Indian  Institute  of  Banking  &  Finance  (IIBF);  Mr.  S.S. 
Mundra,  CMD,  Bank  of  Baroda;  Mr.  M.V.  Tanksale,  CMD,  Central  Bank  of  India;  other 
dignitaries, ladies and gentlemen. I am pleased to be amidst you today on the occasion of 
launch  of  two  new  certificate  courses  by  the  IIBF  viz.,  Certified  Banking  Compliance 
Professional course jointly with the ICSI and Certified Bank Trainer course jointly with NIBM. 
Human  resource  management  and  compliance  are  two  of  the  major  support  functions  in 
banks and hence, the courses being launched today are of vital importance for augmenting 
the skill sets of the bank employees in the respective areas. I am particularly happy to be 
present here today as the launch of the course on compliance is a sort of a dream come true, 
a dream which I had shared with the Dr. Bhaskaran when I was the CMD at Punjab National 
Bank. 
As you know, all the three institutions involved in evolving the two courses being launched 
today can boast of an outstanding pedigree. While ICSI is the professional body responsible 
for developing and regulating the profession of Company Secretaries in India, IIBF has been 
continuously supporting the cause of development of professionally qualified and competent 
bankers and finance professionals since its establishment in 1928. NIBM is an autonomous 
institution established by Reserve Bank of India with a mandate to play a proactive role as a 
“think-tank”  in  the  banking  system.  It  is,  indeed,  commendable  that  these  institutions  of 
excellence have decided to collaborate and leverage their respective strengths to jointly offer 
programmes/ courses to meet the needs of the banking industry and I congratulate all the 
three institutions on this initiative. 
I  observe  that  these  courses  have  two  distinct  components  –  An  examination  followed  by 
short  class  room  learning.  I  also  understand  that  IIBF  has  developed  reading  material  for 
these  certificate  programmes,  which  should  provide  useful  inputs  for  the  candidates.  The 
Certified Bank Trainer course comprises of two papers – Human Resource Management and 
Training. As we all know, the Indian banking system today stands at the cusp of an explosive 
growth. This growth has to be essentially supported by a matching supply of suitably trained 
manpower.  It  is  in  this  context  that  training  of  the  banking  personnel  assumes  great 
significance. With the evolution of new age banking, even the trainers have to be adequately 
equipped to deal with new technology and evolving policies. This course attempts to hone 
the  skills  of the faculty  to  enable  them  to  be more  effective  as  trainers.  I  observe  that  the 
Certified  Banking  Compliance  Professional  course  also  comprises  of  two  papers  –  Risk, 
Regulation  &  Governance  and  Compliance  in  Banks.  After  going  through  the  structure  of 
both the courses, I am happy to note that they are very well conceptualized and will assist in 
strengthening the two crucial functions in banks i.e. training and compliance. 
Though we all agree that both issues hold equal importance for banks, my observation is that 
Human  Resources  Management  is  a  more  glamorous  subject  and  people  are  more 
interested in discussing it. It is precisely for this reason that, today, I have chosen to speak 
on the other topic – Compliance, which is considered a rather drab and uninteresting topic 
and is restricted to cursory Board Room discussions. I intend to share my perspectives on 
the significance of the compliance function in banks and its evolution in the Indian context. 
During my talk today, I would also delve on the need for banks to follow the basic compliance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
principles  in  order  to  overcome  the  challenges  posed  by  the  ever-growing  complexities  of 
modern day banking. 
What does compliance mean? 
5. Before I head into the subject proper, it would be appropriate to understand the import, 
impact  and  intent  of  the  term  “compliance”.  The  Merriam-Webster  Dictionary  defines 
“compliance”  as  “(a)  the  act  or  process  of  complying  with  a  desire,  demand,  proposal, 
regimen  or  coercion,  (b)  conformity  in  fulfilling  official  requirements.”  In  banking  parlance, 
compliance  alludes  to  adherence  to  a  set  of  laws,  regulations,  rules,  practices,  related 
Self-Regulatory  Organization  (SRO)  standards,  and  codes  of  conduct  applicable  to  the 
various  banking  activities.  To  my  mind,  banking  compliance  can  be  broadly  segregated  in 
three parts- 
a) 
b) 
c) 
The internal compliance means adherence to the internal policies formulated by the Board 
based  on  which  an  internal  governance  framework  would  have  been  laid  down.  Thus, 
internal  compliance  would  be  applicable  to  all  employees  of  the  bank.  The  regulatory  and 
legal compliance, on the other hand, is applicable to the bank as a whole  – the institution 
itself would be responsible for ensuring adherence to the extant regulatory instructions and 
above all, for abiding by the laws of the land, both in letter and spirit. 
Internal compliance, including SRO standards  
Regulatory Compliance  
Legal Compliance. 
Why compliance function in banks is important? 
Let me now turn to the significance of the compliance function in banks. We all agree that 
laws,  customs  and  codes  are  meant  to  bring  in  a  semblance  of  order  and  uniformity  in 
conduct of the various stakeholders. Compliance to these ensures orderliness and reduces 
overall systemic vulnerability. For this, it is imperative that the regulated entities are willing to 
commit  themselves  to  the  laws  of  the  land  and  comply  with  the  regulations,  including 
self-regulations. In securing compliance, regulators have adopted different strategies ranging 
from codification of laws, rules and regulations (prescriptive), to periodical meetings with the 
subjects (review mechanism). If, however, one or more of the regulated entities are observed 
to be non-compliant with the regulations, the supervisory authorities might need to resort to 
coercive techniques to ensure conformity with the regulations. Thus, fundamentally, whether 
forced  or  voluntary,  compliance  is  an  essential  pre-condition  for  ensuring  order  and 
preventing chaos in systems. 
Compliance  is  a  theme  that  pervades  all  spheres  of  banking  functions.  Bankers  deal  with 
complicated  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  issues  all  the  time,  transcending  various 
spheres of banking operations. It is in this context that a dedicated framework for overseeing 
the implementation of directions/guidelines issued by the regulator/supervisor is required in 
the banks. The objective of the compliance function is to minimize the deviations; or when 
they actually do occur, to ensure that there is a process to promptly respond to and redress 
the anomalies. 
A few posers … 
The  overall  responsibility  for  ensuring  compliance  is  with  the  Banks’  Top  Managements 
although  the  compliance  responsibilities  are  spread  across  various  functional  lines  and 
business  locations.  I  would  like  to  ask  a  few  basic  questions  here  –  how  does  the  Top 
Management  satisfy  itself  that  all  rules  and  regulations  are  being  complied  with?  Is  it 
declaration  based?  What  I  mean  is  whether  under  your  internal  procedure,  the  branch 
manager  merely  confirms  to  the  Regional  Manager/Zonal  Manager  that  all  functions  are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
being performed as per the prescribed rigor; the Regional Manager/ Zonal Manager accepts 
the  same  and,  in  turn,  makes  a  similar  declaration  to  the  Head  Office,  which,  ultimately, 
certifies the same to the Compliance department? Are such declarations taken on face value 
or  is  there  an  internal  system  of  checking  the  actual  veracity  of  that  declaration.  In  other 
words, is the compliance process action-based and not merely declaration-based? 
Reserve Bank of India has issued comprehensive guidelines requiring banks, among others, 
to develop function-wise compliance manuals. I would like to know how  many banks have 
developed comprehensive compliance manuals and whether an internal process has been 
instituted to ensure that the manuals are duly adhered to by the business lines. 
Another  issue  that  I  would  like  to  highlight  is  that  of  the  rank  of  the  compliance  officer.  I 
wonder how a less than sufficiently enabled lower level official of the rank of DGM/AGM can 
effectively  interact  with  GMs,  EDs  or  CMDs  to  implement  or  enforce  compliance.  RBI 
guidelines  on  “fit  and  proper”  criteria,  which  are  borne  out  of  the  need  to  establish  high 
standards  of  corporate  governance,  categorically  mandate  that  only  a  senior  executive 
should be appointed as the compliance officer by banks. 
Let  me  pose  another  question  here:  do  banks  consider  compliance  as  a  cost  centre  or  a 
revenue generating channel? Answer to that is very obvious. Compliance is treated as a cost 
and the business verticals consider it more of an impediment than a necessity. I would like to 
emphasize here that compliance with the prescribed standards, codes, rules and regulations 
improves  the  Corporate  Governance  in  banks.  The  role  of  the  compliance  function  is  to 
ensure that the rules/ regulations are appropriately incorporated in bank’s internal processes 
and  that  each  functionary,  right  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  appreciates  the  value  of 
compliance. It is important for the senior executives as well as the line functionaries to realize 
that compliance failures may lead to serious implications for them, for the business as well as 
for the system as a whole. In a sense, the need for compliance can, effectively, be equated 
to  the  frictional  force  which,  though  impedes  the  progress  a  bit,  is  still  necessary  for 
movement.  Compliance  works  more  as  a  lubricant  which  oils  the  business  machinery  and 
keeps it going. 
Is compliance a recent phenomenon? 
Compliance activity has been in existence ever since the first regulation or law was enacted. 
After all, you cannot have a law/ regulation without an attendant requirement to comply with 
it. The compliance activity, in earlier times, was integrated with other systems and processes 
within  the  banks;  however,  with  banking  becoming  more  complex,  the  compliance  has 
evolved  as  an  independent  function  in  banks.  Let  me  briefly  recount  how  the  compliance 
function  in  banks  has  evolved  in  the  recent  history.  Reserve  Bank  of  India  introduced  a 
system  of  “Compliance  Officer”  in  banks  way  back  in  August  1992,  based  on  the 
recommendations  of  the  Committee  on  Frauds  and  Malpractices  in  Banks  (Ghosh 
Committee). The role of compliance officers came into sharper focus since 1995 when the 
General  Manager  in  charge  of  Audit  and  Inspection  was  made  responsible  for  the 
compliance functions with a requirement for periodic reporting or certification on compliance 
functions directly to the CMD. However, it was gradually recognized that the circumference of 
compliance  functions  in  banks  needed  to  be  not  only  enlarged,  but  very  clearly  defined, 
especially in a scenario where successive Annual Financial Inspection Reports prepared by 
the  banking  supervisor  highlighted  a  bevy  of  compliance  deficiencies.  RBI’s  recognition  of 
the  need  and  importance  of  compliance  functions  received  a  further  impetus  after  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  issued  the  High  Level  Paper  on  Compliance 
Risk and the Compliance Function in Banks in April 2005. These principles formed the basic 
groundwork for our own work on issuing rigors for compliance functions in banks, in the year 
2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
What is the scope of the compliance process? 
Banks  in  India  primarily  operate  under  the  provisions  of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act. 
However,  there  are  several  other  enactments  such  as  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,  Foreign 
Exchange Management Act (FEMA), Income Tax Act and Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act (PMLA) which impact the business of banking. The banks in India have to comply with 
periodic  regulations  and  directions  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  the  primary 
regulator.  Further,  as Indian  Banks  are  expanding geographically  across  the  borders,  they 
also  need  to  adhere  to  local  laws  and  regulations  applicable  in  the  overseas  jurisdictions. 
There are also industry standards and codes set by BCSBI, FIMMDA, FEDAI and IBA which 
need to be followed by the banks. With most of the banks having turned public and having 
been listed on the stock exchanges, they also need to adhere to the listing and disclosure 
requirements.  Also,  as  banks  are  undertaking  other  business/functions  such  as 
bancassurance, cross selling of mutual funds, wealth management, etc. they need to adhere 
to the guidelines issued by other regulators like IRDA, SEBI, PFRDA, etc. I understand that 
there are about 54 legislations that impact banking business and all of them need some sort 
of compliance. The compliance function, very often, extends beyond what is legally binding 
and embraces broader standards of integrity and ethical conduct. 
Compliance  function  not  just  encompasses  the  banks’  standalone  operations  but  also 
includes  various  Para-banking  functions,  which  are  conducted  within  the  wider  banking 
group.  Consequently,  there  is  a  critical  need  for  the  management  of  compliance  risk  as  a 
Group level risk under an enterprise wide risk management framework. 
What is the fall-out of non-compliance? 
The non-fulfillment of compliance responsibilities is likely to bring to the fore various risks that 
may have potentially debilitating effects on the bank. The BCBS paper defines Compliance 
risk as “the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, material financial loss, or loss to reputation a 
bank may suffer as a result of its failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, related self-
regulatory organization standards, and codes of conduct applicable to its banking activities”. 
The  compliance  area  is,  thus,  critically  important  in  identifying,  evaluating,  and  addressing 
legal and reputational risks. The penalties imposed by regulators/supervisors, including RBI, 
on regulated entities for non-compliance of directions, rules and statutory requirements and 
the  associated  “name  and  shame”  that  these  penalties  bring  in  their  wake,  are  a 
manifestation  of  the  compliance  risk  facing  banks.  These  also  have  ramifications  on  the 
perception of the masses about the institutions so penalized. In fact, one of the key functions 
of  the  compliance  department  has  to  be  information  dissemination,  whereby  instances  of 
compliance failures are quickly circulated among the staff along with preventive instructions, 
especially  with  an  eye  on  preventing  future  frauds/  mishaps  and  other  manifestations  of 
compliance risk. 
What are the essential ingredients of an effective compliance framework? 
Let  me  now  turn  to  what  I  believe  constitutes  the  basic  building  blocks  of  an  effective 
compliance 
framework.  These  are:  (i) Compliance  Policy;  (ii) Compliance  Structure; 
(iii) Compliance Manual/ checklist; (iv) Compliance Personnel; and (v) Compliance Audit. The 
compliance  process  involves  identifying  the  level  of  compliance  risk  in each  business  line, 
products  &  processes,  suitably  advising  the  operational  functionaries  and  formulating 
instructions for mitigation of such risk. The integrity of the compliance process would depend 
upon  how  well  the  compliance  architecture  has  been  built  up  within  the  organization  and 
whether  there  is  clear  identification  of  responsibility  and  accountability  for  the  compliance 
function.  If  we  can  get  the  above  basics  right,  probably  the  foundation  of  an  effective 
compliance framework would have been well laid. 
The role of compliance officers is extremely important to ensure evolution of an appropriate 
risk  mitigation  plan  by  bank  Boards.  During  pre-screening  of  prospective  products  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
services,  compliance  function  provides  vital  inputs  on  possible  breaches  of  regulatory 
guidelines. Documentation deficiencies, very often, plague the operational efficiency of banks 
and this could well be the case for compliance function too. In this regard, it is important that 
regular  updates  are  carried  out  to  the  Compliance  manuals  and  detailed  check  lists  are 
prepared, which will ensure availability of an itemized inventory of “dos and don’ts” which can 
be followed by every new incumbent in the compliance hierarchy and also help in building 
institutional  memory.  Further,  in  order  that  the  compliance  process  attains  its  desired 
objectives,  it  is  imperative  that  the  Compliance  and  Audit  functions  act  in  a  coordinated 
manner. 
However, let me state that all banks need not have a uniform internal compliance structure. 
RBI’s compliance guidelines clearly recognize the differences among the banks with regard 
to  their  scale  of  operations,  their  risk  profiles  and  organizational  structures  and,  therefore, 
allow freedom to the management to organize their compliance function best suited to their 
individual  requirements.  However,  I  would  like  to  add  a  word  of  caution  here.  In  an  ever 
changing  competitive  scenario,  what  we  may  not  do  as  bankers today  may  not  be such a 
remote possibility tomorrow and, therefore, the compliance officers have to not only be aware 
of present set of regulations but also be able to foresee possible impediments to operations 
going forward. Same is the case with compliance structures, which need to retain flexibility 
and adaptability to stay in sync with the evolving business environment. 
Is there a conflict of interest between the broad operational mandate of banks and the 
compliance function? 
Compliance teams are invariably caught in a bind over whether to overlook certain rigors of 
regulation to facilitate the business or to enforce them zealously. A significant underpinning 
that can help solve this dilemma is the extent of independence that the compliance officers 
enjoy. It is imperative that the compliance officers enjoy complete independence so that they 
can fearlessly put forth their apprehensions on probable compliance deficiencies and pitfalls 
in  various  business  lines.  Towards  this  end,  RBI  has  prescribed  that  the  remuneration  of 
compliance officers should be independent of the business lines they are responsible for and 
should  be  more  in  alignment  with  the  bank’s  overall  financial  performance.  A  proactive 
system of testing for compliance on various points to obviate influences from business lines, 
enabling direct reporting of compliance aspects by Compliance Heads to Boards of banks, 
etc. are some of the means to ensure the independence of the compliance function. 
What is the role of the top managements of banks in compliance? 
Above  arguments  possibly  point  to  a  predominant  role  for  dedicated  compliance  units  in 
banks.  This,  however,  does  not  undermine  the  role  of  the  Top  Management  in  the 
compliance  function.  Top  Management  in  banks  have  a  very  critical  role  in  ensuring 
compliance. This was one of the main planks on which the BCBS document articulated its 
stance  on  the  inter-relationship  between  compliance  functions  and  corporate  governance. 
Attainment  of  high  standards  of  compliance  underscores  the  ability  of  the  management  to 
remain  accountable  and  responsible  all  the  time,  which  is  an  essential  tenet  of  corporate 
governance, especially since the process has to be rolled out at the top for employees down 
below  to  emulate.  The  most  effective  corporate  culture  emphasizing  standards  of  honesty 
and integrity is one in which the Board of directors and senior management lead by example. 
Besides, there has to be an active channel of two-way communication that can transmit the 
Top Management’s compliance ethos down the hierarchical levels and carry back feedback 
from the lower level in order to progressively improve bank’s compliance processes. 
Would theoretical education help in improving compliance process? 
While  compliance  officers  often  have  the  prior  experience  of  working  in  live,  operational 
environments, a sound theoretical grounding in terms of knowledge of laws and statutes and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
familiarity with the roles and responsibilities can definitely be an added advantage. It is in this 
context that courses such as the one being launched today could go a long way in educating 
compliance functionaries on essential aspects of legal compliance, creating documentation 
related awareness and, in the process, ironing out the chinks in the compliance armor. More 
than anything else, compliance officers need to know the realms in which they operate, the 
scope of their functions and how limited or expansive their interaction and reach should be. 
In  sum,  they  should  be  aware  of  when  to  report  and  what  to  report  to  their  respective 
Boards/Management  Committees  on  compliance  failures  and  then  take  it  forward  to  the 
banking regulator and supervisor. Their role is also of moral suasion in convincing Boards to 
be  guided  by  prudent  compliance  policies  which  can,  at  times,  be  dragged  in  different 
directions by forces of competition, market demands, general business needs and ambitions. 
It is perfectly desirable to prevent a compliance failure upfront, rather than report the same 
after  the  occurrence  of  a  potentially  damaging  event.  Compliance  staff  should  have  fair 
knowledge  of  law,  accountancy  and  information  technology  along  with  adequate  practical 
experience in various business lines and audit / inspection functions to enable them to carry 
out  their  duties  effectively.  In  order  to  keep  the  compliance  staff  up-to-date  with 
developments  in  the  areas  of  banking  laws,  rules  and  standards,  regular  and  systematic 
education/  training  in  areas  such  as  new  products  and  services  introduced  in  the  banking 
industry,  corporate  governance,  risk  management  and  supervisory  practices,  etc.  are 
necessary. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, I would emphasize that each bank must develop a robust compliance system 
with a well-documented compliance policy clearly outlining the compliance philosophy of the 
bank, role and set up of the compliance department, composition of its staff and their specific 
responsibilities.  For  the  compliance  policy  to  be  effective,  it  is  important  that  the  policy  is 
driven  by  the  risk  profile  of  businesses  and  their  stated  risk  appetite.  For  the  long  term 
stability  and  survival  of  the  bank,  it  is  important  that  a  healthy  compliance  culture  is 
developed and percolated down to the lowest level functionaries in the bank. If we follow the 
basic  tenets  of  compliance,  the  risk  of  manifestation  of  compliance  failure  would  be 
minimized.  We  agree  that  compliance  is  costly  and  will  involve  expenditure,  but  let  me 
remind you that, in the final analysis, it is non-compliance which would prove costly and may 
endanger the very survival of the institution. 
The compliance function is acquiring increasing importance in banks on account of growing 
regulatory  complexity  and  also  creating  a  demand  for  competent  banking  compliance 
professionals. In view of the constantly evolving legal/ regulatory framework, those already 
working in this area also need to continuously update their knowledge base and skill sets to 
remain relevant. I believe that the certificate course being launched today would help create 
a  cadre  of  suitably  trained  banking  compliance  professionals.  It  is  also  heartening  to  note 
that the course would not only be open to bankers who have completed CAIIB but also to the 
members  of  ICSI.  Given  the  fact  that  legal  knowledge  is  essential  in  ensuring  proper 
compliance,  having  company  secretaries,  who  are  well  versed  with  various  laws,  as 
compliance officers would imply having in place the right persons for the right job. 
Policies  and  products  alone  cannot  ensure  success  in  banking  performance.  The 
performance  of  banks  depends  on  the  quality  of  staff,  their  professional  competence  and 
also the compliance culture in the bank. This has to be nurtured and kept updated through 
training  and  other  knowledge  management  efforts.  Banks  need  a  battery  of  in-house 
professional trainers to spearhead these efforts and it is here that the Certified Bank Trainer 
course  would  come  in  handy.  Since  we  need  a  multitude  of  professional  trainers  to  take 
forward the task of competence building and to provide mentorship to the bank staff, I feel 
the scope for this course is also phenomenal. 
I hope, both the bankers and the ICSI members, realize the potential benefits that these two 
courses  offer  and  make  their  optimum  use.  I  believe  that  these  courses  have  tremendous 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
value in today’s business environment, where the quality of manpower and the compliance 
culture  of  banks  are  two  areas  that  can  give  competitive  advantage  to  banks,  besides 
contributing to the strength and resilience of individual banks and the entire financial system. 
I once again congratulate all the three Institutes for their efforts towards launching these two 
courses  at  an  appropriate  time,  and  wish  them  all  success  in  their  future  academic 
endeavors. 
Thank you!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
