Erkki Liikanen: On the structural reform 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level Expert Group on the structure of the EU banking sector, at the Securities Industry and 
Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), New York, 19 April 2013. 
 Clearly detailed accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. Original charts are on the Bank of 
Finland’s website 
Research findings 
Before the financial crisis, the consensus view from the finance and growth research was at 
that time that financial development not only follows economic growth but contributes to it.1  
However, after the financial crisis, the other side of the financial sector growth has received 
increasing attention.  
Now it is recognised that before the crisis, the financial sector had grown to quite massive 
proportions in many countries. And at the same time, the sector had become more and more 
concentrated as the biggest institutions had increased their market share. 
[Slide 2: Rapid growth in the EU banking sector] 
Let me start with the benign appraisal of the expanding financial sector and the emergence 
of  increasingly  large  banks  that  prevailed  before  the  crisis.  I  will  then  consider  the  more 
malign diagnosis that has emerged after the crisis. 
The  predominant  view  in  the  benign  story  is  that  growth  of  the  financial  sector  improves 
overall economic growth opportunities by mobilising resources to finance investment projects 
and by facilitating risk management.2 The key is that a well developed financial system helps 
allocate productive resources more efficiently, both by channelling funds to growth sectors 
and by pulling resources from declining ones. 
At the level of individual financial institutions, the growth of bank balance sheets was seen as 
reflecting  increasing  returns  to  scale  and  scope  from  combining  a  wide  variety  of  financial 
services and providing them cross-border to internationally active clients. 
It is also possible that returns to scale in the largest banks stem from leveraging the superior 
skills  of  high-performing  teams  of  bankers.  This  argument  offered  an  explanation  to  the 
conspicuous  compensation  levels  observed  before  the  crisis.  Because  in  the  banking 
industry such teams are relatively mobile and hence their bargaining power is strong, much 
of the returns may accrue to bankers in the form of high compensation, rather than to banks’ 
owners.3  
Nonetheless,  the  question  was  raised  later,  whether  the  productivity  of  the  top  human 
resources in banking had been so much higher than in other industries as the increase in 
bankers’ compensation over the years suggested. 
                                                 
1  Levine (2005), Finance and growth: Theory and evidence, in Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Aghion 
& Steven Durlauf. 
2  King & Levine (1993), Finance and growth, Schumpeter might be right, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108; 
King & Levine (1993), Finance, entrepreneurship and growth, Journal of Monetary Economics 32. 
3  Anderson and Joeveer (2012), Bankers and bank investors: reconsidering the economies of scale in banking, 
CEPR Discussion Paper 9146. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  events  of  the  financial  crisis  have  led  to  also  consider  the  malign  diagnosis  of  the 
massive size of the financial sector and of the single financial institutions that dominate the 
banking sector. 
Some recent research at the BIS suggests that finance does contribute to economic growth 
but  only  up  to  a  point.4  Too  large  a  financial  sector  may  imply  too  high  risk-taking,  which 
results  from  over-investment  and  too  much  leverage  in  some  sectors  of  the  economy, 
typically the real estate related sector. This increases the frequency of crises which involve 
heavy output losses. 
Too large and a very well paid financial sector may also deprive other sectors of some of the 
most productive human resources.  
What makes the financial sector grow too big? 
Researchers  have  suggested  reasons  ranging  from  banks’  failure  to  internalize  systemic 
risks that stem from growth in leverage and ballooning balance sheets to rent-extraction in 
opaque OTC markets.5  
However,  the  most  natural  explanation  may  be  the  explicit  and  implicit  public  guarantees 
which have led to lower funding costs to the largest institutions which the markets expect to 
be “too-big-to-fail”.  
Pursuing such a status in the eyes of the market, and the ensuing cheaper funding, can give 
a  strong  incentive  to  grow.  Given  the  size  of  the  largest  banks’  balance  sheets,  even  a 
relatively small advantage in the funding spread means a big hidden flow of subsidy from the 
taxpayers to those banks.6 
Recent  research  at  the  Bank  of  England  suggests  that  the  increasing  returns  to  scale  in 
banking, beyond a certain size range, may largely result from the cheaper funding costs of 
the  presumed  too-big-to-fail  banks.7  An  interesting  aspect  of  the  research  is  also  that  the 
social cost of too-big-to-fail banks, due to increased systemic risk, appears to be significantly 
higher than the benefits from the economies of scale.8  
However, not only the size of the financial sector and that of the banks is important, but also 
what the sector actually does.  
In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  there  was  a  trend  among  the  biggest  banks  to  strengthen  their 
focus on investment banking, including trading operations. 
[Slide 3: Shifts in focus of operations as illustrated by shifts in assets structures] 
Part  of  this  trend  was  driven  by  the  growing  demand  by  corporate  customers  for  risk 
management  services.  To  a  significant  extent,  however,  the  growth  in  investment  banking 
activities was driven by the banks themselves in search for new revenue streams and higher 
profitability. In many banks the proportion of trading assets in the balance sheet increased 
substantially as securities and derivatives trading provided a relatively fast and flexible way 
to grow.9 
                                                 
4  Cecchetti and Kharoubi (2012), Reassessing the impact of finance on growth, BIS Working Paper 381. 
5  Stein (2012) and Bolton, Santos, and Scheinkman (2012), respectively. 
6  Noss and Sowerbutts (2012), Bank of England FS Papers Series, FS Paper No 15. 
7  Davies  and  Tracey  (2012),  Too  big  to  be  efficient?  The  impact  of  implicit  funding  subsidies  on  scale 
economies in banking. Bank of England mimeo. 
8  Boyd and Heitz (2012), The social costs and benefits of too-big-to-fail banks: a “bounding” exercise, University 
of Minnesota working paper, February. 
9  Boot and Ratnovski (2012), Banking and trading, IMF Working Paper 12/238. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  relative  importance  of  customer  loans  fell  over  time  and  the  importance  of  interbank 
lending grew. Moreover the customer loan business transformed as many banks particularly 
in the US moved away from the “originate and hold until maturity” model to the “originate and 
distribute”  model  where  granted  loans  are  pooled,  then  securitized  and  sold  to  investors, 
including  European  banks.  Securitization  was  motivated  by  the  desire  to  economize  on 
capital buffers, but it turned out later that the assumed benefits of diversification were vastly 
outweighed by the increasing propensity to contagion.  
Big risks followed, also at the systemic level, as balance sheet growth was often matched 
with  dramatic  changes  in  the  liability  side  of  banks’  balance  sheet.  Firstly,  banks  became 
increasingly leveraged as the solvency rules allowed this to happen without a proportionate 
addition  of  fresh  capital.  The  loss  absorption  capacity  weakened.  Second,  banks  relied 
increasingly  on  short-term  wholesale  funding,  typically  from  the  repo  market,  which  made 
them  more  vulnerable  to  market  disruptions.  Thirdly,  the  rapid  balance  sheet  growth  also 
required more interbank financing, which resulted in more interconnectedness in the financial 
network, thus creating contagion channels.10  
[Slide 4: Increased leverage as illustrated by shifts in funding structures] 
Another  risk  of  a  more  systemic  nature  is  that  diversification  along  similar  lines  can  make 
financial institutions more similar to one another by exposing them to the same risks.11 
And  indeed,  the  benefits  of  diversification  appear  to  have  been  offset  by  the  greater  risk 
banks  were  exposed  to  as  the  share  of  activities  outside  the  traditional  retail  banking 
operations was increasing.12 
Some  potential  benefits  of  diversification  may  also  have  been  lost  as  implementing  a 
diversification  strategy  is  a  big  managerial  challenge.13  It  is  particularly  challenging  in  a 
banking  group  because  of  the  differences  in  management  cultures  and  risk  profiles  of  the 
different entities. 
The challenge at hand is to reform the financial sector and banks towards a more healthy 
structure and size in order to redirect banking activities to support the society and real sector 
in the best way possible.  
The key is to remove any perverse incentives, which could lead to an excessive growth of 
the  financial  sector.  For  example,  the  inevitable  safety  nets  needed  to  protect  depositors 
must not lead to moral hazard which would undermine the stability of the financial system 
and entire economies. 
How the HLEG proposals address the identified challenges in the size, structure and 
conduct of the business of banks 
In  the  High-level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector, 
nominated by Commissioner Barnier about a year ago, we detailed the different phases of 
the  crises,  analysed  the  characteristics  of  the  banking  sector  and  identified  a  number  of 
weaknesses, which we thought the ongoing regulatory reform would resolve only partially. 
                                                 
10  Shin (2010), Macroprudential policies beyond Basel III, Princeton University, policy memo. 
11  Wagner  (2010),  Diversification  at 
financial 
institutions  and  systemic  crises,  Journal  of  Financial 
Intermediation 19. 
12  Stiroh  and  Rumble  (2006),  The  dark  side  of  diversification:  the  case  of  US  financial  holding  companies, 
Journal of Banking & Finance 30; Mercieca et al. (2007), Small European banks: benefits from diversification? 
Journal of Banking & Finance 31. 
13  Stiroh  (2004),  New  evidence  on  the  determinants  of  bank  risk.  Journal  of  Financial  Services  Research  30; 
Acharya et al. (2006), Should banks be diversified? Evidence from individual bank loan portfolios. Journal of 
Business 79. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
[Slide 5: Summary of the problems in the EU banking sector identified by HLEG] 
We  also  identified  strengths  that  needed  to  be  maintained  in  the  prospective  structural 
changes  on  European  banks.  For  example,  we  thought  it  would  be  very  important  to 
accommodate the diversity of business models of banks in the European market place. 
In our deliberations we considered two avenues as possible ways forward. 
[Slide 6: Two avenues as possible ways forward were considered] 
In  the  first  avenue,  additional,  non-risk-weighted  capital  requirements  on  trading  activities 
and credible recovery and resolution plans for banks would have been the main instruments. 
We  acknowledged  that  the  measurement  of  risks  inherent  in  trading  assets  is  prone  to  a 
significant  “model  risk”.  Robust  capital  requirements  which  do  not  rely  on  complicated 
models are one way to tackle this issue (as are limits on risk concentrations and counterparty 
exposures). Avenue 1 was based on this approach. 
The  possibility  of  structural  measures  did  enter  Avenue  1,  but  only  as  a  conditional 
instrument. The idea was that if a bank was not able to prove that the required recovery and 
resolution  plans  were  credible,  separation  of  trading  activities  was  to  be  imposed  by 
authorities. 
In  the  second  avenue,  any  significant  trading  activities  would  be  required  to  be  separated 
from  retail  deposit  banking.  The  separation  proposal  (or  subsidiarisation  as  it  has  been 
labelled in the international discussion) outlined in Avenue 2 was based on the notion that 
capital requirements are not by themselves sufficient to limit excessive risk-taking incentives 
induced by deposit insurance if risks are difficult to measure and risk profiles can be changed 
rapidly, as in trading activities. 
Further, a sufficiently wide separation of trading activities would avoid definitional problems 
which arise, for example, if the dividing line had to be drawn between proprietary trading and 
market making. 
After a long discussion, where both avenues were supported, the group decided to propose 
mandatory separation. 
[Slide 7: The High-level Expert Group’s proposal for mandatory separation within a banking 
group] 
First, the group wanted to limit the spill-over of the effects of the deposit guarantee system 
and any implicit government guarantees to the trading activities of banks. The deposit bank 
and trading entity are to stand on their own merits also in terms of capitalisation and funding, 
even  though  they  could  operate  within  the  same  banking  group.  Without  separation,  the 
explicit  and  implicit  guarantees  would  distort  the  market  mechanism  and  spur  the  deposit 
banks to unhealthy expansion in their trading activities. 
[Slide 8: Rationale for mandatory separation] 
Second,  we  saw  the  need  to  simplify  the  structure  of  large,  complex  banks.  Reducing 
complexity  by  means  of  separation  facilitates  management.  Steering  effort  to  the  right 
direction  by  means  of  incentive  schemes,  for  example,  is  easier  in  a  less  complex 
organisation,  where  the  organisational  units  are  more  homogeneous.  Separation  also 
facilitates  supervision  and  monitoring  by  outside  stakeholders  such  as  shareholders,  bank 
creditors and other market participants, thus reinforcing market discipline. Finally, separation 
makes it easier to impose recovery and resolution measures on failing banks. 
Third, we further emphasised the need to strengthen the governance of banks by altering the 
management culture. Separating retail banking and trading activity would reduce the mixing 
of  two  very  different  management cultures. They are intrinsically different in the customer-
based deposit and commercial banking field and in the “transaction-based” trading activities. 
In the former, the relevant horizon is long and the role of trust in the customer relationships is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
essential.  The  latter  has  a  different  logic  –  that  of  beating  the  market  and  collecting 
transaction fees. Profits often come from counterparts instead of customers. 
The choice of where to draw the line between the deposit bank and the trading entity was 
aimed  so  as  to  enable  banks  to  service  the  real  economy  in  the  best  way  possible.  We 
concluded  that  allowing  the  deposit  bank  to  provide  non-banking  clients  with  customer-
initiated hedging services with basic instruments such as forex and interest rate futures and 
swaps as well as to undertake securities underwriting would leave sufficient room for deposit 
banks to service corporate customers and thus fulfil their role in financing the real economy. 
Moreover, while seeking to correct the problems which result from the mixing of trading with 
deposit banking, we wanted to preserve the universal banking model at group level. Hence, 
we  allowed  the  separated  entities  to  operate  under  the  same  roof.  This  would  keep  the 
trading units within the supervisory umbrella of the bank supervisors. It would also be less 
disruptive  of  the  European  banking  market  than  a  complete  divestment  of  certain  trading 
activities  and  would  allow  “one–stop  banking”  to  continue  where  it  is  to  the  benefit  of 
customers. 
Our work was facilitated by the structural proposals which had been previously made in the 
US and the UK. The general orientation of all three proposals – the American Volcker rule, 
the British Independent Commission on Banking (Vickers) proposal, which is taken forward in 
the  form  of  draft  legislation,  and  our  proposal  is  similar.  However,  they  do  differ  in  some 
respects. 
[Slide 9: Comparison of suggested structural reforms] 
The Volcker rule is the most narrow, but also most radical in that it targets mainly proprietary 
trading, but requires of banking groups to wholly divest their proprietary trading activities – 
they cannot be continued even in separate subsidiaries of banking groups. The Vickers and 
High-level  Expert  Group  proposals  are  wider  in  scope,  seeking  to  regulate  more  trading 
activities than the Volcker rule, but are in a sense less radical in the implementation of the 
separation as they allow separation within the banking group. However, the UK government 
has  proposed  to  give  authorities  reserve  powers  to  call  for  full  separation,  meaning 
disallowing even the group structure, in case banks try to circumvent the ring-fence. 
By  avoiding  the  challenging  segregation  of  proprietary  trading  and  market  making,  our 
proposal differs from the Volcker Rule. Our proposal prevents market making to become a 
way to circumvent the prohibition of proprietary position-taking in securities market. 
When comparing our proposal with the proposal to be implemented in the UK, one can say 
that  the  proposals  started  from  different  directions.  The  Vickers  proposal  started  from  the 
narrow banking philosophy and sought to restrict the use of those funds. We on the other 
hand focused on the most volatile parts of banking business and sought to cordon off those 
so  as  to  protect  the  traditional  universal  banking  model,  as  we  used  to  know  it,  from 
engaging in excessive risk-taking. The end results as to where the line is drawn between the 
entities to be separated are, however, not totally different.  
The main difference in where the line between the separated entities is to be drawn is that 
we would allow the deposit bank to engage in securities underwriting whereas this activity 
would be separated in the UK. As I already mentioned, our solution is based on the view that 
underwriting is closely connected with corporate finance. 
Earlier this year also the French and German governments published proposals for structural 
reform in the banking sector. These national level initiatives can be seen as adoptions of our 
proposal as they apply the same “subsidiarisation” model. The activities to be separated are 
somewhat narrower as proprietary trading ought to be separated to the trading entity, but not 
market  making.  However,  there  would  be  supervisory  powers  to  limit  the  open  positions 
taken  in  the  course  of  market  making.  Hence,  the  French  and  German  proposals  can  be 
seen  as  an  intermediate  position  between  our  proposal  and  separating  only  proprietary 
trading in the narrow sense.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Continuing with a few words on the rest of our proposals. 
[Slide 10: The five proposals of the High-level Expert Group] 
Our analysis of capital requirements also found its way to our final recommendation. Here we 
acknowledged the important work done by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in 
reviewing the trading book capital requirements. Moreover, we highlighted the importance of 
the evaluation of the capital requirements on real estate related lending, an issue which is 
currently on the agenda of for example the European Banking Authority (EBA). 
Bail-in  lies  at  the  core  of  tackling  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem  as  it  improves  the  loss 
absorbency of banks, ensures that investors rather than taxpayers take on the responsibility 
for  losses  in  the  face  of  resolution,  and  further  enhances  creditors’  incentives  to  monitor 
banks.  In  the  High-level  Expert  Group  we  foresaw  a  two  tier  system  for  the  bailing  in  of 
investors in bank debt.  
The bail-in process which is outlined by the Commission in the proposed Bank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive plays a key role in ensuring orderly restructuring or winding-up of banks 
without  the  prolonged  bankruptcy  proceedings.  We  proposed  that  there  would  be  an 
additional  layer  of  designated  bail-in  instruments  to  further  improve  the  loss-absorption 
capacity  of banks.  We believed  that  this  would  best  combine  loss  absorbency  and  market 
discipline with legal certainty and the stability of markets. The designated bail-in instruments 
would  have  clear  pre-specified  terms  and  holding  restrictions,  which  would  prevent  other 
banks from holding these debt instruments. 
In addition, we proposed that the governance and control of banks ought to be strengthened 
further. Particular attention ought to be given to the ability of management and boards to run 
large  and  complex  banks,  the  powers  of  the  risk  management  function  and  the  quality, 
comparability  and  transparency  of  risk  disclosure,  the  possibility  to  use  designated  bail-in 
instruments in remuneration schemes, and the appropriateness of imposing caps on variable 
as well as overall compensation. 
How the HLEG proposals address the challenges of the financial sector discussed in 
the beginning 
Subsidiarisation  of  trading  facilitates  resolution,  thus  making  bail-in  rather  than  bail-out  a 
credible  option.  The  recommendation  that  banks  should  have  a  layer  of  designated  bail-in 
instruments further supports the aim of making bank bail-out at taxpayers’ risk only a rare 
exception. Only functions that are essential to the functioning of the society, i.e. the deposit 
taking  and  payment  system,  would  benefit  from  a  government  guarantee.  As  a  result,  the 
separated trading activities will be funded from the market at a price better reflecting the true 
riskiness of the operations. This is expected to restrain incentives for excessive growth and 
risk taking in the trading entity. 
The recommendations will not only have an impact on the size of the financial sector, but 
also on what kind of operations there will be. For example, separation restricts banks with 
insured  deposits  from  engaging  in  high-risk  trading  activities  which  are  not  essential  to 
deposit banking. The efforts of the deposit bank are thus expected to be redirected towards 
servicing the needs of households and SMEs. 
And, finally, the recommendations will have an impact on how banking business is conducted 
in the future. The primary aim is to shift the focus from short to long term, which is more in 
line with the interests of the real economy and society. 
Efficient  market  discipline  as  well  as  active  and  timely  supervision  will  ensure  that  the 
financial  sector  and  banks  find  their  way  to  a  more  healthy  size  and  structure.  Our 
recommendations will also facilitate their task. Simpler structures will make it easier for both 
investors and supervisors to monitor banks. Moreover, the recommendation to improve the 
quality,  comparability  and  transparency  of  risk  reporting  will  further  facilitate  monitoring  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banks.  Our  recommendations  not  only  facilitate  monitoring,  but  the  additional  layer  of 
designated bail-in instruments will increase also creditors’ incentives to monitor banks and 
thereby improves market discipline. 
Concluding remarks 
As  major  regulatory  reforms  are  planned  after  the  crisis,  it  is  important  to  take  in  account 
what  research  has  to  say.  Before  the  crisis  the  consensus  view  held,  with  some 
qualifications,  that  growth  in  finance  promotes  economic  growth.  After  the  crisis,  the 
possibility  that  the  financial  sector  can  also  grow  too  big  has  been  taken  more  seriously. 
Accelerated  growth  of  the  financial  sector  may  indicate  a  looming  crisis.  Therefore 
restrictions may be needed, and we need to make sure that distorted incentives within the 
financial sector are minimized. Improving the quality of finance continues to be a key priority 
in  promoting  economic  growth.  Structural  reforms  of  banking  can  support  these  aims  by 
helping to weed out distorted incentives from finance. 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
