Fritz Zurbrügg: The financial crisis in its sixth year – an end in sight? 
Speech by Mr Fritz Zurbrügg, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the Money Market Event, Zurich, 21 March 2013. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (http://www.snb.ch/en) 
 In this, the sixth year of the financial crisis, the situation on the financial markets has eased 
considerably. Is what we're seeing the prospect of an end to the crisis, or is this just a flash in 
the pan? 
Measures by central banks made a major contribution to stabilising the financial sector. This 
sector,  however,  is  just  a  part  of  the  whole,  and  while  its  stability  is  a  precondition  for 
sustained global economic growth, it is by no means a guarantee. The positive mood in the 
financial markets and leading economic indicators raise hopes that a recovery is underway. If 
these hopes are to be realised, however, structural reforms need to be implemented. 
The three most significant challenges for the global economy are increasing the resilience of 
the  financial  sector,  improving  the  flexibility  of  labour  and  goods  markets  (especially  in 
Europe),  and  consolidating  the  public  finances  of  the  advanced  economies.  Progress  has 
been made in all three areas. The way ahead, however, is still both long and difficult. Due to 
the relatively lengthy period of weak growth, there is considerable danger that reform fatigue 
might  spread  in  those  countries  most  severely  affected.  It  is  therefore  that  much  more 
important  that  the  reforms  are  well-planned  and  credible,  and  that  they  are  implemented 
consistently,  but  also  prudently.  There  is  also  the  threat that  pressure  will  build  on  central 
banks to compensate a failure to reform with monetary policy measures. 
Central banks can and must resist this pressure, in order that they can continue to focus on 
ensuring price stability. Governments, on the other hand, should embrace this deep crisis as 
an opportunity to implement urgently needed structural reforms. Only then will we be able to 
say, with certainty, that the end of the financial crisis is in sight. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
