Graeme Wheeler: Improving New Zealand’s economic growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 1 February 2013. 
 I’m conscious of George Bernard Shaw’s comment that “if all the economists were laid end to 
end,  they  would  never  reach  a  conclusion”.  So  I’ll  try  and  be  more  of  a  one-handed 
economist  in  offering  some  thoughts  on  New  Zealand’s  economic  performance,  ways  in 
which it might be improved, and our role in the Reserve Bank. 
New Zealand’s economic performance 
Like other small, commodity-producing economies, our economic prospects depend greatly 
on  the  growth  in  world  trade  and  output.  IMF  data  suggests  that  the  global  economy  is 
expanding at an annual rate of around three and a quarter percent – or just below its average 
rate for the past three decades. But it doesn’t feel like business as usual.  
Over the past two decades, the global economy has changed dramatically. Asia is now the 
world’s  largest  economic  region.  Its  GDP  at  market  exchange  rates  is  about  15  percent 
higher than that of North America and 60 percent more than the euro area. China and East 
Asia  are  the  main  growth  poles  in  the  global  economy  and  emerging  and  developing 
countries  accounted  for  80  percent  of  global  growth  last  year.  Among  the  advanced 
economies, growth prospects in the US are improving (despite December quarter GDP) but 
the recovery is the slowest for 70 years. Japan is going through another weak patch, and the 
euro area is likely to be in a difficult recession until 2014, and then recover slowly. This, in 
spite of US$15 trillion of additional spending by the world’s governments in response to the 
global financial crisis and over US$5 trillion of quantitative easing by the major central banks. 
With official interest rates close to zero in the major advanced economies, investors continue 
to  search  for  higher  yields  in  countries  with  stronger  growth  rates,  favourable  commodity 
price outlooks, sound macroeconomic policies, and higher interest rates. As with Australia, 
Canada,  Sweden,  Norway  and  some  Asian  and  Latin  American  countries,  the  ensuing 
exchange rate appreciation affects the growth of our import substitution and export sectors. 
I’ll return to this issue in greater depth when addressing the New Zealand Manufacturers and 
Exporters Association later this month. 
How have we fared relative to other advanced countries over the past two decades?  
Since 1990 we’ve outperformed many OECD countries on inflation and unemployment. Our 
inflation  rate  has  been  one  and  a  quarter  percent  below  the  OECD  median  and  our 
unemployment rate half a percent lower. But our per capita income has lagged behind and 
we’ve run large current account deficits. Real per capita GDP growth has been one and a 
quarter percent, about half a percent below the median and our current account deficit has 
averaged five percent of GDP – about the 6th largest relative to GDP in the OECD region.  
There are two main ways in which our prosperity can improve over the longer run. The first is 
if the world is willing to pay more for what we produce. The second is by raising our labour 
productivity – that is by increasing the level of output per working hour. In the short term, we 
can generate higher income if we increase labour force participation or work longer hours. 
But we already have a higher proportion of our population in the labour force than nearly all 
other OECD economies and we work longer hours than most people in the OECD. 
The  good  news  is  that  there’s  strong  international  demand  for  our  commodity  exports. 
Despite falling over the past 15 months, our terms of trade, or the ratio of export prices to 
import prices, remain 20 percent higher than the average for the 1990s. This improvement 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
partly reflects the expansion of the global middle income class over the past two decades, 
led by China, and the rising demand for protein. 
Our labour productivity story is much less impressive. Since 1990, our labour productivity has 
grown  at  an  annual  rate  of  one  percent,  about  one  and  three  quarters  percent  below  the 
seven largest OECD economies. This is the main reason why our real per capita GDP is now 
25 percent below the OECD median.  
This is striking given the high international rankings for the quality of our institutions, control 
of  corruption,  ease  of  doing  business,  and  according  to  the  World  Bank,  the  highest  per 
capita endowment of renewable resources in the world. 
So  why  is  our  per  capita  income  so  far  below  the  OECD  median?  Partly  it’s  due  to  our 
geographic location and small economic size. Distance and economic size matter a lot even 
in  a  more  globalised  world  of  trade,  capital  and  knowledge  flows,  and  increasing 
interdependence.  This  also  partly  explains  why  our  export  range  is  concentrated  over 
relatively few products – with food and beverages accounting for almost half our exports. The 
OECD  and  IMF  believe  size  and  distance,  which  limit  economies  of  scale  and  market 
opportunities,  account  for  around  three  quarters  of  the  gap  in  our  per  capita  income 
compared to the OECD average. 
But this is not the whole story. Despite our high international rankings in key areas, the latest 
World  Economic  Forum’s  Global  Competitiveness  Report  ranks  New  Zealand’s  overall 
competitiveness at 25th out of 142 countries. Besides market size, we perform poorly on our 
macroeconomic environment, and especially on our budget deficit and low national savings. 
But regulatory and performance-related factors also diminish our growth potential. Many of 
the remedies to substantially improve our ranking lie in our own hands, and groups such as 
the  2025  task  force,  the  Savings  Working  Group,  and  the  Productivity  Commission, 
emphasised reforms that can raise our living standards.  
Three  areas  seem  particularly  important.  The  first,  is  to  raise  our  level  of  saving  and 
investment, and improve the quality and productivity of our investment. 
In 2007, the World Bank analysed the stylised characteristics of the 13 economies that had 
grown at an average rate of seven percent per annum or more for a 25 year period since the 
1950s. Eight of the countries were in Asia.1 
We  share  many  of  the  characteristics  of  these  countries  in  terms  of  openness  of  the 
economy,  macroeconomic  stability,  and  market  based  resource  allocation.  One  key 
difference however, is that all these countries had savings and investment ratios in excess of 
25 percent of GDP and often over 30 percent. 
Over  the  past  three  decades  our  net  national  savings  rate  averaged  only  three  percent  of 
GDP – almost five percentage points below the OECD median. For the past 25 years, our 
net household savings as a percentage of household disposable income averaged minus two 
and  a  quarter  percent  –  the  lowest  in  the  OECD  (where  data  are  available),  and  10 
percentage points below the OECD median.  
Our  desire  for  such  high  levels  of  consumption  was  met  by  borrowing  the  savings  of 
foreigners. As a consequence, our net foreign liability position is 73 percent of GDP, one of 
the highest ratios in the OECD, and not much different from some countries that have been 
at the centre of the financial crisis in the euro area. The build-up in external debt increases 
our vulnerability to economic shocks and the high propensity of New Zealanders to borrow 
means  that  higher  interest  rates  than  elsewhere  are  required  to  achieve  similar  inflation 
outcomes. 
                                                 
1   The Growth Report, Strategies for sustained growth and inclusive development. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although, our national savings ratio is low, our investment rate over the past three decades 
has been around the OECD average, and this is also true of business investment. But our 
capital  to  labour  ratio,  or  the  amount  of  capital  that  labour  works  with,  is  low  by  OECD 
standards. Second, much of our investment goes into housing rather than more productivity-
promoting investment, and in 2011, 70 percent of households’ net wealth was in the form of 
net equity in housing.  
We  need  more  investment,  including  foreign  investment,  that  can  bring  benefits  of  job 
creation, technology transfer and market opening. Today, about 75 percent of global trade is 
undertaken  by  multinational  corporations  and  about  a  third  of  trade  is  intra-firm  trade. 
However,  instead  of  welcoming  foreign  investment,  we  have  one  of  the  more  restrictive 
frameworks  among  OECD  countries.  We  should  re-examine  the  factors,  including  tax  and 
regulation, that diminish and distort the incentives to both save and invest. 
A  second  priority  should  be  to  return  to  fiscal  surpluses  and  lower  public  sector 
indebtedness. This will strengthen the economy’s resilience and create more fiscal room for 
responding  to  future  economic  shocks.  The  expansion  in  government  spending  has 
historically been one of our main growth industries and our budget deficit relative to GDP, 
after adjusting for the impact of the economic cycle on spending and revenue, was one of the 
largest in the OECD in 2011. This is the main reason why the 2012 Global Competitiveness 
Report  ranked  us  112th  for  our  budget  deficit.  Important  steps  are  being  taken  to  reduce 
government  spending  and  this  will  be  an  on-going  challenge  as  demographic  change  will 
greatly expand government outlays unless there’s significant policy change. For example, the 
ratio of the over 65 age group to those of working age is projected to change from 1:5 to 
almost half that in 25 years’ time.  
Increasing fiscal deficits mean that monetary policy has to be tighter and interest rates higher 
than  otherwise,  and  this  adds  to  the  exchange  rate  pressures  on  the  export  and  import 
substitution industries. This constrains output and employment in sectors facing international 
competition  –  sectors  where  productivity  growth  potential  is  usually  higher.  Instead, 
resources  often  find  more  attractive  returns  in  the  non-traded  or  sheltered  sectors  where, 
although  measured  productivity  is  lower,  producers  face  less  international  competition  and 
can  raise  prices  more  readily.  This  is  one  reason  why  it’s  critical  to  cut  back  ineffective 
government  spending,  and  ensure  that  our  welfare  spending  is  targeted  better  at  those  in 
need. 
Modern  growth  theory  stresses  the  importance  of  the  role  of  human  capital,  and  the 
knowledge  and  skills  of  the  population.  The  quality  of  education  is  critical  in  creating 
opportunities for growth and increasing real income. We need to improve the evenness of 
our  education  outcomes.  Globalisation  and  technology  have  widened  the  distribution  of 
income  within  most  advanced  economies,  including  New  Zealand,  over  the  past  three 
decades. In the mid-2000s we had greater income inequality than most OECD economies, 
and this is unlikely to have changed. The bottom income deciles are populated by those with 
lesser  skills,  and  those  who  experience  prolonged  and  recurrent  spells  of  unemployment. 
Addressing these groups would both promote productivity and reduce inequality. 
Our education system is well regarded internationally. We rank 7th among 65 countries in the 
OECD’s  Programme  for  International  Student  Assessment  that  tests  high  schoolers’ 
performance across reading, mathematics, and science. But, we have the greatest difference 
in reading performance between students from different socio-economic backgrounds out of 
all  OECD  countries,  and  the  PISA  scores  for  Maori  and  Pacific  Island  students  are  much 
lower  than  the  average  for  students  of  European  descent.  Over  the  past  15 years, 
unemployment  rates  for  Maori  and  Pacific  Islanders  have  been  three  times  that  for  the 
European population. 
How can the Reserve Bank best contribute to New Zealand’s economic prospects? 
There are two main ways. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  first  is  by  delivering  price  stability  and  reducing  the  risk  of  inflation  surprises.  Price 
stability,  and  expectations  that  future  inflation  will  be  both  low  and  stable,  contribute  to 
economic  growth  in  several  ways.  They  reduce  uncertainty  as  to  future  inflation  outcomes 
and  assist  planning  and  long  term  contracting.  They  enable  producers  and  consumers  to 
identify  relative  price  shifts  and  allocate  resources  in  response  to  shifts  in  demand.  They 
avoid the distortions created by the interaction of high rates of inflation and the tax system 
that lead to higher effective rates of taxation. And they reduce the incentive for investors to 
acquire  non-productive  assets,  such  as  investment  properties,  as  hedges  against  inflation. 
Research by the IMF suggests that in industrialised countries the threshold level of inflation 
above which inflation significantly slows economic growth is estimated at 1–3 percent.2 
In considering inflation pressures the Reserve Bank closely examines recent developments 
in  the  economy,  and  the  outlook  for  competitiveness,  demand,  and  output  growth  and 
employment.  In  setting  the  official  cash  rate  we  aim  to  avoid  excessive  volatility  in  output 
growth, interest rates and the exchange rate. We seek to respond to changing conditions but 
avoid rushing into decisions that might need to be quickly reversed and in doing so create 
uncertainty as to the Reserve Bank’s objectives. 
Four times a year we prepare two year ahead economic forecasts. But forecasting is far from 
an  exact  science.  Instead,  there  are  conditional  probabilities  around  each  element  in  the 
forecasts and our published numbers are our central expectations: that is, what we believe is 
the most likely path of these variables. There are always many uncertainties, an important 
one  right  now  being  the  economic  impact  of  reconstruction  here  in  Christchurch.  For 
example, how much investment will take place and how quickly, how will insurance pay-outs 
be used, how much employment is likely to be generated and where does it come from, and 
what  cost  pressures  and  bottlenecks  are  associated  with  reconstruction  and  how  is  the 
impact being reflected more broadly across the country? 
The  second  area  where  we  contribute  to  New  Zealand’s  growth  is  by  strengthening 
prudential  regulation  and  supervision  to  help  create  a  more  stable  and  efficient  financial 
system.  A  well-functioning  financial  system  helps  an  economy  grow  by  pooling  and 
mobilising savings, allocating funds to investment, providing liquidity, and redistributing risk. 
The financial system needs regulation because in a limited liability framework the interests of 
banks and bankers can differ widely from those of society at large. Bankers face incentives 
to increase leverage and risk in the expectation of achieving higher returns. In doing so they 
tend to under-price tail risk and often seek to build competitive advantage through complex 
financial  products  and  customised  services.  Their  financial  accounts  can  be  opaque  and 
shareholders  and  creditors  often  lack  the  means  to  monitor  bank  balance  sheets,  or  the 
incentive to do so if they believe that the government will provide financial support to a failing 
institution.  As  the  global  financial  crisis  demonstrated,  interconnections  among  financial 
institutions, and their sheer size, mean the failure of a financial institution can have massive 
destructive effects on the economy and the welfare of citizens. 
The Reserve Bank has several important initiatives underway to enhance the stability of our 
financial system. Last month we increased the capital requirements for our banks and are 
currently registering over 100 insurance companies and around 60 non-bank deposit takers. 
We’re working with banks to introduce an open bank resolution system by 30 June this year, 
which  will  enable  a  distressed  bank  to  continue  operating,  while  placing  the  cost  of  the 
bank’s  failure  on  the  bank’s  shareholders  and  creditors,  rather  than  taxpayers.  And,  later 
next month, we will consult with financial institutions on a framework for the potential use of 
macro-prudential instruments. These instruments, which include the counter cyclical capital 
buffer, sectoral capital requirements, the core funding ratio, and quantitative restrictions on 
high  loan-to-value  ratio  lending,  are  designed  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
                                                 
2   Threshold Effects in the Relationship Between Inflation and Growth. IMF staff papers, Vol 48, 2001. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system to shocks, and dampen the financial cycle when concerns increase about systemic 
risk. 
Conclusion 
To a considerable extent our destiny largely lies in our own hands. We don’t have the luxury 
that many developing countries enjoy of relying on catch up technology to propel growth. We 
operate  much  closer  to  the  technological  frontier,  and  if  we  are  to  attract  new  capital, 
entrepreneurship and investment in innovation, our policies have to stand out internationally. 
There’s  no  simple  generic  formula  for  raising  growth  rates,  but  the  more  prosperous 
countries and the economies that are growing rapidly all built strong linkages with the global 
economy,  and  created  an  environment  that  fostered  strong  productivity  growth,  and  high 
rates of investment from domestic and foreign sources. 
We’ve  much  to  do  in  continuing  to  build  our  global  linkages  and  addressing  government 
spending  and  regulatory  issues  that  diminish  productivity  and  competitiveness.  But 
addressing  these  will  create  valuable  payoffs  for  our  future  given  our  major  resource 
endowments, our impressive agricultural and primary production engine, and the potential in 
our education, tourism and other sectors. 
In most situations the comments made almost a century ago by William Bryan, the 41st US 
Secretary  of  State  remain  relevant:  “Destiny  is  not  a  matter  of  chance;  it  is  a  matter  of 
choice”. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 