Thomas Jordan: Switzerland – developments and challenges in 2012 
from a monetary policy perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank,  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  Shareholders  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
26 April 2013. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council 
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests 
Once again, the European financial and debt crisis has dominated events of the past year. 
And, once again, the Swiss National Bank has been faced with considerable challenges in 
the conduct of its monetary policy. The crisis in Europe intensified in spring and summer and 
triggered strong upward pressure on the Swiss franc. 
This was pressure we had to withstand. In an already fraught global economic environment, 
an  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  would  have  caused  an  inappropriate  tightening  in 
monetary conditions for Switzerland. This in turn would have compromised price stability and 
had potentially serious consequences for the Swiss economy. 
The  SNB  therefore  enforced  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of  CHF  1.20  per  euro  with  the 
utmost  determination.  This  called,  at  times,  for  a  high  level  of  activity  on  the  foreign 
exchange market on the part of the SNB. The extensive purchases of foreign currency were 
reflected on our balance sheet. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  start  by  addressing  the  key  developments  and 
challenges in 2012 from a monetary policy perspective and, at the same time, present you 
with our assessment of the current year. I would then like to turn my attention to the subject 
of gold as part of our currency reserves. 
But first, let me begin with the key events in monetary policy. 
Key events in monetary policy in 2012 and 2013 
More than 20 months have passed since the SNB introduced the minimum exchange rate 
against  the  euro  under  exceptional  circumstances.  In  summer  2011,  the  Swiss  franc  had 
appreciated to such an extent that we had to take action. It is the SNB’s statutory mandate to 
ensure price stability, while taking economic developments into account. With money market 
interest rates already close to zero and conventional monetary policy options exhausted, we 
would have no longer been able to fulfil this mandate without the introduction of a minimum 
exchange rate. In taking this step, the SNB averted the threat of adverse developments to 
price  stability  and  the  Swiss  economy.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  provided  the  foreign 
exchange  market  with  clear  guidance  and  gave  companies  a  sounder  basis  for  their 
investment planning. 
Notwithstanding  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  conditions  for  the  Swiss  economy  remained 
difficult  in  the  past  year.  Global  economic  growth  weakened,  after  having  already  lost 
momentum  the  previous  year.  This  slowdown  was  mostly  due  to  the  deterioration  in 
economic activity in emerging economies and to the recession in the euro area. Although the 
European financial and debt crisis is weighing particularly heavily on the euro area economy, 
it is also curbing growth in other regions. 
The  crisis  intensified  in  spring  and  summer  2012  amid  growing  fears  that  one  or  more 
member states may leave the euro. Refinancing costs in the affected countries climbed and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
uncertainty  among  economic  agents  rose  considerably.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  Swiss 
franc was highly sought-after in its role as a safe haven currency, the deepening of the crisis 
triggered strong upward pressure on the franc. Particularly in the critical months of May to 
August,  the  only  means  of  enforcing  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  through  extensive 
foreign  currency  purchases.  Overall,  the  SNB  purchased  foreign  currency  last  year  to  the 
value of CHF 188 billion. 
The SNB was well-prepared from the outset for the enforcement of the minimum exchange 
rate. Since its introduction, we have been monitoring the foreign exchange markets round the 
clock,  from  when  they  open  on  Sunday  evening  in  Sydney  to  when  they  close  on  Friday 
evening  in  New  York.  In  order  to  achieve  the  required  effect  on  the  exchange  rate,  we 
conduct  foreign  exchange  transactions  with  a  wide  range  of  domestic  and  foreign 
counterparties.  With  a  network  of  well  over  100  banks  from  around  the  world  as 
counterparties, we cover the relevant interbank foreign exchange market. 
The foreign currency purchases made in 2012 led to a significant rise in our foreign currency 
holdings. The increased volume also resulted in a considerably higher level of financial risks 
on  our  balance  sheet.  Yet  these  foreign  currency  purchases  were  necessary.  An 
appreciation of the Swiss franc would have caused an inappropriate tightening in monetary 
conditions,  which  in  turn  would  have  compromised  price  stability  and  had  serious 
consequences for the economy. We therefore firmly believe that, given the circumstances, 
there was no alternative to the minimum exchange rate. 
Inflation  remained  in  negative  territory  in  2012.  From  mid-year,  however,  the  negative 
inflation rates trended closer to zero. Our most recent inflation forecast also shows that there 
is neither a threat of inflation nor a threat of deflation in the foreseeable future. In 2012, the 
Swiss economy did not escape entirely unscathed from the global slowdown in growth, and 
lost momentum. Nevertheless, Switzerland’s GDP still grew on average by 1% for the year, 
as compared to 1.9% a year previously. The fact that price stability continued to be ensured 
in Switzerland and that our economy has held up relatively well in this difficult environment is, 
on the whole, largely attributable to the minimum exchange rate. 
Both the Swiss economy and the SNB are faced with challenges this year, too. There are 
some  bright  spots,  however.  According  to  economic  indicators  from  the  US  and  emerging 
economies,  the  recovery  of  the  global  economy  has  taken  hold.  With  regard  to  the  debt 
crisis,  a  number  of  measures  taken  at  European  level  have  helped  ease  the  situation.  In 
particular,  the  announcement  by  the  European  Central  Bank  that  it  would,  under  certain 
conditions,  buy  up  unlimited  quantities  of  sovereign  bonds  issued  by  indebted  euro  area 
countries contributed to easing tensions on the financial markets. The purchase programme 
alone cannot solve the crisis. However, it has significantly reduced tail risks, such as the exit 
of one or several countries from the monetary union, and it buys governments more time to 
implement  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  The  affected  countries  have  already 
made some concrete progress in this regard. 
However, it is clearly too early to relax our guard. The global economic situation is still fragile 
and the way out of the crisis in Europe is long and arduous. In many countries – not just in 
Europe – there are still a number of unanswered questions with regard to the medium-term 
growth  outlook  and  the  sustainability  of  public  finances.  And  while  we  expect  the  global 
economy  to  recover  gradually  this  year  and  the  Swiss  economy  to  grow  by  1–1.5%, 
considerable uncertainties remain. The Swiss franc is still high, even at today’s level. In view 
of  the  fragile  international  environment,  the  downside  risks  for  the  Swiss  economy  remain 
substantial. 
In particular, the threat that the franc could suddenly come under upward pressure again has 
not  been  averted.  The  minimum  exchange  rate  is  an  important  instrument  in  helping  to 
prevent an undesirable tightening in monetary conditions. The SNB will therefore continue to 
enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate  with  the  utmost  determination  and,  if  required,  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities for this purpose. It stands ready to 
take further measures at any time. 
Gold as part of the Swiss National Bank’s currency reserves 
In my following remarks, I would like to speak about the subject of gold as part of the SNB’s 
currency reserves. 
As reported in the media last week, the so-called gold initiative has formally qualified for a 
referendum vote to be held. This popular initiative demands that the SNB hold at least 20% 
of  its  assets  in  gold,  that  it  be  prohibited  from  selling  its  gold  reserves  and  that  all  gold 
reserves be physically stored in Switzerland itself. 
The SNB does not generally comment on any political initiatives. However, the gold initiative 
has  a  very  direct  impact  on  the  SNB’s  capacity  to  act.  This  is  why  we  are  taking  the 
opportunity today to present our viewpoint for the first time on the demands of the initiative. 
The  initiators see  a  high  level  of gold reserves as  a guarantee for  currency  stability.  They 
fear that the Swiss franc will decline in value and that price stability will be threatened if a 
large  proportion  of  the  balance  sheet  does  not  consist  of  gold  holdings.  They  are  also 
concerned  that  the  SNB’s  gold  reserves  held  abroad  are  not  secure  and  will  not  be 
accessible in critical situations. 
We share the  objectives  the  initiators  put forward,  such  as maintaining currency  and  price 
stability  and  ensuring  both  the  SNB’s  capacity  to  act  and  its  independence.  However,  the 
measures proposed to this effect are not suitable; in fact, they are even counterproductive. 
Instead,  they  are  based  on  misunderstandings  about  the  importance  of  gold  in  monetary 
policy  and  would  compromise  the  SNB’s  capacity  to  act  in  pursuing  its  monetary  policy, 
which would run counter to the objectives envisaged. In other words, these measures would, 
in certain situations, considerably hinder the SNB in fulfilling its monetary policy mandate and 
be  detrimental  to  Switzerland.  We  therefore  consider  it  our  duty  to  point  out  the  serious 
disadvantages of the initiative already at an early stage. 
Having said that, however, the SNB is interested in a dialogue on any questions connected 
with the initiative. With this in mind, allow me to make a few remarks. 
The  SNB  has  the  statutory  mandate  to  ensure  price  stability,  while  taking  due  account  of 
economic  developments.  The  monetary  policy  operations  that  must  be  carried  out  in 
fulfilment of this mandate have a direct impact on the SNB’s balance sheet. In order for the 
SNB to fulfil its mandate at all times, its capacity to act in monetary policy matters must not 
be compromised by rigid rules on the composition of its balance sheet, which would be the 
case with the required 20% minimum share of gold and the ban on the sale of gold. 
It was precisely the latest crisis that demonstrated how important it is for the SNB to have the 
flexibility  to  expand  its  balance  sheet,  if  needed.  In  future,  the  SNB  will  also  need  this 
flexibility  to  reduce  the  balance  sheet  again,  if  necessary.  The  demands  of  the  initiative 
would considerably curtail this flexibility. 
Were the  initiative  to  be  accepted,  the  SNB  would  –  in  the  current  environment  –  have  to 
make large-scale gold purchases to meet the required 20% minimum share of gold. It would 
not be allowed to sell this gold at a later point, even if it had to reduce its balance sheet again 
in  order  to  maintain  price  stability.  In  a  worst-case  scenario,  the  assets  side  of  the  SNB’s 
balance  sheet  would,  over  time,  be  largely  comprised  of  unsellable  gold.  Managing  the 
interest rate level and the money supply would only be possible via the liabilities side of the 
balance sheet; in practice by issuing the SNB’s own interest-bearing debt certificates (SNB 
Bills). This would have serious financial consequences: On the assets side, the SNB would 
neither have any interest income nor could it realise any profits on gold due to the ban on 
sales. On the liabilities side, it might have to pay high interest on debt certificates. The SNB 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
could therefore find itself in a situation in which it could only finance its current expenses by 
means of money creation. 
The far-reaching demands of the gold initiative would inevitably have repercussions for our 
monetary policy. In making its monetary policy decisions, the SNB would have to consider 
the long-term consequences the necessary gold purchases would have on its capacity to act 
and  on  the  structure  of  its  balance  sheet.  Furthermore,  market  participants  would  hardly 
regard  monetary  policy  decisions  as  credible,  should  these  decisions  involve  a  substantial 
expansion of the balance sheet, which in turn would impair the effect of monetary policy. It is 
unlikely  that  decisions  such  as  the  introduction  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  or  the 
stabilisation  of  UBS  would  have  been  made  in  the  same  way  given  these  circumstances. 
This constraint on the capacity to act would not be in Switzerland’s interest. 
Gold  is  nevertheless  an  important  component  of  the  SNB’s  assets.  However,  this  is  not 
because  gold  guarantees  price  stability.  In  today’s  monetary  system,  there  is  no  direct 
connection  between  the  proportion  of gold  on  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  and  price  stability. 
This  is  also  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  the  objective  of  price  stability  has  been  better 
achieved  in  recent  years,  even  though  the  proportion  of  gold  on  our  balance  sheet  was 
smaller,  than  at  times  when  gold  accounted for  a  much  larger  share.  A  high  proportion  of 
gold on the balance sheet is no guarantee for price stability. 
There is another reason why gold is useful for the SNB and Switzerland. As part of a good 
diversification of currency reserves, a certain proportion of gold can help reduce the balance 
sheet risk. We have therefore never ruled out the possibility of future gold purchases. At the 
same time, however, gold is also one of the most volatile and thus riskiest investments. A 
high  proportion  of  gold  would  increase  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  risk.  With  the  increasing 
share of gold on the balance sheet, a secondary effect would be that the profit distribution to 
the  Confederation  and  the  cantons  would  likely  be  lower.  This  is  because,  unlike  foreign 
currency  investments,  gold  does  not  generate  income  in  the  form  of  interest  or  dividends, 
and any valuation gains on gold could not be realised because of the ban on sales. 
If, as the initiative demands, a ban on selling gold were to be enshrined in the constitution, 
the question would arise as to whether an immovable asset of this kind could even still fulfil 
the function of a currency reserve. Yet, the very purpose of currency reserves is that they are 
available quickly and without restriction when needed. This availability in a crisis situation is 
important, even if – as is currently the case – we are not intending to sell gold. 
The  availability  of  gold  reserves  also  plays  a  role  with  regard  to  their  storage.  Let  me 
therefore  take  a  look  at  the  third  component  of  the  initiative,  i.e.  the  demand  that  all  gold 
reserves be physically stored in Switzerland. 
Decentralised  storage  in  Switzerland  and  abroad  is  in  line  with  the  basic  principles  of  due 
diligence in the conduct of business and business continuity management. It ensures that the 
SNB can in fact access its gold reserves, especially in an emergency. The same standards 
are applied to storing gold abroad as to storing gold in Switzerland. Our partner central banks 
keep  clearly  identifiable  gold  bar  holdings for  the  SNB.  Each  bar  stored  abroad  has  a  bar 
identification  and  remains  the  property  of  the  SNB.  The  availability  of  our  gold  holdings  is 
fully guaranteed at all times. 
As with many other central banks, the SNB has never made the storage locations public. The 
SNB  reviews  the  geographic  allocation  of  its  gold  reserves  periodically  and  adjusts  it  if 
necessary.  In  addition  to  security  considerations,  avoiding  public  discussions  when  gold  is 
being  relocated  was  one  of  the  reasons  why  storage  locations  have  so  far  been  treated 
confidentially among central banks. 
However,  the  SNB  is  aware  that  there  has  been  a  growing  need  for  transparency  in  our 
population  in  the  last  few  years.  We  have  therefore  decided  to  provide  more  detailed 
information  in  this  matter.  This  is  the  only  way  for  us  to  rectify  the  misinformation  and 
misconceptions with regard to storage locations which have increasingly surfaced. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Of our 1,040 tonnes of gold, more than 70% – and thereby the overwhelming proportion – is 
stored in Switzerland. The remaining 30% is distributed between two countries. Roughly 20% 
of the gold reserves are kept at the central bank of the United Kingdom, and approximately 
10%  at  the  central  bank  of  Canada.  The  SNB  has  been  storing  gold  exclusively  in  these 
countries  for  over  ten  years.  A  number  of  clearly  defined  criteria  are  used  when  selecting 
countries for gold storage. First, adequate regional diversification and good market access 
for the storage of gold must be ensured. Second, the country in which the gold is stored must 
be politically and economically very stable and guarantee the immunity protection of central 
bank investments. Unlike the other two demands of the gold initiative, the manner of storing 
the  gold  reserves  has  no  immediate  implications  for  monetary  policy.  In  our  opinion, 
however,  the  principles  of  risk  diversification  and  the  requirements  of  due  diligence  in  the 
conduct of business still speak for decentralised storage in Switzerland and abroad. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, in order for the SNB to continue fulfilling its statutory mandate, it is 
important that it can maintain its capacity to act in the conduct of monetary policy. Given the 
challenging environment in  which  we  will also be operating this year, we once again need 
broad support. In this spirit, I would like to thank our shareholders for their loyalty and great 
interest in the activities of the SNB. On behalf of the Governing Board, my thanks also go to 
our staff for its tireless efforts for our institution. Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
