Haruhiko Kuroda: Realizing the Asian century 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Conference on “The future of Asia”, Tokyo, 24 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning. I am honored to be here today at the International Conference on the Future 
of Asia. 
In  the  45  years  of  my  career,  I  have  moved  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  Hitotsubashi 
University, the Asian Development Bank, and now to the Bank of Japan. But wherever I have 
worked,  my  focus  has  been  on  Asia,  and  I  have  always  cherished  my  ties  with  my  Asian 
colleagues.  From  this  standpoint,  I  will  first  briefly  touch  upon  economic  developments  in 
Asia, then move to the thrust of my speech today, which is the challenges to realizing the 
Asian Century and how these may be addressed, and close with how Japan can contribute 
to these efforts. 
Economic developments in Asia: factors driving growth 
2. 
While  developed  economies  have  experienced  prolonged  economic  downturns  since  the 
Lehman Shock and the ensuing global financial crisis, Asia has maintained a higher growth 
rate than any other region in the world, albeit with some slowdown. In particular, the growth 
of ASEAN economies has been outstanding, with a boost in economic growth in 2012. 
I  would  like  to  point  out  three  structural  changes  supporting  the  strength  of  the  Asian 
economies. The first change is that the supply chain in Asia has been enhanced. An intra-
regional supply chain network, covering not just finished goods but also other areas of the 
supply chain ladder such as raw materials and intermediate goods, has been established by 
the relocation of firms, thereby underpinning the global competitiveness of the region. 
This  integrated  supply  chain  network  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  second 
change I wish to point out, that is, trade liberalization, with the increase in FTA agreements 
between  economies  both  inside  and  outside  the  region.  This  trade  liberalization  is  most 
pronounced in the Korean and ASEAN economies. Intra-regional and cross-regional trade in 
ASEAN economies is growing much faster than the global average.  
The third change is closely linked to the other two changes: the autonomous expansion of 
domestic demand with the increase in income reflecting increased production activities in the 
region. The expansion of domestic demand can be seen as a result of the Asian economies’ 
rebalancing of their economic growth toward a more domestic-driven model from that based 
on  foreign  demand.  In  particular,  the  economic  rebalancing  in  China  to  achieve  “quality 
economic growth” deserves attention, as it is vital for China to maintain sustainable growth, 
and will have significant implications for all of Asia. 
It  should  be  noted  that  these  three  changes  are  not  mutually  exclusive,  but  rather 
intertwined. The shift from “Factory Asia” (as a manufacturing base) to “Consumer Asia” (as 
a consumption center) is expected to change the nature of the supply chain, stimulate new 
demand in Asia, and foster new industries. 
Realizing the Asian century: how to avoid the middle income trap 
3. 
Looking  ahead  30  to  40  years,  we  may  well  expect  Asian  economies  to  be  even  more 
prosperous. The Asian Development Bank, where I was President until this spring, published 
a report titled Asia 2050: Realizing the Asian Century in 2011. The report forecasts that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Asia’s GDP would comprise half of global GDP by 2050, which is about double the current 
share, on the condition that Asian economies maintain their momentum. 
However, the rise of Asia is by no means preordained. The path will not be easy and requires 
more  than  just  doing  more  of  the  same.  The  report  warns  of  another  future  if  the  region 
cannot tackle its daunting policy, institutional, and governance challenges in a timely manner. 
In  this  pessimistic  scenario,  the  region  could  fall  into  a  Middle  Income  Trap  and  become 
stuck with low growth rates. 
The concept of the Middle Income Trap originally pertained to resource-rich countries in Latin 
America and Africa that became middle-income economies by extracting and exporting their 
resources, but did not climb higher to become developed economies. Asian economies have 
risen from being low-income to middle-income, not just by depending on natural resources, 
but  by  utilizing  their  human  resources  in  the  form  of  abundant  labor  to  manufacture  and 
export  goods.  But  the  question  is  whether  high  and  sustainable  economic  growth  can  be 
maintained  after  passing  the  Lewisian  Turning  Point,  where  surplus  labor  from  the 
agricultural sector is absorbed into the industrial sector and upward pressure is exerted on 
industrial sector wages. There are only four Asian economies, other than Japan, that have 
joined the league of developed countries with per capita Gross National Income of more than 
10,000  USD  since  World  War  II:  South  Korea,  Taiwan,  Hong  Kong,  and  Singapore,  often 
dubbed the Four Asian Tigers. This shows how much more difficult it is for a middle-income 
economy  to  become  a  developed  economy  than  for  a  low-income  economy  to  become  a 
middle-income economy. 
The  key  lies  in  whether  a  middle-income  economy  has  the  ability  to  grasp  its  growth 
potential, and whether there are autonomous mechanisms in place to fully exploit its growth 
potential. I mentioned in the first part of my speech that the growth potential in Asia is high. 
With that in mind, in order to avoid the Middle Income Trap and realize high growth, Asian 
economies  require  not  only  robust  macroeconomic  policies,  but  also  strenuous  efforts  to 
implement the necessary structural reforms in order to improve production inputs, such as 
labor,  capital  and  technology,  and  to  push  their  growth  potential  to  new  frontiers.  The 
concrete measures will vary for each economy as they face a unique set of challenges, and 
each  economy  will  have  to  make  its  own  decisions.  Nevertheless,  there  may  also  be 
common  challenges  such  as  liberalizing  regulations  so  as  to  create  an  environment 
conducive  to  innovation,  and  strengthening  economic  governance  in  order  to  enhance 
transparency  and  social  fairness.  To  add  to  this,  improving  education  levels  is  crucial  to 
making the best of human resources. I strongly believe Asia can overcome these challenges. 
Enhancing regional cooperation in Asia 
4. 
In discussing the Asian Century, the question naturally arises as to how its realization would 
contribute to the stability of the region and the global economy. There are many issues that 
Asian economies should tackle together as one.  
Among  constructive  efforts,  I  would  like  to  stress,  as  the  governor  of  a  central  bank,  the 
importance of regional financial cooperation. 
The  stronger  network  among  Asian  economies and  closer  ties  with  the global  economy  in 
terms  of  trade  and  investment  obviously  has  its  merits,  but  it  also  increases  the  risk  of 
contagion to stress events in other regions, such as financial crises. It is also important to 
avoid becoming the source of stress that might endanger the stability of the global economy 
and financial markets. 
In order to enhance resilience against shocks, as well as making the financial system more 
robust,  it  is  important  to  build  a  regional  financial  intermediary  system  that  is  not  solely 
dependent on foreign capital. In addition, enhancing the safety net as a backstop against a 
global financial crisis is also essential. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Asian  central  banks  and  financial  authorities  are  actively  engaged  in  sharing  insights  by 
exchanging information and opinions, as part of their efforts to increase the effectiveness of 
financial  supervision. We  are  also  committed  to  promoting the  local  currency-denominated 
bond  markets  so  that the  abundant  savings  of Asian  economies  can  be  utilized  effectively 
within the region. One positive step towards enhancing the region’s safety net is the current 
efforts  to  strengthen  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative.  If  Asia  succeeds  in  strengthening  its  own 
financial  system,  it  can  play  an  even  more  important  role  globally  in  designing  new 
international financial architecture and discussing governance systems. 
Conclusion: how can Japan contribute? 
5. 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  address  the question,  what  can  Japan  do to  contribute  to the 
realization of the Asian Century? The answer to this question is not singular. As I mentioned 
earlier, Japan can contribute through trade, investment, and financial cooperation. Japan can 
also assert its identity as a member of the Asian region, to participate in the stronger regional 
ties  and  cooperation,  through  which  Japan  can  achieve  higher  growth.  This  would  be 
mutually beneficial for both Japan and other Asian economies. 
In  its  early-April  Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  a  new  policy 
framework, Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Easing (QQE),  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price 
index (CPI) at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. The Bank 
believes this will lead Japan’s economy to overcome the deflation that has lasted for nearly 
15 years, and reinvigorate the economy, adding substance to Japan’s efforts to contribute to 
the realization of the Asian Century. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
