Daniel Mminele: The importance of well-developed and functioning 
capital markets for growth and development 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Opening  Ceremony  of  the  1st  South  Africa-China  Capital  Market  Forum  conference, 
Johannesburg, 7 August 2013. 
 to 
Introduction 
1. 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen. Allow me to extend a special welcome to our visitors 
from  China.  Thank  you 
the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange,  Shanghai  Stock 
Exchange  and  Frontier  Advisory  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  inaugural conference 
of  the  South  Africa-China  Capital  Market  Forum.  This  initiative  bears testimony to the 
growing relationship between China and South Africa. 
In the 15 years since the establishment of official relations between China and South Africa, 
cooperation between the two countries has improved immensely. A  number of Memoranda 
of Understanding  (“MoUs”)  have  been signed,  Foreign  Direct Investment  (FDI)  has  picked 
up,  and  bilateral  trade  between  the  two  countries  has  surged.  China  became  South 
Africa’s biggest trading partner in 2009 and is now the largest destination for South Africa’s 
exports.  With  respect  to  FDI,  China  is  actively  involved  in  mining,  manufacturing  and 
construction  with  China’s  FDI  presence  growing  from  around  R340  million  in  2005  to 
roughly  R50 billion  in  2012.  The  most notable  FDI  transaction  was  in  the  banking  sector, 
specifically, the 20 per cent stake that Industrial and Commercial Bank of China acquired in 
Standard Bank for US$5.5 billion in 2007. 
South  Africa  and  China  also  cooperate  in  various  international  groupings,  including  the 
G20 and more recently as part of BRICS. South Africa, as you know, was invited to  join  the 
BRICS  group  when  China  was  the  chair  and  successfully  hosted  the  5th BRICS  Summit 
earlier  this  year  when  it  assumed  chair  of  BRICS  for  2013.  Having been already allotted 
an  investment  quota,  at  this  Summit,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (the  Bank)  and 
People's  Bank  of  China  (PBoC)  signed  an  agency agreement enabling the Bank to invest 
in China’s interbank bond market  through the People’s  Bank  of  China.  South  Africa  was 
the  first  country  on  the  continent  to  be given access to the Chinese onshore bond market 
in  this  way.  As  part  of  the  growing  importance  of  trade  between  our  countries,  this 
represents an opportunity to diversify the country’s foreign exchange reserves  accordingly, 
and  to  invest  in  the  world’s  fifth  largest  bond  market  which  continues  to  grow  rapidly, 
both 
in  depth  and  liquidity.  Currently,  the  BRICS  are  negotiating  both  a  Contingent 
Reserve Arrangement (CRA) and  the  establishment  of  a  New  Development  Bank  (NDB). 
The  CRA  is  a  type  of  financial  safety  net  in  the  form  of  a  self-managed  facility 
through which  BRICS countries  can  provide  mutual  support  to  each  other  when  dealing 
with  short-term liquidity and balance of  payment pressures,  and will likely take the form of 
a  swap  agreement,  with  an  initial  size  of  US$100  billion.  The  aim  of  the  NDB  is  to 
mobilise  resources  for  infrastructure  and  sustainable  development  projects  in  BRICS. 
Chief Negotiators have been appointed by each country and have commenced negotiations 
around  issues  such  as  membership;  governance;  capital  size;  structure  and  articles  of 
agreement, amongst others. 
The importance of capital markets 
2. 
Literature  around  the  relationship  between  capital  market  development  and  economic 
growth  goes  as 
(followed  by  Joseph 
Schumpeter  and  John  Hicks  in  the  1900s)  pointed  out  that  industrialisation  in most  of  the 
developing  countries  was  due  to  the  availability  of  the  financial  system  to  mobilise 
far  back  as  1873,  when  Walter  Bagehot 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
productive  financial  capital. Today  this  remains a  widely debated  topic,  with some division 
among  economists  regarding  the  importance  of  finance  for  growth  and  the  causal 
relationship between the two. Some would argue that financial development  is  not  important 
and  that  it  is  actually  economic  development  which  creates  the  demand  for  financial 
instruments. Others would concur with Bagehot and argue  that  a  well-developed  financial 
system  improves  the  efficiency  of  financing  decisions,  supports  a  better  allocation  of 
resources  and  therefore  promotes  economic  growth  and  development.  Well-developed 
capital  markets  not  only  support  growth,  but  the  ability  to  diversify  sources  of  finance 
helps  to  foster  more  stable growth by ensuring that shocks to the supply of bank credit do 
not  impede growth.  I would certainly  lean towards the camp  that argues that the  financial 
system  is  without  a  doubt  essential  for  economic  growth.  To  quote  the  words  of  Former 
British Prime Minister Gladstone “…finance is, as it were, the stomach of the country, from 
which all the other organs take their tone.” 
Various  studies  conducted  over  the  years,  found  that  equity  market  liberalisation  led,  in 
some  instances,  to  over  one  percentage  point  of  additional  economic  growth  in  those 
countries  that  implemented  them  in  the  late  20th century.  In  addition, as  long as domestic 
government  debt  remains  at  moderate  levels,  the  growth  of  bond  markets  contributes 
positively  to economic  growth and  provides  a  basis  for  the development  of  other  capital 
markets.  Such  studies  point  out,  however,  that  it  is  those  countries  with  the  highest 
quality  institutions  that  benefit  the  most  in  terms  of growth, that is, institutions need to be 
strengthened  along  with  financial  development,  for  without  this,  markets  can  become 
fragile  and  pose  a  threat  to financial stability and ultimately growth. Key in this regard is 
good governance frameworks, transparency and accountability. 
Well-functioning  capital  markets  are  particularly 
important 
long-term 
financing  needs  as  they  help  mobilise  resources  and  efficiently  direct  the  flow  of 
savings and investment inside an economy in a manner that facilitates the accumulation  of 
capital  and the production of  goods and  services.  In  a similar  way, the existence of robust 
financial  markets  and  institutions  also  facilitates  the  international  flow  of  funds  between 
countries.  Deep  and  liquid  capital  markets  not only  help  provide  finance  for  government 
but also increase the  benefits of financial integration and improve the resilience of countries 
against shocks. 
In  the  absence  of  well-developed  financial  markets,  it  becomes  costly  to  raise  capital, 
information  tends  to  be  limited  and  there  is  a  lack  of  financial  transparency, which  means 
that  information  is  not  as  readily  available  to  market  participants,  and risks  are  likely  to 
be  perceived  to  be  higher  than  in  economies  with  more  fully-  developed  financial 
systems. 
The G20 has recognised the importance of developing local currency bond markets and in 
this  vein  adopted  an  Action  Plan  to  Support  the  Development  of  Local  Currency  Bond 
Markets (LCBMs) in 2011. The Action Plan recognized that financial deepening  in general, 
and  LCBM  development  in  particular,  could  enhance  the  stability  of  the  international 
monetary  system  by  (i)  raising  capacity  of  economies  to  absorb  volatile  capital  flows  and 
intermediate  them  efficiently  and  safely;  (ii)  reducing  reliance  on  foreign  savings;  (iii) 
attenuating  external  imbalances;  (iv)  mitigating  the need  for  large  precautionary  reserve 
holdings;  and  (v) 
the  capacity  of  macroeconomic  policies  to  respond  to 
shocks by allowing balance sheets to adjust more smoothly. 
A  recent  guest  post  by  Jingdong  Hua  of  the  International  Finance  Corporation  notes that 
capital  markets  have  been  a  driver  of  China’s  economy,  which  has  displayed remarkable 
growth  of  roughly  10  per  cent  over  the  past  three  decades.  China  has  introduced  a 
number  of  innovative  reforms  to  spur  the  development  of  its  domestic markets,  including 
amongst  others,  increasing  the  ceiling  on  its  Qualified  Foreign Institutional Investor (QFII) 
programme, and doubling the amount of domestic stocks and bonds that foreign institutional 
investors are allowed to buy. 
to  a  country’s 
improving 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some  steady  progress  has  been  made  over  the  past  number  of  years  in  developing 
Africa’s  capital  markets,  but  these  still  remain  shallow  and  illiquid  and  tend  to  be small 
and  fragmented,  owing  to  a  number  of  factors  including  low  income  levels; weak judicial 
systems; and scarcity of human capital and financial infrastructure. The financial sector is a 
key driver of growth in South Africa. The South African economy has over the years steadily 
moved towards being a service oriented economy. As a percentage of economic output, the 
tertiary sector accounts for almost 70 per cent in real terms, with the finance, insurance, real 
estate and business services making up 34 per cent of the tertiary sector. 
South  Africa  stands  out  on  the  continent  as  having  the  most  well-developed  and liquid 
financial markets. Across emerging market countries, South Africa also compares  favourably 
with  its  peers.  Turnover  in  fixed-income  securities  trading  on the JSE has been gradually 
increasing,  from  below  R10  trillion  in  2004  to  a  record  of  almost  R23  trillion  in  2012. 
Turnover  on  the  equity  market  over  the  same  period increased  from  R950  billion  and 
reached R3.4 trillion in 2012.  Market capitalisation on the equity market is roughly R9 trillion 
and R2 trillion for the debt market. 
There is no doubt about the many benefits that South Africa has reaped  from having well-
developed  capital  markets.  The  local  currency  bond  and  equity  markets  helped  cushion 
the  country  during  the  financial  crisis,  helping  to  absorb  capital  inflows,  reduce  the 
dependency on foreign debt and therefore limit the adverse effects of the global crisis. 
The  liquidity  of  this  market,  combined  with  investors’  search  for  yield  in  recent  years, has 
seen  non-residents  become  the  largest  investor  base  for  government  funding,  holding 
close to 40 per cent of government bonds (a ratio similar to Poland, Indonesia, Mexico and 
Malaysia),  from  10  per  cent  at  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  and exceeding  the  28  per  cent 
held by pension funds. The South African bond market is well developed in the sense that 
it is not only dominated by financial institutions and the  government,  but  also  comprised  of 
a  large  number  of  non-financial  corporates, while  the  maturity  extends  beyond  30  years. 
The  biggest  challenge  in  South  Africa  has  been  that  of  developing  secondary  market 
liquidity in the corporate bond market, while a more developed derivatives market would add 
to the depth of the market. 
Although not a typical central bank function, the South African Reserve Bank initially played 
an  active  role  as  participant  in  the development  of  the  domestic  government bond market 
through its various phases of development. The Bank played an active role  in  developing 
the  secondary  bond  market  in  the  1990s  as  the  sole  market  maker,  and  played  a 
leading  role  in  bond  derivatives,  inter  alia  to  ensure  continued net  selling  of  government 
bonds in adverse market conditions. In the late 1990s, the Bank reduced its involvement in 
the secondary market, which at the time was judged to be sufficiently mature. 
Capital  markets  of  course  also  play  an  important  role  in  policy  making,  providing 
instantaneous feedback to policy makers on market expectations and perceptions of policy. 
Such  perceptions  and  expectations  are  reflected  in  bond  and  equity  risk premia. 
Having  noted  the  benefits  of  well-developed  financial  systems,  my  remarks  would  be 
incomplete  without  at  least  briefly  referring  to  the  global  financial  crisis  and  how  this may 
have changed the views of some on the positive impact of financial development  and  the 
role  of  markets. John  Lipsky,  former  IMF  First  Managing Director,  put  it  very  well  when 
he  said  that  “…much  of  this  reassessment  is  natural and  sensible.  However,  it  is  fair  to 
say  that  the  idea  that  financial  markets  are  not perfectly self-regulating does not represent 
a  novel  insight.  To  the  contrary,  there  are  good  reasons  why 
they  are  regulated 
universally.”  In  a  nutshell,  this  highlights  the  importance  of  regulation  and  effective 
supervision  in  order  to  try  and  avoid  a  repeat of  the  global  financial  crises,  which  led  to 
an  economic  and  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which  after  6  years  the  world  economy  is  still 
struggling  to  recover  from.  However,  it is  also  important  that  regulation  is  appropriately 
calibrated,  and  that  a  defensible  balance  is  struck  between  ensuring  maximum  benefit 
from capital markets through innovation on the one hand, and the need to protect markets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
that  do  not  appropriately 
and  financial  systems  that  may  be  still  be  in  their  infancy  or  not  yet  sufficiently 
developed  on  the  other.  Particular  care  needs  to  be  taken  when  formulating  global 
regulatory  standards 
take  account  of  country-specific 
circumstances and may have unintended consequences. 
Let  me  now  conclude  by  congratulating  you  on  this  important  initiative,  which  will 
contribute to the further development of efficient and well-functioning capital markets in  both 
countries,  and  also  promote  regular  interaction  between  issuers,  investors, brokers  and 
others  in  the  interest  of  growth  and  development.  I  wish  you  every  success  in  your 
endeavours, and no doubt you  will go  from strength  to strength  in years to come. 
I thank you. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
