Gill Marcus: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
93rd ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 26 July 2013. 
 Dear Shareholders, 
Members of the Board, 
Deputy Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The past financial year has been as difficult as any since the global financial crisis began. 
The crisis has continued to mutate and the impact on South Africa has been compounded by 
domestic challenges that have at times overshadowed the global risks. The latest mutation 
comes in the form of a slowdown in the emerging market economies, which until recently had 
been the main engine of global growth. 
In its recent World Economic Outlook update in July, the IMF revised down its April forecasts 
for  global  growth  in  2013  by  0,2  percentage  points,  mainly  as  a  result  of  a  sudden 
deterioration  in  the  outlook  for  the  emerging  markets.  The  Brics  countries  featured  very 
strongly in this downgrade: growth in China was lowered from 7,8 per cent to 7,5 per cent; 
Russia from 3,4 per cent to 2,5 per cent; India from 5,8 per cent to 5,6 per cent; Brazil from 
3,0 per cent to 2,5 per cent and South Africa from 2,8 per cent to 2,0 per cent. The speed of 
this downturn is cause for concern, and illustrates that the idea that the emerging markets 
can decouple from the advanced economies and become an independent engine of global 
growth is overly simplistic. 
This slowdown is compounded by financial market uncertainties and turbulence that followed 
the announcement by the US Federal Reserve that it may begin to slow the pace of asset 
purchases. Long-term yields spiked in both advanced and emerging bond markets, as capital 
flowed  out  of  emerging  markets  in  particular.  While  the  markets  have  calmed  down 
somewhat following their original overreaction, this episode illustrates not only the difficulties 
that advanced economies will have in reversing their highly accommodative monetary policy 
stances  in  the  future,  but  also  the  likely  spillover  effects  on  emerging  and  developing 
countries.  Our  challenge  as  a  country  will  be  to  anticipate  and  reduce  our  vulnerability  to 
these risks. 
In  the  meantime,  however,  loose  monetary  policy  is  expected  to  persist  in  most  of  the 
advanced  economies  as  downside  risks  to  growth  continue  and  inflation  remains  largely 
benign  with  a  concern  about  deflation  rather  than  inflation,  particularly  in  Japan  and  the 
United  States.  The  Eurozone  remains  mired  in  a  deepening  recession,  the  Japanese 
recovery  is  uncertain,  and  the  US  economy,  while  showing  signs  of  improving,  is  facing 
headwinds from a sharp fiscal contraction. 
The South African economic growth prospects have also weakened in the face of global and 
domestic constraints. The Bank’s most recent forecast is for growth of 2,0 per cent in 2013, 
rising  to  3,3  per  cent  next  year.  However,  there  are  downside  risks  to  this  forecast, 
particularly  given  electricity  supply  constraints.  At  the  same  time,  driven  mainly  by  a 
depreciating  currency  and  rising  wage  and  salary  costs,  the  forecast  inflation  path  has 
moved up, and a temporary breach of the target range is expected in the third quarter of this 
year, despite an absence of strong demand pressures. Although our forecast suggests that 
inflation will remain within the target range thereafter, it is uncomfortably close to the top of 
the target range and the risks to this forecast are seen to be on the upside. 
The  Bank’s  primary  mandate  remains  price  stability  within  a  flexible  inflation  targeting 
framework. This means that we need to be cognizant of the state of the economy, and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
policy dilemma has become more marked with rising inflation and slowing growth. Against 
the backdrop of a volatile currency responding to domestic and global developments, we can 
expect a challenging year ahead for monetary policy. 
As  was  elaborated  in  the  Annual  Report,  the  Bank  has  the  responsibility  to  act  on  its 
expanded mandate of financial stability. This is part of a global phenomenon which has seen 
responsibility for financial stability and macroprudential oversight becoming increasingly the 
responsibility  of  central banks. This  has  raised expectations  about  what  central  banks  can 
and should do, with the danger that expectations can become unrealistic. The move to the 
Twin Peaks regulatory architecture is well under way. In terms of this framework, the Bank 
has been given responsibility for prudential regulation of the financial sector, which will entail 
a move of a number of personnel from the Financial Services Board (FSB) to the Bank. In 
addition, the Bank has been given responsibility for macroprudential oversight. The coming 
year  will therefore not only see  logistical and personnel challenges, but also challenges of 
integrating  our  expanded  mandate  of  financial  stability  with  our  primary  mandate  of  price 
stability. 
An important function of the Bank is the management of the country’s official gold and foreign 
exchange reserves. For some time there has been a need to build up the country’s holdings 
of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  which  were  –  and  still  are  –  low  in  comparison  to  IMF 
estimates  of  reserve  adequacy  and  our  emerging  market  economy  peers.  The  need  to 
accumulate these reserves was driven by the imperative to reduce the country’s vulnerability 
to  sudden  large  outflows  of  capital,  something  to  which  our  economy  is  prone.  We  have 
made  good  progress  in  this  regard  in  the  past  10  years,  with  gross  gold  and  foreign 
exchange reserves increasing from US$8 bn in June 2003, to current levels of US$47 bn. 
Net reserves increased from US$1 bn to US$45 bn over the same period. During the past 
financial year, most of the moves in the level of reserves were a result of valuation changes 
relating to fluctuations in the gold price and exchange rate movements. Direct accumulation 
was limited given the weakening of the rand over the period. However, our responsibility for 
managing these reserves has impacted significantly on the profitability of the Bank. 
The financial statements presented to you today show that the Bank has recorded a loss for 
the  third  consecutive  year.  For  the  2012/13  financial  year,  a  loss  of  R1,5  billion  was 
recorded,  compared  with  R491  million  in  the  previous  financial  year.  It  is  important  to 
elaborate on the nature of these losses, as they arise due to the unique nature of a central 
bank.  The  structure  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet  is  intrinsically  linked  to  the  diverse 
responsibilities of a central bank. As has been elaborated in a recent paper published by the 
Bank for International Settlements, central banks pursue national welfare and not profits. It 
follows therefore that profitability is not necessarily a good guide for measuring success, and 
a focus on profitability can lead to sub-optimal policies for the country as a whole. The Bank’s 
activities and financial results should therefore be seen in a broader context and not within 
the artificial narrow confines of its balance sheet. 
The  major  source  of  our  losses  emanate  from  our  accumulation  and  holding  of  foreign 
exchange reserves. When the Bank purchases foreign exchange, it injects rand liquidity into 
the  market.  Unless  we  neutralise  this  liquidity  increase,  it  could  have  inflationary 
consequences.  There  are  a  variety  of  ways  that  we  can  do  this  through  our  open  market 
operations,  for  example  through  foreign  exchange  swap  transactions,  conducting  reverse 
repurchase transactions, or the issuing of Reserve Bank debentures. This process is known 
as sterilisation. However, while we are paying around 5 per cent (linked to the current repo 
rate) on these transactions, we earn very little on our holding of foreign exchange reserves. 
This  is  because  the  ongoing  global  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in  abnormally  low  interest 
rates in the advanced economies. And it is the currencies of these countries that are held as 
our reserves. 
The cost of sterilisation and the low returns on foreign currency holdings continue to impact 
the  financial  results  of  the  Bank.  The  income  of  the  Bank  is  mainly  derived  from  foreign 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investments  and,  due  to  the  low-yielding  environment  this  was  insufficient  to  cover  the 
operational  costs  of  the  Bank.  In  addition,  the  total  income  of  the  Bank  decreased  by 
R282 million compared with the previous year, mainly due to a reduction in commission on 
banking services. 
Clearly we could improve our balance sheet by not accumulating reserves or by reducing our 
reserve holdings. However this would not be in the interest of the country as a whole. To the 
contrary, our reserves are still considered to be on the low side, and over time we will need 
to  build  up  these  reserves  further.  But  it  is  also  important  to  point  out  that  reserve 
accumulation has in fact been highly profitable for the country. As the rand has depreciated 
over  time,  the  rand  value  of these  reserves  has  increased quite  substantially.  However,  in 
terms  of  the  SARB  Act,  these  revaluation  gains  (or  possible  losses)  accrue  to  the 
government  through  the  Gold  and  Foreign  Exchange  Contingency  Reserve  Account 
(GFECRA),  while  the  current  low  return  and  cost  of  sterilisation  accrue  to  the  Bank.  As 
shown in the Annual Report, the GFECRA stood at R67,6 bn at the end of the 2011/2012 
financial  year,  growing  to  R125,5  bn  at  the  end  of  March  2013.  In  this  sense  the  artificial 
separation of these two components of reserve accumulation give a distorted picture, and we 
need  to  bear  in  mind  this  context  of  accounting  conventions.  We  have  to  take  policy 
decisions that are in the best interests of the country. 
A further contributory factor to the increased losses reported this past financial year relates to 
the Bank’s role as the sole issuer of currency in the economy. The previous banknote series 
had been in existence since 1992. A decision was taken to introduce a new series, and at the 
same time upgrade the security features of the banknotes in order to minimise counterfeiting 
risks. The introduction of a new currency series involves high initial fixed costs for a number 
of years as the stocks are built up, including buffer stocks. It is important to bear in mind that 
the notes and coin in circulation peaked at a level above R110 bn during the financial year, 
and increases at about 10 per cent per annum (compared to the peak in the previous year). 
In  November  2012,  the  new  Mandela  banknote  series  was  launched  resulting  in  a 
R819 million increase in the cost of currency in comparison to the prior year, recognising that 
as  we  knew  we  were  introducing  the  new  note  series,  production  of  the  old  notes  was 
deliberately kept to the minimum required so that we could draw down on the buffer stocks. 
In  summary,  the  losses  experienced  by  the  Bank  since  2010  are  not  a  reflection  of  bad 
management  or  poor  budget  controls,  but  are  the  result  of  the  exceptionally  low  foreign 
yields and the cost of issuing the new currency series. We are not driven by a profit motive 
and the losses arise from us performing our functions in the interest of the economy. But at 
the  same  time  we  cannot  be  complacent  and  use  this  as  an  excuse  for  uncontrolled 
expenditure.  We  therefore  remain  committed  to  containing  our  costs  and  maximising 
operational efficiency. 
At this time we would normally have expanded on some of the questions raised during the 
shareholder  road  shows  held  in  Pretoria,  Durban  and  Cape  Town  on  10,  11  and  12  July 
2013,  respectively.  However,  the  questions  posed  this  year  were  either  specific  to  the 
persons attending the meetings or have been addressed in my earlier remarks. 
Unfortunately, this year’s shareholder road shows were not well attended and the Bank has 
decided  that  it  will  no  longer  hold  the  road  shows  in  Durban  and  Cape  Town  unless 
circumstances dictate otherwise. However, the road show in Pretoria will still take place prior 
to the AGM each year. The general information letters that are distributed to shareholders at 
least twice each year, will continue. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
