Loi M Bakani: Papua New Guinea’s economy and comments on the 
planned Sovereign Wealth Fund 
Address  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  to  the  2012 
Papua New Guinea Advantage Summit, an International Investment Summit on Papua New 
Guinea, Port Moresby, 9 September 2013. 
 Acknowledgments  
The organizers entitled my presentation as “economic briefing” and asked me to touch upon 
the  “Sovereign  Wealth  Fund”.  I  will  do  my  best  in  the  time  allotted  to  me,  to  cover  both 
subjects and more.  
I will commence with the subject of Inflation:  
As you might know, the Bank of Papua New Guinea’s (the Bank) main role and objective, as 
is the case with many Developed Countries Central Banks, is “Price Stability”. Only after this 
objective is achieved, and subjected to it “to promote macro-economic stability and economic 
growth in Papua New Guinea”. In the last four years 2009–2012, the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea  achieved  its  primary  and  secondary  objectives,  far  beyond  expectations.  Inflation 
was on the average 6.4% per annum. Given the very high economic growth, as measured by 
the real increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of 9.5% in the same period, the inflation 
outcome is at the low end of our projections and expectations.  
The outcome we are still trying to fully understand is the very low inflation in 2012, of 2.2%. 
This trend continues in 2013 with inflation of 1.6% in the March quarter and 0% in the June 
quarter, in spite of the devaluation of the Kina since the last quarter of 2012. In the past, our 
analysis showed that the devaluation was one of the main causes of inflation. It may seem 
that the effect of kina devaluation is offset by low imported inflation because of low inflation in 
our  major  trading  partner  countries  and  slow  down  in  capital  inflow,  and  could  be  a 
measurement issue.  
At the present the Bank’s projections show that inflation in 2013 will be around 5.5%. The 
Bank’s assessment and analysis shows that the projection is on the high side. I state with 
confidence that, “Price Stability”, will be achieved.  
The second subject of my presentation is on GDP growth:  
As stated above, GDP growth in the last four years was 9.5%. Present projections are for a 
5.2% growth in 2013. This projection which, in my view is on the low side, means that in the 
five years 2009 to 2013 average GDP growth will be 9%. There is no question that it is one of 
the highest growth rates in the world.  
We  can  without  hesitation  define  Papua  New  Guinea  as  a  Very  High  Growth,  Small 
Emerging Market Economy. With the commencement of the operation of the LNG project in 
2014,  Papua  New  Guinea  has  a  huge  potential  to  continue  and  grow  at  high  rates  in  the 
future.  
Why do I consider the projected GDP growth for 2013 to be on the low side? It will all depend 
on the implementation of the Government’s Expenditure Plan (Appropriation Act) in the 2013 
and future budgets. Based on the fact that the PNG LNG Project construction is scaling down 
in  2013,  and  will  end  in  early  2014,  the  Government  decided  to  present  an  expansionary 
budget with a substantial deficit of K2.5 billion or around 7.1% of GDP.  
The guiding principles were:  
1.  
2.  
Free education;  
Free basic health services;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Infrastructure development;  
Rural development projects; and  
Law and order.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
The  overall  policy  stance  of  the  Government  of  providing  free  education,  free  health  that 
goes hand in hand with clean water and sewerage systems, law and order and infrastructure 
development  is  right  and  commendable.  To  turn  Papua  New  Guinea  from  a  low  income 
developing economy, to a medium to high income developing one, we will need a healthy 
and  better  educated  population,  in  which  individual  safety  and  security  is  granted.  For  the 
produce of our rural population to reach the markets, we will have to have usable transport 
infrastructure  of  roads,  ports  and  jetties,  airports,  coastal  shipping  as  well  as  power  and 
telecommunication.  
In this respect the utilization of the machinery and equipment and highly trained man power 
used to develop the LNG project, for national and rural infrastructure development is a top 
priority.  The  Government  must  take  the  lead  role  in  the  detailed  planning,  issue  of  the 
tenders and awarding of contracts, to ensure that the implementation of these developments 
are done in the most efficient and productive way.  
The  allocation  of  K10  million  to  each  district  has  to  be  used  to  develop  the  rural 
infrastructures  such  as  feeder  roads,  class  rooms,  health  clinics,  police  stations,  while  the 
National  Government  takes  responsibility  for  the  national  roads,  communication,  power, 
airfields,  ports  and  jetties,  coastal  shipping  and  other  infrastructure.  A  combined  plan  and 
effort will turn rural Papua New Guinea around, and improve the livelihoods for 80% of the 
population.  
The Government has to plan in great detail and professionally the pace of implementation. 
The decisions it took are very wide ranging, complex and very costly. It has to ensure that 
the very large amounts of resources that were allocated to each of the above tasks are used 
efficiently, and under close scrutiny and control.  
The  Government  is  aware  that  its  2013  expenditure  plan  can  be  funded  from  domestic 
financial resources. This will result in all of it, excluding some minor import components of 
fuel, spare parts and some planning will be accounted for as contribution to domestic GDP. If 
things  will  materialize  as  planned,  then  GDP  growth  will  be  substantially  higher  from  the 
5.2% projected, and closer to the five year average growth of 9%.  
The Government has to plan in great detail and professionally the pace of implementation. 
The  decisions  it  took  are  very  wide  ranging,  complex  and  costly.  It  has  to  ensure  that  the 
very large amounts of resources that will have to be allocated to each of the above tasks are 
used efficiently, and under close scrutiny and control.  
I recommend that, only after all the plans and safe guards are in place, the resources should 
be released. Otherwise we will repeat the misallocations and misuse of funds of the recent 
years from the public funds.  
Another  policy  I  advocate  from  the  day  I  was  appointed  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  is  the 
development of the agriculture sector.  
Eighty  percent  of  our  population  are  subsisting  and  earning  their  living  in  the  formal  and 
informal agriculture sector. We have an abundance of very fertile land, no shortage of water 
resources, excellent climatic conditions, and many under employed people in the rural areas. 
Therefore, in the medium term, the industry that can provide a source of income and improve 
the  standard  of  living, of  the  great  majority  of  the  population  is  the  agriculture  sector.  The 
agriculture  export  industries  like  oil  palm,  cocoa,  coffee,  rubber,  tea  and  coconut  are  just 
some of the commodities that, if the right structures will be put in place, they can serve the 
purpose  of  providing  productive  employment  and  income  to  the  rural  majority.  Given  the 
world  shortage  of  food  and  the  ever  increasing  prices  of  food  products  in  recent  years, 
Papua New Guinea can become the food basket of the Pacific and beyond. The Government 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
should develop an incentive framework that encourages investment in the agriculture sector, 
to replace imports, enhance and encourage exports of food products.  
The most effective way of counter-acting the “Dutch Disease” phenomena is by developing 
the  traditional  industries.  No  question  that  in  Papua  New  Guinea  agriculture  will  be  the 
preferred industry to concentrate our efforts and focus.  
Given  that  the  resources  are  available,  and  the  production  technologies  are  simple,  the 
development is not hard to come by. Papua New Guineans are farming their land for many 
generation,  and  achieving  results  in  agriculture  can  be  realized  relatively  in  a  short  time. 
Once the education system will progress and the population’s technical skills will improve, 
the development of more sophisticated industries can be encouraged and incentivized by the 
Government.  
As requested by the organizers, I will make some short comments on the planned Sovereign 
Wealth Fund (SWF). Because of some legislative problems, a new Sovereign Wealth Fund 
Organic Law was drafted. I am very comfortable with the new Organic Law because it meets 
the internationally recommended Santiago Principles of Governance and Management.  
The objectives as stated in the SWF Organic Law and Act are:  
I quote from the new Act;  
The objectives for which the SWF is established are that it: 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
supports the long-term social and economic development objectives of the State;  
provides a means of saving for future generations; and  
facilitates  the  macroeconomic  stabilisation  of  the  Papua  New  Guinea  budget  and 
economy.  
These  objectives  may  from  time  to  time  be  further  defined  by  a  Constitutional  Law  or  a 
Regulation.  
I am in full agreement with the funds that will be established:  
I quote from the new Act;  
The SWF shall comprise: 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
a Sub-Fund to be known as the “Sovereign Wealth Fund Development Fund”;  
a Sub-Fund to be known as the “Sovereign Wealth Fund Futures Fund”;  
a Sub-Fund to be known as the “Sovereign Wealth Fund Stabilisation Fund;  
a Sub-Fund to be known as the “Sovereign Wealth Fund Management Fund; and  
such  other  Sub-Funds  as  may  be  provided  for  by  a  Constitutional  Law  or  by  a 
Regulation.  
The funds will be domestically managed and off shore invested. My assessment is that after 
several  iterations  we  reached  a  state,  in  which  it  will  be  of  great  value  in  stabilizing  the 
economy and preventing the “Dutch Disease” phenomena from occurring, and if it does, to 
counter act it.  
I will touch on two very important initiatives by the Bank of Papua New Guinea. Those are in 
my domain and very dear to me.  
The  Bank,  in  collaboration  with  the  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Program,  held  a  two  day 
workshop  on  the  22nd  and  23rd  of  August  to  discuss  the  Financial  Service  Sector 
Assessment report. The report identified gaps and issues as to why 85% of the population 
continues to be unbanked. We are currently formulating the “National Strategies on Financial 
Inclusion and Education”, with the aim to enable the great majority of the population to be 
financially literate and included in the formal financial sector. It was decided to establish a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Centre for Excellence in Financial Inclusion (CEFI) to be the national coordinating agent of all 
financial  inclusion  and  education  initiatives.  The  CEFI  was  launched  in  April  2013  and  its 
mandate approved by the NEC in August 2013.  
The Bank will also see to it that the payment system is low cost, efficient and provides all the 
necessary instruments that an advanced financial system needs. The new National Payment 
System is at an advanced testing stage and planned to go live toward the end of 2013. The 
objective is to achieve real time settlement of all payments and transfers carried out by and 
through the financial system in PNG.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
