Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Bank of Thailand’s policy direction in 2013 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Bank  of 
Thailand, Bangkok, 22 January 2013. 
 Honourable guests and members of the press, 
Thank  you  all  for  attending  this  annual  event,  in  which  I  would  like  to  outline  the  Bank 
of  Thailand  (BOT)’s  policy  direction  in  2013.  Throughout  history,  our  country  might  at 
times  be  faced with  economic  challenges  and  obstacles  of  different  nature  and  severity, 
but  the  BOT’s  mission  and  resolve  to  safeguard  Thailand’s  economic  and  financial 
stability  has  remained  unchanged  since  its  birth  over  70  years  go.  Today  our  country  is 
moving  into  an  era  of  ever-closer  linkages,  whose  scope  extends  well  beyond  the 
technology  and  communication  dimension.  It  involves  regional  economic  integration, not 
least  among  neighbouring  countries  or  what  is  collectively  known  as  the  CLMV  area. 
Within  our country  itself,  the  volume  of  cross-provincial  trade  and  the  number  of  SMEs 
outside  the  capital  have grown, suggesting that growth has been increasingly inclusive. On 
the other hand, the greater economic interdependence brought about  by  closer  trade and 
financial  integration  could  also  be  a  source  of  systemic  risk,  if  an  imbalance,  however 
small, was allowed to develop unchecked. 
The  BOT,  as  one  of the  nation’s  key  policy  makers,  strives  to  foster  a  sound  and  stable 
economic environment  that  enables  the  private  sector  not only to  grow,  but  also  to  retain 
sufficient  resilience  and flexibility  to  withstand  competition  and  uncertainties.  We  continue 
to  place  an  emphasis  on  promoting the global competitiveness  of Thai businesses, while 
ensuring the integrity of the economic and financial system as a whole, the very foundation 
of consumer and business confidence. 
The  key  challenge  this  year  for  the  BOT  and  other  policymakers  is  to  preserve  the  right 
balance of policy mix, which in turn demands both intra- and inter-agency cooperation. Our 
common  goal is to promote a sustainable growth path and ensure a high standard of living 
for all Thais. 
Economic developments and policy implementation in 2012 
Last  year,  the  Thai  economy  had  to  grapple  with  the  stagnating  global  economy,  volatile 
capital  flows,  and  challenges  in  recovering  from  the  flood  crisis.  Notwithstanding  these 
difficulties,  the  economy  proved  to  be  resilient  and  flexible  enough  to  withstand  various 
shocks  and  uncertainties.  Indeed,  robust  domestic  demand  has  become 
the  main 
engine  of  growth  amid  the  softening  global  economy,  helped  in  part  by  government 
stimulus  measures.  Overall  economic  activities  consequently improved, and I would like to 
thank all parties for their collective efforts. 
On the monetary policy front last year,  a greater emphasis  was placed  on risks to growth, 
which justified  the accommodative  monetary policy stance throughout 2012. The Monetary 
Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
total  of 
0.50  percentage  points. The  first  cut  took place  earlier  in  the  year,  and  was  designed  to 
help  speed  up  economic  recovery  after  the  severe  flood.  The  last  easing  in  the  latter 
part  of  2012  was  intended  to  provide  an  additional  cushion  against  the impact of global 
economic slowdown and to further bolster domestic demand to sustain growth momentum. 
These  policy  decisions  were  deemed  consistent  with  keeping  inflation  within  the  target 
range,  as  well  as  maintaining  the  overall  financial  stability.  In  fact,  the  first  joint  meeting 
between  the  MPC  and  the  Financial  Institutions  Policy  Committee  (FIPC)  took  place  last 
year,  where  the  two  committees  shared  their  perspectives  and  information,  as  well  as 
discussed  in  depth  potential  sources  of systemic  risk  that  could  arise  from  economic  and 
twice  by  a 
the  policy 
lowered 
interest 
rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financial  linkages.  Regarding  capital  flow  policy  and  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance, the BOT continued to relax regulations to  promote outward investment and foster 
more balanced capital movements. 
A  clear  lesson  from  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  is  that  a  good  conduct  of monetary 
policy alone  does  not  necessarily  guarantee  a  sound  and  stable  financial  system.  As  a 
result,  central  banks  around  the  world  have  stepped  up  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
supervision  of  financial  institutions,  improve  risk  management,  and  place  a  greater 
emphasis  on  monitoring  systemic risks. Last  year,  the  BOT introduced the Basel III capital 
regulatory  framework  with  focus  on  improving  capital  quality,  increasing  capital  base  to 
provide  cushion  in  the  event  of  a  crisis,  and  strengthening  risk  management procedures, 
especially in the realm of credit risks. These initiatives would further strengthen the stability 
of financial institutions,  laying the foundation  for stronger  financial system  and economy in 
the longer term. 
To  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  payment  system,  the  BOT  has  launched  the  Imaged 
Cheque  Clearing  and  Archive  System  (ICAS),  for Bangkok  and  its  vicinity  since  February 
2012.  In  addition,  the  Financial  Consumer  Protection  Center  (FCPC)  was  set  up  to 
provide  information  about  the  BOT,  to receive consumers’ complaints regarding financial 
services,  and  to  offer 
the  public,  all  of  which  have  been  well 
received. 
financial  education  to 
Economic outlook in 2013 
Looking  ahead,  risks  to  growth  have  declined  on  the  back  of  firmer,  if  moderate,  global 
recovery,  and  robust  domestic  demand  which  continues  to  be  the  main  growth  driver 
for  the  Thai economy. Private consumption  would continue to benefit from the first-car tax 
rebate program as well as the reduction in personal income tax which would take effect this 
year.  Furthermore,  private  investment  continues  to  expand  steadily  on  positive  growth 
prospects, post-flood reconstruction in some parts of the manufacturing  sector, and  various 
government  stimulus  measures.  Meanwhile,  exports  started  to  show  signs  of  a  broad-
based  recovery,  and  should  pick  up  pace  in  the  latter  half  of  this  year,  lending  an 
additional  support  to  growth  momentum as  the  effect  of  government’s stimulus  wanes. 
Inflationary  pressure  meanwhile  should  remain  contained.  The  impact  of  the  second 
minimum wage hike on inflation is  expected to  be  limited,  as  most  businesses manage to 
keep  a  lid  on  cost  via  increased  production  efficiency,  encouraged  in  part  by  a  highly 
competitive  goods  market.  The  BOT  will  however  continue  to  closely  monitor  any 
inflationary impact of the wage increase. 
Policy challenges for 2013 
While  it  may  seem  that  the  worst  is  behind  us,  one  must  continue  to be  vigilant  of  risks. 
It  is crucial  for  policy  to  be  forward-looking  and  proactive,  quickly  adjusting  to  changing 
environment and shifting challenges. As I have mentioned, the key immediate challenges is 
to  preserve  the  right  balance  of  policy  mix,  in  order  to  ensure  that  each  policy’s 
effectiveness is maximized and grounded on the basis of sustainable  economic  well-being, 
as well as safe and sound financial system. Toward these goals, the BOT has a number of 
functions to perform. 
Monetary policy and exchange rate policy 
The  overriding objective of  monetary policy  continues to  be the  safeguarding of  economic 
stability,  which  encompasses  the  dimensions  of  growth,  inflation,  and  financial  stability. 
This  year,  a key challenge  will be in striking the right balance between providing sufficient 
support  to  growth  while ensuring  that  financial  stability  is  also  preserved. In  particular,  a 
prolonged  accommodative  monetary  policy  may  pose  risks  to  financial  stability  if  it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
encourages  excessive  debt  accumulation,  or  induces overinvestment  in  risky  assets  as 
investors  search  for  higher  yields.  Financial  imbalances  or  a  bubble may  develop  as  a 
result, further complicating policy decisions. Thus, the BOT  will continue  to closely monitor 
credit  developments  and  household’s  debt  servicing  ability,  especially  for  the  lower-
income group. 
Another  key  challenge  will  be  the  management  of  volatile  capital  flows,  and  implications 
of  exchange  rate  movements  on  the  real  economy.  In  meeting  this  challenge,  the  BOT 
has  at  its  disposal  various  policy  options,  ready  to  be  deployed  under  different 
circumstances.  The  recently  announced  Capital  Account  Liberalization  Master  Plan  was 
aimed in part to encourage Thai companies to diversify their investments  abroad, including 
towards  neighbouring  countries,  and  operating  their  businesses  more  efficiently  using 
local  currencies.  The  initiative  would  help  foster  more  balanced  capital  flows,  and 
promote  financial  market  development  that  facilitates  the  regional  integration  under  the 
ASEAN Economic  Community  (AEC)  in  2015. We  will  continue  to  support  businesses  in 
strengthening  their abilities to cope with exchange rate fluctuations. 
financial 
recognized 
is  now  universally 
that  economic  growth  and 
Financial institutions policy 
It 
institution 
development  must  proceed  hand  in  hand.  The  development  of  financial  institutions  in 
Thailand  has  indeed  seen  a  significant  and  continuous  progress,  which  has  greatly 
helped support  economic activities  over  the years.  Still,  many  steps  must  be  taken  to 
further  enhance  the  financial  system  and  promote  a  more  efficient  intermediation.  To 
deepen 
financial  access,  the  BOT  will  cooperate  with  relevant  agencies  to  allow 
commercial banks and non-banks to offer microfinance services, under the business model 
appropriate  for  risks  and  behaviour  of  the  targeted  group. At  the  same  time,  it  remains 
our priority  to reinforce the stability of financial institutions by strengthening capital base and 
improving  risk  management, 
to  cushion  against  potential  shocks  under  adverse 
circumstances. 
This  year,  we  will  establish  a 
foreign  commercial  bank 
subsidiaries, with  a  view  to  enhancing  the  competitiveness  of  the  banking  industry  as 
envisaged  in  the  Financial Sector  Master  Plan  Phase  2.  Meanwhile,  a  guideline  will  be 
laid  out  allowing  domestic  commercial  banks  to  expand  and  integrate  into  the  Qualified 
ASEAN  Banks  (QABs)  network  under  the  AEC. This  integration  offers  an  opportunity  for 
Thai  banks  to  step  up  their  efforts  to  fortify  their  strategic  strengths  and  prepare  for  a 
fiercer  competitive  environment.  Stronger  institutions  could  seize  the  opportunity  to 
expand  internationally  and  diversify  their  risks.  A  balance  must  be  struck  between  the 
three  objectives  of 
increasing  financial  service  efficiency  and  access,  safeguarding 
financial system’s  integrity, and strengthening consumer financial protection. 
framework 
licensing 
for 
Payment systems policy 
The  priority  this  year  will  be  to  expand  the  coverage  of the  ICAS  across  the  country,  to 
speed  up the  provincial  cheque  collection from  3–5  business  days  to  1  business  day. 
The  initiative will  help promote  a more  efficient payment  system, enabling  fast, safe,  and 
secure  economic  transactions  as  well  as  promoting  a  substitution  of  electronic  for  cash 
payments. In  doing  so, the BOT  will  collaborate  with relevant  agencies  in  developing  the 
payment  infrastructures  that  support  not  only  domestic  electronic  payments,  but  also 
cross-border  ones,  which  require  risk  management  mechanisms  able  to  handle  foreign 
exchange settlements under different time zones, and a standardized  payment system that 
allows  international  connectivity  for  example.  These  undertakings,  in  turn,  would  lay  the 
foundation  for  more  efficient  intra-regional  trade  and  investment  within  the  AEC.  The 
challenge  for  payment  system  policy consists  of keeping  a  balance  between  encouraging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
development  for efficiency gain, and ensuring that there is adequate supervision in place to 
ensure a safe and sound payment system for Thailand. 
Conclusion 
I  believe that  Thailand has one of  the highest  potentials in  the region. Though there are 
challenges  ahead, opportunities  abound. The  BOT, as  a key policy maker,  will  endeavour 
to  implement economic  policies  under  its  purview  in  a  timely  and  judicious  manner.  We 
are  ready  to  work  with  all  parties,  public  and  private  alike,  to  create  a  supportive 
environment  conducive 
through  closer  policy 
coordination  among  all  relevant  agencies,  a  common  vision  for  the country will emerge, 
leading  ultimately  to  constructive  engagements  between  all  parties.  With  a  shared vision 
and  collective  efforts,  our  goal  of  long-lasting  prosperity  for  the  nation  is  not  beyond  our 
reach. 
Thank you. 
to  sustainable  growth.  I  trust 
that, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
