Gane Simbe: Financial inclusion in the Solomon Islands 
Speech by Mr Gane Simbe, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, on the 
occasion of the ANZ goMoney Launch, Honiara, 12 September 2013. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to take part in this event to mark the official announcement of 
the launch of ANZ goMoney or Mobile Money Banking service in Solomon Islands, which will 
go live on Monday 16th September, 2013. It is a historical event because it is the first mobile 
phone banking service to be officially launched publicly in Solomon Islands.  
On behalf of the Central Bank I congratulate ANZ on reaching this milestone.  
And  while  I have  this  opportunity,  I  as  the  Chair  for  the  Pacific  Islands  Working  Group  on 
financial  inclusion,  also  extend  the  Working  Group’s  congratulations  to  ANZ,  for  the 
successful  launch  of  ANZ  goMoney  in  two  countries,  which  are  members  of  the  Pacific 
Islands working group as well.  
Let  me  take  a  few  minutes  to  make  three  observations  why  we  at  the  Central  Bank  of 
Solomon Islands are excited about the launching of this service; and what we believe, means 
to the people of Solomon Islands, especially those in the rural areas.  
Firstly,  we  see  the  launch  of  ANZ  goMoney,  as  part  of  the  progressive  achievements 
towards  the  financial  inclusion  policy  that  the  Central  Bank  and  governments  present  and 
past; would like to see, being realized in the Solomon Islands.  
CBSI applauds ANZ’s active commitment to bring financial services to the people. ANZ has 
used many different models of financial services delivery to the rural populations: brick and 
mortar  branches;  use  of  Mobile  Banking  trucks  to  reach  the  rural  communities  and 
installation  of  solar  powered  ATMs  to  help  customers’  access  financial  services.  But  the 
operational cost of these models has been prohibitive and cannot be sustained. However, in 
recent years ANZ has  been active in financial literacy and is also member of the financial 
inclusion taskforce in Solomon Islands.  
We  are  excited  that  with  80  per  cent  of  population  now  having  access  to  mobile  phone 
networks services in the country, ANZ has taken this opportunity offered by the mobile phone 
network  infrastructure  to  introduce  ANZ  goMoney  using  the  branchless  banking  model. 
ANZ’s  appointed  merchants  and  agents  throughout  the  country  will  now  be  part  of  the 
financial delivery system in Solomon Islands.  
Then  secondly,  we  are  interested  in  the  launch  of  this  banking  service  because  of  cost 
savings the ANZ goMoney will give to ANZ’s rural clients. Many of our teachers and public 
servants living in remote parts of country have spent a good part of their income in travel cost 
and time wastage to access banking services. This wastage of money and time could end if 
the new service is available in their communities. The impact of such savings can benefit and 
improve the living standards of people living in rural communities.  
Thirdly, the launch of ANZ goMoney marks another challenge not only for ANZ but also for 
the  CBSI.  This  is  the  education  of  the  users  on  use  of  these  electronic  or  digital  banking 
services.  I  learnt  that  ANZ  has  already  embarked  on  educating  its  clients  ahead  of  this 
launch, but our people must be taught the values that they get from the use of these new 
financial service platforms. We want to encourage active use of the service (both customers 
and traders) to realise the benefits of capital investments.  
With  these  few  remarks  ladies  and  gentleman  once  again,  we  in  the  Central  Bank  of 
Solomon Islands congratulate ANZ on this occasion and we wish ANZ goMoney a successful 
launch on Monday, 16th September 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
