Miroslav Singer: Regulatory earthquake 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Miroslav  Singer,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the 
Basel  Consultative  Group  Workshop  on  the  impacts  of  Basel  III  on  emerging  market  and 
smaller economies, Czech National Bank, Prague, 26 August 2013. 
 Dear participants of the Basel Consultative Group Workshop, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  warmly  welcome  you  to  the  Czech  National  Bank,  which  is  proud  to  host  this 
workshop on the impacts of Basel III on emerging market and smaller economies. 
I  am  very  glad  that  my  institution  is  involved  in  this  workstream  because  I  believe  it  is 
important  for  emerging  economies  not  to  be  merely  passive  recipients  of  the  regulatory 
“earthquake” in the banking industry which is spreading from advanced countries. Emerging 
economies should not and cannot blindly adopt new regulatory measures, as their financial 
markets  have  their  own  specific  features.  What  is  a  priority  for  regulators  in  the  most 
developed  economies  may  not  be  a  priority  for  regulators  in  emerging  economies. On  the 
other  hand,  the  proposed  measures  within  the  Basel  III  framework  may  have  unintended 
consequences for these countries, so it is worthwhile either to be prepared for them or to try 
to mitigate them if they are negative. 
Let  me  start  by  underlining  what  I  consider  to  be  the  two  fundamental  difficulties  of  the 
current  regulatory  push.  The  first  one  is  of  a  general  nature,  while  the  second  lies  in 
differences in the relationship between the size of the financial sector and the size of the real 
economy in the most developed economies and the emerging ones. 
As to the general difficulty, I strongly believe that the world is becoming more fundamentally 
uncertain. Alignment and coordination of regulatory tools and policies can only take us so far. 
There is no guarantee that rules and harmonisation will produce the right outcome, that the 
new rules will be significantly better than previous ones, or that in the fundamentally highly 
uncertain world the “right” set of rules exists at all. Therefore, it is surprising to me that we 
are so focused on the design of the, hopefully, right set of rules and often also on limiting the 
space for their diversification. After all, diversification is a tried and tested strategy for dealing 
with  fundamental  uncertainties.  The  push  for  harmonisation  at  the  expense  of  space  for 
diversification is leading individual sovereigns to take a different approach, namely, that of 
insulation and buffering. This itself is not such a bad thing. After all, taking as a benchmark 
the maritime world, in which the rules of shipbuilding are fundamentally clearer, more certain 
and  more  effective  than  the  current  rules  of  financial  market  regulation,  big  ships  are 
constructed  with  watertight  compartments  to  contain  any  flooding  if  the  hull  is  breached. 
However,  uncoordinated  insulation  hinders  free  trade  in  financial  services  and  flows  of 
financial  assets,  effectively  harming  the  common  markets  for  them.  I  believe  that  the 
marginal benefits of focusing more on space for coordinated diversification of approaches to 
regulation are now much higher than those of trying to find “the ultimately and finally correct 
set of rules” and imposing them on all countries. 
As to the second difficulty, it seems to me that the much smaller size of the financial sector 
relative  to  the  real  economy  in  emerging  or  less  developed  economies  has  profound 
consequences  for  the  optimal  mix  of  regulatory  rules  –  consequences  that  are  neither 
acknowledged nor discussed. To develop this idea, let me stress that most measures dealing 
with the crises of financial institutions in the most developed economies were influenced by 
the  fact  that  those  institutions  dwarfed  the  budget  revenues  of  the  relevant  treasuries. 
Consequently, their wind-down – with government guarantees for most of their liabilities to 
agents in the real economy, such as household or corporate sector deposits – would have 
led immediately to a serious downgrade of the relevant sovereign debt. But this is not the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
case with most developing and emerging economies and their financial institutions, whose 
size  relative  to  the  real  economy,  forex  reserves  or  budget  revenues  is  much  smaller. 
Consequently, the optimal mix of the pace of financial sector growth and the risk of financial 
sector crises differs significantly, allowing for faster growth even with higher risks. In addition, 
while  recognising  that  many  developed  economies  see  a  need  to  downsize  their  financial 
sectors and/or institutions, this need is not shared in the emerging world and less developed 
countries.  The  different mix  of  regulatory  rules  –  allowing  for faster growth  of  the financial 
sector in countries where its relative size is lower, even at the expense of higher riskiness of 
the  sector,  would  also  be  welfare  enhancing.  After  all,  generally  faster  growth  of  less 
developed economies resulting from faster growth of their service sectors – comprising also 
financial services – would foster growth of the most developed countries’ export sectors and 
consequently overcome the slack caused by their need to restrict their financial sector growth 
rates. It is quiet fascinating how this observation – which in essence merely follows some of 
the basic logic of the Ricardian argument supporting free international trade – is being almost 
completely ignored in the current regulatory earthquake. 
This  earthquake  is  mostly  due  to  the  financial  crisis,  which  spread  swiftly  to  the  world 
primarily from the US and later from the Eurozone. The emerging markets were hit as well, 
some  of  them  very  strongly,  but  by  and  large  their  financial  sectors  have  shown  stronger 
resilience  than  in  many  developed  countries.  This  was  also  the  case  of  my  country  –  the 
Czech Republic – as we have had no bankruptcy of any more significant financial institution 
and consequently no state aid in the financial industry for many years now. However, this is 
no  reason  for  complacency.  The  market  economy  has  always  developed  in  more  or  less 
deep cycles and it seems this will be the case in the future as well. It is our duty to assess 
the measures critically at present, as some of them may have adverse side effects and may 
in fact exacerbate potential crises. 
Your contributions are concerned with emerging market and smaller economies, i.e. EMSEs. 
This group of countries is a rather heterogeneous one. Under this heading one can subsume 
China  and  countries  from  Southeast  Asia  as  well  as  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean, 
countries  which  were  formerly  centrally  planned  economies  as  well  as  small  island 
economies  with  huge  financial  sectors.  Some  of  the  countries  have  their  own  currencies, 
some are members of currency unions and some, as is the case of the Czech Republic, are 
members  of  the  European  Union,  which  implies  a  tremendous  amount  of  regulatory 
measures  created  to  a  large  extent  out  of  their  control.  Furthermore,  it  is  obvious  that 
jurisdictions within this group differ substantially and will continue to do so. 
Despite  all  these  differences,  I  think  the  emerging  and  smaller  economies  have  some 
common  features  other  than  the  already  mentioned  most  profound  difference  of  relatively 
smaller sizes of their financial sectors and institutions. For example: 
• 
their financial markets are typically more volatile than those in advanced economies, 
and so is their GDP growth, which at the same time is higher on average than in 
advanced economies; 
these  countries  are  also  typically  experiencing  stronger  credit  growth,  as  their 
financial sectors are in the process of catch-up; 
they  usually  have  lower  credit  ratings  and  shallower  government  bond  markets, 
which in some cases implies a lack of high quality liquid assets, a lack of adequate 
collateral etc. Saying that, I must stress that this difference does not apply to some; 
my country is a testimony to this; 
the countries face a whole range of home-host issues, as many globally significant 
financial institutions operate branches or subsidiaries in those countries. 
   These  are  just  examples  of  features  which  could  possibly  interact  with  the  Basel III 
framework in emerging economies in a way that was not originally intended. As I see from 
the topics covered by your workstream, you touch on all these aspects, so there is a chance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
that the paper that will emerge out of your contributions and out of the discussions you will 
have today will be useful for regulators in EMSEs and for the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision as well. Hopefully, today’s workshop will help you with this. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that some of my more general comments on the deficiencies 
of the current regulatory “push” have not ruined your motivation for this meeting. I wish you 
every success in your work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
