Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity and prices 
and future monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Kanagawa, 28 February 2013. 
 I. 
Current situation of overseas economies and their prospects for a moderate 
recovery  
Easing of tension in global financial markets  
A. 
I would like to start my speech with a look at overseas economies. Developments in global 
financial  markets  continue  to  require  vigilance,  especially  in  terms  of  the  European  debt 
problem  and  the fiscal  problem  in the  United  States.  Nevertheless,  tension  in  the financial 
markets  has  eased  significantly  since  around  autumn  2012,  as  evidenced  by  the 
repurchasing of risk assets such as currencies of emerging economies and stocks and the 
selling of advanced economies’ government bonds and the yen, which had been purchased 
as  a  safe  currency.  Three  things  seem  to  be  at  work  in  the  background  to  these 
developments. First, in Europe and the United States, a decline has occurred in tail risks – 
risks with a low probability of materialization but a devastating impact if they materialize. This 
reflects  the  fact  that  in  Europe  the  possibility  of  disintegration  of  the  euro  has  fallen 
significantly,  supported  by  (1)  the  approval  of  new  disbursement  of  financial  assistance  to 
Greece, (2) some progress achieved in fiscal consolidation and economic structural reforms 
by  peripheral  European  countries  such  as  Portugal  and  Spain,  and  (3)  the  introduction  of 
safety valves such as the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). In addition, at the beginning 
of 2013 the United States avoided the “fiscal cliff,” a state in which the expiration of large-
scale  tax  cuts  and  substantial  fiscal  spending  cuts  threatened  to  occur  simultaneously. 
Second, investors’ confidence has returned due to expectations regarding policy measures, 
as central banks in advanced economies such as the United States and Europe as well as 
Japan have conducted aggressive monetary easing. Third, expectations have grown that the 
global economy will pick up, as the U.S. and Chinese economies have firmed since autumn 
2012.  
Gradual pick-up in overseas economies from a deceleration phase  
B. 
While  overseas  economies  remain  in  a  deceleration  phase  as  a  whole,  signs  of  a  pick-up 
have been observed. The U.S. economy has been on a moderate recovery trend. Business 
sentiment  that  had  been  cautious  due  to  concerns  over  the  fiscal  cliff  has  improved 
somewhat, and business fixed investment has shown signs of a pick-up. In the household 
sector,  firmness  in  housing  investment  and  car  purchases  has  become  pronounced  partly 
due to the effects of the decline in long-term interest rates. As for the outlook, the recovery 
trend in the U.S. economy is likely to gradually strengthen in the latter half of 2013, as the 
effects of expiration of tax cuts wane and uncertainties diminish in regard to fiscal spending 
cuts and the debt ceiling problem.  
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  remains  weak.  From  the  latter  half  of  2013,  however, 
economic activity is likely to gradually recover particularly in core countries such as Germany 
and  France.  This  is  because  (1)  disturbances  in  financial  markets  have  been  diminishing; 
(2) the  degree  of  fiscal  austerity,  while  continuing,  has  eased  somewhat;  and  (3)  the 
competitiveness of peripheral countries’ exports has begun to recover with the progress in 
structural reforms, including reductions in labor costs.  
The  Chinese  economy  has  been  generally  picking  up  since  autumn  2012,  as  the 
government’s expansionary fiscal measures centered primarily on infrastructure investment 
and monetary easing measures have been producing positive effects. The real GDP growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
rate in the January-March quarter of 2013 is expected to recover to the 8.0–9.0 percent level 
for the first time in a year.  
In these circumstances, looking at the outlook for the global economy as a whole, the real 
GDP  growth  rate  is  expected  to  accelerate  moderately  from  3.2  percent  in  2012  to 
3.5 percent in 2013 and 4.1 percent in 2014, according to the latest World Economic Outlook 
released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2013. If the global economy – 
led by emerging economies – registers growth rates as projected, the rates will be above the 
historical long-term average.  
II. 
Current situation of Japan’s economy and its prospects, with the key factor of 
a pick-up in overseas economies  
Leveling out of Japan’s economy  
A. 
Japan’s  economy  remained  relatively  weak  during  the  latter  half  of  2012,  as  exports  and 
production  decreased  significantly  due  mainly  to  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies, 
which in turn adversely affected domestic demand such as business fixed investment in the 
manufacturing  industry.  However,  recent  developments  show  that  the  pace  of  decrease  in 
exports has been moderating and production appears to have stopped decreasing. Based on 
these  developments,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  February  13  and  14, 
2013,  the  Bank  of  Japan  revised  upward  its  basic  assessment  of  the  domestic  economy, 
from  an  assessment  that  the  economy  remained  relatively  weak  to  an  assessment  that  it 
appeared to have stopped weakening.  
The leveling out of production is mainly attributable to three factors. First, the effects of the 
ending  of  subsidies  for  purchasing  energy-efficient  cars,  which  temporarily  exerted  strong 
downward  pressure  on  car  production,  have  fallen  off.  Second,  the  effects  of  the  recent 
developments  in  the  relations  between  Japan  and  China,  which  dealt  a  serious  blow 
particularly to exports of cars and related items, have eased somewhat. And third, the pace 
of  decrease  in  exports  has  been  moderating  as  overseas  economies  such  as  the  United 
States  and  China  have  shown  some  signs  of  picking  up.  Nevertheless,  while  exports  are 
showing  some  signs  of  leveling  out,  it  is  necessary  to  closely  monitor  whether  a  clear 
increase  will  occur  in  exports,  which  are  expected  to  become  the  driving  force  of  a  full-
fledged economic recovery. Consequently, uncertainty remains over how Japan’s economy 
will achieve a full-fledged recovery.  
B. 
Effects of fiscal policy measures, the depreciation of the yen, and the rise in 
stock prices  
temporary  boosting  effects  of  various  policy  measures.  First, 
Japan’s  growth  rate  for  2013  is  expected  to  rise  relatively  steadily,  in  line  with  the 
accumulation  of 
the 
implementation  of  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  2012  of  about  20  trillion  yen  is 
expected to have an effect, particularly in public investment, from the April-June quarter of 
2013 onward. Second, the recent developments in foreign exchange rates and stock prices – 
supported in part by expectations for the new administration’s economic and fiscal policies as 
well  as  for  the  Bank’s  enhancement  of monetary  easing  –  are  expected  to gradually  have 
positive effects mainly in exports and private consumption. Third, a front-loaded increase in 
demand prior to the hike in the consumption tax scheduled in April 2014 is likely to take place 
particularly in demand for housing and durable consumer goods.  
According to the median of the forecasts of the majority of the Bank’s Policy Board members 
in  the  interim  assessment  of  the  October  2012  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices, 
released in January 2013, the real GDP growth rate is expected to be 1.0 percent for fiscal 
2012,  accelerate  to  2.3  percent  for  fiscal  2013,  and  decline  to  0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2014 
even after accounting for the effects of the consumption tax hike. The year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  is  expected  to  rise 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
gradually reflecting an improvement in the output gap as a result of the economic growth rate 
continuing to exceed the potential growth rate. As for the median of the forecasts, the year-
on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  projected  to  be  minus  0.2  percent  for  fiscal  2012, 
0.4 percent for fiscal 2013, and 0.9 percent for fiscal 2014 excluding the direct effects of the 
consumption tax hike. Meanwhile, with regard to risk factors, attention should be paid to the 
prospects  for  the  European  debt  problem,  the  momentum  toward  recovery  for  the  U.S. 
economy, the possibility of emerging and commodity-exporting economies making a smooth 
transition  to  a  sustainable  growth  path,  and  the  effects  of  the  recent  developments  in  the 
relations  between  Japan  and  China.  With  these  factors  taken  into  consideration,  a  high 
degree of uncertainty remains concerning Japan’s economy.  
III. 
Downside risks to the economic outlook  
Weak recovery of overseas economies  
A. 
With respect to the aforementioned baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and 
prices in Japan, I consider the downside risks to be rather large.  
The greatest concern arises from the possibility of the deceleration in overseas economies. 
Although overseas economies are likely to gradually emerge from their current deceleration 
phase,  the  sustainability  of  their  recovery  will  likely  remain  unpredictable.  In  the  United 
States, housing investment and private consumption are expected to be the driving force of 
the pick-up in the economy in the short run; if the recent uptrend in long-term interest rates 
strengthens  suddenly,  however,  this  could  adversely  affect  funding  for  housing  investment 
and car purchases. Attention should also be paid to the risk that the persisting uncertainty 
over fiscal policy could exert downward pressure on the U.S. economy with an influence on 
public sentiment.  
With regard to the euro area, it is necessary to remain continually vigilant against the risk that 
financial  markets  could  suffer  renewed  disturbance  if  political  and  social  instability  hinders 
fiscal  consolidation  and  economic  structural  reforms  and  if  slow  progress  in  coordinating 
national interests hampers Europe’s ongoing integration such as the formation of fiscal and 
banking  union. In  addition,  since  banks’  lending  attitudes  have  not  shown  signs  of  easing, 
there is a risk that funding constraints could prevent the economy from emerging from the 
deceleration phase for a long time.  
As for China, the government’s policy stance is the focus of attention. Because aggressive 
fiscal  measures  adopted  after  the  Lehman  shock  left  many  issues  unresolved  –  such  as 
excessive  capital  stock  and  an  overheating  in  the  real  estate  market  –  China’s  previous 
administration  had  remained  cautious  about  public  spending  despite  a  decelerating 
economy.  The  current  administration  also  appears  to  be  maintaining  a  cautious  stance.  In 
addition,  the  Chinese  government  remains  vigilant  against  (1)  a  rise  in  the  inflation  rate, 
(2) an upturn in major cities’ housing prices, which the previous administration had sought to 
contain,  and  (3)  a  rapid  expansion  in  shadow  banking  such  as  trust  business,  where 
personal assets are flowing in to gain high returns. The possibility should therefore not be 
ruled out that the government will reverse its accommodative stance on fiscal policy. In terms 
of  monetary  policy,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has  indicated  its  intention  of  placing  top 
priority  on  controlling  inflation.  Moreover,  in  response  to  the  expansion  in  bank  lending  in 
January  2013,  the  authorities  have  reportedly  instructed  large  banks  to  constrain  lending. 
The authorities have stated their intention of strengthening risk management associated with 
shadow banking, in which case there is a risk that infrastructure investment and real estate 
investment will be significantly suppressed.  
Continuation of a large negative output gap in the major economies 
B. 
Aside  from  the  short-term  downside  risks  I  have  mentioned,  there  is  concern  over  the 
medium to long term: it could take time before the U.S. and European economies, as well as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  Chinese  economy,  overcome  the  aftereffects  of  the  credit  bubble.  Similar  to  what 
occurred  in  Japan,  firms  will  likely  continue  their  cautious  stance  on  employment  and 
households’ medium- to long-term income expectations are likely to weaken in view of the 
persistently  high  unemployment  rate,  causing  the  economies  to  lag  behind  in  achieving  a 
self-sustaining  recovery  with  an  expansion  of  employment  and  income.  What  I  wish  to 
highlight  here  is  that  since  the  Lehman  shock,  the  output  gap  –  which  indicates  the 
aggregate  demand  and  supply  balance  –  has  been  largely  negative  across  the  advanced 
economies.  According  to  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD), the output gap in the advanced economies, after having reached minus 4.0 percent 
of GDP in 2009, is expected to exceed minus 3.0 percent in 2013, at minus 3.3 percent. In 
the OECD’s projections for the output gap as of November 2012, the output gap of Japan is 
minus 2.1 percent for 2013, but that of the United States and of the euro area is substantially 
more negative.  
The large negative output gap in the advanced economies indicates a prolonged excess in 
production capacity and labor in the aftermath of the credit bubble, appearing in the form of 
balance-sheet  adjustments.  This  type  of  situation  causes  firms  to  post  lower  profits  and 
further restrain investment, and causes households to lower their income expectations and 
restrain  consumption,  exerting  downward  pressure  on  the  already-declining  inflation  rate. 
With this situation spreading widely in the major economies, which are Japan’s main export 
destinations, considerable uncertainty will inevitably remain over Japan’s export environment 
in the long run.  
Expansion of trade deficit and financial market stability  
C. 
With regard to the downside risks to Japan’s economy, due attention should be paid to the 
continued  trend  in  the  expansion  of  trade  deficit  and  its  effects  on  financial  markets.  As  I 
mentioned, Japan’s economic growth rate is expected to rise relatively smoothly for the time 
being, but the recovery of overseas economies could lack momentum. In addition, imports of 
raw  materials  are  expected  to  remain  at  a  high  level.  This  situation  could  cause  Japan’s 
trade deficit to expand. An expansion of the trade deficit causes the yen to depreciate mainly 
through  changes  in  the  supply-demand  balance  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  This  could 
then destabilize financial markets, because not only a buoyant economy and a rise in import 
prices but also a reduction in surplus funds in the domestic markets cause long-term interest 
rates to rise. Attention should therefore be paid to the effects of the expansion of trade deficit 
on financial markets as well as economic activity.  
Furthermore, long-term interest rates could rise if credibility of the conduct of fiscal policy is 
undermined. The rise in long-term interest rates could significantly affect Japan’s economy, 
and  depending  on  the  degree  of  the  rise,  could  also  affect  the  economy  by  greatly 
aggravating instability in the banking system. Long-term interest rates in Japan have been 
stable  so  far,  and  this  may  be  regarded  as  evidence  that  the  credibility  of  fiscal  policy  is 
being maintained. However, given that unexpected events may trigger sudden and nonlinear 
changes  in  market  sentiment,  as  experienced  with  the  European  debt  problem,  it  is 
necessary to continue careful monitoring to identify the changes as risk factors.  
Developments in prices and wages in Japan and their characteristics  
IV. 
Before  I  move  onto  my  next  topic  of  monetary  policy  conduct,  I  would  like  to  discuss 
developments in prices and wages in Japan, which are closely linked to my topic, and give 
my personal view on the background to the prolonged deflation.  
A. 
Historical developments in Japan’s inflation rate and a comparison with other 
major economies  
Since the 1980s, Japan’s inflation rate has remained at a consistently low level, unlike the 
case  of  other  major  economies.  According  to  the  OECD,  during  the  decade  from  1985  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1995, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI in the G-7 countries was 3.3 percent on 
average, while in Japan it was 1.4 percent. For the 15 years thereafter, from 1996 to 2011, 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI in the G-7 countries was 1.9 percent on average, 
while  in  Japan  it  was  minus  0.1  percent. The  difference  between  the  averages  of  Japan’s 
inflation  rate  and  those  of  the  G-7  countries  remained  mostly  unchanged:  approximately 
1.9 percent  for  the  first  ten  years  from  1985  and  around  2.0  percent  for  the  15  years 
thereafter, when Japan’s economy fell into deflation. This indicates that, during the 25 years 
as a whole, Japan and the other major economies generally experienced a long downtrend in 
their inflation rates.  
I  see  in  this  the  possibility  that  Japan’s  deflation  might  have  been  brought  about  by  the 
downtrend in global inflation.  
In  particular,  a  large  negative  output  gap  –  a  state  of  excessive  supply  –  continues  to  be 
seen  in  the  major  economies  since  the  Lehman  shock,  on  the  back  of  balance-sheet 
adjustments in the aftermath of the credit bubble. This has created an environment where the 
inflation rate is subject to downward pressure, and such developments overseas could also 
be considered to have exerted downward pressure on price developments in Japan.  
B. 
Major factor behind the difference between inflation rates in Japan and the 
United States: the service sector  
I  would  also  like  to  compare  and  examine  price  developments  in  Japan  and  abroad.  For 
example, if we compare price developments in Japan and the United States, in Japan the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was minus 0.2 percent on average between 1997 and 
2011,  while  in  the  United  States  it  was  2.4  percent,  resulting  in  a  gap  of  2.6  percentage 
points. The major factor behind this was a difference in the contribution of prices of services 
less  rent,  which  accounted  for  about  one-third  of  the  2.6  percentage  point  gap,  or 
0.9 percentage  point.  When  rent  was  included,  services  prices  accounted  for  almost  two-
thirds of the gap, or about 1.7 percentage points. In my view, the fact that services prices are 
typically susceptible to developments in wages may indicate the reason why Japan’s price 
structure is prone to deflation and suggest how deflation can be overcome.  
Relationship between the potential growth rate, wages, and prices  
C. 
As  seen  earlier,  according  to  the  OECD,  since  2009  –  when  the  negative  output  gap 
expanded  worldwide  due  to the  effects  of  the Lehman  shock  – the  negative  output gap  in 
Japan  has  not  been  particularly  large  compared  with  other  major  economies,  and  this 
suggests that the level of the output gap does not solely determine the level of the inflation 
rate. In considering the cause of deflation in Japan, attention should therefore be paid to the 
supply-side  factors,  such  as  the  rate  of  increase  in  labor  productivity  and  the  economy’s 
potential growth rate.  
In Japan, there is a relatively strong correlation between the potential growth rate per capita 
and medium- to long-term inflation expectations. This relationship is considered to reflect the 
customary  practice  prevailing  between  employers  and  employees:  when  medium-  to  long-
term growth expectations declined after the bursting of the economic bubble, Japanese firms 
tended  to  adjust  wages  rather  than  employment,  and  workers  tended  to  accept  such 
adjustments.  Although  Japan  has  experienced  prolonged  deflation  that  is  unprecedented 
among  major  economies,  its  unemployment  rate  has  remained  very  low  relative  to  other 
economies  and  the  employment  situation  has  shown  outstanding  stability.  In  the  United 
States,  on  the  other  hand,  employment  has  fallen  but  declines  in  wages  and  prices  have 
remained  quite  limited  amid  economic  deterioration.  These  contrasts  show  how  means  of 
adjustment in the labor market differ between Japan and the United States.  
With these points taken into account, an end to deflation and a further rise in Japan’s inflation 
rate require efforts to strengthen the growth potential to raise the economy’s potential growth 
rate and subsequently boost growth expectations. Such improvements are expected to result 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in  an  increase  in  services  prices  through  a  rise  in  the  rate  of  wage  increase.  However,  if 
wages  increase  unaccompanied  by  a  strengthening  in  the  growth  potential  and  a  rise  in 
productivity,  this  will  depress  corporate  profits,  which  in  turn  could  restrain  business  fixed 
investment and hamper steady economic growth. The possibility of a resultant deterioration 
in  the  employment  and  income  situation  is  a  matter  of  concern.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the 
inflation  rate  increases  while  the  growth  potential  does  not  strengthen  and  wage  inflation 
remains  unchanged,  the  general  standard  of  living  will  fall  in  real  terms.  In  sum,  the 
economic condition to be sought is a balanced increase in wages and prices on the basis of 
a strengthened growth potential.  
V. 
Current and future conduct of monetary policy  
Decisions made at the MPM held on January 21 and 22, 2013  
A. 
At the MPM held on January 21 and 22, 2013, the Bank decided to take additional steps to 
provide monetary accommodation decisively by introducing two measures: the “price stability 
target” of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI; and the “open-
ended asset purchasing method” for the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program). In 
addition to these two measures, another important decision was the strengthening of policy 
coordination  between  the  government  and  the  Bank.  The  Bank,  together  with  the 
government,  decided  and  released  “Joint  Statement  of  the  Government  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan on Overcoming Deflation and Achieving Sustainable Economic Growth.”  
The Bank had previously adopted a “price stability goal in the medium to long term,” judged 
to be in a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI, and set a goal at 1 percent for the time being. As I will explain in detail later, the 
Bank replaced this goal with the “price stability target” of 2 percent for the following reasons. 
First, there is an increasing awareness among the general public that even if the Bank were 
to use the term “price stability target” it would not conduct monetary policy in an automatic 
manner  in  pursuit  of  a  certain  inflation  rate.  And  second,  as  progress  is  achieved  through 
efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  –  such  as  those  by  the  government  to  strengthen  the 
competitiveness and growth potential of Japan’s economy – an increase is likely to occur in 
the inflation rate at which firms and households perceive price stability – the basis for their 
economic  activity.  There  is  uncertainty  with  regard  to  how  the  strengthening  of the growth 
potential  of  Japan’s  economy  will  proceed,  but  the  Bank  expects  the  setting  of  this  very 
ambitious target to have the secondary effect of encouraging efforts by a range of entities. In 
this  regard,  the  “price  stability  target”  of  2  percent  could  serve  in  a  sense  as  a  kind  of 
“slogan” for the general public in the revitalization of Japan’s economy.  
Moreover,  the  Bank  has  introduced  the  “open-ended  asset  purchasing  method”  without 
setting  any  termination date,  to  clearly  show  its  strong  determination  to  achieve  the  “price 
stability target” of 2 percent, which it considers will result in greater policy effects. Under the 
current purchasing method – which makes a commitment in terms of the future level of the 
total size of the Program – the total size of the Program will be increased to 101 trillion yen 
by  end-2013  from  65  trillion  yen  at  end-2012,  as  had  been  planned  earlier.  From  January 
2014  and  for  some  time,  the  Bank  will  purchase  about  13  trillion  yen  in  financial  assets, 
including about 2 trillion yen of JGBs, every month without setting any termination date.  
The Bank’s price stability target and its importance  
B. 
Next, I would like to discuss in more detail the inflation targeting system, looking at examples 
of  overseas  systems.  Article  2  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  Act  stipulates  that  “currency  and 
monetary control by the Bank of Japan shall be aimed at achieving price stability, thereby 
contributing to the sound development of the national economy.” This tells us that achieving 
price stability is the precondition for the sound development of the national economy and that 
the sound development of the national economy – which deeply impacts public welfare – is 
the ultimate target of the monetary policy conduct. Based on this thinking, in policy conduct 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
aimed at achieving the price stability target, it is most important to aim at contributing to the 
stability  and  development  of  the  economy  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  and  to  carefully 
conduct policy while monitoring the soundness of the financial system. At the same time, it 
must  be  noted  that  policy  conduct  aimed  at  guiding  the  inflation  rate  to  the  target  in  an 
automatic  manner  in  fact  entails  the  risk  of  hampering  medium-  to  long-term  economic 
stability.  
Flexible inflation targeting system  
C. 
The introduction of an inflation target by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in 1988 was a 
first  among  the  central  banks  of  the  major  economies,  followed  by  the  central  banks  of 
Canada  and  the  United  Kingdom.  In  New  Zealand,  the  central  bank  aimed  at  the  target 
rigidly  in  the  beginning,  but  later  it  was  recognized  that  this  rigidity  was  destabilizing  the 
economy. For this reason, the introduction of an inflation target was deferred by the central 
banks  of  Japan,  the  United  States,  and  other  major  economies  in  Europe.  Subsequently, 
however,  central  banks  adopting  an  inflation  target  have  made  adjustments  to  boost 
flexibility.  Many of the central banks have not specified the timing for achieving the target. 
Even  the  Bank  of  Canada  –  which  specified  the  term for  achieving  the  target  as  “typically 
within  a  horizon  of  six  to  eight  quarters”  –  allows  adjustments  in  the  length  of  the  term 
depending on developments in economic activity and prices to ensure the target’s flexibility. 
As  a  result,  central  banks  in  major  economies  are  at  present  conducting  policy  aimed  at 
achieving  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability  while  assessing  the  current  developments 
and  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  examining  various  risks,  including 
those  stemming  from  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances.  This  policy  framework  is 
often referred to as the flexible inflation targeting system. The price stability target adopted 
by the Bank of Japan is based on the same thinking. The Bank has clarified that it will aim to 
achieve  this  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  “at  the  earliest  possible  time.”  The  intention 
behind  this  clarification  is  that,  as  discussed  earlier,  in  achieving  an  inflation  target  it  is 
important – from the viewpoint of ensuring medium- to long-term stability of the economy – to 
secure  flexibility  in  the  policy  conduct  while  carefully  ascertaining  risks  arising  from,  for 
example, the accumulation of financial imbalances. The Bank will aim to achieve the target 
“at the earliest possible time” on this basis.  
In  other  major  economies,  central  banks  have  introduced  inflation  targets  with  the  aim  of 
containing  rising  inflation  and  reinforcing  their  independence  from  the  government  by 
ensuring the transparency of their policy conduct. The Bank of Japan, on the other hand, has 
introduced  the  price  stability  target  in  an  attempt  to  overcome  deflation.  This  point  differs 
from  the  inflation  targets  of  other  central  banks,  and  therefore  the  Bank’s  action  may  be 
regarded as an unprecedented endeavor.  
Votes at the MPMs held in January and February  
D. 
So far, I have explained the decisions made at the MPM held on January 21 and 22, 2013. At 
the meeting, I voted against the introduction of the price stability target of 2 percent in terms 
of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. The main reasons for my vote have already 
been outlined in the minutes of the MPM, which were released on February 19. Although my 
remarks here will thus repeat them, I would like to briefly review the three reasons outlined in 
the minutes. First, while the inflation rate consistent with sustainable price stability pursued 
by the Bank is considered to be largely affected by the general public’s current perception of 
price  developments,  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year rate  of  change  in the  CPI  had 
rarely  been  achieved  in  the  past  two  decades,  and  based  on  the  general  public’s  current 
perception of price developments that is built on such past experience, the 2 percent inflation 
rate  is  considerably  higher  than  the  inflation  rate  that  is  considered  at  this  point  to  be 
consistent  with  sustainable  price  stability.  Second,  this  suggested  that,  even  if  the  central 
bank were to set 2 percent inflation as a target, this alone is highly unlikely to substantially 
influence 
toward 
strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy are essential in order to achieve the 
inflation  expectations.  Third,  efforts  by  a  wide  range  of  entities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
2 percent target, but if the 2 percent target were set before such efforts made progress and 
the effects of these efforts were confirmed, this could impair the credibility of monetary policy 
due  to  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  achievement  of  the  target.  For  these  reasons,  I 
judged  that  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  do  its  utmost  to  achieve  the  target  of  1  percent  in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for the time being would further enhance 
the policy effects and be more appropriate in the current situation.  
Subsequently, at the MPM held on February 13 and 14, I voted for the public statement that 
included the following sentence: “the Bank has set the price stability target at 2 percent in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI.” I still hold the view that it is not an easy 
task to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. Neither is there a significant change in 
the general public’s perception of price developments at present. However, in line with the 
recognition that a range of entities, including the government and the private sector, will fulfill 
their respective roles to overcome deflation, I considered that financial market developments 
after the introduction of the price stability target of 2 percent appeared to reflect expectations 
for  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  and  the  government’s  various  policy  measures,  and  that  it 
was  important  to  further  increase  credibility  regarding  the  Bank’s  decision  on  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent from the viewpoint of overcoming deflation. While monitoring the 
effects  of  monetary  policy  and  their  spread  through  the  economy,  the  Bank  will  conduct 
policy aimed at achieving this target in a responsible manner, by carefully communicating its 
policy  intentions  and  considering  a  decisive  action  for  additional  monetary  easing  as 
necessary.  
The Bank’s policy stance on achieving the 2 percent price stability target  
E. 
In  my  opinion,  the  Bank’s  decision  to  introduce  the  open-ended  asset  purchasing  method 
with the aim of achieving the 2 percent price stability target indicates that asset purchases 
through  market  operations  will  continue  to  form  the  core  of  the  Bank’s  policy  to  enhance 
monetary  easing.  Specifically,  this  decision  is  based  on  the  idea  that  the  Bank  will  give 
greater consideration to producing policy effects by affecting market prices, which is what the 
comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy  has  been  aiming  for.  This  means  encouraging  a 
decline in longer-term interest rates and a reduction in risk premiums and thereby ensuring 
financial conditions that allow firms and households to raise funds at low cost.  
There  seems  to be  a  range  of  views  in  financial  markets  currently  on  the feasibility  of  the 
2 percent price stability target. If any doubt arose in the markets over the Bank’s stance on 
achieving the target, this could reduce the policy effects. Therefore, with a view to avoiding 
such a situation and continuing to clearly show the Bank’s strong determination to achieve 
the  target,  it  is  important  to  steadily  conduct  asset  purchases  under  the  Program  in  a 
sustainable  manner  and  thereby  produce  the  intended  policy  effects.  In  this  regard,  I  will 
discuss 
the  Program; 
strengthening  coordination  with  the  government  and  maintaining  fiscal  consolidation;  and 
communication to the public to gain understanding of the Bank’s policy intention.  
the  amount  outstanding  of 
three  points:  steadily 
increasing 
Issues regarding the operation of the asset purchase program  
F. 
First, let me mention an issue concerning the payment of interest under the complementary 
deposit facility, or the payment of interest on excess reserve balances of financial institutions’ 
current  accounts  at  the  Bank.  This  issue  needs  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that 
undersubscription  –  that  is,  aggregate  bids  falling  short  of  the  Bank’s  offers  –  has  been 
occurring  frequently  in  the  fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral 
since  the  turn  of  the  year.  Generally  speaking,  as  the  degree  of  monetary  easing  is 
enhanced, financial institutions’ demand for liquidity will be met sufficiently, thereby reducing 
their  need  for  funds  provided  by  the  Bank;  consequently  market  participants  will  have  a 
reduced  incentive  to  submit  bids  for  the  Bank’s  market  operations.  Moreover,  the  bidding 
activity  for  market  operations  is  affected  by  not  only  the  supply  and  demand  conditions  of 
market participants’ funds but also various events and speculation in the markets. Therefore, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
with regard to financial institutions’ current accounts held at the Bank, the balances of which 
change  along  with  the  Bank’s  asset  purchases,  careful  deliberation  is  necessary  in 
discussing  the  lowering  or  the  abolishment  of  the  payment  of  interest  on  excess  reserve 
balances  of  the  current  accounts.  Since  such  a  move  would  affect  financial  institutions’ 
incentive to hold excess reserves at the Bank, the costs and benefits should be assessed 
while taking into account the sustainability of asset purchases under the Program.  
Second, it should be noted that the remaining maturity of JGBs to be purchased under the 
Program  is  currently  one  to  three  years. This  takes  into  account  the fact  that the  average 
financing  term  used  by  Japanese firms  is  around  three  years. On  this  point,  some market 
participants, for example, have called for extending the remaining maturity of the JGBs to be 
purchased under the Program. Some have noted the importance of enhancing policy effects 
by encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates, and others have mentioned the need 
to conduct asset purchases under the Program smoothly and to ensure the sustainability of 
the purchases.  
And third, the Bank purchases risk assets – namely, CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded 
funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  –  for  the  purpose  of 
encouraging  a  decline  in  risk  premiums  in  the  markets,  while  paying  due  attention  to  the 
potential cost of impairing the Bank’s balance sheet. On this point, some market participants 
have stated that the Bank should increase the amount of risk assets it purchases.  
In this regard, in deliberating on the possibility of either extending the remaining maturity of 
JGBs  to  be  purchased  under  the  Program  or  increasing  the  amount  of  risk  assets  to  be 
purchased,  it  is  essential  for the  Bank  to  carefully  assess  costs  and  benefits  in  light  of  its 
policy  objective  of  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  while  giving  due 
consideration  to  the  two  points  mentioned  earlier:  ensuring  the  sustainability  of  asset 
purchases under the Program and producing the intended policy effects.  
G. 
Importance of strengthening coordination with the government and 
maintaining fiscal consolidation  
The joint statement indicates that the Bank sets the price stability target at 2 percent in terms 
of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, and under the target it will pursue monetary 
easing  and  aim  to  achieve  this  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  At  the  same  time,  the 
government  will  formulate  measures  for  strengthening  the  competitiveness  and  growth 
potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  and  promote  them  strongly,  as  well  as  steadily  promote 
measures aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure.  
In  order  for  the  Bank  to  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the 
2 percent price stability  target, it is important for the credibility of fiscal management to be 
firmly ensured in the financial markets. In this regard, it is worth noting the obvious: the policy 
coordination  mentioned  in  the  joint  statement  does  not  indicate  “monetization,”  that  is,  the 
central bank’s financing of the government’s fiscal deficit. The firm guarantee by law in many 
countries of a central bank’s independence is the result of bitter experience. Specifically, the 
underwriting  of government  securities  by  central  banks  during  wartime  led  to  a substantial 
expansion  of  government  debt,  which  became  a  burden  for  future  generations.  This 
underwriting  also  accelerated  inflation  and  destabilized  financial  markets  and  the  financial 
system, which seriously degraded people’s living conditions.  
Japan experienced sharp inflation immediately after the end of World War II, and in response 
the  yen  was  revalued  and  a  freeze  on  bank  deposits  was  imposed.  While  the  number  of 
people who actually experienced these events is gradually declining, one of the vital roles of 
a central bank is to continue to provide a warning about the dangers of monetization based 
on the lessons of history.  
In addition to preventing monetization at all costs, it is essential to avoid even the emergence 
of  mere  doubt  in  financial  markets  as  to  whether  the  Bank’s  action  could  be  considered 
monetization.  If  such  doubt  should  emerge,  the  credibility  of  fiscal  policies  would  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
undermined to a substantial degree and a fiscal crisis could occur, which in turn would inflict 
considerable damage on economic activity, together with a crisis in the financial system. It 
should be recognized that, in such a case, the quality of people’s lives would be significantly 
impaired.  
In addition to the joint statement in which the government clarified its stance of emphasizing 
fiscal discipline, the Cabinet decided the fiscal consolidation target, which aims at halving the 
primary  balance  deficit  relative  to  GDP  by  fiscal  2015  from  the  fiscal  2010  level  and 
achieving a surplus by fiscal 2020. It appears that these moves will contribute to containing 
the risk that concern over monetization will emerge in financial markets. If the government’s 
determination  regarding  fiscal  consolidation  spreads  further  in  the  markets  –  through  its 
communication about the consistency between the supplementary budget for fiscal 2012 and 
the  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  policy  as  well  as  the  path  to  achieving  fiscal 
consolidation  –  this  will  give  the  Bank  more  room  to  proceed  with  purchasing government 
securities  without  causing  concern  over  monetization.  This  would  also  help  achieve  the 
2 percent price stability target.  
H.  
Importance of communication to the public to gain understanding of the 
Bank’s policy intention  
With a view to strengthening the policy coordination between the Bank and the government, 
it is important to deepen the public’s understanding of the Bank’s thinking on the conduct of 
monetary policy and its specific actions. The Bank considers it essential to make its utmost 
efforts to this end. To my understanding, the issues that need to be explained thoroughly to 
deepen  the  public’s  understanding  are  as  follows.  First,  as  the  principle  of  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy, it is important that the policy should aim at achieving price stability, thereby 
contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy.  Second,  regarding  the 
effects  of  monetary  policy  on  price  developments,  I  continue  to  attach  importance  to  the 
transmission mechanism in which monetary policy influences demand, thereby encouraging 
the  improvement  in  the  output  gap;  in  this  regard,  the  transmission  mechanism  in  which 
monetary policy underpins inflation expectations is also noteworthy. And third, I consider that 
the medium- to long-term trend in inflation rates is largely determined by supply-side factors, 
such as the growth rate of productivity and the potential growth rate of the economy, or in 
other words, by the growth potential of the economy.  
Function of Policy Board members in making monetary policy decisions  
I. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I will briefly touch on the central bank committee system in 
which  monetary  policy  decisions  are  made  as  a  result  of  deliberations  among  committee 
members, rather than by any one individual. The Bank of Japan Act stipulates that the Policy 
Board  shall  be  established,  composed  of  nine  members  –  the  Governor,  two  Deputy 
Governors, and six Members of the Policy Board. It also stipulates that matters concerning 
monetary  policy  shall  be  decided  by  the  Policy  Board.  This  type  of  committee  system  is 
currently adopted by not only the Bank of Japan but also other major central banks. In his 
book  The  Quiet  Revolution:  Central  Banking  Goes  Modern,  Alan  S.  Blinder,  a  former  vice 
chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, positively assessed the 
advantage  of  group  decision  making  by  policy  committee  on  the  basis  of  certain 
assumptions. He pointed to two developments behind the spread of the committee system: 
the  worldwide  trend  of  increased  central  bank  independence  from  the  government;  and 
growing recognition of the system’s success in the United States and Germany, where it had 
been introduced as a pioneering effort. He also noted that decision making by members of a 
committee  could  help  avoid  certain  risks  associated  with  decision  making  by  a  single 
individual and thereby generate better outcomes.  
In the vote taking, each member of the Bank of Japan’s Policy Board is given an equal vote 
and makes a judgment independently. The split vote that occurred at the January 2013 MPM 
demonstrates  that  each  member’s  autonomy  is  respected.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
provisions of the Bank of Japan Act that the members of the Policy Board shall be appointed 
by  the  Cabinet,  subject to  the  consent  of  the  House  of  Representatives  and  the  House of 
Councillors, and shall not be dismissed against their will during their terms of office of five 
years, except in special cases such as becoming incapable of carrying out their duties due to 
mental or physical disorder.  
At the same time, we the Policy Board members conduct our daily duties by fully recognizing 
the  responsibility  that  we  –  who  are  not  chosen  by  election  –  are  granted  considerable 
authority  to  make  monetary  policy  decisions,  which  significantly  affect  people’s  lives. 
Therefore,  in  order  to  maintain  and  enhance  the  public’s  trust,  I  believe  that  it  is  vital  to 
further enhance the transparency of the conduct of monetary policy – that is, communication 
to  the  Diet  and  the  public  by  thoroughly  explaining  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. We are also listening with all due respect to the government’s and public’s 
opinions on monetary policy conduct and working to incorporate them into policymaking, and 
I regard today’s meeting as one such opportunity for this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
