Glenn Stevens: Economic policy after the booms 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Anika 
Foundation Luncheon, supported by Australian Business Economists and Macquarie Bank, 
Sydney, 30 July 2013. 
 Thank you for coming out to support the Anika Foundation1 once again. This annual occasion 
is one of our key fundraising events and your generosity is greatly appreciated. Today would 
not  be  possible  without  the  support  of  The  Australian  Business  Economists  and  the 
Macquarie Securities Group, and so on behalf of the Board of the Anika Foundation, I thank 
them for their continuing contribution to combating adolescent depression and suicide. 
Introduction 
We have for the past five years or so lived in “interesting times”. The shocks to which the 
economy has been subject have had larger magnitudes than had been the case during “the 
great moderation”. The world economy, our terms of trade and the international availability of 
credit have been a good deal more variable since 2007. For example, the variability of world 
GDP has roughly doubled – compared with that in the decade or so prior to 2007 – while the 
volatility  of  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  has,  on  some  metrics,  quadrupled.  In  response,  our 
interest rates and exchange rate have also been more variable. 
There  hasn’t  been  much  additional  variation,  though,  in  the  real  economy  or  the  rate  of 
unemployment. Depending on your preferred measure, the variability of real GDP has either 
increased a little, or declined slightly; a similar story holds for the unemployment rate. There 
was a pronounced cycle in inflation, peaking in 2008, but since then inflation has been much 
better  behaved.  This  suggests  that  the  various  policy  responses  and  the  economy’s  own 
adjustment capacity have generally been working as they should towards stabilising overall 
outcomes, in the face of the much bigger external shocks we have faced. 
That  said,  achieving  the  sort  of  growth  we  aspire  to  has  become  more  difficult.  Average 
output  growth  has  been  lower  over  the  past  five  years  in  Australia,  as  it  has  in  all  other 
advanced  economies. Moreover,  the  challenges  ahead  are  substantial  and  will  require  the 
appropriate  responses.  In  shaping  those  responses,  we  need  to  be  sure  to  draw  the  right 
conclusions and lessons from the experiences of recent years. In that vein, as I offer some 
remarks about the period ahead, I will also draw on those conclusions from recent history 
that seem pertinent. In so doing I shall be reiterating some themes I have touched on before, 
including at earlier lunches in this series. 
The resources boom 
It is now well understood that the “mining boom” is shifting gear, and that we are entering a 
new phase. 
The story of the boom has always had three phases.2 In the first phase, commodity prices 
rose to very high levels. As a result, Australia’s terms of trade rose to levels not seen in a 
very long time. These prices had a hiatus in 2009 with the global downturn but resumed their 
upward trend quite quickly. 
                                                 
1   See Anika Foundation. 
2   See Stevens G (2012), “Producing Prosperity”, RBA Bulletin, December pp 81–87. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  historical  context,  the  high  prices  have  been  quite  persistent.3  This  led  to  the  second 
phase,  in  which  resource  producers  ramped  up  their  investment  to  take  advantage  of 
demand for raw materials, in particular iron ore and natural gas, and to a lesser extent coal. 
Resource sector investment rose from an average of about 2 per cent of GDP, where it had 
spent most of the previous 50 years, to peak at about 8 per cent. That big rise is now over, 
and a fall is in prospect, with uncertain timing. It could be quite a big fall in due course. 
The third phase is now under way, in which we will see investment spending fall back, but a 
lift in volumes shipped of the various commodities. The latter has already started – for iron 
ore, volumes are rising at about 15 per cent per year – but shipments will probably increase 
further  yet  for  some  time  and  then  stay  high.  Shipments  of  natural  gas  will  not  start 
increasing strongly until 2015, and will probably have several years of very strong growth, 
and then remain high for a few decades. 
In that third phase, real GDP will get a lift. National income measured in current dollars will 
also get a lift from the higher volumes, but that is likely to be offset in part, at least, by lower 
prices.  The  lift  in  real  GDP  coming  from  this  rise  in  exports  will  be  driven  more  by  higher 
output per person; in fact, the level of employment needed to extract and ship the materials 
will be less than the level needed to build the capacity to do so. 
Let’s  be  clear  that  Australians  will  continue  to  benefit  from  the  higher  level  of  resources 
output  for  a  very  long  time.  There  has  been  a  large  lift  in  the  global  demand  for  natural 
resources that our country happens to have in abundance. Most people agree that the rate of 
growth  of  that  demand  will  be  lower  in  future  than  it  has  been  in  recent  years;  some  say 
much lower. But the lift in the level of demand we have already seen is permanent enough, 
and large enough, to have a quite persistent effect on our economy. Australian production is 
meeting much of the additional global demand for iron ore and, prospectively, natural gas. 
This will be at prices that, although lower than prices observed today, are likely to be higher 
than the average seen for many years up to the middle of the past decade. Even allowing for 
the  high  degree  of  foreign  ownership  in  the  resources  sector,  flows  of  income  accruing  to 
Australians, through a few different channels, will be high over a long period. 
The  end  of  the  second  phase,  the  investment  phase,  of  the  boom  is  nonetheless  quite  a 
challenging time. The investment spending by the resources sector will no longer be adding 
to growth in demand in Australia. In due course it will, instead, be subtracting from it. To be 
sure, a significant part of that investment spend has been supplied by imports, and to that 
extent its decline will affect imports rather than domestic production. But even allowing for 
that,  there  has  still  been  substantial  demand  for  Australian  product  and  labour  from  the 
resources sector, which appears likely to abate over the years ahead. 
Since we wish to see aggregate demand in the economy sufficient to utilise the productive 
resources  of  labour  and  capital  that  we  have,  this  means  that  we  would  like  to  see  a 
“rotation” to other sorts of demand as the resources sector demand slows. The “post boom” 
growth  story  of  the  economy  would  desirably  involve  stronger  expansion  in  some  other 
sectors, including those that have seen weaker than normal conditions in the past couple of 
years. 
It is reasonable to expect that there will be some pick-up in these other areas, for reasons I 
have  outlined  elsewhere.4  In  brief,  business  capital  spending  outside  the  resources  sector 
has been subdued; housing investment likewise has been on the low side. There is ample 
scope for both to rise. This is by no means a certainty though and while there are signs of an 
                                                 
3   At this point the terms of trade have fallen by 15 per cent since the 2011 peak (back to their 2008 peak!). 
Assuming  a  further  fall  of  15  per  cent  over  the  next  few  years,  the  terms  of  trade  will  still  have  a  10-year 
average level 50 per cent higher than the 20th century average. 
4   Stevens  G  (2013),  “Economic  Conditions  and  Prospects”,  Address  to  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia 
(Queensland) 2013 Business Luncheon, Brisbane, July. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increase  in  dwelling  investment  getting  under  way,  a  stronger  trend  in  non-resources 
business investment looks like it is a while off yet. 
For a benign outcome to occur, a few things need to be in place. Reasonable global growth 
outcomes obviously would be a major help. At this stage global growth is sub-par, though not 
disastrous, with most forecasters saying next year will be better. Most of them quickly add a 
long list of things that could go wrong. There is nothing we can do about that. 
The  second  condition,  which  we  can  do  something  about,  is  that  macroeconomic  policy 
settings  need  to  be  appropriate.  Fiscal  policy  is  in  consolidation  mode,  and  that  seems 
broadly appropriate. Monetary policy is, by historical metrics at least, very accommodative. 
The exchange rate has also declined since its recent highs, and doubts about whether it will 
play its normal role as a shock absorber have lessened of late. 
A  third  condition  is  that  Australian  businesses  need  to  be  internationally  competitive.  The 
exchange  rate  is  helping  here  but  productivity  and  cost  performance  will  also  be  key.  On 
these fronts, I think firms have stepped up their efforts considerably. 
This combination is a necessary, though not in itself sufficient, set of conditions for the sort of 
demand rotation likely to be necessary. 
The  fourth  ingredient  is  “confidence”.  It  is  somewhat  concerning  that  the  business 
community’s  confidence  has  been  quite  subdued  in  recent  times.  To  the  extent  that 
substantial structural change has been occurring, and there is inevitable uncertainty over the 
international outlook, it is quite understandable that some business segments have found the 
going hard and don’t feel very confident. Moreover, the phase shift of the mining boom itself 
is dampening confidence in some areas. 
That said, it would be good if there was a bit more confidence in the business community 
about  the  future.  Unfortunately,  it  is  not  a  straightforward  thing  to  turn  sentiment  around. 
There’s no such thing as the “confidence policy lever”. Rather, we have to rely on: 
 
 
 
All  the  more  reason,  then,  to  make  sure  that  the  accretion  of  regulatory  actions  being 
undertaken does not inadvertently make it harder for businesses to plan with confidence, to 
achieve better cost and productivity performance, or to take a chance on a new product, a 
new investment or a new worker. 
In the case of households, according to surveys sentiment is neither particularly weak nor 
particularly strong at present. It is reasonable to expect that households will play a role in 
driving  demand  over  the  years  ahead  –  and  in  due  course  that  will  help  to  lift  business 
confidence.  But  in  thinking  about  that  role  we  need  to  understand  the  ways  in  which 
household behaviour has changed. 
clarity of policy frameworks and objectives; 
consistent application of policies towards well-understood goals; and, 
attention to avoiding things that can dampen confidence unnecessarily. 
The credit boom 
The title of this talk, “Economic Policy after the Booms”, uses the plural quite deliberately. 
There were two “booms”. Before the mining boom, or at least before its full flowering from 
about the middle of last decade, there was an earlier boom. It was global, but Australians 
took  part  in  it.  I  am  referring  of  course  to  a  boom  in  credit,  which  saw  a  very  significant 
increase  in  borrowing  by  households  in  particular,  and  a  rise  in  asset  values,  especially 
dwellings.  This  was  associated  with  a  lengthy  period  of  unusually  strong  growth  in 
consumption. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This boom did not end in Australia as painfully as it did in some other places, but end it did. 
Consider  two  charts  I  showed  at  the  Anika  Foundation  lunch  two  years  ago  in  July  2011. 
These have been updated, and use revised data.5 
 
Graph 1 
Graph 2 
                                                     
5   The  level  of  household  financial  assets  from  June  2002  has  been  revised  almost  15 per  cent  higher  on 
average, predominantly reflecting upward revisions to estimates of households' holdings of unlisted equity. As 
a result, the debt-to-assets ratio has been revised lower by 0.8 percentage points on average. Trend growth in 
household  assets  was  also  revised  slightly  lower.  In  contrast,  growth  in  household  disposable  income  was 
revised slightly higher, leading to a small upward revision in the saving ratio in the 2000s. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It  is  even  clearer  now  than  it  was  two  years  ago  that  the  behaviour  of  households  has 
changed  in a  very  important  way.  Real  consumption  per person  had risen  faster than  real 
income per person for 30 years, from the mid 1970s until about 2005. (Only the last third of 
that period is shown here.) That changed some years ago now, and after a noticeable fall in 
consumption  in  late  2008  and  early  2009,  spending  and  income  have  grown  roughly  on 
parallel tracks. Since 2009, trend growth in per capita consumption has been about 1.4 per 
cent per annum, half what it had been from 1995 to 2005. 
One contributing factor is seen in the second of the two charts, where it’s clear why people’s 
sense of wealth has not been rising at anything like the pace that it had been up until the 
financial crisis. Financial assets have begun to grow again, since the share market has risen 
over  the  past  year  and  households  have  also  accumulated  other  financial  assets  such  as 
deposits.  But  the  value  of  non-financial  assets  in  particular  –  mainly  dwellings  –  is  lower 
today in real per person terms than it was five years ago. Total assets per person have risen 
at a pace of 2½ per cent in real terms since the middle of 2009, which is much slower than in 
the preceding decade, and even a bit slower than in the period 1975–1994. 
The slowdown in asset values has been associated with a lift in saving and a slower path for 
consumption,  which  has  had  important  implications  for  the  economy.  The  table  below 
suggests  that  slower  consumption  growth  is  prominent  in  explaining  the  slower  pace  of 
overall demand growth and output since the middle of 2007. 
 
Table 1: Contributions to Australian GDP Growth* 
Per cent per annum
4.1 
2.3 
1.1 
0.3
0.9
0.2 
0.9 
4.0
−0.2
3.7
1995–mid 2007 mid 2007–2013
2.9 
1.4 
1.1 
1.0 
0.1 
0.0 
0.6 
2.8 
−0.2 
2.5 
Domestic Final Demand 
Consumption 
Business Investment 
Mining 
Other Industries 
Dwelling Investment
Public Demand 
Gross National Expenditure 
Net exports 
GDP 
(*) Components are not additive given nature of the chain-volume series. 
Sources: ABS; RBA  
 
One’s assessment of prospects for consumption will be driven mainly by one’s assessment 
of the outlook for income, but will also be affected by expectations about asset values and in 
particular one’s view on whether housing prices are overvalued. Those who think they are 
will be drawn to the conclusion that a number of additional years of flat or declining real per 
capita asset values lie ahead, for non-financial assets at least; those who are not so worried 
about housing prices may expect that stronger growth, in real per capita terms, might occur. 
Either way, however, it would seem unlikely that we could bank on a resumption of sustained 
growth in assets, in real per person terms, of 7 per cent per year over the next few years. It 
follows  that  the  saving  rate  is  unlikely,  any  time  soon,  to  decline  back  to  where  it  was  in 
2005.  Average  saving  rates  well  above  that  earlier  level  seem  more  likely  for  some  time, 
even  though  there  will  presumably  be  cyclical  ups  and  downs.  While  current  saving  rates 
have been described as “high”, a look at longer-run history suggests that “normal” would be a 
better description. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Implications that might flow from these observations would include the following. 
First,  some  strengthening  in  consumption  from  recent  rather  subdued  growth  rates  is  a 
reasonable expectation, but we should not expect a return to the sorts of growth seen in the 
1995–2007  period.  Nor,  surely,  should  we  try  to  engineer  one,  at  least  on  the  back  of 
borrowing. Households continue to service their borrowings well – the household arrears rate 
is low and has fallen slightly over the past year – but we would be risking future problems 
were  we  to  see  a  big  run-up  in  debt  from  here.  This  does  not  preclude  prudent  levels  of 
borrowing by new entrants to the housing market, or by investors, nor does it preclude gains 
to  consumers  as  costs  are  squeezed  out  of  the  system.  It  doesn’t  mean  that  consumers 
won’t respond with their customary alacrity to new products offered at attractive prices. Trend 
changes in habits – more consumption of services and “experiences”, more online shopping 
and so on – will presumably continue. Moreover, factors that lift disposable incomes – such 
as higher real earnings on the back of productivity improvements, or sustainable reductions 
in taxes – could be expected to lift consumption on a sustainable basis. But we are unlikely 
to see a return to the earlier boom conditions. 
Second, all other things equal, interest rates are likely to be lower in such a world than they 
were  in  a  world  in  which  households  were  extending  their  finances.  This  is  a  global 
phenomenon, but it holds in Australia too. A higher desired rate of saving ex ante means that 
the return to saving will, other things equal, be at a lower level as the market clears. Those 
who  have  long  been  savers  no  doubt  feel  aggrieved  that  the  returns  they  have  earlier 
enjoyed  cannot  be  found  as  easily  now.  That  is  in  large  part  because  other  savers  have 
joined them and the market prices reflect that. Having said that, it is still possible to earn a 
gross interest rate on a bank deposit that is a bit above the inflation rate. 
Third,  a  desire  to  hold savings  in  a less  risky form  means  that  the  yield  give-up  to  hold  a 
safer asset is larger. The way this is usually expressed is that lower risk appetite, or perhaps 
more accurate assessment of risk that was there all along, means risk spreads are higher. 
Spreads are well down on their peaks reached at the height of risk aversion a few years ago, 
but do seem to have settled at a higher level than in the mid 2000s. 
Absolute borrowing costs for most borrowers are very low despite higher spreads, because 
the  return  on  one  of  the  least  risky  assets –  the  cash  rate  –  is  the lowest  for  50 years  or 
more. The market yields on government securities, the lowest risk assets of all, have likewise 
been very low. In other words, with many investors wanting safety, the price of safety has 
risen. It has to rise by enough to prompt at least some people to start to shift their portfolios 
in the direction of taking some more risk – by holding equities, physical assets and so on, 
though  obviously  we  don’t  want  too  much  risk-taking.  One  of  the  things  we  have  been 
watching  for  as  we  have  been  reducing  interest  rates  has  been  an  indication  of  savers 
shifting portfolios towards some of the slightly more risky asset classes, as that is one of the 
expected and intended effects of monetary policy easing. There are clearly signs of policy 
working in this respect, though not, to date, by so much that we see a serious impediment to 
further easing, were that to be appropriate from an overall macroeconomic point of view. 
Policy after the booms 
In the third phase of the “mining boom” and post the credit boom, our economic challenges 
are changing in nature. In the next few years our task will involve supporting, so far as it is in 
our power, a change in the sources of demand that affect the economy. As resources sector 
investment  declines,  other  sources  of  demand  need  to  strengthen,  but  in  a  way  that  is 
sustainable.  The  fact  that  consumption  is  likely  to  provide  only  a  modest  impetus  to  any 
acceleration  in  domestic  demand  suggests  that  other  areas  will  be  important.  As  I  noted 
earlier, at least some of the conditions are in place for stronger trends in dwelling investment 
and,  in  time,  non-resources  business  capital  expenditure.  And  exports  of  resources  will 
continue to pick up strongly. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But successful “rotation” of demand will probably also involve more net foreign demand for 
other Australian output of various kinds. Given that, the recent decline in the exchange rate 
seems to make sense from a macroeconomic perspective. It would not be a major surprise if 
a further decline occurred over time, though of course events elsewhere in the world will also 
have a bearing on that particular price. 
The conduct of monetary policy must, and does, take account of the various features of the 
environment we face. Calibrations drawn from an earlier part of history can’t be assumed to 
have the same reliability. Elements of the monetary policy transmission process are probably 
working  somewhat  differently  than  on  other  occasions.  To  take  one example,  the  fact  that 
policies in major economies have been at very unusual, or extreme, settings for some time is 
a complication because of the potential effects on the exchange rate – though, as noted, the 
exchange rate appears to have been behaving more normally of late. 
The fact that the rest of the world has had such low interest rates, that the desire for safe 
assets has been so strong, that the spreads between the cash rate and the rates that matter 
most  for  the  economy  have  widened,  and  that  people  have  sought  to  get  to  a  position  of 
lower leverage – all these have been important in explaining why the cash rate has been so 
low compared with what we had been used to until the mid 2000s. That this has occurred 
while we have had the peak of the resources investment boom is all the more remarkable. 
This has been guided by the flexible inflation targeting framework we have had in place for 
20 years now. This framework has prompted appropriate and timely action when needed. It 
has  seen  a  substantial  easing  in  monetary  policy  since  late  2011.  We  have  been  saying 
recently that the inflation outlook may afford some scope to ease policy further if needed to 
support demand. The recent inflation data do not appear to have shifted that assessment. 
More generally, the credible and sensible approach to policies is: 
 
 
 
 
to keep our eyes on the main objectives; 
to preserve sound frameworks; 
to act consistently with these frameworks and in ways that support confidence; and, 
to  keep  looking  for  ways  to  enhance  the  flexibility  the  economy  itself  has 
demonstrated in adjusting to the shocks of recent years. 
Failure  to  do  this  would  be  costly.  But  the  rewards  from  consistent  application  of  good 
policies are known, from our own experience, to be big, even if not immediate. Remembering 
that is the challenge we face. 
Thank you once again for coming along today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
