DeLisle Worrell: Growing the economy 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Barbados 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry’s Lunchtime Lecture, Bridgetown, 27 March 2013. 
 Barbadians can and must grow our economy, in order to continue the improvement in the 
quality of life for our citizens, to provide job opportunities for our enterprising youth, and to 
enrich  our  culture  and  society.  Growth  must  be  sustainable,  by  which  I  mean  that  it  must 
yield lasting benefit. The jobs we create should be permanent, the additional income we earn 
must  enable  us  to  buy  more  goods  and  services  this  year,  and  the  next,  and  the  year 
following. That means we must fuel the growth of our economy by increasing the amount of 
foreign exchange we earn each year. 
The point of departure for strategising about growth is the question: how may we earn more 
foreign exchange from tourism, international business services and agro processing and how 
may we economise on the use of the foreign exchange we earn? Let us together examine 
what we know about these questions. 
We  must  become  more  competitive,  not  by  selling  our  services  cheaply,  but  by  reducing 
bureaucratic inefficiency, improving access to finance, and upgrading the national work ethic. 
The  World  Competitiveness  index,  compiled  by  the  Global  Forum,  offers  guidance  in  this 
regard. These three items are the issues most often cited as obstacles to doing business in 
Barbados.  Significant  gains  in  these  areas  will  come  with  commitment  to  excellence, 
attention to detail, persistence, and intolerance of substandard service. The institutions are in 
place  to  assist  us  in  reaching  the  goal:  the  National  Initiative  for  Service  Excellence,  the 
Productivity Council and the Public Sector Reform Unit, among others. We must find ways to 
make  them  work  effectively.  Central  Bank  has  made  a  commitment  to  ourselves  and  the 
nation to lead the way.  I take this opportunity to invite everyone  who uses our services to 
hold  us  to  an  international  standard  of  high  performance.  Always  ensure  that  we  let  you 
know, up front, when you should expect a response from us or completion of your business 
with us. If we are excessively or persistently tardy, I am expecting you to be in touch with me 
directly. 
We  should  refine  tourism  marketing  strategies.  Central  Bank  is  assisting  this  effort  by 
researching local tourism markets within our major source countries, among other studies. 
This is but one element in the multifaceted strategy now underway, by government and the 
private  sector,  to  renew  the  growth  of  tourism.  As  befits  the  country’s  leading  foreign 
exchange  earner,  there  is  a  wealth  of  institutional  arrangements  for  collaboration  in  the 
sector,  and  government  agencies  and  tourism  providers  should  seek  ways  to  make  this 
cooperation more fruitful. 
Among other strategies for tourism, we should continue to enrich the menu of choices open 
to the visitor. Central Bank is proud of the restoration of the Masonic Lodge, and the museum 
of  commerce,  education  and  freemasonry  that  is  being  commissioned  will  enrich  the 
Bridgetown  Heritage  experience.  We  should  invest  in  the  uniqueness  of  the  Bajan 
experience, including our other World Heritage properties. 
In  the  International  Business  and  Financial  Services  sector,  the  challenge  is  to  broaden 
Barbados’ market appeal. We have an impressive network of double taxation treaties, and 
we  are  seeking  ways  of  using  them  all,  to  diversify  the  sources  of  international  business 
income. 
We  should  make  a  big  push  to  bring  alternative  energy  to  the  take-off,  via  a  mix  of 
photovoltaics, wind, waste-to-energy, and possibly ethanol production. These are all by now 
well  established  technologies,  and  teething  problems  will  have  been  ironed  out.  I  believe 
households  and  firms  should  focus  especially  on  generating  their  own  power  using 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
photovoltaics.  Barbados  is  among  the  sunniest  countries  in  the  Caribbean  and  the  world. 
Photovoltaic systems are now eminently affordable, about half the price of the typical family 
car,  and  Government  offers  generous  incentives  for  installation.  There  is  the  potential  for 
employment generation in retailing systems, installation, servicing and maintenance. There is 
scope for innovation in adapting systems to optimise performance for local conditions, and 
developing  intelligent  control  systems.  Financial  institutions  are  allowing  what  should  be  a 
profitable  avenue  for  growing  business  to  go  abegging.  I  have  to  say  to  all  of  you  in  the 
private  sector  that,  with  a  few  conspicuous  exceptions  –  and  I  must  single  out  Williams 
Evergreen – you are not covering yourselves with glory on this one. 
The  rum  industry  is  our  major  success  in  agriculture  and  manufacturing.  Its  strength  has 
been  the  shift  towards  premium  aged  rums,  blended,  bottled,  packaged  and  branded  in 
Barbados  for  export.  Economies  of  scale  are  against  us,  and  we  cannot  hope  to  be 
competitive  in  price  with  any  agricultural  or  manufacturing  product  from  countries  that  do 
large scale production. Our agriculturalists and manufacturers need to follow the example of 
the rum producers: move up the value chain, produce a distinctive product, and sell it at a 
premium price, to a discriminating clientele. 
Effective  policy  coordination  is  needed  in  all  foreign  exchange  activities,  between 
government  and  private  sector,  with  respect  to  objectives,  financing,  monitoring,  and 
feedback. We have to monitor how new initiatives are being implemented, and whether the 
intended  goals  are  being  reached.  There  must  be  feedback  to  ensure  corrective  action  if 
results are not being achieved. For this purpose we may use existing institutions, such as the 
Barbados  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  and  the  Social  Partnership,  through 
information sharing and minor reorganisation in some cases. Barbados is rich in institutions, 
and it is therefore better to bend existing institutions to our purpose, than to create new ones. 
Growth is not about starting with a clean slate, but rather about building on the foundations 
that  have  proved  to  be  solid.  We  do  have  to  develop  new  products  and  services,  and  to 
explore new markets, but we should use the things we know  well as a  point of departure. 
Surely we should have learned by now that if you can’t make a success of business that you 
know better than others, chances are pretty slim that you will succeed with something that 
other people have been doing for years, and know far more intimately than you. 
We have everything we need to revive the economy: 
• 
We have at our disposal innovation and entrepreneurship, at home, in the diaspora, 
and among those who have chosen to make their homes here; 
We  have  examples  of  success  in  tourism,  international  business,  agro-processing 
and alternative energy; 
We are in the top 1/3 of global competitiveness, as measured by the Global Forum; 
Barbados has become legendary as a tropical resort destination; and 
Government and the well established private enterprises have access to domestic 
and foreign funding. 
  We know where improvement is needed, and what we must focus on in order to improve our 
competitiveness: 
• 
We must intensify efforts to identify the sources of government inefficiency, and to 
devise practical ways of achieving lasting gains in efficiency; 
Appropriate financing arrangements are needed for innovators. This is the one area 
where we need greater clarity on what may be the best way forward. Many of our 
previous  notions  clearly  cannot  work,  and  we  must  seek  out  alternative 
arrangements, rather than flogging the old dead horses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
  Every  worker  and  every  business  owner  must focus  primarily  on  what  each  of  us 
can do to give unsurpassed service and excellent value for money, in whatever it is 
that we do. 
We should have confidence in our ability to renew economic expansion, based on how far we 
have  come  in  this  country.  When  I  was  born  in  1945,  the  typical  lower  middle  class 
household like my own family did not yet have electricity. We did have piped water, a single 
tap in the yard. When I returned to Barbados in 1973 to establish the Research Department 
at Central Bank, I discovered that only 30 percent of homes had a WC at that time. In the 
space of two generations Barbadians have transformed this country from the third world to 
the first world. And we have done it without the natural resource endowment of many others. 
This remarkable achievement should buoy our spirits and sharpen our resolve as we take on 
the heavyweight countries of the first division. 
The quality of life in our country is more important than the growth rate. Our Caribbean and 
Latin  American  neighbours  who  are  growing  have  a  long  way  to  go  before  achieving  our 
standard of living. We do not have their backlog of destitution and want. We may therefore 
take  our time to  establish  sound foundations for  growth  that  will  endure,  and  that  we  may 
sustain, whatever the future state of the world. 
Sustainable growth is a marathon, not a sprint. If you rush out of the starting gate, boosting 
domestic consumption, you will run out of foreign exchange, with the risk of losing the gains 
you have made in the short run. In a race with experienced marathoners, only the hopelessly 
naive will rush to the front of the field. For Barbados, the proper comparison is not with the 
growth of countries like Guyana and the Dominican Republic whose GDP is less than a third 
of our own, but with The Bahamas and Bermuda where GDP is much higher. If you compare 
Barbados’  performance since  the  2008  crisis  with  that  of The  Bahamas and  Bermuda,  we 
see no great difference. 
Finally,  let  me  remind  you  that  fiscal  consolidation  establishes  the  foundation  for  future 
growth. I refer you to my paper on maintaining our policy independence, which you may find 
on the Central Bank’s website. The experiences of Cyprus and Greece are salutary. We in 
Barbados can be reassured that we are in no danger of having to accede to the impositions 
of the IMF or any other agency, because we have $1.4 billion in foreign exchange reserves 
at the Central Bank. I believe every Barbadian would agree that that reassurance is worth the 
fiscal  sacrifices  that  we  have  imposed  on  ourselves,  even  though  this  means  that 
government continues to observe strict limits on domestically financed growth. 
In conclusion 
We have every reason to be confident of the economic future of our country, because our 
fate is entirely up to us. The adverse impact of the prolonged global recession is a reality we 
cannot escape, and because we depend so heavily on foreign exchange we do not have the 
option  of  bettering  our  lives  by  depending  on  our  own  resources. We must  therefore  seek 
ways  of  increasing  foreign  earnings  from  the  activities  we  are  renowned  for,  tourism, 
international  business  and  rum,  and  of  economising  on  oil  imports  by  generating  green 
energy.  We  know  what  this  entails:  increasing  government  efficiency,  developing  more 
appropriate financial strategies, and transforming work attitudes. Government and the private 
sector must  invest  in  creating  new  high quality  productive  capacity,  improving  productivity, 
and maintaining and upgrading infrastructure. It is a tall order, but we are in the big leagues 
now,  and  we  need  to  benchmark  our  performance  on  the  gold  standard,  in  order  to  keep 
moving  up  the  ranks. We  may  be  confident  in  our  ability  to  meet  the  challenge,  when  we 
reflect on how far the country has come in the lifetimes of many of us, on the basis of slow, 
sustained and equitable growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
