Sarah Dahlgren: Supervisory reform for global banks 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sarah  Dahlgren,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution 
Supervision Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Center for Transnational 
Legal Studies Seminar on “The impact of US regulatory reform on global banks”, New York City, 
12 February 2013. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak today. Please note that the opinions I express today are 
my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Although  the  topic  of  the  seminar  is  “regulatory  reform”,  I  will  focus  my  comments  on 
“supervisory  reform”.  Regulation  and  supervision  work  together  to  ensure  a  strong  global 
financial  system.  While  rules  and  regulations  set  out  the  standards  that  must  be  met, 
supervision provides the necessary oversight and enforcement to ensure firms are following 
the rules. 
It’s  a  challenge  to  supervise  a  large  internationally  active  firm.  Many  businesses  are  truly 
global and often include complex booking models that may involve trades being originated in 
one domicile with various sub components being booked in one or more other jurisdictions. 
As Governor Tarullo noted in a recent speech, there are unique challenges in regulating and 
supervising the U.S. operations of a global institution. Although we have full authority over 
the  local  operations,  we  see  only  a  piece  of  your  global  operations  and  regular  access  to 
information can be limited. It’s one thing when we have a view into all of the operations and 
access to decision makers at the top of the house – both senior management and boards of 
directors – as is the case when we are the home country supervisor. It’s another thing when 
we see but one piece of the organization. I can’t help but think of the fable about the blind 
men and the elephant – each of whom feels a different part of the elephant and each thinks 
he is right about what the elephant really is. I could continue the analogy, but I think my point 
is  clear  –  without  the  context  of  the global  organization,  we  can’t  be  sure  whether  we  are 
seeing the head or the tail of the elephant, or the organization. 
If  done  well,  host  country  supervisors  can  be  the  eyes  and  ears  for  the  home  country 
supervisor. We have context for the activities of the banks doing business in our markets and 
can provide that to the home country supervisor. In addition, host county supervisors can be 
helpful  in  ferreting  out  where  practices  aren’t  consistent  across  a  firm;  identifying  where 
certain  practices  (like  stress  testing)  aren’t  occurring  as  necessary;  providing  insights  into 
key business lines that are primarily conducted in the U.S., such as municipal finance and 
certain products within sales and trading; and helping to assess the risk culture in the U.S. 
operations, which can be a key input into the overall view of the home country supervisor. 
As  you  discussed  this  morning,  there  are  a  range  of  new  rules  and  regulations  being 
considered to enhance the regulation of the U.S. operations of foreign banks. Beyond these 
new rules, though, we are continuing to press ahead to make substantive enhancements to 
how  we carry out supervision of the largest global firms doing business in the U.S. These 
enhancements largely follow along the work that we are doing to enhance overall supervision 
of all the firms that we supervise, so they shouldn’t be a surprise to you. 
These enhancements, many of which reflect lessons we learned through the financial crisis, 
include  deepening  our  engagement  with  senior  managers,  including  business  line  owners 
and  directors  of  firms;  developing  a  better  understanding  of  firm  strategy,  revenue  and 
business  drivers  and  vulnerabilities;  enhancing  our  focus  on  resilience  and  ensuring  that 
buffers  are  strong  –  including  stronger  capital,  liquidity,  collateral  management  and 
contingency planning, to name a few; and increasing our attention on risk culture and risk 
appetite within the firms we supervise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What I offer today is two-fold. First, I will identify three things that you – as global firms with a 
U.S. presence – can do to help remove impediments to our understanding the operations we 
are supervising and to make it easier to get our jobs done. This should also make it easier for 
you to understand and follow the rules that are set out for global firms. And, second, I will 
share three things that I think we – as supervisors – need to do to strengthen supervision of 
global firms and, at the same time, make it easier to get our jobs done. 
Three things global firms with U.S. presence can do 
• 
the  basis  for  building 
First,  improve  communication  and  transparency  with  supervisors.  Communication 
between  supervisors  and  supervised  institutions  has  to  start  with  a  “no  surprises” 
philosophy,  which  serves  as 
the  right  channels  of 
communication and confidence between firm and supervisor. This means identifying 
and discussing issues that could grow into significant risk events – even before all of 
the  facts  may  be  known  or  collected.  “No  surprises”  also  means  more  timely 
information sharing with key supervisors. Supervisors talk regularly and pass along 
key information; we are fine doing so, but firms could position themselves better if 
they communicate significant items to core supervisors on similar timetables. Given 
the global management structures of many business lines and risk functions, a risk 
event in one jurisdiction may have an immediate impact in other jurisdictions. 
Another  element  of  improving  communication  is  sharing  more  global  information 
with host supervisors. In order for us to better understand your operations and to put 
the U.S. operations into the global context, we need to have a better understanding 
of  the  global  operations.  Many,  if  not  most,  firms  assert  that  they  manage 
businesses and risk on a global basis. With this approach, firms have an obligation 
to  share  relevant  and  significant  issues  around  the  globe  with  key  host  country 
supervisors  on  a  timely  basis.  As  well,  firms  need  to  share  more  global  data  
–  including  key  risk  management  reports  –  that  allow  host  supervisors  to  better 
understand  important  vulnerabilities,  as  well  as  the  overall  condition  of  the  firm. 
While  information  sharing  among  supervisors  can  address  some  of  this,  it’s 
insufficient to assume that key host country jurisdictions don’t need to have a view of 
the overall health of the company. 
And, finally, clarity – or transparency – of communication with supervisors needs to 
be  a  focus  going  forward.  There  are  times  when  firms  attempt  to  respond  to 
questions or concerns with very narrow answers or with an overwhelming amount of 
paper. This generally leads to additional follow up – on both sides – and a lot of time 
and energy expended to resolve the outstanding questions. I encourage you to ask 
for clarity when we aren’t being clear and to try to understand better what we are 
looking  for  by  asking  more  questions.  One  way  that  you  can  facilitate  better 
information flows is to provide us with what you provide to senior management and 
board members, rather than producing something just for us. 
Second, invest in MIS. One of the key weaknesses identified during the last crisis 
was  that  information  systems  within  firms  weren’t  robust  enough  to  provide  timely 
and  accurate  risk  management  information  as  events  unfolded.  While  some 
progress has been made to address some of these weaknesses, there is still quite a 
bit more work needed in firms to achieve a robust risk reporting infrastructure. From 
a host supervisor’s point of view, significant improvements in MIS are necessary to 
demonstrate that firms have clarity about their businesses and risks and have the 
tools necessary to manage the risks both here and abroad. 
At the same time, the challenges in implementing effective MIS across a global firm 
are made more daunting by the complex legal and organizational structures of most 
firms today. As the financial crisis highlighted, risk reporting by business line alone 
isn’t sufficient to effectively manage a global firm. Firms need to be able to segment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
  data not just by business line, but also by legal entity. Firms with simpler legal entity 
structures tend to be able to do this more readily on both an as-needed basis, but 
also on a more routine basis. Simplifying your  organizational structure in the U.S.  
– and globally –  would facilitate enhancements in MIS and risk reporting, while at 
the same time facilitating our understanding of your organization. 
Third,  encourage  and  provide  better  access  to  key  executives  and  directors.  As  I 
indicated  at  the  outset,  one  of  the  enhancements  we’ve  made  to  our  broader 
supervisory  program  is  deepening  our  engagement  and  interactions  with  senior 
leaders  and  directors  of  the  firms  we  supervise.  This  effort  stems  from  a  critical 
lesson from the crisis – that we need to better understand our firms and how they 
operate, including a greater understanding of how the governance of the firm works. 
We expect that by intensifying the supervisory relationship with those overseeing the 
health of the firm, we can improve the flow of information and dialogue. This should 
give us an earlier and clearer view into emerging business trends and risk strategies 
within  the  firm.  It  should  give  us  a  better  sense  of  what  the  senior  leaders  and 
directors are thinking. And, it also creates a better dynamic where discussions are 
more frequent and less monumental so that dialogue flows more naturally through 
all means – not just in person, but also over the phone and via email. 
This effort extends not just to firms where we are the home country supervisor, but 
also  to  large  global  firms  where  we  are  the  host  supervisor.  We  realize  the 
challenges  in  building  any  relationship,  and  the  challenges  in  doing  so  across 
geographic boundaries, cultures and corporate entities are even more challenging. 
Nevertheless, where we have had success in building that dialogue and deepening 
the  engagement  with  business  leaders  and  directors  of  global  firms,  we  have 
achieved a higher degree of understanding on both sides. As relationships develop, 
we have found more frequent, informal dialogue to be extremely productive for all 
involved.  Firms  are  in  a  better  position  to  understand  what  our  concerns  are  and 
respond  more  appropriately  and  timely  to  these  concerns.  And,  we  understand 
better the tone at the top – even though the top is somewhere other than the U.S. – 
as well as the risk culture of the firm. It’s simply not enough to understand tone at 
the top in the U.S., if the top is really somewhere else. 
Three things that supervisors can do 
• 
First, improve communication with firms. The counterpart to asking you to improve 
your  communications  with  us  is  raising  the  expectation  that  we  do  the  same. We 
need  to  be  timelier  in  our  communication  of  relevant  findings  in  our  supervisory 
efforts, and we need to shorten the time between the conclusion of supervisory work 
and our feedback to firms. More timely communication should also include sharing 
information in the earlier stages of our work, before all issues have been confirmed 
or facts sorted out, but at the point at which we suspect there’s something not quite 
right.  This  is  important  not  just  in  the  context  of  formal  supervisory  efforts  like 
examinations,  where  we  may  have  an  early  read  on  an  issue,  but  also  in  areas 
where we see something or something has been flagged through other means and 
we raise it with you for discussion and attention as needed. 
Our communication needs to be more candid and direct. Too often I hear that our 
communication has too much “nuance” and that firms struggle to understand exactly 
what we are looking for. To be clearer in our communication, though, we also need 
to better understand the businesses you are in and how your businesses operate. 
As I indicated earlier, we need more context to understand your operations – and 
your sharing more global information with us does provide that necessary context. 
Second,  improve  collaboration  and  communications  with  other  supervisors  –  both 
U.S. and foreign. For true consolidated supervision to work, information has to flow 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 freely  among  supervisors.  We  need  to  eliminate  the  legal  impediments  for 
supervisors  on  the  ground  to  be  able  to  share  information  in  a  more  routine  and 
natural  way.  There  are  many  efforts  underway,  through  such  venues  as  the  FSB 
and  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group,  to  promote  enhanced  information  sharing  and 
collaboration among supervisors. 
We also need to work more collaboratively together. This means sharing concerns 
about issues and agreeing on work necessary across the global firm to address the 
issues.  This  means  jointly  conducting  examinations,  as  well  as  concurrently 
conducting work with similar scopes so that the full picture of the firm can be drawn, 
and we can capture all the relevant insights of these globally managed businesses. 
Finally, it also means leveraging the results of work from other supervisors and not 
undertaking duplicative work. 
Third, enhance supervisory colleges, which were designed to improve the exchange 
of information among supervisors with the goal of ensuring safe and sound banking 
practices,  reducing  the  possibility  of  governmental  assistance,  and  building 
confidence  in  the  financial  system.  We  need  to  make  supervisory  colleges  more 
effective  by  going  beyond  basic  information  sharing.  In  addition  to  improving  our 
information  sharing,  this  should  also  include  making  sure  that  core  colleges  are 
appropriately  constructed  and  reflect  the  key  jurisdictions  necessary  to  get  a  full 
picture of the risks of the firm; ensuring that the dialogue between supervisors and 
firms  in  college  settings  is  robust  and  that  the  engagement  among  all  parties  is 
sufficiently  high;  and  providing  clear  and  direct  feedback  following  supervisory 
colleges, both between supervisors and to the firm. 
Home supervisors should be providing host supervisors with feedback and, where 
necessary,  direction  on  key  risks  and  other  issues  requiring  follow  up  in  their 
jurisdictions. Host supervisors should be providing home supervisors with feedback 
on  what  they  are  seeing  in  their  jurisdiction  and  how  risks  are  evolving  in  their 
markets. And, finally, to ensure consistency of supervisory messages on group-wide 
issues, home and host supervisors should agree on key message to firms. 
Finally, supervisory colleges are a good way to promote more consistent supervision 
of  globally  active  firms,  and  supervisors  should  leverage  the  college  construct  to 
reinforce  more  consistent  application  of  global  standards  and  risk  management 
expectations across all firms. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, my goal here today was to leave you with several things we need from you to 
help us achieve a stronger supervisory framework for foreign banks operating in the U.S. and 
also  recognize  that  there  are  things  that  supervisors  need  to  continue  to  work  on  to 
strengthen our oversight of global firms. 
We  want  to  ensure  we  are  doing  everything  we  can  to  be  an  effective  host  supervisor, 
including ensuring consistency and equivalence in how we approach all global firms. We also 
have a responsibility to facilitate, to the greatest extent possible, the job of the home country 
supervisor, and we expect the same from our supervisory colleagues around the world who 
are our eyes and ears on the ground in those other jurisdictions. While this is very important 
in our routine day-to-day operations, it becomes even more important in effectively dealing 
with crisis situations. 
We  have  a  common  interest  –  a  safe  and  stable  global  financial  system.  In  pursuing  this 
common interest, there are three fairly simple – yet important – things we need you to do: 
• 
• 
ensure robust communication with host supervisors; 
continue to build out your risk reporting and broader MIS capabilities; and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 encourage  deeper  and  more  intensive  dialogue  among  your  senior  leaders  and 
directors with key host supervisors. 
And, for our part, we need to: 
• 
improve our communications with firms, including being more timely and clearer in 
our feedback; 
improve collaboration with home and other host supervisors; and, 
make  supervisory  colleges  more  effective,  by  promoting  more  robust  discussions 
and more direct feedback to firms. 
 Thank you for your attention today. I look forward to continuing to work with  you on these 
issues as we seek to enhance our supervisory programs.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
