Jörg Asmussen: The global crisis – lessons for international policy 
cooperation 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel, 23 June 2013. 
 Sehr geehrter Herr Ministerpräsident, 
sehr geehrte Frau Oberbürgermeisterin, 
sehr geehrter Herr Professor Snower, 
dear laureates, 
meine Damen und Herren, 
It is my pleasure to be here today in Kiel and warmly congratulate Gro Harlem Brundtland, 
Joseph  Stiglitz  and  Mohammed  Ibrahim  for  winning  the  2013  Global  Economy  prize.  This 
prize  has  high  reputation  at  the  ECB  where  we  believe  that  international  cooperation  and 
openness are crucial for improving people’s standards of living. Some of you might recall that 
the prize was awarded in 2011 to former ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet. 
I  would  like  to  focus  my  intervention  today  on  some  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  the 
global financial crisis for international policy cooperation. I will start with a question. Does the 
crisis call for a substantial change in the approach to international policy cooperation? 
My answer is yes, for the following three reasons: 
First, the world has become more interconnected and shocks are transmitted more rapidly 
across countries. Consider the following figures on global financial integration: 
Total foreign assets and liabilities of advanced economies rose from 68% of GDP in 1980 to 
almost 450% of GDP in 2010. 
The synchronisation of a severe economic and financial downturn, after the failures of major 
financial  institutions  in  2008,  is  a  stark  reminder  of  the  significant  interdependence  of  our 
economies.  In  2009,  40  out  of  the  50  largest  economies  in  the  world  experienced  severe 
recessions. 
Second,  we  need  a  new  approach  to  international  cooperation  because  the  potential 
sources  of  shocks  have  multiplied.  Alongside  domestic  shocks,  countries  are  now  more 
exposed  than  in  the  past  to  external  financial  shocks  and  global  shocks  to  confidence. 
Keeping one’s “house in order” is no longer sufficient to fully insulate domestic economies 
from these shocks. 
Third, we need a new approach to international cooperation because the crisis has unveiled 
structural  vulnerabilities  in  the  global  economy.  In  particular,  our  current  institutions  were 
designed for the economic system of the 20th century. They are not suitable for the global 
challenges  of  the  21st  century.  Global  economic  cooperation  is  needed  to  design  better 
institutions. 
For these three reasons, we have to take the crisis as a serious opportunity to tune global 
policy making to today’s interconnected world. 
The  stakes  are  high,  because  the  economic  and  social  cost  of  the  crisis  has  been  large. 
Unemployment, especially youth unemployment, has significantly increased since 2008. As 
many  as  73  million  young  people  are  estimated  to  be  unemployed  globally  in  2013, 
especially  in  advanced  economies  –  including  the  euro  area  –  the  Middle  East  and  North 
Africa. 
Would reversing globalisation solve the problem? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
My answer is no. Being in northern Germany today, with its long tradition of openness and 
free trade ever since many of the cities along the Baltic coast joined the Hanseatic League, is 
a stark reminder of the benefits of global and European integration. And perhaps the case of 
Germany shows these benefits even more clearly: 
• 
The share of Germany in global exports stood at around 8% in 2012. This makes 
Germany the largest global exporter after China (10%) and the US (9.8%). 
Exports of goods and service from Germany to the rest of the EU increased from 
around 20% of German GDP in 2000, to around 30% of GDP in 2012. 
Exports from Germany to the rest of the world increased from around 30% of GDP 
in 2000 to more than 50 % of GDP in 2012. 
  Protectionism would clearly harm Germany and Europe. Therefore, we should not turn our 
back on globalisation. We should rather learn to better reap its benefits and make it more 
inclusive, in ways such that benefits are also fairly shared. 
The crisis offers an opportunity to learn from past mistakes. At the domestic level, it shows 
the importance of addressing imbalances with sound policies and structural reforms. At the 
global level, it shows the real cost of non-cooperative attitudes and policies. It therefore calls 
for a substantial change in institutional and governance frameworks for international policy 
cooperation. 
Let  me  first  identify  past  mistakes  by  considering  the  main  vulnerabilities  unveiled  by  the 
crisis, both at the global and European level. 
On the global front, the crisis mainly revealed the existence of global economic governance 
failures and weak surveillance mechanisms. 
Global imbalances led to the accumulation of fragilities in the global financial system and to 
unsustainable global macroeconomic outcomes. 
For example, long term interest rates in the US and globally did not respond as expected to 
the Federal Reserve tightening cycle which started in 2004. This unusual behaviour of long 
term  interest  rates,  which  reflected  the  global  savings  glut,  was  labelled  “Conundrum”  by 
Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. Persistently low long-term interest rates led to 
an aggressive search for yield and capital misallocations in the financial system. 
How the impact of domestic policies could spill  over to other countries was not sufficiently 
appreciated.  And  the  need  for  stronger  international  cooperation  on  this  front  was  not 
recognised that much before the crisis either. 
In 2007 the IMF attempted to broaden the focus of bilateral surveillance to the implications of 
domestic  policies  for  external  sustainability.  The  attempt  failed  because  some  countries 
resisted to having their exchange rates labelled as “fundamentally misaligned” and to adjust 
their policies accordingly. 
A forum for global economic governance tuned to the economic realities of the 21st century 
was missing. Institutional frameworks to create sufficient peer pressure at the global level to 
prompt  systemic  players  to  act  were  weak.  Thus,  global  economic  governance  and 
multilateral surveillance were not fully equipped for the new challenges of a globalised world. 
But the crisis also revealed acute failures in the global financial system. 
While  financial  sectors  became  increasingly  international,  supervision  and  regulation 
remained  largely  national  in  scope  and  only  loosely  coordinated  at  the  international  level. 
This encouraged regulatory arbitrage, the creation of large, complex financial intermediaries, 
and poor risk management practises. 
Several  of  these  features  also  characterised  our  European  continent.  The  crisis  revealed 
fragilities in the governance, surveillance frameworks and financial architecture of the euro 
area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The rules and governance framework associated with the Stability and Growth Pact were not 
sufficiently  enforced  and,  therefore,  respected.  Efforts  to  promote  structural  reforms,  for 
example under the Lisbon Agenda, were weak. As we know now too well, macroeconomic 
imbalances  within  the  euro  area  grew  unabated.  Competitiveness  developments  across 
Member States diverged to an unsustainable extent. 
For instance, a harmonised indicator of price competitiveness shows that between 2000 and 
2008 Germany became almost 20% more competitive in real terms vis-à-vis the rest of the 
euro area average. Over the same period, price competitiveness decreased by around 10% 
in Italy and Spain vis-à-vis the euro area average. 
In addition, despite the unprecedented level of financial integration in the euro area, banking 
supervision remained domestic. Cross-border resolution frameworks, in turn, did not reflect 
the increasing complexity and interconnectedness of the European banking system. 
Overall,  inappropriate  policies  in  one  country  in  the  euro  area  could  create  negative 
externalities for other euro area countries, and possibly destabilise the monetary union as a 
whole.  The  crisis  hence  revealed  that  the  euro  area  needs  much  stronger  mechanisms  to 
correct inappropriate domestic policies. It also revealed that the euro area’s ability to absorb 
shocks,  especially  asymmetric  ones,  and  its  frameworks  for  crisis  management  and 
resolution need to be significantly strengthened. 
What  has  been  done  so  far  to  address  the  global  and  European  vulnerabilities  that  were 
revealed by the crisis? 
Let me start with the global perspective. 
Economic  governance  and  surveillance  mechanisms  have  been  strengthened  appreciably. 
The  G20  was  upgraded  to  the  Leaders’  level,  replacing  the  G7  as  the  premier  forum  for 
international  economic  cooperation.  This  made  governance  more  encompassing  and 
legitimate. 
The  G20  represents  65%  of  the  world  population  (including  the  EU),  while  the  G7 
represented slightly more than 10% of it. The key emerging market economies are now at 
the table. 
The first three G20 Leaders’ summits (Washington, London and Pittsburgh) led to important 
achievements,  including  a  coordinated  policy  response  to  the  cyclical  downturn,  a  solemn 
commitment to keep the global economy open and more resources to the IMF. 
The  G20  also  gave  political  impetus  to  a  broad  agenda  for  financial  reform  to  make  the 
global financial system more stable and more resilient. Work is under way in different fora to 
fill regulatory gaps, make regulation more consistent across countries, limit the possibility for 
arbitrage, improve supervision of cross-border institutions and facilitate their resolution. 
The  crisis  has  also  led  to  radical  changes  in  the  European  institutional  and  governance 
framework. 
In little less than four years, we have created the European Stability  Mechanism (ESM), a 
permanent crisis resolution mechanism for the euro area. We have also strengthened euro 
area  economic  governance, 
the 
Macroeconomic  Imbalance  Procedure.  The  creation  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism 
(SSM)  at  the  ECB  is  also  under  way.  It  will  make  supervision  consistent  with  the  level  of 
banking  integration  in  Europe. These  are  essential  elements  needed  to break the  adverse 
feedback loop between banks and sovereigns. 
What needs to be done to finish the job and make the global economic and financial system 
more stable and resilient to reap the benefits of globalisation fully? We still have a long way 
to go, admittedly, and this is still not the time to rest on our laurels. 
Let me hence sketch what issues remain unsolved. 
“Fiscal  Compact”  and 
instance 
through 
the 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  global  reform  agenda  has  lost  momentum,  as  the  sense  of  urgency  imposed  by  the 
crisis has vanished. 
On  the  global  financial  reform  front,  for  instance,  progress  has  slowed  down  in  several 
respects.  This  has  generated  frustration  and  led  to  country-specific  regulatory  initiatives. 
These  initiatives  should  not  create  market  distortions,  harm  global  and  European  financial 
integration or lead to regulatory arbitrage. 
Progress on the front of global economic policy-making has also slowed down. The G20’s 
effectiveness  is  now  being  questioned.  Being  larger  than  the  G7,  it  is  also  more 
heterogeneous  in  terms  of  values  and  represented  interests.  Therefore,  reaching  an 
agreement at the negotiation table is more challenging. Also, the G20 might appear distant to 
citizens,  which  is  not  helpful  for  legitimacy,  as  the  latter  is  intrinsically  linked  to  local 
proximity.  Finally,  not  all  countries  are  at  the  table.  An  entire  continent  like  Africa  is  only 
represented by one country, namely South Africa. 
Despite its limitations, the G20 remains essential for global economic cooperation insofar as 
there is no obvious alternative. Returning only to the G7 or the G8 is not an option. At the 
same time, it was premature to conclude that the former formats are dead with the rise of the 
G20. The conclusions of this week’s G8 Summit in Northern-Ireland on fighting tax evasion 
and  on  world  trade  for  example  showed  that  the  smaller  formats  can  stimulate  important 
momentum for the G20 and other fora like the WTO. 
Where do we stand on the European front? 
An essential lesson from the crisis is that the Economic and Monetary Union is an incomplete 
project.  The  “Four  Presidents”  Report  outlined  the  necessary  steps  to  move  towards  a 
genuine monetary union, which I strongly support. 
First,  we  need  to  complete  with  great  urgency  the  banking  union.  We  need  a  clear  and 
transparent assessment of the conditions of the banking system (“asset review”) before the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism takes over. We also need a strong commitment towards an 
effective  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  which  is  an  indispensable  element  of  the 
banking union and a necessary complement to the SSM. The SRM would allow for a smooth 
winding down of banks, especially those with large cross-border activities. It needs to entail 
both a strong Single Resolution Authority (SRA) as well as a Single Resolution Fund (SRF). 
The latter should be financed with ex-ante risk based levies on the banking sector. These 
arrangements  would  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  system  and  ultimately  break  the  link 
between banks and sovereigns. 
Second, we need to further strengthen and integrate our economic governance frameworks 
to make our economies more competitive and resilient to asymmetric shocks. One front on 
which  European  governance  can  greatly  improve  relates  to  structural  reforms.  Ultimately, 
structural reforms benefit the many at the expense of the few. A recent OECD Report called 
this  the  “Double  Dividend”  of  structural  reforms:  they  increase  growth,  and  if  implemented 
properly, decrease inequality. 
One way to create incentives for Member States to engage in structural reforms could be the 
provision  of  temporary  financial  assistance  to  alleviate  the  short-term  costs  of  reforms,  in 
exchange  of  a  contractual  agreement  to  complete  them.  The  contract  would  entail  clear 
goals  in  line  with  EU  policies  and  measurable  targets.  These  contracts  could  be  useful  in 
several instances, especially in the presence of “reform and bailout fatigue”, and constrained 
public finances. 
Third, the increasing level of integration within Europe calls for a new institutional design to 
ensure legitimation, accountability and democratic control. On the one hand, Governments 
should ensure that national parliaments are appropriately informed and involved in decision 
processes.  On  the  other  hand,  national  parliaments  are  often  not  in  the  best  position  to 
incorporate  the  EU  common  interest  in  their  decisions.  Therefore,  European  institutions 
should  be  strengthened,  in  particular  the  European  Parliament  which  could  maybe  also 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
convene in a euro area format. This would ensure that the level of accountability matches the 
level at which decisions are taken. 
It is time for me to conclude, 
Globalisation has lifted out of poverty and improved the living standards of millions around 
the world. It has greatly benefited Germany and the rest of Europe. It has benefited emerging 
Asia. And it is now benefiting large parts of Africa. We should not reverse globalisation. We 
should rather elevate our game and adapt our toolkit to the new realities of the 21st century. 
This will enable us to reap the full benefits of globalisation and share gains more fairly. 
Stronger  international  policy  cooperation  would  help  to  deliver  stronger,  more  sustainable 
and balanced growth globally. It is the best means to avoid currency wars. It would help to 
make  growth  more  inclusive  and  decrease  unemployment,  especially  among  the  youth.  It 
would  increase  peer  pressure,  thereby  improving  governance,  especially  in  developing 
countries. Stronger international policy cooperation would also help to make growth models 
more compatible with the scarcity of natural resources and environmental constraints. 
The crisis has offered an opportunity to learn from past mistakes. This opportunity should not 
go  wasted.  As  the  sense  of  urgency  imposed  by  the  crisis  vanishes,  the  risk  is  that 
complacency slows down reforms, while the road that lies in front of us is still long. But the 
decision to complete the global reform agenda through enhanced international cooperation is 
entirely in our hands. 
This is why I believe that the Kiel prize for the Global economy is a reminder for us of the 
importance of globalisation and international cooperation. Therefore, I want to conclude with 
warm congratulations to the winners of the prize. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
