Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 30 April 2013. 
 Today,  on  30  April  2013,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  most  recent  monetary  and 
economic  developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the 
Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, 
at 3.75%. The Supervisory Council deems that the current monetary conditions are adequate 
to meet Bank of Albania's inflation target in the medium term. 
The present interest rates and liquidity situation in the economy provide simultaneously the 
necessary monetary stimulus to boost domestic demand. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 According  to  INSTAT  data,  economic  activity  in  Albania  increased  1.6%  in  2012.  The 
Albanian  economy  showed  signs  of  weakness  during  the  past  year,  reflecting  an  overall 
uncertainty in the internal and external environment. Nonetheless, against the backdrop of 
unfavourable developments, the main indicators of domestic and external balances remained 
within  healthy  parameters.  During  this  period,  inflation  ranged  within  the  Bank  of  Albania 
target band and indicators of banking system soundness improved. 
Maintaining these balances provides the right macroeconomic premises for sustainable and 
long-term growth. 
Referring  back  to  the  performance  of  inflation,  INSTAT  data  reveal  that  consumer  prices 
rose  on  average 2.5%  in  the first quarter  of  2013.  Inflation  continues to  be  determined  by 
food prices; their contribution accounts for about 90% of headline inflation. Moreover, food 
inflation  was  offset  by  the  lower  inflation  of  non-food  consumer  goods.  Inflation  of  this 
category reflected the downward oil price, following its decline in international markets. Also, 
the  price  fall  of  long-term  consumer  goods  provided  downward  effects,  whereas  prices  of 
other consumer goods did not change significantly. 
From  the  macroeconomic  perspective,  inflation  continues  to  reflect  the  weak  pressures 
from the aggregate demand-side and the absence of supply-side shocks. 
Below-potential  growth  of  aggregate  demand  leads  to  underutilisation  of  production 
capacities  and  generates  weak  pressures  on  increasing  wages,  producer  prices  and  profit 
margins. Under these circumstances, internal pressures on consumer prices appear weak, 
as reflected by the low core inflation. On the other hand, imported inflation was subdued due 
to the low inflation in Albania’s trading partners and the stable exchange rate. 
The most recent data on the real economy are as at 2012 Q4. According to these data, the 
Albanian  economy  grew  1.7%  driven  by  expanded  activity  in  the  services,  industry  and 
agriculture  sectors.  The  activity  of  the  construction  sector  continued  to  shrink.  Data  on 
economic activity for the first quarter of this year remain limited. 
Based on indirect indicators, our analyses point to low economic growth, relying mainly on 
foreign  demand,  while 
their  sluggish 
performance.  Private  consumption  and  investment  remain  weak  in  the  presence  of 
uncertainties for the future, decelerating disposable income, tighter lending terms and spare 
production capacities. 
the  domestic  demand  components  continue 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  performance  of  budget  indicators  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  shows  increased 
fiscal stimulus. Budget deficit increased 41.5% during this quarter, reflecting the 3.6% decline 
of fiscal revenues and 1.4% increase in public expenditure. The Bank of Albania once again 
draws the attention on maintaining the fiscal equilibriums and keeping the budget deficit and 
public debt at affordable and harmless levels for the Albanian economy. In our opinion, the 
medium-term priority for the fiscal policy should be maintaining budget discipline. 
In  the  long  term,  the  Albanian  public  debt  should  be  reduced  and  anchored  in  a  reliable, 
effective and transparent fiscal rule. 
Developments in the external sector of the economy reveal continued positive contribution 
of net exports to aggregate demand growth. Data on foreign trade for January and February 
show that trade deficit narrowed 27.1% annually, reflecting at the same time the further surge 
in exports and the weak performance of imports. During this period, imports shrank 9.5% in 
annual terms, while exports maintained their high annual growth rates, at 18.6%. 
Monetary developments were in line with the performance of the real economy during the 
first  quarter.  In  January  and  February,  credit  to  the  economy  was  weak  across  all  its 
segments. 
As at end-February, the loan portfolio of the banking sector stood only 1.7% higher than a 
year earlier. As we have already underlined, the main problem with regard to lending remains 
the low business and consumer demand for loans. However, banks’ lending policies appear 
more conservative, as reflected in the relatively tight lending standards. 
The forecast for subdued consumer prices and weak economic growth in the period ahead 
motivated  the  further  easing  of  the  monetary  policy  at  the  outset  of  the  current  year.  In 
January,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  cut  the  key  interest  rate  by  0.25 
percentage  points  to  3.75%.  Through  anchoring  inflation  expectations,  easing  liquidity 
pressures  and  cutting  the  short-term  interest  rates,  the  monetary  policy  has  aimed  at 
reducing the costs of long-term lending to the economy and supporting the growth of credit, 
consumption and investments in Albania. 
The  Bank  of  Albania's  easing  policy  did  not  reflect  uniformly  across  the  financial  market 
segments. The latest key  interest rate cut was reflected swiftly and completely both  in the 
interbank market and the primary market of government securities. On the other hand, it was 
only partially transmitted to the deposits market and even less to the credit market. These 
developments illustrate the fact that, in the presence of added risk premiums and structural 
changes  of  behaviour  in  the  financial  market  and  the  real  economy,  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy  action  is  lower.  Based  on  these  reasons,  the  Bank  of  Albania  decided  to 
support its stimulating monetary policy with a number of changes on the easing side of the 
supervisory,  regulatory  and  macroprudential  framework.  Set  out  in  details  in  the  previous 
month, these measures aim at further reducing liquidity premiums and intermediation costs in 
the financial markets, in order to boost lending and economic growth. 
Our  projections  for  2013  support  the  assessment  for  Albania's  economic  growth  ranging 
close to past year's rates. Foreign demand will be the main driver of economic growth, while 
the  fiscal  policy  is  expected  to  contribute  to  growth  on  the  same  direction,  but  at  lower 
intensity,  in  the  period  ahead.  On  the  other  hand,  private  consumption  and  investment 
remain  weak  and  unstable.  The  continuation  of  below-potential  economic  growth  will 
determine  weak  inflationary  pressures  in  the  upcoming  months  as  well.  In  the  absence  of 
unexpected  supply-side  shocks,  consumer  prices  will  continue  to  rise  at  low  rates. With  a 
90% probability, four-quarter-ahead annual inflation will range within the 0.6–3.6% band. The 
low annual inflation rates and forecast for their continuation over the monetary policy-
relevant horizon call for maintaining the stimulating nature of the monetary policy over 
the next quarters. 
 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 3.75%. It concluded that stimulating monetary conditions establish the 
proper  premises  for  meeting  the  inflation  target  in  the  medium  term,  and  contribute  to  the 
growth  of  aggregate  demand  and  full  utilisation  of  production  capacities.  The  weak 
inflationary  pressures  determine  the  continuation  of  a  stimulating  monetary  policy  by  the 
Bank of Albania. Lastly, the Supervisory Council reiterates the need to continue and deepen 
structural reforms, which boost productivity and enhance the competitiveness of the Albanian 
economy. These reforms pave the way for expanding the economic potential and should be 
seen as the main instrument supporting sustainable and long-term growth for Albania. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
