Jens Weidmann: The monetary union as a community of stability 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Bundesbank’s 
parliamentary  evening,  Regional  Office  in  Hamburg,  Mecklenburg-West  Pomerania  and 
Schleswig-Holstein, Hamburg, 29 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
1  
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen 
I am glad of this opportunity to speak to you at this parliamentary evening. 
I would like to begin with a short anecdote about the economist who lost his keys. One night 
a policeman notices an economist standing beneath a lamp-post looking for something. The 
policeman asks if he can be of assistance, to which the economist replies, “I’ve lost my keys 
and can’t find them.” The policeman asks, “Are you sure this is where you lost them, sir?” 
And the economist answers, “No, I lost the keys over by the car, but the light is better here.” 
People like to tell this story when rebuking economists because they didn’t see the financial 
and debt crisis coming. Indeed, financial stability reviews and other economic studies prior to 
the crisis do contain references to shifts within the financial system. Yet the macroeconomic 
risks that this development on the financial markets produced did not receive nearly as much 
attention as they warranted. 
This is because the economic models they used had blind spots. As a result, the financial 
markets were rudimentarily modelled at best. Looking back, one might say that impressive 
progress has been made in financial economics and macroeconomics over the past decades 
– but unfortunately they have advanced independently of each other rather than alongside 
each  other.  It  is  only  recently  that  researchers have  started  to focus more  strongly  on  the 
interaction between the financial sector and the real economy. 
Yet that isn’t the only moral of the story of the lost keys. Even when combating the crisis, 
there  is  a  risk  that  we  only  see  the  obvious,  what’s  right  in  front  of  our  noses  –  like  the 
fluctuations in the financial markets. But if we want to overcome the crisis once and for all, 
we  have  to  illuminate  the  dark  corners  as  well.  Only  if  we  identify  and  remedy  the 
weaknesses  in  the  framework  of  monetary  union  will  we  ensure  that  the  monetary  union 
remains a community of stability. 
For this reason, my speech this evening consists of two parts. First, I would like to examine 
the main features of the current monetary union framework. Then I will discuss the options 
we have for stabilising the monetary union on a lasting basis. 
The Maastricht framework 
2  
The  creation  of  the  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  was  a  major  step  towards 
greater integration. Yet this integration was not developed to the same extent in all areas. 
Whilst  a  single  monetary  policy  was  put  in  place  in  the  euro  area,  responsibility  for  fiscal 
policy and other important policy areas such as labour market policy have, for the most part, 
explicitly remained with the member states. 
This  so-called  Maastricht  Approach  is  geared  to  the  principle  of  open  markets,  a  principle 
that  is  guaranteed  in  the  single  European  market  by  the  four  fundamental  freedoms:  free 
movement of goods, capital, services and people. The Maastricht framework is founded on 
the principle of subsidiarity, which was enshrined in the treaties of the European Union. It is 
based on the principle of liability, which was incorporated into the EU treaties as the no bail-
out principle and which stipulates that – subject to certain limitations – no member state is 
allowed  to  assume  liability  for  another’s  debts.  And  finally,  it  is  based  on  the  primacy  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
monetary  policy.  This  is  something  which  is  particularly  important  to  me,  not  least  for 
professional reasons, and which was underscored by the independence of the central bank 
and the ban on monetary financing. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  his  book  “Making  the  European  Monetary  Union”,  the  economic 
historian  Harold  James  drew  on  a  technical  analogy  to  describe  the  challenge  facing  the 
Maastricht  Approach.  He  wrote  that,  without  a  common fiscal  regime  and  without  a  stable 
financial  system,  the  monetary  union  had  a  very  high  centre  of  gravity  that  made  for 
vulnerability and instability. 
The crisis has again thrown the challenges confronting the Maastricht Approach into sharp 
relief. I am convinced of the importance of maintaining the euro as a stable currency. To stay 
with Harold James’ allegory, we must lower the centre of gravity of the monetary union so 
that it cannot be blown off-course so easily in future. 
3  
A reinforced framework for monetary union 
Two paths to a stable monetary union 
3.1  
Before  I  proceed  any  further,  let  me  say  this:  there  is  no  “panacea”  that  will  cure  the 
“European patient” overnight. Indeed, the temptation to seek a “quick fix”, an easy, politically 
“painless”  solution  –  we  hear  this  kind  of  talk  repeatedly  in  debates  about  the  role  of  the 
central banks – is nothing short of dangerous. 
The “acute measures” such as the provision of funds from the rescue packages, offer pain 
relief. They help to buy time for the necessary adjustments, but all they actually do is fight the 
symptoms. They cannot eliminate what caused the crisis. 
It will take time until the causes of the crisis have been treated. This treatment should seek to 
remedy  unsound  developments  at  the  national  level  while  stabilising  the  framework  of 
monetary  union  on  a  sustained  basis.  Thus,  the  very  first  priority  must  be  to  regain 
confidence in the soundness of the public finances of individual countries, in the stability of 
their financial systems and in the competitiveness of their economic structures. 
This  is  where  the  adjustment  programmes  come  in,  providing  assistance  with  conditions 
attached  or  promising  “solidarity  in  exchange  for  solidity”.  But  at  the  same  time,  this 
assistance undermines the no bail-out clause to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the 
form it takes. 
But  it’s  not  just  a  matter  of  correcting  national  policy.  Just  as  an  earthquake  reveals  how 
structurally  unsound  a  building  is,  so  the  crisis  has  exposed  the  shortcomings  in  the 
framework of the monetary union. 
What is more, the architects of the Maastricht framework underestimated certain elements 
which exacerbated the crisis, such as the contagion effects between the individual countries 
or between banks and governments as well as the significance of national macroeconomic 
imbalances. 
Essentially, there are two possible paths to a more stable monetary union. Either we dare to 
take the step towards deeper political integration or we enhance the current framework and 
strengthen the countries’ individual responsibility as a constituent element of the monetary 
union. 
Deeper  political  integration  could,  for  example,  be  a  fiscal  union.  However,  a  fiscal  union 
must not simply mean a greater mutualisation of liability: that would be a transfer union. A 
serious fiscal union would require the member states to transfer national sovereignty to the 
community  level  by  giving  the  community  the  necessary  right  to  intervene  in  the  event  of 
unsound public finances. Liability and control must be kept in balance if the incentive to incur 
debt,  which  is  inherent  in  the  monetary  union,  is  not  to  be  increased  and  if  the  monetary 
union is to prevail as a stable monetary union. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Such a transfer of sovereignty would be a radical move and require wide-ranging legislative 
changes  nationally  and  at  the  European  level.  Above  all,  such  a  step  towards  greater 
integration would need  not just political support but also public backing from the individual 
countries. On this point, however, we should remain realistic. The will to make these changes 
is not discernible at present – in the midst of the crisis – neither in Germany nor in any of our 
partner countries. 
For  the  time  being,  then,  our  only  option  is  the  second  path,  namely  to  strengthen  the 
present Maastricht framework. Amongst other things, this would involve giving the fiscal rules 
greater binding force, for they have been stretched and even ignored too often in past, with 
Germany not being entirely blameless in this respect. But that also requires the possibility of 
sovereign  default  as  the  ultimate  logical  conclusion  of  individual  responsibility,  without 
constantly endangering the stability of the European financial system. 
In this respect, the “new” Stability and Growth Pact is a step in the right direction. But it is not 
enough to merely have a set of “new”, tighter rules; these rules actually have to be applied 
and  filled  with  life.  This  is  where  the  European  Commission  has  a  particular  responsibility 
given the considerable discretionary powers it has in interpreting the new rules. I would not 
consider it appropriate to stretch the flexibility of the rules to the absolute limit from day one. 
In its August Monthly Report, the Bundesbank examined the recent decisions by the Ecofin 
Council  regarding  the  excessive  deficit  procedures  for  euro-area  countries  from  a  critical 
perspective.  Spain,  France,  Slovenia  and  Cyprus  were  each  granted  longer  deadlines  to 
make adjustments than those actually envisaged in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
However, derogations of this kind should be reserved for well-justified exceptional cases. For 
this  ultimately  results  in  a  weakening  of  the  structural  consolidation  requirements  and 
corrective action being pushed into the future. Granting exceptions to a number of countries 
simultaneously undermines the disciplinary effect of the fiscal rules. 
It is true that consolidation measures dampen growth in the short term; but from a long-term 
perspective, sound public finances and growth are not contradictory. On the contrary, only 
through sound public finances can sustainable growth be achieved. 
Consolidating  unsustainable  public  finances  and  running  an  efficient  government  create 
scope for economic activity in the private sector, thereby strengthening expansionary forces. 
What is more, consolidation is a crucial precondition for investors to regain confidence in the 
debt sustainability of the crisis-hit countries. This is the only way they can access the capital 
markets once more and shake off the need for assistance from partner countries. 
Politically, such a path of consolidation is not an easy one to take. Yet it is interesting to note 
that the path of consolidation meets with more approval from the European general public 
than  one  might  think,  judging  from  remarks  heard  from  political  quarters.  According  to  a 
survey  conducted  by  the  Pew  Research  Center,  only  around  one  third  of  Europeans 
questioned  believe  that  the  economic  problems  in  their  country  can  be  solved  by  raising 
government  spending.  Contrary  to  common  prejudices,  the  French  in  particular  are  for  an 
expenditure-based consolidation, with 81% in favour. The figure in Spain is 67%, and 59% in 
Italy.  In  Germany,  67%  of  individuals  polled  want  to  see  the  present  budgetary  stance 
maintained.  This  broad  consensus  of  opinion  in  the  major  member  countries  is  an 
encouraging sign. 
Setting up the banking union and accompanying regulatory measures 
3.2  
One of the lessons the crisis has taught is that the financial system needs to be reformed. It 
laid bare systemic vulnerabilities and revealed a fatal negative feedback loop between public 
finances and bank balance sheets which allows problems afflicting banks to spill over into the 
public sector. This is what happened in Spain and Ireland, for example. The bursting of the 
real estate bubble knocked a host of banks off balance, forcing the state to step in and itself 
run into difficulties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But the mechanism works in the other direction, too, as we have seen in Greece and Cyprus. 
The solvency problems weighing on the Greek government impaired the value of sovereign 
bonds  held  in  bank  balance  sheets,  which  meant  that  these  banks  then  needed  to  be 
rescued. Besides jeopardising financial stability in the euro area, this negative feedback loop 
also  neutralises  a  key  tenet  of  the  market  economy  –  the  no  bail-out  principle.  Walter 
Eucken’s  oft-repeated  principle  that  “those  who  benefit  shall  also  bear  the  costs”  offers 
importance guidance in this regard. 
It  was  to  rectify  these  problems  that  the  large-scale  institutional  project  entitled  “banking 
union”  was  rolled  out.  The  banking  union  consists  of  two  pillars.  The  first  is  a  single 
supervisory mechanism. The ECB is to be tasked with directly overseeing the most important 
banks  in  the  euro  area,  around  130  in  number,  the  aim  being  to  ensure  consistent 
compliance  with  high  prudential  requirements  throughout  the  member  states  and  to  take 
account of cross-border interaction. 
The  SSM  Regulation  will  probably  be  adopted  by  the  European  institutions  this  autumn, 
paving  the  way  for  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  to  get  to  work  by  the  ambitious 
deadline of autumn 2014. 
The second pillar is a single resolution and restructuring mechanism. The rationale behind 
this  instrument  is  that  systemically  important  banks  in  the  past  relied  on  an  implicit 
government  guarantee.  This  encouraged  them  to  run  up  disproportionately  high  risks  and 
ultimately meant that they had to be rescued by the taxpayer. To reduce the likelihood of this 
happening  in  the  future,  there  needs  to  be  a  way  to  wind  up  banks  –  ideally  without  the 
taxpayer having to foot the bill. 
Thus,  having  the  right  sequence  of  liability  is  key  in  bank  resolutions.  Shareholders  and 
creditors  are  the  ones  that  should  bear  the  losses.  Deposits  not  only  come  last  in  the 
sequence of liability but are additionally protected under the deposit guarantee regime. If this 
protection proves insufficient, a resolution fund financed by banks will have to step in. The 
taxpayer should no longer be the first in line but the very last link in this chain of liability. A 
set-up  like  this  can  mitigate  flawed  incentives  and  imbue  the  no  bail-out  principle  with 
renewed strength. 
In  July,  the  European  Commission  put  forward  its  proposal  for  a  European  resolution  and 
restructuring  mechanism,  which  contains  the  sequence  of  liability  I  just  mentioned.  Other 
aspects of this mechanism, like the question as to which institution should have the final say 
in resolving a bank, still need to be debated over the next few weeks, of course. 
However,  the  banking  union  should  not  already  have  a  political  millstone  around  its  neck 
when it gets started. That is to say that strict and thorough reviews will be needed to bring 
legacy risks lurking in bank balance sheets out into the open. Any capital shortfall that comes 
to light ought to be covered either by shareholders or the capital markets. State aid should 
only be available to banks running sustainable business models. 
Capital  shortfalls  arising  on  the  watch  of  national  supervisors  ought  to  be  covered  at  the 
national  level  as  well;  that  is,  by  the  banks’  home  countries.  Anything  else  would  be 
tantamount to a transfer, which should be disclosed as such. Balance sheet risks must not 
be smuggled to the community level under the cloak of the banking union. 
Bank  balance  sheets  always  partly  reflect  national  economic  developments  and  a  host  of 
economic  policy  decisions.  As  long  as  key  variables  continue  to  be  decided  upon  at  the 
national level, introducing comprehensive mutual liability would be the wrong thing to do. 
A  banking  union  can  help  to  sever  the  negative  feedback  loop  linking  governments  and 
banks, and it can enhance financial stability. But further action will be needed if we are to 
prevent this vicious circle from simply being shifted from the national to the European level. 
That  means  putting  an  end  to  the  preferential  treatment  given  to  sovereign  risk  in  bank 
balance  sheets.  Banks’  substantial  exposure  to  sovereign  risk  –  which  even  increased  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
some  quarters  during  the  crisis  –  owed  something  to  the  0%  risk  weight  for  government 
bonds and the absence of upper limits for lending to governments. 
Putting an end to this practice of privileging sovereign debt over corporate loans would also 
represent a major step towards making lending to businesses more attractive again. 
That’s  not  the  only  regulatory  measure  that’s  of  decisive  importance.  Higher  capital 
requirements are key to ensuring that banks can withstand greater losses under their own 
steam, thereby shifting risk back to shareholders. This process got underway with the Basel 
III regime and now needs to be rigorously implemented. 
Having  a  mechanism  that  facilitates  the  orderly  resolution  or  restructuring  of  large, 
international and highly interconnected banks in the event of difficulties – otherwise known as 
the “too big to fail” problem – is equally important in future. Progress has been rather mixed 
so far on the implementation of internationally agreed standards for resolution regimes. 
Role of monetary policy 
4  
Finally, I would like to turn to central banks’ role in resolving the crisis. The causes of the 
crisis are structural. This is why only structural measures can resolve the crisis. 
Monetary  policy  –  that  is,  the  Eurosystem  –  has  already  done  a  great  deal  to  contain  the 
crisis. The Eurosystem has cut key interest rates and it is supplying banks with practically 
unlimited amounts of liquidity. On top of this, in July ECB President Mario Draghi provided 
forward  guidance  on  the  ECB’s  future  monetary  policy  stance,  indicating  that  key  interest 
rates would remain at present or lower levels for the foreseeable future. 
Though the design details of these monetary policy measures are debatable, the action itself 
was essentially correct. However, the longer the phase of low interest rates continues, the 
blunter  the  loose  monetary  policy  instrument  becomes;  risks  to  financial  stability  increase 
and the exit becomes more difficult. 
The Eurosystem also intervened in the government bond markets, however, and raised the 
prospect of further interventions subject to certain conditions. You will be aware that I take a 
critical view of these steps. 
For  by  purchasing  government  bonds  of  countries  that  are  finding  it  difficult  to  place  their 
bonds  in  the  market,  central  banks  are  redistributing  the  burden  of  unsound  fiscal  policy 
throughout  the  euro  area.  Ultimately,  this  is  tantamount  to  mutualising  liability  for  the 
individual  countries’  debts  via  the  central  bank.  Doing  so  blurs  the  boundaries  between 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy  and  might  end  in  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  being 
called  into  question.  Redistributing  risk  in  this  manner  ought  to  be  the  sole  prerogative  of 
elected parliaments. And it naturally also  weakens the no bail-out principle and lowers the 
pressure to reform. 
The members of the ECB Governing Council do, however, agree that monetary policy cannot 
resolve  the  crisis.  Only  by  implementing  the  aforementioned  structural  reforms  in  the 
member  states  and  by  making  adjustments  to  the  framework  of  monetary  union  will  we 
succeed in overcoming the crisis in a lasting fashion and safeguarding the euro’s future as a 
stable currency. 
Conclusion 
5  
Ladies and gentlemen 
Until the crisis erupted, practically no-one disputed that the European Union’s evolution into a 
monetary union had brought benefits for all member states. 
Yet  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area  has  placed  an  immense  strain  on  the  foundations  of  the 
monetary union, and many of the crisis management measures have skewed the equilibrium 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
between  liability  and  control.  And  we  should  take  care  that  the  entire  package  of  crisis 
management  measures  in  combination  does  not  effectively  create  a  new  institutional 
framework which poses greater problems going forward. 
Hence,  a  key  challenge  for  economic  policy  will  be  to  fill  the  no  bail-out  principle  with 
renewed vigour, both in the financial system and throughout the monetary union as a whole. 
Transforming  the  bank  rescue  packages  already  granted  by  the  EFSF  or  ESM  into  ESM 
direct bank recapitalisation instruments – something which Ireland and Greece are looking to 
achieve – is not helpful in this connection. 
And  it  is  key  to  uphold  and  defend  the  role  played  by  central  banks  as  independent 
institutions with a clear focus on safeguarding price stability. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
