Gill Marcus: Lessons for South Africa from Germany in a challenging 
global environment 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Southern 
African-German  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  luncheon,  Johannesburg,  19  April 
2013. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. We meet at a time when the IMF Spring 
meetings  are  taking  place  in  Washington.  The  mood  in  Washington  appears  to  be  less 
sombre than was the case in the previous meetings, as the three big high-risk, high impact 
concerns of last year – a possible Eurozone breakup, the US fiscal cliff and a possible hard 
landing in China – have been avoided or at least postponed for now. However the low growth 
environment  looks  set  to  persist,  and  the  World  Economic  Outlook  of  the  IMF  published 
earlier this week indicates that global growth is unlikely to be much better than was the case 
in 2012. Recent political and banking sector developments in Cyprus, Portugal, Spain and 
Italy illustrate just how fragile the recovery remains.  
Although  in  recent  years  there  have  been  important  shifts  in  South  Africa’s  trade  ties, 
diversifying away from our traditional partners, Europe remains an important destination for 
our exports and an important source of both direct and portfolio investment. Germany ranks 
second in terms of destination of South Africa’s manufactured exports and the outlook for the 
South African economy therefore remains intricately tied to the fortunes of the region, and to 
Germany in particular.  
In  my  remarks to  you  today  I  will  outline  how  we  see  the  outlook for the  global  economy. 
However, beyond our trade and investment relationships, there are a number of lessons that 
South Africa can learn from Germany’s experience with labour relations and skills training, 
which are important elements of the kind of structural shifts that are required if South Africa is 
to compete effectively in the international trade arena, and to make appreciable inroads into 
the country’s unemployment problem.  
Global developments are critical for the South African economy going forward, and we look 
forward to a revival in world trade to help drive the domestic recovery. The cautious optimism 
that was evident at the beginning of the year, what some refer to as the “new year effect”, 
has  now  given  way  to  renewed  concerns.  The  IMF  forecasts  global  growth  this  year  to 
average  3,3  percent,  compared  with  3,2  per  cent  in  2012  but  down  on  their  previous 
estimates.  The  IMF  still  sees  the  recovery  as  fragile,  with  downside  risks  remaining, 
particularly in advanced economies. The World Trade Organisation last week downgraded its 
forecast for growth in world trade in 2013 from 4,5 per cent to 3,3 per cent (well below the 
long  run  trade  growth  of  6  per  cent),  mainly  a  result  of  renewed  risks  coming  from  the 
Eurozone and the impact of rising protectionism.  
We are in effect seeing a continuation of the crisis which has mutated between a subprime 
crisis, a growth crisis, a fiscal crisis, a sovereign debt crisis, a systemic banking crisis and a 
political crisis. All of these aspects are of course interrelated, and very often the resolution of 
one creates problems in another sphere. Nowhere is it more evident than in Europe where 
weak politics and weak economic outcomes and outlooks feed off each other. The banking 
crisis  in  Cyprus  illustrates  clearly  how  even  very  small  countries  can  be  potentially 
systemically important.  
While it appears that the tail risks related to the Eurozone have receded somewhat, these 
risks have not disappeared. Recent interventions by governments and the ECB, in particular 
the OMT, have shown a credible commitment to maintaining the integrity of the region, but 
important structural changes will need to be made in the medium to long term. In the short 
term,  Europe  is  experiencing  a  recession  and  rising  unemployment,  due  in  part  to  fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
austerity  and  banking  sector  deleveraging.  The  economic  downturn  in  the  periphery  has 
been worse than official projections, and this could reinforce the adverse government debt 
dynamics  and  raise  anew  the  questions  of  the sustainability  of the regional  arrangements, 
and the political acceptability of fiscal austerity. At the same time, progress seems to have 
stalled on banking reforms in the region, and the initial indecision regarding the bail-out of the 
Cyprus  banking  system  has  probably  undermined  progress  on  these  reforms,  as  well  as 
raising new concerns about safety of deposits.  
The other major lagging economy is Japan, and the outlook is perhaps a bit more difficult to 
assess following the announcement of significant monetary and fiscal stimulus packages. It 
is  not  clear  to  what  extent  the  massive  liquidity  injection  US$1,4  trillion  over  the  next  two 
years announced by the Bank of Japan will result in higher domestic expenditure. What is 
more  certain  is  that  the  monetary  stimulus  is  likely  to  lead  to  renewed  capital  flows  to 
emerging  market  economies,  with  their  attendant  challenges.  We  have  already  seen  the 
short term impact of this policy announcement, with the recent recovery of the rand to levels 
below R9,00 against the US dollar.  
The  outlook  for  the  United  States  is  a  bit  more  positive,  with  the  worst  of  the  fiscal  cliff 
scenarios having been averted. The nascent recovery in the US housing market, the pick-up 
in  private  sector  investment,  and  the  recovery  in  the  banking  system  point  to  a  more 
favourable  outcome  than  was  feared  in  the  latter  part  of  last  year.  But  some  of  the  fiscal 
issues  have  merely  been  delayed  and  not  fully  resolved,  so  the  potential  for  a  further 
negative shock to growth remains. The so-called “sequester” came into effect a few weeks 
ago, and the negative impact of this will become apparent in due course. The most recent 
data coming out of the US suggest a moderation in the second quarter following weak retail 
sales in March, slower employment growth and the fall in the Michigan consumer confidence 
index to a nine-month low in April, as the effects of higher taxes begin to take effect.  
Even  in  the  event  of  a  relatively  positive  growth  scenario,  US  monetary  policy  is  likely  to 
remain highly accommodative for some time to come, with implications for the persistence of 
capital flows to emerging markets. The recently published minutes of the FOMC suggest that 
there has been consideration given to moderating the pace of quantitative easing, and there 
are  fears  that  this  could  result  in  significant  reversals  of  capital  flows  from  emerging 
economies.  However,  we  believe  that  for  this  reversal  to  occur  will  require  a  sustained 
improvement  in  the  unemployment  situation.  Any  exit  strategy  is  likely  to  be  measured,  to 
ensure that it does not undermine any nascent recovery. The eventual normalisation of US 
monetary policy is likely to signal a return to sustained growth, which will contribute positively 
to  the  global  recovery.  Furthermore,  an  early  reversal  of  quantitative  easing  may  also  be 
offset by quantitative easing in Japan.  
Fears of a hard landing in China have abated, and although a return to previous elevated 
growth  rates  is  unlikely,  the  expected  growth  rates  of  around  8  per  cent  should  help  to 
underpin  the  demand  for  and  the  price  of  commodities,  which  is  critical  for  South  Africa’s 
growth outlook.  
There is little doubt that there has been a tectonic shift in the drivers of global growth. The 
emergence of countries such as Brazil, Russia, China and India, for example, has changed 
the epicentre of global economic activity. The Brics share of global GDP has increased three-
fold in the past 15 years, and this share is currently around 20 per cent in market terms and 
about 30 per cent in PPP terms. According to Arvind Subramanian of the Peterson Institute 
of International Economics, this latter share is expected to increase to as much as 45 per 
cent by about 2030.  
South Africa is now part of the BRICS grouping, and although a relatively small partner, we 
are full members and are working to maximize the opportunities that present themselves. We 
are also aware that there are other countries that are also deserving of being members of 
this club, and a further indication of how a growing number of emerging markets are part of 
the shifting economic paradigm. Our membership should also be seen in the context of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economy being a gateway to Africa, which has been one of the outperforming regions in the 
past number of years, and which is expected to continue to grow at rates of around 5 per 
cent.  
As a region, Africa is the most important destination of our manufactured exports, and China 
has now become South Africa’s largest trading partner, although much of our exports to that 
country are commodities or commodity based. Despite these developments, the experience 
of the past few years has shown that emerging markets cannot completely decouple from the 
advanced  economies.  But  the  continued  weakness  in  South  Africa’s  traditional  trading 
partners  in  the  Eurozone  and  the  UK  underlines  the  need  to  seek  new  markets  for 
manufactured exports.  
Germany has long been one of South Africa’s traditional trading partners, and remains the 
second  largest  destination  by  country  for  South  Africa’s  manufactured  exports,  after  the 
United  States.  In  2012,  the  value  of  these  exports,  mainly  machinery  and  electrical 
equipment, amounted to R21,8 bn and accounted for about 60 per cent of our total exports to 
Germany. On the trade front, we still run a fairly large deficit with Germany, with total exports 
of R37,8 billion, and imports of R84,0 billion. Most of these imports are manufactured goods. 
In addition, Germany is one of the most important sources of direct foreign direct investment, 
with  around  620  German  companies  operating  in  the  country,  employing  approximately 
90,000 people. German firms have invested R33.7 billion in South Africa since 2003.  
Trade and investment flows are important not only for employment, but also from a balance 
of  payments  perspective.  Since  the  crisis,  the  weak  recovery  in  the  advanced  economies 
constrained South Africa’s export growth which impacted adversely on the trade account of 
the balance of payments, particularly at a time when the exchange rate was relatively strong 
in response to strong capital inflows to emerging market economies.  
The  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  widened  significantly  in  2012  when  it 
measured  6,3  per  cent.  This  deterioration  was  driven  in  part  by  strong  import  growth, 
particularly  those  related  to  infrastructural  expenditure  investment  by  the  state-owned 
enterprises. These imports will contribute to expansion of existing capacity and efficiencies in 
the  economy  as  well  as  to  future  growth,  but  are  likely  to  remain  at  elevated  levels  and 
relatively  insensitive  to  exchange  rate  developments.  However,  the  disturbing  aspect  of 
recent  trends  has  been  the  weak  recovery  of  South  Africa’s  exports  despite  a  marked 
improvement in our terms of trade since 2010.  
Part  of  this  has  been  due  to  the  slow  global  recovery.  But  this  is  not  the  whole  story,  as 
South Africa’s export performance has lagged that of its emerging economy peers who have 
faced  the  same  global  environment.  Slow  export  growth  was  also  an  outcome  of  the 
widespread  stoppages  in  the  mining  sector  last  year,  which  adversely  affected  the  export 
performance  of  our  main  source  of  exports.  But  non-mining  exports  have  also 
underperformed, and we need to learn from the experience of countries such as Germany as 
to how to improve competitiveness under adverse circumstances.  
The main export sectors of the South African economy therefore face a challenging outlook, 
from both external and internal sources. Commodity prices, apart from the gold price, have 
not  generally  recovered  to  pre-crisis  levels,  and  their  volatility  is  illustrated  by  their  sharp 
decline in recent days. At the same time input costs, particularly electricity and wage costs, 
have  risen  significantly  and  the  sector  is  beset  by  an  increasingly  difficult  labour  relations 
environment. The manufacturing sector remains vulnerable to the continued weak demand 
from Europe while its import and export competitiveness was also adversely affected by the 
appreciation  of  the  currency  in  2010/11.  Following  the  recent  depreciation  of  the  rand  the 
outlook for the sector is more positive, but nevertheless fragile.  
The exchange rate is an important part of this story. As we have seen the rand has been on 
a depreciating trend over the past few months, but has also been highly volatile.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
these 
The Consumer Price Index increased by 5,9 percent in March this year, the same increase 
as  in  February.  The  year-on-year  price  increases  were  mainly  driven  by  the  categories  of 
housing  and  utilities  and  transport,  with  the  higher  petrol  prices  impacted  by  the  weaker 
exchange rate, and the exchange rate remains an upside risk to the inflation outlook. These 
factors  are  expected  to  contribute  to  a  temporary  breach  of  the  inflation  target  during  this 
year.  It  also  appears  that  medium  term  inflation  expectations  remain  anchored  inside  the 
inflation target.  
Although the depreciation of the exchange rate does create challenges for monetary policy 
because  of  the  adverse  impact  on  inflation,  a  floating  exchange  rate  acts  as  a  shock 
absorber and is an important part of the adjustment process in dealing with a deteriorating 
current account deficit. Nevertheless the underlying structural issues remain, which will make 
it  all  the  more  important  for  South  Africa  to  improve  its  domestic  savings  performance,  as 
well as to continue to attract sufficient volumes of foreign capital, preferably  in the form of 
direct investment, an area where German companies have been particularly strong.  
But the importance of Germany goes beyond simply looking at our economic ties. There is a 
lot that we can learn from the German experience. This is particularly the case with respect 
to labour relations and skills training.  
Much of Germany’s post war economic success can be attributed to its Social Market model. 
While this model is peculiar to Germany, there are many lessons for South Africa. Allow me 
to  expand  on  three  of  these  aspects  –  industrial  relations,  training  and  investment  in 
continuous  competitive  enhancements.  Naturally, 
three  aspects  are  mutually 
reinforcing.  
Germany’s  industrial  relations  are  characterised  by  a  high  degree  of  cooperation  between 
employer and employee organisations. Both workers and firms take a long term view of the 
economy and both parties recognise the importance of continuously raising productivity. Both 
parties understand the need to share the productivity gains. This allows for an alignment of 
incentives  between  workers  and  employers.  At  a  micro  or firm  level,  there  are  appropriate 
mechanisms to resolve disputes early and in a win-win spirit. In South Africa, we need to find 
models that enable earlier dispute resolution in the workplace before labour disputes affect 
the broader economy. We also need to find ways that enable the work force to have greater 
knowledge of the financial affairs of the company and sector, while management needs to 
better appreciate the living and working conditions of their employees.  
Germany  has  a  dual  training  system  with  high  quality  vocational  training  institutions 
complementing  on-the-job  training  by  firms.  In  Germany,  nearly  two-thirds  of  the  country’s 
workers  are  trained  through  partnerships  among  companies,  technical  schools  and  trade 
guilds.  In  2011,  German  companies  took  on  and  trained  nearly  600  000  paid  apprentices. 
The schools provide theoretical lessons on the side, while trade unions help ensure training 
is standardised. German firms take in young work-seekers and provide a period of training 
and  induction  in  order  to  prepare  young  workers  for  the  rigours  of  work  and  to  give  new 
workers the skills required to raise their own productivity. These apprenticeship schemes are 
based on a partnership between the state, employers and training institutions. Firms benefit 
by receiving support from the state to take on new work seekers.  
More importantly, they benefit from the high quality training provided both by public training 
institutions  and  by  on-the-job  training  provided  by  the  firm.  The  outcome  for  the  firm  is  a 
steady  supply  of  young  workers  with  the  knowledge  and  training  to  fit  into  a  globally 
competitive  economy.  The  outcome  for  society  as  a  whole  is  that  new  entrants  can  gain 
access to work and training quickly, meaning that long term unemployment is low. Germany 
has amongst the lowest youth unemployment rates in the world, currently standing at 7,7 per 
cent, compared with the Eurozone average of 23,9 per cent.  
South Africa by contrast, has amongst the highest rates of youth unemployment in the world 
at 51 per cent, with our young people locked out of the workplace both due to poor skills and 
a lack of suitable experience. The pre-1990 system of apprenticeship that prevailed, although 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
by no means perfect, was abandoned without an adequate replacement being put in place. 
The record of the SETA’s has been patchy at best, so there is no overall coherent focus on 
skills  training  in  the  country. The result  is that when  large  scale  infrastructure  projects  are 
undertaken, many of the skills have to be imported.  
Germany  is  one  of  the  few  developed  countries  to  maintain  a  globally  competitive 
manufacturing  sector.  It  has  done  this  because  it  has  been  able  to  invest  in  capital  to 
continuously  raise  productivity  and  because  of  its  ability  to  produce  a  steady  stream  of 
competent  and  appropriately  skilled  young  workers.  Germany  has  used  the  furnace  of  an 
open economy to put pressure on both workers and firms to remain productive and remain at 
the cutting edge of technology. While several sectors in South Africa are globally competitive, 
there are too many sectors that are not. South Africa has to raise its competitiveness across 
the  board,  but  particularly  in  the  tradable goods  and  services  sector. This  is  the  only  long 
term  solution  to  structural  weaknesses  in  our  economy  that  presents  itself  through  large 
current account deficits.  
The combination of these three policies; industrial relations, training and competitiveness has 
allowed  Germany  to  emerge from  the global financial  crisis  in  a  much better  position than 
almost any other advanced economy. When demand for goods and services fell in 2008 and 
2009, many countries saw large-scale job-losses. In most countries, including South Africa, it 
is  seen  as  normal  for firms  to  reduce  staff  numbers  when  demand  falls.  During  the  crisis, 
almost one million jobs were lost in South Africa, and we are still not back at pre-crisis levels. 
The unemployment rate measured 21,8 per cent in the third quarter of 2008, but deteriorated 
during the crisis to reach a peak of 25,7 per cent in the second quarter of 2011, and currently 
stands at 24,9 per cent.  
In  Germany,  both  firms  and  workers  opted  to  reduce  working  hours  and  hence  income, 
rather than face retrenchments. Government supported firms by subsidising training, allowing 
firms  to  use  the  period  of  slower  demand  to  retool  and  to  raise  the  skills  profile  of  its 
workforce.  The  result  was  that  unemployment  increased  moderately  from  7,1  per  cent  in 
October 2008 to a peak of 8,0 per cent in July 2009, and in February of this year measured 
5,4 per cent, compared with a Eurozone average of 12,0 per cent. Low unemployment in turn 
meant that domestic demand held up more strongly than in other comparable countries. And 
despite significant pressure from new emerging market competitors, Germany has remained 
competitive in its key high tech, specialised manufacturing sectors.  
In  South  Africa,  we  too  introduced  a  training  lay-off  scheme  whereby  firms  would  move 
workers  from  production  to  training  when  demand  was  low,  partly  subsidised  by  the 
Unemployment Insurance Fund. Sadly, this scheme was not subscribed to as widely as the 
policy-makers intended. This is partly due to uncertainty on the pace of economic recovery 
and partly due to low levels of trust between firms, workers and government.  
We  have  seen  some  aspects  of  these  policies  applied  by  German  firms  in  South  Africa. 
There has been considerable success in raising productivity in the motor industry, thanks in 
large part to the training model of many German firms. Our challenge is to broaden these 
lessons. When economists talk of the benefits that foreign direct investment brings, they do 
not  only  talk  about  the  direct  benefits  of  capital  and  machinery.  They  also  talk  about 
technology,  management  practices  and  systems  of  innovation.  When  these  occur,  the 
recipient country benefits far more than can be measured by the amount of money that has 
flowed in.  
In  order  to  tackle  high  levels  of  unemployment  in  South  Africa,  we  seek  not  just  foreign 
investment.  We  seek  long  term  partnerships,  partnerships  that  will  be  mutually  beneficial. 
South Africa has a huge skills mismatch. This mismatch will not be resolved overnight, but 
firms  can  take  the  lessons  from  Germany  and  help  to  build  a  workforce  that  is  skilled, 
satisfied and globally competitive. Unless firms realise that it is in their long term interests to 
develop their workers, we are not likely to benefit from the synergies of public education and 
training and firm level training.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The year ending March 2013 was declared the German – South African year of science. This 
partnership between our two countries to advance scientific cooperation and development is 
a  practical  example  of  how  our  countries  can  cooperate  to  achieve  mutually  beneficial 
outcomes.  We  call  on  both  South  African  and  German  firms  to  use  partnerships  such  as 
these to pursue scientific and technological cooperation to the benefit of all parties.  
We trust that our strong relationship can and will be further strengthened in the coming years 
through  deeper  cooperation,  higher  bilateral  trade  and  greater  investment  in  capital  and 
people.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
