Andrew Bailey: Meeting the challenges of a changing world – the view 
from the Prudential Regulation Authority 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer of the Prudential Regulation Authority at the Bank of England, at the Association of 
British Insurers Biennial Conference, London, 9 July 2013. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak today. It is just over three months since the new system of 
financial regulation in the UK came into being. There are over 700 insurers in this country 
now subject to prudential supervision by the PRA and conduct supervision by the FCA (in 
addition, insurance brokers are entirely supervised by the FCA). Today, I want to talk about 
how the PRA is going about the prudential supervision of insurers. There are good reasons 
to argue that the insurance industry has been relatively little affected by the financial crisis in 
terms  of  instability  in  the  industry,  but  of  course  that  does  not  extend  to  arguing  that  the 
industry  is  unaffected  by  the  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis,  that  could  never  be  the 
case. So, there are very real challenges for insurers. 
Why do we single out banks and insurers for prudential supervision by the PRA? The reason 
for locating insurance and banking in the PRA is that we have learned during the crisis that 
our job as prudential supervisors is to ensure that the public and users of financial services, 
including the corporate sector, can be assured of continuous access to the critical services 
on  which  they  depend.  Let  me  also  make  clear  at  the  outset  that  insurance  supervision 
matters as much to us as bank supervision. The crisis has given us more challenges with 
banks, but our statutory objectives make clear that our attention must be on both industries. 
Many financial services may be regarded as critical by their users, but some are distinctive 
because  it  is  hard  for  consumers  to  replace  their  provider  with  a  substitute  without 
unacceptable  cost  and  loss.  Insurers  provide  critical  services  to  the  public  in  terms  of  risk 
transfer and very long-lived savings contracts. This last point draws out that insurance is not 
a single homogenous industry – general and life insurance are very different activities – and 
we recognise that in our supervision. It would not be acceptable to the public for their access 
to risk transfer through, say home or car insurance, or professional indemnity insurance, to 
name but a few, to be withdrawn in a disruptive and unannounced way. In the same way, 
savings  contracts  that  are  long-lived  and  provided  by  life  insurers,  and  are  often  an 
individual’s  primary  pension  provision,  are  critical  financial  services  that  are  difficult  to 
replace  without  unacceptable  cost.  There  is  therefore  a  common  feature  of  banking  and 
insurance in terms of continuity of access to critical financial services. 
The PRA has the general objective of ensuring the safety and soundness of the firms under 
its  regulation.  Safety  and  soundness  is  defined  in  terms  of  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system, which in itself is closely linked to the access of users to critical financial services on 
a continuous basis. But for insurance we have a second objective, namely the protection of 
policyholders. 
Why do we have a second objective for insurance? For me, the reason is that continuity of 
insurance protection – of risk transfer and long-term savings products – requires a greater 
assurance  that  the  policyholder  has  access  to  their  contract  –  in  other  words,  it  is  quite 
contract  specific,  and  in  some  cases  those  contracts  are  long-term  in  nature.  For  banks, 
depositors want continuity of access to funds, but they have less need of access to the exact 
contract – deposits can be moved. Put another way, most of the underlying risks to banks 
arise  from  their  assets,  whereas  for  insurers  they  arise  from  liabilities  and  assets.  So,  we 
need somewhat different objectives for prudential supervision. 
The  traditional  model  of  supervision  has  been  quite  industry  specific.  The  FSA  regime 
introduced  in  1997  created  a  single  authority,  but  within  the  FSA  the  framework  of  rules 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
applied to insurance supervision was unique to the industry. It is true that in the run-up to the 
start  of  the  crisis,  and  for  some  time  thereafter,  the  FSA  mingled  insurance  and  bank 
supervision in terms of its operating units, but I think that did not work effectively, and the 
FSA and now the PRA moved to a clear distinction, with insurance supervision headed by 
Julian Adams. Insurance supervision is a skill of its own, and while our supervisors do move 
roles  between  insurance  and  banking  in  both  directions,  we  want  to  ensure  that  we  have 
groups of truly expert insurance and banking supervisors. 
Recently,  we  have  taken  a  further  step  on  insurance  supervision  by  formalising  two 
directorates,  for  General  and  Life  Insurance,  reporting  to  Julian,  and  headed  by  Chris 
Moulder and Andrew Bulley respectively. Chris and Andrew bring a wealth of experience of 
insurance supervision and for Chris auditing. Alongside Julian, Chris and Andrew is a policy 
directorate  headed  by  Paul  Sharma  who  is,  I  think  I  can  say,  a  true  veteran  of  insurance 
supervision. And, I am delighted that Nick Prettejohn has joined the PRA Board. Nick brings 
extensive insurance expertise to our work as a board. 
Most  important  of  all,  we  have  a  new  Governor  and  Chairman  of  the  PRA  Board,  Mark 
Carney.  I  am  delighted  to  be  working  with  Mark,  and  he  also  brings  his  experience  as 
Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, which is spearheading the work to create simple 
global capital standards for insurers as a central plank of its work on insurers which are of 
significance to the financial system. I will say some more on this later. 
I hear occasionally the charge that the PRA and the Bank lack senior level knowledge and 
experience in insurance. As I hope you can tell, I don’t accept that argument. 
The  Bank  of  England  has  the  objective  of  promoting financial  stability  by  ensuring  a more 
resilient  financial  system  that,  inter  alia,  is  able  to  support  the  credit  creation  and  asset 
allocation  necessary  to  build  and  sustain  economic  recovery.  A  more  resilient  financial 
system will support that recovery, and by reforming and bringing the Bank’s monetary and 
financial stability objectives closer together, I can assure you that we are working very hard 
to use our toolkit to the best advantage. And this includes insurance supervision, where the 
new arrangements have already brought about a closer understanding of the role of insurers 
in the transmission of monetary policy, and the issues that arise in a world of sustained very 
low interest rates and Quantitative Easing. 
A key part of the new structure of the Bank of England is the Financial Policy  Committee. 
The  FPC  has  the  so-called  macro-prudential  responsibility  which  has  at  its  heart  the 
resilience of the financial system as a whole. The FPC has a crucial role both to scan the 
financial system for threats to that resilience, and to ensure by recommendation, or in some 
situations  direction,  to  those  bodies  such  as  the  PRA  and  FCA  directly  charged  with 
institutional regulation, that mitigating actions are put in place. It is therefore quite natural that 
the FPC is interested to know that the PRA is conducting stress testing of insurers, and to 
know  whether  those  tests  are  appropriate  to the  objectives  of financial  stability.  Moreover, 
the  FPC  needs  to  question  whether,  even  if  individual  firms  are  doing  the  right  thing,  the 
system as a whole is resilient. This is the essence of macro-prudential regulation. It can, and 
should, ask questions which transcend firm level supervision, such as whether the level of 
inter-connectedness of participating firms is a cause of excessive weakness in its own right. 
We want the public to have confidence in the financial system, and let’s face it in some areas 
we have a lot of hard work to do. Now, to do that, we have to build a better understanding of 
the  new  regime  and  what  we  are  trying  to  do  to  achieve  our  statutory  objectives.  The  old 
ways  of  doing  things  were  surrounded  by  some  mystique  and  a  lot  of  privacy.  There  is  a 
need  for  appropriate  privacy  because  the  firms  we  regulate  embody  important  private 
interests,  and  those  are  crucial  to  a  functioning  market  economy.  Regulators  do  not  run 
firms;  that  is  not  our  job.  We  represent  the  public  interest  with  objectives  given  to  us  by 
Parliament, for which we are accountable to Parliament. We must be, and no doubt will be, 
held to high standards as we seek to balance our pursuit of the public interest with a properly 
functioning market economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We have set out how we supervise insurance companies in our approach document. We are 
a  judgement-based  supervisor,  based  on  evidence  and  against  a  framework  of  rules. 
Judgement must be forward-looking as we have to assess risks to our objectives. I know that 
this emphasis on judgement can ruffle feathers – it can make us seem intrusive. I want our 
use of judgement to be always focussed on the key risks to our objectives. 
We  are  though  conscious  of  the  need  to  be  proportionate  in  our  approach  and  to  take 
account  of  the  regulatory  burden  we  are  placing  on  firms.  In  order  to  do  so,  insurers  are 
divided  into  five  categories  of  impact.  Category  one  insurers  pose  the  greatest  risk  to  the 
PRA  objectives  through  their  size,  interconnectedness,  complexity  or  business  type  and 
category five insurers pose the least risk. Every firm has been told which category they are in 
and this should provide an indication of the level of supervisory interaction they can expect 
from the PRA. Moreover, we are not aiming to be a “no firm failure” regulator; rather, we aim 
to minimise adverse consequences if a firm fails. 
An important part of our new supervisory approach is a focus on business model analysis. 
This might come across as a bit of a fad, but it isn’t meant to be. Instead it is grounded in 
such  basic  questions  as:  where  does  the  firm  make  money;  are  the  revenue  streams 
sustainable; how well does the firm stand up to tests of stresses on its balance sheet; does it 
generate cash flow to cover dividends; is the leverage of the firm sustainable; what are the 
risks  from  competition  on  premium  income;  are  there  conduct  risks  which  could  pose  a 
prudential  threat?  These  are  basic  questions,  but  in  another  field,  if  the  answers  to  such 
questions had prompted action in the past by banks, history would be different. 
What I  have just  described  is  judgemental  supervision  that must  be forward-looking to the 
risks that may arise. This is crucial, and was not properly a part of the pre-crisis approach to 
supervision. Let me give a few current examples of this for insurers. 
We are focused on the impact of very low interest rates staying with us for a protracted time, 
and when I say this I am offering no view whatsoever on the likely course of monetary policy. 
Likewise,  we  want  to  know  that  the  prudential  position  of  firms  also  captures  the  possible 
impact of an unexpected upward shift in the slope of the yield curve, and again I am offering 
no view on monetary policy. 
The FPC in its most recent recommendations, from last month, has asked us, working with 
the  FCA  and  other  areas  of  the  Bank,  to  provide  an  assessment  to  the  FPC  of  the 
vulnerability of borrowers and financial institutions to sharp upward movements in long-term 
interest rates and credit spreads in the current low interest rate environment. There will be a 
report back to the FPC in September. This work will include insurers, and it will go along with 
the  stress  testing  under  way,  which  also  –  rightly  –  includes  a  “rates  stay  low  for  long” 
outlook too. 
Another  example  of  business  model  risk  I  would  give  comes  from  the  impact  of  conduct 
issues. I am a very strong advocate of our new system, not least because it recognises that 
conduct and prudential supervision of insurers are different specialisms. My interest is in the 
possible  prudential  threats  from  any  conduct  issues.  I  am  therefore  keenly  interested  in 
Martin Wheatley’s assessment of these consequences and threats. 
Finally, on business models, the work that we are doing to assess risks at an individual firm 
level and a sector level is complementary to the work that we expect firms to be undertaking. 
We believe that it is important that senior management of all insurers, big and small, take 
responsibility  for  understanding  and  mitigating  the  risks  in  their  business  and  be  able  to 
demonstrate  to  us  that  they  are  doing  this.  I  realise  that  the  Parliamentary  Commission 
chaired by Andrew Tyrie was about banks and their record. But it raised an important theme 
that  has  to  be  considered  more  widely,  namely  that  our  approach  to  supervision  of  firms 
ensures that senior individuals are properly accountable and thus incentivised. The record of 
the  banking  crisis  indicates  that  this  senior  accountability  was  not  effective  in  banks  that 
failed.  Often,  the  simplest  points  are  the  most  powerful,  and  complexity  is  a  poor  guide. 
Andrew Tyrie and his colleagues have done a great service by making a simple but powerful 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
point – as supervisors we must incentivise and hold to account those at the top, and not seek 
to do the job of management by influencing excessively further down. 
I could not end without talking about Europe and Solvency II and wider global developments 
in insurance regulation. A month or two ago I ruffled a few feathers by criticising the cost and 
time taken preparing for a European Directive that isn’t finalised. I have no regrets, because 
as  public  officials  we  have  to  speak  honestly  and  transparently.  I  was  making  a  point  on 
behalf of firms because I feel strongly that you have been put to too much expense and time 
spent by management and boards. But, in saying this, I should be clear that the PRA has not 
withdrawn from involvement in Solvency II, far from it. 
As Tidjane said this morning, the insurance industry and its regulators cannot operate in a 
vacuum.  This  is  why  we  continue  to  invest  a  large  amount  of  our  time  engaging  with  our 
counterparts in Europe as well as with the European Supervisory Authorities, the ESAs. We 
liaise  closely  with  EIOPA,  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority. 
Julian Adams sits on the EIOPA Board of Supervisors and Management Board and this gives 
us an opportunity to participate at a European level. 
A  few  weeks  ago,  EIOPA  reported  on  the  critical  issue  of  the  long-term  guarantees 
assessment  and  closed  its  consultation  on  proposals  for  preparatory  guidelines.  We  now 
have acceptance that the classic matching adjustment is a prudent measure, which is hugely 
important for the UK life insurance industry. We know that many of you still have concerns 
around  the  restrictions  built  into  the  classic  matching  adjustment,  particularly  around  the 
assets that can be used and the effect of possible downgrades in portfolios which are held 
for the long-term. We will continue to push for a prudent solution that will meet the needs of 
UK insurers and allows for the continued provision of annuities to policyholders. In doing so, 
we recognise that some restrictions are needed for the classic matching adjustment to be an 
effective and prudent measure. 
The  importance  of  the  EIOPA  recommendations  and  their  acceptance  by  the  European 
Commission should not be underestimated. We have come a long way from the suggestion 
last year that a matching adjustment would not be part of the directive at all. The focus now 
has to be on making sure that we end up with an operable system which doesn’t introduce 
procyclicality. 
The  negotiations  on  the  long-term guarantees  assessment  and  other  outstanding  areas of 
Solvency II, such as the third country equivalence regime, are expected to continue over the 
summer,  with  a  conclusion  expected  in  the  autumn.  At  the  same  time,  EIOPA  will  be 
finalising the preparatory guidelines. We are hopeful that there will be final agreement by the 
end of the year, but we cannot make any promises. It is then critical that we have a clear and 
credible timeline for implementation so that firms can ensure that they will be compliant when 
the new rules are introduced. The official implementation date for Solvency II of 1 January 
2014 is clearly unrealistic, and late last year we set a new planning horizon of 31 December 
2015 for US and for the UK industry. During that period, we are allowing firms to put to use 
the  significant  investment  in  Solvency  II  internal  models  to  meet  the  current  regulatory 
requirements under the Individual Capital Adequacy Standards (ICAS) – referred to as “ICAS 
plus”. We believe that the UK’s current prudential framework for insurers is a good basis for a 
smooth transition to the new regime under Solvency II. 
We  are  forward  looking  and  judgement  based  and  this  will  be  the  way  that  we  approach 
Solvency  II  implementation.  We  believe  that  the  Solvency  II  Own  Risk  and  Solvency 
Assessment, the ORSA, will help give us a better understanding of an insurer’s business. It 
is therefore logical for us to make early adjustments to our existing regime to incorporate the 
ORSA  under  ICAS  plus.  This  will  mean  that  UK  insurers  are  better  prepared  for  the 
introduction of Solvency II. 
To monitor the on-going appropriateness of internal models, we have introduced the use of 
early warning indicators based on metrics that are independent of the model calculations. In 
cases  where  the  indicator’s  threshold  is  breached  it  will  trigger  an  immediate  supervisory 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
response; a capital add-on is, in all but exceptional cases, likely to be the most effective way 
to  restore  compliance  with  the  Solvency  II  calibration  requirement  (i.e.  99.5%  over  a  
one-year period). Importantly, we expect that where internal models are used for regulatory 
capital purposes, they should contribute to prudent risk management and measurement. And 
they should be updated regularly in order to reflect the insurer’s risk profile and not just to 
ensure compliance with the letter of our requirements. 
My view is that we still have a good way to go to make the Solvency II regime manageable in 
its use and implementation. I have to say that I think the early design did not come up to the 
mark  in  this  respect.  Our  use  of  early  warning  indicators  is  precisely  because  we  have 
learned the hard way  with banks that excessive reliance on modelled capital requirements 
lends itself to cutting capital levels too low. In banking supervision we are playing catch-up by 
working to raise capital levels from ones that were too low. We can avoid that outcome for 
insurance by acting now to introduce sensible backstops. 
Turning finally to the broader global environment, the financial crisis has led to a great deal of 
debate around whether insurers contribute to systemic risk in the financial system. The IAIS 
has  been  considering  whether  there  are  insurers  which  can  be  classed  as  Globally 
Systemically  Important.  In  doing  so,  it  has  developed  a  methodology  to  identify  insurers 
whose  distress  or  disorderly  failure,  because  of  their  size,  interconnectedness,  and  the 
nature of their activities would cause significant disruption to the global financial system and 
economic activity. This work is at an advanced stage and we should hear shortly from the 
Financial Stability Board on a list of global systemically important insurers. The implications 
for  being  labelled  as  a  GSII  will  then  need  to  be  considered.  The  PRA  recognises  that 
insurers  are  not  systemic  in  the  same  way  as  banks.  However,  we  strongly  believe  that 
failure of some insurers could have the potential to pose risks to the stability of the financial 
system or to directly disrupt economic activity through the availability of risk transfer. 
A  single  insurer  failing  could  have  far-reaching  consequences,  with  the  ripple  effect 
stretching beyond simply the impact on policyholders of the insurer. Where an insurer has a 
large  market  share  of  a  particular  type  of  insurance,  the  failure  of  the  insurer  has  the 
potential to have a wider impact, especially if it is difficult for policyholders to get replacement 
cover elsewhere. 
The  IAIS/FSB  work  on  GSIIs  is  obviously  of  major  significance,  but  it  needs  to  be  viewed 
alongside the work to identify and agree a simple backstop capital regime, perhaps of the 
early warning indicator type, on a global basis. The IAIS and FSB will take this forward. For 
me, it is critical because if we get this right, we can deal more effectively with issues of cross-
border  recognition,  and  more  generally  seek  to  simplify  the  capital  regime.  The  prize  is 
therefore big, and firms need to be involved with us in the work. 
In  conclusion,  there  is  a  lot  going  on  in  insurance  regulation.  The  IAIS  work  is  important, 
because  it  means  that Solvency  II  isn’t  the  be  all  and  end  all  of  insurance  regulation. We 
have a lot to do on these fronts, but the work is crucial, and it will require your involvement. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
