Jens Weidmann: The stability of the financial system within European 
monetary union 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the conference of 
the  Bavarian  Association  of  Cooperatives  (Genossenschaftsverband  Bayern),  Munich, 
11 July 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to this conference. I’m delighted to have the opportunity 
to speak to you here today. 
First  of  all  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Bavarian  Association  of  Cooperatives  on  the 
120th anniversary of its creation. Of course, the association encompasses many more types 
of  business  than  the  financial  institutions  which  are  the  focus  of  my  attention  as  a  central 
banker and bank supervisor. 
But I’m afraid a speech on the finer details of cooperatives would simply be too much for me. 
And, after all, the Bundesbank itself often warns against asking too much of central banks. 
So today I would like to focus on banks, the crisis and the role of monetary policy. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  talking  about  the  Austrian  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter.  He  had 
three goals in life: to be the greatest economist in the world, the greatest horseman in Austria 
and the greatest lover in Vienna. He claimed to have achieved two of these aims, although 
he never specified which. 
I wouldn’t wish to speculate about Schumpeter’s abilities as a horseman or a lover. But he 
certainly was an outstanding economist. 
Banks, real economy and the no bail-out principle 
2. 
And  as  an  economist,  Joseph  Schumpeter  had  clear  ideas  about  the  role  of  banks.  He 
viewed them mainly as partners and supporters of enterprises in the real economy. 
I  believe  that  cooperative  banks  also  see  themselves  in  that  role.  That  and  cooperative 
banks’ regional ties were two factors which had a stabilising effect during the crisis – even 
though  the  cooperative  sector  was  not  entirely  spared  the  repercussions  of  the  financial 
crisis. 
However, the public image of quite a few other banks has suffered significantly as a result of 
the crisis. Many people now doubt whether banks really do see themselves as partners and 
supporters of businesses. 
Indeed,  the  public  feel  that  the  crisis  was  caused  by  ruthless  bankers  and  out-of-control 
financial markets – who left the real economy and taxpayers to deal with the fallout. Recent 
revelations of deplorable conversations among certain Irish bankers have only made matters 
worse. 
This  impression  is  not  entirely  false,  but  neither is  it  entirely  correct.  It’s true that financial 
markets tend towards excess, and that all too many financial market players neglected risk 
management.  It’s  also  true  that  the  financial  markets  had  moved  away  from  their  role  as 
service providers to the real economy. 
Yet blaming the crisis entirely on ruthless bankers and out-of-control financial markets would 
be simplistic. Bank balance sheets always partly reflect developments in the real economy. 
And they also reflect public finances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I don’t mean to talk down the excesses on the financial markets. But we must also look for 
the origins of the crisis in the real economy, and in economic and fiscal policy. 
Of course, that doesn’t make it any easier to solve the crisis. On the contrary: it only makes 
the tangled web of causes even denser and harder to unpick. 
What helps is to identify a simple principle that can guide us in our search for answers. And 
that is precisely what I intend to do now. 
The  concept  I’m  referring  to  is  the  no  bail-out  principle.  This  means,  essentially,  that 
everyone should face the consequences of their own actions. Or, in other words, that those 
who are ultimately liable should also have the power to make decisions. 
I’m  sure  that  everyone  here  is  familiar  with  this  concept:  many  entrepreneurs  stake  their 
personal  wealth  on  their  business  decisions.  And,  although  cooperative  banks  also  share 
liability through an institutional guarantee scheme, this “all for one” liability is balanced out by 
strict controls. 
No bail-out principle, banks and public budgets 
3. 
In the euro area, there hasn’t always been a healthy balance between liability and control. 
The  no  bail-out  principle  was  dangerously  eroded  for  two  major  groups:  governments  and 
banks. 
The losses of many banks were ultimately borne by the taxpayers of the countries in which 
they  were  based.  And  the  taxpayers  of  some  euro-area  countries  ultimately  financed  the 
budgets of others. 
This is because these banks and governments were considered to be systemically important 
–  it  was  feared  that  their  financial  difficulties  could  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system. So it wasn’t the decisionmakers – those in control – who were ultimately liable. And 
this undermines the incentives for responsible behaviour. 
The  Maastricht  framework  –  the  rulebook  for  European  monetary  union  –  is  therefore 
founded on the no bail-out principle: no euro-area country should be liable for the debts of 
another. However, this principle lost its binding effect when the crisis began – if not before. 
To strengthen the foundations of Europe’s monetary union, we need to reinforce the no bail-
out principle – for both governments and banks. 
With this in mind, I would now like to discuss some specific reforms. It is important to look at 
both banks and governments at the same time, as there are close links between them. 
And  these  links  were  a  major  problem  during  the  crisis.  So  let’s  take  a  step  back  and 
consider where exactly the problem lies. 
If many banks run into financial difficulties at the same time, that can threaten the stability of 
the  entire  financial  system.  Governments  then  often  have  no  option  but  to  bail  out  these 
banks to prevent the system from collapsing. 
This doesn’t just generate the wrong incentives, as I mentioned earlier. Above all, it costs a 
lot  of  money.  Look  at  Ireland,  for  example:  rescuing  its  banks  raised  the  country’s  2010 
budget deficit to more than 30% of GDP. 
By the same token, if government finances go awry, that causes problems for banks – firstly, 
because  many  banks  have  large  government  bond  holdings  and,  secondly,  because  the 
general economic situation initially worsens when a government has to make savings. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  safeguard  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  and  prevent  future 
crises,  we  have  to  loosen  the ties  between  governments  and  banks  as  much  as  possible. 
And in doing this, we must ensure that the no bail-out principle applies universally again. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There are several possible points of departure for achieving this. We can make banks more 
resilient,  make  government  finances  more  sustainable,  and  ensure  that  governments  are 
shielded as far as possible from the effects of banks’ problems – and vice versa. Some of the 
current reforms to the institutional framework are based on these three approaches. 
Basel III, with its new capital and liquidity rules, will make sure that banks are better able to 
bear losses and that bank owners take on more liability. This will make banks less likely to 
experience financial difficulties and need government bail-outs. 
The plans for a European banking union are in a similar vein. The first pillar of this union will 
be the single supervisory mechanism, which is also tasked with preventing bank difficulties at 
an early stage. 
Yet  neither  Basel  III  nor  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  will  allow  us  to  prevent  all 
financial distress among banks. Nor would we want to do so. Indeed, the possibility of failure 
is  vital  for  a  functioning  market  economy.  Joseph  Schumpeter  defined  this  concept  as 
“creative destruction”. 
So  it  is  important  to  be  able  to  allow  banks  to  fail  without  governments  –  and  thus  also 
taxpayers – having to foot the bill. 
There are also plans to introduce a single resolution mechanism – the second pillar of the 
banking union – to ensure that the owners and creditors of a bank needing restructuring or 
resolution take a sufficient share of its losses. 
This has to entail a clear sequence of liability: first the owners, then subordinated creditors, 
then depositors with balances above the threshold for the deposit guarantee scheme. If that 
is still insufficient to solve the problem, troubled financial institutions should then have access 
to a resolution fund financed by banks. 
When a bank runs into difficulties, taxpayers should be the last port of call rather than the 
first.  This  sequence  of  liability  is  compatible  with  the  no  bail-out  principle  and  strengthens 
market discipline for banks. 
Two weeks ago, the EU finance ministers agreed on a liability framework of this kind. Plans 
have quite rightly been made to introduce legislation ensuring that a bank’s shareholders and 
creditors are first in line to bear any losses. 
However,  I  believe  that  there  are  still  some  weaknesses  in  this  framework.  It  allows 
substantial scope for discretionary exemptions from such bail-ins. 
The upcoming negotiations between the European Council and the European Parliament will 
provide  an  opportunity  to  correct  such  weaknesses.  In  my  view,  it  is  also  important  to 
implement the bail-in regulations ahead of the current schedule, by 2015. 
There are thus two specific approaches applicable to the banking sector: Basel III and the 
single supervisory mechanism will make banks less likely to experience financial distress. If 
they do, the resolution mechanism and its clear regulations on the sequence of liability will 
help to ensure that taxpayers will not have to foot the bill again. 
We can apply the same logic to public finances. There too, the first step is to ensure that 
governments no longer run into serious financial problems so easily. The new fiscal rules, for 
instance, will help to achieve this – provided that they are applied strictly in practice. 
The  no  bail-out  principle  also  needs  to  be  reinforced  for  public  finances.  The  potential  for 
contagion  among  euro-area  countries  was  underestimated  in  the  run-up  to  European 
monetary union. However, if one country’s public finance problems threaten financial stability 
throughout the euro area, limited assistance is justifiable – subject to strict conditionality. We 
have set up the ESM to perform this task. 
Yet  our  goal  must  be  for  each  country  to  rapidly  regain  responsibility  for  its  own  public 
finances.  The  government,  parliament  and  electorate  of  each  euro-area  country  must  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
responsible for ensuring that their economy is competitive and performs well, that the country 
generates  growth  and  employment  under  its  own  steam,  that  its  government  finances  are 
sustainable in the long term, and that excessive public deficits and debt are eliminated so 
that the country can absorb cyclical shocks without external assistance. 
Far-reaching reforms are needed to achieve this level of stability. All this is challenging, but 
shouldn’t  it  really  be  a  matter  of course?  After  all,  these  are  the  prerequisites for  a  stable 
monetary union. 
To achieve these aims, to set the right incentives for sound policymaking, we need to lend 
more weight to the no bail-out principle again. 
The  collective  action  clauses  on  recently  issued  government  bonds  are a  step  in  the  right 
direction, enabling a bail-in of bond creditors in the event of serious solvency problems. Only 
then will the market have a disciplining effect on government budgets. 
But as the crisis has shown, the success of this approach of national responsibility hinges on 
one condition: ensuring that public finance problems do not derail the whole financial system. 
Two  things  can  at  least  help  to  ensure  that  this  condition  is  fulfilled:  in  the  medium  term, 
banks should be obliged to set aside sufficient capital to back government bonds, and they 
should also be subject to limits on large exposures to governments. Such limits have been 
applied as standard to corporate loans for a long time now. 
This  would  make  banks  more  resilient  to  public  finance  problems,  encouraging  them  to 
adjust their demand for government bonds more closely to the level of risk involved. 
Any government with an unsound fiscal policy would face rising interest rates on its bonds. 
Kenneth Rogoff, former chief economist at the IMF, even views adequate capital backing for 
government bonds as a far more effective debt brake than the rules of the fiscal compact. 
Incidentally, putting an end to preferential treatment of government debt over corporate loans 
would also make lending to enterprises more attractive again. And you could all benefit from 
that,  even  though  there  are  currently  no  signs  of  constraints  on  lending  to  enterprises  in 
Germany.  Quite  the  opposite:  credit  standards  for  corporate  loans  were  actually  loosened 
slightly in the first quarter of 2013. 
However, bank balance sheets don’t just reflect government finances but also developments 
in the real economy. The reforms I’ve described will therefore also make the banking system 
more stable. The road ahead is challenging, and decisionmakers will need enough resolve to 
face down opposition to such reforms and get them implemented. 
How can monetary policy help? 
4. 
Yet this must not entice politicians to go for what some view as the “easy way out”. As you’ve 
probably already realised, I’m talking about the role of monetary policy. 
The  ECB  Governing  Council  agrees  unanimously  that  monetary  policy  cannot  solve  the 
crisis. At best, it can buy time – but that is not its job. 
Monetary  policy  has  already  helped  substantially  in  preventing  an  escalation  of  the  crisis. 
However, this has taken it a long way into uncharted – and dangerous – territory. 
It’s  no  secret  that  I  am  critical  of  the  ECB’s  government  bond  purchase  programmes  in 
particular. If Eurosystem central banks buy government bonds issued by countries with poor 
credit  ratings,  this  will  distribute  the risks  of  unsound fiscal  policy  among  all  the  euro-area 
states. This  weakens the  no  bail-out  principle  and  entails  redistribution,  which  is  really  the 
prerogative of fiscal policymakers. 
Alongside the government bond purchase programmes, the sustained period of low interest 
rates is also controversial. Incidentally, that is true of many countries outside the euro area, 
too. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Many  savers  find  the  low  interest  rates  and  negative  real  interest  rates  unfair.  Some 
enterprises,  prospective  homeowners  and  governments,  on  the  other  hand,  probably  see 
them as a blessing. They help them to service their debt and to fund investments cheaply, 
thus boosting economic activity. 
Given the subdued medium-term inflation outlook, which is due to the weak macroeconomic 
backdrop and muted credit growth, the low interest rates are justified from a monetary policy 
perspective. 
Yet low interest rates are not without their side-effects. While they are currently justified from 
a  monetary  policy  perspective,  we  must  not  blind  ourselves  to  reality:  they  tempt 
decisionmakers  to  delay  reforms  and  necessary  structural  changes.  Risks  to  financial 
stability may build up, and these side-effects will increase the longer the phase of low interest 
rates continues. 
All  this  means  that  the  interest  rate  environment  also  poses  a  challenge  for  cooperative 
banks;  a  sustained  period  of  low  interest  rates  squeezes  profit  margins  and  means  cost 
structures have to be adjusted. 
Given the subdued medium-term outlook for inflation, the ECB Governing Council stated last 
week that it expected the key ECB interest rates to remain “at present or lower levels for an 
extended period of time”. 
This does not constitute a change of strategy; it is an attempt to explain our monetary policy 
stance  even  more  simply  and  clearly  –  so  that  it  is  understood;  if  possible,  by  all  market 
participants.  It  outlines our  likely  monetary  policy  response  based  on  current  data  and the 
Eurosystem’s two-pillar approach to analysing risks to price stability. 
It is not a historical sea change in monetary policy communication; it is intended to provide 
more monetary policy guidance in times of heightened uncertainty. 
However,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  this  guidance  is  conditional  on  economic 
developments. It does not lay out an unconditional, fixed path for key interest rates. The ECB 
Governing Council has not simply tied itself to a mast like a modern-day Ulysses. 
This forward guidance should not, therefore, rule out a timely rise in key interest rates if there 
are signs of increasing price pressures in the future. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, aside from the acute crisis measures it is vital that we create a more 
stable monetary union. This won’t be easy to achieve. 
The current crisis has many different causes and combating it in the short term has taken a 
huge  toll  on  the  framework  of  Europe’s  monetary  union.  Many  different  remedies  will 
therefore be needed to find a lasting cure for this crisis. 
I have discussed some of these remedies in detail here today; others I have only mentioned 
in passing. What many of them should have in common, however, is the aim of strengthening 
the no bail-out principle. 
This applies to banking and financial market regulation, the creation of a European banking 
union and the treatment of government debt in a monetary union. 
These are no easy tasks, and they sometimes involve a difficult balancing act – including for 
myself.  But  I  promise  that  I  will  campaign  forcefully  and  persistently  to  ensure  that  this 
promise is kept: that our currency, the euro, remains stable. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
