Jens Weidmann: Fiscal and monetary policy – dancing too close? 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  École  des 
Hautes Études Commerciales, Paris, 25 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to thank you for inviting me to be here today, which is a real pleasure for me. The 
HEC is, without doubt, one of the most renowned European Business Schools. Looking at 
the number of CEOs of Fortune Global 500 companies it provides, HEC ranks as number 
four in the world, and as number one in Europe. 
But HEC’s reach is by no means limited to the business world. There are a number of former 
students  who  have  risen  to  the  highest  positions  in  the  public  domain.  These  include 
François Hollande and WTO Director-General Pascal Lamy. 
Therefore, it is an exceptional honour for me to receive the Diplôme HEC d’Honneur. And the 
fact that I am already the third German citizen to receive the Diplôme symbolises the close 
connections between France and Germany. 
Just four weeks ago, France and Germany celebrated the 50th anniversary of the “Elysée-
Treaty”,  the  treaty  of  friendship  as  it  is  called.  And  the  friendship  between  France  and 
Germany has come a long way since Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer met in Paris 
to sign the treaty. 
However,  we  still  cling  to  our  favourite  clichés  regarding  each  other’s  national  cultural 
behaviour. Let us look at a recent poll in  which  French people were asked to name some 
typical  German  traits.  According  to  this  poll,  Germans  are  –  first  and  foremost  –  very 
“serious” people. Put in the words of the French writer Stendhal: “It seems that in Paris more 
jokes are made in the course of one evening than in Germany during a whole month”. 
Well, I am German so I would not dare to tell a joke. But as I am in Paris I might try at least to 
pass on a little quip I heard the other day. It goes like this: “How many Germans do you need 
to change a light-bulb? One, he holds the light-bulb and the rest of Europe revolves around 
him”. 
I’m afraid this quip reflects the impression some might have of Germany at the moment. But 
let me add two things: first, the same joke was being told in the 1990s, and back then, the 
French  where  the  ones  holding  the  light-bulb.  Second,  the  joke  did  not  reflect  actual 
circumstances in the 1990s, nor does it reflect them today. 
In reality, Europe can only  work if all of us move in the same direction. Only together can 
France  and  Germany  act  as  the  driving  forces  of  European  integration.  And  only  together 
can France and Germany help to solve the current crisis. 
However, regarding the crisis, there are some issues on which we have different opinions. 
And  here  it  is  important  to  address  these  differences  openly,  listening  to  each  other  and 
trying to understand what each of us thinks. Only when we share our thoughts and ideas can 
we develop a sensible solution to our problems. 
This is why I am happy to be here today. For it gives me the opportunity to share and discuss 
my ideas with you. And given that we are at one of the most high-ranking business schools 
worldwide,  I  look  forward  to  listening  to  your  ideas  as  well.  But  let  me  begin  with  a  few 
observations on which I think we all agree. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Same crisis, different perspectives? 
2. 
With respect to the current crisis and its origins, we all see more or less the same problems. 
We  see  a  sovereign  debt  crisis;  we  see  high  public  or  private  debt  and  a  lack  of 
competitiveness in some member states; we see current account imbalances, and we see 
weaknesses in the framework of monetary union and in its financial system. 
With respect to the future, we all are focused on the same objective: a prosperous European 
Union and a stable single currency. However, it is the question of “how to get there” where 
opinions  differ.  This  should  be  no  surprise  because  it  is  indeed  a  tricky  question.  To 
paraphrase the American politician Hubert Humphrey: The solution is hammered out on the 
anvil of discussion, dissent and debate. So, I would like to highlight three issues where I feel 
that  my  view  and  the  view  of  many  decision-makers  in  Germany  might  differ  from  that  of 
others. 
Some say it would hurt growth if countries consolidated their public finances at great speed. 
In my view, consolidation is crucial for growth in the long term and not that bad for growth in 
the short term. 
Some  say  Germany  should  do  more  to  rebalance  current  accounts  by  reducing  its 
competitiveness.  In  my  view,  instead  of  making  one  country  weaker  we  have  to  make  all 
countries stronger. Europe as a whole has to become stronger. 
Some say monetary policy should do more to solve the crisis. In my view central banks must 
focus  on  price  stability,  must  remain  independent,  and  must  not  become  too  closely 
intertwined with fiscal policy. 
In the next part of my speech I would like to explain the reasoning behind my positions. 
Solving the crisis – the national and the European level 
3. 
Let us begin at the national level, in those countries that are at the centre of the crisis. There 
we see several deficiencies, but I would like to point out two things in particular: high public 
debt and a lack of competitiveness. In countries such as Greece, Portugal, Ireland and Italy 
public  debt  stands  well  above  100%  of  GDP.  And  since  the  euro  was  introduced, 
competitiveness has declined by 12% in Greece, by more than 14% in Spain and by more 
than 8% in Italy. 
These are the underlying problems; this is where we have to apply the  medicine. And the 
medicine  of  choice  seems  to  be  straightforward:  governments  have  to  consolidate  public 
finances  and  they  have  to  embark  on  structural  reforms  to  make  their  economies  more 
competitive.  The  ultimate  goal,  of  course,  is  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  sustainable 
growth and employment. 
Allow me a few words on France at this point. France is the second largest economy in the 
euro area. It is home to many renowned firms, it has a strong domestic market, and it has 
favourable demographics – in particular when compared to Germany. 
However, France also faces structural challenges. The unemployment rate stands at more 
than  10%,  its  world  market  share  of  exports  has  declined  by  25%  since  the  beginning  of 
EMU and at around 90% of GDP public debt has reached a level that could potentially hurt 
growth, according to some studies. 
But  France  has  acknowledged  the  importance  of  sound  public  finances  and  a  competitive 
economy.  And  with  the  “National  Compact  for  Growth,  Competitiveness  and  Jobs”  the 
government has laid the foundation for some very promising reforms. Furthermore, the social 
partners  agreed  on  labour  market  reforms  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  This  could  be  an 
important step toward achieving a better functioning labour market. 
However, regarding fiscal consolidation, more challenges lie ahead. One of them is to meet 
the commitments under the Excessive Deficit Procedure. According to the last projection by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the European Commission, France will not meet the deadline to reduce the deficit 2013 to 
below the reference value of 3% of GDP. This has now posed the question of whether the 
deadline should be postponed or not. 
It  is  certainly  true  that  it  is  more  difficult  to  meet  deficit  targets  in  the  context  of  weak 
economic growth. However, in the current situation we need to recognise that we are faced 
with a crisis of confidence. There has been a partial loss of confidence in our fiscal rules as 
well as in the will of European countries to consolidate their public finances. 
Moreover, there is the criticism that deficit targets may, in fact, become a moving target. In 
such an environment it is in my view particularly important for the heavy weights in EMU to 
give clear signals, which boost the credibility of the fiscal rules and agreements in EMU and 
the credibility of their consolidation strategy. 
But coming back to the countries at the centre of the crisis, both remedies, consolidation and 
structural reforms, are hotly debated. 
Consolidation vs growth 
3.1. 
Regarding  consolidation,  many  people  fear  that  it  will  hurt  growth.  Hannes  Swoboda,  an 
Austrian member of the European Parliament claimed that: “Austerity measures won’t bring 
people out of the crisis. It is like giving poison to a man or woman who is sick.” 
Personally, I tend to agree more with Christian Noyer. He said: “In the current circumstances 
facing Europe, I believe these concerns are misplaced”. I, too, believe that these concerns 
are exaggerated. It is indeed likely that consolidation will have a short term dampening effect 
on growth. 
However, to quote Mario Draghi: ”What’s the alternative?” Putting consolidation off would just 
shift the problem into the future. It would buy time but in so doing also worsen matters today 
as there is the risk that trust in public finances would erode even more. Moreover, a wide-
spread lack of trust in public finances weighs heavily on growth. A study by Carmen Reinhart 
and Kenneth Rogoff implies that debt levels above 90% will reduce growth. 
I do not advocate a strict Ricardian view here. I do believe, however, that peoples’ concerns 
about  increasing  adjustment  needs  in  the  future  will  affect  their  spending  and  investment 
today.  Thus,  it  is  important  that  governments  adhere  to  the  consolidation  plans  they 
announced. This will inspire confidence, which is an important prerequisite for the economy 
to grow. As Jean-Claude Trichet once said: “When you’ve lost confidence, when households 
have no trust, when businesses have no trust, when savers have no trust, then the best way 
to find growth and jobs is to recreate confidence.” 
In my view, this is true not just for the countries at the heart of the crisis. A failure to signal 
the necessary commitment will not contribute to improving the confidence of investors and 
consumers in the euro area. 
Thus, my appeal for consolidation does not stem from a desire to punish past sins. Rather, 
the goal is to make those countries at the heart of the crisis stronger. And if we adhere to our 
fiscal rules there is no need to set up the ECB as lender of last resort let alone to call for 
inflation as a solution for resolving the debt problem. 
Regaining competitiveness 
3.2. 
And  the  same  is  true  with  regard  to  the  second  problem  I  mentioned:  the  lack  of 
competitiveness  in  some  member  states.  The  most  visible  sign  of  this  lack  are  current 
account  deficits.  Countries  such  as  Spain,  Portugal  and  Greece  imported  more  than  they 
could export and thus ran current account deficits. Other countries such as the Netherlands 
and Germany have been running persistent current account surpluses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  part,  these  imbalances  are  driven  by  fundamental  characteristics  of  the  respective 
economies. For instance, countries with an ageing population naturally save more than they 
invest domestically. Consequently, they run temporary current account surpluses. 
However,  to  a  large  degree  the  imbalances  we  observe  are  driven  by  structural  problems 
and are not temporary but persistent. And a persistent current account deficit might become 
a  risk.  The  longer  a  country’s  current  account  is  in  deficit  the  more  foreign  liabilities  this 
country  piles  up.  Eventually,  these  liabilities  have  to  be  paid  back  which  might  become 
difficult  if  the  inflowing  capital  is  not  invested  wisely.  Once  the  willingness  or  the  ability  to 
repay comes into question capital flows might reverse. This is highly disruptive as spending 
and investment would have to adjust abruptly. 
Against this backdrop, current accounts in the euro area have to be rebalanced. Now, the 
question is: which countries need to take measures? Those with a current account deficit? 
Those with a surplus? Both? 
The typical German answer would be this: the deficit countries must act. They must address 
their  structural  weaknesses.  They  must  become  more  competitive  and  they  must  increase 
their  exports.  As  a  result,  the  deficits  and  surpluses  would  automatically  adjust.  In  other 
words:  Current  account  positions  are  symmetric  as  regards  economics  statistics,  but  not 
when it comes to macroeconomic risks. Thus, it is in the interest of deficit countries to adjust. 
Naturally, this position has been challenged and a number of renowned economists take a 
different view. Christine Lagarde of the IMF for example said: “Those with surpluses could do 
a  little  something.  It  takes  two  to  tango”.  Her  suggestion  implies  that  the  adjustment  of 
current  accounts  should  be  shared  between  deficit  countries  and  surplus  countries. Those 
with a surplus would become a little less competitive, while those with a deficit would become 
a bit more competitive, and eventually they would meet in the middle. 
Well, the question we have to ask ourselves at this point is: “Where would that take us?” For 
two reasons I believe it would not take us very far. One reason relates to what would happen 
inside the euro area, the other relates to the outside world. 
Let us first consider the euro area. Imagine that wages in Germany were pushed up, causing 
the economy to become less competitive. For the sake of argument, let us assume a wage 
increase of two percentage points. That is, two percentage points on top of what unions and 
employers would otherwise agree on. 
This is the policy shift we fed into our economic models to calculate its effect on the current 
accounts  of  deficit  countries  and  on  the  German  economy.  According  to  our  economic 
models, GDP in Germany would decline by ¾% and employment would decline by 1% while 
the effect on the deficit countries would be close to zero. This sobering result is mainly due to 
the structure of trade flows between Germany and Southern Europe. 
After all, we have to acknowledge that Europe is not an island but part of a globalised world. 
And  at  the  global  level,  we  are  competing  with  economies  such  as  the  United  States  or 
China. If Europe wants to succeed in this world it has to strive for global competitiveness. 
The  attempt 
to  shield  one  European  country 
the 
competitiveness of another makes all of us weaker. 
Europe as a whole has to become more dynamic, more inventive and more productive. This 
is not a new concept; it was already at the heart of the Lisbon strategy. And one thing we 
have learned from the failure of this strategy is that commitments should always be binding. 
Against this backdrop, the new Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure is a step in the right 
direction. 
Nevertheless,  in  the  end,  competitiveness  is  always  a  relative  concept.  As  the  current 
accounts of deficit countries begin to adjust, the current accounts of countries with surpluses 
will  automatically  follow.  This  process  is  already  well  under  way.  Since  its  peak  in  2007, 
Germany's current account surplus vis-à-vis the rest of the euro area has about halved. And 
from  competition  by 
lowering 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
looking ahead, we expect the surplus to decline further, provided confidence is restored. This 
expectation is in line with what the IMF says in its latest World Economic Outlook. 
So, yes, it takes two to tango and countries with surpluses are already on the dance floor. 
However, it is the countries with deficits that will have to lead in this particular dance. 
Solving the crisis – the role of monetary policy 
4. 
Now  that  we  have  mentally  entered the  dance floor,  let  us  see  who  else  is  dancing. Well, 
monetary policy certainly is and there are many who would like to see it dance even more. 
European politicians, in particular, have conveyed the impression that the ECB is the “last 
man  standing”.  Spanish  foreign  minister  José  Garcia-Margallo,  for  instance,  claimed  that 
“only the central bank could put out the fire”. 
In my view, this is a misguided perception. The ECB is certainly not able to solve the crisis in 
a  sustainable  manner.  Earlier  on,  I  talked  about  the  fundamental  problems  within  some 
member states: high public debt and a lack of competitiveness. Add to that the weaknesses 
in monetary union’s institutional framework, and it becomes clear that monetary policy, or for 
that matter, exchange rate policy cannot be the solution. These are structural problems that 
require structural solutions. 
The illness is more than the pain it inflicts and monetary policy is just a pain reliever at best. 
Once the effect wears off, a higher dose becomes necessary – as we have seen throughout 
the crisis. 
Besides, monetary policy has already done a lot to contain the crisis. The ECB Governing 
Council reduced interest rates to a mere 75 basis points, decided to provide banks with quasi 
unlimited  liquidity,  and  to  intervene  in  bond  markets.  With  all  these  measures  the  central 
banks of the Eurosystem took on considerable risks, and they became involved in political 
issues far beyond the traditional role of central banks. 
As Stephen King wrote in the Financial Times: “Monetary policy is doing more to redistribute 
income  and  wealth  than  to  trigger  a  rebound  in  economic  activity.  Central  bankers  are 
making  decisions  that  are  more  political  than  economic”.  Indeed,  the  measures  of  the 
Eurosystem have contributed to a redistribution among tax payers in different countries. 
“Well”,  you  might  say,  “this  is  a  necessary  act  of  solidarity  and  a  healthy  act  of  pragmatic 
monetary policy”. Don’t get me wrong: I do not question the case for solidarity. My argument 
is rather about the question of who decides about solidarity and what it means for the stability 
of the single currency. 
In my view, it has to be democratically elected parliaments who decide about redistributing 
wealth or risks. Besides, we could run the risk of suffering from the tragedy of the commons 
in which monetary policy would become a shared resource that would be overused. And this 
is not just a theoretical consideration. It is something of practical relevance when it sets the 
stage for a discussion about the independence of central banks. 
And such a discussion has begun. Joseph Stiglitz recently claimed that: “The notion of the 
desirability of an independent central bank was predicated on the belief that monetary policy 
was a technocratic matter, with no distributional consequences.” From this he concludes that: 
“The crisis has called into question the notion of independence”. Japan provides a real-life 
example of a central bank that has come under political pressure. 
I  must  admit  that  these  developments  worry  me.  They  worry  me  because  theoretical 
considerations as well as historical experience contain one central message: Independence 
and a focus on price stability are crucial for successful monetary policy. 
Central  banks  should  not  find  themselves  dancing  too  closely  with  fiscal  policy.  To 
paraphrase one of my predecessors: If you dance too close with fiscal policy she will marry 
you. And the offspring are usually higher inflation and reduced fiscal discipline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
And here, I am not even referring to the German experience of the 1920s. We just have to 
look back to the 1970s. In these years, inflation rates in countries with independent central 
banks were comparatively low. While average inflation in Germany stood at 5%, it reached 
as much as 14% in Italy and 15% in Spain. 
Or think of the French experience of the late 1980s. In 1993 the Banque de France became 
independent and Jean-Claude Trichet introduced his policy of the “Franc fort”. Only then did 
inflation rates decrease from an average of nearly 4% to less than 2%. 
So, if we care about stable prices and if we care about purchasing power then we should be 
worried. We  should  be  worried  because  on  the  European  dance  floor monetary  and  fiscal 
policy  are  moving  toward  each  other.  Think  of  Greece:  while  governments  hesitated  to 
disburse the next tranche of loans, monetary policy stepped into the breach. Nevertheless, 
we should not overburden monetary policy with the task of solving a crisis that it cannot solve 
anyway. The price would be too high. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I began my speech with  a joke about how to change light-bulbs in 
Europe. As you might know, traditional light-bulbs are increasingly being phased out in the 
European Union. This is a sign of the changing times we are living in. 
But  not  everything  has  to  change.  Proven  concepts  such  as  central  bank  independence 
should  be  preserved.  Nevertheless,  the  most  important  point  of  my  speech  is  that  we  all 
share the same objective: a prosperous European Union and a stable single currency. This is 
what unites us and keeps us going. 
And  as  I  said  in  the  beginning:  Only  together  can  France  and  Germany  solve  the  current 
crisis. And as the largest economies in Europe they already contribute significantly through 
the  rescue  mechanisms.  Stabilizing  monetary  union  requires  that  both  countries  are 
economically and politically strong. 
But it also requires a common approach. A common approach that is suited to tackling the 
underlying  causes  of  the  crisis.  At  the  national  level,  this  should  include  consolidation  of 
public finances and structural reforms. But that is certainly not enough. 
We  also  have  to  improve  the  framework  of  monetary  union.  This  includes  reestablishing 
market  mechanisms  and  the  liability  of  investors  for  their  decisions  at  all  levels: We  need 
mechanisms  that  allow  banks  to  fail  without  triggering  a  systemic  crisis  –  a  well-designed 
banking union would be a step in the right direction. We also need mechanisms that allow 
states not to be bailed out without triggering a systemic crisis – this includes, for instance, the 
introduction of capital requirements for government bonds and caps on banks’ exposure vis-
à-vis single countries. 
Thus, there are many challenges we have to master and many problems we have to solve. 
This makes it necessary for us to share our ideas and discuss those issues where we have 
different opinions. In my speech I have tried to shed some light on my ideas, now I’m looking 
forward to discussing them with you. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
