Stanley Fischer: Challenges facing the Israeli economy 
Remarks by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, upon taking leave of 
the Knesset Finance Committee, Jerusalem, 4 June 2013. 
 I would like to thank the members of the Committee for their wishes. It was an honor for me 
to serve as Governor of the Bank of Israel. It was not readily apparent that they would offer 
the  position  to  someone  who  was  not  a  citizen  of  Israel.  But  in  the  end,  that  is  what 
happened, and my wife and I are very happy for the extraordinary opportunity that we had. 
Many people on the professional team at the Bank of Israel helped me during this period, 
contributing much to the work at the Bank during my term of office. We must not forget that I 
arrived in 2005, when the economy was in the midst of a period of impressive growth, and 
one of the reasons for the fact that we made it through the global crisis was that the economy 
entered  the  crisis  in  good  condition:  the  government  budget  was  balanced  in  2007,  the 
current account was in surplus, the banks were strong—everything required for a country to 
successfully get through the crisis was in place in Israel before the crisis. 
I would also like to thank the former Chairman of the Finance Committee, MK Rabbi Moshe 
Gafni, who contributed much to the system’s stability, and to the legislation of the new Bank 
of Israel Law, which was also helped along by former Knesset Speaker MK Reuven Rivlin. I 
recognize the fact that you cannot work alone—it is necessary for there to be people who 
agree to work with you, and in this context, I also note the Opposition Leader who is here, 
who was then in the coalition and who assisted with the passage of the law. 
If I compare the situation of the economy today to what it was in 2005, the debt-to-GDP ratio 
is much lower, although the government deficit is higher. We moved to a situation where the 
current  account  is  balanced  compared  to  the  surplus  we  were  in  before  the  crisis.  The 
unemployment rate today is very low in an historic perspective, and the employment rate is 
higher.  The  incidence  of  poverty  remains  more  or  less  at  the  same  level  as  it  was.  The 
exchange rate is more appreciated today, which to a large extent is a result of the strength of 
the economy—people want to live in a strong economy with a weak exchange rate, but this is 
a  situation  that  generally  does  not  happen.  The  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  obviously 
much higher than what they were  when I took the position, as a result of foreign currency 
purchases that we have been making since 2008. The average growth rate between 2005 
and  2012  was  4.3  percent,  and  average  per  capita  growth  during  those  years  was  2.5 
percent. The average inflation rate then as today is within the target range, such that we can 
say that we did not, and do not today, have an inflation problem. 
The last decade started with a deep recession and negative growth, and in the middle of the 
decade, we moved to rapid growth of 6 percent for a number of years, an exceptionally high 
rate  for  countries  at  the  level  of  development  of  Israel.  Following  the  financial  crisis,  we 
continued  to  grow  at  a  higher  rate  than  other  developed  countries,  and  if  we  continue 
maintaining responsible policy, we can, I hope, continue this way. The unemployment rate is 
very  low  compared  internationally,  since  while  unemployment  in  Israel  is  in  decline,  it  has 
risen in many countries. Long –term inflation expectations are close to the midpoint of the 
target  range.  This  means  that  the  public  believes  that  the  economy  can  continue  growing 
without inflationary outbursts, and it can plan its economic life without concern of spikes in 
prices.  This  is  a  very  important  achievement—thirty  years  ago,  we  never  would  have 
believed we would attain it. 
The government deficit grew in 2012 by 4.2 percent, and in order to reinstate control over the 
budget, the government recently decided on important measures to reduce the deficit in the 
coming  years.  These  measures  are  also  very  important  due  to  the  fact  that  the  interest 
burden that the government is paying is very high in international comparison, as a result of 
the  risk  premium  that  the  financial  markets  include  for  the  Israeli  economy.  A  diplomatic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
process, if the markets attribute any importance to it, would reduce these costs in the final 
analysis, although it would take time, since the interest paid today is on debt that was issued 
in the past, and a reduction in the interest rate would affect new debt. 
There are many challenges facing the Israeli economy. 
The  first  challenge  to  which  will  relate  is  handling  the  problem  of  poverty.  The  data 
unsurprisingly show that the incidence of poverty is higher among large families, and lower 
as the percentage of wage earners increases. Furthermore, the incidence of poverty among 
Arabs  and  ultra-Orthodox  Jews  is  very  high. In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  implement a 
policy  that  will  increase  the  labor force  participation  rate  of these two  sectors,  and  we  are 
witness to important initiatives in the area of academic education, mainly among the ultra-
Orthodox sector. 
The  Israeli  education  system’s  achievements  in  the  international  PISA  tests  are  below 
average. We have recently had better achievements in TIMS tests, and I hope that they will 
also  be  reflected  in  the  other  tests.  We  must  improve  the  achievements  of  the  education 
system in order to achieve higher economic success. 
The World Bank conducts a survey of the ease of doing business in all countries each year. 
In 2013, we were in 38th place, a very unsatisfactory placing. We have fallen significantly in 
this ranking during the past decade, not because our situation has deteriorated, but because 
the bureaucratic burden in other countries has lessened. The bureaucracy affects not only 
the ease of doing business, but also the cost of living. For instance, we see its effect on the 
ability to adjust the supply of housing and on housing prices. 
The  Concentration  Committee  made  two  important  recommendations  on  the  matter  of 
breaking apart pyramids and separating financial and real holdings. In this context, I note that 
if we require the immediate complete separation of financial and real holdings, there would 
be no people who would be able to be controlling owners of banks, since they would not be 
able to obtain the required capital through their activities in the real industries. It is possible 
that  in  another  few  decades,  we  will  reach  the  conclusion  that  controlling  owners  are  not 
necessary for banks. But in the meantime, I suggest not to conduct such large experiments 
on the financial system. I usually don’t make comparisons to Greece, but this time I will do 
so: For hundreds of years, we have seen the ramifications that an unstable financial system 
has on the market. We have a strong banking system, which was of tremendous assistance 
in our ability to withstand the crisis. We must not endanger its stability, so I suggest not to 
limit  cross-holdings  of  financial  and  real  entities  for  now  beyond  what  the  Concentration 
Committee  recommended  when  it  set  a  benchmark  of  NIS  6  billion  for  holdings  of  a  real 
company  by  someone  who  holds  controlling  interest  in  a  financial  entity.  I  understand  the 
logic  behind  the  other  suggestions,  but  I  think  that  we  must  first  of  all  examine  the 
ramifications of lowering the number of entities that can hold controlling interest before we 
continue advancing in this field. 
Labor productivity in the Israeli economy is 20 percent lower than the OECD average. While 
we are a wealthy economy, it is a mistake to compare ourselves to the US and Scandinavia 
all  the  time,  where  labor  productivity  is  very  high.  It  is  important  that  we  deal  with  all  the 
challenges in education, the bureaucracy, infrastructure and more, in order to deal with the 
problem of low productivity. 
The  Supervisor  of  Banks  headed  a  team  that  presented  important  conclusions  regarding 
reinforcing banking competitiveness. Each time I would meet a senior banker from abroad, I 
would try to convince him to start banking operations in Israel. I didn’t succeed, and since 
2008,  I  have  stopped  trying  since  the  crisis  led  banks  to  stop  expanding  their  operations 
overseas.  However,  at  the  team’s  recommendation,  there  are  many  steps  whose 
implementation can help reinforce competitiveness in the banking system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Defense expenditures increase from year to year, although their share of GDP continues to 
decline  and  has  now  reached  its  level  from  the  beginning  of  the  1960s.  Still,  defense 
expenditures are the largest component in the state budget. It is clear to all of us that we live 
in unsafe and uncertain surroundings. It is the government’s duty to protect its citizens, and 
there is therefore no alternative to large budgets for the defense establishment. This also has 
positive ramifications, such as the defense establishment’s contribution to the development 
of the high-tech industry. We do not have the luxury to think that we are Sweden and to plan 
our  expenses  without  needing  to  allocate  about  5  percent  of  GDP  to  defense.  We  must 
continue to provide ourselves with defense, but the allocation of more money to defense is 
not  the  only  solution. We  must  also try  to find  other  solutions,  and  try  to  achieve  a  peace 
agreement  with  our  neighbors,  including  with  the  Palestinians.  The  phrase,  “there  is  no 
partner for peace” is a self-fulfilling phrase. You need two for an agreement, and if we don’t 
want  to  look  for  a  partner,  we  will  remain  in  the  current  situation.  We  must  look  for  the 
partners  for  peace.  Until  we  reach  agreements,  it  will  cost  us  more  since  we  will  need  to 
reinforce  our  readiness.  However,  in  the  long  term,  we  will  benefit from  it,  and  it  will  have 
positive ramifications in various areas. We must, therefore, find a way to act more proactively 
in order to stop the conflict that has continued here for far too long. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
