Per Callesen: Current economic and financial issues affecting Denmark 
Speech by Mr Per Callesen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the International 
Capital  Market  Association’s  (ICMA)  Annual  General  Meeting  and  Conference  2013, 
Copenhagen, 24 May 2013. 
 Thank you for the invitation.  
As this important event is held in Copenhagen, I expect you would appreciate reflections on 
some of our domestic issues and a few international issues seen from our perspective. I will 
try to cover:  
 
 
Our current economic situation and the experience of negative policy interest rates  
The state of our banking sector, now soon 5 years after the outbreak of the financial 
crisis  
Perspectives on the European banking union  
FTT  
 low 
inflation,  moderate 
Current economic situation and negative interest rates  
1. 
The  fundamentals  of  the  Danish  economy  are  by  and  large  at  par  with  most  other  North-
Western European economies. We have very large levels of private savings, large current 
account  surplus,  moderate  public  sector  deficit, 
levels  of 
unemployment and extremely low interest rates.  
Growth  is  low  for  both  structural  and  cyclical  reasons.  Structurally,  the  working  age 
population is no longer increasing and productivity growth is weak. For a number of years 
even weaker than in many peer countries. Cyclically, we are still in the aftermath of a strong 
housing and construction bubble which led to overheating in 2006–07. Fiscal policy is over 
the years 2011–2013 moderately contractionary, tightening the structural balance by 0.5 per 
cent of GDP annually after major stimulus in 2009 and 2010.  
High  savings  and  low  real  investments  imply  that  Denmark  is  increasingly  becoming  a 
creditor  nation.  That  was  not  the  case  just  going  back  5  years.  Now  the  international 
investment position is net assets of 35 per cent of GDP and net annual revenues from the 
return on assets are some 3–4 per cent of GDP.  
This, together with moderate pressures from net capital inflows, has provided some currency 
challenges. We have successfully run a fixed exchange rate policy for 30 years, first against 
the  Deutsche-mark,  later  against  the  euro.  We  were  used  to  have  moderate  interest  rate 
spreads and in some cases had to raise policy rates more significantly to counter negative 
currency pressures, which tend to come in recessions, such as in 1993, 2000 and 2008. In 
recent years this has reversed. The challenge has been to avoid currency appreciation.  
Our  policy  remedies  are  a  combination  of  currency  intervention  and  interest  rate 
adjustments. In most cases we have simply shadowed decisions taken by the ECB. In late 
2011 our policy spreads towards the ECB became negative. When the ECB cut its deposit 
rate even further in July 2012 we followed suit, this time taking our marginal deposit rate (for 
certificates of deposits which have a maturity of one week) to negative territory at –0.2 per 
cent.  By  January  2013  we  increased  the  negative  rate  to  –0.1  per  cent  following  some 
reversal of the previous inflows.  
Episodes of negative market interest rates are rare, but they happen. There are examples of 
negative  rates  for  T-bills  in  Japan  in  the  1990s  and  recently  for  short  term  money  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rates in Germany, Switzerland and Denmark. Episodes of negative policy rates are very rare. 
So what have we learned?  
First,  the  transmission  to  market  rates  has  worked  well.  Money-market  rates  fell  and  the 
currency weakened – as intended – probably because the remaining uncertainty about our 
readiness  to  introduce  negative  rates  vanished.  Subsequently,  upwards  currency  pressure 
also  faded  due  to  improvements  in  the  debt  financing  situation  of  vulnerable  euro  area 
countries. The volume of money market transactions has declined, but the money market still 
functions well. We were careful in preparing market participants well in advance that moving 
towards  negative  deposit  rates  was  an  option  and  explained  how  the  system,  if  invoked, 
would work.  
Second,  spill  over,  if  any,  to  the  retail  rates  of  private  banks  has  been  very  limited.  The 
annual costs associated with a negative policy rate of –0.1 per cent compares to 0,013 per 
cent of private bank lending volume, or in other words 1.3 basis-points. When private banks 
have positive net positions, deposits, at the central bank, lower policy rates will affect their 
earnings. The marginal impact is not stronger by moving into negative territory than reducing 
a positive rate to a level less positive.  
Third,  neither  private  banks  themselves  nor  their  customers  have  increased  their  cash 
holdings. For the former large amounts of cash holdings are probably too costly as compared 
to negative policy rates of such a low level. For customers, the incentive to hold more cash 
has not been present, since banks have not introduced negative deposit rates for customers.  
Can our experience be copied? We do not take positions on the policy stance of other central 
banks  and  we  are  careful  not  to  make  parallels  to  very  different  situations.  Our  case  is 
specific, a small open economy and a very explicit exchange rate target. Our concern was 
not to directly target inflation or spur lending to the real economy.  
The current state of the banking sector  
2. 
The Danish banking sector – like banking sectors in peer countries – found itself in 2008 with 
far too little capital and too much reliance on short term whole sale funding. We had, and to 
some extent still have, a long tail of smaller banks of which too many were weak, although 
we also have many well-run smaller banks.  
May  be  surprisingly  for  some,  the  collapse  of  the  housing  bubble  has  not  caused  direct 
problems for financial stability. There is much international talk about high household debt in 
Denmark and some other Northern European – I would add the term creditor – countries. In 
our case, loan impairments in our mortgage institutions due to household exposures – and 
these institutions provides by far most of lending for housing – cumulates to less than 1 per 
cent of lending over the entire 5–6 years since the collapse of the housing bubble. Also for 
the banking sector itself, write down of household exposures have been very limited.  
It helps of course that debt servicing costs are very low and falling. It helps that our mortgage 
system has a very strong prudential framework. It helps that households also have very large 
financial assets. Whereas previous generations of owner occupied houses paid down debt 
almost entirely before retirement, current generations have large private pensions and can 
continue to serve debt. Note also that household debt is strongly correlated with income. The 
20 per cent of households with the highest income owe more than 50 per cent of household 
debt. They are also those most likely to hold large financial assets in addition to the value of 
houses.  
Neither was trouble for the banking sector caused by their investment or proprietary trading 
positions – structural separation of banks is not the issue in this country.  
What  caused  the  banking  problem  was,  on  the  back  of  small  capital  and  liquidity  buffers, 
traditional  lending  –  one  could  add  reckless  lending  –  to  commercial  real  estate,  some 
expansionary  business  developers  and  certain  branches  such  as  agriculture.  Also,  our 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
important 
largest bank had a branch in Ireland which suffered from very high losses. Domestically the 
housing  bubble  and  its  collapse  indirectly  reinforced  these  problems  due  to  the  large 
contributions to the bust of the real economy. Of course also the negative spill over from the 
weak international economy took its toll on the real economy and bank exposures.  
In  our  assessment,  Denmark  has  come  a  long  way  to  clean  up  problems  in  the  banking 
sector. Profitability is still low due to high levels of loan impairments related to the lending 
previous  referred  to.  And  some  smaller  banks  still  struggle.  But  overall  the  sector  has 
become much better capitalized and prepared for the future. However, we are not done yet.  
Recently,  a  government-appointed  commission  on  systemically 
financial 
institutions  recommended,  inter  alia,  a  special  capital  surcharge  for  Danish  SIFI’s.  The 
surcharge varies between 1 and 3.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets. We would expect the 
total capital charges for our SIFI’s to be by and large at the level set in peer countries with 
similarly  sized  banking  sectors.  Our  recommendation  is  therefore  to  implement  the 
recommendations  of  this  committee  (in  which  we  took  part)  and  strengthen  capital 
requirements without delay. To quickly clarify the regulatory requirement for SIFI’s has strong 
merits.  
Arguments, if any, for a mediocre capitalization of banks are weak and not persuasive.  
As  a  point  of  departure,  the  risk  of  and  return  to  assets  of  a  bank  are  not  related  to  the 
composition of liabilities. Higher capital should therefore not have much of an impact for its 
overall funding costs. To the extent this would not be the case, the main reason is likely to be 
that investors attribute a high probability of government intervention and bail-out in case a 
failure  of  a  bank  due  to  its  low  capital.  Implicit  government  guarantees  are  not  a  good 
substitute for well capitalized banks. They would be distortive, expensive for tax payers and 
leads to too much risk-taking.  
It  is  an  investment  worth  taking  even  if  funding  costs  and  therefore  lending  costs  would 
increase marginally due to higher capital requirements. Financial crisis are very costly and it 
has a strong payoff to reduce their frequency.  
In the Danish case the larger banks has already come a long way by increasing their capital 
positions, in some cases beyond the stipulated future regulatory requirements. Benefits have 
also  already  materialized:  As  an  example,  the  funding  costs  of  Danish  banks  relative  to 
competitors  have  come  down  substantially  over  the  last  1–2  years  in  parallel  with  better 
capital positions  
Banking Union  
3. 
The  European  Banking  Union  is  a  major  issue  under  discussion  and  development.  We 
believe this makes a lot of sense. Just a few remarks to make clear where we stand:  
Denmark is a strong supporter of a harmonized approach to resolution where comprehensive 
and  rules-based  bail-in  of  bank  creditors  comes  first  and  in  center  of  any  resolution  of  a 
troubled financial institution. Of course a fiscal lending or capitalization backstop is needed 
and dealing with any SIFI in distress will have to manage the systemic concerns.  
While there are euro area specificities related to banking, most issues of the banking union 
has  a  broad  scope  of  caring  for  the  internal  market,  ensuring  efficient  cross-border 
cooperation  and  breaking  the  link  between  sovereign  and  banks,  creating  better  mutual 
insurance. Thus, it is a matter for all EU countries.  
The  Central  Bank  has  urged  the  government  to  engage  actively  in  discussions  of 
developments  of  the  full  the  banking  union,  including  potential  participation  in  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. It is our impression that this is taken up well.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
FTT  
4. 
Finally, a few words on the Financial Transaction Tax, which I understand has been a focus 
area for ICMA. In short, we share the concerns raised about this. Banks are wrong if they 
complain about higher capital requirements. They are right if they complain about FTTs.  
Some issues debated have been the difficulties of ensuring the global coverage of such a tax 
and the incidence of costs. The real and most important issue should, however, be how such 
a  tax  will  affect  the  functioning  of  the  detailed  machinery  of  financial  markets.  A  few 
observations:  
We  observed  in  the  financial  crisis  that  illiquidity  is  problematic  and  can  trigger  large 
difficulties. Bank regulation therefore calls for larger liquidity buffers. The FTT is effectually a 
tax on market liquidity and thus works counter to the intention of liquidity regulation.  
As liquidity in secondary markets is intentionally reduced by introducing an FTT, one should 
expect  higher  investor  premiums  in  primary  markets.  This will  raise  funding  costs  in  many 
markets, including for government debt.  
Very  many  transactions  are  undertaken  by  financial  institutions  on  behalf  of  non-financial 
companies  in  order  to  mitigate  risks  of  fluctuation  of  currencies,  raw  materials  etc.  Higher 
costs  of  such  insurance  would  likely  lead  to  less  risk  mitigation,  or  in  other  words  more 
“speculative” exposures.  
As regards volatility in financial markets it is doubtful that less liquid markets would reduce 
such volatility. Here the effects tend to move in different directions and the literature tends to 
be  inconclusive.  Markets  for  real  products  would  probably  be  more  volatile.  If  financial 
instruments can no longer serve the functioning of smoothing and shift the risk of exposures 
to those who can professionally bear it at smaller costs.  
Overall an FTT does not fit well with current efforts to repair the financial system.  
Thank you for the attention! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
