Mark Carney: Canada’s latest Polymer bank notes 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at the bank note unveiling, Ottawa, Ontario, 30 April 2013. 
 I am pleased to welcome you today for the unveiling of the last two bank notes in our new 
Polymer series, the $5 and $10 bank notes. 
One of the critical elements of the Bank of Canada’s mandate is the design, production and 
distribution of bank notes that Canadians can use in complete confidence for their day-to-day 
transactions. It is therefore very important for the Bank to keep ahead of counterfeiters who 
undermine this confidence. 
We made considerable progress in the fight against counterfeiting even before the release of 
the  polymer  bank  notes.  In  2012,  for  example,  the  rate  of  counterfeiting  had  dropped  by 
92 per cent from its peak in 2004. These new bank notes offer increased security and will 
contribute to a further reduction in counterfeiting rates. 
Almost half a billion of these new notes are now in circulation. Safer, cheaper, greener, the 
polymer notes have already proven their worth. 
Safer,  because  all  the  notes  have  the  same  state-of-the-art  security  features,  using 
holography, transparency and other elements that make them difficult to counterfeit but easy 
for everyone, especially those behind the counter, to verify. 
Cheaper, because the durable polymer material lasts at least 2.5 times longer than paper-
based notes. This means that fewer notes will need to be printed, making the series more 
economical. 
Greener because, over the life of the series, fewer notes produced also means fewer notes 
transported. And when they do need to be replaced, the notes will be recycled in Canada. 
As  we  all  know,  these  polymer  bank  notes  look  and  feel  different  than  the  paper-based 
currency of the past. 
This has been a big change for everyone: the Canadian public, financial institutions, retailers 
and the manufacturers of bank-note-handling equipment. The Bank of Canada will continue 
to work closely with all of these groups through this transition. 
The $5 and $10 bank notes that we are unveiling today will make their début in November, 
and in the coming months, businesses can begin to prepare for the switch and upgrade their 
cash-handling machines. 
The innovative nature of the polymer notes is echoed in the theme of the series – frontiers – 
because, in so many ways, these notes break new ground. 
The  “frontiers”  theme  is  also  reflected  in  the  images  chosen  to  grace  these  notes.  Each 
denomination  represents  the  best  of  Canada:  scientific  discovery  on  the  $100  note,  Arctic 
research on the $50 and valour and sacrifice on the $20. 
The bank notes we unveil today continue this tradition. The $10 note depicts a great feat of 
engineering from Canada’s past – the joining of East and West by rail. The $5 note highlights 
Canada’s  technological  achievements  that  look  skyward  –  our  contributions  to  the 
international space program. 
As Governor of the Bank of Canada, I join all my colleagues to express our pride in these 
new bank notes, also a product of great technological innovation. They are the impressive 
result of teamwork and dedication by chemists, physicists, researchers, artists and analysts. 
This kind of synergy, which is at the heart of excellence, has been a hallmark of our nation 
throughout its history. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
