Lim Hng Kiang: Boosting international linkages and cross-border 
opportunities 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  4th  World  Islamic  Banking 
Conference: Asia Summit 2013, Singapore, 4 June 2013. 
 Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
And to all our foreign guests, a warm welcome to Singapore. 
Introduction 
I am honoured to be invited to deliver the opening address for the 4th WIBC Asia Summit. 
Since its inauguration, I am pleased to see that the Conference has grown in participation 
and stature, with attendance nearly doubled since 2010. 
Continued growth of Islamic Finance 
When this conference convened in Singapore this time last year, one key takeaway was that 
the  Islamic  Finance  industry,  being  well-capitalised  and  tied  to  underlying  real  economic 
activities,  was  presented  with  unique  opportunities  to  expand  further  in  an  era  of 
deleveraging  by  global  financial  institutions  and  the  demand  for  back-to-basic  investment. 
The  need  for  the  industry  to  integrate  itself  with  global  finance  and  strike  roots  in  key 
international financial centres was also emphasised. 
We have indeed seen continued strong growth in the Islamic finance industry over the past 
year. The Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) estimated that assets of the global Islamic 
financial services industry grew by 20.4% year-on-year to reach an estimated USD1.6 trillion 
as at end 2012.1 Last year also saw a record volume of sukuk issuances globally, with sukuk 
issuance from more countries, and of larger size and longer tenor. 
Key financial centres have continued to facilitate the development of Islamic finance within 
their jurisdictions. Singapore has made adjustments to our regulatory and tax regime to allow 
for  the  growth  of  Islamic  finance  since  2004.  Hong  Kong  has  recently  amended  its  tax 
regulations to allow for issuance of sukuk, while the UK recently established an industry task 
force to facilitate further development of Islamic finance. Going forward, the broadening and 
deepening of economic and financial ties between Asia and the Middle East, the two major 
centres  for  Islamic  finance,  will  also  provide  further  impetus  for  future  growth  of  Islamic 
finance globally. 
Connectivity between Asia and the Middle East 
There are three important observations to be made on the growing connectivity between Asia 
and the Middle East. 
First, the economic relationship between the two regions has expanded beyond the energy-
related sector. Asia’s demand for energy exports from the Middle East will continue to remain 
robust as the region expands. However, non-energy trade between the two regions is also 
growing fast. About 40% of GCC’s non-oil exports are to Asia. Saudi Arabia is the leading 
                                                
1 
Islamic Financial Services Industry Stability Report 2013, Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
petrochemical  supplier  to  China’s  textile  industry,  and  China’s  exports  to  the  GCC  are 
estimated to be growing by 30% annually.2 
Second, financial flows between the two regions are increasing significantly. With the rapid 
accumulation of foreign reserves from the unprecedented oil windfall in recent years, GCC 
countries  are  looking  to  rebalance  their  portfolio  of  foreign  investments  with  a  greater 
allocation  to  Asia.  McKinsey  observed  that  over  the  period  of  2002–2006,  about  11%  of 
GCC’s capital outflows were to Asia. They estimated that this share could nearly double to 
20%  by  2020.  However,  Asia  in  turn  is  also  investing  into  the  Gulf,  particularly  in 
infrastructure projects in the GCC. There is now rising FDI from China and India in sectors 
such  as  construction,  tourism,  telecommunications,  software  and  engineering  services, 
garments, chemical products, and food.3 
Third, there are now increased numbers of financial intermediaries to facilitate cross-border 
financial  transactions  between  the  two  regions.  Major  Middle  East  Islamic  banks  have 
established operations in Malaysia. Leading banks from the GCC are now using Singapore 
as a base for expanding into East Asia and to facilitate Asian business expansion into the 
Middle  East.  Malaysian  and  Singapore  banks  are  in  the  Middle  East  to  seek  business 
opportunities. Together, the presence of all these active players makes for a vibrant Islamic 
Finance ecosystem in Singapore. 
Cross-border Islamic transactions set to take off 
Going  forward,  in  the  next  phase  of  growth,  I  am  optimistic  that  we  will  see  greater 
proliferation of cross border Islamic transactions. This will add a fresh boost to the growth of 
the global Islamic Finance industry, complementing the domestically driven growth of Islamic 
finance markets in Asia and the Middle East. 
First, both the Middle East and Asia will continue to post robust growth relative to other parts 
of  the  world.  This  gives  incentive  for  economic  and  financial  players  to  participate  more 
actively  in  each  others’  economies.  The  GCC  economies  have  held  up  well  despite  weak 
global  growth,  suffering  limited  impact  from  slowdowns  elsewhere  in  the  world.  IMF 
estimates that growth in the GCC countries will moderate slightly but remain robust at 4.0% 
in 2013 and 2014.4 Growth will be largely driven by increased domestic demand, and further 
spending on infrastructure to address present shortfalls and facilitate economic expansion. 
IMF has projected Asia to grow by 5.7% in 2013, and 6.0% the following year, exceeding the 
outlook for the global economy.5 Growth in Asia over the medium term will be supported by 
continued  urbanisation,  favourable  demographics  and  increased  intra-Asian  trade  and 
investment. 
Second,  multilateral  Islamic  finance  agencies  are  making  steady  headway  in  addressing 
issues  that  contribute  to  some  fragmentation  of  the  Islamic  finance  industry.  Work  by  the 
IFSB in setting international standards and best practices for the industry is providing greater 
uniformity of regulatory environment for Islamic financial players globally. The International 
Islamic Financial Markets (IIFM) is collaborating with ISDA and industry players to develop 
standardisation of Islamic financial products, documentation and related processes that will 
facilitate cross-border Islamic hedging, risk management and money market activities. Efforts 
by the Accounting & Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI), Islamic 
                                                
2 
“The  New  Silk  Road:  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  rediscover  trade  and  investment  opportunities”,  Research 
Department, Kuwait China Investment Company (KCIC), January 2011. 
Ibid. 
“Economic growth moderates across Middle East”, IMF Survey, May 21, 2013. 
“World Economic Outlook”, IMF, April 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3 
4 
5 
2 
 Development  Bank  and  Malaysia’s  International  Shariah  Research  Academy  (ISRA)  in 
research and fostering dialogue between Shariah Scholars from various jurisdictions are also 
narrowing the differences in views on Shariah issues in finance. As work on all these fronts 
progress,  this  will  encourage  greater  interest  internationally  to  participate  in  cross  border 
financing and investment activities. 
The prospects for cross-border Islamic finance are already very bright. We are beginning to 
see cross border sukuk issuance within Asia, as well as between Middle East and Asia. As 
early as 2010, Malaysia’s Khazanah issued a S$1.5b sukuk in Singapore, while Japan-based 
Nomura issued 2-year $100m sukuk in Malaysia. Last year, taking advantage of favorable 
currency swap rates, Singapore listed companies Natural Resources and Golden Agri tapped 
the Malaysian Ringgit (MR) sukuk market. In the last two years, two GCC firms, Abu Dhabi 
National  Energy  Company  and  Kuwait-based  Gulf  Investment  Corp  issued  MR  sukuk  in 
Malaysia. There is considerable scope to issue more such cross-border sukuk, especially to 
finance  the  large  infrastructure  needs  in  both  Middle  East  and  Asia.  Already  a  large 
proportion of sukuk issued in each region are linked to infrastructure projects.6 
Singapore’s contribution 
In  light  of  these  developments,  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  Islamic  financial  activities  in 
Singapore  have  continued  to  expand  over  the  past  year.  In  banking,  Middle  East  banks 
based in Singapore have started offering Islamic window facilities for their corporate clients. 
Recently,  Singapore-listed  shipping  company  Atlantic  Navigation,  which  has  operations  in 
GCC and India, signed an Islamic financing facility with a Singapore-based bank to further its 
business  activities.  Home-grown  Mustafa  Group  is  also  considering  an  Islamic  financing 
facility to fund its expansion into neighbouring countries. 
In  fund  management,  Securus  Fund,  the  world’s  first  Shariah  compliant  data  centre  fund, 
successfully  completed  its  second  round  of  fund  raising  earlier  this  year  to  double  their 
capital to about US$200m. The Fund is based and jointly managed in Singapore by Keppel 
Data Centre Investment Management and AEP Investment Management, which is majority-
owned by the Saudi Al-Rajhi Group. With the capital increase, the Fund has since acquired 
quality  data  centres  in  Ireland  and  Netherland  to  add  to  its  existing  assets  in  Australia, 
Malaysia and UK. Sabana REIT, the world’s largest Islamic REIT in terms of listed assets, 
issued the first convertible sukuk in Singapore last year. The response from investors in Asia 
and the Middle East has contributed to Sabana launching its S$500m multicurrency sukuk 
programme in April 2013. This is Singapore’s second corporate sukuk programme after City 
Development’s  S$1b  programme  launched  in  2010.  Earlier  this  year,  City  Development 
issued the 7th and 8th tranches from their programme for a total amount of S$100m. We are 
encouraged  that  more  sukuk  issuances  are  also  in  the  pipeline.  Just  recently,  Swiber,  a 
major  Singapore-listed  company  engaged  in  offshore  EPIC  (Engineering,  Procurement, 
Installation  and  Construction)  services  in  Asia  Pacific,  Middle  East  and  Latin  America, 
announced its intentions to set up a sukuk programme in Singapore in the coming months. 
These developments suggest that the growth potential for Islamic finance in Singapore has 
yet to be fully realised, and that Singapore can play a role in giving growth of cross-border 
Islamic  financing  an  even  greater  push.  Towards  this  end,  MAS  is  presently  working  with 
other government agencies and the industry to identify and address time-to market issues to 
further facilitate Islamic finance activities in Singapore. This includes looking into providing 
greater clarity and certainty in the regulatory and tax treatment to expedite the issuance of 
sukuk and other Islamic capital market instruments. 
                                                
6 
“Beyond  Borders:  The  GCC  and  Asia  could  Rev  up  their  economies  –  and  the  Islamic  Finance  Market”, 
Standard & Poor’s Rating Services, Sep 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  need  to  raise  competency  and  develop  talent  to  support  the  growth  of  the  industry 
cannot be overstated. Singapore Management University (SMU) has successfully completed 
its  first  Masters  programme  in  Islamic  Law  and  Finance;  and  SMU  has  reiterated  its 
commitment to support efforts at growing the human capital for the Islamic finance industry. 
Industry players here have formed the Gulf Asia Shari’ah Compliant Investments Association 
(GASCIA)  to  promote  and  undertake  initiatives  to  further  grow  the  industry.  Recently,  a 
GASCIA member introduced Islamic finance training to a leading local Madrasah to increase 
the students’ awareness and promote interest in pursuing a career in the industry. MAS will 
continue to work with industry players and training providers to ensure that we have a ready 
supply of talent to meet the needs of the industry as it continues to grow. 
Conclusion 
Singapore’s  success  as  an  international  financial  sector  stems  from  its  high  standards  of 
regulation; deep and liquid capital market, the presence of international buy side players, and 
a critical mass of financial intermediaries with expertise to address a wide range of financing 
needs. We will leverage on these strengths to further support the growth of Islamic finance. 
The  growing  and  deepening  linkages  between  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  will  present 
significant opportunities. I am pleased to see more players from the Middle East, Asia and 
other regions at today’s conference. I hope you will take advantage of this event to explore 
new ideas to spur the further growth of cross border Islamic financing transactions between 
our two regions, and globally. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
