Ignazio Visco: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy 
Concluding  remarks  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Ordinary 
Meeting of Shareholders 2012 – 119th Financial Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 31 May 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In these remarks I will give an account of a difficult year and speak about the severe test that 
we have all had to face. I will recall you of what has been done, describing the role of the 
Bank of Italy. I will speak about the progress made, even if it is insufficient; about the results 
achieved,  although  these  are  still  fragile;  about  the  need  not  to  waste  but  to  defend  and 
consolidate  these  achievements  in  order  to  set  the  recovery  process  in  motion;  and  lastly 
about the conditions for a return to balanced growth. 
Allow  me  to  start  with  a  farewell,  in  fact  with  more  than  one.  On  28  April,  in  this  delicate 
moment in the life of the country, our Director General Fabrizio Saccomanni was called to 
join the Government as Minister for the Economy and Finance. Endowed with outstanding 
personal  and  professional  qualities,  he  has  worked  in  almost  all  of  the  Bank’s  institutional 
and administrative fields of action. His experience, his thorough knowledge of the European 
and  international  organizations  in  which  he  has  held  prominent  positions  and  performed 
important  tasks  for  Italy,  the  competence  and  balance  he  has  demonstrated  in  his  many 
years of service to the Bank, for which we owe him a debt of gratitude, will be even more 
essential in the test that awaits him. We extend our warm best wishes to him. 
He is succeeded by Salvatore Rossi, our former Deputy Director General, who has for many 
years  combined  broad  managerial  responsibilities  with  economic  analysis  attentive  in 
particular to innovation and development. As Director General, he is also Chairman of the 
Insurance Supervisory Authority, which at the beginning of the year was placed by law under 
the direction of the Governing Board of the Bank of Italy, assisted by two outside directors.   
In July 2012 Anna Maria Tarantola, the first woman on our Governing Board, left the Bank to 
become president of the state broadcasting corporation RAI, a challenging assignment that 
recognizes  her  management  skills  and  professional  rigour.  In  December,  at  the  end  of  a 
career  that  was  exemplary  for  commitment,  dedication  and  analytical  and  institutional 
contributions, Deputy Director General Giovanni Carosio concluded his mandate. I would like 
to thank both of them warmly for their contribution of ideas and activity on behalf of the Bank. 
Between October 2012 and 10 May the Governing Board was brought back up to strength 
with  the  appointment  of  Deputy  Directors  General  Fabio  Panetta,  Luigi  Federico  Signorini 
and Valeria Sannucci. The new members of the Governing Board previously held positions of 
responsibility  at  the  highest  levels  in  the  fields  of  monetary  policy,  financial  stability, 
supervision,  internal  administration,  and  coordination  of  the  activities  connected  with  the 
Bank’s participation in the Eurosystem and the banking union project.  
The Bank of Italy is required to submit a yearly report on its activities to Parliament and the 
Government. Starting this year, the report has been enlarged and will be presented together 
with  the  annual  report  and  financial  statements.  In  this  way  we  will  be  able  to  give  a  full 
account  of  the  Bank’s  operations  and  activities,  its  analyses,  guidelines,  administrative 
actions and organization.  
The  fundamental  responsibilities  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  for  monetary  policy  within  the 
Eurosystem and for supervising the national banking and financial system are well known. At 
the  same  time  the  Bank  is  a  complex  organization  providing  services  that  benefit  both 
intermediaries  and  the  general  public.  We  administer  the  resources  entrusted  to  us  with 
diligence. The report on operations describes the steps taken to rationalize our procedures, 
improve the quality of our services and achieve greater efficiency.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  a  member  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  Bank  is  involved  in  the  payment  systems,  in  the 
production  of  banknotes,  and  in  ensuring  the  business  continuity  of  common  IT  systems, 
often as lead institution in charge of joint activities and projects. Together with the three other 
largest  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  we  are  creating  a  centralized  platform  for  the 
settlement of securities transactions.  
At  home,  last  year  we  made  further  progress  in  automating  the  centralized  state  treasury 
service and promoted the widespread adoption of the European format for payment services, 
thereby  helping  to  cut  costs  and  foster  competition.  Against  a  background  of  worsening 
economic conditions and risks for financial stability, we further strengthened our supervisory 
controls  on  banks  and  other  intermediaries,  stepped  up  inspections,  and  broadened  our 
checks on compliance with the rules for consumer protection and against money laundering.  
The  European  Central  Bank,  the  national  central  banks  and  the  national  supervisory 
authorities  are  working  to  create  the  single  supervisory  mechanism.  This  far-reaching 
institutional innovation will require an organizational adaptation as significant as, and even 
more  complex  than,  the  one  leading  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  project  must 
capitalize  on  the  best  national  practices;  it  must  aim  to  achieve  a  common  system  of 
supervisory  rules  and  practices  ensuring  pursuit  of  high  and  strict  standards.  We  attach 
special importance to aspects that are a fundamental part of our tradition, such as the central 
role  of  inspections,  methodologically  robust  analysis,  and  continuous  discussion  and 
dialogue with banks’ boards of directors and top management.  
The single supervisory mechanism will be based on the close integration of European and 
national  structures  in  the  case  of  the  largest  banks,  and  on  the  direct  responsibility  of 
national authorities – within the framework of common guidelines – for the rest; the tasks of 
customer  protection,  combating  money 
laundering  and  supervision  of  non-bank 
intermediaries will continue to be conducted at national level. The delicate launch phase will 
require  substantial  investment  in  human  and  technical  resources.  The  workload  will  not 
diminish, either for us or for the supervisory authorities of the other countries, as we strive to 
combine frameworks that differ in many respects. 
Concerning  the  events  involving  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena,  a  detailed  account  of  the 
supervisory initiatives and the measures adopted was made available on the Bank of Italy’s 
website at the end of January and has since been updated. Supervision of Monte dei Paschi 
has  been  continuous  and  increasingly  stringent  in  recent  years;  the  judicial  authorities  will 
assess whether this activity was obstructed by former directors and managers. From 2010 to 
2012  we  demanded  that  steps  be  taken  to  restore  a  balanced  liquidity  position,  thereby 
staving  off  serious  threats;  we  requested  a  marked  strengthening  of  capital  and  of  the 
internal  control  system;  we  prompted  a  radical  change  of  management.  We  are  working 
closely with the judiciary, to the benefit of our respective institutional objectives: safeguarding 
stability and suppressing illegal actions. The contribution of the Financial Intelligence Unit is 
fundamental. We have operated properly and with diligence and care, within the scope of the 
law; we welcome constructive comments. 
In  2012  the  Bank  of  Italy  considerably  increased  the  volume  of  its  assets,  participating  in 
exceptional  single  monetary  policy  interventions,  particularly  the  expansion  of  bank 
refinancing  operations.  This  has  resulted  in  larger  profits,  but  also  in  the  need  for  greater 
precautionary  allocations  to  risk  provisions.  The  Treasury  will  receive  a  payment  of 
€1.5 billion, on the basis of the Statute and subject to approval of the financial statements. 
The taxes owed by the Bank on its income and productive activities for the 2012 financial 
year amount to almost €2 billion. 
From 2008 to 2012 the Bank’s operating costs fell by more than 10 per cent; its staff was 
reduced  by  about  700  to  just  over  7,000.  Technology  has  made  possible  large  savings  in 
resources and improvements in services in the payment sector. We have reduced internal 
administration and reinforced banking and financial supervision. The Governing Board and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the Board of Directors agree on the objective of eliminating most of the Bank’s network at the 
provincial level. 
We have not ceased to recruit staff, using transparent and merit-based procedures, including 
innovative methods, to select highly qualified young people. Women account for 35 per cent 
of  all  personnel  and  23  per  cent  of  employees  with  managerial  responsibilities;  both 
percentages  are  rising.  We  promote  gender  equality  in  recruitment,  in  the  assignment  of 
positions  and  in  career  progression.  We  will  continue  to  do  so  in  the  interest  of  good 
administration. 
I  wish  to  convey  my  personal  thanks  and  those  of  the  Governing  Board  to  the  managers, 
directors  and  all  the  staff  who  work  for  the  Bank  of  Italy,  proudly  performing  their  public 
duties with discipline and honour, as the Constitution requires; capable, when times are hard, 
of  an  outstanding,  self-sacrificing  commitment  of  effort,  skill,  passion,  dedication  and 
openness to change. The Bank and the country know they can count on them.  
to  “unconventional” 
Monetary policy in the euro area 
Conditions on the global financial markets have improved, but the world economy has yet to 
return to a steady growth path. The economic situation differs markedly in the main regions. 
The  major  emerging  countries  are  still  growing  at  rapid  rates.  Among  the  advanced 
countries,  the  United  States  appears  to  be  gradually  returning  to  the  rates  of  growth  that 
characterized  the  most  recent  expansions.  In  Japan,  aggressively  expansive  policies,  not 
devoid of risk, are seeking to stimulate economic activity. The euro area is struggling to pull 
out  of  recession:  demand  is  dampened  by  the  immediate  effects  of  public  and  private 
deleveraging in many countries; cyclical weakness is spreading to the economies not directly 
exposed to the sovereign debt crisis. 
Recovery in the euro area requires help from every sphere of economic policy. Including by 
recourse 
instruments,  monetary  policy  has  made  an  essential 
contribution to averting serious consequences for financial stability; it has safeguarded price 
stability.  The  tools  of  intervention  have  been  chosen  based  on  the  characteristics  of  the 
financial system, the origin of the tensions and the institutional structure: we have aimed first 
and  foremost  to  support  the  liquidity  of  the  banks,  which  in  the  euro  area,  more  than 
elsewhere, play a pre-eminent role in financing the economy, and to prevent sovereign debt 
market distortions from impeding the proper transmission of monetary policy. 
We remarked a year ago that the levels to which sovereign interest rates had risen in many 
countries  of  the  area  reflected  not  only  the  deterioration  of  national  growth  and  fiscal 
prospects,  but  also  a  systemic  risk  factor,  subsequently  called  “redenomination  risk”, 
connected with fears of a break-up of the monetary union, due in part to the incompleteness 
of its institutional design. We documented this risk swiftly and analytically; our results have 
been  confirmed  by  the  studies  of  other  institutions  and  have  been  adopted  by  the 
Eurosystem. 
At  the  end  of  June  the  summit  meeting  of  euro-area  heads  of  state  and  government 
approved flexible and efficient utilization of the financial support mechanisms – the European 
Financial Stability Facility and the European Stability Mechanism – to stabilize the financing 
conditions of the countries exposed to the sovereign debt tensions, provided they honoured 
their  European  commitments.  The  possible  use  of  those  mechanisms  for  the  direct 
recapitalization  of  banks,  after  the  creation  of  a  single  supervisory  mechanism,  was 
envisaged. 
In early August the ECB Governing Council announced the introduction of outright monetary 
transactions (OMTs) for purchases of government securities on the secondary market, with 
no quantitative limits. A few days before that the President of the ECB had promised to do 
whatever was necessary to safeguard the euro. In September the details of the scheme were 
defined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to 
to  country,  owing  not  only 
Countering the increase in interest rates on sovereign debt when that increase stems from 
redenomination  risk  and  distorts  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  falls  fully  within  the 
Eurosystem’s  mandate.  The  benefits  of  the  announcements  of  the  new  measures  were 
immediate: medium- and long-term yields came down in the countries under pressure; the 
fragmentation of markets along national lines lessened. 
The steps taken by the Eurosystem in the last two years have counteracted the worsening of 
credit conditions in the euro area and its repercussions on the macroeconomic situation. In 
Italy, according to our estimates, they have helped to buoy output by at least two and a half 
percentage points over that span. Our estimates, however, cannot measure the effects of the 
financial  collapse  that  could  have  occurred  in  the  absence  of  these  interventions,  with 
disastrous consequences for the national and European economies. 
In recent months the fears concerning the single currency’s survival and financial conditions 
in the area have abated further; one factor has been the expansion of global liquidity, which 
has  spurred  a  search  for  high  yields  on  the  part  of  institutional  investors.  In  Italy,  interest 
rates on government securities have also declined on the longest maturities, returning to the 
levels prevailing at the beginning of 2010. 
Yet these advances have not been accompanied by an improvement of the real economy; 
economic activity continued to be weak throughout the euro area in the first quarter. Credit 
conditions  still  differ  from  country 
the  diversity  of 
macroeconomic situations but also to the residual uncertainty as to the future conditions of 
funding in the national banking systems. 
At  the  beginning  of  this  month,  considering  the  contraction  of  demand,  the  prospect  of 
prolonged  cyclical  weakness  and  the  decline  of  both  actual  and  expected  inflation  in  the 
medium term to well below 2 per cent, the ECB Governing Council lowered the rate on main 
refinancing  operations  further,  taking  it  to  a  new  historic  low  of  0.5  per  cent.  The  Council 
reiterated that the unlimited supply of liquidity at fixed rates would continue for as long as 
necessary and in any case until July of next year. The ECB, in concert with other European 
institutions, is examining initiatives to promote a market in securities backed by loans to non-
financial corporations.  
The  Governing  Council  stands  ready  to  intervene  again  as  new  information  becomes 
available and to consider all possible measures for maintaining credit conditions throughout 
the  area  consistent  with  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The  ECB’s  management  of  official 
interest rates has proven effective; the effects of last year’s reductions have spread to the 
countries hardest hit by the tensions. 
The measures taken, in particular the announcement of outright monetary transactions, are 
conducive to the national and European reforms which alone can eradicate redenomination 
risk. Monetary policy can guarantee stability only if the area’s economic fundamentals and 
institutional architecture are consistent with that objective. 
Every country must do its part. The procedure for the activation of OMTs presupposes the 
emergence of very serious tensions; it can only be applied to countries that have previously 
requested, possibly on a precautionary basis, a European financial assistance programme, 
and  it  is  subordinated  to  compliance  with  the  conditions  attached.  These  reflect  the 
awareness  that  the  fears  of  euro  reversibility  are  not  disjoined  from  those  for  the 
sustainability of the public debt and the growth prospects of individual countries. 
More  than  any  conditionality,  however,  what  is  essential  is  the  shared  determination  to 
advance towards a complete European Union: monetary union, banking union, fiscal union 
and  finally  political  union.  Important  strides  forward  have  already  been  taken.  Under  the 
pressing time constraints dictated by the crisis, there has been uncertainty, mistakes have 
been made, decisions have not been easy. But the way ahead is clear. 
We  must  proceed  along  the  path  of  integration.  The  banking  union  project  is  designed  to 
break  the  spiral  between  sovereign  debt  and  the  conditions  of  banks  and  credit.  The 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
importance  of  this  has  been  further  underscored  by  the  handling  earlier  this  year  of  the 
banking  crisis  in  Cyprus,  which  was  resolved  only  after  problems  of  coordination  between 
European  and  national  authorities  had  emerged.  The  creation  of  a  single  banking 
supervisory mechanism in which the ECB and the national authorities play a pivotal role is 
the  first  step.  It  must  be  completed  by  rapid  introduction  of  a  common  bank  resolution 
scheme and common deposit insurance. 
The contours of the project for the common budget for the euro area must be defined and a 
timetable for its realization drawn up. The report of the European Commission last November 
and  the  one  drafted  by  the  presidents  of  the  European  Council,  the  Commission,  the 
Eurogroup  and  the  ECB  move  in  this  direction.  The  institution  of  common  mechanisms  of 
financial  support  for  structural  reforms  in  single  member  countries  can  constitute  the 
occasion for the launch of the project and the issue, on a trial basis, of joint debt securities. 
The Italian economy 
Italy’s weak recovery following the global financial crisis ended in the second half of 2011, 
when our government securities market came under pressure. There ensued a vicious circle 
between the state of the public debt, of banks and credit, and of the real economy. Economic 
activity contracted by 2.4 per cent last year.  
This  year  too  will  register  a  substantial  fall  in  output  and  employment.  A  cyclical  upturn 
towards the end of the year is possible; it will depend on the acceleration of world trade, the 
implementation of appropriate economic policies, positive developments in expectations and 
investment conditions, and the availability of credit. 
The recession is deeply undercutting potential output and threatens to erode social cohesion. 
In  2012  Italy’s  gross  domestic  product  was  7  per  cent  smaller  than  in  2007,  households’ 
disposable income was more than 9 per cent lower, and industrial production was down by a 
quarter. Hours worked were down 5.5 per cent, and more than half a million jobs had been 
lost. The unemployment rate, at 11.5 per cent this March, has practically doubled since 2007; 
it is nearly 40 per cent among young people and higher still among those in the South. 
The financial and international origins of the crisis, on which economic policy makers have 
mostly focused, must not blind us to the fact that in Italy  more than in other countries the 
cyclical ups and downs are superimposed on serious structural weaknesses. In the ten years 
preceding  the  crisis,  this  was  already  evident  in  the  overall  performance  of  the  Italian 
economy, which fared worse than those of nearly all the other major advanced countries. 
We  failed  to  respond  to  the  extraordinary  geopolitical,  technological  and  demographic 
changes  of  the  last  quarter-century.  The  adjustment  required,  and  put  off  for  so  long,  is 
historic  in  scope.  It  will  affect  the  accumulation  of  tangible  and  intangible  capital,  product 
specialization and the organization of production, the education system, skills, career paths, 
the characteristics of the welfare system and income distribution, the positional rents that are 
incompatible  with  the  new  competitive  environment,  and  the  working  of  government.  An 
adjustment of this magnitude needs a decisive contribution from the political system, but the 
response of society and all the forces of production is essential. 
Firms  are  called  upon  to  make  an  exceptional  effort  to  ensure  the  success  of  the 
transformation  by  investing  resources  of  their  own,  seizing  the  opportunities  for  growth, 
adapting their corporate structures and organization, relying on innovation and their ability to 
hold their own in the most dynamic markets. They have demonstrated their ability to do so at 
other times in our history. Some are doing so now. But too few have been willing to take the 
plunge; at times, instead, the illusory solution of public support is advocated. 
This  year’s  Report  contains  a  special  section  on  innovation  in  Italy.  The  ability  to  renew 
products and processes, to export to emerging markets and to internationalize, including by 
heading or joining global production chains, divides the firms that are continuing to expand 
sales  revenue  and  value  added  from  those  that,  instead,  are  struggling  to  remain  on  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
market. The recession has deepened this divide and made the inadequacy of some parts of 
the productive system glaringly obvious.  
Transferring activity from ailing to  growing sectors and firms requires profound changes in 
employment relationships and in the education system. The point is not so much to foresee 
which sectors and activities will attract consumption and investment demand in the decades 
to come as to facilitate the transition, reduce the social costs, and capitalize on opportunities.  
Many occupations are disappearing; in the years to come young people cannot simply count 
on replacing their seniors as they retire. Now is the time to establish the right conditions for 
the  birth  and  growth  of  new  enterprises  and  to  generate  new  job  opportunities.  Lifelong 
vocational training must be developed to cover working careers characterized by mobility and 
change,  with  workers  safeguarded  by  reinforced  safety  nets  and  insurance  systems,  both 
public  and  private,  during  periods  of  inactivity.  Schools  and  universities  must  support  this 
process by ensuring education of adequate quality and quantity, acting with determination to 
raise levels of academic achievement and develop new skills.  
Italy needs conditions that are conducive to enterprise and to the reallocation of productive 
factors. The lag we have accumulated is accentuated by a redundant regulatory framework, 
by complex and costly administrative obligations that must be drastically reduced, law that 
must  be  rendered  more  certain,  widespread  corruption  that  must  be  stamped  out,  and 
insufficient  protection  from  crime.  Immediate,  visible  progress  in  removing  these  serious 
obstacles  can  stimulate  productive  investment,  including  from  abroad,  in  all  the  country’s 
regions, especially in the South, where what is most critical is the environment for business 
activity, on which the balanced development of our economy ultimately depends.   
The programme of reforms launched in the last two years stems from these considerations. 
But in many instances, after the enactment of reform laws, the implementing measures have 
been slow to follow; in some cases they are still lacking and administrative practices remain 
unchanged. This is a recurrent feature of our country’s history: the chief difficulties reside not 
so much in the substance of the laws as in their effective application.  
The  pace  of  reform  has  slackened  in  the  past  year,  owing  in  part  to  the  progressive 
deterioration of the political climate. In resuming the path of reform with determination – as 
the European Commission too urges in the recommendations accompanying the closure of 
the  excessive  deficit  procedure  –  it  is  vital  to  adopt  a  comprehensive  approach  that  fixes 
medium-term  objectives  from  the  outset.  Structural  reforms  take  time;  they  can  be 
implemented in succession, provided that they are designed as part of a bigger picture that 
immediately clarifies their goals, implications and benefits. A credible programme can have 
an impact on expectations at once, dispelling uncertainties, fostering investor confidence and 
favouring the prospects of employment and income, above all for the young, who today find it 
difficult to imagine any future in our country.  
The  consolidation  of  the  public  finances  was  also  postponed  for  too  long;  in  the  face  of 
demographic  pressure  on  important  expenditure  items,  the  priorities  for  the  allocation  of 
resources were not clearly set. In 2007 public expenditure excluding interest payments was 
43  per  cent  of  GDP,  two  percentage  points  more  than  in  1997;  the  primary  surplus  had 
contracted by more than three points. In the same period in Germany primary expenditure 
decreased by more than four percentage points of GDP to just under 41 per cent. 
The  response  of  budgetary  policy  in  the  wake  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  was 
prudent in Italy: the support to economic activity in 2009 was provided through discretionary 
measures affecting the composition of the budget, without increasing the deficit. 
From  2010  onwards,  the  budgetary  stance  became  restrictive.  Following  the  explosion  of 
sovereign risk, to avoid a potentially devastating confidence and liquidity crisis, in the second 
half  of  2011  a  correction  to  the  public  finances  of  the  order  of  5  per  cent  of  GDP  was 
introduced. This made it possible to bring the deficit down within the 3 per cent limit in 2012 
and to aim at structural balance as early as this year. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  adjustment  had  a  negative  impact  on  GDP  growth  in  2012  of  about  one  percentage 
point. A larger impact, of about two points, resulted from the effects of the liquidity crisis on 
the cost and availability of credit for the private sector, the slowdown in world trade, and the 
increase  in  uncertainty  and  the  related  loss  of  confidence.  The  adjustment  of  the  public 
finances  helped  to  reduce  the  tensions  on  the  government  securities  market,  thereby 
preventing even worse developments. 
The  advances  made  must  be  preserved.  Squandering 
them  would  have  grave 
consequences.  It  would  be  illusory  to  imagine  we  can  overcome  the  crisis  by  means  of 
budget deficits: investors and market participants allow us only a thin margin of confidence 
today.  The  volume  of  government  securities  to  be  placed  every  year  to  finance  the  deficit 
and, above all, to roll over the maturing debt is on the order of €400 billion. 
This year there is no room for any further increase in the deficit, since the margin available 
has  been  earmarked  to  pay  general  government’s  commercial  debts  in  relation  to  capital 
outlays.  These  payments  can  be  brought  forward,  however,  and  those  relating  to  current 
expenditure, which affect the debt but not the deficit, can be increased; above all, no new 
debts  of  this  kind  must  be  formed.  The  conditions  need  to  be  created  for  taking  full 
advantage  of  the  existing  instruments  and  subsidies  to  enable  young  people  to  enter  and 
remain in the labour market. 
The  European  Commission  has  undertaken  to  examine  ways  to  allow  national  budgets  to 
deviate temporarily from their medium-term objectives – keeping the deficit below 3 per cent 
of GDP – in order to finance investment projects, subject to specific conditions. In Italy, this 
could benefit investment to protect and enhance the value of the environment and our artistic 
and cultural heritage. 
Reductions in taxation, which are necessary in the medium term and which could be planned 
now, will necessarily be selective, giving priority to labour and production: the tax wedge on 
labour  acts  as  a  brake  on  employment  and  business  activity.  Tax  evasion  distorts  the 
allocation of the factors of production, gives rise to unfair competition, hinders growth in firm 
size and increases the burden borne by law-abiding taxpayers. It needs to be fought at the 
supranational level as well. A significant contribution to better fiscal conduct can derive from 
the simplification and rationalization of taxes and formalities. The certainty of tax rules and 
their careful and balanced formulation can influence expectations, and hence demand, more 
and better than immediate tax cuts of uncertain sustainability. 
A  reallocation  of  expenditure  in  favour  of  the  more  productive  components  is  possible  by 
pursuing  improvements  in  efficiency  and  recoveries  of  resources  across  the  board.  If  this 
method  is  adopted  permanently,  the  functioning  of  general  government  can  more  nearly 
approach  international  standards.  Significant  results  will  not  be  possible  without  involving 
local  government.  Transferring  resources  on  the  basis  of  standard  costs,  with  any  excess 
expenditure borne by the local authorities concerned, encourages the dissemination of best 
practices.  The  efficient  use  of  public  resources  requires  a  reassessment  of  the  different 
levels of government, with the elimination of redundancies.  
The banks and lending 
The outlook for domestic demand also depends largely on credit access conditions. Lending 
to firms slowed sharply in the second part of 2011 and since the beginning of December of 
that year has contracted by about €60 billion. The decline, which was particularly abrupt at 
first owing to the banks’ severe difficulties in raising funds on the international markets due to 
heightened sovereign risk, continued at a more moderate pace during 2012; in the first four 
months of 2013 the contraction accelerated again, to nearly 4.0 per cent on an annual basis. 
Lending to households has also declined but less so. The cost of credit to firms, which rose 
in the course of 2011, declined for most of last year but stopped falling in the autumn. Bank 
lending rates are still higher than the euro-area average by about one percentage point for 
loans to firms and by half a point for mortgage loans to households.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The banking system is the main source of funding for our economy. At the end of 2012 bank 
credit to firms and households amounted to just under €1.5 trillion, or 94 per cent of GDP; 
banks’  investment  in  government  securities  came  to  around  €350  billion.  The  highly 
unfavourable  state  of  the  economy  depresses  credit  demand  today.  The  contraction  in 
lending  reflects  the  decline  in  business  investment,  the  fall  in  purchases  of  durable  goods 
and the weak property market. But the decline in lending is also due in significant measure to 
the tightening of supply, which is in turn linked to a deterioration in customer creditworthiness 
and its impact on banks’ asset quality. In turn, the credit supply conditions have an adverse 
effect on economic activity, creating a negative spiral that must be broken.  
The  acute  restriction of  credit  supply  at  the  end  of  2011  in  response to  funding  difficulties 
was attenuated by the unlimited supply of three-year liquidity by the Eurosystem and by the 
increase in the range of the assets eligible as collateral for refinancing operations. The Bank 
of  Italy  allowed  Italian  counterparties  to  use  less  creditworthy  illiquid  assets,  in  this  case 
charging  all  the  associated  risks  to  its  own  balance  sheet.  The  collateral  pledged  with  the 
Bank of Italy based on bank loans currently amounts to around €180 billion, which represents 
slightly less than a third of all the assets eligible for central bank refinancing and half of those 
actually in the collateral pool. 
Thanks to these measures immediate liquidity risks have been averted. The funds obtained 
through  the  three-year  refinancing  operations  do  not  constitute  a  permanent  resource, 
however.  Tension  on  the  government  securities  markets  has  not  completely  dissipated. 
There is still uncertainty regarding the banks’ ability to regain full access to the international 
markets, particularly the long-term segments. We are working, through discussions with the 
banks and in collaboration with the ECB, to expand the range of eligible assets. 
An  increased  risk  of  corporate  default  is  driving  up  the  interest  rates  on  loans.  Since  the 
middle of 2012 this has offset the effect of the lowering of official rates and, more recently, of 
the decline in yields on government securities. 
The  credit  supply  tensions  seem  to  be  affecting  even  firms  with  a  balanced  financial 
situation, albeit to a smaller degree. The difficulties are greatest for small and medium-sized 
firms, which are less able to tap other sources of finance. Gross issues of corporate bonds 
amounting  to  €35  billion  last  year  were  attributable  almost  exclusively  to  large  groups.  In 
2012 the interest rate differential between bank loans of up to €1 million and those for larger 
amounts averaged 160 basis points, about twice the value recorded in the three years prior 
to the crisis.   
At the end of 2012 the stock of bad debt had risen to 7.2 per cent of total lending, compared 
with 3.4 per cent in 2007; and that of other non-performing loans to 6.3 per cent, up from 
1.9 per cent. For corporate loans, the new bad debt ratio recently rose to over 4 per cent on 
a  seasonally  adjusted  annual  basis,  a  level  not  reached  for  twenty  years.  The  leading 
indicators suggest that it will remain high until the end of 2013.   
The Government and trade associations have taken many steps in recent years to mitigate 
firms’ difficulty in obtaining credit and to meet their liquidity needs, strengthening measures 
already  adopted  and  introducing  new  ones.  Between  2009  and  2012  almost  €60  billion  in 
financial benefits was made available to small and medium-sized enterprises through debt 
moratoria and the interventions of Cassa Depositi e Prestiti and the Central Guarantee Fund. 
The  Fund’s  resources  can  be  increased,  taking  care  to  ensure  that  the  guarantees  to  be 
provided are for additional loans granted on more favourable conditions, and that beneficiary 
firms are fully informed about the public support measures. 
Faced with the deterioration of banks’ loans, the Bank of Italy has intensified its scrutiny of 
banks’ provisioning. Off-site and on-site checks have been conducted, with banks asked to 
continually  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  coverage  ratio  of  their  non-performing-loan  and 
urged,  when  necessary,  to  take  corrective  measures.  This  action  will  continue,  partly  in 
conjunction with similar exercises agreed at international level, with a view to the creation of 
the single European supervisory mechanism. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
For the twenty large and medium-sized banking groups so far subjected to checks, coverage 
ratios ceased to fall and instead rose by two percentage points in the second half of 2012 to 
44 per cent. Increases were recorded for the other banks as well. 
If the Bank of Italy’s supervision had been less incisive, the risks for the banks and for the 
economy would have been extremely serious. The promptness and credibility of supervisory 
action  reassured  international  investors  about  the  quality  of  Italian  banks’  balance  sheets, 
sparing Italy’s banks the destabilizing wave that struck other European banking systems and 
enabling  them  to  continue  to  supply  credit  to  households  and  firms.  The  coverage  ratios 
reached must be maintained and in some cases raised. 
To minimize the procyclical effects of the interventions, we called on the banks to increase 
their  internally  generated  resources  by  further  curbing  operating  costs,  dividends  and 
executives’  and  directors’  compensation,  consistently  with  banks’  profitability  and  capital 
adequacy. For banks that will have to undertake more far-reaching adjustment, a contribution 
must come from the sale of non-strategic assets. A correction of the current tax penalization 
of  value  adjustments  to  loans  would  be  opportune.  The  stretching  out  in  time  of  their  tax 
deductibility, which is not the rule in the major countries of the European Union, discourages 
lending to firms during economic downswings. 
Over the past five years the Italian banking system, starting from sound initial conditions, has 
weathered  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  instability  of  the  sovereign  debt  market,  and  two 
deep recessions. Since the onset of the crisis, the highest quality capital has increased from 
7.1 to 10.7 per cent of the entire banking system’s risk-weighted assets; for the five largest 
groups the ratio has risen from 5.7 to 10.9 per cent. 
The soundness and resilience of the Italian financial system were recently confirmed by the 
International  Monetary  Fund  at  the  conclusion  of  its  periodic  financial  sector  assessment. 
The outcome of the IMF’s stress testing to date shows that our banks as a group are in a 
position  to  withstand  shocks  thanks  to  their  capitalization  and  the  liquidity  provided  by  the 
Eurosystem.  The  Fund  emphasized  the  fundamental  contribution  of  supervisory  action  to 
systemic stability. 
The capital ratio gap between Italian banks and the European average, which has narrowed 
to about two percentage points, is due in large part to the massive injections of public capital 
to  banks  in  other  countries.  In  December  government  support  to  the  banks  amounted  to 
1.8 per cent of GDP in Germany, 4.3 per cent in Belgium, 5.1 per cent in the Netherlands, 
5.5 per cent in Spain and 40 per cent in Ireland. In Italy it came to 0.3 per cent including the 
interventions in favour of Monte dei Paschi di Siena. 
These  interventions,  now  being  vetted  by  the  Commission,  were  necessitated  by  the 
European  Banking  Authority’s  recommendation  that  EU  banks  procure  extraordinary, 
temporary  supplementary  capital  buffers  to  cope  with  fluctuations  in  the  value  of  their 
government  securities  holdings.  These  resources  will  also  facilitate  the  restructuring  plan 
adopted by Monte dei Paschi’s new management. The government has granted the bank a 
loan  on  onerous  terms.  The  restructuring  plan  has  ambitious  objectives;  its  success  will 
depend in part on economic and financial developments in the country as a whole. 
Italian  banks’  financial  leverage  ratio  (total  balance-sheet  assets  over  capital)  is  14  to  1, 
compared with an average of 20 to 1 in the rest of the European Union. In the last two years 
the  Italian  banks  taking  part  in  the  Basel  Committee’s  periodic  monitoring  have  sharply 
reduced the additional capital they would need if the new “Basel III” requirements (including 
the capital conservation buffer) were fully in effect from €35 billion to €9 billion. 
Capital  strengthening,  transparency  of  accounting  and  rigorous  risk  evaluation  criteria 
sustain  investor  confidence  and  help  contain  banks’  outside  funding  costs  in  particularly 
adverse  circumstances.  But  the  ultimate  guarantee  of  banks’  stability  is  their  capacity  to 
generate  earnings.  Looking  ahead,  declining  profitability  threatens  to  weaken  capital  and 
undermine  banks’  ability  to  finance  the  recovery  of  the  real  economy.  Between  2007  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
2012  Italian  banks’  return  on  equity  declined.  Last  year  it  was  0.4  per  cent  net  of 
extraordinary items in connection with goodwill impairments. 
The risk of unfavourable developments over the next few years must be countered first of all 
by  effective  action  to  curb  costs.  In  a  highly  labour-intensive  industry  like  banking, 
consideration  must  be  given  to  measures,  even  temporary  ones,  to  reduce  staff  costs  in 
relation  to  revenue.  The  provision  of  the  2011  industry-wide  labour  contract  for  company-
level agreements to combine flexibility and solidarity moves in the right direction. In order to 
cope with contingent difficulties and actually preserve jobs, banks must proceed resolutely 
along this path. 
Change in the use of productive factors and in the channels of distribution must be promoted, 
fully exploiting the opportunities offered by the new technologies. In the last fifteen years the 
Internet channel has gained importance in relations with customers, but the impact on the 
traditional branch network has been limited. Differentiating between these two channels, one 
for  standardized  services  and  the  other  for  more  complex  and  customized  products  and 
services  could  help  to  reverse  the  Italian  banking  industry’s  decade-long  upward  trend  in 
costs as a proportion of revenues.   
In any event, customer trust remains fundamental. Progress has been made on this front, but 
further  improvement  is  needed  to  enhance  the  quality  and  completeness  of  customer 
information,  to  ensure  that  the  contractual  terms  as  advertised  correspond  fully  with  those 
actually applied, and to prevent improper charges being levied on customers. The Bank of 
Italy  has  drawn  up  clear  rules,  compliance  with  which  it  verifies  also  by  means  of  special 
inspections, imposing fines when irregularities are detected.   
For  several  years  now,  for  individual  disputes  there  is  the  Banking  and  Financial 
Ombudsman, acting through three territorial panels and independently of the Bank of Italy. It 
has proved to be effective and highly regarded. We intend to strengthen it further and are 
considering 
the 
Ombudsman’s decisions is one factor in the Bank of Italy’s assessment of banks. 
The difficulties in the financing of firms necessarily invite reflection on the overall structure of 
Italy’s  financial  system,  the  underdevelopment  of  the  bond  and  equity  markets  and  the 
consequent excessive dependence of firms on bank loans. As we have underscored on other 
occasions, this structure partly reflects Italian firms’ reluctance to go to the market, although 
the banks have not pressed them sufficiently to do so.  
The  current  situation  demands  that  both  sides  overcome  these  hesitations.  For  solid 
businesses with good growth prospects, the difficult conditions of the market for bank credit 
are a powerful stimulus to tap the capital markets. On the banks’ side, an advanced financial 
system would enable them to diversify their sources of revenue, maintain a balanced loan-to-
deposit ratio and share the risks of financing customers with the markets. While paying due 
attention  to  conflicts  of  interest,  banks  can  encourage  firms’  recourse  to  the  market  by 
exploiting  the  advantage  in  assessing  creditworthiness  that  derives  from  their  long-term 
relationships.    
The capital strengthening of firms and their opening to the capital markets also require far-
reaching changes in the entire financial system. It is indispensable that the role of pension 
funds and other long-term investors be reinforced; appropriate incentives must be provided 
for the accumulation of equity capital. 
In  the  present  difficult  economic  conditions  and  with  the  prospect  of  a  comprehensive 
revision of banks’ business model, the role of shareholders is crucial. They will have to be 
able to support banks financially, by foregoing dividends if need be, carefully monitor their 
management without interfering, and accept dilution of control, where necessary encouraging 
mergers with other banks. They will be compensated by profitability in the longer term. 
In the crisis years banking foundations have supported the capital strengthening of some of 
the largest Italian banks. In their dealings with the banks in which they have an interest they 
the  number  of  panels.  Promptness  of  compliance  with 
increasing 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
must  comply  with  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  law,  refraining  from  influencing  their 
operational  decisions  or  organization;  like  any  other  shareholder,  they  must  promote  the 
choice of directors on the basis of competence and professionalism, by transparent criteria.  
The  rules  governing  cooperative  banks  were  drawn  up  for  intermediaries  whose  business 
was restricted to a limited geographical area and marked, as in the case of mutual banks, by 
a high degree of mutuality. Today they may be inadequate for large intermediaries operating 
at national and even international level, listed on the stock exchange and with institutional 
investor shareholders representing a multitude of small savers whose aims and interests are 
unrelated to mutuality. For such intermediaries the rigid application of some aspects typical 
of the cooperative model may even detract from their ability to strengthen their capital. 
On several occasions we have indicated possible measures to facilitate the participation of 
shareholders and make institutional investors’ role more effective. It should be made easier 
for listed cooperative banks to turn themselves into companies limited by shares, when their 
size and the nature of their operations make this necessary. Within the scope of our powers, 
in order to ensure sound and prudent management, we promote changes in the application 
of governance practices; where the shortcomings are most serious, we require them. 
 Europe and Italy are still navigating a difficult passage. To get through it we cannot relax our 
efforts; we must press on with the work of reform. 
European citizens must find in the strengthening of the Community framework a source of 
common identity, an understanding that everybody stands to benefit. For the countries that 
brought  them  into  being,  the  single  market  and  the  economic  and  monetary  union  have 
represented an enormous opportunity for growth and stability, which needed – which needs – 
to be grasped in full. Some have not yet done so, Italy among them. On countless occasions 
our country has contributed ideas and policy initiatives to the European Community. It is part 
of our heritage of values and it is in our interest to continue to do so, in these difficult times, 
in which Europeans’ will to cooperate and to unite is sometimes called into question. 
We Italians, from the beginning among the creators of the European construction, must show 
that we know how to extricate ourselves from the grave condition into which we have fallen: 
jobs that are being lost and not being created; firms that are unable to modernize and finance 
themselves, that are closing; banks weakened first by the sovereign debt tensions and then 
by  the  effects  of  the  recession,  with  some  at  risk  of  being  in  difficulty.  Our  political 
representatives  are  finding  it  hard  to  mediate  between  the  general  interest  and  particular 
interests; citizens are receiving conflicting and uncertain signals in this respect. 
We cannot always ask others to shoulder the burden of reform. All of us must do our share: 
firms, workers, banks, public institutions. A budget that, apart from cyclical contingencies, is 
in  balance  and  whose  composition  fosters  employment  and  growth  is  the  prerequisite  for 
every effective and equitable policy. The sacrifices made to achieve and consolidate financial 
stability  are  the  consequence  of  long-ignored  rigidities,  lags  accumulated  over  time.  Italy’s 
release  from  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  is  the  first  fruit  of  these  sacrifices,  an 
achievement not to be squandered. It should be viewed as an investment on which to build.  
We  must  not  fear  the  future,  be  afraid  of  change.  We  can  build  nothing  by  defending 
entrenched positions and our own particular interests; all of us stand to lose. What is needed 
is awareness, solidarity and foresight. Measures and stimuli that are well-designed, even if 
they  contemplate  a  not  inconsiderable  span  of  time  for  transforming  the  country,  will 
engender the confidence needed to decide that today it is already worth the effort to commit 
oneself, to work, to invest.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
