Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives 
Annual  address  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), to the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 14 February 
2013. 
The underlying data series can be found on the Norges Bank’s website.  
 Introduction 
Life was blessed for these people, living in a small capital in a small country, geographically 
outside  the  world;  geographically,  but  not  economically.  The  bright  springs  bubbled  up  as 
never before (...). They were sent sparkling to the sky by popping corks over tables set for a 
feast (...) But all those who lived by the banks of the bright springs knew that they could not 
spring eternal.1 
Johan Borgen’s portrayal of Norway as it was almost a hundred years ago could also serve 
as an apt description of today’s Norway, even though the environment was entirely different 
at that time. 
Five years after the financial crisis started in earnest, growth is weak and unemployment high 
in  many  countries.  The  economic  situation  in  Norway  stands  in  stark  contrast  to 
developments  abroad.  Norway’s  economy  is  still  growing  and  unemployment  remains  low. 
There is a tendency to see ourselves as a country apart. 
Norway’s  oil  and  gas  resources  provide  an  economic  base  that  few  other  countries  enjoy. 
Income levels are among the highest in the world and the people of Norway are generally 
highly  educated.  Our  access  to  natural  resources  makes  a  significant  contribution  to  our 
prosperity.  At  the  same  time,  our  increasing  dependence  on  oil  and  gas  increases  the 
vulnerability of the Norwegian economy. We know that neither of these sources will spring 
eternal. 
The  theme  of  my  speech  this  evening  is  how  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  Norwegian 
economy. 
Continued weak growth prospects, but less fear 
When  the  financial  crisis  washed  over  the  Norwegian  banking  sector  in  autumn  2008,  we 
were  reminded  of  how  dependent  we  are  on  the  world  around  us.  Nonetheless,  the 
Norwegian economy weathered the crisis well. After about a year, the downturn in Norway 
was over. 
Chart 1: Emerging economies are driving oil demand 
One of the main reasons is that there is strong demand for Norwegian goods in countries 
where  economic  growth  remains  robust.  The  centre  of  gravity  in  the  world  economy  is 
shifting. In the course of the next few decades, China will most likely be the largest economy 
in the world. Emerging economies – with China at the forefront – are the main driving force 
behind the increase in demand for crude oil and other commodities. As a result, prices for 
Norwegian export goods have remained high, even in the context of declining growth among 
our traditional trading partners. 
Chart 2: Strong improvement in terms of trade 
                                                 
1  From Johan Borgen’s novel “De mørke kilder” [The Dark Springs], first published in 1956, Gyldendal Norsk 
Forlag. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  emergence  of  newly  industrialised  economies  has  also  led  to  lower  import  prices  in 
Norway. The improvement in Norway’s terms of trade is without parallel in our recent history. 
We have to go back to the boom period at the time of World War I – a period portrayed so 
vividly by Johan Borgen in his novel “The Dark Springs” – to find anything similar. 
Developments in other countries have been less favourable. What started as a banking crisis 
in  the  US  and  the  UK  has  developed  into  a  sovereign  debt  crisis,  with  Europe  at  the 
epicentre. Austerity measures and economic contraction are now going hand in hand. Social 
unrest is spreading. 
Unemployment  in  many  countries  has  risen  to  alarming  levels.  Economic  growth  is  weak, 
particularly in Europe, constrained by uncertainty and fear of new setbacks. Both the public 
and  private  sectors  are  focusing  efforts  on  reining  in  debt.  Banks  are  consolidating  their 
balance  sheets  and  reducing  lending  to  businesses  and  households.  In  the  US,  the 
formulation of fiscal policy has yet to be clarified. There too, households and businesses are 
hesitant to increase spending on consumption and investment owing to the uncertainty. 
Chart 3: Public debt to GDP ratio 
Total sovereign debt in advanced economies is almost as high as it was after World War II, 
following  a  period  of  soaring,  debt-financed  military  spending.  The  long  post-war  boom 
helped to reduce debt. 
Experience  shows  that  it  is  difficult  to  restore  growth  after  a  financial  crisis.  Necessary 
austerity measures can amplify an economic downturn, with falling tax revenues and rising 
spending on benefits and measures, trapping both public finances and economic activity in a 
downward spiral. This is what we have seen in Europe. 
Structural reforms are often crucial to creating a basis for renewed growth. One case in point 
is the Nordic countries in the 1990s. 
Charts 4a and 4b: Public debt to GDP ratio and GDP 
A less successful case is Japan. The Japanese authorities hesitated for a long time before 
reforms  were  implemented,  including  financial  sector  reform.  Government  debt  increased 
sharply  after  several  unsuccessful  attempts  to  kickstart  the  economy  through  deficit 
spending.  The  pace  of  growth  in  the  Japanese  economy  has  never  regained  its  pre-1990 
levels. 
Today,  economic  growth  is  low  in  virtually  the  entire  OECD  area.  Many  countries  must 
implement fiscal consolidation measures, while there is also a need to stimulate the economy 
and  create  jobs.  That  is  a  difficult  balancing  act.  Global  growth  is  being  supported  by  the 
expansion in emerging economies. This is generating positive growth impulses to advanced 
economies. 
Chart 5: Euro area crisis – less fear 
The  European  crisis  was  acute  about  a  year  ago,  at  the  beginning  of  2012.  Spanish  and 
Italian government bond yields had risen markedly. The reason was not only the uncertainty 
related to sovereign debt problems in those countries. Markets also reflected fears that the 
construction  –  European  monetary  union  –  might  crumble.  The  question  of  the  fate  of  the 
euro was on the table. 
Through 2012, the European Central Bank (ECB) intervened with resolute measures to calm 
the  markets.  The  banking  system  was  offered  large  amounts  of  long-term  funding.  In 
summer 2012, the ECB declared that it was prepared to make unlimited purchases of debt 
securities  from  governments  which  fulfil  the  conditions  for  borrowing  from  the  European 
Stability Fund. 
These measures seem to be working. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Borrowing rates for debt-burdened countries have fallen markedly. Other risk premiums have 
also decreased. Fears of a euro-area breakup and the collapse of the European economy 
are no longer dominant. 
The  European  monetary  union  –  after  being  established  –  cannot  be  dissolved  without 
serious consequences for Europe and the world economy. There is little point in discussing 
whether the original idea was a good one or not. The child was born and is now a teenager. 
As expected, puberty has presented problems. These problems must now be dealt with by 
the European authorities. 
Budget deficits in Europe are being reduced, despite strong headwinds from the slowdown 
that  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  austerity.  Structural  reforms  are  being  implemented  to 
increase growth capacity over time. Business sector costs are falling and competitiveness is 
improving in the countries hardest hit by the crisis. Steps have been taken in the direction of 
closer cooperation and coordination of economic policy. 
However, the path ahead is long. We may have to wait until the next decade before growth 
gains a firm footing in Europe. 
Nonetheless, we have seen a clear shift in financial market sentiment. This shift is reflected 
in the fall in European government bond yields. The clearest indication of optimism can be 
found in equity markets. 
Chart 6: Government Pension Fund Global 
With  the  upswing  in  equity  markets,  the  value  of  Norway’s  financial  wealth  is  increasing. 
Close  to  60  percent  of  the  capital  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  –  Norway’s 
sovereign  wealth  fund  –  is  invested  in  global  equity  markets.  When  times  are  good  in  the 
global economy and optimism is on the rise, the return on the Fund increases. Conversely, 
turbulence  and  low  risk  willingness  in  the  market  have  a  negative  effect  on  the  Fund’s 
assets. This is a risk we have to live with to achieve solid returns over time. 
Because of the Fund’s long-term horizon, short-term risk tolerance is high. We can exploit 
this by sitting tight and engaging in countercyclical investment. The Fund’s size also allows 
us to reduce risk by spreading our investments across many countries. Norway has become 
a global financial investor. Through the Fund’s investments, Norway increasingly takes part 
in value added generated in other countries. 
Over  the  past  hundred  years,  growing  global  trade  and  cross-border  flows  of  capital  and 
labour have been important factors driving economic progress. At times, the principles of free 
trade and capital movements have been set out of play. Walls have been erected between 
countries  in  the  form  of  trade  barriers  and  restrictions  on  capital  flows.  This  has  not  been 
successful.  Countries  that  have  attempted  to  shield  their  economies  from  the  rest  of  the 
world have fallen back into stagnation. 
Nascent signs of increased protectionism are again giving cause for concern. If this tendency 
intensifies,  international  trade  and  prosperity  will  be  undermined.  With  its  open  economy, 
Norway  would  be  severely  affected.  It  is  in  our  own  interest  to  make  an  active  effort  to 
counteract such a development. 
Monetary policy – a nominal anchor 
Against  the  background  of  an  economic  downturn  and  low  interest  rates  among  Norway’s 
trading partners, the conduct of monetary policy in Norway is challenging. A higher key policy 
rate might have curbed debt growth and demand pressures in the Norwegian economy. But 
in an environment of persistently low external interest rates, such a policy would likely have 
led to a sharp appreciation of the krone, resulting in too low levels of inflation and economic 
activity.  Thus,  the  crisis  in  Europe  and  weak  growth  in  the  US  are  also  contributing  to 
keeping interest rates in Norway at a low level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The main objective of monetary policy in Norway is low and stable inflation. This objective 
provides  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  With  firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations, 
monetary policy can contribute to stable developments in the real economy. 
Chart 7: Rise in consumer prices 
The operational target of monetary policy is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 
percent over time. Over the past ten years, average inflation has been somewhat below, but 
close to, 2.5 percent. Inflation targeting has served us well. 
Monetary policy is the first line of defence in demand management. When the impact of the 
crisis was felt in the Norwegian economy in autumn 2008, the key policy rate was sharply 
reduced. This contributed to counteracting the negative effects on output and employment in 
Norway.  A  credible  and  firmly  anchored  monetary  policy  can  curb  the  impact  of  external 
shocks. This increases the resilience of the Norwegian economy. 
Owing to substantial cross-border labour flows, changes in the competitive environment and 
new trade patterns, consumer price inflation has in periods deviated from the target. In such 
a  situation,  monetary  policy  must  be  oriented  towards  bringing  inflation  towards  the  target 
over  time,  while  preventing  excessive  swings  in  output  and  employment.  The  appropriate 
amount of time that should be taken to reach the inflation target will depend on the shocks to 
which the economy is exposed and their duration. 
Chart 8: Rise in consumer prices and producer prices 
In  today’s  situation,  it  is  appropriate  to  use  a  few  years  to  bring  up  inflation.  Prices  for 
Norwegian  goods  have  increased  considerably  more  than  consumer  prices,  reflecting  the 
improvement  in  Norway’s  terms  of  trade.  Incomes,  output  and  employment  are  rising  at  a 
solid pace. Household debt and house prices are still moving up. These are the key reasons 
why the key policy rate has not been lowered further. 
We will not lose sight of the inflation target. As the economic situation abroad normalises, 
and pressures on the Norwegian krone ease, cost inflation and high activity in Norway will 
result in higher consumer price inflation. The key policy rate will then gradually be raised and 
approach a normal level. 
But developments could take another course. A pronounced weakening of growth prospects 
or  a  krone  that  is  too  strong  may  over  time  lead  to  inflation  that  is  too  low.  Such 
developments would be counteracted by monetary policy measures. We still have room for 
manoeuvre in interest rate setting – in both directions. 
More resilient banking sector 
The financial crisis provided us with some important insights. First, the crisis illustrated that 
low  and  stable  inflation  is  not  sufficient  to  secure  financial  stability.  Second,  the  crisis 
revealed severe shortcomings in banking regulation. Banking and financial sector regulation 
is  now  being  reformed  in  many  countries.  New  liquidity  buffer  and  capital  adequacy 
requirements  are  due  for  implementation  in  line  with  the  changes  to  the  EEA  rules.  The 
regulatory reform will make the banking industry more resilient to periods of rising losses and 
financial market turbulence. 
Norwegian banks have become more solid in recent years, which is a positive development. 
Banks’ capital, in particular that of the largest banks, should be increased further in order to 
satisfy the new requirements due for implementation. 
Chart 9: Bank lending margins have increased 
Banks’  lending  rates  have  remained  fairly  high  over  the  past  year,  despite  a  fall  in  their 
borrowing costs. The increase in margins may reflect banks’ efforts to build up their capital. 
Household debt is rising in Norway, but household income is growing at a solid pace. Given 
the present economic situation, households can tolerate higher interest rate margins in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
banking  system.  Banks’  owners  must  also  make  a  contribution,  which  they  can  do  by 
participating in equity issues or by accepting that a smaller share of profits is distributed as 
dividends. 
In  addition  to  raising  more  capital,  banks  must  base  their  lending  on  more  stable  funding 
sources. Improved capital adequacy and more stable funding will be an advantage for banks, 
and not a disadvantage, in an environment of intensified global competition. 
Although growth in our part of the world is weak and real interest rates are low, many banks 
are  still  operating  with  high  return  targets,  which  could  lead  to  excessive  short-term  risk 
taking.  Banks  and  their  owners  should  accept  that  return  on  equity  will  be  lower,  but  also 
safer, in the years ahead. A more robust financial system will benefit us all. 
The forthcoming regulatory framework for banks in the EEA includes a countercyclical buffer 
– a capital requirement that can be increased in upturns and turned off in downturns. When 
banks  are  required  to  build  up  an  additional  buffer,  they  are  better  equipped  to  cope  with 
periods of rising losses. Banks will be less likely to reduce lending in order to comply with the 
minimum  capital  requirements.  The  capital  buffer  will  hence  contribute  to  enhancing 
economic stability. 
Later  this  year,  Norges  Bank  will  publish  analyses  and  provide  advice  on  the  size  of  the 
countercyclical buffer in conjunction with its monetary policy analyses. The aim is to ensure 
that the analytical basis is consistent with the formulation of monetary policy. 
The  countercyclical  buffer  will  be  one  of  many  factors  that  influence  economic  prospects, 
banking sector behaviour and lending rates facing households and businesses. If risk builds 
up in the banking system, the buffer requirement will be increased. In a downturn, the buffer 
requirement can be lowered. Norges Bank will assume that the countercyclical buffer comes 
in addition to the other core capital requirements, which are set at 9 percent today. During 
the  phase-in  period,  banks  should  be  prepared  for  a  gradual  increase  in  equity  capital 
requirements. 
The  government  authorities  are  responsible  for  drawing  up  the  laws  and  regulations 
governing  the  financial  industry.  This  also  applies  to  the  decisions  relating  to  the 
countercyclical  buffer.  The  countercyclical  buffer  should  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  an 
assessment  of  overall  risk  in  the  banking  system.  The  authorities  can  assume  that  the 
response pattern of monetary policy is stable. 
The Norwegian economy is also vulnerable 
Structural  adjustments  in  the  business  sector  are  the  key  to  economic  progress.  Over  the 
past  40  years,  the  oil  and  gas  industry  has  been  an  engine  of  innovation  and  growth  in 
Norway. In the beginning phases of the Norwegian oil age, the impulses to other economic 
sectors  were  modest.  Over  the  years,  we  have  developed  an  internationally  competitive 
petroleum supply industry of considerable scope. 
While the companies operating on the Norwegian continental shelf had to import virtually all 
their equipment in the 1970s, the import share has now dropped to just below 40 percent. 
The Norwegian engineering industry has flourished. The supply industry has become a major 
export industry. Almost two-thirds of total Norwegian exports are now linked to the petroleum 
industry. 
Chart 10: A manufacturing sector divided 
Vigorous activity in the oil and gas industry also helped Norwegian manufacturing fare better 
than  manufacturing  in  other  OECD  countries  during  the  financial  crisis.  The  petroleum 
industry is a buffer against the current downturn in advanced economies. In that respect, the 
Norwegian economy has become more robust. The flip side of the coin is that our economic 
future  is  becoming  increasingly  dependent  on  oil  and  gas  activities.  The  substantial 
petroleum revenues and the spillover effects from oil and gas production are reflected in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
labour market and are driving up house prices and debt. In those respects, the Norwegian 
economy is also vulnerable. 
In the mid-1980s, the Norwegian economy was shaken by a sharp and long-lasting fall in oil 
prices. Today’s situation is quite different. Oil prices are persistently high, primarily reflecting 
the emergence of newly industrialised countries. But it is risky business to take today’s oil 
price levels for granted. New energy production technologies are being developed. Climate 
challenges will not disappear. If oil prices were to fall again, a number of off-shore investment 
projects  would  become  unprofitable,  with  considerable  spillover  effects  on  other  sectors  of 
the economy. Unemployment would probably rise. We cannot eliminate that risk. Curbing the 
exploitation of oil and gas resources is not a feasible alternative. The abiding question is how 
to limit the vulnerability associated with increased oil dependence. 
Our main defence is to keep our own house in order. Norway must be poised to resist shocks 
to its economy. 
The fiscal rule for petroleum revenue spending is one defence mechanism. The petroleum 
fund  mechanism  and  moderate  and  predictable  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the 
central  government  budget  contributes 
to  enhancing  economic  stability.  Reserves 
accumulated in the Government Pension Fund Global provide fiscal leeway in the event of 
an economic setback, as observed in 2008 and 2009. 
By limiting petroleum revenue spending to the expected real return on the Fund, we ensure 
that  our  petroleum  wealth  will  benefit  future  generations.  A  balanced  approach  to  revenue 
spending  will  allow  future  generations  to  share  in  the  wealth  also  through  the  part  that  is 
spent on public investments domestically. 
Chart 11: Norwegian labour is expensive 
The  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  also  has  another  facet.  It  increases  the  cost  of 
Norwegian labour. During upturns Norwegian companies have fared well, in spite of rapidly 
rising  costs,  thanks  to  efficiency  gains  and  the  rise  in  producer  prices  for  their  goods  and 
services.  Some  other  countries  in  Europe  allowed  costs  to  rise  at  broadly  the  same  pace 
over a number of years. Now that these countries are in a downturn with a high level of spare 
capacity, they are improving competitiveness. If the Norwegian economy enters a downturn, 
the high level of costs in our country may become a hindrance in the competition for tenders 
and market shares. 
A floating exchange rate is a buffer against economic shocks. The experience of 1998 and 
2008, for example, indicates that the krone will depreciate in the event of a sharp drop in oil 
prices. When inflation is firmly anchored, the rise in consumer prices will not accelerate even 
if the krone weakens. Norges Bank can then allow the krone to fall in value without having to 
implement a large degree of monetary policy tightening. This will dampen the downturn in the 
mainland economy, hence facilitating restructuring in the business sector. 
Should  the outlook  for  the  petroleum  industry  show  a  significant  shift, Norway  will  have  to 
start down the hard path of economic adjustment. What we need above all is a profitable and 
efficient business sector that can adapt to new times. In that respect, there are some aspects 
of the Norwegian economy that give cause for reflection. 
Chart 12: Mainland GDP – stable nominal growth 
On the surface, developments are positive. Nominal mainland GDP growth at current prices 
has  been  almost  surprisingly  stable.  Over  the  past  20  years,  nominal  mainland  GDP  has 
increased by around 6 percent annually, and growth is still hovering around that trend. There 
were some tendencies towards overheating in the years prior to the financial crisis. Price and 
cost inflation in the Norwegian economy picked up markedly. But the correction that followed 
during  and  after  the  crisis  has  brought  growth  back  to  trend.  There  is  little  in  this  chart  to 
indicate  that  the  world  economy  has  recently  been  through  the  most  severe  economic 
downturn in post-war history. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The picture changes when growth is broken down into price and volume. The high prices for 
domestically produced goods are the main factor that has supported our country’s income. 
Since 2005, producer prices have increased considerably faster than trend. This illustrates 
that mainland businesses have also benefited from the substantial improvement in Norway’s 
terms of trade. 
Chart 13: Mainland GDP – slump in economic activity 
Economic activity, on the other hand, slumped during the financial crisis. Although economic 
growth has picked up in the past few years, the level is still clearly below the pre-crisis trend. 
This would indicate that the financial crisis and the debt crisis have had lasting effects on the 
Norwegian economy as well. 
Chart 14: Mainland GDP – per capita 
The  picture  becomes  even  clearer  when  population  growth  is  factored  in.  Measured  per 
capita,  we  do  not  generate  more  value  today  than  we  did  five  years  ago.  This  picture  is 
similar to that of other advanced economies. The break from the years prior to the financial 
crisis is clear. Growth is being supported by immigration and employment growth, and not by 
increased productivity. 
There are two factors that determine value added in a population. One is labour input and the 
other is labour productivity. I will look at some aspects of each of these factors. 
Chart 15: Employment ratio is high, but hours worked are low 
The  employment  ratio  is  high  in  Norway.  Labour  force  participation  is  high  and  most  job-
seekers find work. 
Employment  has  increased  rapidly  since  the  mid-1990s.  An  expansionary  monetary  policy 
and additional government expenditure of oil money buoyed activity and employment through 
the financial crisis. Measured by hours worked, labour input has also risen, albeit not to the 
same extent. On average, the working day is shrinking. 
The employment ratio adjusted for working hours provides an expression of average labour 
input  per  hour  worked  among  the  active  population.  In  this  chart,  hourly  labour  input  is 
measured in relation to usual hours of work per year of 1 750 hours. In 2011, the average 
number  of  hours  worked  in  Norway  came  to  about  60  percent  of  usual  hours  of  work  per 
year. By this measure, the employment ratio was higher in Greece than in Norway up to the 
time  when  Greece  was  fully  hit  by  the  crisis.  Total  labour  input  is  considerably  higher  in 
Sweden, Finland and the US than in Norway. We work less than the OECD average. 
When income growth is high, it is natural that some of the increased wealth will be reflected 
in a greater preference for leisure. It is nevertheless telling that the number of hours actually 
worked is considerably lower in Norway than among our main trading partners, despite very 
low unemployment in Norway. Generous transfer schemes and other aspects of our welfare 
system induce many to exit the labour force – wholly or partially. In recent years, the high 
level  of  labour  immigration  has  compensated  for  this.  Nonetheless,  this  situation  does  not 
seem sustainable. Reforms that provide stronger work incentives are needed and should be 
implemented in anticipation of an ageing population. The pension reform was an important 
step in the right direction. 
Chart 16: Productivity growth has declined 
What  about  the  other  factor  that  is  crucial  to  growth?  Mainland  productivity  increased 
markedly in the 1990s, partly owing to a number of structural reforms. The banking sector 
was rationalised after the crisis. The tax reform set the stage for profitable investments and 
business  sector  restructuring.  Improved  competitiveness  and  the  development  of  the  oil 
industry  facilitated  the  rapid  integration  of  new  technology  by  firms.  Productivity  growth 
remained relatively high up to around 2005. But since then it has declined. The decline has 
been more pronounced than among our trading partners. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Chart 17: Growth in real capital 
Productivity  is  closely  linked  to  capital  stock  per  worker.  Growth  in  real  total  fixed  capital 
formation for mainland Norway fell during the financial crisis. It has since picked up again. 
When  population  growth  is  taken  into  account,  this  picture  also  changes.  Growth  in  fixed 
capital  per capita  has declined  and  is close  to  zero,  even  after  three  years  of  low  interest 
rates and solid growth in the economy. Investment in the mainland economy has been at a 
low level in the years following the financial crisis. Thus, our overall value added per capita 
has increasingly been spent on consumption and on replacing existing fixed capital. 
Chart 18: High growth in labour-intensive sectors 
The phasing-in of a highly profitable oil industry and higher petroleum revenue spending via 
the central government budget has amplified the structural shifts in the Norwegian economy. 
Services production has increased. When the financial crisis hit, industries that do not benefit 
from  oil  sector  demand  or  public  spending  stagnated.  The  differences  in  growth  across 
industries has thus widened since 2008. 
Labour-intensive sectors with relatively low productivity have accounted for a large share of 
employment  growth  in  recent  years.  Employment  has  shown  only  moderate  growth  in 
industries with a high share of fixed capital per employee and a high productivity level, such 
as manufacturing and technical activities. 
Chart 19: Public purchases of goods and services 
Budget spending priorities have pushed in the same direction. In the past 40 years, public 
consumption  as  a  share  of  mainland  GDP  has  increased  considerably  from  18  percent  in 
1970  to  28  percent  in  2011.  In  the  same  period,  the  share  of  investment  has  remained 
virtually unchanged. 
Productivity growth has stagnated in most OECD countries. Goods production has declined, 
while services production has increased, as in Norway. But this shift was based on borrowing 
rather than increased earnings in many countries. After the financial crisis, funding sources 
dried up and these countries were faced with a debt crisis. Fundamental structural problems 
with eroded competitiveness came into evidence. These countries must not only reduce their 
debt levels, but also engage in a painful process of adjustment and rationalisation. Only then 
can these economies find the path to renewed growth. 
The Norwegian economy has experienced virtually 20 consecutive years of growth. We have 
invested in a hugely profitable oil industry and found a balance between spending petroleum 
revenues domestically and saving petroleum revenues in the form of foreign investment. On 
the other hand, it seems that both the public and private sectors are having difficulties finding 
profitable mainland investment projects. Taking a  longer view, this is a source of concern. 
Should petroleum revenues shrink, we need more pillars to stand on. Otherwise, we would 
have  to  embark  on  the  path  of  adjustment  towards  renewed  growth,  the  path  that  other 
countries are already going down. 
Conclusion 
Let me return to Johan Borgen. For Wilfred Sagen and his peers, the festive times did not 
last long. The war came to end and freight earnings declined. The boom period was followed 
by  hard  times.  Banking  crises,  parity  policy  and  protectionism  led  to  prolonged  and  deep 
recessions in the world economy. 
The  environment  is  entirely  different  today.  From  a  global  viewpoint,  there  is  reason  to 
believe that the worst of the crisis is over. The Norwegian economy is in a unique position. 
The wealth in our time is not a short-term asset. We are likely to benefit from revenues and 
positive impulses from oil activities for many decades ahead. But that source will not spring 
eternal. If we are to maintain our prosperity over time and reduce the vulnerability to a fall in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
petroleum  revenues,  we  must  generate  a  larger  number  of  profitable  investments  in  the 
mainland economy – both in the public and the private sector. We must also provide stronger 
incentives for participating in the labour market and generating value added. 
Perhaps Norway is not so much an economy apart after all. There will be new times. Come 
what may. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Charts 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
