P Vijaya Bhaskar: Achieving professional excellence 
Address  by  Mr  P  Vijaya  Bhaskar,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Silver Jubilee Function of Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI), Mumbai, 15 June 
2013. 
 Introduction 
I. 
At the outset, I thank the organisers of the Silver Jubilee Function of Institute of Company 
Secretaries  of  India  (ICSI)  for  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  on  the  very 
topical  subject  of  “Achieving  Professional  Excellence”.  A  Silver  Jubilee  has  a  special 
significance in the life of any institution as it signifies a coming of age and maturity. It's also a 
time to look back and thank every person who has contributed. 
II. 
“Profession” and “Excellence” 
Profession 
(a) 
Post  the  industrial  revolution,  there  has  been  a  knowledge  explosion  which  led  to  an 
exponential increase in the number of professions. In fact, we are living in exponential times. 
The world’s knowledge is increasing at exponential rates, as is our technology. In the history 
of mankind, it is widely acknowledged that the explosion of knowledge in the last 200 years is 
unprecedented. A profession, as we are all well aware, is an occupation especially one that 
involves  knowledge  and  training  in  a  branch  of  advanced  learning  like  your  profession  – 
secretarial practice. 
Excellence 
(b) 
It  is  a  truism  that  “Excellence  is  a  journey  not  a  destination”.  Pursuit  of  professional 
excellence,  as  such,  is  a  life  long  continuous  journey.  Such  professional  excellence  is 
essentially a subset of Human Excellence. 
Bhagavad Gita talks about “Yogah Karmasu Kaushalam” – Yoga is excellence at work. This 
verse advises us to perform our allocated duty in an excellent manner. Kaushalam signifies 
doing  work  with  devotion  and  without  attachment.  Such  detached  attitude  enhances  its 
values and improves the concentration and skill of the individual concerned. 
Swamy Vivekananda's golden words on Excellence, whose 150th birth anniversary we are 
celebrating this year, are not only worth committing to memory by all of us but are worthy of 
emulation,  if  we  are  serious  enough,  about  achieving  “Excellence”  in  our  lives  and 
profession. He says – "In the little things that you do, un-observed by anybody else, if you 
are excellent, then you are truly excellent. When people are watching and praising you and 
you do well that is not the true test of excellence. Nobody is watching you, what you do in the 
most private aspect of your life, there if you are excellent, you will be excellent everywhere." 
Swamy  Vivekananda  has  also  talked  about  the  essential  ingredients  for  achieving  Human 
Excellence. He particularly emphasises on Atma Shraddha – Self-confidence i.e. having faith 
in oneself – which brings out the best out of us and a sense of honour and self-respect. If we 
work with such self-confidence, we put our heart and soul in whatever tasks we undertake. 
It’s  only  soulful  work  which  becomes  excellent.  Wherever  there  is  no  sense  of  honour, 
personal worth and dignity, one’s work becomes sloppy and slipshod. Professionals need to 
especially  remember  this  all  through.  Following  Atma  Shraddha,  the  other  ingredients  for 
achieving Human Excellence are knowledge, responsibility, love and concern for others, as 
expounded by Swamy Vivekananda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Other essentials of human excellence 
III. 
At  a  technical  level,  human  excellence  is  achieved  when  there  is  a  harmonious  blend  of 
Intelligence, Emotional and Spiritual Quotients (IQ, EQ and SQ respectively). 
IQ represents material capital reflected in rational intelligence and concerned about “What I 
think”? 
EQ represents social capital reflected in emotional intelligence and concerned about “What I 
feel”? The level of EQ determines how one handles relationships. In a profession, EQ is most 
important because it’s all about handling relationships with one’s clients, peers, professional 
associations, regulators and the society around. 
SQ represents spiritual capital reflected in spiritual intelligence and concerned about “What I 
am”? 
Physiologically, left brain is used for IQ (thinking – serial processing) while right brain is used 
for EQ (feeling – parallel processing). Given its expansive and all encompassing nature, the 
whole brain is pressed into service for SQ (about “being” – synchronous processing). 
The  above  can  also  be  grouped  as  hard  and  soft  skills.  As  a  general  rule,  hard  skills  are 
relatively easy to acquire; while soft skills are hard to come by. 
In other words, Human Excellence calls for qualities of both the head and the heart. 
Essentials of professional excellence 
IV. 
Knowledge,  skills  and  management  of  conflicts  of  interest  are  the  three  most  essential 
ingredients of Professional Excellence. Professional Excellence predominantly calls for both 
personal  competence  (How  we  manage  ourselves!)  and  social  competence  (How  we 
manage relationships!). 
Knowledge – on the knowledge front, adequate care is being 
(a) 
taken,  particularly  by  professional  bodies  such  as  yours.  A  set  of  standard  syllabii, 
periodically revised to take care of the new developments, minimum criteria for acquiring the 
professional degree and the ongoing Continuous Education Programme to avoid practicing 
professionals  from  becoming  stale,  as  also  compulsions  of  competition  from  other  allied 
professions  ensure  that  knowledge  levels  are  reasonably  taken  care  of,  on  a  continuous 
basis. 
Skills – both hard and soft skills have an overwhelming bearing 
(b) 
on Professional Excellence. Ensuring Knowledge levels is the easier part. Acquiring skills is 
the  more  difficult  part  of  the  equation.  Among  skills,  soft  skills  are  of  great  significance 
because, as I said earlier, as a general rule, relatively speaking, soft skills are hard to come 
by; while hard skills are easy to acquire. 
Conflicts of interest management 
(c) 
What  is  conflict  of  interest  (COI)?  In  the  Code  of  Ethics  of  your  Institute,  a  “Conflict  of 
Interest”  has  been  defined  as  a  situation  wherein  the  interests/benefits  of  one  person  or 
entity conflict with the interests/benefits of the institute. 
They  are  situations  in  which  an  interest  interferes,  or  has  the  potential  to  interfere,  with  a 
person, organization or institution's ability to act  in accordance with the interest of another 
party,  assuming  that  the  person,  organization  or  institution  has  a  (legal,  conventional  or 
fiduciary) obligation to do so. The interests which lead to conflicts may be pecuniary or non-
pecuniary, personal / social / other competing professional interests or human emotions of 
greed / kinship or friendship / anger / hatred. Such conflicts may be actual or potential. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conflict  of  interest,  thus,  fundamentally  represents  –  a  “Dharma  Sankat”  –  an  ethical 
dilemma. Such conflicts are a part and parcel of one's existence, but the conflicts of interest 
in the financial  world have a special and particular lure because of huge financial benefits 
involved in exploitation thereof. 
All  professionals  –  doctors,  lawyers,  engineers  etc.,  including  finance  professionals, 
generally, play a dual role i.e., that of being the principal and an agent to their customers, in 
the discharge of their functions. Consequently, finance professionals jointly act as an agent 
of  the  customer  when  they  provide  the  diagnosis  to  their  finance  related  problems  and 
consider the best remedial action therefor, besides acting as a principal in executing with the 
customer  the  prescribed  action.  Mutatis  mutandis,  the  same  holds  good  for  almost  all 
professional  services.  This  inherent  dual  capacity,  common  to  most  professional  services, 
naturally gives rise to conflicts of interest in cases where the professional acting as an agent, 
prescribes  actions  which  he  knows  are  to  his  own  benefit  as  principal,  rather  than  to  the 
customers. There is nothing special about financial services in this respect. Agency theory 
(principal-agent  relationship)  offers  a  valuable  lens  for  assessing,  inter  alia,  conflicts  of 
interests. 
Financial  services  come  jointly  under  the  category  of  “experience  goods”  and  “credence 
goods”;  wherein,  information  is  obtained  by  the  consumers  only  during /  after  the  services 
have  been  purchased  or,  perhaps,  may  not  be  able  to  obtain  the  same  even  after 
purchasing.  In  other  words,  the  consumers  will  find  it  that  much  more  difficult  in  obtaining 
information  about  the  quality  of  services  offered  by  the  finance  professionals,  due  to  the 
inherent nature of financial services. 
In such circumstances, exploitation of conflicts of interest by finance professionals due to the 
classic “principal-agent” conflict, away from the glare of the public could lead to loss of trust 
in  the  profession.  As  Walter  Bagehot  put  it  so  elegantly,  “One  terra  incognita  seen  to  be 
faulty;  every  other  terra  incognita  will  be  suspected.”  The  inevitable  credibility  contagion 
catches  on.  All  professionals,  especially  in  the  finance  world  should  be  very  wary  and 
watchful to prevent such an eventuality. Otherwise, disastrous consequences would follow, 
which would be difficult to tackle. 
It is a matter of fact, which has repeatedly come to the fore that conflicts of interest cannot be 
legislated / regulated away, despite having the best prescribed standards. Management of 
conflict of interest calls for adherence to ethics and values. In fact, a value-oriented individual 
is  the  cornerstone  in  the  entire  process  of  mitigation  of  interests.  As  famously  said,  "the 
greatest conflicts are not between two people / institutions / nations, but between one person 
and  himself."  Hence,  ethical  conduct  should  be  developed,  sustained  and  fostered  in  the 
professional atmosphere through enabling legal, regulatory and institutional environment. 
Management of conflicts of interest calls for a high degree of maturity and a sense of balance 
and proportion. The reason is that conflicts of interest situations predominantly carry shades 
of grey rather than being black and white. 
Hence, above all, a sense of values and ethics is the very foundation to manage conflicts of 
interest – “Dharma Sankat”. Professionals with high knowledge and skills, but without values 
and ethics, more often than not, could end up as disasters. 
In  other  words,  the  framework  for  mitigating  conflicting  interests  should  be  constructed 
inside-out, from the core point of an individual's value-oriented personality to an outer layer of 
enabling environment, through all possible means available to your profession. The conflict 
mitigation  process,  at  its  absolute  broadest,  should  strike  a  reasonable balance  that  helps 
guard against present and future problems of conflicts of interest while preserving those traits 
of your profession which are the source of its creative and competitive genius. 
Sometimes,  due  to  certain  professional /  personal  problems  or set-backs,  one  may  not  be 
able to focus fully on one’s profession. That is quite understandable, but the touchstone is as 
to whether, over one’s entire career, one has been able to constantly deliver to the highest 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
standards of professional excellence which is achieved through high levels of knowledge and 
skills coupled with an unshakable sense of values and ethics. Another important aspect is 
that  the  top  professionals  in  high  positions  should  be  very  measured  in  their  talk  and 
behaviour, because they are looked upon as role models for the profession in particular and 
the society in general. 
Conflicts of interest and finance professionals – an uneasy relationship 
(d) 
In  contemporary  times,  especially  since  the  onset  of  the  present  ongoing  crisis  in  2008, 
among the professions – finance related professionals have been in the limelight due to all 
the wrong reasons. In the period immediately prior to 2008, the continuous saga of financial 
scandals involving high profile companies like Enron, Worldcom, Arthur Andersen, Tyco in 
USA; Ahold, Parmalat in Europe, Citi bank's activities in Europe and Japan, BNP Paribas are 
still fresh in one's memory. More recently, those involving J P Morgan, Standard Chartered, 
HSBC  in  the  international  arena  serve  as  examples.  The  recent  episodes  of  proven 
transgressions  by  some  of  our  banks  also  raise  concerns  and  highlight  the  critical  role  of 
ethics in business. In all these cases, expert observers have concluded that the role of the 
finance  professionals  and,  more  importantly,  their  exploitation  of  conflicts  of  interests  as 
being at or near the centre of such scandal-driven financial storms. 
Conflicts of interest, of late, have reappeared in our public discourse. It is alleged that, we in 
India, are not appreciative enough of the world of Conflicts of Interests. It is also argued that 
we  do  not  appreciate  the  separation  of  roles  and  responsibilities  of  our  private  and  public 
lives; and that we freely mix both together for our gains. It is further said that for us, there is 
no conflicts of interests and it is only maximisation or juggling of interests, etc. 
In  such  a  milieu,  there  is  an  onerous  responsibility  on  professional  bodies  like  yours.  You 
need to adequately demonstrate that you are not only aware of such situations but are doing 
everything at your command to ensure that your members are indeed “Walking the talk!” 
ICSI’s code of conduct 
A look at the Institute's code of conduct available on the website reveals that the two most 
important principles of professional excellence viz., management of conflicts of interest and 
adherence  to  ethics  &  values  have  been  alluded  to,  but  perhaps  need  to  be  elaborated, 
against  the  backdrop  of  the  above.  Further,  adequate  training  in  this  regard  to  all  the 
members is an imperative. This is the paramount need of the hour for all professional bodies, 
especially the ones related to the financial world. 
Summing up 
Let me conclude by recapitulating what I have tried to put forth in front of you. I started off by 
briefly  defining  and  describing  the  two  important  words  of  profession  and  excellence. 
Thereafter,  I  highlighted  the  generic  principles  of  human  excellence  and  derived  the 
principles of professional excellence therefrom. As stated, hard skills are relatively easy while 
soft  skills,  by  and  large,  are  hard  to  develop.  To  effectively  play  the  dual  role  of  both  the 
principal  and  agent  of  one’s  customers,  while  all  along  maintaining  a  sense  of  ethics  and 
values  is  a  feat  which  is  akin  to  walking  on  a  razor’s  edge.  I  am  sure,  your  Institute  will 
resolve  in  the  Silver  Jubilee  year  to  throw  light  on  a  path  which  would  enable  all  the 
professionals of your Institute to walk the razor’s edge continuously and consistently without 
any slip up. 
I  wish  ICSI  Good  Luck  and  God’s  Grace  in  its  race  for  celebrating  the  oncoming  Golden 
Jubilee. 
Thank You. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
