Ardian Fullani: Review of economic policies for Albania’s fast, sound 
and stable growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Meeting  with  the 
Chairman  of  the  Socialist  Party  and  the  Albanian  Banking  System  Executives  and 
Representatives, Tirana, 25 July 2013. 
 Dear Mr. Rama, 
Dear Mr. Pencabligil, 
Dear banking system executives, 
First of all I would like to thank you for the invitation. This round table is a follow-up of our 
philosophy  of  a  trialogue  between  the  Bank  of  Albania,  the  banking  system  and  the 
Government  to  discuss  the  economic  policies  for  Albania’s  fast,  sound  and  stable  growth. 
The  presence  of  Mr.  Rama,  the  incoming  Prime  Minister  of  Albania,  gives  this  meeting 
special significance. 
The banking sector is not only the greatest and the most efficient driver of economic growth 
in Albania, but also the custodian of Albanian household savings and the determiner of funds 
destination  in  the  economy.  Today’s  round  table  precedes  discussions  on  the  economic 
programme and budget of the incoming government. 
Dear guests, 
The Bank of Albania has just completed its periodic analysis of the Albanian economy. Also, 
in  view  of  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP),  we  have  maintained  regular 
contacts with the international institutions to assess Albania’s financial soundness. Availing 
myself of this opportunity, I would like to share with you some preliminary conclusions and 
present the central bank’s vision for future development policies. 
The Albanian economy is facing big cyclical and structural challenges. The cyclical weakness 
of  aggregate  demand  restricts  Albania’s  economic  growth  in  the  short  and  medium  term, 
whereas  the  solution  of  structural  problems  will  determine  its  long-term  development. 
Overcoming these challenges requires joint, brave, coordinated and forward-looking action. 
The Bank of Albania deems that this action should be based on four pillars: (i) safeguarding 
macrofinancial  stability 
the  country  and  pursuing  stimulating  economic  policies; 
(ii) reducing uncertainty in economy; (iii) ongoing structural reform and (iv) convergence with 
the European Union. 
in 
First pillar: Macroeconomic stability and economic stimulus 
1. 
As  already  known,  Albania’s  economic  development  is  in  a  fragile  stage.  Against  the 
backdrop of the global crisis, the economic growth rates have decelerated, posing difficulties 
to the public and private sectors, to businesses, households and the financial system. 
In  plain  terms,  the  aggregate  demand  is  weak  and  does  not  manage  to  fully  utilise  the 
country’s  productive  capacity.  Consumer  spending  is  low,  primarily  due  to  households’ 
uncertainties about the future, but also due to their slowing income. The two other aggregate 
demand components also show limited ability in providing stable economic growth impulses: 
public spending is limited, due to lack of fiscal room because of a higher public debt, while 
Albania’s  exports  suffer  the  sluggish  demand  from  the  international  markets  and  the  low 
degree of diversification. Finally, business investments are downward, reflecting businesses’ 
restricted room for boosting their sales and banks’ tighter lending standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The economy is a complex and interdependent mechanism. All the afore-mentioned factors 
have led to a sluggish labour market and elevated pressures on public finances. They have 
also  increased  vulnerabilities  to  many  businesses  and  the  non-performing  loans  in  the 
banking system. 
In  Bank  of  Albania’s  opinion,  this  situation  requires  pursuit  of  stimulating  macroeconomic 
policies.  Economic  theory  and  practice  suggest  that  the  maintenance  of  macroeconomic 
balances is a prerequisite to pursue these policies. I have reiterated that these balances do 
exist  in  the  Albanian  economy.  They  constitute  a  strong  point  for  its  future  outlook. 
Inflationary pressures remain weak, external balances of the economy are improving and the 
Albanian financial system is healthy. But the macroeconomic balances should be maintained 
and  further  strengthened  in  the  future.  This  objective  is  a  preliminary  filter  and  every 
macroeconomic incentive should pass through it. 
Every macroeconomic stimulus should also consider another vital equilibrium: that of 
financial stability in the country, otherwise it is at risk of becoming unproductive. The 
global  crisis  has  significantly  elevated  a  country’s  exposure  to  risks  related  to 
financial stability. Therefore, this equilibrium should remain a constant priority and in 
concert  with  stimulating  development  policies.  The  healthier  we  are  financially,  the 
broader the spaces available to stimulate the development of the country. 
Having said the above and availing myself of the presence of the three main stakeholders 
responsible for designing and implementing the macroeconomic policies, let me now share 
with you Bank of Albania’s opinion about promoting the country’s development in the short 
term. 
The  Bank  of  Albania,  being  an  independent  institution,  responsible  for  the  monetary 
policy  and  for  the  supervision  and  regulation  of  the  banking  system,  has  taken  concrete 
actions to boost demand in the economy. We have lowered the key interest rate to record 
lows and are considering other spaces available in this regard. We have also supplied the 
banking system with the liquidity needed for a smooth functioning of the financial markets. 
Finally,  we  have  introduced  a  new  regulatory  package to  boost  lending.  Our  policies  have 
been successful in maintaining macroeconomic balances, which is also the Bank of Albania’s 
goal. However, their transmission to boosting economic activity requires better reflection by 
the banking system. 
The  banking  system  has  worked  well  to  preserve  its  soundness.  It  has  supported  the 
Albanian economy in its expansion phase and has shared a part of the economic slowdown 
costs with it. Unlike many other experiences, the Albanian banking system succeeded 
in withstanding the global crisis without using any public funds. On the contrary, at 
the  peak  of  the  crisis,  many  banks  managed  to  bring  fresh  capital  in  the  country, 
against  the  setting  of  fiscal  contraction  and  funds  withdrawal  by  the  European 
banking groups and higher non-performing loans. 
However, we deem that the banking system is capable of boosting lending. First, the banking 
system  should  intensify  its  efforts  to  cleanse  its  balance  sheets  through  collateral 
enforcement  and  realistic  assessment  of  borrowers’  creditworthiness.  Second,  without 
violating the culture of observing the contractual obligations, it should be more active in the 
loan restructuring process to provide more room to businesses deserving it. Third, we think 
that  Albania  has  in  place  business  and  development  projects  of  a  long-term  interest  that 
deserve greater attention. Lack of the loan demand is an already-known and well-understood 
problem.  However,  the  banking  system  should  be  more  flexible  when  assessing  the 
submitted applications. 
In  all  my  public  pronouncements,  I  have  iterated  the  prudence  needed  for  sound 
public  finances  in  the  country.  We  deem  that  the  country’s  sustainable  development 
economic paradigm requires taking swift measures for making the public finances healthier. 
Beyond the short-term challenges about the current year’s budget, putting in place a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reliable and transparent fiscal rule is a necessity to discipline the fiscal policy in the long 
term and guarantee the trust of the financial markets in the Albanian public debt. 
Finally, the Bank of Albania deems that the macroeconomic stimulus should continue to be 
based on a stimulating monetary policy and a banking system more focused on the needs of 
the  economy.  Also,  we  believe  that  the  fiscal  policy  lacks  the  room  for  such  actions.  This 
action  path  preserves  the  macroeconomic  stimulus  and  the  soundness  of  macroeconomic 
balances, hence providing the shape to the first pillar of development policies. 
Second pillar: Reducing uncertainty in economy 
2. 
The  second  pillar  (of  a  short-term  action,  as  well)  relates  to  reducing  uncertainty  in  the 
economy.  This  uncertainty  is  multidimensional  and  affects  the  private  sector  decisions 
intricately, hence making consumers and businesses reluctant to spend and invest. 
The uncertainty is not only related to domestic developments, but a significant part of it also 
originates from there. Several above-mentioned incentives – concrete-term recommitment to 
preserving the soundness of public finances and enhancing balance-sheet transparency in 
the Albanian economy – are the appropriate steps in this regard. Other incentives to reduce 
uncertainty would be to: 
• 
the  contingency  plans  and  relations  with 
strengthen 
institutions; 
enhance transparency and consistency of development programs, both at national 
and intersectoral levels; 
strengthen the legal, regulatory and fiscal framework, and minimise their volatility; 
improve  the  business  climate  in  its  relations  with  the  tax  administration  and  the 
judicial system. 
international 
financial 
  Taking these steps would be a significant progress towards development. 
Third pillar: Structural reforms 
3. 
The third pillar of development, i.e., the structural reforms in economy, should be stronger 
and deeper. Sticking to today’s agenda, I would like to say that these reforms would open the 
way  to  a  healthier  and  more  competitive  economy,  with  a  balanced  development  across 
sectors.  Our  resolution  and  success  in  implementing  these  reforms  would  determine  the 
long-term development of the Albanian economy. 
Fourth pillar: Convergence with the European Union 
4. 
I think that the identification, design and implementation of the structural reform package by 
closely  cooperating  with  the  specialised  international  institutions  would  be  productive. 
Currently, Albania meets all the conditions for a fast convergence with the European Union. I 
also think that the European integration is the best way to withstand the current crisis and 
guarantee stable economic growth in the long term. The Bank of Albania, being an integral 
part of the Vienna II Initiative, is greatly committed to the process of reshaping the financial 
structure supporting the development of South-Eastern Europe. 
Thanking you for your attention, I am open to further discussions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
