Andreas Dombret: Regulatory agenda of the international financial 
system – a coherent strategy 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Bankenkonferenz  2013,  Austrian  Working  Group  on  Banking  and 
Finance, Vienna, 11 February 2013. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Professor Lucius 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, thank you very much for inviting me to speak to you today at the opening of the 
banking conference. 
Even though today’s discussion is focused on the banking sector, please allow me to take an 
overarching perspective in my speech by looking at the financial sector as a whole. This is 
because the close linkages in the financial system – both within sectors and across sectors 
and  countries  –  make 
take  account  of  existing  connections  and 
cross-linkages in regulation, too. Otherwise, there is a risk of individual regulatory measures 
working  in  opposite  directions  or  even  cancelling  each  other  out.  Instead  of  a  coherent 
strategy, we would then have a patchwork carpet. 
it  necessary 
to 
The regulatory agenda for the international financial system 
2. 
At their summit in Washington D.C., the Heads of State or of Government of the G20 opted 
for  an  all-embracing  approach.  They  decided to  subject  all  systemically  important  financial 
institutions,  financial  markets  and  financial  instruments  to  appropriate  regulation  and 
monitoring. After all, the financial crisis had exposed shortcomings in the financial system as 
a whole as well as in its regulation. The aim of the regulatory agenda is therefore to eliminate 
these shortcomings and to make the financial system as a whole more resilient. 
The plan of action adopted in Washington marks the hour that the regulatory agenda saw the 
light of day, so to speak. At the following G20 summits, this agenda was successively refined 
and worked through stage by stage. In this context, the international Financial Stability Board 
(FSB)  plays  a  key  coordinating  role.  This  is  because  the  regulatory  agenda  consists  of 
several  components  on  which  the  relevant  standard-setting  bodies  and  international 
committees  are  working  in  parallel.  The  reforms  that  are  being  tackled  range  from 
strengthening financial supervision through improved transparency regulations to measures 
designed 
from  systems  of  remuneration. 
Coordinating all these strands of work is the task of the FSB, which is also responsible for 
regular reporting to the G20. 
The large number of work strands and regulatory provisions might create the impression that 
the sometimes exaggerated faith in the market prior to the crisis is now being replaced by 
excessive  faith  in  government.  Let  me  make  it  clear:  what  matters  for  us  is  not  the  sheer 
number of regulations but their quality. 
After  all,  the  purpose  of  regulations  is  to  create  a  consistent  and  reliable  regulatory 
framework  that  sets  the  right  incentive  for  market  players  to  behave  in  a  risk-conscious 
manner. The regulatory reforms initiated by the G20 are therefore also aimed at reasserting 
market economy principles – such as the unity of liability and control in particular. Ultimately, 
functioning  financial  markets  are  indispensable  for  our  general  economic  wellbeing,  since 
they ensure the efficient allocation of risks and capital. 
false  incentives  stemming 
to  correct 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Cross-linkages and connections 
3. 
The  close  interlinkages  within  the  international  financial  system  mean  that  sector-specific 
regulations can also impact on other sectors and market players. The individual elements of 
the regulatory agenda therefore not only have to build up stage by stage, one on top of the 
other; they also have to be interlocked. 
For example, close links exist between the banking and insurance sectors, not least because 
insurers  invest  in  bank  bonds  on  a  significant  scale.  Regulation  of  one  sector  therefore 
always has implications for the other. For that reason, any interactions between the solvency 
regime  for  insurers  and  bank  regulation  have  to  be  borne  in  mind  if  we  are  pursuing  a 
coherent regulatory agenda. 
The  regulatory  framework  for  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  known  as  SIFIs, 
provides us with an example of the cross-sector applicability of regulatory provisions. This 
framework  was  developed  under  the  aegis  of  the  FSB  and  was  adopted  by  the  G20  in 
November 2011. Its objective is to contain the systemic risks emanating from SIFIs. To this 
end,  the  framework  rests  on  two  pillars:  the  first  of  these  comprises  better  loss-absorbing 
capacity in comparison with other institutions. This is achieved by capital surcharges going 
beyond  Basel  III  set  according  to  the  systemic  importance  of  the  given  institution.  The 
second  pillar  consists  of  mechanisms  allowing  the  restructuring  and  resolution  of  SIFIs 
without  plunging  the  financial  markets  into  turbulence.  The  example  of  the  recently 
nationalised  SNS  Reaal  in  the  Netherlands  shows  the  importance  of  putting  in  place 
regulations in this sector. 
The SIFI framework was initially applied to globally systemically important banks. In a second 
stage,  it  was  extended  to  banks  which  are  systemically  important  at  the  domestic  level. 
Finally,  intensive  work  is  being  performed  at  present  on  transferring  it  to  insurers  and 
financial  market  infrastructures  which  are  systemically  important  globally.  In  terms  of  its 
application, the framework is thus not restricted to a specific sector. Furthermore, it can be 
applied to banks which are systemically important internationally as well to banks that are not 
systemically important at the global level but at the domestic level. This means that the SIFI 
framework  takes  account  not  only  of  interlinkages  across  sectors  but  also  of  the  close 
connection between national and supranational levels. 
In  designing  the  new  Basel  framework,  Basel  III,  the  close  interlinkages  in  the  financial 
system – between sectors as well as between jurisdictions – have to be taken into account in 
order to prevent regulatory arbitrage. This is because the new capital and liquidity standards 
for  banks  will  not  only  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital  and  an 
improvement in liquidity. At the same time, these more stringent regulations will potentially 
set incentives to shift transactions and thus circumvent the stricter banking regulation. I am 
thinking in this context not only of shifts into less strictly regulated jurisdictions but also, in 
particular, of transactions being shifted towards less strictly regulated players of the shadow 
banking system. 
These  examples  also  show  clearly  that  we  have  already  passed  a  number  of  important 
milestones  in  financial  market  regulation,  but  are  still  a  long  way  from  our  destination. 
Progress in work on the various elements of the reform agenda is at different stages. Some 
reforms  have  already  taken  the  form  of  planned  legislation  or  have  already  entered  into 
force; others will follow this year. Even so, we still have a lot to do. 
Besides solving the “too big to fail” problem, developing comprehensive recommendations on 
the  regulation  of  the  shadow  banking  system  is  among  the  upcoming  major  projects  this 
year. Here, I expect the publication of our final report in September. The future viability of the 
business models of a number of banks will also be subjected to scrutiny – not least against 
the  backdrop  of  the  ongoing  discussion  about  the  introduction  of  a  model  involving  a 
separation of commercial and investment banking, or the Volcker Rule. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And then we also still have a lot of work to do on the regulation of OTC derivatives trading. 
The G20’s original time schedule for implementing the recommendations on the reform of the 
OTC derivatives markets by the end of last year failed to be met. It is therefore all the more 
important  not  to  ease  off  at  this  point  but  to  press  on  resolutely  with  its  implementation. 
Delays in the timetable cannot always be avoided. But they should not lead to the envisaged 
reforms being watered down. Otherwise, we would be jeopardising our goal of making the 
financial system as a whole more resilient to crises. 
the 
Consistent implementation taking centre stage 
4. 
Although we still have a fair stretch of road ahead of us, the focus is rapidly moving away 
from  the  development  of  regulatory  measures  towards  implementing  them.  In  the  future, 
monitoring their implementation will undoubtedly be shifting more and more to centre stage. 
The  reason  for  this  is  that,  if  the  regulatory  measures  agreed  at  international  level  are  to 
have  their  intended  effect,  it  will  be  absolutely  crucial  for  them  to  be  implemented 
consistently  in  the  individual  countries  as  well.  That  also  includes  adhering,  as  far  as 
possible, to the timelines agreed for their implementation so that competitive distortions are 
avoided as far as possible. To prevent the emergence of a regulatory gap, the regulations 
should  be  applied  not  only  in  the  G20  countries  but  also,  preferably,  in  all  countries  with 
developed financial systems. 
Regulators  and  supervisors  are  aware  of 
importance  of  consistent  national 
implementation.  For  that  reason,  we  have  significantly  expanded  our  work  in  monitoring 
national  implementation  over  the  past  few  years.  Thus,  the  self-commitment  of  the  FSB 
members to lead by example in the implementation of international standards is subject to a 
regular review with publication of the results. In addition, for three years now, a system of 
peer reviews has been in place among FSB members to investigate the relationship between 
promise  and  performance  or,  in  other  words,  how  far  the  internationally  agreed  standards 
and  principles  have  been  implemented  nationally.  In  cooperation  with  international 
standard-setting  bodies,  in  October  2011  the  FSB  presented  a  coordinated  framework  for 
monitoring  and  reporting  on  the  implementation  of  the  agreed  reforms.  In  this  connection, 
greater attention is being paid to areas such as the Basel framework and measures relating 
to  SIFIs,  but  also  including  the  shadow  banking  system.  In-depth  monitoring  and  regular 
publication  in  the  form  of  progress  reports  to  the  G20  are  also  helping  to  keep  up  the 
pressure for implementation. 
In  order  to prevent  regulatory  arbitrage  between  sectors and  countries,  we  have  to  fix  our 
sights even more firmly on the systemic aspects of regulation. The key requirement for doing 
this is to assess the overall effects of the regulatory measures and to analyse any potential 
interactions between them. 
Impact  studies  play  a  major  part  in  gauging  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  new  proposed 
regulation. I therefore expressly welcome the fact that all the Basel reforms – including the 
new Basel III liquidity standards – are being accompanied by studies that assess both their 
short and long-term effects on banks and the real economy. 
Repeated fears have been voiced from within the financial industry that the stricter Basel III 
regulations combined with the more far-reaching requirements for SIFIs will have the effect of 
restricting the credit supply. The Basel Committee has looked into this question and come to 
the  conclusion  that  the  drawbacks  are  outweighed  by  the  advantages,  namely  the  gain  in 
stability  and  the  reduced  likelihood  of  future  crises.  A  moderate  increase  in  the  cost  of 
lending  and  minor  losses  in  growth  will  thus  not  put  at  risk  the  supply  of  credit  to  the 
economy. 
Pressing ahead with work on the various elements of the reform agenda in parallel harbours 
the  risk  that  individual  measures  might  conflict  with  each  other.  In  our  closely  interlinked 
financial  system,  focusing  on  sector-specific  measures  can  easily  lead  to  unintended 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
interactions  occurring  or  even  conflicting  incentives  being  set.  Such  a  lack  of  consistency 
might lessen the desired effects of the new regulations or even negate them entirely. 
One possible instance of unwanted interactions is the combined effect of European banking 
regulation and the EU solvency regime for insurers. This is because banking regulation aims 
to place bank funding on a stable, that is a long-term basis, while, under certain conditions, 
the  solvency  regime  gives  preference  to  bank  bonds  with  short  maturities.  Capital 
requirements  increase  relatively  sharply  given  longer  duration  of  the  bank  debt  securities 
held  by  insurance  companies  –  at  least  when  the  standard  formula  is  used.  The  outcome 
might be that insurers change their asset allocation to the detriment of bank debt securities. 
As insurers are among the most important investors in bank bonds, this could ultimately lead 
to an increase in banks’ funding costs. 
Within a single sector, too, different regulations can set conflicting incentives. One example 
of this might be the interplay between the EU crisis management directive and the scheduled 
liquidity ratio requirements. This is because the draft proposals of the directive provide for 
short-term liabilities being excluded from bail-in, thus setting incentive for short-term funding. 
This  is  diametrically  opposed  to  the  aim  of  regulating  liquidity,  which  is  to  safeguard  the 
maintenance of liquid funds even under unfavourable circumstances and for longer periods 
of time. 
Of course, a final judgement on the effects of each of the regulatory initiatives can only be 
made  when  their  precise  details  are  known  and  as  soon  as  robust  empirical  evidence  is 
available. 
In the end, for the regulatory reforms to have their desired effect, it will be absolutely crucial 
that  we  identify  any  potential  interactions  of  this  kind  and,  as  far  as  possible,  avoid  them. 
This is quite clearly anything but an easy task. It means weighing up the aims and effects of 
various measures. It could also mean that measures which have already been adopted have 
to be amended or revised while they are in the process of being implemented or soon after. 
The latest example of this is the revision of the liquidity standard by the Basel Committee. 
Having said that, however, it should be clear to both the general public and those affected by 
regulation that this is not a case of watering down measures once they have been adopted. 
Rather, it is matter of taking due account of systemic aspects of regulation so as to avoid 
possible unwanted consequences. 
is  not  a  patchwork.  Rather, 
international  regulatory  agenda 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The 
it  represents  an 
all-embracing approach covering a wide range of issues from institutions to financial markets 
to  individual  instruments.  This  coherent  strategy  consists  of  several  interlocking  structural 
elements,  the  overall  impact  and  potential  interactions  of  which  have  to  be  carefully 
analysed. For it is only with an internally consistent regulatory agenda that we can make the 
international financial system more stable and more resilient to crises. 
In  order  to  achieve  this  goal,  the  international  agreements  now  finally  also  have  to  be 
consistently transposed into national regulations and laws. Even if slight delays to the original 
timetables cannot always be avoided, there should be no doubt about the determination of all 
the G20 countries, including the EU, to continue fulfilling their commitment to implement the 
reforms. 
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to the ensuing discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
