Stefan Gerlach: Macroprudential policy in Ireland 
Address  by  Mr  Stefan  Gerlach,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the 
seminar  on  “Reform  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis”,  University  of  Limerick,  Limerick, 
19 September 2013. 
 I am grateful to Mark Joy for his help in preparing these remarks. 
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak at this seminar on Reform in the Aftermath of 
the  Crisis  here  at  the  University  of  Limerick.  This  is  my  first  visit  to  Limerick  so  I  am 
particularly pleased to be here.  
As all of you know, the Central Bank of Ireland regulates and supervises individual financial 
institutions, that is, we are the microprudential supervisor, here in Ireland. This is an area that 
Fiona  Muldoon,  who  will  speak  later  this  afternoon,  and  her  colleagues  on  the  Bank’s 
regulatory  side  have  done  much  to  strengthen  in  recent  years.  The  motivation  for 
microprudential  policy  is  that  by  seeking  to  reduce  the  risk  of  failure  of  individual  financial 
institutions, the health and stability of the overall financial system can be promoted. 
But we know from the financial crisis that the financial system is more than the sum of its 
parts. Unfortunately, it is easy to imagine a situation in which individual market participants 
appear safe and sound, but the system overall is not. For instance, consider a situation in 
which  financial  institutions’  individual  balance  sheets  look  healthy  but  they  hold  similar 
market  positions.  If  for  some  reason  these  institutions  decide  to  limit  their  exposures  by 
reducing their positions, by selling collectively they might cause the market to become one 
sided and prices to fall rapidly. As that happens, they may redouble their efforts to get out of 
the  market,  leading  to  fire  sales,  massive  valuation  losses  and  to  contagion  to  other 
investors.  The  risk  that  markets  may  herd,  and  for  financial  institutions  to  have  similar 
positions, may thus cause problems that microprudential supervisors may not spot. 
What is less well known is that the Central Bank is also the macroprudential policy maker in 
Ireland.1 As such we monitor developments in the financial system to limit the likelihood of 
another financial crisis. Macroprudential policies are very much a response to the financial 
crisis and an example of how central banks and financial regulators are drawing the lessons 
from the crisis and reforming the way they go about ensuring financial stability.  
Since the notion of macroprudential policy is much less well known among the public, today I 
will take the opportunity to talk about it.  
What is macroprudential policy? 
1. 
It  is  useful  to  start  with  a  definition:  by  macroprudential  policy  we  mean  efforts  by  the 
macroprudential  policy  makers  to  limit  systemic  risk,  that  is,  the  risk  of  disruptions  to  the 
provision of financial services caused by an impairment of the financial system, with serious 
negative  consequences  for  the  real  economy  and  welfare.2  The  tools  that  are  used  are 
primarily the prudential tools that microprudential supervisors are using to limit the risk to the 
soundness of individual financial firms.  
I  emphasise that  while  there  are many  policies  that  can  be  used to  strengthen  the  overall 
financial system, only those under the control of the macroprudential policy maker constitute 
                                                
1   The Central Bank of Ireland’s mandate for macroprudential oversight stems from its responsibilities regarding 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system:  The  Central  Bank  Reform  Act  2010  lists  “the  stability  of  the  financial 
system overall” as one of the institution’s central objectives. 
2   See the discussion in Lim et al. (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
macroprudential  policy.  For  instance,  tax  policy  can  be  an  effective  tool  for  combatting 
housing bubbles, but is not macroprudential policy. 
Why do we need macroprudential policy? 
2. 
The  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  the  fact  that  traditional  macroeconomic 
stabilisation and microprudential policies are not enough to ensure the stability of the broader 
financial  system.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  actions  of  individual  firms  can  create 
interdependencies, potentially leading to systemic risk developing.  
The rationale for using macroprudential policy rests on three factors.3 First, the tendency of 
the financial system to amplify shocks. For instance, banks may respond to a downturn in the 
economy by cutting new lending, reinforcing the downturn.  
Second,  feedback  mechanisms  that  can  result  in  an  overexposure  to  adverse  aggregate 
shocks. For instance, the interdependencies between credit and asset prices can lead to a 
situation in which bank lending drives up asset prices and therefore collateral values, leading 
to additional lending and further asset price increases.  
Third, financial linkages that increase the vulnerability of the system to shocks. While many 
of these may be in the form of direct exposures, linkages may be under the radar screen of 
regulators and take the form of implicit guarantees or exposures in derivatives and funding 
markets. 
What are the policy options? 
3. 
Macroprudential policy has come to the fore of the international financial policy agenda only 
in  the  wake  of  the  recent  financial  crisis  and  as  a  field  of  economic  policy  it  is  relatively 
untested (BIS, 2010). As a result, there is little  consensus about best practise in this area 
and policymakers seeking to implement policy today face a wide range of difficult choices.  
First, in addressing a particular systemic risk, the macroprudential policymaker must choose 
to exercise either one or multiple policy instruments. The use of multiple instruments has the 
advantage  of  allowing  the  policymaker  to  tackle  different  aspects  of  the  same  risk.  The 
disadvantage is that more instruments may mean more unintended consequences, through 
what is often called, regulatory leakage. Recent research on UK banks (Aiyar et al., 2012), 
for instance, finds that regulated banks reduce lending, as expected, in response to tighter 
macroprudential  capital  requirements  aimed  at  smoothing  the  credit  cycle.  However, 
unregulated banks increase lending in response to tighter capital requirements on a relevant 
reference group of regulated banks. This regulatory leakage is substantial.  
Second,  policymakers  must  choose  between  being  either  broad-based  or  targeted  in  their 
approach to systemic risk. Targeting specific types of transactions, for example, may make 
the  policy  instruments  more  precise  and  potentially  more  effective,  but  raises  the  risk  of 
avoidance.  
Third, macroprudential policymakers must strike a balance between rules and discretion. As 
their  names  suggest,  rules-based  instruments  are  activated  according  to  some  triggering 
rule,  informed  by  indicators  of  systemic  risk.  Such  rules  act  as  a  safeguard  against 
forbearance  and  the  policymaker’s  inability  to  fully  anticipate  the  timing  and  magnitude  of 
policy  effects  (Friedman,  1948)  and  the  reactions  of  market  participants  (Kydland  and 
Prescott,  1977).  However,  rules  are  difficult  to  design.  Furthermore,  discretion  allows 
policymakers  to  learn  from  observing  the  interaction  between  macroprudential  policy,  the 
financial system and the economy. 
                                                
3  
IMF (2013a). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fourth, policies may be fixed or may be calibrated over time. Effective macroprudential policy 
involves  some  combination  of  both: (i) time-invariant  regulations make  it hard for  systemic 
risk  to  build  up;  and  (ii)  policies  that  are  introduced  or  tightened  when  systemic  risk  is 
perceived as rising to dangerous levels (Figure 1).  
Macroprudential time-invariant and time-varying policy instruments 
Figure 1 
 Time-invariant versus time-varying rules 
4. 
Let  me  focus  a  little  more  on  the  arguments  surrounding  time-varying  and  time-invariant 
policies. 
Currently central banks are focussing squarely on the design of time-varying macroprudential 
policy instruments. Such instruments focus on stabilising the financial system throughout the 
aggregate risk cycle by building cushions during good times so that financial institutions have 
the capacity to deal with risks when they materialise in bad times. Since we are in the wake 
of such a financially destructive boom and bust, the desire of global policymakers to minimise 
the  risks  inherent  in  future  booms  is  understandable.  However,  policymakers  must  ask 
themselves whether we are in danger of relying too much on time-varying macroprudential 
policies. 
To  my  mind,  time-varying  macroprudential  policy  instruments  have  profound  limitations. 
Firstly,  the  effectiveness  of  these  instruments  assumes  that  the  policymaker  can  detect 
accurately the build-up of systemic risk. Systemic risk is, however, hard to measure. While 
there are some reasons to believe that we can provide early warnings of dangerous build-
ups  in  risks  (Dell’Ariccia  et  al.,  2012;  Drehmann  et  al.,  2012),  there  is  little  evidence  that 
these warnings are reliable. The IMF shows, for instance, that even measures of systemic 
risk  based  on  the  growth  rate  and  level  of  credit  produced  very  low  probabilities  of  crisis 
before  2007  (IMF,  2011).  No  model  or  method  to  assess  systemic  risk  professes  to  be 
complete  or  adequate (Bisias  et  al.,  2012).  Confounding  improvements  in  measurement  is 
the fact that it is difficult to operationalize the concept of systemic risk.  
A second limitation of time-varying macroprudential policy is that, even if a dangerous build-
up of risk is detected, it is not clear what action the policymaker should take. This makes it 
likely that the policymaker will face heavy criticism from those likely to be affected by policy 
action, and therefore more likely to engage in forbearance. The idea that the public sector 
knows  better  than  the  collective  wisdom  of  the  market  will  always  be  controversial  and 
disputed.  Rules  will  be  challenged,  the  integrity  of  indicators  will  be  called  into  doubt  and 
resistance  will  be  high.  It  therefore  seems  hazardous  to  rely  solely  on  time-varying 
macroprudential policy to ensure financial stability.  
Macroprudential  policy  should  therefore  be  built  on  a  strong,  time-invariant  foundation  of 
microprudential and macroprudential regulations that aim to ensure financial institutions are 
robust enough in normal times and are endowed in unstable times with characteristics, such 
as low leverage, that prevent or retard the build-up of systemic risk.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Currently  policymakers  across  the  globe  are  working  towards  stronger  baseline  policies 
through raising the quality and quantity of bank capital, broadening liquid assets, requiring 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  to  hold  additional  capital  and  liquidity,  and 
tightening  oversight  of  securitisation,  over  the  counter  derivative  markets  and  shadow 
banking. With higher capital and liquidity in the system, systemic risk will be lower. The lower 
is systemic risk, the lesser the need for a highly activist, time-varying macroprudential policy 
regime. 
What policy instruments are available?  
5. 
Perhaps surprisingly, the macroprudential policy instruments that are most likely to be used 
are those that microprudential policy makers are relying on today. Partially this may reflect 
some lack of ingenuity in thinking about new instruments to be used! However, it is also likely 
to reflect the lack of practical experience of implementing macroprudential policies. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  was  established  in  2011  in  order  to  provide 
warnings  of  macroprudential  risks  and  encourage  the  application  of  macroprudential 
instruments within the European Union. To help guide national macroprudential authorities, 
the ESRB has provided an indicative list of macroprudential policy instruments (see Table 1).  
European Systemic Risk Board indicative list of macroprudential instruments 
Table 1 
Intermediate objective  
Instruments  
1. Mitigate and prevent excessive credit growth  
and leverage  
2. Mitigate and prevent excessive maturity 
mismatch and market illiquidity  
Counter-cyclical capital buffer  
Sectoral capital requirements  
Macroprudential leverage ratio  
Loan-to-value requirements  
Loan-to-income / debt (service)-to-income 
requirements  
Macroprudential adjustment to liquidity ratio  
(eg, liquidity coverage ratio)  
Macroprudential restrictions on funding sources 
(eg, net stable funding ratio)  
Macroprudential unweighted limit to less stable 
funding (eg, loan-to-deposit ratio)  
Margin and haircut requirements  
3. Limit direct and indirect exposure 
concentration  
Large exposures restrictions  
Central clearing party requirement  
4. Limit the systemic impact of misaligned 
incentives with a view to reducing moral hazard  
Systemically important financial institution capital 
surcharges  
5. Strengthen the resilience of financial 
infrastructures  
Margin and haircut requirements on CCP clearing  
Increased disclosure  
Structural systemic risk buffer 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While the list in the Table is quite detailed, broadly speaking there are three basic types of 
instrument:  
i. 
credit instruments, which seek to limit dangerous build-ups or concentrations in bank 
lending. Credit instruments include both indirect measures such as caps on loan-to-
value  ratios  and  debt-to-income  ratios,  and  direct  measures  such  as  ceilings  on 
credit or credit growth.  
liquidity  instruments,  to  ensure  that  banks  have  sufficient  liquidity  to  withstand 
shocks.  These  instruments  include  limits  on  maturity  mismatch  and  reserve 
requirements.  
capital instruments, which aim to reduce risky behaviour by raising the cost to banks 
of  undertaking  certain  activities  through  increased  capital  requirements  on  these 
activities.  Counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  and  dynamic  loss  provisioning  are 
examples of capital instruments.  
ii. 
iii. 
In  addition,  there  are  instruments  associated  with  other  policy  fields,  such  as  competition 
policy  (either  restricting  or  encouraging  competition)  or  monetary  policy  (reserve 
requirements  and  the  level  of  short-term  interest  rates),  that  might  be  used  to  support 
macroprudential policy. However, as I mentioned earlier, since these policy instruments are 
not  under  the  control  of  the  macroprudential  policy  maker,  they  do  not  constitute 
macroprudential policy and unlikely to play more than a secondary role at best. 
Does macroprudential policy work? 
6. 
While both the ESRB and national authorities are seeking to identify the best tools available 
for  macroprudential  policy,  the  effectiveness,  efficiency  and  legal  feasibility  of  these  tools 
continue to be investigated. The limited experience of countries including Canada, Croatia, 
Spain,  New  Zealand,  the  US,  China,  Hong  Kong  and  South  Korea,  suggests  that 
macroprudential  policies  can  be  effective  in  terms  of  their  impact  on  intermediate  targets 
such  as  credit  growth,  property  price  inflation  and  the  availability  of  credit.  But  it  is  less 
obvious  whether these policies have improved welfare, long-term financial stability or have 
allowed for the successful deflation of property bubbles (Elliott et al 2013; IMF 2013b). 
According  to  an  IMF  survey  conducted  in  2010,  two-thirds  of  49  countries  surveyed  had 
activated  macroprudential  instruments  since  2008  (Lim  et  al.,  2011).  Emerging-market 
economies  have  in  the  past  been  quicker  and  more  willing  to  use  macroprudential 
instruments  than  advanced  economies,  but  the  recent  crisis  has  led  many  advanced 
countries, not least those of the European Union, both individually and as members of the 
ESRB, to contemplate using macroprudential instruments.  
In  Spain,  the  central  bank  introduced  dynamic  loss  provisioning  in  2000  in  order  to  guide 
banks to build up loss provisions to account for expected losses on new loans and historical 
average losses on the outstanding stock of loans (Jimenez et al., 2012). Ex post, dynamic 
loss  provisioning  was  effective  in  helping  to  cover  credit  losses  in  the  banking  sector.  But 
with the onset of the financial crisis, coverage was far less than adequate.  
In New Zealand, in 2010, the central bank introduced two liquidity ratios to increase banks’ 
liquidity buffers and a core funding ratio to ensure banks were holding a higher percentage of 
more stable liabilities such as retail deposits and wholesale loans maturing in more than a 
year. These requirements were tightened again in 2013. They have met with success in as 
much  as  banks  responded  by  changing  their  funding  structures  to  meet  the  new 
requirements even before they were formally introduced.  
The  United  States  has  arguably  more  than  a  century’s  worth  of  experience  of  using 
macroprudential  policy  tools,  even  if  these  tools  were  not  couched  at  the  time  in  terms  of 
achieving explicitly macroprodruential objectives, but more so to protect the soundness of the 
financial  system  (Elliott  et  al  2013).  Policy  tools  were,  in  broad  terms,  aimed  at  regulating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
either credit supply or credit demand. Margin requirements (stock market), limits on loan-to-
value ratios and restrictions on loan maturities (mortgages) have been used to regulate the 
demand for credit. To control credit supply, reserve requirements (credit, repos, commercial 
paper), interest-rate ceilings (time and saving deposits), capital requirements and restrictions 
on the types of loans banks could hold in their portfolios, have been utilised. Successes were 
common but so too were unintended side-effects: In 1934 the Federal Reserve gained the 
authority to set margin requirements to counter increases in stock-market credit by curbing 
bank  loans  to  stock  brokers.  By  1974,  non-bank  lending  and  derivatives  had  become  so 
abundant as a compensatory source of credit that the Federal Reserve decided the policy 
tool was no longer effective. 
Today,  comprehensive  methods  to  assess  the  net  benefits  of  macroprudential  policies 
remain,  globally,  at  an  early  stage  of  development.  A  fully  operational  model  of 
macroprudential  policy  must  include  not  only  a  decision  rule  for  when  to  act,  but  also  a 
conceptual  framework  capable  of  assessing  and  quantifying,  as  much  as  possible,  all  the 
important policy variables: the probability of experiencing a crisis, the expected loss in output 
given a crisis occurs, the likely effectiveness of whatever policy tool is being considered in 
reducing both the probability of the crisis and the associated output loss, and the cost of the 
policy itself. Analytical tools must also be capable of assessing policy leakages. The IMF is 
doing good work in this field (IMF, 2013b) and contributions from academia are increasing in 
number and comprehensiveness (Angelini et al., 2012; Bianchi and Mendoza, 2011; Jeanne 
et al., 2013; Munakata et al., 2013) but more needs to be done to construct the apparatus 
necessary for calculating, reliably, the full welfare implications of macroprudential policy.  
Could macroprudential policy have helped mitigate Ireland’s financial crisis? 
Overall bank lending increased 178 per cent between 2002 and 2007  
At the same time, house prices increased 85 per cent and  
Commercial property prices increased 66 per cent  
7. 
The story of the Irish crisis is, at this stage, well-known to most. Let me simply point to three 
figures,  to  which  policymakers,  the  public  and  banks  themselves  had  access  prior  to  the 
crisis: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
Based on these figures, it seems clear that alarm bells should have been ringing. 
What could macroprudential policy have done? Allow me to focus on one, admittedly time-
varying,  measure.  As  of  1  January  2014  new  European  Union  legislation  gives  national 
authorities the right to demand that banks hold, in addition to all other capital, an additional 
counter-cyclical  buffer  up  to  2.5  per  cent  of  risk-weighted  assets.  The  primary  aim  of  a 
counter-cyclical capital buffer is to ensure the banking system has enough capital to protect 
the financial system from periods of excess aggregate credit growth that are associated with 
the build-up of systemic risk.  
Activation of the counter-cyclical capital buffer is typically guided by deviations of aggregate 
credit  as  a  share  of  GDP  from  its  long-term  trend.  This  is  often  called  the  credit  gap. 
Threshold values of the credit gap are used to define the range of the gap at which the buffer 
should be deployed. If the gap is below the lower threshold, the counter-cyclical capital buffer 
is zero. If the gap is above the upper threshold the counter-cyclical capital buffer should be 
set  at  its  maximum  of  2.5  per  cent  of  risk-weighted  assets.  Between  the  lower  and  upper 
threshold  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  should  vary  with  the  extent  of  the  build-up  of 
systemic risk.  
Simulation  exercises  conducted  by  the  IMF  suggest  that  if  Ireland  had  implemented  a 
counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  during  the  decade  prior  to  the  financial  crisis  it  could  have 
saved up to a quarter of the fiscal costs of the crisis for the Irish state (IMF, 2013b). If the 
buffer had been in place in Ireland from 1997, it would have, according to IMF calculations, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
built up to its maximum (of 2.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets) roughly three years ahead of 
the  financial  crisis,  providing  a  pre-emptive,  dampening  force  on  the  huge  credit  upswing 
experienced in Ireland during the 2000s (Figure 2 and Figure 3).  
 Figure 2 
Ireland credit-to-GDP 
gap 
(per cent) 
Figure 3 
Ireland: simulated counter-cyclical  
capital buffer 
(per cent of risk weighted assets) 
 
However,  while  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  would  have  been  helpful,  they  have 
shortcomings. Their effectiveness may be  impaired, for instance, by the provision of credit 
through the shadow banking system, unreliable signals for activation and deactivation of the 
policy  tool,  and  conflicts  with  microprudential  policy  –  while  the  macroprudential  authority 
may  require  lower  buffers  the  banking  supervisor  may  resist  this  on  the  basis  of  solvency 
concerns  about  the  individual  institution.  Further  using  the  above  broad  metric  of  credit, 
counter-cyclical  capital  buffers  cannot  be  used  to  target  risks  in  specific  sectors  or  asset 
markets. Nor can they be tailored to allow less risky banks to face smaller buffers: all banks 
receive the same buffers regardless of their contribution to excess lending.  
 Conclusions 
8. 
Overall then, while macroprudential policy is needed to fill a gap that exists currently between 
microprudential policy and traditional macroeconomic stabilisation policies (such as monetary 
and fiscal policy), there are reasons to be cautious about its design and implementation. 
The effects of the current crisis, and the policy failures evident in hindsight, coupled with the 
limited international experience of implementing macroprudential policies suggest that some 
success is possible and that macroprudential instruments should be explored further. 
However,  implementation  should  not  proceed  without  due  regard  for  costs  and  benefits. 
Macroprudential  policy  is  new  and  the  potential  for  unintended  side-effects  is  great.  Costs 
include  policy  mistakes,  policy  leakages,  a  higher  price  and  lower  volume  of  financial 
intermediation  in  normal  times,  and  regulation-induced  growth  in  shadow  banking  (IMF, 
2013c). 
fiscal,  competition,  microprudential  and  crisis-
management  policies  can  promote,  but may  also  inhibit,  macroprudential  objectives. While 
our  understanding  of 
the 
incomplete  and 
implementation of any single macroprudential policy tool must be done with great care.  
Difficulty in designing reliable rules for triggering macroprudential policy is another reason for 
caution.  For  a  successful  economic  policy  rule  it  is  important  to  specify  in  advance  what 
policy action that will be taken when a certain event happens. As a central banker, I naturally 
turn  to  a  comparison  with  monetary  policy;  here  both  the  policy  action,  raising  short-term 
Interactions  with  monetary, 
these  effects 
it  remains 
improving, 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
interest rates, and the event, inflation, are well-defined. For macroprudential policy this is not 
the  case.  Potential  policy  actions  are  manifold  and  policy  outcomes,  the  avoidance  of 
systemic risk, is difficult to quantify.  
Furthermore, for monetary policy, we can draw on a rich history of cross-country experience, 
data, and models to inform us how interest rates affect inflation. With macroprudential policy 
we are targeting rare events, so historical experience is of less value, not least because, as 
the  financial  system  evolves,  comparisons  with  past  events  may  become  less  informative. 
The  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  policy  will  have  to  be  measured  using  models  that 
allow  us  to  compare  the  present  with  fictional  alternative  paths  for  the  economy.  These 
models, as with all models, will be only as reliable as their underlying assumptions. 
References 
Aiyer, S., Calomiris, C. and T. Wieladek (2012) “Does Macro-Pru Leak? Evidence from a UK 
Policy Experiment,” NBER Working Paper Series, 17822 
Angelini, P., Neri, S. and F. Panetta (2012) “Monetary and macroprudential policies,” ECB 
Working Paper Series, No. 1449 
Bank for International Settlements (2010) “The term macroprudential: origins and evolution,” 
BIS Quarterly Review, March 2010 
Bank of England, (2009) “The role of macroprudential policy,” Discussion Paper, Nov 2009  
Bianchi, J. and E. Mendoza (2011) “Optimal macroprudential regulation in a Fisherian model 
of financial crises,” BIS Papers, in: Bank for International Settlements (ed.), Macroprudential 
regulation and policy, volume 60, pages 66–72 
Bisias, D., Flood, M., Lo. A, and S. Valavanis (2012) “A survey of systemic risk analytics,” US 
Treasury, Office of Financial Research Working Paper No. 0001 
Central Bank of Ireland (2011) “The Financial Measures Programme Report”, March 2011  
Dell’Ariccia,  G.,  Deniz,  I.,  Laeven,  Luc.  and  T.  Hui  (2012)  “Policies  for  macrofinancial 
stability: How to deal with credit booms,” IMF Staff Discussion Note 12/06 
Drehmann, M., Borio, C., Gambacorta, L., Jiménez, G., and C. Trucharte (2010) “Counter-
cyclical Capital Buffers: Exploring Options,” BIS Working Papers No. 298. 
Drehmann, M., Borio, K. Tsatsarounis (2012) “Anchoring counter-cyclical capital buffers: the 
role of credit aggregates,” International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 7 (4), pp.189–240. 
Elliott, D., Feldberg, G. and A. Lehnert (2013) “The history of cyclical macroprudential policy 
in the United States,” Financial and Economics Discussion Paper Series, Federal Reserve 
Board 
ESRB  (2011)  “Recommendation  on  the  macroprudential  mandate  of  national  authorities“, 
Official Journal of the European Union (ESRB/2011/3) 
ESRB 
macroprudential policy“, Official Journal of the European Union (ESRB/2013/1) 
Goodhart,  D.  (2011)  “The  macroprudential  authority:  Powers,  scope  and  accountability,” 
OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends, Vol.9, No.1, pp. 109–144. 
Heijmans, R. and R. Heuver (2011) “Is this bank ill? The diagnosis of doctor Target 2“, DNB 
Working Paper No 316 
ICFR  (2011)  “What  is  the  price  of  Basel  III?  An  analysis  of  the  impact  (and  the  impact 
studies)  of  Basel  III  on  the  real  economy,”  International  Centre  for  Financial  Regulation, 
Discussion Paper, Oct, 2011 
intermediate  objectives  and 
“Recommendation  on 
instruments  of 
(2013) 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
IMF (2011) “Towards operationalising macroprudential policy: When to act,” Chapter 3 in the 
Global Financial Stability Report, September 
IMF (2013a) “Key aspects of macroprudential policy,” IMF Working Paper, forthcoming 
IMF  (2013b)  “Key  aspects  of  macroprudential  policy:  background  paper,”  IMF  Working 
Paper, forthcoming 
IMF  (2013c)  “Evaluating  the  net  benefits  of  macroprudential  policy:  a  cookbook,”  IMF 
Working Paper Series, WP/13/167 
Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2013) “Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up After the 
Crash,” NBER Working Paper No. 18675 
Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, J. and J. Salas (2012) “Macroprudential Policy, Counter-
cyclical  Bank  Capital  Buffers  and  Credit  Supply:  Evidence  from  the  Spanish  Dynamic 
Provisioning Experiments,” European Banking Center Discussion Paper No. 2012–011 
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B. and S. Yesiltas (2012) “Leverage across firms, banks, and 
countries,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 88, No. 2, pp. 284–298 
Kydland,  F.  and  E.  Prescott  (1977)  “Rules  rather  than  discretion:  The  inconsistency  of 
optimal plans,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 3 
Lim  et  al  (2011)  “Macroprudential  policy:  What  instruments  and  how  to  use  them,”  IMF 
Working Paper 
Munakata,  K.,  Nakamura,  K.  and  Y.  Teranishi  (2013)  “Optimal  Macroprudential  Policy”, 
CAMA Working Paper 51/2013 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
