Michael Gondwe: Islamic commerce and finance 
Opening remarks by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the workshop 
on “Islamic commerce and finance”, Lusaka, 24 March 2013. 
 The Guest Speakers, Mufti Shafiq Jakhura and Maulana Bilal Jakhura; 
Distinguished invited guests; 
Participants; 
Ladies and gentlemen; 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I would like to extend a very 
warm welcome to you all to this important workshop on Islamic Commerce and Finance. To 
our  Guest  Speakers,  Mufti  Shafiq  Jakhura  and  Maulana  Bilal  Jakhura,  I  wish  to  extend  a 
special welcome to you to Zambia and in particular to Lusaka. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Bank of Zambia is honoured and delighted to be invited to give 
a keynote address at this workshop. 
This Workshop on Islamic Commerce and Finance could not have come at a more opportune 
time  than  now,  when  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  embraced  financial  inclusion  on  its  policy 
agenda as a way of increasing access to appropriate financial products and services to all 
segments of society in Zambia. 
Ladies and gentlemen, Islamic commerce and finance have expanded significantly in the 
last  few  decades  globally  both  in  terms  of  size  and  the  number  of  players.  For  Instance, 
Islamic finance is currently practiced in more than 50 countries worldwide. In many countries, 
Islamic finance co-exists with conventional finance and is not limited to Muslim countries. 
Distinguished participants, recent industry estimates indicate that Islamic finance is set to 
continue  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  about  15%.  The  increased  trade  between  the  sub-
Saharan  region  and  Islamic  nations  in  the  Middle  East  only  reinforces  our  view  that 
partnerships  among  the  corporate  players  between  the  two  regions  will  foster  more 
developments in the area of Islamic finance. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) recognizes that 
the limited access to financial services and low number of products available to the different 
sectors of the economy has hindered the development potential of Zambia’s economy. There 
is  need  therefore,  to  revitalize  the  financial  sector  so  that  it  meets  the  challenges  of 
accelerated  and  sustained  investments  in  key  sectors  of  the  economy.  This  can  only  be 
achieved where the financial system is able to improve its allocative efficiencies by providing 
appropriately  designed  products  and  services  to  all  segments  of  the  population  like  the 
Muslim community. 
Recent  developments  in  the  financial  sector  world-wide  offer  some  encouragement  that 
working together could extend the range and reach of financial services that are available to 
our people. Still a lot remains to be done to extend financial services to the majority of our 
people, particularly those that are economically active and to foster ongoing sustainability of 
our  financial  institutions.  It  is  against  this  background  that  Bank  of  Zambia  accepted  your 
invitation to present the keynote address as a way of marking our commitment to ensuring 
that the financial system caters for all segments of the population. 
Distinguished participants, the rapid growth of Islamic finance raises a series of important 
questions, such as whether Islamic finance should be regulated differently from conventional 
finance.  Because  modern  Islamic  finance  is  relatively  new  to  most  countries,  rules  for 
financial  accounting,  bank  governance,  and  lending  standards  are  continually  evolving  as 
business practices become more refined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ladies and gentlemen, you may wish to note that since October 2008, when the Bank of 
Zambia hosted the first ever Islamic Banking Conference here in Lusaka, work has been on-
going  to  develop  a  regulatory  framework  for  Islamic  banking.  The  Bank  has  held  several 
consultations  both  internally  and  externally  and  has  also  subjected  the  Islamic  Banking 
framework  to  expert  review  by  internationally  renowned  Islamic  banking  experts.  The 
framework is now in its final stages and is expected to become operational before the end of 
the year. 
We are aware that the financial sector has waited for so long to start offering Islamic banking 
products  and  services.  As  a  central  bank,  we  assure  you  that  the  regulatory framework  is 
receiving  active  attention  and  the  market  will  be  informed  once  all  the  formalities  have 
completed. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  although  the  Muslim  Community  constitutes  only  an  estimated 
12 per cent of Zambia’s population, the community constitutes high value businessmen who 
control a very significant share of the Zambian economy in various sectors. Their exclusion 
from the financial sector therefore, has significant impact on the Bank of Zambia efforts on 
financial inclusion. You may wish to note that the majority of the Muslim community shun the 
use of commercial banks due to lack of banking products and services that are compliant to 
their religious ethos and yet they control a significant share of economic activities in all the 
major  sectors.  The  introduction  of  Islamic  finance  may  provide  a  solution  to  injecting  the 
much needed liquidity currently being kept in homes on account of lack of shariah compliant 
banking products and services. 
It  is  the firm  belief  of the  Bank  of  Zambia  that  a  robust  regulatory  framework  will  not  only 
seek to expand access to finance but will also have positive effects on the overall interest 
rates  in  the  money  markets  and  ultimately  affect  the  rate  at  which  financing  for  economic 
activity is being provided. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  introduction  of  Islamic  banking  would  come  with  its  own 
challenges. For us at Bank of Zambia, this entails further strengthening of our supervisory 
capacity. We  would  welcome this  challenge  and  hope  to rise  to  the occasion  by  providing 
adequate supervisory infrastructure and a sound environment in which economic agents can 
conduct their businesses. 
I have no doubt that this workshop is very timely and that it provides a unique opportunity for 
participants to share knowledge and experiences on how best to promote financial diversity 
and inclusiveness especially with regard to Islamic commerce and finance. 
Distinguished  participants,  on  behalf  of  Bank  of  Zambia,  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
organizers  and  presenters  of  this  workshop  for  recognizing  the  important  role  that  Islamic 
commerce and finance plays in an economy like ours. It is my hope that all delegates will 
engage fully in these discussions and make the most of the wealth of knowledge generated 
in the house. 
Ladies and gentlemen, It is now my honour and privilege to declare the Islamic Commerce 
and Finance Workshop officially open. 
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
