Ardian Fullani: Lending to the economy and the long-term stability of the 
banking system 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at a forum on “Lending to the 
economy and the long-term stability of the banking system”, Tirana, 4 March 2013. 
 Dear Guests, 
Welcoming you to this forum, allow me to say a few words about its importance. The Bank of 
Albania considers that an open and ongoing communication with the banking industry and 
business  community  is  a  pre-condition  to  ensuring  greater  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  of  the  country.  These  meetings  serve  as  platforms  to  present  incentives  and 
strategic decisions, with direct impact on the economic and financial activity of both sectors 
represented in this meeting. Therefore, this is an open forum where the Bank of Albania’s 
analysis,  conclusions  and  decision  making  will  be  confronted  by  the  analyses  and 
conclusions drawn by both other groups. 
I believe this meeting will lead us to a good understanding and assignment of responsibilities 
to provide Albania’s economic activity with a new stimulus by reviving lending to economy. 
Hence, allow me to share with you the main topic of today’s forum: lending to the economy 
and the banking system’s long-term stability. Besides professional discussions on the topic, 
this meeting is also aimed at launching the Bank of Albania’s new initiative, which I would call 
the Bank of Albania’s package to revive lending. 
Let me elaborate this topic further, dividing my speech into three main sections: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Highlights on the recent economic and financial developments in Albania; 
A retrospective view of the confrontation of our economy with the global crisis; 
A package of measures we propose to revive lending to economy. 
Albanian economy during 2012 
Year  2012  was  a  challenging  one  for  Albania’s  economic  development.  The  Albanian 
economy  recorded  positive  growth  and  its  economic  and  financial  balances  were  stable. 
Economic growth, however, has pursued a clear slowing path over the past four years and 
the concerns accounting for this performance remain present. 
As  we  have  continuously  stated,  Albania’s  economic  activity  suffers  from  lack  of  final 
demand for goods and services. Consumers and businesses, in particular, appear reluctant 
to consume and invest due to higher uncertainty and tighter lending standards. The lack of 
this  demand  is  reflected  in  partial  utilisation  of  productive  capacities,  yielding,  in  turn,  low 
economic growth, a sluggish labour market, business financial constraints, and deteriorating 
loan quality. 
Although as at end-2012, non-performing loans rose to 22.5% as a percentage of total loans, 
the banking sector appears stable. Capitalisation and liquidity figures stand at good levels. 
Profit was distinctly better than in 2011. 
Loans and deposits grew higher than in 2011 but at a lower growth rate. The decelerating 
lending was particularly significant, growing by merely 2.1% in the past year. Only lending in 
Albanian lek provided a positive contribution, while lending in foreign currency shrank on a 
year  earlier.  Banks  increased  their  prudence  in  lending,  leading  to  a  relatively  tightening 
credit  supply.  A  significant  impact  was  made  by  tightening  of  regulatory  and  prudential 
regulations  at  European  level,  which  were  passed  on  to  a  refrained  lending  activity 
throughout  the  countries  that  have  European  banks  in  place.  This  phenomenon,  which  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
technically  recognised  as  deleveraging  or  reduced  “risk  appetite”,  has  brought  about  a 
phenomenon  which  according  to  McKinsey  is  known  as  “balkanization”  of  the  European 
financial system. 
This  phenomenon,  either  open  or  hidden,  is  rather  damaging  from  the  viewpoint  of 
development  perspectives  of  the  countries  in  the  region  and  for  the  European  integration 
process. From our viewpoint, the banking system should be avant-garde in this process, by 
exposing  the  country’s  competitive  advantage  at  parent  banking  groups  and  attracting 
foreign investors. 
In  its  analyses,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  identified  the  weakening  demand  as  the  main 
concern  facing  the  Albanian  economy.  Mandated  by  law  to  maintain  price  stability,  we 
assess that the low economic growth may be an obstacle to achieving our mandate in the 
medium  run.  We  have,  therefore,  emphasised  that  Albania’s  economic  policies  should  be 
stimulating. 
We also deem that the fiscal policy faces lack of room for fiscal stimulus and that it should 
increase its orientation toward consolidating the long-term stability of public finances. Under 
these  circumstances,  we  have  fully  steered  our  policies  and  instruments  toward  boosting 
consumption and investments in Albania. Bank of Albania’s monetary policy has been more 
and more stimulating. It has lowered the key interest rate for six consecutive times to record 
low  of  3.75%.  We  have  also  continued  to  supply  the  banking  system  with  the  required 
liquidity to support the public and private sectors’ activity. In parallel, our communication with 
the  public  has  aimed  at  guaranteeing  the  economic  agents  and  financial  markets  on 
maintaining of an easing monetary policy in the future. 
Overall,  our  monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in  preserving  macroeconomic  balances; 
however, its effect on stimulating the economy has been more limited. The financial market 
and  the  banking  system  have  not  fully  reflected  the  key  interest  rate  cuts  in  their  main 
products – loans, deposits and Government securities – while the Albanian consumers and 
businesses  have  slightly  responded  to  monetary  stimulus  and  lower  interest  rates.  To  our 
opinion, this performance reflects two core problems that our economy and macroeconomic 
policies  are  facing:  These  two  problems  are:  the  first  is  the  structural  vulnerability  of  the 
Albanian economy, and the second is the restriction of conventional instruments of economic 
control, monetary and fiscal policy, in boosting the aggregate demand and economic growth. 
Addressing  them  in  a  differentiated  way  requires  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
necessary  structural  reforms  that  support  entrepreneurship,  enhance  productivity,  improve 
competition  and  support  economic  growth.  In  addition,  it  points  out  that  need  to  take 
unconventional measures to boost lending and support the economy. 
Let  me  now  briefly  dwell  on  structural  concerns/vulnerabilities/problems  and  focus  on  the 
Bank of Albania’s initiative to address the second challenge. 
Albanian economy in the face of the global crisis 
Like all developing and emerging economies, the Albanian economy has undergone a rapid 
economic  growth  on  its  path  to  catching  up  EU  economies.  This  growth  has  been  mostly 
supported  by  rapidly  increased  consumption  in  economy  and  has  been  financed  by  using 
previous  savings  or  foreign  financing  sources.  The  main  beneficiaries  of  this  demand  are 
construction  and  services,  i.e.,  the  sectors  that  use  labour  force  intensively  and  ensure 
increase in wages and employment but which are slightly export-oriented. On the other hand, 
industry and agriculture slowed down, suffering from lack of attention by the banking system, 
a  higher  degree  of  investments  and  expertise,  and  longer  time  needed  for  return  on 
investments. This tendency has left Albania with a small base of export-oriented industries or 
of those competing with import products. 
The global crisis served as an important testing for this growth model. It highlighted its limits 
to  face  external  shocks  and  its  restrictions  in  an  ever  challenging  global  environment.  In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
simpler  words,  the  global  crisis  revealed  the  importance  of  maintaining  sound  balances  in 
both public and private sectors. It also depicted that more competitive economies that have 
successfully  competed  in  global  markets  are  those  economies  that  have  higher  and  more 
sustainable growth rates. It is my pleasure to state that this lesson has been learned by the 
Albanian  economy  at  both  consumer  and  producer  level.  More  specifically,  Albanian 
households have been more reluctant to spend and more inclined to save. 
In  a  longer-term  horizon,  this  is  undoubtedly  positive.  First,  it  guarantees  the  health  of 
individual household balances, and second, it creates a sufficient fund of financial savings to 
boost credit and investments in the country. 
In a shorter-term horizon, it induces lack of demand and makes economic growth difficult. On 
the other hand, the Albanian business learned that the domestic market has limited abilities 
to generate a sustainable economic growth. As a consequence, it is showing a rising interest 
to  industry  and  agriculture,  as  sectors  that  have  a  better  development  perspective  and  a 
larger market. 
The  above-mentioned  situation  has  important  implications  for  the  country’s  development 
pace  and  macroeconomic  policies.  First,  it  implies  that  the  country’s  economic  growth 
potential  is  lower  in  the  medium  term.  In  other  words,  the  transfer  of financial  and  human 
resources across sectors, acquisition of technologies and modern business practices, as well 
as exploration of foreign market penetration, need time and determine the economic growth 
rate.  Moreover,  this  development  is  faced  with  an  unfavourable  external  environment, 
relatively  high  cost  of  funds  and  lack  of  domestic  demand.  Recovery  of  previous 
development  paces  takes  time.  Second,  the  higher  propensity  to  save  and  increased  risk 
premia restrict the ability of monetary policy to generate additional demand in the economy 
by lowering the key interest rate. 
Global  economic  developments  are  optimistic.  The  euro  area  and  the  European  currency 
appear  more  consolidated  due  to  the  ECB’s  contribution  and  nation-wide  efforts  for  fiscal 
consolidation. However, the optimism is fragile. Central banks of advanced economies have 
stated  clearly  that  they  will  continue  to  apply  the  quantitative  easing,  as  long  as  inflation 
remains below the target and unemployment remains high. 
Actually, the so-far solutions have been in forms never experienced before. In fact, they pose 
new challenges with regard to implementation and potential risk spillover effects projected in 
the long run. 
Under  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  considering  the  situation  as  rather 
complicated  and  after  an  intensive  work,  has  succeeded  in  designing  a  full  package  of 
measures.  They  aim  to  boost  credit  and  improve  micro  and  macroeconomic  balances  of 
financing the economy, about which I will inform you in the following. 
Package of credit recovery 
The  idea  about  the  package  that  we  are  introducing  today  occurred  last  year,  where  we 
discussed,  jointly  with  you  and  representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Justice,  about  legal 
amendments needed to promote collateral execution. Since that meeting, our experts have 
worked intensively for enriching it and bringing it to today’s form. 
The package consists in three pillars: legal pillar; monetary policy pillar and prudential pillar. I 
will dwell on them in the following: 
1 – Legal pillar 
The rapidly increased non-performing loans in the recent years, reflects, inter alia, a number 
of known and unknown problems of collateral execution. Therefore, together with the banking 
industry,  we  have  identified  and  made  relevant  proposals  for  a  higher  efficiency  of  the 
collateral  execution  process.  In  consultation  with  other  important  stakeholders  in  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
process, legal amendments to the Civil Procedures Code and to the Civil Code have been 
drafted. 
These amendments aim to accelerate the obligatory collateral execution, avoiding procedural 
delays caused by bank debtors. 
More specifically, the proposed amendments address the following: 
• 
Courts do not take measures to secure charges/sues, when the bailiff actions are 
rejected; 
Courts do not take measures to secure charges and do not suspend the execution 
of  collateral,  when  the  debtor  requests  the  invalidity  of  the  executive  title,  arising 
from a bank credit; 
Reduction  by  50%  of  the  initial  price  of  the  immovable  property,  placing  an 
acceptable  average  for  the  debtor  and  the  bank,  and  making  clearer  the  value 
(price) of the item with which the second auction begins. 
  We  are  informed  by  the  Ministry  of  Justice  that  these  amendments  are  in  process  of 
finalisation and this legal package will be sent for approval to the Council of Ministers and 
then to the Parliament of Albania. I take this opportunity to iterate the need for these legal 
proposals  to  be  approved  by  the  Assembly  of  Albania  at  an  earlier  time  possible. 
Improvements in the legal framework and collateral execution practice would provide public 
authorities with new spaces to boost lending in Albania. 
2 – Monetary policy pillar 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  Bank  of  Albania’s  monetary  policy  has  been  easing  recently, 
undertaking 6 consecutive key interest rate cuts. 
The one-week repurchase agreement rate, following the last cut in January 2013, reached 
the  lowest  historical  level,  to  3,  75%.  It  is  a  record  low,  not  only  historically  but  also  if  we 
compare it with all other economies in the region, including most new EU member states as 
well. The Bank of Albania deems that the monetary conditions are appropriate to ensure the 
meeting  of  inflation  target  in  the  medium  run,  providing  at  the  same  time  the  necessary 
monetary  stimulus  to  support  domestic  demand.  However,  from  the  viewpoint  of  this 
meeting, the future of monetary policy is what really counts. 
As stated in the last Statement by the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, the Bank of 
Albania  will  continue  to  pursue  a  stimulating  monetary  policy,  as  long  as  inflationary 
pressures  remain  weak.  Furthermore,  I  would  like  to  ensure  the  banking  system  that  the 
operational  framework  we  provide  will  maintain  the  same  stimulating  nature.  It  aims  at 
preventing  banks  from  any  tensions,  even  sporadic  ones,  with  regard  to  market  liquidity 
adequacy (its quantity, price and maturity). 
3 – Prudential pillar 
While both first pillars impact indirectly and over an extended period of time, the prudential 
pillar impacts directly and swiftly on credit recovery. It includes a number of measures that 
will release financial resources to banks and will encourage them to channel those resources 
toward lending. Regulatory changes are at the core of these measures: 
• 
• 
The  reduction  of  the  requirements  for  liquid  assets  by  banks  may  be  carried  out  without 
infringing  the  stability  of  the  system,  since  their  level  is  generally  higher  than  that  of 
international standards and of banks in the region. Moreover, given that banks operating in 
the  country  have  their  origin  mainly  in  Europe,  this  reduction  may  take  place  under  the 
conditions  of  declining  risk  premia  in  European  financial  markets.  However,  it  will  be 
Reduced requirements for liquid assets by banks; 
Changed risk coefficients in the investment structure to boost lending. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monitored  and  implemented  according  to  each bank’s  risk  profile. This means  that  though 
the reduction may be general, the level of liquid assets requested by currency and in total 
may be different in different banks. 
Change  in  the  risk  coefficients  of  the  investment  structure  will  take  place,  so  that  banks’ 
capital  better  supports  the  shifting  of  their  resources  toward  lending.  More  specifically,  we 
propose  significant  increase  in  risk  coefficients  that  are  used  for  calculating  the  banks’ 
capital, for new flows of bank investments with non-residents. 
This increase in risk coefficients may take place also for part of bank investment stock with 
non-residents, taking into consideration: 
• 
• 
• 
Regulatory requirements for liquid assets; 
Adequate coverage of bank liabilities to non-residents; and 
The  time  needed  so  that  this  shift  does  not  cause  any  operational  overburden  to 
banks. 
On  the  other  hand,  risk  coefficients  may  decrease  in  banks  for  the  amount  of  new  credit 
added to the existing stock, for a certain period of time. In this way, the intended shifting of 
funds  toward  lending  in  the  country  may  be  conducted  even  by  those  banks  that  have  a 
lower capital adequacy ratio. 
These  measures  are  not  administrative.  The  decision  to  conduct  funds  shifting  to  private 
sector credit in the country will be decided by the bank itself. As in any other case, the bank 
should balance all the factors affecting risk, costs and benefits from such a shift. 
The  implementation  of  the  above  measures  requires  amending  the  existing  regulatory 
framework, which will be temporarily applicable (ad hoc). After that, banks should gradually 
return to complying with the existing regulatory framework, as regards the methodology for 
calculating capital requirement. In this way, we preserve, at any time, the necessary stimulus 
in banks to lend prudentially. 
Focusing  on  the  need  to  address  non-performing  loans,  we  deem  that  it  represents  a 
concern both for the banking industry and the Bank of Albania, not so much for the stability of 
the system, as for the costs that this phenomenon brings to banking activity, consumers and 
related services. 
Also, public authorities may take measures in this regard. I take this opportunity to iterate the 
need  for  settlement  of  public  sector’s  liabilities  to  private  entities.  This  would  positively 
contribute to settling a part of liabilities that these companies, or connected ones, have to the 
banking sector, hence mitigating the level of non-performing loans. 
In parallel, this process should be treated at its roots, to establish a transparent and stable 
mechanism that addresses factors, which contribute to the increase of public sector liabilities 
toward private companies, and avoids their increase in the future. 
Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  amend  the  regulatory  framework  to  urge  banks  to 
support borrowers’ request for credit restructuring, from the moment the credit is considered 
as  good.  If  the  banks  realise  this  in  an  effective  manner,  they  will  have  a  lower  cost  as 
regards requirements for credit risk provisioning. 
This  element  would  enable  banks  to  address  more  prudently  and  proactively  their  best 
clients, who may be showing their first signs of credit repayment problems due to factors that 
are beyond their control. 
As an element to keep this action in check, the regulatory framework will envisage that this 
loan  stay  temporarily  under  this  category  (or  in  the  substandard  category),  and  will 
immediately fall in a lower category, if the loan quality deteriorates after restructuring. 
After  broad  consultations  with  the  banks,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  drafted  the  relevant 
instructions that will guide them in the debt restructuring process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Similarly, the Bank of Albania finds that a part of the non-performing loans, mainly the loss 
loans,  remain  in  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banks  owing  to  different  interpretation  by  the 
banking  industry  and  the  tax  authorities  about  the  commencement  and  completion  of  the 
legal proceedings against a debtor. Eliminating these loans from the banks’ balance sheets, 
in  the  absence  of  a  coordinated  interpretation,  leads  to  consequences  on  the  banks’  tax 
burden and prevents writing off loss loans from balance sheets; subsequently, the level of 
non-performing loans swells and banks allocate their capacities inefficiently. 
I  take  the  opportunity  to  underline  that  the  banking  industry  and  fiscal  authorities  need  to 
identify the factors that lead to different interpretation of the same problem, and to formulate 
the  necessary  legal  and  sublegal  amendments  to  provide  a  definite  solution.  The  Bank  of 
Albania is willing and stands ready to provide comprehensive assistance on this matter. 
Role of business 
The  business-banks  relationship  is  fundamental  to  economic  activity  success.  This 
relationship  is  always  conditioned  by  developments  in  the  surrounding  environment.  The 
effects  of  the  economy’s  slowdown  have  not  been  uniform  across  the  sectors  of  the 
economy, and businesses do not face the same problems. 
Nevertheless, overall, businesses face lower volume and income of economic activity. Some 
businesses  need  to  restructure  their  activity,  not  only  by  decreasing  costs  and  improving 
efficiency, but also by entering new markets and introducing new products. 
To  achieve  this  target,  the  owners’  instinct  and  willingness  do  not  suffice;  it  takes 
professional  expertise, well-studied  projects  and  additional financing  or  restructuring  of the 
existing  loan.  I  think  that  the  business-bank  partnership  is  indispensable  in  this  process. 
Banks are increasingly developing their financial advisory capacities and are also developing 
banking  products  in  order  to  be  closer  to  the  needs  of  the  business.  Also,  they  are 
increasingly active in the restructuring the credit to businesses. 
Nevertheless,  both  sides  have  complaints  related  to  each  other. The  businesses  complain 
that banks are tight fisted, and often banks’ lending does not correspond with the businesses 
activity cycle. 
On the other hand, banks claim that businesses submit unreliable projects for crediting, and 
deficient financial information for decision making. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  confident  that  the  relationship  between  business  and  banks  will 
develop to the benefit of both parties, if they: 
• 
Enhance their understanding of the activity profile, market conditions and regulatory 
requirements, which determine the activity of each of them; 
Enter  into  cooperation  agreements,  based  on  transparent,  comprehensive  and 
professional information; 
Act proactively to detect situations in which this agreement should be reviewed, to 
improve the possibilities to settle liabilities against each-other. 
  The measures that Bank of Albania proposes today support the need for a closer relationship 
between banks and business, in the current economic situation in Albania. They expand the 
banks’  room  for  a  greater  flexibility  in  the  process  of  credit  restructuring.  However,  banks 
would not finance unsuccessful businesses; neither would they lend to businesses that do 
not supply transparent and complete information. A closer relationship also implies that, in 
their analysis, banks need to utilise more effectively the available information about existing 
and new borrowers, which may be generated by such sources as the Credit Registry. 
Banks  should  establish  sustainable  long-term  relationship  with  the  businesses  to 
enhance  consultancy  and  lending,  especially  with  regard  to  the  small  and  medium-
sized enterprises. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the 
financial 
intermediation 
requires  maintaining 
Conclusions 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  the  current  economic  and  financial  situation  in 
Albania 
rates  and  addressing 
non-performing  loans  with  priority.  Collaboration  with  other  public  authorities  has  been 
successful; also, concrete action is expected to be taken on settling outstanding payments to 
private companies, and approving the proposed legal amendments on collateral execution. 
Today, the Bank of Albania proposed some additional measures aimed at inducing banks to 
lend more. These measures, which will be soon reflected in the regulatory framework, have a 
countercyclical nature and are in general temporary. 
This  element,  and  the  needed  control  mechanisms  that  accompany  such  measures,  will 
encourage banks to respect the obligation to credit prudentially and soundly. Given that, at 
present,  crediting  has  additional  risks,  the  banks  management  and  shareholders  should 
ensure  that  these  short  and  medium-term  risks  are  covered  by  adequate  capital.  The 
outcome  of  these  measures  would  improve  if  businesses  understood  and  used  them 
properly. To this end, the relationship between businesses and banks should be base only 
on  transparent  and  professional  collaboration.  This  should  be  better  reflected  in  the 
media and transferred to the public. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  will  assess  the  impact  of  these  measures  and  monitor  their 
implementation on regular basis. In the view of this process, we stand ready to adapt them to 
the economic and financial developments, or support them with other measures. The stability 
of the financial system shall be at the foundation of each action of the Bank of Albania in this 
regard. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  remind  all  the  representatives  of  the  private  sector,  whether  in 
production  or  financial  industry,  that  under  the  effects  and  impact  of  the  crisis,  the  public 
authorities,  lawmakers,  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities,  have  made  important  changes  in 
terms  of  philosophy,  objectives  and  decision  making,  far  from  traditional  considerations. 
These  temporary  changes  aim  at  mitigating  the  crisis  effects,  stabilising  the  economy, 
consumption and private investment. 
The package I introduced today is a good example to illustrate this change. It is necessary, 
therefore, for the private sector to adopt such a temporary adjustment. 
Ms.  Lagarde,  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  appealed  that  in  the 
current situation, the goal of the private sector cannot be only profit; it must also be to add 
value,  create  jobs,  develop  the  new  ideas  that  drive  an  economy  forward  and  provide 
stability.  Boosted  employment  and  higher 
from  employment  means  more 
consumption  and  investments,  higher  consumer  demand  for  goods,  services  and  lending 
instruments. The private and financial sector should be accountable to the real economy: a 
private  sector  that  supports  employees  and  consumers,  and  a  financial  sector  that  adds 
values instead of destroying them. 
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  an  important  message:  the crisis  came  in  as  a 
global  crisis  and  its  solution  should  come  as  such.  However,  each  country  should  do  its 
homework and undertake the necessary structure reforms to overcome it. 
People only accept change in necessity and see necessity only in crisis – said Jean Monnet, 
regarded by many as chief architect of the European unity. 
Thank you and success in your work!  
income 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
