Erkki Liikanen: Banking after the regulatory reforms – business as 
usual? 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the Highlevel 
Expert  Group  on  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  at  the  Bank  of  Finland  SUERF 
Conference, Helsinki, 13 June 2013. 
 Slides (PPT) 
Slides (PDF) 
On the size and structure of the banking sector 
[Page 1: On the size and structure of the banking sector] 
Research findings 
Before  the  financial  crisis,  the  consensus  view  from  the  finance  and  growth  research  was 
that financial development not only follows economic growth but contributes to it.1 
However, after the financial crisis, the other side of the financial sector growth has received 
increasing attention. 
Now it is recognised that before the crisis, the financial sector had grown to quite massive 
proportions in many countries. And at the same time, the sector had become more and more 
concentrated as the biggest institutions had increased their market share. 
[Page 2: Rapid growth in the EU banking sector] 
Let me start with the benign view of the financial sector expansion, and the emergence of 
increasingly large banks, that prevailed before the crisis. 
The  main  point  in  the  benign  story  is  that  growth  of  the  financial  sector  improves  overall 
economic growth opportunities by mobilising resources to finance investment projects and by 
facilitating risk management.2 The key assumption is that a well developed financial system 
helps  allocate  productive  resources  more  efficiently,  both  by  channelling  funds  to  growth 
sectors and by pulling resources from declining ones. 
At the level of individual financial institutions, the growth of bank balance sheets was seen as 
reflecting  increasing returns  to  scale  and  scope from  combining  a  wide  variety  of financial 
services and providing them also cross-border to internationally active clients. 
However, the events of the financial crisis have led us to also consider the malign diagnosis 
of the massive size of the financial sector and of the single financial institutions that dominate 
the banking sector. 
Some recent research at the BIS suggests that finance does indeed contribute to economic 
growth  but  only  up  to  a  point.3  A  too  large  financial  sector  may  imply  too  high  risk-taking, 
which results from over-investment and too much leverage in some sectors of the economy, 
typically the real estate related sector. This increases the frequency of crises which involve 
                                                
1   Levine (2005), Finance and growth: Theory and evidence, in Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Aghion 
and Durlauf 
2   King and Levine (1993), Finance and growth, Schumpeter might be right, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108; 
King and Levine (1993), Finance, entrepreneurship and growth, Journal of Monetary Economics 32 
3   Cecchetti and Kharoubi (2012), Reassessing the impact of finance on growth, BIS Working Paper 381 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
heavy output losses. Moreover, returns to scale may have accrued to bankers in the form of 
high  compensation  rather  than  to  the  stakeholders  with  “skin  in  the  game”,  i.e.  a  bank’s 
owners.4  A  too  large  and  a  very  well  paid  financial  sector  may  also  have  deprived  other 
sectors of some of the most productive human resources.5 
What makes the financial sector grow too big? 
Researchers  have  suggested  reasons  ranging  from  banks’  failure  to  internalize  systemic 
risks that stem from growth of leverage and ballooning balance sheets to rent-extraction in 
opaque OTC markets.6 
However,  the  most  natural  explanation  may  be  the  explicit  and  implicit  public  guarantees 
which have led to lower funding costs to the largest institutions which the markets expect to 
be too-big-to-fail. 
Pursuing such a status in the eyes of the market, and the ensuing cheaper funding, can give 
a  strong  incentive  to  grow.  Given  the  size  of  the  largest  banks’  balance  sheets,  even  a 
relatively small advantage in the funding spread means a big hidden flow of subsidy from the 
taxpayers to those banks.7 
Recent research suggests that the increasing returns to scale in banking, beyond a certain 
size range, may largely result from the cheaper funding costs of the presumedly too-big-to-
fail banks.8 An interesting aspect of the research is also that the social cost of too-big-to-fail 
banks,  due to  increased  systemic  risk,  appears to  be  significantly  higher  than  the  benefits 
from the economies of scale.9 
However, not only the size of the financial sector and that of the banks is important, but also 
what the sector actually does. 
In the run-up to the crisis there was a trend among the biggest banks to move their focus 
towards investment banking, including trading operations. 
[Page 3: Shifts in focus of operations as illustrated by shifts in assets structures] 
Part  of  this  trend  was  driven  by  the  growing  demand  by  corporate  customers  for  risk 
management  services.  To  a  significant  extent,  however,  the  growth  in  investment  banking 
activities was driven by the banks themselves in search for new revenue streams and higher 
profitability. In many banks the proportion of trading assets in the balance sheet increased 
substantially as securities and derivatives trading provided a relatively fast and flexible way 
to grow.10 
The  relative  importance  of  customer  loans  fell  over  time  and  the  importance  of  interbank 
lending  grew.  Moreover  the  customer  loan  business  was  transformed  as  many  banks 
particularly in the US moved away from the “originate and hold until maturity” model to the 
“originate and distribute” model where granted loans were pooled, then securitized, and sold 
                                                
4   Anderson and Joeveer (2012), Bankers and bank investors: reconsidering the economies of scale in banking, 
CEPR Discussion Paper 9146 
5   Philippon and Reshef (2012), Skilled biased financial development: Education, wages and occupations in the 
U.S. financial sector, NBER Working Paper Series 13437 
6   Stein (2012) and Bolton, Santos, and Scheinkman (2012), respectively 
7   Noss and Sowerbutts (2012), Bank of England FS Papers Series, FS Paper No 15 
8   Davies and Tracey (2012), Too big to be efficient? The impact of implicit funding subsidies on scale 
economies in banking, Bank of England mimeo 
9   Boyd and Heitz (2012), The social costs and benefits of too-big-to-fail banks: a 'bounding' exercise, University 
of Minnesota working paper, February 
10   Boot and Ratnovski (2012), Banking and trading, IMF Working Paper 12/238 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  investors,  including  European  banks.  Securitization  was  motivated  by  the  desire  to 
economize  on  capital  buffers,  but  it  turned  out  later  that  the  assumed  benefits  of 
diversification  were  vastly  outweighed  by  the  increasing  propensity  to  contagion.  The 
increasingly long and opaque chains of claims and the exposures to entities in the shadow 
banking system made banks and the financial sector as a whole vulnerable to shocks.11 
Big risks followed, also at the systemic level, as balance sheet growth was often matched 
with  dramatic  changes  in  the  liability  side  of  banks’  balance  sheet.  Firstly,  banks  became 
increasingly leveraged as the solvency rules allowed this to happen without a proportionate 
addition  of  fresh  capital.  This  was  particularly  true  in  the  case  of  capital  requirements  for 
market and counterparty risk. Furthermore, the more frequent use of internal models resulted 
in lower capital requirements. The loss absorption capacity weakened. Second, banks relied 
increasingly  on  short-term  wholesale  funding,  typically  from  the  repo  market,  which  made 
them  more  vulnerable  to  market  disruptions.  Thirdly,  the  rapid  balance  sheet  growth  also 
required more interbank financing, which resulted in more interconnectedness in the financial 
network, thus creating even more contagion channels.12 
[Page 4: Increased leverage as illustrated by shifts in funding structures] 
Another risk of a systemic nature is that diversification along similar lines can make financial 
institutions more alike by exposing them to the same risks.13 
And  indeed,  the  benefits  of  diversification  appear  to  have  been  offset  by  the  greater  risk 
banks  were  exposed  to  as  the  share  of  activities  outside  the  traditional  retail  banking 
operations was increasing.14 
Some  potential  benefits  of  diversification  may  also  have  been  lost  as  implementing  a 
diversification  strategy  is  a  big  managerial  challenge.15  It  is  particularly  challenging  in  a 
banking  group  because  of  the  differences  in  management  cultures  and  risk  profiles  of  the 
different entities. 
The challenge at hand is to reform the financial sector and banks towards a more healthy 
size and structure in order to redirect banking activities to support the society and the real 
sector in the best way possible. 
No one knows what the right size of the financial sector is, but what we can do is remove any 
perverse incentives which could lead to an excessive growth of the sector. For example, the 
safety  nets  needed  to  protect  depositors  must  not  lead  to  the  kind  of  moral  hazard  which 
would undermine the stability of the financial system and entire economies. 
How the HLEG proposals came about? 
In  the  High-level  Expert  Group  on  reforming  the  structure  of  the  EU  banking  sector,  we 
detailed the different phases of the crises, analysed the characteristics of the banking sector, 
and  identified  a  number  of  weaknesses  which  we  thought  the  ongoing  regulatory  reform 
would resolve only partially. 
                                                
11   Adrian and Shin (2010), The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007–09 
12   Shin (2010), Macroprudential policies beyond Basel III, Princeton University, policy memo 
13   Wagner  (2010),  Diversification  at 
institutions  and  systemic  crises,  Journal  of  Financial 
financial 
Intermediation 19 
14   Stiroh  and  Rumble  (2006),  The  dark  side  of  diversification:  the  case  of  US  financial  holding  companies, 
Journal of Banking & Finance 30; Mercieca et al. (2007), Small European banks: benefits from diversification? 
Journal of Banking & Finance 31  
15   Stiroh  (2004),  New  evidence  on  the  determinants  of  bank  risk.  Journal of  Financial  Services  Research  30; 
Acharya et al. (2006), Should banks be diversified? Evidence from individual bank loan portfolios. Journal of 
Business 79 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
[Page 5: Summary of the problems in the EU banking sector identified by HLEG] 
We  also  identified  strengths  that  needed  to  be  maintained  in  the  prospective  structural 
changes  of  European  banks.  For  example,  we  thought  it  would  be  very  important  to 
accommodate the diversity of business models of banks in the European market place. 
In  our  deliberations  we  considered  two  avenues  as  possible  ways  forward.  In  the  two 
avenues we put different emphasis on the most promising measures to end the too-big-to-fail 
problem; capital requirements, resolution regimes, and structural reform. 
[Page 6: Two avenues as possible ways forward were considered] 
In  the  first  avenue,  additional,  non-risk-weighted  capital  requirements  on  trading  activities 
and credible recovery and resolution plans for banks would have been the main instruments. 
We  acknowledged  that  the  measurement  of  risks  inherent  in  trading  assets  is  prone  to  a 
significant  “model  risk”.  Robust  capital  requirements  which  do  not  rely  on  complicated 
models are one way to tackle this issue (as are limits on risk concentrations and counterparty 
exposures). Avenue 1 was based on this approach. 
The  possibility  of  structural  measures  did  enter  Avenue  1,  but  only  as  a  conditional 
instrument. The idea was that if a bank was not able to prove that the required recovery and 
resolution  plans  were  credible,  separation  of  trading  activities  was  to  be  imposed  by 
authorities. 
In the second avenue, by contrast, any significant trading activities would be required to be 
separated  from  retail  deposit  banking.  The  separation  proposal  outlined  in  Avenue  2  was 
based  on  the  notion  that  capital  requirements  are  not  by  themselves  sufficient  to  limit 
excessive risk-taking incentives induced by deposit insurance if risks are difficult to measure 
and  risk  profiles  can  be  changed  rapidly,  as  in  trading  activities.  Avenue  2  also 
acknowledges the risk of heterogeneous application of tailor-made separation based on the 
credibility of the recovery and resolution plans of individual banks. Thus avenue 2 includes 
uniform separation ex ante in order to facilitate resolution of large and complex banks without 
public funds and hence reduce the too-big-to-fail problem. 
Further, a sufficiently broad separation of trading activities from deposit banking would avoid 
definitional  problems  which  would  arise,  for  example,  if  the  dividing  line  had  to  be  drawn 
between proprietary trading and market making. 
HLEG proposal for mandatory separation 
After a long discussion, where both avenues were supported, the group decided to propose 
mandatory  separation  (or  subsidiarisation  as  it  has  been  labelled  in  the  international 
discussion). 
[Page 7: The High-level Expert Group’s proposal for mandatory separation within a banking 
group] 
First,  the  group  wanted  to  limit  the  spill-over  of  the  benefits  from  the  deposit  guarantee 
system and any implicit government guarantees to certain trading activities of banks. Even 
though the deposit bank and the trading entity, to which the above mentioned activities are to 
be  separated,  could  operate  within  the  same  banking  group,  restrictions  on  transfers  and 
exposures between the separated entities are imposed. Moreover, the deposit bank and the 
trading  entity  are  to  stand  on  their  own  merits  also  in  terms  of  capitalisation  and  funding. 
Without separation, the explicit and implicit guarantees would distort the market mechanism 
and spur the deposit banks to unhealthy risk-taking and expansion in their trading activities. 
[Page 8: Rationale for mandatory separation] 
Second,  we  saw  the  need  to  simplify  the  structure  of  large,  complex  banks.  Reducing 
complexity  by  means  of  separation  facilitates  management.  Steering  effort  to  the  right 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
direction  by  means  of  incentive  schemes,  for  example,  is  easier  in  a  less  complex 
organisation,  where  the  organisational  units  are  more  homogeneous.  Separation  also 
facilitates  supervision  and  monitoring  by  outside  stakeholders  such  as  shareholders,  bank 
creditors and other market participants, thus reinforcing market discipline. Finally, separation 
makes it easier to impose recovery and resolution measures on failing banks. 
Hence,  simplification  of  the  structure  of  large,  complex  banks  by  means  of  separation 
facilitates  the  application  of  the  ongoing  regulatory  initiatives  in  the  area  of  corporate 
governance, disclosure procedures and the crucially important bank recovery and resolution 
framework. 
Of  particular  interest  is  naturally  whether  an  EU  wide  structural  reform  could  have 
implications for the functioning of the banking union currently under construction. First of all, I 
think  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the  simplification  of  the  large,  complex  European  banks  would 
facilitate  the  task  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  Secondly,  resolution  of  banks 
currently  seen  as  too-big-to-fail,  needs  to  become  a  credible  option,  whether  or  not  the 
responsibility for resolution lies on a national or European authority. Third, we saw the need 
to  shield  the  deposit  taking  bank  from  excessive  risk-taking  in  trading  activity  and  from 
exposures to entities in the shadow banking system. 
Fourth,  we  emphasised  the  need  to  strengthen  the  governance  of  banks  by  altering  the 
management culture. Separating retail banking and trading activity would reduce the mixing 
of  two  very  different management  cultures. They  are  intrinsically  different  in  the customer-
based deposit and commercial banking field and in the “transaction-based” trading activities. 
In  the  former,  the  relevant  horizon  is  long  and  the  role  of  the  customer  relationships  is 
essential.  The  latter  has  a  different  logic  –  that  of  beating  the  market  and  collecting 
transaction fees. Profits often come from counterparts instead of customers. 
The choice of where to draw the line between the deposit bank and the trading entity was 
aimed  so  as  to  enable  banks  to  service  the  real  economy  in  the  best  way  possible.  We 
concluded  that  allowing  the  deposit  bank  to  provide  non-banking  clients  with  customer-
initiated hedging services with basic instruments such as forex and interest rate futures and 
swaps as well as to undertake securities underwriting for them would leave sufficient room 
for deposit banks to service corporate customers and thus fulfil their role in financing the real 
economy. 
Moreover, while seeking to correct the problems which result from the mixing of trading with 
deposit banking, we wanted to preserve the universal banking model at group level. Hence, 
we would allow the separated entities to operate under the same roof. This would keep the 
trading units within the supervisory umbrella of the bank supervisors. It would also be less 
disruptive  of  the  European  banking  market  than  a  complete  forced  divestment  of  certain 
trading activities and would allow “one–stop banking” to continue where it is to the benefit of 
customers. 
Our work was facilitated by the structural proposals which had been previously made in the 
US and the UK. The general orientation of all three proposals – the American Volcker rule, 
the British Independent Commission on Banking (Vickers) proposal, which is taken forward in 
the  form  of  draft  legislation,  and  our  proposal  is  similar.  However,  they  do  differ  in  some 
respects. 
[Page 9: Comparison of suggested structural reforms] 
The Volcker rule is the most narrow, but also most radical in that it targets mainly proprietary 
trading, and requires of banking groups to wholly divest their proprietary trading activities – 
they cannot be continued even in separate subsidiaries of banking groups. The Vickers and 
High-level  Expert  Group  proposals  are  wider  in  scope,  seeking  to  regulate  more  trading 
activities than the Volcker rule, but are in a sense less radical in the implementation of the 
separation as they allow separation in the form of subsidiarisation within the banking group. 
However, the UK government has proposed to give authorities reserve powers to call for full 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
separation,  meaning  disallowing  even  the  group  structure,  in case  banks  try  to  circumvent 
the ring-fence. 
The EU High-level group wants to separate not only proprietary trading in the narrow sense, 
but  also  market  making.  So,  avoiding  the  difficult  segregation  of  proprietary  trading  and 
market making is one way our proposal differs from the Volcker Rule. Our proposal prevents 
market making to become a way to circumvent the prohibition of proprietary position-taking in 
securities market. 
The  treatment  of  market  making  in  structural  regulation  has  become  a  point  of  some 
controversy. In addition to the problem of circumvention, the debate concerns a question of 
principle: is there some market failure in the supply of liquidity through market making, which 
justifies use of insured deposits to fund the market making inventory? It is not at all obvious 
that there is. 
When comparing our proposal with the proposal to be implemented in the UK, one can say 
that  the  proposals  started  from  different  directions.  The  Vickers  proposal  started  from  the 
narrow banking philosophy and sought to restrict the use of those funds. We on the other 
hand focused on the most volatile parts of banking business and sought to cordon off those 
so  as  to  protect  the  traditional  universal  banking  model,  as  we  used  to  know  it,  from 
engaging in excessive risk-taking. The end results as to where the line is drawn between the 
entities to be separated are, however, not totally different. 
The main difference in where the line between the separated entities is to be drawn is that 
we  would allow the deposit bank to engage in securities underwriting whereas this activity 
would be separated in the UK. As I already mentioned, our solution is based on the view that 
underwriting is closely connected with corporate finance. 
About half a year ago the French and German governments published national proposals for 
structural reform in the banking sectors of those countries. These initiatives can be seen as 
adaptations of our proposal as they apply the same “subsidiarisation” model. The activities to 
be  separated  are  somewhat  narrower  as  proprietary  trading  would  to  be  separated  to  the 
trading entity, but not market making. However, there would be supervisory powers to limit 
the open positions taken in the course of market making. 
During last spring, structural reforms were put on the agenda of the international regulatory 
community. The issue has been discussed both at the Bank for International Settlements and 
at the International Monetary Fund.16 Simultaneously, the European Commission has worked 
on  an  impact  assessment  and  recently  launched  a  consultation  where  two  alternative 
scenarios for structural reform in EU are to be assessed by the banks; one scenario is close 
to our proposal while the other is somewhat broader both in terms of its scope and the depth 
of the gorge between the entities to be separated.17 
[Page 10: Structural reform on the agenda of the international regulatory community] 
On the other HLEG proposals 
Now let me continue with a few words on the rest of our proposals. 
[Page 11: The five proposals of the High-level Expert Group] 
                                                
16   Gambacorta  and  van  Rixtel  (2013),  Structural  bank  regulation  initiatives:  approaches  and  implications.  BIS 
Working  Paper  412.  Vinals  et  al.  (2013),  Act  local  but think  global:  Can  the  Volcker,  Vickers,  and  Liikanen 
structural measures create a safer financial system? IMF Staff Discussion Note 13/4. 
17   European Commission (2013) Consultation by the Commission on the structural reform of the banking sector 
(http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/2013/banking-structural-reform);  See 
also  European 
Financial Stability and Integration Report 2012, April 2013, for further detail on the background to the impact 
assessment done by the Commission. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  proposal  for  an  additional  separation  requirement  supports  the  goal  that  supervisors 
should  have  effective  tools  to  make  sure  that  banks’  recovery  and  resolution  plans  can 
actually  work.  If  supervisors  see  that  banks  try  to  test  the  separating  line,  say,  between 
proprietary  trading  and  the  permitted  parts  of  market  making,  hence  also  endangering  the 
resolution and recovery plans, a more far-reaching separation of trading activities could be 
imposed  on  such  banks.  In  the  group  we  highlighted  the  importance  of  the  European 
Banking  Authority’s  (EBA)  role  in  ensuring  that  the  recovery  and  resolution  plans  and  the 
integral resolvability assessments are applied uniformly across Member States. 
Our analysis of capital requirements was also reflected in our final recommendations. Here 
we acknowledged the important work done by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
in reviewing the trading book capital requirements. Moreover, we highlighted the importance 
of the evaluation of the capital requirements on real estate related lending, an issue which is 
currently on the agenda of for example EBA. 
Investor bail-in lies at the core of tackling the too-big-to-fail problem as it improves the loss 
absorbency of banks, ensures that investors rather than taxpayers take on the responsibility 
for  losses  in  the  face  of  resolution,  and  further  enhances  creditors’  incentives  to  monitor 
banks.  In  the  High-level  Expert  Group  we  foresaw  a  two  tier  system  for  the  bailing  in  of 
investors in bank debt. 
The bail-in process which was outlined by the Commission in the proposed Bank Recovery 
and Resolution Directive plays a key role in facilitating orderly restructuring or winding-up of 
banks without the prolonged bankruptcy proceedings. We proposed that there would be an 
additional  layer  of  designated  bail-in  instruments  to  further  improve  the  loss-absorption 
capacity  of  banks. We  believed  that  this  would  best  combine  loss  absorbency  and  market 
discipline with legal certainty and the stability of markets. The designated bail-in instruments 
would  have  clear  pre-specified  terms  and  holding  restrictions  which  would  prevent  other 
banks from holding these debt instruments. The holding restrictions would reduce the risk of 
contagion within the banking sector and thus constrain the fear of triggering a systemic crisis 
at the time of a capital conversion or a write-down. 
In addition, we proposed that the governance and control of banks ought to be strengthened 
further. Particular attention ought to be given to the ability of management and boards to run 
large  and  complex  banks,  the  powers  of  the  risk  management  function  and  the  quality, 
comparability  and  transparency  of  risk  disclosure,  the  possibility  to  use  designated  bail-in 
instruments in remuneration schemes, and the appropriateness of imposing caps on variable 
as well as overall compensation. We also saw the need to enhance the sanctioning powers 
of supervisors so as to ensure enforcement of risk management responsibilities. 
How the HLEG proposals address the malign diagnosis of the size and structure of the 
banking sector 
Subsidiarisation of trading facilitates resolution by making bail-in rather than bail-out a more 
credible  option.  The  recommendation  that  banks  should  have  a  layer  of  designated  bail-in 
instruments further supports the aim of making bank bail-out at taxpayers’ risk only a rare 
exception. Only functions that are essential to the functioning of the society, i.e. the deposit 
taking  and  payment  system,  would  benefit  from  a  government  guarantee.  As  a  result,  the 
separated trading activities will be funded from the market at a price better reflecting the true 
riskiness of the operations. This is expected to restrain incentives for excessive growth and 
risk taking in the trading entity. 
The recommendations will  not  only  have  an  impact  on the size  of  the financial  sector,  but 
also on what kind of operations there will be. First of all the proposals reduce the distorted 
incentives  which  endangers  socially  optimal  allocation  of  resources.  For  example,  as  the 
subsidy  of  the  implicit  government  guarantee  is  reduced,  competition  particularly  in  the 
trading  activity  is  revitalised,  which  will  improve  the  allocation  of  funds  in  the  economy. 
Moreover, separation restricts banks with insured deposits from engaging in high-risk trading 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
activities which are not essential to deposit banking. The efforts of the deposit bank are thus 
expected to be redirected towards servicing the needs of households and SMEs better. 
The  interconnectedness  within  the  banking  sector  and  thus  the  complexity  of  the  financial 
sector will be affected too. As intra-group financing and transfers of capital or risks between 
the  deposit  bank  and  the  trading  entity  will  be  limited,  there  will  be  fewer  channels  of 
contagion.  Further,  limits  on  trading  activities  will  reduce  the  counterparty  risks  of  deposit 
banks. There is, however, need for further research on financial networks, focusing on the 
effects of structural reform. These issues are notoriously difficult to measure. So we need to 
know  more  about  how  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system  can  be  monitored  and 
effectively reduced. 
And, finally, the recommendations will have an impact on how banking business is conducted 
in the future. The primary aim is to shift the focus from short to long term, which is more in 
line  with the interests of the real economy and society. I would also like to  emphasise the 
importance  of  eliminating  the  presumption  that  profits  are  private,  but  downside  risks  are 
public. In the future risk-takers will also have to take into account the potential losses from 
their bets. 
Efficient market discipline as well as active and timely supervision must help ensure that the 
financial  sector  and  banks  in  particular  find  a  more  healthy  size  and  structure.  Our 
recommendations seek to facilitate this task. Simpler structures will make it easier for both 
investors and supervisors to monitor banks. Moreover, the recommendation to improve the 
quality,  comparability  and  transparency  of  risk  reporting  will  further  facilitate  monitoring  of 
banks. Our recommendations for separation not only facilitate monitoring by supervisors, but 
the additional layer of designated bail-in instruments which we propose should also increase 
large creditors’ incentives to monitor banks and thereby improve market discipline. 
Concluding remarks 
As  major  regulatory  reforms  are  planned  after  the  crisis,  it  is  important  to  take  in  account 
what research has to say. I have emphasized the increased attention paid to incentives and 
risk taking. Before the crisis the consensus view held, with some qualifications, that growth in 
finance  promotes  economic  growth.  After  the  crisis,  the  possibility  that  the  financial  sector 
can  also  grow  too  big  has  been  taken  more  seriously.  Accelerated  growth  of  the  financial 
sector may indicate a looming crisis. Therefore restrictions may be needed, and we need to 
make sure that distorted incentives within the financial sector are minimized. Improving the 
quality of finance continues to be a key priority in promoting sustainable economic growth. 
Structural  reforms  of  banking  should  support  these  aims  by  helping  to  weed  out  distorted 
incentives from finance. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
