Haruhiko Kuroda: The Bank of Japan’s Semiannual Report on Currency 
and Monetary Control 
Statement by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, before the Committee on 
Financial Affairs, House of Representatives, Tokyo, 26 March 2013. 
 Introduction 
The  Bank  of  Japan  submits  to  the  Diet  its  Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary 
Control in June and December. Most recently, the Bank submitted the report for the first half 
of  fiscal  2012  on  December  7,  2012.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  talk  about 
recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and  present  an  overall  review  of  the  Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
I. 
First, I will explain economic and financial developments in Japan. 
Japan’s  economy  has  remained  relatively  weak  since  summer  2012  mainly  against  the 
background  of  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies,  but  some  positive  signs  have 
recently  been  observed.  The  Bank  currently  assesses  that  the  economy  has  stopped 
weakening. Three factors can be pointed out as underlying developments behind this change 
in the economic situation. 
First, overseas economies – the U.S. and Chinese economies in particular – have begun to 
show  signs  of  emerging  from  their  deceleration  phase.  The  U.S.  economy  has  been  on  a 
moderate recovery trend with increasing firmness, while the balance-sheet repair weighing 
on  the  economy  has  gradually  been  mitigated.  Private  consumption  has  been  increasing 
moderately  and  housing  investment  has  been  showing  clear  signs  of  picking  up,  as  the 
employment situation follows an improving trend. Business fixed investment, which had been 
constrained, shows signs of picking up. The Chinese economy, albeit with some fluctuations 
in exports, appears to be emerging from its deceleration phase supported by firm domestic 
demand,  with  firmness  in  private  consumption  and  rises  in  infrastructure  investment. 
Meanwhile,  economic  activity  in  Europe  continues  to  recede  slowly  as  business  fixed 
investment  and  private consumption  have  been  declining  partly  due  to the  effects  of fiscal 
austerity and the tightening of financial conditions, although further deterioration in business 
and household sentiment is coming to a halt. 
Second, business and household sentiment has been improving mainly on the back of the 
recent  depreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  rise  in  stock  prices.  In  global  financial  markets, 
investors’  risk  aversion  remains  abated,  partly  due  to  progress  made  in  policy  responses 
regarding the European debt problem since last summer and to the fact that the U.S. “fiscal 
cliff”  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  was  avoided.  Nevertheless,  developments  including  the 
situation  surrounding  the  European  debt  problem  –  particularly  discussions  on  the  support 
package  for  Cyprus  and  developments  in  Italy  following  the  general  election  –  require 
continued attention. 
Third,  factors  that  had  been  exerting  downward  pressure  on  the  economy,  such  as  the 
effects  of  the  decline  in  car  sales  due  to  the  ending  of  subsidies  for  purchasers  of 
environmentally  friendly  cars  and  the  effects  of  the  recent  bilateral  relationship  between 
Japan and China, have fallen off or diminished. 
Under  these  circumstances,  exports  appear  to stop  decreasing.  Business fixed  investment 
has  shown  some  weakness  on  the  whole,  although  resilience  has  been  observed  in 
nonmanufacturing.  In  contrast,  public  investment  has  continued  to  increase,  and  housing 
investment  has  generally  been  picking  up.  Private  consumption  has  remained  resilient, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
supported  mainly  by  demand  from  the  elderly.  Reflecting  these  developments  in  demand 
both at home and abroad, industrial production has stopped decreasing. 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  the  pick-up  in  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  become  more 
evident around mid-2013, mainly against the background that domestic demand remains firm 
partly owing to the steady implementation of various economic measures and that overseas 
economies gradually emerge from the deceleration phase. 
Financial  conditions  in  Japan  are  accommodative.  In  terms  of  interest  rates,  the  overnight 
call rate has remained at an extremely low level, and firms’ funding costs have been hovering 
at low levels. With regard to credit supply, firms have continued to see financial institutions’ 
lending  attitudes  as  being  on  an  improving  trend.  Issuing  conditions  for  CP  and  corporate 
bonds have remained favorable on the whole. As for credit demand, firms have shown signs 
of  increasing  their  demand  mainly  for  working  capital  and  funds  related  to  mergers  and 
acquisitions. In these circumstances, firms have retained their recovered financial positions 
on the whole. 
On  the  price  front,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  all 
items less fresh food) is around 0 percent. For the next few months, it is expected to turn 
negative due to the reversal of the previous year’s movements in energy-related and durable 
consumer  goods.  Thereafter,  however,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is 
expected to start a moderate increasing trend as the aggregate supply and demand balance 
continues a moderate improving trend with Japan’s economy on a moderate recovery path. 
There  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  concerning  Japan’s  economy,  including  the 
prospects  for  the  European  debt  problem,  the  momentum  toward  recovery  for  the  U.S. 
economy, the possibility of emerging and commodity-exporting economies making a smooth 
transition to the sustainable growth path, and the effects of the recent bilateral relationship 
between Japan and China. Recent developments in financial markets appear to assume that 
the  global  economy  will  emerge  from  the  deceleration  phase  and  pick  up.  The  Bank  will 
continue to carefully examine whether the uncertain factors surrounding the global economy 
will be dispelled smoothly. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
Next, I will explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
Japan’s  economy  has  suffered from  deflation for  nearly  15  years.  This  is  an  extraordinary 
situation even on a global scale. A vicious cycle – where a decline in prices causes wages 
and profits to contract, thereby reducing investment and consumption, consequently leading 
to  a  further  decline  in  prices  –  has  been  causing  a  deterioration  in  Japan’s  economy. 
Overcoming  deflation  at  the  earliest  possible  time  is  the  most  critical  issue  facing  Japan’s 
economy. 
Ensuring  price  stability  is  the  mandate  of  the  central  bank,  and  the  role  of  the  Bank  in 
overcoming  deflation  is  extremely  important.  The  Bank  has  engaged  in  a  wide  range  of 
efforts – from implementing the zero interest rate policy and the quantitative easing policy, to 
pursuing monetary easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial 
market stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth in 
more recent years – but fallen short of overcoming deflation. There are many factors – both 
at home and abroad – exerting downward pressure on prices in Japan: an increase in cheap 
imports from overseas, increased distribution efficiency mainly due to deregulation, and the 
consequent  low-price  strategies  of  firms  as  well  as  an  increased  preference  among 
households  for  low  prices.  Notwithstanding  these  factors,  it  is  the  Bank’s  mandate  as  the 
central bank to achieve  price stability by addressing them. Indeed, no other country in the 
world  is  undergoing  such  a  prolonged  period  of  deflation. The government  announced, for 
overcoming  deflation  and  achieving  economic  revitalization,  a  “three-pronged  strategy”  – 
consisting  of  bold  monetary  policy,  flexible  fiscal  policy,  and  a  growth  strategy  that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
encouraged  private  sector  investment  –  and  swiftly  undertook  responses  including  the 
emergency  economic  measures.  An  upturn  in  stock  prices  was  recently  observed,  as  a 
positive response to such efforts and in expectation of an economic recovery. 
Of  particular  significance  is  the  joint  statement  released  this  January,  in  which  the 
government  and  the  Bank  clearly  set  their  respective  tasks  and  announced  their 
determination  to  accomplish  those  tasks  with  responsibility.  This  marks  a  significant  step 
toward  overcoming  deflation  and  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  Bank 
introduced a “price stability target” of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the  CPI,  and  decided that  under  the  price  stability  target  it  would  pursue  monetary  easing 
and  aim  to  achieve  this  target  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  The  Bank  believes  that  the 
achievement of this target, without delay, is its mission of utmost importance. 
So far the Bank – with a view to overcoming deflation – has been purchasing a variety of 
assets  such  as  sovereign  debt  as  well  as  corporate  bonds,  CP,  exchange-traded  funds 
(ETFs),  and  real  estate  investment  trusts  (REITs).  While  such  purchases  go  beyond  the 
domain of traditional central bank operations, the scale and type of assets to be purchased 
have not been sufficient to materialize a strong commitment to achieving 2 percent inflation 
at  the  earliest  possible  time.  We  need  to  pursue  bold  monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of 
quantity and quality. 
Moreover, given that there is little room for the interest rate to decline, it is imperative to work 
on market expectations in the conduct of monetary policy. Through communication with the 
market, we need to make clear that we have adopted the uncompromising stance that we will 
do whatever is necessary to overcome deflation. 
Furthermore,  ensuring  cooperation  with  the  government  is  also  important.  The  effect  of 
monetary  policy  will  be  reinforced  by  maintaining  consistency  with  the  government’s 
economic  policies.  According  to  the  joint  statement  released  by  the  government  and  the 
Bank, they will strengthen their policy coordination and work together in order to overcome 
deflation early and achieve sustainable economic growth with price stability. The government 
will flexibly manage fiscal policy, formulate measures to strengthen the growth potential and 
competitiveness  of  Japan’s  economy,  and  promote  measures  aimed  at  achieving  fiscal 
consolidation in the medium to long term. For its part, the Bank will on its own responsibility 
pursue  monetary  easing  with  a  view  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  at  the  earliest 
possible  time.  Parallel  to  monetary  easing,  if the  government  can  take  initiatives  to  create 
real  demand  and  improve  wages  and  employment  through  the  expansion  of  consumption 
and  investment,  this  is  expected  to  contribute  to  generating  a  virtuous  cycle  that  will 
eventually  lead  to  price  increases.  To  avoid  an  increase  in  interest  rates  on  the  back  of 
declining  confidence  in fiscal  management,  it  is also  important  to take measures  aimed  at 
achieving fiscal consolidation in the medium to long term. We expect the government to take 
appropriate actions in line with the joint statement. 
For  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  we  will  continue  to  examine  the  most  effective 
policy  measures,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meetings,  by  making  full  use  of  the  Bank’s 
resources,  while  assessing  the  effect  on  the  market  through  the  examination  of  economic 
and price developments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
