Lim Hng Kiang: Assessing the global megatrends that will impact 
Singapore’s future 
Speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Credit  Suisse  Global  Megatrends  Conference, 
Sentosa Cove, 17 January 2013. 
 Ambassador David Adelman, US Ambassador to Singapore 
Lito Camacho, Vice Chairman Asia Pacific and Country CEO, Singapore 
Francesco de Ferrari, Head of Private Banking, Asia Pacific 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Good  morning.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  join  you  at  Credit  Suisse’s  first  Global  Megatrends 
Conference. It is fitting to hold this conference in Singapore. As a small, open economy in the 
heart of Asia, we have always been acutely conscious of global trends and developments. 
Our  attitude  has  always  been  that  we  are  too  small  to  influence  global  developments  and 
events. We are a price taker. What we can do is align Singapore’s position in anticipation of 
the major trends and be nimble enough to ride through short term volatility. So I am happy to 
share  with  you  our  assessments  of  the  global  megatrends  that  will  impact  our  future;  and 
how Singapore is positioning itself to take advantage of these trends. Let me highlight a few. 
Asia’s growing importance and economic integration 
Asia  will  continue  to  thrive,  driven  by  Asian  consumption,  to  become  a key  pillar  of global 
demand. China already accounts for a quarter of the world’s demand for luxury goods. As 
China’s consumption increases, its rising import demand will have a positive impact on Asia 
and  on  the  rest  of  the  world.  Besides  China,  India’s  middle  class  is  estimated  to  grow  to 
almost 600 million people by 2025, and almost 60% of Indonesian households, in a country 
of 240 million people, are expected to reach middle-class status by 2020. 
The Asian Development Bank projects that, by the middle of the century, Asia will account for 
more than half of global GDP and will own half of the world’s financial assets and financial 
institutions. I’m sure all of you are cautious about long-term extrapolations, but this projection 
is one of many which are reflective of the optimism and growth potential that we see not just 
in China, but Indonesia and other Southeast Asian countries. 
As these countries in Asia power ahead, they will drive further economic integration within 
this  region.  PricewaterhouseCoopers’  “Future  of  World  Trade”  study  describes  how  new 
trade corridors will form within Asia as a result of this integration. 
In  1990,  20  years  ago, the  developed  economies  dominated the  world  trade map.  Europe 
was responsible for over half of the world’s exports, although these were mainly intra-Europe 
flows.  In  2010,  this  map  has  changed  with  the  global  shift  in  manufacturing  to  Asia,  with 
China accounting for 9 out of the top 25 bilateral trade routes by value. 
By 2030, 20 years from now, the centre of gravity of global trade patterns is projected to shift 
even  further  to  within  Asia,  with  China  accounting  for  17  out  of  the  top  25  bilateral  trade 
routes, overtaking trade links between developed countries like Japan-USA, Germany-USA 
that will grow but they will grow much more slowly. 
Within Asia, trade patterns will evolve. With increasing urbanisation and consumer demand, 
China’s trade with developed Asia, will change. It will start to import relatively more finished 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
consumer goods from Japan, Korea and Singapore. These bilateral trade routes are not new, 
but they will rise in importance. 
China’s trade with developing Asia, particularly with Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, will 
propel these bilateral trade routes into the top 25 bilateral trade routes by 2030. Indonesia in 
particular,  with  low  wage  costs  and  proximity  to  China,  is  well  placed  to  become  the  next 
manufacturing hub and sell low-end manufactured products back to the Chinese. 
The shift in centre of gravity of world trade to Asia is more than a China story. As developing 
Asian economies become wealthier, they will consume more and trade more with each other. 
For example, bilateral trade between Thailand and Indonesia is projected to be almost five 
times as high in 2030 as it was in 2009. 
To support this Asian integration, countries in Asia have already come together on regional 
platforms to foster greater openness and cooperation. For example, ASEAN has concluded 
Free  Trade  Agreements  (FTAs)  with  Australia,  New  Zealand,  China,  Korea,  Japan,  and 
India.  The  ASEAN-China  FTA  alone  covers  over  1.9  billion  consumers  and  an  estimated 
trade  volume  of  US$1.2  trillion.  As  Asia  grows  and  comes  together  economically,  global 
companies that aim to have a share of the pie will have to develop strategies and production 
models that are customised for Asia. 
Singapore exists at the confluence of these emerging trade routes within Asia and as well as 
between Asia and other regions. We have positioned ourselves as Global-Asia hub to take 
advantage  of  Asia’s  growth.  Our  strategic  location  and  affinity  with  other  Asian  countries 
made us the location of choice for companies from the West to grow in Asia. In 2011, IBM 
Services  set  up  an  Integration  hub  here.  GlaxoSmithKline  too  has  set  up  their  Emerging 
Markets & Asia Pacific HQ here to serve the Asian market. 
At  the  same  time,  Asian  companies  expanding  globally  often  opt  for  Singapore  as  their 
international  base. Tata Communications from India  has  its  HQ  in  Singapore,  as  do many 
Chinese  companies.  To  aid  these  efforts,  Singapore  has  initiatives  to  attract  and  develop 
talent that can thrive globally. For example, in 2010 we set up the Human Capital Leadership 
Institute to bring talent together to interact with one another and to prepare for the future. 
Urbanisation and sustainability 
Second, sustainability challenges will loom larger as the growth of the global economy puts 
more stress on the environment. More than half of the global population already live in cities. 
There are 23 megacities today; and it is projected that this number will double by 2030. Most 
of these new megacities will be in South and East Asia. OECD estimates that more than half 
of the infrastructure needed by 2030 has not been built yet. 
Growing cities will need to simultaneously deal with the problems of scarce resources and 
climate  change.  Even  developed  countries  can  be  vulnerable  to  extreme  climate  changes. 
Hurricane  Sandy  left  a  quarter  of  New  York  City’s  population  without  electricity,  and  shut 
down vital transport infrastructure including all 3 airports and all subway lines. 
Whether or not a global agreement on mitigating the effects of climate change is reached or 
not,  there  will  be  tremendous  business  opportunities  for  companies  that  can  provide 
solutions to address the challenges of resource efficiency and to back up vulnerable systems 
and infrastructure. Innovative urban solutions and investments in infrastructure R&D will be 
sorely needed. 
As an early adopter of sustainable development strategies, Singapore is happy to share our 
experience  learnt  from  sustainable  growth  strategies.  The  annual  World  Cities  Summit, 
hosted in Singapore, serves as a platform for the exchange of leading-edge ideas on building 
liveable and sustainable cities. 
Beyond  the  exchange  of  ideas,  Singapore  is  pushing  the  boundaries  in  sustainability 
research.  Two  National 
Innovation  Challenge  programmes  are  currently  on-going, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
addressing  the  themes  of  1)  Energy  Resilience  for  Sustainable  Growth  and  2)  Land  and 
Liveability.  These  research  programmes  will  lead  to  solutions  that  seek  to  overcome 
Singapore’s constraints in energy and land arising from our small size and limited resources. 
More importantly, the outcomes from these programmes can contribute to addressing some 
of the global challenges in urban development and the growth of megacities, both within Asia 
as well as in other parts of the world. 
Demographics 
Third,  uneven  global  demographics  will  present  countries  with  both  challenges  and 
opportunities.  Developing  countries  with  young  and  growing  workforces  will  face  the 
challenges of creating enough jobs and investing adequately in infrastructure, industry and 
institutions. If they succeed, they will be able to reap their “demographic dividend” and grow 
rapidly into middle-income economies. 
If they fail, high unemployment will cause increasing restlessness and agitation for political 
change and revolution. The International Labour Organization, in its “Global Trends for Youth 
Employment 2012” report, attributed the Arab Spring protests partly to high levels of youth 
unemployment.  Such  instability  could  similarly  affect  other  countries,  and  a  demographic 
dividend could turn into a demographic curse. 
At the other end of the spectrum, many advanced economies are experiencing rapidly ageing 
populations. Decades of low birth rates coupled with affluence and access to medical care 
and nutrition mean that the elderly live much longer even as fewer babies are born. Even as 
life  expectancy  in  the  EU  and  North  America  increased,  the  average  retirement  age  has 
fallen from 68 to 63 (from 1970 to 2010). The state will find difficulty financing the increased 
public  expenditure  on  healthcare  and  pension  systems  given  shrinking  populations  of 
working adults, falling tax revenues and high dependency ratios. 
In order to remain competitive, these advanced economies have 2 options. They can choose 
to  augment  their  population  through  the  import  of  young  labour  or  global  talent.  This  path 
leads  to  challenges  in  cultural  integration.  The  alternative  is  for  these  countries  to 
compensate for a stagnant and aging workforce with the deployment of technology. Japan 
and  Korea  are  the  best  examples,  relying  on  an  increasing  level  of  automation  and 
sophisticated robotics. 
As demographics change, so too will consumer demands. Singapore is positioning itself to 
attract  companies  to  monitor  and  understand  these  changes  within  Asia.  The  Singapore-
based Asian Consumer Insights Institute, launched in 2011, is helping companies to develop 
and  test-bed  Asian-specific  products  and  business  strategies.  In  2012,  Nielsen,  a  global 
provider of consumer insights, chose Singapore to launch an innovation hub. This hub, the 
first  of  its  kind  in  Asia,  will  develop  new  technologies  and  methodologies  in  neuroscience, 
shopper  technology,  and  measurement  science  to  enhance  consumer and  market  insights 
for companies working to reach consumers in Asia. 
Technology 
The final trend I’d like to talk about is that of technology. Technology, especially information 
technology,  continues  to  change  the  world  and  is  reshaping  the  social  compact  between 
states and citizens. According to IMS Research, the number of internet-connected devices 
has reached 9.6 billion. That is more than the number of people in the world today. 
This hyper-connectedness between citizens, corporations and the cities they live in will give 
rise  to  new  disruptions.  The  Arab  Spring  protests  for  example,  were  facilitated  by  the 
widespread  access  to  mobile  technologies.  Citizenry  today  are  able  to  quickly  organise 
themselves around special interests and put pressure on governments and businesses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
But the digital revolution cuts both ways. Always-connected users leave data trails that make 
them easier to track and to be analysed, and many corporations now have more access to 
citizens’ personal data than do the governments. Last year, Facebook worked with the FBI to 
bring  down  an  international  cybercrime  gang  responsible  for  more  than  US$850  million  in 
damages  to  computer  networks.  Power  dynamics  are  changing  and  traditional  state 
institutions  will  need  to  share  power  and  evolve  new  modes  of  cooperation  with  such 
companies. 
Even  so,  the  trend  of  more  data  and  greater  openness  will  continue.  There  are  good 
examples of how governments are leveraging technology in Asia. The Korean government is 
working with networking giant Cisco to build the world’s first smart city by 2015. New Songdo 
City will occupy a manmade island and will incorporate millions of sensors and computers to 
monitor every aspect of the city’s operation. 
Recognising the enormous potential, Singapore tapped into the data revolution quite early in 
the  game.  As  an  example,  the  Data.gov.sg  initiative,  brings  together  5,000  data  sets from 
over  50  government  agencies,  and  makes  that  data  stats  available  to  the  public.  Our 
“Singapore  Real-Time”  vision  aims  to  grow  data  related  services  and  develop  the  data 
industry. In 2011, the MIT Senseable City Laboratory obtained a research grant to launch the 
“LIVE Singapore!” project. This project provides a platform to pool real-time information from 
several government agencies and to present them in visually compelling ways. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have sketched out several key trends which I believe will have the 
greatest impact on the world, and highlighted how Singapore is responding to these trends. 
The future landscape will not just be shaped by the flow of goods and money, but also by the 
flow of ideas. This conference is therefore a very useful platform to bring together thought 
leaders and successful individuals from the East and West, not just to discuss future trends, 
but to seed and drive the exchange of powerful, world-changing ideas. 
On this note, let me wish everyone a rich and exciting discussion at the conference today. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
