Malcolm Edey: The financial stability role of central bank 
Address by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the Thomson Reuters' Australian Regulatory Summit, Sydney, 1 May 2013. 
 I have chosen as my subject today the financial stability role of central banks. 
One of the consequences of the recent financial crisis has been a rediscovery, or at least a 
renewed appreciation, of that role. If we think back to the pre-crisis period, it seems fair to 
say  that  most  of  the  public  attention  given  to  central  banking  was  focused  on  the 
conventional monetary policy function – that is, the regular adjustment of interest rates for 
inflation control. 
Without in any way diminishing the importance of that function, it is certainly the case that the 
financial stability role of central banks has increased in prominence since the crisis. We can 
see that in several ways. Central banks played a crucial part in the initial crisis response by 
providing emergency liquidity support to institutions and markets under strain. In many cases 
they  held  direct  regulatory  responsibilities  for  dealing  with  troubled  institutions,  or  else 
cooperated closely with the agencies exercising those powers. And they have played a key 
advisory  role  in  helping  to  shape  the  post-crisis  regulatory  environment  around  the  world. 
During this period, governments in a number of jurisdictions have taken steps to strengthen 
the financial stability mandates of their central banks and in some cases have given them 
additional regulatory powers to that end. 
One commentator has gone so far as to say that the financial stability role of central banks 
has been rediscovered with a vengeance 1. I want to explore today what that might mean in 
practice. 
The first point to make is that the financial stability role of central banks is not new. In his 
book The Evolution of Central Banks  2 Charles Goodhart argues that financial stability was 
an original core function of central banks, arising from their unique position as lenders of last 
resort to the banking system. 
It is worth focusing briefly on the economic rationale for that role. It derives from the nature of 
banking  itself.  Banks  are  intermediaries  that  engage  in  credit  evaluation  and  maturity 
transformation in order to link borrowers and lenders. In doing so they perform a function that 
has  become  vital  to  the  modern  economy,  but  the  history  of  banking  shows  that,  without 
proper supporting arrangements, the system can be vulnerable to instability. One source of 
instability that became evident as banking systems developed was their vulnerability to runs 
and panics. Put simply, even a sound bank could be put at risk if it were forced to liquidate its 
assets in a panic, and the best defence against that was to give them access to a central 
source  of  liquidity  3.  Central  banks  evolved,  or  were  established  by  governments,  to  meet 
that need. 
Historically this role had important synergies with other central banking functions, and with 
other  aspects  of  what  we  now  call  financial  stability  policy.  Under  the  gold  standard,  the 
lender of last resort (and the related liquidity management) functions were closely intertwined 
                                                
1   Buiter (2012), The role of central banks in financial stability: how has it changed? CEPR Discussion Paper 
Series No. 8780. 
2   Goodhart  (1988),  The  Evolution  of  Central  Banks,  MIT  Press. For a  more  recent  discussion,  see  Goodhart 
(2010), The Changing Role of Central Banks, BIS working paper 326, http:/www.bis.org/publ/work326.pdf 
3   By this I mean a last line of defence. I don't mean to imply that banks should not hold liquid resources of their 
own in the first instance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with the price stability objective. The gold standard was seen as a general discipline against 
inflation or deflation. Central banking actions to preserve the gold standard were therefore 
seen as both promoting price stability and also promoting the capacity of banks to meet their 
obligations – in other words, financial stability. 
Part of that general role involved managing monetary systems in a way that would reduce 
the risk of panic and instability in the first place. But it also meant applying Bagehot's famous 
principle that central banks should lend freely, at a penalty rate and on good collateral, in the 
event that a crisis occurred. The liquidity management role of central banks also led naturally 
to their engagement in other areas of financial stability policy, including exercising a degree 
of oversight of the banks that they were lending to. 
Obviously the world now is very different from what it was in Bagehot's day. We no longer 
have a gold standard, and financial systems are much more complex than they were then. 
But  I  began  with  that  background  in  order  to  emphasise  an  important  point  of  historical 
continuity.  Central  banks  retain  a  key  role  as  liquidity  providers  and  managers  today,  and 
these functions continue to have important synergies with other aspects of financial stability 
policy. 
How then should we think about financial stability policy in the modern environment, and how 
should we think about the central bank's role in particular? I want to provide some general 
thoughts on that question while acknowledging that this is not an area for simple answers. 
When economists talk about policy frameworks in a given field, they like to think in terms of a 
taxonomy that has (at least) the following main elements: 
• 
• 
• 
First, the objectives – what is the policy aiming to achieve? 
Second, the instruments – what are the tools available for achieving them? 
Third,  the  strategy  –  what  are  the  logical  processes  linking  the  instruments  to 
objectives? 
And  finally,  governance  –  who  are  the  decision  makers,  and  how  are  they  held 
accountable? 
 In the case of the monetary policy function of central banks these questions have been well 
studied,  and  there  is  by  now  a  well-established  consensus  as  to  what  constitutes  a  best 
practice framework, at least in general outline. It could be summarised as follows: 
• 
The objective is inflation control, possibly defined as a numerical target and possibly 
broadened to incorporate some element of business cycle stabilisation. 
The  policy  instrument  (in  conventional  circumstances)  is  the  short-term  interest 
rate4. 
The  strategy  could  be  modelled  as  something  like  what  economists  refer  to  as  a 
‘forward-looking Taylor rule’. This essentially says that the interest rate is adjusted to 
lean  against  fluctuations  in  output  and  inflation,  in  order  to  exert  a  stabilising 
influence on both. 
And the governance structure should involve the government setting the objective 
and  an  independent  central  bank  controlling  the  policy  instrument,  subject  to 
appropriate accountability. 
   Obviously  this  summary  glosses  over  a  vast  amount  of  detail,  but  in  concept  at  least  the 
framework is reasonably well studied and well accepted. 
For financial stability policy, the position is much more complex. 
                                                
4  
I leave aside here the question of ‘unconventional’ measures when interest rates are at or near zero. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  objective  might  be  defined  as  something  like  avoid  financial  instability,  or  perhaps 
slightly more scientifically, keep the risk of system-wide financial disruption acceptably low. 
These  things  of course can't  be readily  quantified,  at  least  at  the  level  of  the  system  as  a 
whole. There is no simple measure of system-wide financial risk, and the concept certainly 
can't  be  expressed  as  a  numerical  target  in  the  way  that  can  be  done  for  the  inflation 
objective. That doesn't mean, however, that the task is hopeless. We are better, I think, at 
identifying  particular  sources  of  risk,  like  excessive  leverage,  poor  credit  standards,  or 
leveraged asset booms, than we are at aggregating them or quantifying their likely systemic 
impacts. We do know financial instability when we see it, and we have a good idea of the 
kinds of behaviour that can contribute to it. The objective, then, is to manage these risks to 
an acceptable level. 
The second element is the set of policy instruments. Here again, the position is much more 
complicated  than  it  is  for  the  inflation  targeting  framework.  The  potential  instruments  of 
financial stability policy are many and varied. One component I have already mentioned: the 
central bank's role in liquidity management. Other instruments include the range of regulatory 
requirements  that  influence  risk  taking  in  the  financial  sector,  like  capital  and  liquidity 
standards.  These  are  what  might  be  termed  ‘structural’  prudential  instruments  aimed  at 
promoting a generally robust financial system. In addition there is a growing interest in the 
potential  use  of  ‘macro-prudential’  tools  in  a  time-varying  and  targeted  way  to  respond  to 
risks  as  they  evolve.  Examples  that  feature  in  international  debate  include  things  like 
maximum loan-to-valuation ratios that might be targeted at cycles in property lending, or the 
counter-cyclical capital buffer incorporated in the Basel III standards, aimed at general credit 
cycles.  In  addition  to  all  this  must  be  added  the  capacity  of  prudential  supervisors  to 
influence and respond to banks' risk taking without the use of prescriptive rules. In Australia's 
case I think we have been well served by APRA taking a pro-active approach on this front to 
ensure that risks in the banking sector have been well understood and well managed. I think 
of this as a policy ‘instrument’ in my general schematic outline, but it is not one that can be 
easily quantified or formalised. 
The third element of my outline is the strategy. How are the instruments deployed to meet 
the objective? 
It should be clear from what I have said so far that the policy strategy in this area can never 
be  as  tightly  defined  or  modelled  as  it  might  be  in  the  monetary  policy  sphere  5.  No  one 
would seriously think of trying to use the equivalent of a Taylor rule to summarise financial 
stability  policy.  But  clearly  the  policy  approach  needs  to  include  at  least  the  following 
components: 
• 
Appropriate  management  of  system  liquidity,  including  a  framework  for  providing 
emergency liquidity in a crisis. 
Capital regulation to ensure well capitalised banks. 
Supervision to promote sound loan lending standards and guard against imprudent 
risk taking in the banking sector. 
Sound risk controls for other systemically important institutions, including providers 
of critical financial infrastructure. 
Robust crisis resolution frameworks. 
Ongoing  monitoring  and  analysis  of  systemic  risks,  including  in  asset  and  credit 
markets; and 
Appropriate coordination among the key policy makers. 
                                                    
5   Arguably most fields of public policy are unlike monetary policy in this sense. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Central banks and supervisors have been working to strengthen all of these elements since 
the  crisis.  Internationally,  there  are  clear  benefits  to  collective  effort  in  a  number  of  these 
areas. In the area of bank regulation, for example, countries have a mutual interest in the 
development of common minimum standards to promote resilience for the global system as a 
whole. The Basel III package of capital and liquidity standards represents a major outcome of 
that cooperative effort 6. 
That brief outline might be thought of as capturing some important commonalities in the way 
various countries are approaching financial stability policy in the wake of the crisis. But there 
are also some significant differences in national approaches, especially in an organisational 
sense. 
That  brings  me  to  the  fourth  element  of  my  outline,  which  is  that  of  governance  or,  put 
simply: who controls the instruments? 
I  have  already  made  the  point  that  one  part  of  the  instrument  set  –  the  management  of 
financial system liquidity, or the last resort lending function – is inherently a function of the 
central  bank.  Internationally,  one  of  the  areas  of  recent  debate  has  been  on  the  extent  to 
which this and other central banking functions should be combined with prudential regulation, 
or whether they are best kept separate. And, if they are not combined, how can they best be 
coordinated, given the synergies between them? 
In current international practice there are a variety of different approaches to this question. 
Australia of course is a jurisdiction that has an integrated prudential regulator separate from 
the central bank. Other examples of that structure are Canada and Japan. The United States 
and Europe have complex arrangements that fall somewhere in the middle. The UK has just 
completed  a  transfer  of  the  prudential  regulation  function  back  into  the  central  bank  after 
separating  them  in  the  late  1990s.  Indonesia  is  in  the  process  of  shifting  in  the  opposite 
direction.  So  clearly  there  are  a  variety  of  different  organisational  models.  In  many  cases, 
including  Australia,  central  banks  have  a  general  mandate to  use  their powers  to  promote 
financial stability, even if they are not the primary bank supervisor. 
A key consideration in all of this is the obvious synergy between central banking activities, 
prudential regulation, and crisis management and resolution responsibilities. The position of 
central  banks  in  financial  markets  is  likely  to  give  them  early  visibility  of  many  types  of 
financial  stress,  and  their  position  as  the system  liquidity  provider  gives  them  an  essential 
role  in  crisis  management.  For  these  and  other reasons  there  is  a  clear  need  for  ongoing 
coordination  of  these  various  roles.  But  coordination  is  not  necessarily  best  achieved  by 
organisational  unity.  Arguments  can  be  advanced  for  a  range  of  different  institutional 
structures, and it is perhaps not surprising that countries have come to differing conclusions, 
depending in part on their own histories and their experiences during the crisis. 
With  that  general  background,  I  want  to  conclude  with  some  observations  about  how  we 
organise these things in Australia  7. In particular, to come back to my original focal point, I 
want  to  ask  what  is  the  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  Australia's  financial  stability 
arrangements. 
It  is  sometimes  said  in  answering  that  question  that  the  Bank  is  the  macro-prudential 
authority in Australia and APRA is the micro-prudential authority. The implication is that the 
Bank  looks  at  stability  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  system  while  APRA  looks  only  at  the 
individual institutions. I think that is at best an oversimplification and is an unhelpful way to 
                                                
6   Other  examples  include  common  mortgage  underwriting  principles,  and  the  development  of  regulatory 
standards and resolution regimes for critical financial market infrastructure. 
7   For a comprehensive discussion of financial stability arrangements in Australia, see the joint RBA and APRA 
the  Australian  Financial  Stability  Framework, 
document  Macroprudential  Analysis  and  Policy 
http://www.apra.gov.au/AboutAPRA/Publications/Documents/2012–09-map-aus-fsf.pdf  
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
look at the two institutional roles. It presupposes that it is possible to focus on the system as 
a  whole  without  taking  an  interest  in  the  individual  components;  or,  conversely,  that  an 
agency can sensibly look at the parts without being interested in how they interact with the 
whole 8. 
The difference between the two roles, I suggest, is best understood in terms of their powers 
and responsibilities rather than their objectives. APRA has powers and responsibilities that 
relate  mainly  to  individual  institutions,  but  its  legislative  mandate  includes  stability  of  the 
system, and it can adjust its prudential settings to address system-wide concerns. The Bank 
has  a  broad  financial  stability  mandate,  existing  in  conjunction  with  other  macroeconomic 
objectives and attached to a very different set of powers. 
In a legal sense the Bank is authorised to provide financial services to the government and to 
the financial system, and has significant powers to engage in financial activities in the public 
interest.  As  I  have  said,  those  powers  enable the  Bank  to  act  as  lender  of  last  resort  and 
liquidity  manager for  the financial  system  in  addition  to  its  better-known  role  in  conducting 
monetary policy. 
When  bank  supervisory  powers  were  shifted  from  the  Reserve  Bank  to  APRA  under  the 
1998  Wallis  reforms,  the  Bank's  general  mandate  to  use  its  powers  to  promote  financial 
stability  was  reaffirmed.  This  was  more  recently  emphasised  by  the  incorporation  of 
reference to the financial stability mandate into the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary 
Policy in 2010. The Wallis reforms and subsequent legislative changes also gave the Bank 
significant  regulatory  powers  in  relation  to  the  resilience  of  the  payments  system  and  of 
financial market infrastructure. 
In summary, then, the Reserve Bank and APRA have different powers but overlapping and 
complementary objectives in relation to financial stability. 
It goes without saying that the two institutions have a strong appreciation of the need to work 
closely  together  and  to  coordinate  with  the  other  key  agencies,  especially  ASIC  and  the 
Australian  Treasury.  There  are  a  number  of  mechanisms,  both  formal  and  informal,  for 
achieving this. At the peak level the four agencies form the Council of Financial Regulators, 
chaired by the Reserve Bank Governor. Numerous other coordinating arrangements exist at 
the  staff  level.  Although  the  Council  is  a  body  without  formal  powers,  it  has  played  an 
important role in a number of different ways, including information sharing, helping to develop 
the  overall  post-crisis  response  and  in  making  coordinated  recommendations  to  the 
government. Internationally I find that there is a lot of interest in the Australian coordination 
arrangements,  and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  a  number  of  other  jurisdictions  have 
moved to develop financial stability council structures of their own in the wake of the crisis. 
To recap briefly, I have tried to outline what I see as the main elements of financial stability 
policy, to explain  why the central bank has a key part in it, arising from its role as system 
liquidity manager, and to highlight the need for coordination between the central bank and 
other agencies, especially the prudential regulator. 
All of that falls well short of a general theory of financial stability, unavoidably so because I 
don't think such a theory is achievable. Nonetheless, I think the arrangements that I've just 
described have generally served Australia well. During the recent period of global financial 
stress,  our  banking  system  and  our  crisis  management  arrangements  have  proved  more 
resilient than most. 
 
                                                
8   For  more  details on  this  point,  see  Edey,  Macroprudential Supervision and  the  Role  of Central  Banks, and 
Ellis, Macroprudential Supervision: A Suite of Tools or a State of Mind? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
In the end, of course, what counts is not the way financial stability policies are allocated to 
particular  agencies  but  the  quality  of  their  implementation.  And  that  of  course  remains  the 
focus for the Reserve Bank, as well as for the wider body of financial regulators in Australia 
and abroad. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
