Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada and Chairman of 
the Financial Stability Board, at the press conference following the release of the Monetary 
Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 17 April 2013. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the April Monetary 
Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
• 
• 
Global economic growth has evolved broadly as anticipated in January. 
In the United States, the economic expansion is continuing at a modest pace, with 
gradually  strengthening  private  demand  partly  offset  by  accelerated 
fiscal 
consolidation. 
Significant policy stimulus has been introduced in Japan. 
Europe,  in  contrast,  remains  in  recession,  with  economic  activity  constrained  by 
fiscal austerity, low confidence and tight credit conditions. 
After picking up to very strong rates in the second half of 2012, growth in China has 
eased. 
Commodity  prices  received  by  Canadian  producers  remain  elevated  by  historical 
standards and, despite recent volatility, overall they are little changed since January. 
The  Bank  expects  global  economic  activity  to  grow  modestly  in  2013  before 
strengthening over the following two years. 
Following a weak second half of 2012, growth in Canada is projected to regain some 
momentum through 2013 as net exports pick up and business investment returns to 
more solid growth. 
Consumer  spending  is  expected  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace  over  the  projection 
horizon,  while  residential  investment  declines  further  from  historically  high  levels. 
Growth in total household credit has slowed and the Bank continues to expect that 
the household debt-to-income ratio will stabilize near current levels. 
Despite the projected recovery in exports, they are likely to remain below their pre-
recession  peak  until  the  second  half  of  2014  owing  to  restrained  foreign  demand 
and  ongoing  competitiveness  challenges,  including  the  persistent  strength  of  the 
Canadian dollar. 
On a quarterly basis, growth in Canada is expected to pick up to about 2.5 per cent 
in the second half of this year. Despite this expected pickup, with the weak growth in 
the second half of 2012, annual average growth is now projected to be 1.5 per cent 
in  2013.  The  economy  is  then  projected  to  grow  by  2.8 per cent  in  2014  and 
2.7 per cent in 2015, reaching full capacity in mid-2015. This is later than anticipated 
in January. 
Total CPI and core inflation have remained low in recent months, broadly in line with 
expectations in January. Muted core inflation reflects material excess supply in the 
economy, heightened competitive pressures in the retail sector, and some special 
factors. Total CPI inflation has been restrained by  low core inflation and declining 
mortgage interest costs, with some offset from higher gasoline prices. 
Both  total  and  core  inflation  are  expected  to  remain  subdued  in  coming  quarters 
before  gradually  rising  to  2  per  cent  by  mid-2015  as  the  economy  returns  to  full 
          BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      remain 
the  special 
inflation  expectations 
factors  subside,  and 
capacity, 
well-anchored. 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to upside and downside risks, which are 
similar to those identified in January. 
The  three  main  upside  risks  relate  to  the  possibility  of  stronger-than-expected 
growth  in  the  U.S.  and  global  economies,  a  sharper-than-expected  rebound  in 
Canadian exports, and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment. 
The  three  main  downside  risks  relate  to  the  European  crisis,  more  protracted 
weakness  in  business  investment  and  exports  in  Canada,  and  the  possibility  that 
growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker. 
Overall,  the  Bank  judges  that  the  risks  are  roughly  balanced  over  the  projection 
horizon. 
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank today maintained the target for the overnight 
rate at 1 per cent. 
With continued slack in the Canadian economy, the muted outlook for inflation, and 
the constructive evolution of imbalances in the household sector, the considerable 
monetary policy stimulus currently in place will likely remain appropriate for a period 
of time, after which some modest withdrawal will likely be required, consistent with 
achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
