Mario Draghi: Responsible leadership in times of crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of the  European  Central  Bank, on  the  occasion  of 
receiving the ESMT (European School of Management and Technology) Leadership Award 
2013, Berlin, 13 June 2013. 
 Good afternoon. 
It  is  a  great  honour  to  receive  this  award  for  Responsible  Leadership  and  I  would  like  to 
thank Mario Monti for his kind introductory words. I regret that I am not able to join you in 
person today in Berlin but am pleased I can address you via Video. 
The fact we have a single currency and a European Central Bank is itself testament to the 
role of leadership. Many of you are too young to remember, but those of us who can recall 
Europe 20 years ago know how unimaginable it once was to speak about a single currency. 
Today, it is an integral part of our lives. 
But as this award reminds us, the key aspect of leadership is responsibility. In the words of 
Peter Drucker, “rank does not confer privilege or give power. It imposes responsibility”. 
As you know, the primary responsibility of the ECB is to maintain price stability in the euro 
area  –  to  secure  the  value  of  our  common  currency.  We  take  this  responsibility  with  the 
utmost  seriousness  as  it  directly  affects  the  lives  of  330  million  citizens  of  the  euro  area. 
Since  the  launch  of  the  euro  in  1999,  we  have  fulfilled  our  mandate  even  through  difficult 
times. We will continue to fulfil this task. 
I am very proud to be personally contributing to the historic project that the euro represents 
as the most tangible sign of European integration. But this pride is accompanied by a deep 
feeling of responsibility. 
There is no doubt that the recent period of economic and financial turbulence has tested us 
in new ways. We have had to take new measures to fulfil our responsibility for price stability. 
We  had  to  look  at  all  the  data,  assess  all  the  evidence,  and  decide  what  measures  were 
necessary to ensure the stability of the euro. 
One such decision was to combat market fragmentation by Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMT),  based  on  a  country  committing  itself  to  strict  and  effective  conditionality  under  an 
EU/IMF economic adjustment programme. 
At almost one year from its announcement, the benefits of OMT are visible to everybody: 
Banks have been able to re-access the market, for both funding and for raising capital, and 
the strong divergence in funding costs across constituencies has receded. 
Deposits have flown back: banks in stressed countries have seen the deposits by the euro 
area money-holding sector increasing by about 200 billion euros since August 2012. 
Another sign of normalisation, and a very important one for German savers, has been the 
increase  in  German  government  bond  yields,  previously  suppressed  by  panic-driven  safe-
haven flows, which have edged up by around 25 basis points. 
And Target balances, which are a summary indicator of fragmentation, have declined by 285 
billion euros, or 25%, since the peak last year, and now are at the same level as in late-2011. 
Therefore,  also  perceived  risks  for  creditor  countries  such  as  Germany  have  greatly 
diminished. 
The  establishment  of  OMT  has  therefore  been  beneficial  to  everybody:  sovereigns, 
corporations,  banks  as  well  as  individuals,  and  it  has  benefited  both  periphery  and  core 
countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The decision on OMT was necessary. It was effective. And it was in line with our mandate. 
It  was  necessary  to  remove  severe  obstacles  to  the  appropriate  transmission  of  monetary 
policy that were putting the singleness of our monetary policy at risk and which were harming 
the economy of the euro area very deeply. 
And it is fully in line with our mandate because it is designed to preserve price stability for the 
euro area and uses instruments foreseen in the Statute. 
In  short, for  the  ECB  responsible  leadership  has  meant  being  true  to  our founding Treaty. 
Staying independent from the voices calling for us to “do more” or to “do less”; staying fully 
focused on our mandate to secure price stability for the citizens of the euro area. 
For the euro area to now move forward and establish itself on stronger ground, we need all 
decision-makers to take their responsibilities. Governments to put right their public finances 
and address the structural challenges to growth in their economies; and the euro area as a 
whole to build a stronger economic and monetary union based on shared sovereignty and 
greater legitimacy. 
There is a great deal of work ahead of us. But I am sure we will succeed. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
