Rundheersing Bheenick: Ensuring the financial stability of the banking 
system in Mauritius 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion 
of the grant of a new banking licence to Barclays Bank Mauritius Limited, Port Louis, 23 May 
2013. 
 I am delighted to welcome you all at the Bank this afternoon. A special word of welcome to 
His  Excellency  Mr  Nicholas  Howard  Leake,  the  British  High  Commissioner.  We  are  very 
pleased to have you all with us on this occasion. 
Today is an important day in the history of Barclays in our country. After almost a century of 
operation  in  Mauritius,  Barclays  Bank  PLC,  Mauritius  Branch  is  converting  into  a  wholly-
owned  subsidiary  to  be  henceforth  known  as  Barclays  Bank  Mauritius  Limited.  Early  this 
week, the President of the Republic, acting on the advice of our Prime Minister, Dr The Hon 
Navinchandra Ramgoolam, FRCP GCSK, appointed me to a new term as Governor of the 
central bank. I am reminded that in August 2008, I revoked the banking licence of the now-
defunct  First  City  Bank  and  the  equally-defunct  South  East  Asian  Bank  to  issue  a  new 
licence to their successors who are still thriving here  which makes this a concatenation of 
four 3’s. It is thus on the 3rd day of my 3rd three-year term as Governor that I am proceeding 
to announce the revocation1 of the 3rd banking licence, and I believe the Barclays people are 
actually rejoicing at this revocation! 
So are we at the Bank of Mauritius. A century ago, the central bank did not even exist – we 
are  younger  than  Barclays  Mauritius  by  almost  two  generations.  Today,  as  regulator  and 
regulatee, we have a strong bond of partnership. We are placing this partnership on even 
firmer  foundations  by  extending  the  legal  arsenal  available  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and 
deploying it to such good effect in the Barclays case. Let me explain. 
Nearly  six  years  have  passed  since  the  global  financial  crisis  unfolded.  Central  bankers, 
commercial  bankers,  financial  commentators,  academics  and  other  finance  professionals 
have  been  on  the  case  ever  since,  busily  drawing  lessons  from  this  prolonged  crisis. 
Countless international fora have examined the appropriate policy frameworks to deal with 
issues identified as having exacerbated the crisis such as structures that were too complex 
and banks that were too-big-to-fail or too-connected-to-fail. An international agreement on a 
cross-border resolution mechanism for internationally-active banks is not likely to be reached 
in the near future. We are waiting with bated breath for more rapid progress with the banking 
union at the level of the European Union. We cannot wait for all the lessons to be learned 
and new institutions to be forged, before we, as regulator, reflect on how these lessons can 
be applied to our own banking system. 
Our problem is somewhat smaller, and certainly less intractable – provided we have an open 
mind about it. Someone has said: 
“More powerful than the will to win is the courage to begin.” 
In the case of Barclays, we have amply demonstrated the courage to begin the process of 
restructuring. Our banking sector is made up of 21 banks, of which five operate as branches 
of foreign banks. Of these, we consider a few to be Domestic Systemically Important Banks 
(DSIBs),  in  view  of  their  size  and  complex  structures.  The  global  crisis  highlighted  two 
sources of vulnerability that the Bank needs to address to ensure the stability of the domestic 
financial system. The first is the need to protect affiliates of cross-border banks operating in 
                                                
1   Technically, it is a surrender of licence under Section 11 (7) of the Banking Act 2004. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
our jurisdiction from any potential problem affecting their parents in their home country. The 
second vulnerability stems from the fact that the failure of a DSIB could not only impair the 
provision  of  key  financial  services  but  also  have  knock-on  effects  on  other  parts  of  the 
domestic economy. These issues have been exercising my mind for quite some time. This is 
why  I  have  been  encouraging  branches  of  foreign  banks  operating  in  Mauritius  to  convert 
into locally-incorporated subsidiaries, and urging our DSIBs to reduce the complexity of their 
structures by resorting to what is now labelled as “ring-fencing.” We have been setting the 
stage for some time. 
That is where Barclays enters the scene, in pursuit of its “One Africa Strategy”. It is seeking 
to align the legal structure of its Mauritius branch business with the rest of Barclays Africa 
entities.  Barclays  sought  our  approval  to  become  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  Barclays 
Bank PLC. Barclays was the first of the targeted banks to do so. Just as it had also been the 
first to set up a Local Advisory Board for its branch operation in February 2012, well before 
we enshrined this in the revised Guideline on Corporate Governance in August 2012. 
Rarely have two simultaneous objectives, coming from opposite sides of the decision chain, 
from the regulator on the one hand and from the regulatee on the other, meshed so well to 
trigger an important change in the banking landscape. The effects of the change will translate 
into  more  muscle  for  both  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  Barclays.  Barclays  will  undoubtedly 
emerge stronger from this restructuring, and the Bank will have more room for manoeuver to 
exercise an effective oversight of the system and reduce its financial stability concerns. But 
in  spite  of  the  clear  and  expressed  support  of  the  regulator,  the  road  leading  to  Barclays 
restructuring its operations into a subsidiary was like an obstacle course. 
From the moment Barclays started the legal procedures to restructure itself, after obtaining 
the  blessing  of  the  central  bank,  it  became  evident  that  our  laws  and  processes  were  not 
designed  to  meet  today’s  needs.  Banking  legislation  did  not  provide  the  regulator  with  the 
powers to enable a “seamless transfer”. And Barclays had to have recourse to a Scheme of 
Arrangement, to be approved by the Supreme Court, in line with the general provisions of the 
Companies  Act.  To  our  mounting  frustration,  the  project  led  to  prolonged  litigation  and 
became mired in procedural entanglements. We realized that, had we found ourselves in a 
crisis situation, the legal procedures would not have allowed us, as regulator to act rapidly to 
resolve matters and ensure financial stability. In times of crisis, no regulator can afford to wait 
for months on end for a bank to reorganize itself. The problem was exacerbated by a number 
of objections – some of which came from within the banking sector itself. As we went from 
court hearing to court hearing, the whole restructuring process gradually became lengthier 
and more cumbersome, with the outcome increasingly unclear and uncertain. Of course, the 
Bank had a Plan B up its sleeve to fall back on. This had in fact been raised in the early days 
when we first discussed the restructuring plan but we thought it was a very remote possibility 
that we would ever have to resort to it. Well, how wrong we were! 
Plan B involved an amendment to the Banking Act to provide for an expedient process for 
banks to restructure their respective businesses − always subject of course, to the approval 
of the central bank. Interestingly, this piece of legislation was welcomed by both sides of the 
House  when  it  was  debated  at  the  National  Assembly  with  a  Certificate  of  Urgency.  Our 
legislators  fully  understood  that  the  Bank  needed  more  specific  provisions  in  the  banking 
legislation  itself  given  the  systemic  importance  of  banks,  and  the  legislative  amendments 
were approved illico presto. 
The new provisions are quite wide-ranging. They allow a financial institution to restructure its 
business with the approval of the central bank. They also empower the central bank to direct 
a bank to restructure its operations. These provisions make the restructuring process clear, 
leaving  little  room  for  controversy  or  for  differing  interpretations. When  Barclays  petitioned 
the  court  under  the  Companies  Act,  there  had  been  different  interpretations  of  the  proper 
procedure to be followed. Objections were raised by some parties. I thank those parties who 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
objected to Barclays’ initiatives, as they have indirectly contributed to a rapid resolution of an 
issue that would otherwise have dragged on and on. 
With  the  new  law  and  the  clarity  it  now  provides,  such  a  situation  should  not  arise  again. 
However, I am told lawyers are reserving their rights to object – this is fair enough. Lawyers 
will be lawyers. As a breed, lawyers do not like clarity. If laws were always crystal clear, just 
imagine  what  a  negative  impact  this  would  have  on  the  demand  for  highly-paid  legal 
services! 
The legislative amendment has positive repercussions on the ease of doing business in the 
country.  It  highlights  the  capacity  of  Mauritian  authorities  to  expedite  changes  in  the  legal 
framework.  It  projects  Mauritius  as  a  jurisdiction  capable  of  coming  up  with  avant-gardiste 
legislation, which allows it to take appropriate, timely and specific actions. 
Our  banks  continue  to  perform  well  and  have  proved  to  be  very  resilient.  The  Global 
Competitiveness Report 2012–2013 of the World Economic Forum ranks our banking sector 
15th  out  of  144  in  terms  of  the  soundness  of  banks.  In  2012,  seven  of  our  banks  ranked 
among  the  top  100  banks  in  Africa  according  to  the  magazine  African  Banker,  a  major 
achievement for a small country like ours with a GDP of only 0.02% of the GDP of the African 
continent as a whole. Banks everywhere remain fragile institutions on account of their high 
leverage and the constant concern over the trade-off between profitability and liquidity. We, 
as  regulator,  want  our  domestic  banks  to  go  beyond  narrow  profitability  concerns  and  to 
become internationally competitive. To do this, they need to become more efficient and come 
closer  to  international  benchmarks. Therefore,  the  regulator  needs to  be  constantly  on  the 
alert against vulnerabilities and possible weaknesses and malpractices within the sector. We 
cannot wait for problems to occur to act – we need to be proactive. Our rules and regulations 
need  to  be  constantly  revisited.  Between  2007  and  now,  11  guidelines  have  been  revised 
and 13 new ones have been issued by the Bank. There are other areas that the Bank is now 
addressing in consultation with the Mauritius Bankers Association. 
First, the issue of DSIBs: a framework is currently being designed to identify DSIBs. We did 
not  wait  for  it  to  be  formalized  before  initiating  a  dialogue  with  two  of  the  largest  banking 
groups, and some of the others as well, to simplify their structures. We started it two years 
ago. The new provisions of the law allow us to require big banks to separate their banking 
and non-banking activities in an expedient manner. Our objective is to reduce the complexity 
of  large  banking  groups,  make  them  easier  to  manage,  make  them  more  transparent  to 
outside  stakeholders,  and  easier  to  resolve  in  case  they  run  into  difficulties. These  in  turn 
contain moral hazard and strengthen market discipline. The good news with regards to our 
DSIBs  is  that  we  are  already  in  presence  of  proposals  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  their 
structures and I hope to see this happening in the near future. 
Second,  these  newly-acquired  powers  will  facilitate  the  implementation  of  living  wills  for  a 
rapid  resolution  of  financial  institutions  in  distress,  without  systemic  disruption,  and 
specifically without putting public finances or bank depositors at risk. 
Third,  we  are  working  towards  establishing  supervisory  colleges  in  Mauritius  for  banks  of 
which we are the home regulator. This year we intend to set up our first such supervisory 
college. This will result in effective information exchange and coordination among regulators 
and supervisors to minimize financial stability risks. With the setting up of a resolution regime 
and  the  establishment  of  supervisory  colleges,  we  will  be  looking  at  a  banking  sector 
relatively insulated from financial stability risks. 
Today, one of the five branches of the foreign banks present in our jurisdiction is converting 
into a wholly-owned subsidiary. Others will surely follow suit. Our big banks are simplifying 
their structures. Many other countries have already adopted such structural bank regulation 
measures  in  response  to  the  global  financial  crisis.  These  structural  measures  mark  a 
paradigm shift in the banking and financial landscape and aim at shielding the real economy 
from certain types of financial activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Ensuring the financial stability of the system is part of the mandate of the Bank. However, 
there  seems  to  be  a  disconnect  between  our  mandate  and  the  scope  of  our  regulatory 
purview.  We  do  not  supervise  all  the  players  in  the  financial  system.  Non-bank  financial 
institutions fall under the purview of another regulator while still other regulatory agencies are 
responsible for other parts of the financial system such as cooperative societies and credit 
unions. The Ponzi Schemes that have been dismantled recently have turned the spotlight on 
the regulatory loopholes in supervision and regulation beyond the banking sector which have 
allowed  the  scammers  to  perpetrate  their  financial  crimes.  This  calls  for  a  system-wide 
review  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to  minimize  the  risks  of  any  such 
recurrence in future. 
Before I conclude, let me share with you a few thoughts on the banking sector in the near-
future. In the next couple of years, I expect a more competitive banking sector with room for 
more players, domestic and foreign – diversity has proved to be a source of resilience. I look 
forward to our banks becoming more efficient for the benefit of customers. Their profitability 
would rest on that competitive edge that they would develop, and not so much on the wide 
net  interest  margins  on  which  they  rely  today.  The  whole  economy  will  gain  from  a  more 
competitive banking sector as this will result in lower cost of capital for the real sector, and 
help stimulate private investment and growth. We expect our banking sector to have more 
responsible practices, including a commitment to achieve socio-economic goals. These are 
the prerequisites for the Bank of Mauritius to achieve its primary mandate of balanced and 
orderly  economic  development  while  ensuring  the  stability  and  soundness  of  the  financial 
system.  By  the  end  of  my  third  three-year  term  at  the  helm  of the  central  bank,  I  hope  to 
leave  as  legacy  a  more  innovative,  more  competitive,  more  resilient  and  a  more  stable 
banking sector. 
I will now announce the revocation of the licence of Barclays Bank PLC Mauritius Branch – 
trust  me  engineering  the  revocation  of  a  banking  licence  is  a  regulator’s  equivalent  of  the 
nuclear option – but in the present case, this revocation is effected with much pleasure and 
leads  to  the  still  greater  pleasure  of  granting  a  new  banking  licence  to  Barclays  Bank 
Mauritius Limited. 
Congratulations and the very best of success at this new juncture of your banking history in 
Mauritius. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
