Patrick Honohan: Sovereign risk – a world without risk-free assets 
Panel comments by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the BIS 
Conference on “Sovereign risk – a world without risk-free assets”, Basel, 8 January 2013. 
 What’s new about sovereign risk since the crisis began? Conceptually, not so much, I would 
suggest – and nothing that cannot be fully explained within standard models of finance. But 
in  practice,  and  in  particular  in  the  euro  area,  two  linked  elements  that  were  always 
potentially present or implicit have leapt into prominence in a way and to an extent that was 
not  foreseen.  The  first  is  that  markets  have  begun  to  price  default  risk  in  a  sovereign’s 
home-currency;  the  second  is  the  contamination  of  the  functioning  and  economic 
effectiveness of banks by the weak credit rating of their sovereigns (as well as vice versa).  
I  have  to  admit  to  the  possibility  that  my  remarks  may  be  subject  to  some  professional 
deformation  here,  in  that  my  perspective  on  these  matters  is  likely  coloured  by  my 
pre-occupation  with  the  situation  in  Ireland.  Ireland  has  certainly  displayed  these  two 
elements in a dramatic way, but they are evidently present in half a dozen other euro area 
countries  also  and  to  an  extent  which  has  had  implications  for  the  functioning  of  the 
Eurosystem as a whole, and therefore on the global financial system. 
Let me take these two points in turn. First the pricing-in of sovereign default risk in “home 
currency”.  
Why did the default premium suddenly emerge? 
Evidently,  even  though everyone  understood  the  rules,  no  such  pricing-in  occurred for the 
first decade of the Eurosystem (Figure 1). Risk appetite was high for much of that period, but 
the  market’s  perception of  sovereign  risk must  also  have  remained  low.  (Perhaps,  despite 
Treaty  prohibitions,  market  participants  assumed  that  any  sovereign  that  got  into  trouble 
would  be  bailed-out).  Indeed,  sovereign  spreads  in  the  euro  area  were  almost  totally 
insensitive to credit ratings before the crisis (Figure 2).  
One often-heard interpretation of what happened during that decade is that the complacent 
market environment relaxed the budget constraint on euro-area sovereigns and led them to 
borrow  recklessly.  Actually  this  story  doesn’t  fit  the  facts  very  well.  After  all,  although 
sovereign  debt  ratios  in  most  of  the  Eurosystem  did  not  fall  as  much  as  they  could  and 
should have on the good years, at least they did not increase dramatically before the crisis 
(Figure 4). (Private debt ratios, and in particular the size of the bank and near-bank systems 
did increase, but that is a somewhat different story, to which I will turn shortly). 
It’s possible alternatively that there was a multiple equilibrium here, with the “good” or low 
interest equilibrium (with a self-fulfilling degree of confidence in the creditworthiness of all the 
sovereigns)  being  selected  by  the  market  at  the  start  of  the  euro,  and  events  during  the 
financial crisis – not least those associated with Greece – having tripped the system into the 
“bad” or high interest equilibrium with default risk premia moving a number of sovereigns into 
a more challenging debt sustainability position.  
Most  likely,  what  we  have  seen  is  a  combination  of  factors:  (i)  a  sharp  reduction  in  risk 
appetite resulting in even little-changed debt ratios, as in Italy, looking more challenging and 
in need of a risk-premium; and in addition (for most countries) (ii) a sharp increase in debt 
ratios  as  governments  reacted  to  the  crisis  (including,  but  not  at  all  confined  to,  the 
socialisation in most countries of some private banking losses through their assumption by 
governments) (Figure 4 again). The increased sensitivity of sovereign spreads to ratings, and 
the increased range of ratings themselves – both illustrated in Figure 2 – suggest that both 
factors are at work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(As  spreads  widened  in  stressed  countries,  their  fluctuations  –  which  would  not  concern 
hold-to-maturity  investors  –  added  a  risk  factor  for  others  and  probably  ratcheted  up  the 
average level of the spreads.) 
In the specific case of Ireland, the depth of the recession and the remarkably high elasticity 
of tax revenues and the Government deficit to the downturn, combined with the unfortunate 
decision  to  lock-in  a  very  comprehensive  bank guarantee  before the  potential  scale  of the 
banking  losses  could  at  all  be  appreciated,  meant  that  Ireland’s  actual  and  prospective 
general  government  debt  made  a  shocking  turnaround  from  about  25  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
2007 to 117 per cent just five years later.  
Historians  will  debate  the  exact  triggers  for  the  market’s  loss  of  confidence  in  the  Irish 
sovereign.  Even  as  late  as  April  2010,  after  the  first  sampling  indicated  the  scale  of  the 
banking  losses,  sovereign  spreads  were  little  more  than  1  per  cent.  By  November  of  that 
year  (just  a  few  weeks  after  the  Deauville  statement  which  persuaded  the  markets  that 
private sector holders of euro sovereign debt would not be immune from loss-sharing) large 
banking outflows and spreads exceeding five per cent made recourse to official assistance 
inevitable. (Figure 3 shows the plot with some relevant news stories flagged). Perhaps the 
most significant take-away from the sequence of spikes and troughs is the fact that some of 
them clearly relate to news that is country-specific, some of them to euro area general news. 
The same is doubtless true for all of the stressed sovereigns. 
Default risk vs. devaluation risk vs. redenomination risk 
It’s worth pausing to recall that raw sovereign spreads such as we are seeing today in the 
euro area are not remotely unprecedented in pre-euro history. On the contrary, they were the 
norm  as  is  illustrated  by  Figure  1.  The  difference  is  that  these  spreads  reflected  a 
combination of default risk and currency risk. During the last fiscal crisis of the 1980s Irish 
sovereign  spreads  ballooned  out  also.  But  that  was  for  local  currency  denominated  debt. 
Eurobond  borrowing  by  the  Irish  Government  remained  at  fairly  tight  spreads  despite  the 
high overall debt ratio (higher than today), and the fact that almost half of the national debt 
was denominated in foreign currency. The high spreads reflected devaluation expectations 
and currency risk generally. And there were devaluations, though less than was baked into 
the spreads – by between 250 and 300 basis points on average during the last ten years of 
that ill-fated regime, the narrow-band EMS. 
It is not that default and devaluation are close substitutes; not at all, and for several reasons. 
For  one  thing,  default  has  potential  reputational  consequences  for  the  issuer  qualitatively 
different  to  those  of  devaluation.  In  addition,  though,  devaluation  affects  not  only  the 
international  value  of  the  Government’s  debt  promises,  but  also  that  of  all  other  contracts 
denominated  in  local  currency;  as  a  result,  depending  on  the  speed  of  price-resetting 
(pass-through)  it  can  affect  competitiveness  throughout  the  economy.  These  differences 
have not been sufficiently emphasised, I feel, in recent discussion. 
As an example, I could mention the Irish devaluation of August 1986. The main goal of this 
important action was restoration of wage competitiveness, not a lowering of the real value of 
the local currency-denominated debt. (Indeed, I recall that some domestic policymakers were 
confused on this point and thought that the debt burden would actually increase as a result of 
translation effect on the foreign currency debt!) 
Such currency risk can be so extreme as to make it impossible for the sovereign to issue any 
sizable amount of local-currency denominated debt to international lenders. In the literature, 
such countries – all in the developing world (and not including Ireland, cf. Figure 5) – were 
said to suffer from “Original Sin”. Happily, the number of countries suffering “Original Sin” has 
been diminishing in recent years. Instead, we have to acknowledge the emergence in market 
pricing of a new phenomenon, “redenomination risk”.  
How can  we recognise redenomination risk? This is not straightforward, not least because 
the term could refer to a number of different scenarios. One suggested way of approaching 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  question  is  to  use  econometric  estimates  of  the  cross-sectional  determinants  of 
sovereign spreads for foreign currency-denominated borrowing to predict current spreads in 
stressed  euro  area  countries:  a  positive  residual  might  suggest  a  redenomination  risk 
premium.  Comparisons  of  current  spreads  of  euro  area  sovereigns  in  euro  and  in  foreign 
currency-denominated  borrowings  provides  for  an  alternative  approach.  My  own  favourite 
approach  is  to  look  at  the  co-movement  in  the  time  series  of  euro  area  country  spreads. 
Some  of  this  co-movement  can  be  attributed  to  fluctuations  in  market  risk-appetite;  the 
remainder  could  be  interpreted  as  a  system-wide  redenomination  premium.1  This  brief 
summary already suggests the complexity and ambiguity of some of the concepts involved 
and their measurement.  
Evidently, redenomination risk, as imagined by market commentators, combines default and 
currency risk in a novel way not contemplated by the Treaty that established the euro area. 
The ECB has made clear its determination to do what is necessary to preserve the euro and 
remove  unfounded  euro  break-up  premia  in  sovereign  yields.  The  OMT,  designed  as  a 
backstop to  inhibit  negative  self-fulfilling  market dynamics,  provides  the necessary  tools  to 
deliver  on  that  commitment.  The  programme  does  not  go  overboard  in  the  direction  of 
removing the incentive for governments to manage their finances in such a way as to recover 
and retain the confidence of the market, but it will ensure that disciplined governments will 
not have to pay spreads that could only reflect market concerns about a system break-up. As 
announced, the ECB will only buy bonds at the shorter end of the maturity spectrum, but the 
OMT can be expected to have an influence transmitted by market forces throughout the yield 
curve,  and  indeed  spreads  have  tightened  right  across  all  maturities  since  the  OMT  was 
announced.  
Still, it is not to be expected that the OMT will by itself restore the tight uniformity of spreads 
that prevailed for the first decade of the euro. Forcing such a tight uniformity would not be 
generally  considered  safe  absent  more  reliable  alternative  mechanisms  for  ensuring 
disciplined  fiscal  policy  in  the  countries  concerned.  More  likely  would  be  a  potentially 
extended  period  of  sovereign  spreads  that,  albeit  narrower  than  at  their  worst,  remain 
material.  
Sovereign spreads and the banks 
That being so, we need to ask what are the consequences of these spreads for the rest of 
the  economy,  and  in  particular for the  operation  of the  banking  system.  Regardless  of  the 
condition  of  the  balance  sheet  and  the  profit  and  loss  account  of  the  banks,  experience 
shows how hard it is for banks in a jurisdiction where the sovereign is under stress to access 
the  money  markets  on  the  finest  terms.  In  essence,  the  market  fears  that  a  stressed 
sovereign  could  in  extremis  reach  to  the  banks  as  a  source  of  last  resort  financing  –  if 
necessary using national legislation to do so. From such a perspective, providers of funds to 
banks  will  tend  to  price-in  the  possibility  that,  at  the  margin, they  could end  up  as  indirect 
providers  of  funds  to  a  stressed  sovereign.  There  are  many  examples  in  history  of  this 
happening, and the consequences for bank funding costs have often been severe.2 
In  other  words,  while  we  have  all  become  sensitised  to  the  pressure  which  socialised 
banking losses can place on the sovereign, markets are also acutely aware of the potential 
damaging  links  in  the  other  direction.  Either  way,  there  are  consequences  for  the  funding 
costs of both the sovereign and the banks.  
                                                
1   Panel  regressions  can  in  principle  isolate  co-movement  from  idiosyncratic,  and  general  risk-appetite  (for 
example, proxied by spreads on non-euro risky bonds) from redenomination premium. 
2   On the other hand, a Government will be loath to default on its debt if sizable amounts of defaulted debt are 
held by the local banks. The track record of the Lebanon, whose banks have tended to lend – I believe – a 
higher percentage of GDP to the Government than in any case of any other country, is testament to this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Given  the  scale  of  banking  in  the  euro  area,  even  a  relatively  small  difference  in  funding 
costs  can  be  consequential.  Once  again,  the  Irish  situation  dramatises  what  can  happen 
when the two-way feedback loop between banks and sovereign causes a loss of access to 
risk-free  rates.  As  is  well  known,  the  Irish  banks  have  suffered  severe  loan  losses  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  bursting  of  the  property  price  and  construction  bubble  which  they  had  so 
enthusiastically financed. Very sizable capital injections (about 50 per cent of GNP from the 
Irish Government alone – a sum which proved too great to be financed without the protection 
of  an  IMF  programme)  have  ensured  that  the  Irish  banks  more  than  satisfy  regulatory 
requirements once again, but their future profitability  is constrained by the emergence and 
likely persistence of the sovereign spreads, and the knock-on effect of the spreads on the 
banks’ funding costs. 
Euro-area risk-free rates are not now the most relevant indicator of the marginal cost of funds 
to  the  Irish  banking  sector.  It  is,  of  course,  true  that  the  Irish  banks  (like  those  in  other 
stressed countries) have been drawing heavily on ECB refinancing facilities during the crisis, 
especially following the huge outflow of funds that occurred in early 2009 and again in the 
last few months of 2010. This access to refinancing has been vital to the continuing operation 
of the banking system, and it has come at the policy rate.  
(Let me mention as an aside a curious feature of the current monetary policy environment in 
the euro area. The two key ECB rates – the main refinancing operations rate and the deposit 
rate – are 75 basis points and zero, respectively. Access to both the refinancing and deposit 
facilities are both close to all-time highs. But in practice, the bulk of the refinancing is going to 
banks  in  the  stressed  countries,  while  the  bulk  of  the  deposits  are  placed  by  banks  in 
non-stressed  countries.  To  the  extent  that  the  stressed  countries  have  tended  to  have 
weaker  economic  performance  during  the  crisis,  this  pattern  might  be  considered 
paradoxical.  But  it  is  of  course  a  reflection  and  semi-automatic  consequence  of  the 
fragmentation  which  has  developed  in  the  euro  area.  To  be  sure,  the  ECB  policy  rate  is 
clearly below the marginal cost of funds in the stressed countries.) 
But access to ECB funds at the policy rate is limited by the availability of eligible collateral 
and  the  haircuts  that  are  applied  to  such  collateral  (despite  the  relaxation  of  eligibility 
criteria). About 20 per cent of the total financing of the three going concern Irish controlled 
banks  comes  from  this  source  at  present  (16  per  cent  of  the  balance  sheet  total). 
Competition for deposits therefore remains strong and rates high. 
It’s not just that higher bank funding costs will now be passed on to new borrowers, adding 
headwinds  to  the  economic  recovery,  though  that  is  certainly  a  factor.  Indeed,  the  lower 
policy interest rates set by the ECB since the crisis began have only been partly transmitted 
to borrowers in Ireland and in the other stressed euro area countries (Figure 6). (As is seen 
by the results of a recursive regression exercise, the pass-through from policy rate to Irish 
residential mortgage SVR rates has halved since the start of the crisis – Figure 7.) Some of 
this  can  be  rationalised  as  reflecting  a  higher  credit  risk-premium  being  charged  by  the 
banks, but some is also due to the higher marginal cost of funds.  
Worse  still  for  the  health  of  the  banks,  and  their  ability  to  contribute  to  the  economic 
recovery, is the fact that they are still coping with the consequences of their marginal cost of 
funds having delinked so sizably from the ECB policy rate.  
These  consequences  arise  because  of  the  long-term  mortgage  contracts  the  banks  made 
when  they  assumed  that  their  marginal  cost  of  funds  would  always  remain  close  to  the 
(risk-free) policy rate. Suffice it to say that a large block of residential mortgages was granted 
at  interest  rates  which  track  the  ECB  policy  rate  plus  a  very  low  spread.  These  tracker 
mortgages, many of which have an average remaining maturity of 15–20 years or more, yield 
less than the marginal cost of funds (Figure 8 which is drawn on the assumption, not strictly 
valid, that the average spread of the trackers over policy rate was unchanged over time). In 
effect, by assuming that their cost of funds would not deviate much from the ECB policy rate, 
the banks exposed themselves to a very large “basis risk”. In principle, they could escape 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
this trap if there were a willing purchaser (public or private) with access to funding at a cost 
that is not contaminated by the sovereign stress. Until such a purchaser comes forward, the 
banks will have to continue to fund this portfolio at a loss, even on performing mortgages, 
whose effects will spill over onto their customers and their owners (not least the State). 
Conclusion 
Irish Sovereign spreads may no longer be bloated by redenomination risk, but at 300 basis 
points at the long-end, they do seem to reflect a credit risk premium that is poor reward, so 
far, for what has been a sizable fiscal adjustment effort.  
Reflecting on where we have got to, it seems that there are distinct parallels with the fiscal 
crisis of the EMS period. As I mentioned, spreads (then reflecting devaluation risk) exceeded 
what would have been needed ex post to compensate for actual exchange rate movements 
by almost the same amount (250–300 basis points). Those spreads were transmitted to the 
banking system then also.  
The Irish financial situation is relatively extreme, and as such illustrates clearly some of the 
key problems that have been faced also in other stressed parts of the euro area. 
While it has delivered a much lower inflation rate, the euro is no longer insulating financial 
markets from the impact of excessive debt in member countries. The early insulation of the 
monetary transmission mechanism from fiscal problems of participating countries has worn 
through. The pernicious feedback loop from banks to sovereign and from sovereign to banks 
that re-emerged in the crisis remains strong and damaging. 
Getting  back  to  the  “good”  equilibrium  will  require  a  healing  process  which  removes  the 
market’s fear of default. It is inevitably a protracted process needing not only firm adherence 
to consistently disciplined policies but also the creation of institutions that can prevent future 
crises, or at least cope with them better if they cannot be avoided.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  2 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5 
