Ardian Fullani: China-Europe economy – future challenges and 
opportunities 
Address  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  China-Europe 
Economists Symposium on “China-Europe economy – future challenges and opportunities”, 
Tirana, 17 January 2013. 
 Dear Mr. Chairman, 
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this Symposium. The rapidly evolving economic 
landscape of the past few years poses to policy-makers a demanding set of challenges and 
opportunities.  I  am  sure  that  the  honest  and  productive  exchange  of  ideas  will  facilitate  a 
deeper  understanding  of  the  problems  we  are  facing  and  will  allow  us  to  design  more 
appropriate strategies for overcoming them. 
Introduction  
Our  topics  of  discussion  today  focus  on  the  performance  and  prospects  of  China  and 
Europe, the two economic regions which probably are at the opposite ends of the spectrum 
of contagion from the global crisis. While China has remained largely unaffected, Europe has 
suffered significantly. The crisis exposed fundamental structural and institutional weaknesses 
in the Eurozone and the EU. 
In  my  short  address,  I  will  concentrate  on  the  current  state  of  Europe’s  economic  and 
financial situation. It would be almost an understatement to define the past, the current and 
the expected developments in the Europe, as difficult and short-term. The so-called “Great 
Depression”  tested  the  Eurozone  and  the  European  economy.  EU  convergence  process 
proved to be incomplete, from economic and institutional point of view. From a longer term 
perspective,  the  process  of  globalization  and  the  adverse  demographic  trends  have 
challenged the sustainability of the economic and social systems of the EU. In spite of these 
problems,  I  remain  firmly  convinced  that  Europe  will  continue  to  be  a  dynamic  and 
prosperous  region  in  the  future.  The  short  term  costs  of  structural  reforms  will  be  far 
outweighed  by  their  targeted  long-term  gains.  A  more  competitive  and  integrated  Europe, 
underpinned  by  stronger  institutions  and  governed  by  more  sustainable  economic  and 
financial policies, will benefit the whole global economy. The remaining part of my speech will 
address these points in more detail. 
Europe through the crisis  
Europe has been one of the worst hit regions from the global crisis. The initial impact of the 
subprime market crash in the US was felt across the European financial sector, with stock 
markets  plummeting  and  banks  facing  huge  losses  on  their  balance  sheets.  The  resulting 
decrease in asset prices and the drying up of bank credit, the decline in global trade activity 
as well as the collapse of business and consumer confidence, were immediately reflected in 
a widespread recession during the 2008–2009 period, followed by a period of uncertain and 
slow  growth.  Unemployment  shot  upwards  while  fiscal  balances  deteriorated  rapidly.  The 
decline of the economic activity fed into further uncertainty in the financial sector, originating 
a  negative  feed-back  loop  which  became  difficult  to  overcome  in  the  presence  of  private 
sector deleverage, widespread risk aversion and public finance constraints. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Most  of  the  aforementioned  features  were  shared  with  other  economies,  such  as  US  and 
Japan. The balance sheet recession they describe remains tractable, at least in theory, with 
a  combination  of  short  term  economic  stimulus,  long  term  commitment  to  macroeconomic 
stability,  structural  reforms,  and  patience.  However,  there  have  been  several  idiosyncratic 
issues  which  set  the  European  experience  apart  from  the  other  economies.  They  were 
manifested  into  severe  public  sector  problems  in  several  Eurozone  countries,  widespread 
lack of trust in institutions and authorities, and the strengthening of centrifugal forces which 
risked breaking the euro apart. 
What were the factors that exacerbated the crisis in the Eurozone? While an exhaustive list 
would be long, I would like to highlight three of them. 
- 
First,  the  inter-dependence  between  sovereign  credit  rating,  financial  sector  risk 
premia  and  the  real  economy  was  exacerbated  by  incomplete  financial  market 
integration.  While  the  region  as  a  whole  suffered  from  capital  outflows,  financial 
integration within EU went in reverse during the past four years. The repatriation of 
cross-border  financial  flows  created  further  problems  in  the  Eurozone  economies 
and neighboring region. In fact, the subsequent cross-border deleveraging and de-
risking  has  been  one  of  the  main  crisis  propagation  channels  that  has  affected 
eastern European countries, Albania included. 
Second, the divergence in intra-regional economic policies resulted in a divergence 
of  competitiveness  within  the  EU  and  Eurozone.  This  accentuated  existing  intra-
regional balance of payments issues during the crisis, highlighting the need for long 
overdue economic and fiscal reforms. 
Third, the absence of a fiscal union has meant that the policy response has been 
lacking, especially in the presence of a monetary policy dealing with the zero lower 
bound of interest rates. Furthermore, doubts about the long term fiscal position of 
certain  Eurozone  countries,  such  as  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Portugal  and  Spain, 
increased  to  unsustainable  levels  their  sovereign  risk  premia  and  their  public  and 
private sector borrowing costs. 
  What has been the policy response within the EU?  
The EU crisis management policy aimed to contain and overcome its effects, but, to a large 
extent, it has been conditioned by some of the constraints I mentioned before.  
Monetary policy took the lead in providing countercyclical stimulus to the economy, with the 
ECB  rapidly  lowering  its  policy  rate  and  injecting  huge  amounts  of  short  and  long  term 
liquidity. Lastly, the announcement in September of the Outright Monetary Transactions by 
the ECB has been a turning point in regaining the trust of the financial markets.  
On the other hand, given the lack of space for stimulating fiscal policies, the public sector has 
been more interested in controlling long-term public debt trajectories, subtracting rather than 
adding  to  economic  stimulus.  To  this  end,  the  agreed  fiscal  compact  and  macroeconomic 
surveillance policies aim to put the Eurozone public finances into a sound and credible long-
term  footing.  On  the  financial  side,  the  EU  has  revised  its  financial  architecture  by 
establishing 
the  EFSF  (European  Financial  Stability  Fund)  and  European  Stability 
Mechanism, by agreeing to establish a single banking system supervisor. Lastly, there have 
been  several  structural  measures  undertaken,  aiming  to  revive  both  the  EU  and  country-
specific  competitiveness.  Among  others,  these  measures  include  increasing  labor  market 
flexibility,  reforming  the  pension  system,  further  liberalizations  in  the  goods  and  services 
markets.  
What remains to be done?  
While arguably late, I think the policy response within the EU has gone in the right direction 
and has been rather comprehensive. Nevertheless, further work is required in the future.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I would like to highlight two of these areas. 
- 
 First, the reform agenda identified by four presidents (of the European Council, of 
the European Commission, of the Eurogroup and of the ECB) aims to complement 
the  monetary  union  with  a  financial  union,  a  fiscal  union,  an  economic  union  and 
some  higher  degree  of  political  union.  This  is  an  ambitious  goal,  but  I  am  fairly 
convinced it will be accomplished within a reasonable time-scale. In this context, it is 
not much a wish list as it is a prerequisite for long term growth. It would indicate to 
the  world  that  Europe  has  answered  the  dilemma  about  its  role  in  the  global 
economy of the 21st century.  
Second,  I  think  that  efforts  to  increase  EU  integration  should  extend  to  include  a 
deeper cooperation with candidate and potential candidate countries in the Eastern 
and Southeastern Europe. These economies are very much connected to the EU, 
from  an  economic  and  financial  perspective.  They  have  undertaken  structural 
reforms  to  liberalize  their  economies,  to  increase  their  competitiveness  and  to 
coordinate their policies. EU efforts should concentrate in aiding and speeding the 
convergence  process  in  the  design  of  markets  and  institutional  frameworks  while 
minimizing the related short term costs. This would be to the mutual benefit of both 
the EU and the region. 
I would like to add that in realizing such an agenda, the policy-makers need to pay special 
attention  to  the  time  dimension.  Reforms  that  need  to  be  made  should  be  made  in  time. 
Furthermore,  such  reforms  have  to  be  made  with  the  whole  of  the  EU  project  in  mind. 
Individual countries have much work to do, but a lasting solution to the challenges will be a 
comprehensive  reform  that  looks  beyond  specific  borders  and  aims  at  raising  the 
competitiveness and sustainability of the EU as a whole. 
Europe in the future  
Ladies and gentleman, to conclude my address allow me to restate my belief in the future of 
Europe. 
A brief glimpse at some figures would illustrate this point. EU comprises roughly 7% of world 
population but accounts for a quarter of global GDP. It has a mature social and  economic 
model,  which  in  spite  of  long-term  challenges  remains  a  viable  paradigm  of  economic 
development.  The  external  position  of  both  EU  and  Eurozone  is  broadly  balanced,  with 
current  account  deficits  of  less  than  1%  of  GDP.  The  public  debt  to  GDP  ratio  of  83% 
compares favorably with that of other advanced economies and competitors such as the US 
and Japan, respectively at 103% and 230%. EU is one of the core areas of global innovation. 
In terms of Research and Development expenditure it is not far behind the US, while in terms 
of number of researchers and patent application actually outperforms it.  
Europe and the EU offer a mature legal environment, with adequate protection for investors 
and  intellectual  property.  Its  macroeconomic  policies  remain  stability-oriented  and  its 
financial system is both mature and sound. Five out of the ten highest ranked countries in the 
latest Global Competitiveness Index are EU countries. 
Furthermore, I would like to emphasize, apart of Eurozone, there are other countries in the 
Eastern  and  Southeastern  Europe  which  offer  a  qualitatively  different  picture.  Up  to  2008 
they  included  some  of  the  fastest  growing  emerging  economies.  These  are  fast  growing 
economies, with better demographic trends. They offer untapped growth potential, in terms of 
qualified  work  force,  business  friendly  environment  and  stable  institutions.  European 
integration  process  has  been  the  main  anchor  and  major  driving  force  of  growth  and 
convergence. Therefore, I strongly urge countries of the SEE region to dedicate substantial 
efforts  towards  a  closer  regional  integration  in  infrastructure,  markets,  education  and  legal 
framework.  Deeper  economic  regional  integration  will  increase  the  competitiveness  of  the 
region from European and global perspective.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Lately, efforts have been made towards a closer regional integration, making the region more 
attractive to potential foreign investors. With a deeper regional integration, a better anchoring 
in the EU convergence process and more funding, the Eastern and Southeastern Europe has 
much to offer to Europe and to the global economy.  
The  periphery  of  the  euro  zone  or  the  future  new  members  provide  many  attractive 
investment  opportunities  in  development  projects  in  infrastructure,  trade,  exploitation  of 
natural  resources,  energy  and  production  capacities.  Most  importantly  the  development  of 
these strategic sectors is designed within the framework of the European development plans 
and the future to be larger European economy. Therefore investing in the region would mean 
to invest in the future of the European economy itself.  
Dear Participants, 
A prosperous and integrated European Economy and confident single currency provides a 
better  anchor  for  the  future  of  our  economic,  financial  and  institutional  convergence  and 
therefore  additional  benefits  for  the  European  economy  itself.  European  economy  is  an 
important  partner  in  global  scale,  accounting  for  a  substantial  share  of  global  demands, 
financing,  education  and  technology  advancement.  The  strength  of  European  economy  is 
mutually beneficial for Europe and its partners, including China.  
Considering  the  past  and  the  present  state  of  economic,  social  political  and  intellectual 
affairs, I remain firmly convinced in the ability of the Europe to rise up to current and future 
challenges to reintroduce itself as the land of opportunity and prosperity. Europe will be an 
important partner for China and the global economy. Before I leave the floor I would like to 
bring  to  your  attention  a  very  old  Chinese  proverb:  “No  one  who  can  rise  before  dawn 
360 days a year fails to make his family rich”.  
Thank for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
