Andrew Bailey: Challenges of prudential regulation 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Society  of 
Business Economists Annual Dinner, London, 3 June 2013. 
 Thank you for inviting me this evening – it is a great pleasure to have this opportunity and 
particularly at a time when we are embarking on major reforms to policymaking in the area of 
financial regulation. 
The  financial  crisis  has  provided  hard  lessons  on  what  happens  when  the  stability  of  the 
financial system is found wanting. It has reminded us how much we depend upon the supply 
of critical services from banks, insurers, investment firms, asset managers and other parts of 
the financial sector. If you take the banks as Exhibit One, there is good reason to curse them, 
but  at  the  same  time  recent  experiences  have  only  served  to  emphasise  how  much  we 
depend  upon  them,  like  it  or  not.  The  new  legislation  on  financial  regulation  in  the  UK 
emphasises the importance of the continuity of supply of critical financial services. This is a 
permanent public policy objective, and rightly so. I use the term “permanent” deliberately to 
distinguish  this  objective  from  the  support  provided  by  Too  Big  /  Important  to  Fail,  which 
should not be permanent. 
The Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England, the FPC, has the task of identifying, 
monitoring  and  taking  action  to  remove  or  reduce  risks  with  a  view  to  protecting  and 
enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  in  the  UK.  These  risks  at  the  level  of  the 
system  can  include  those  arising  from  structural  features  of  financial  markets,  from  the 
distribution of risk within the financial system, and from unsustainable levels of leverage, debt 
or credit growth. The emphasis here is very clearly on ensuring the resilience of the financial 
system. 
But  our  objective  is  not  to  achieve  resilience  at  any  cost  –  our  actions  must  not  have  a 
significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of 
the  UK  economy  in  the  medium  or  long  term.  Moreover,  and  here  you  will  recognise  the 
symmetry with the objectives of the MPC, the legislation provides that, subject to achieving 
our  primary  objective  for  financial  stability  –  resilience  –  the  FPC  must  also  support  “the 
economic  policy  of  Her  Majesty’s  Government,  including  its  objectives  for  growth  and 
employment”. 
The reforms have also created the new Prudential Regulation Authority as part of the Bank of 
England.  Here,  the  statutory  objective  of  the  microprudential  regulator  is  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  the  firms  which  we  prudentially  regulate  –  banks,  insurers  and  major 
investment firms. Moreover, our objective of safety and soundness sits in the context of the 
stability of the financial system. What does that mean? One clear example is that we are not 
a no firm failure regulator. Orderly failure which does not disrupt our statutory objectives is 
part of supporting a functioning market economy. 
We have learned the hard way that financial stability is essential for supporting growth and 
employment.  We  have  seen 
the 
consequences in terms of lost output and the need to use public money to counteract the 
inability of the tools of the day to deal with the threat of the collapse of the system. We have 
also seen the long-lasting effects of that loss of financial stability. I remember that in the early 
stages of the financial crisis, most forecasts suggested a recovery would take hold in a year 
or so, on the assumption that the policy tools available at the time would be effective. That 
did not happen. 
A crucial lesson from that experience was the importance of policy coordination, which is why 
it is so much at the heart of the new role of the Bank of England. The remits of the MPC and 
the  effects  of  damaging 
financial  stability,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
FPC require the committees to explain how they have regard to the policies of each other. In 
the  last  year,  we  have  seen  that  coordination  at  work.  Almost  a  year  ago,  the  Bank  and 
Treasury  introduced  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme.  The  Bank  also  introduced  an 
extended  collateralised  term  repo  facility.  At  that  time,  the  FSA  eased  banks  liquid  asset 
requirements following a recommendation from the FPC, and also the FSA relaxed capital 
requirements  on  eligible  net  new  bank  lending  as  part  of  a  deliberate  set  of  actions  to 
combine the objective of resilience with supporting activity in the economy. 
Since then, the focus has been on the capital of the banks more than anything else. The FPC 
has recommended to the PRA that it should seek to establish a minimum level of capital on 
the  final  Basel  3  measure  of  at  least  7%  after  taking  account  of  three  issues,  namely 
uncertainty around asset valuation in more vulnerable portfolios, possible future conduct of 
business costs, and aggressive use of risk weightings. A further test is to consider whether 
banks  are  making  acceptable  progress  towards  the  Basel  3  minimum  leverage  ratio 
(leverage is a simple concept in many respects, but it is confusing in one respect, namely 
that you might – but Basel doesn’t – describe this as a maximum leverage ratio). 
The PRA is in discussion with the banks on the issue of capital. I read a lot on this most days 
of the week. Let me make a few points.  Many commentators and journalists have  worried 
publicly that these recommendations will lead to lower bank lending. I want to reassure you, 
that  is  not  the  case.  Capital  is  not  money  that  has  to  be  stashed  away  for  a  rainy  day. 
Essentially,  it  is  the  shareholders’  stake  in  the  company.  In  non-financial  companies, 
shareholder capital or equity is used to finance the acquisition of assets. The same is true for 
banks. Equity finances the provision of loans to households and companies. In that sense, 
additional  capital  supports  lending  by  banks  and  does  not  substitute  for  it.  Higher  capital 
ensures that enough of the finance raised by banks is in a form that is capable of absorbing 
losses without the banks going bust. 
Much of the discussion on capital is couched in terms of a ratio to risk-weighted assets. But 
another more basic yardstick of a bank’s ability to withstand losses is the leverage ratio. This 
is simply the bank’s capital expressed as a proportion of its assets. So a further test that we 
should  consider  is  whether  banks  are  making  acceptable  progress  towards  the  Basel 3 
minimum leverage ratio. Basel 3 requires that banks have leverage ratios in excess of 3%. 
In asking banks to have a larger share of equity on their balance sheet, we are for the most 
part dealing with legacy issues. The whole point of this exercise is to move more rapidly to 
put the past and its problems behind us. This emphasis on legacy explains why it is possible 
to want more capital to back old risks while easing the capital requirements on new lending 
to the real economy. Frankly, this is about convincingly putting the past behind us. 
We have not yet released numbers on the capital requirements for each bank. At the end of 
March,  the  FPC  –  consistent  with  its  remit  –  announced  that  UK  banks  had  around  a 
£25 billion  capital  shortfall  against  the  7%  Basel  3  yardstick.  To  be  clear,  that  £25  billion 
referred to the shortfall in banks’ balance sheets at the end of 2012. And at the time of the 
FPC’s  announcement,  I  said  that  firms  had  already  made  plans  to  deal  with  half  of  the 
£25 billion  number. The PRA  has  translated  all of  that  into firm  by firm numbers.  And,  the 
PRA Board is taking a view on whether for each firm it agrees with the quantum of capital 
implied by the FPC’s figure, and the timing of action it requires from banks. This is entirely 
consistent  with  the  “comply  or  explain”  nature  of  FPC  recommendations  to  the  PRA.  We 
have  not  released  bank  by  bank  numbers  because  as  a  prudential  supervisor  we  want  to 
spend  time  discussing  with  each  bank  our  judgement  on  the  need  for  capital,  and  their 
judgement on the actions they can take. I make no apology for doing this quietly. I am much 
more interested in the outcomes that the running commentary. 
Within the past two weeks, you will have read that RBS and Lloyds now have plans to make 
good their capital shortfall without raising new equity. Some commentators have written that 
this means RBS and Lloyds have been let off the hook. I have to tell you that is not true, it 
was  always  envisaged  that  both  banks  would  achieve  their  capital  enhancements  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
restructuring  their  balance  sheets  without  reducing  their  lending  to  the  UK  economy. 
Moreover, both of those institutions have come a long way from their original business plans, 
and are consequently much safer thanks to FSA and now PRA pressure. These banks have 
agreed to do what we have asked and we will hold them to that. This is a regulator’s promise. 
As we near the end of a timely but not rushed process, we will be communicating in the next 
few weeks the headline results of this work. 
Finally, there is also comment that nobody has yet raised new equity capital, or announced 
an intention to do so. True, but that is not the only way to increase capital relative to assets. 
What  has  not  gone  unnoticed  is  the  reasonably  steady  stream  of  disposals  by  UK  banks, 
both of businesses and assets. At the end of last week, for instance, the last elements of one 
of  the  more  infamous  assets  of  the  crisis,  the  so-called  HBOS  Alt-A  US  mortgage  assets 
were sold. We are happy to see these disposals happen. 
I mentioned earlier the steps taken last summer at the time of the introduction of the FLS. 
The  evidence  on  credit  creation  in  the  UK  economy  is  however  mixed.  Funding  costs  for 
banks have fallen, which I think is a necessary pre-condition of stronger lending. 
Net  lending  in  the  UK  was  broadly  flat  in  the  second  half  of  last  year  up  modestly  in  the 
remainder of this year. This compares with an expectation prior to the launch of the Funding 
for Lending Scheme that net lending would decline over last year and this. I emphasise this 
point because the record of the first year of FLS needs to be judged against a worse outlook 
for lending a year ago. 
Net lending to large businesses remains weak, but these companies tend to have access to 
alternative  sources  of  external  finance,  such  as  corporate  bond  markets  and  such  bond 
issuance has been very strong so far this year, more than double the quarterly average pre-
crisis. 
Small and medium-sized enterprises are more reliant on banks for external finance. Survey 
evidence suggests some improvement in the pricing of loans to small firms, but applications 
for  credit  have  not  yet  picked  up,  and  net  lending  to  SME’s  remained  negative  in  the  first 
quarter of this year. Survey evidence suggests that both lenders and borrowers expect an 
increase in firms’ demand for loans. This is the pattern also seen by firms surveyed by the 
Bank  of  England’s  regional  Agents.  But,  the  extent  of  any  increase  will  depend  on  the 
macroeconomic  outlook,  as  well  as  the  perceived  reliability  of  bank  credit  as  a  source  of 
finance. 
There is, I have to say, a sense of déjà vu here, in that twenty years ago, coming out of the 
recession of the early 1990s there was a concern about SME lending. Then, too, it was hard 
to  untangle  lack  of  supply  and  lack  of  demand  as  causes.  A  lot  work  was  done  then, 
including by the Bank of England, to seek to understand better the causes of the problem. 
This time, there remains a need for such work, a point that I will come to in a moment. But, 
as the central bank, we have this time put our toolkit to work more directly. 
It is important here to be clear on the role of a central bank. Our role is to ensure access to 
credit – to take steps to unblock the supply of lending. Although we can have some influence 
over the supply of credit generally, as we have with the FLS, it is not for us to judge the credit 
risks of, and hence the access to and price of credit (in terms of the risk premium above the 
risk-free rate) for individual borrowers. Coming out of the crisis, we want to see the market 
economy restored and functioning. We have recently announced an extension to the Funding 
for Lending Scheme, so that drawings are now possible until early 2015. We expect that this 
should provide confidence to scheme members to expand their lending to the real economy 
by virtue of them having greater confidence in their future access to funding. The extension 
also expands the FLS to cover lending to financial leasing and factoring corporations (which 
are a source of credit for SMEs). 
We have been clear that the design of the extended FLS particularly encourages lending to 
SME’s in determining access to the FLS. Incentives to lend to SME’s are therefore in place, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
no doubt about that. But we cannot promise that the results will follow almost as night follows 
day, because there is more to it than that. Let me end, by advertising a piece of work done 
by your chairman-elect, chairing a group that recently produced a report on SME lending in 
Northern Ireland. In that report, Kate and her colleagues point to structural market failures 
affecting  the  supply  of  finance  to  SMEs,  which  mainly  relate  to  imperfect  or  asymmetric 
information, and which tend to be exacerbated in times of heighted economic uncertainty and 
risk  aversion.  Likewise,  the  report  points  to  information  failures  on  the  demand  side  for 
businesses seeking finance. The report goes on to note that over the last five years there 
has been a market correction as banks have moved away from a lending approach based on 
property as security to one that is more based on evidence of a business plan that indicates 
returns to the firm that will repay borrowing. Linked to this shift, a property debt overhang is 
leading businesses with such property exposures to experience more constrained access to 
finance,  something  that,  other  things  equal,  will  take  time  to  work  through.  Our  evidence 
tends  to  support  this  dichotomy  between  the  position  of  companies  where  commercial 
property is either the source of their business or the source of their security for borrowing, 
and those where there is no such dependence. The conclusions I draw from this are that as 
well as our part in creating the right incentives for credit to be on offer, there is a need to 
extend the work done by Kate and her colleagues, to consider information flows in terms of 
particularly  of  credit  assessments,  and  the  issue  of  whether  some  types  of  commercial 
property are acting as a restraint or access to finance. It is also consistent with comments I 
hear from businesses and banks that the “distribution” capacity of SME lending lags a long 
way behind the mortgage market. 
In conclusion, we are determined to put behind us the legacy of issues that have called into 
question  the  capital  position  of  banks  during  the  crisis.  We  are  approaching  the  sixth 
anniversary of the start of the crisis, so this is hardly overly hasty action. The resilience of the 
financial system is our objective, but this is not just for its own sake but also to support the 
economy and credit creation. The evidence in credit creation is so far mixed, which is not in 
my view a mark of the failure of policy since this operates with a lag. 
But  it  does  indicate  that  all  of  us  should  go  on  looking  for  changes  that  will  help.  The 
distribution and information issues around SME lending identified by Kate and her colleagues 
are one such area, and in my view more focus needs to be put on the consequences of debt 
overhangs  linked  to  commercial  property  in  those  parts  of  the  market  where  there  are 
problems. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
