Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Basic principles guiding monetary 
policy in Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
annual dinner of Uganda’s Bankers’ Association, Kampala, 30 November 2012. 
 The Chairman and members of Uganda Bankers’ Association, 
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, 
Distinguished invited guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I am very pleased to be here with you at the traditional end of the year annual dinner of the 
Uganda Bankers’ Association. I would like to thank the Chairman of the UBA for inviting me 
to be guest of honour at this occasion, which is an honour I appreciate greatly. I want to take 
this opportunity to make a few remarks about the basic principles which guide our monetary 
policy  in  Uganda,  especially  in  the  light  of  the  reforms  we  have  introduced  over  the  last 
18 months which, of course, are very pertinent for the banking industry. 
As you all know, the BOU introduced a new monetary policy framework at the start of the last 
fiscal  year.  The  new  framework  is  an  inflation  targeting  lite  framework  (ITL),  similar  in  its 
basic  features  to  that  used  by  many  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  and  emerging 
markets around the world. The primary objective of our monetary policy is to hold the annual 
rate of core inflation to 5 percent over the medium term. That does not mean that we will aim 
to  keep  core  inflation  at  five  percent  all  of  the  time,  because  that  is  neither  possible  nor 
desirable. Prices are subject to supply side shocks which can drive inflation up well above 
policy targets, as happened in 2011. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  realistically  prevent  inflation  from  rising  in  the  short  term  if  prices 
have been hit by a large supply shock, such as a food price shock, in Uganda or anywhere 
else in the world. What monetary policy can realistically achieve is to bring core inflation back 
down over a period of time, which in most cases will probably be in the region of a year at 
least, depending on the size and nature of the shock. When faced with a supply side shock 
to prices, of the type which hit our economy in 2011, the goal of the Central Bank must be to 
ensure that the initial rise in prices triggered by the shock does not feed into a self reinforcing 
spiral of higher prices, which would lead to higher inflation becoming persistent. The Central 
Bank  cannot  prevent  a  temporary  rise  in  inflation,  but  it  must  not  allow  this  to  turn  into 
permanently  higher  inflation.  To  avoid  this,  monetary  policy  has  to  be  tightened  to  curb 
domestic  demand,  so  that  weaker  demand  gradually  offsets  the  inflationary  effects  of  the 
supply  side  shock.  This  is  why  we  tightened  monetary  policy  in  2011,  by  raising  interest 
rates. As you may remember, the Central Bank Rate (CBR) was raised very sharply in the 
second  half  of  2011  because  the  supply  side  shock  to  prices  was  itself  very  large;  for 
example, annual food price inflation rose to 50 percent in September 2011. 
Once we saw evidence that inflationary pressures were abating and we were convinced that 
inflation was on a downward path, we were able to begin cautiously easing monetary policy, 
by reducing the CBR in February of this year. Inflation has now been brought back down to 
our medium term target of 5 percent. Looking ahead over the next 12 months, we intend to 
set  our  monetary  policy,  using  the  CBR,  to  maintain  core  inflation  as  close  as  possible  to 
5 percent. 
Although inflation is the primary target of our monetary policy, we are also concerned with 
the growth of real output, which is a secondary objective of monetary policy. More specifically 
we  aim  to  ensure that real  output  is  in  line  with  its  potential  level,  which  is  determined  by 
supply side growth. This means that, in circumstances where real output is below its potential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
level, we will use monetary policy to support a recovery of output provided that this does not 
undermine  our  ability  to  achieve  our  inflation  target. In  some  circumstances,  notably  when 
the economy has suffered an aggregate supply shock, as was the case in 2011, there is an 
unavoidable  conflict  between  achieving  both  the  inflation  and  output  targets.  In  these 
circumstances the inflation target has to take precedence, because otherwise the credibility 
of  the  Central  Bank  to  control  inflation  will  be  jeopardized.  However  there  are  other 
circumstances  where  there  is  not  an  inherent  conflict  between  the  inflation  and  output 
targets. With the supply side shocks which hit our economy in 2011 having now abated, the 
conflict between the inflation and output targets has also largely dissipated, although it could 
re-emerge if the economy were hit by further supply side shocks in the near future. 
We estimate that the potential growth of real output of our economy – which is determined by 
the growth of the labour force, capital investment and productivity growth – is currently in the 
region  of  6–7  percent  per  annum.  In  the  last  fiscal  year,  real  output  growth  was  only 
3.4 percent; about half of the potential growth rate. As a consequence, a negative output gap 
has opened up. Actual output is lower than potential mainly because of constraints on the 
demand  side,  which  include  constraints  arising  from  macroeconomy  policy  and  those 
emanating from the weaknesses in the global economy. Although we expect that real GDP 
growth will pick up in 2012/13, it will not be anywhere near fast enough to close the negative 
output gap and I do not think that real output in the economy will be restored to its potential 
level before 2013/14 at the earliest. 
A  negative  output  gap  tends  to  dampen  inflationary  pressures,  because  it  means  that 
aggregate  demand  in the  economy  is  weak relative  to  aggregate  supply.  Consequently,  in 
the  current  circumstances  it  is  possible  to  use  monetary  policy  to  try  and  boost  domestic 
demand  and,  therefore,  real  output  without  jeopardizing  our  objective  of  controlling  core 
inflation at 5 percent. This is why we have reduced the CBR over the last few months; we 
would like interest rates to fall to stimulate a recovery of bank lending and thus a recovery of 
demand for goods and services from the private sector. 
However, it is necessary to recognize the constraints and limits on our ability to achieve our 
objectives for output. First, as I have already mentioned, the current coincidence of interests 
between  our  inflation  and  output  objectives  will  only  last  as  long  as  there  are  no  further 
supply  sides  shocks  to  the  economy.  Secondly,  in  an  economy  which  still  has  a  relatively 
shallow financial system, the overall impact of monetary policy on aggregate spending in the 
economy is not large. The main transmission channel of monetary policy to the real economy 
is through bank lending to the private sector, but the stock of bank lending is only 16 percent 
of  GDP.  A  large  share  of  household  spending  in  the  economy  is  not  directly  affected  by 
monetary  policy,  although  there  may  be  some  indirect  effects  through  employment. 
Furthermore, there are other factors, as well as monetary policy, which affect both the supply 
of, and demand for, bank credit, such as the level of household indebtedness and the value 
of assets such as land and property which are used as collateral for loans. 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  from  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and  make  a  few  remarks 
about  its  operational  modalities,  and  in  particular  the  role  of  the  Central  Bank  Rate  in  our 
monetary  policy  framework.  In  effect  the  CBR  performs  a  dual  role.  It  acts  as  a  guide  for 
short term interest rates and it provides a very visible signal of the stance of monetary policy. 
In modern monetary policy frameworks, the signaling of the stance of monetary policy plays 
a  very  important  role  in  guiding  expectations  about  the  economy  and  the  actions  of  the 
Central  Bank. That  is  why  we  announce  the  CBR  publicly  at  the  start  of  every  month  and 
explain the thinking behind our interest rate decision. 
Since the ITL framework was introduced, we have been able, using our regular interventions 
in the money market, gradually to bring short term interbank interest rates quite closely into 
line with the CBR. The average 7 day interbank rate for November was 12.6 percent, which 
is very close to this month’s CBR of 12.5 percent. In turn other interest rates such as those 
paid on wholesale deposits are now also moving roughly in line with the CBR. As such the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
CBR is now proving quite effective in influencing the marginal cost of funds for commercial 
banks.  We  have  been  less  successful  in  influencing  the  path  of  bank  lending  rates;  they 
followed the CBR up in the second half of 2011 but have been much slower in coming down 
this year, with the result that interest rate spreads have widened. I hope that, as our financial 
sector becomes more competitive and sophisticated, we will see bank lending rates become 
more responsive to changes in the marginal cost of funds for banks and interest rate spreads 
being reduced. 
Finally  I  will  briefly  touch  on  the  instruments  of  monetary  policy.  In  the  past,  the  main 
instrument  of  monetary  policy  was  the  regular  primary  auction  of  Government  securities, 
which  we  used  as  a  tool  to  control  the  monetary  base.  Under  the  ITL  monetary  policy 
framework, our operating target is the interbank interest rate, not the monetary base, and the 
tool  we  use  to  influence  the  interest  rate  is  secondary  market  operations  in  the  money 
market, mainly repos and reverse repos. The primary auctions of Government Securities are 
now  used  to  fund  the  Government’s  domestic  borrowing  requirement  and  to  refinance  the 
existing stock of securities as they mature, rather than as an instrument of monetary policy. 
Furthermore,  the  Government  will  fund  fully  its  domestic  borrowing  requirement  from  the 
market,  by  issuing  securities,  without  recourse  to  any  funding  from  the  Central  Bank.  It  is 
possible that we might occasionally use a primary auction of securities for monetary policy 
purposes in the future, but this will be the exception rather than the rule and if we do so we 
will announce this explicitly, to avoid any confusion. 
I  hope  that  you  have  found  these  remarks  useful.  As  I  noted  earlier,  transparency  and 
communication play a vital role in modern monetary policy frameworks, so it is very important 
that  the  public  and  especially  decision  makers  in  the  banking  and  business  communities 
have a good understanding of what the Central Bank aims to achieve and how this will affect 
the economy. 
Lastly, I would like to congratulate the Uganda Bankers’ Association and its members for all 
of their efforts to over the course of this year and in particular for their work in developing and 
promoting a code of ethics and good banking practices to guide all members of the UBA. 
Thank you for listening to me. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
