Pentti Hakkarainen: Debate on “Re-evaluating the universal banking 
model: Can the Volcker, Vickers or Liikanen rules make banks safer?” 
Remarks  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the 
4th Future  of  Banking  Summit,  organised  by  Economist  Conferences,  Paris,  26  February 
2013. 
 Thoughts on the reasons why the universal bank model exists, i.e. why it is valuable 
“There are benefits from combining different business lines under one roof” 
There are a number of reasons why banks combine several business lines under one roof: 
– 
– 
strive for optimal use of capital 
diversification of risk as distribution of profits and losses of different business lines 
are less than fully correlated 
synergies from combination of different expertises 
servicing  the  multiple  needs  of  clients,  especially  in  the  case  of  corporate  clients 
(one-stop-shopping) 
 There  is  now  one  way  of  structuring  a  universal  bank.  E.g.  some  universal  banks  have 
numerous business lines under one legal unit, whereas other universal banks operate as a 
holding group of separate companies. The business lines or legal units can be defined based 
on e.g. business areas or functions and/or geographical reach. 
The way banks aim to be structured is crystallised in the strategy, but e.g. M&A history and 
ability  to  achieve  organic  growth  has  had  a  great  impact  on  how  universal  banks  are 
structured today. 
“However, some banks already see the value of applying a universal bank model 
where various business activities are clearly structured and business lines are legally 
separated” 
Even  without  regulation requiring so, many  banks  already  manage  different  business  lines 
separately, which closely resembles a structure with different legal units. 
– 
Banks find management, risk management and HR/recruiting easier if the business 
is separated along logical units, i.e. functions/activities which fall naturally together. 
From a risk management perspective, portfolios are already managed separately. 
In  some  cases  an  important  driver  for  legal  separation  of  businesses  is  “Disaster 
management”,  i.e.  keeping  particularly  risky  or  vulnerable  business  in  a  separate 
legal unit thus making it easier to divest/withdraw  without exposing the rest of the 
operations for contagion by cutting linkages rapidly. 
 There are also benefits of being organised along separated business lines. 
– 
The pricing of internal funding of business units can be arranged at arm’s length with 
risk-adjusted transfer pricing. 
Allocation of economic capital can be done by business line and even at the level of 
individual customers, which support decision making and carrying out the business 
in an optimal way. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
“Making the structure of universal banks clearer would simplify the governance of 
banks and improve risk management.” 
I have some insights from practice on what the consequences of legal separation of business 
lines could be. 
In my view legal separation would benefit in particular the governance and risk management 
of banks. 
– 
As the HLEG report states, I have also experienced that the cultures of traditional 
retail  banking  and  investment  banking/trading  activities  are  very  different  and 
blended cultures can cause problems. 
The  nature  of  the  business  and  the  attitude  towards  risk-taking  are  different.  In 
investment banking and trading activities profits are generated by actively seeking 
risk-taking  opportunities  by  opening  risky  positions. Whether  these  risk  exposures 
had good risk-adjusted return prospects, has often been of secondary importance. 
Models and warning signs flagged by risk management were often disregarded; high 
risks  were  taken  even  if  the  probability  of  success  was  low  and  the  potential 
downside was significant. In traditional retail banking, profits are mainly earned from 
interest rate margin income from long term customer relationships in a more stable 
manner. Credit quality assessment and pricing policy lie at the core of the business. 
Also the time horizon differs markedly. In the trading activity the results settled and 
assessed every single day. In retail banking profits are generated over several years 
time period. 
The  responsibility  and  independence  of  the  management  is  enhanced  if  business 
lines are separated to legal entities. 
Separation also facilitates management, risk management and HR/recruiting, as the 
objective  and  needs  are  clearer  in  a  separately  defined  business  unit.  Aligning 
incentives  to  the  strategy  of  the  business  line  by  means  of  targets  included  in 
remuneration schemes will also be easier. 
If  the  operations  to  be  separated  are  logical  units  then  it  is  most  probable  that 
required reporting systems to support governance are already in place. 
     Separation  will  also  facilitate  monitoring  by  external  stakeholders  thus  improving  market 
discipline,  which  can  be  seen  as  an  extension  to  the  internal  corporate  governance 
mechanisms. 
– 
Specifically, separation may improve transparency and reduce uncertainty about the 
quality  of  banks  as  an  investment  opportunity  thus  facilitating  pricing  of  the 
separated  parts.  This,  on  the  other  hand,  would  improve  the  access  to  market 
funding among above average quality banks 
Moreover making the structure of universal banks clearer through separation of businesses 
also facilitates the task of supervisors and authorities responsible for resolution. 
– 
Separation  will  certainly  facilitate  the  application  of  recovery  and  resolution 
measures hence reducing the likelihood of public bail-outs, which would in turn have 
dramatic implications for e.g. funding costs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Differences between the proposals of Independent Commission on Banking and High-
level Expert Group 
“The difference in the location of the ring-fence is important, ...” 
John Vickers has made very insightful comments on the compatibility of the proposal of his 
group, the Independent Commission  of  Banking  with  the  proposal  of  the  High-level  Expert 
Group. 
I have a few comments on this theme: 
– 
ICB  and  HLEG  proposals  started  from  different  directions;  the  approach  taken  by 
ICB  started  from  the  narrow  banking  philosophy,  whereas  HLEG  focused  on  the 
most  volatile  parts  of  banking  business.  However,  the  groups  ended  up  with 
qualitatively similar proposals. 
As John Vickers has stated already, the main question as regards the position of the 
ring-fence is “Where should securities underwriting be; in the investment bank (such 
as  in  ICB)  or  in  the  deposit  bank  (as  in  HLEG)?”  Another  difference  is  that  ICB’s 
proposal includes geographical restrictions as non-EEA customers cannot be served 
by  the  deposit  bank.  This  highlights  the  focus  on  the  viability  of  the  UK  banking 
sector in the ICB. 
HLEG  is  based  on  the  view  that  underwriting  is  closely  connected  with  corporate 
banking and thus naturally belongs to the deposit bank. From the corporate client’s 
perspective, issuing a bond is an alternative way of financing to taking a bank loan. 
From  the  bank’s  perspective,  there  are  similar  elements  in  both,  because  both 
involve  a  customer  credit  quality  assessment,  although  in  underwriting  the  bank’s 
own position taking is normally quite limited. 
It  is  true  that  a  promise  of  market  making  can  be  an  important  complement  to  a 
successful underwriting of a bond. However, separate entities within the bank group 
can well provide the underwriting and market making services without any additional 
cost to the customer. 
   HLEG did emphasise the importance that authorities require additional separation if that is 
needed to make the recovery and resolution plans credible, a measure that would bring the 
HLEG separation proposal closer to the ICB ring-fencing proposal. 
The proposals are also somewhat different with respect to the height of the ring-fence. The 
ICB 
the 
Parliamentary Commission of Banking, tasked with the pre-legislative review of the bill, the 
ring-fence  will  now  be  “electrified”  by  giving  authorities  reserve  powers  to  require  full 
separation. 
included  restrictions  on  cross-ownership, 
for  example.  As  suggested  by 
“... but the difference in capital requirements imposed on retail banking may have 
greater implications for banks.” 
However, in my view the fundamental difference between the two proposals is the difference 
in capital requirements. 
– 
ICB imposes an extra capital requirement on the ring-fenced retail bank (~deposit 
bank). 
The  HLEG  was  more  concerned  of  strengthening  the  capitalisation  of  the  trading 
entity  and  therefore  suggested  a  review  of  capital  requirements  on  trading  book 
requirements.  It  also  suggested  a  review  on  capital  requirements  on  real  estate 
related lending. HLEG did, however, not make any explicit requirement on imposing 
higher capital requirements. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 I do recognise that the requirement to issue designated bail-in instruments can be 
interpreted  as  higher  capital  requirements.  These  would,  however,  apply  across 
business lines not only to the deposit bank. 
Some banks might be able to implement separation without significant costs as many banks 
already have the needed governance system in place, whereas suggested changes to the 
funding structure (tougher capital requirements) could entail additional costs. 
I  tend  to  agree  with  the  critiques  that  it  can  be  challenging  for  the  ring-fenced  banks  to 
remain viable as the relatively narrowly defined operations might not be sufficient to generate 
the  profits  needed  to  build  up  the  required  level  of  capital.  On  the  other  hand,  the  HLEG 
proposal would not separate more activities than mandated, and this might be the voluntary 
outcome in some banks. 
It  would  also  be  very  important  to  ensure  that  capital  requirements  are  aligned  globally  to 
ensure the level playing field of banks. Now ICB proposal will set the UK banks and foreign 
subsidiaries  in  a  disadvantaged  position  in  comparison  to  foreign  banks’  non-subsidiary 
operations in the UK and with non-UK banks which can provide UK customers with financing 
elsewhere. 
Finally, I would like to highlight the importance of sufficient loss absorption capacity across 
business areas. As highlighted in recent work by Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig, imposing 
higher capital requirements has a positive impact on bank incentives and behaviour. Among 
other things, well-capitalised banks maintain their lending also during downturns. 
Proprietary trading and market making – is the question whether they are separable or 
whether they should be separated? 
The first  argument for  the  approach taken  by  HLEG  is  based  on the  desired  scope  of  the 
safety net. 
– 
It is important to note that in the proposed separation, the question is not whether 
certain type of market making supports the real economy or not; as a starting point, 
all  banking  activities  support  the  real  economy.  Instead,  the  question  is  whether 
there is a market failure of some degree in certain banking activities so that those 
activities need to be publicly supported by giving them access to insured deposits as 
a funding base. I.e., is it so that market making cannot be carried out in a profitable 
manner without cheap funding from deposit taking? If that is the case, then it means 
that market making is cross-subsidized. 
To draw on a recent comment by Darrell Duffie “the more limited the types of risks 
that  are  legally  permitted  by  those  within  the  safety  net,  the  less  opportunity  for 
moral  hazard”  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  as  small  a 
fraction of banking activity as possible, preferably only the activities essential to the 
functioning  of  the  society,  i.e.  the  deposit  taking,  payment  system,  and  perhaps 
lending to households and SMEs, ought to benefit from a government safety net. 
When deciding what activities are allowed to be funded with insured deposits, there 
may of course be a question of level playing field between different jurisdictions. But 
that  should  be  addressed  via  sufficient  harmonisation  of  the  structural  measures 
taken, not by being too lax about extending the use of deposits. 
In  short,  there  appears  to  be  no  clear  case  that  market  making,  excluding  few 
exceptions,  ought  to  benefit  from  explicit  or  implicit  government  guarantees.  So, 
market making should not have access to insured deposits. 
   The second argument underlying the HLEG proposal relates to whether it is possible to make 
the distinction between proprietary trading and market making. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    in 
the  US 
trading  and  market  making.  E.g. 
From a regulatory and supervisory perspective it is very challenging to draw a clear 
line  between  proprietary 
the 
implementation  of  the  Volcker  rule  has  been  delayed  as  a  result  and  when 
implemented the supervisors will have to rely on tedious transaction-by-transaction 
supervision. 
In  its  pure  form,  market  making  is  not  about  taking  open  positions  and  the  price 
spreads given re very narrow. Only when things do not go as planned inventory is 
building up and this is when we get closer to the territory of proprietary trading. 
At  the  level  of  the  trading  floor,  it  is  relatively  easy  to  distinguish  the  proprietary 
trading and market making. 
However,  things  can  also  be  hidden  if  so  desired,  hence  making  the  supervision 
potentially very difficult. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
