Loi M Bakani: Financial inclusion and financial literacy in Papua New 
Guinea 
Welcome address by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
National  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  Development Workshop,  Port  Moresby, 
22 August 2013. 
 Honorable Don P Polye, MP, Minister of Treasury 
UN Resident Coordinator, 
Our colleagues representing key Department ad Ministries, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Welcome. 
I would also like to extend a special welcome to the Pacific Financial Inclusion Program, our 
partner in conducting this workshop. I offer in advance my thanks to our Session Chairs and 
Panelists in the topic discussions later today and tomorrow for the wealth of insight they will 
impart into our deliberations. My deepest gratitude also to those who have travelled from the 
provinces and from abroad to take part in our first national strategy for financial inclusion and 
financial literacy workshop. 
Papua  New  Guinea  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  innovations  and  commitments  aimed  at 
building  an  inclusive  financial  system,  because  we  recognize  its  role  in  enhancing 
sustainable  economic  growth  and  development.  The  National  Informal  Economy  Policy’s 
included  Financial  Inclusion  as  one  of  its  two  main  pillars  for  2011–2015.  And  earlier  this 
year,  the  National  Executive  Council  endorsed  the  Centre  for  Excellence  in  Financial 
Inclusion (CEFI). 
Whether it is creating new technologies or drawing on technologies already widely available 
such  as  mobile  phones  –  our  banks  and  private  sector  actors  have  led  efforts  to  move 
beyond  cash  and  make  electronic  transfers  possible  for  more  people  in  more  places  – 
including most critically to the poor and those otherwise unable to access financial services. 
Donors and our civil society also play a vital role in making innovations work – including to 
reach  poor  and  vulnerable  groups.  Their  work  helps  to  close  capacity  gaps  &  expand  the 
opportunities  available  to  poor  people.  It  also  important  that  our  government  and  public 
leaders strike the right balance btw incentivizing innovation while ensuring new initiatives are 
fair,  inclusive,  and  sustainable.  To  this  end  Bank  of  PNG  continues  to  put  in  place 
appropriate regulations, safeguards and adequate infrastructure. 
However, financial exclusion remains astoundingly high and is most severe among women 
and  rural  and  informal  workers.  Today’s  national  workshop  on  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  literacy  is  about  coming  together  to  recognize  those  challenges  that  stand  in  our 
way. We must commit ourselves to overcoming them in a coordinated and collaborative way. 
Because we cannot solve them as one institution or one individual. 
The workshop will start with setting the parameters for what is means to build an inclusive 
financial  sector,  after  which  we  will  together  review  the  state  of  financial  inclusion  in  the 
country. I must say that I am encouraged that we are seeing double digit growth in financial 
services access points across the country, including a 200% annual growth in agents since 
2008. There is now a  wider range of financial products being offered by both existing and 
new service providers, including micro-insurance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We will also hear from financial service providers on how they have identified and segmented 
their markets, and share with us what has worked and what needs improving. Real partners 
that not only provide the system, but also can create the demand for it, are essential to bring 
down transaction costs for everyone, and especially the poor. Participating financial service 
providers and other experts will identify what regulatory and market conditions are necessary 
to encourage innovation and scale. 
We will share the findings of the BPNG/PFIP Financial Competency survey 2013. As you all 
know, financial literacy can enhance the ability of people to interface more effectively with the 
financial  system.  It  can  help  them  manage  risks  in  their  day-to-day  lives  and  plan  for  the 
future.  And,  it  can  play  an  important  role  in  promoting  savings  and  household  asset 
accumulation. These are important benefits not only for individuals but also at the national 
level.  At  the  workshop,  we  will  hear  from  financial  literacy  providers  on  successful 
approaches  which  have  improved  the  financial  behaviours  of  people  with  low  levels  of 
functional  as  well  as  financial  literacy.  Improved  financial  literacy  can  increase  economic 
participation  and  social  inclusion,  drive  competition  and  market  efficiency  in  the  financial 
services sector. 
In particular, the National Workshop will come up with concrete and measurable actions to 
overcome the key constraints excluding women. Women constitute approximately 50% of the 
country’s  7  million  people  but  disproportionally  represent  less  than  30%  of  total  financial 
services portfolio in the country. On 20 August, we gathered together 25 leaders from across 
the  country,  and  with  help  with  Women  World  Banking,  will  present 
the  main 
recommendations to you today. 
The Bank has, through our participation in the Pacific Island Working Group, reviewed our 
regulatory environment for consumer protection, the findings of which we will share with you 
today. I consider it integral to integrate consumer protection and consumer empowerment as 
a  key  pillar  of  financial  inclusion  and  will  invite  practical  suggestions  on  strengthening 
consumer protection and market conduct. 
On  the  second  day  of  this  workshop,  all  participants  will  be  assigned  to  specific  Working 
Groups  to  deliberate  on  key  topics  and  reach  consensus  on  3  priority  actions  each  to  be 
accomplished  from  2014  to  2015.  Each  group  will  present  their  priority  actions  with 
measurable targets, including delineating responsibilities and resources required to achieve 
them. 
Your role here today is of critical importance and I encourage you to discuss freely today’s 
topics  with  the  other  participants,  and  to  find  innovative  solutions  to  progress  financial 
inclusion  and  financial  literacy  for  all  Papua  New  Guineans.  To  deliver  more  effectively  & 
expand access to financial services – we need the innovation and reach of the private sector 
–  the  local  know-how  of  community  groups,  as  well  as  the  leadership  and  initiative  of 
governments. 
The road to building an inclusive financial system is long but our partnership; our collective 
effort will unlock many opportunities to extend our reach for that goal. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
