Michael Gondwe: Supervision of non-banks and microfinance 
institutions 
Remarks by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the opening ceremony 
of the Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute of Eastern and Southern Africa 
(MEFMI)  regional  workshop  on  “Supervision  of  non-banks  and  microfinance  institutions”, 
Lusaka, 8 April 2013. 
 The MEFMI Programme Officer, 
Distinguished Resource Persons, 
MEFMI Staff, 
Participants, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to officiate at this workshop on Supervision of Non-Bank Financial 
Institutions and Microfinance organised by the Financial Sector Management Programme of 
MEFMI. 
May I take this opportunity, on behalf of MEFMI and on my own behalf, to welcome you all to 
this  important  workshop  and,  in  particular,  to  welcome  you  to  Lusaka. I  urge  you  to  make 
some time to visit and sample some of the beautiful spots that our city and country has to 
offer. 
I also wish to welcome and thank our distinguished resource persons Mr. Japheth Katto from 
Capital Markets Authority of Uganda, Mr. Nkosilathi Moyo from World Vision here in Zambia, 
Mrs. Rachel Mushosho from the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and Mr. Kagisanyo Kelobang 
from  the  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  in  Tunis  for  accepting  invitations  to  present  at 
this workshop and hope that their participation will enrich the deliberations of this workshop 
as well as increase the knowledge of the participants. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Non-bank  financial  institutions  are  a  significant  component  of  the  financial  sector  as  their 
assets constitute a significant proportion of the total financial sector assets in most countries 
in the region. Similarly, microfinance institutions play a critical role in poverty alleviation and 
economic  empowerment  of  marginalized  communities  in  our  region.  As  such  these 
institutions  are  systemically  important  as  they  can  exacerbate  the  fragility  of  the  financial 
system particularly where there is lack of effective regulation. 
Over the past few years, we have seen a trend where these institutions have increased in 
numbers in our region; some have been established as part of financial conglomerates while 
others are on a standalone basis. Sadly, our supervisory and regulatory structures for this 
sector in the MEFMI region have remained rather incoherent and somewhat underdeveloped 
to handle the challenges that have been identified with this sector. The trend makes it more 
important than  ever for supervisors  in  the  region  to get together  and  talk  about matters  of 
common interest. 
I am pleased to note that over the past few years, the region has taken a proactive stance 
towards  promoting  harmonisation  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  and  the 
integration  of  financial  systems.  Through  MEFMI,  SADC,  COMESA,  the  East  African 
Community (EAC) and the West African bloc, member central banks are working together to 
promote  effective  supervisory  standards  geared  towards  achieving  long  term  goals  of 
financial inclusion and financial stability. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
regulatory structures, 
international trends and standards, and 
 integration of non-banks into the formal sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I note with gratitude that this workshop is designed to address supervisory standards in the 
non-bank and microfinance sector through three main themes, namely; 
i)  
ii)  
iii) 
These are all very important and topical issues and allow me to talk a little bit more about 
one  of  these  themes  –  the  development  of  regulatory  structures.  First,  while  there  is  a 
definite role for international standards for regulation of this sector, it is very important that 
they are implemented in a way that takes into account the individual circumstances of each 
country.  Secondly,  the  standards  we  adopt  should  in  the  end  not  impede  financial  sector 
inclusion. We need to balance this in order to achieve our overall objective which is a sound 
and efficient financial system. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is important not to assume that supervisory arrangements should be, or can be, the same 
in every country. They must be tailored to the individual circumstances of each country. As 
an example, what is appropriate for Namibia may be totally inappropriate for another country 
like Uganda, and vice versa. However, there are likely to be common characteristics that cut 
across and can enable us all to learn from each other. I do not wish to prescribe what you 
should  talk  about  throughout  this  workshop,  but  I  am  hopeful  that  what  I  have  mentioned 
above can form some discussion points in the deliberations of this workshop. It is also my 
desire that as you travel back to your respective countries, you would have learnt something 
you can implement to improve our respective financial systems. 
In conclusion, as financial markets become increasingly globalised, supervisory co-operation 
and  harmonisation  become  increasingly  important.  Organisations  such  as  MEFMI  play  an 
important role in developing capacity in the identified areas of macroeconomic and financial 
sector management. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  commend  MEFMI  which  has  been  in  the  fore  front  of  building  sustainable 
capacity in financial supervision in the sub-region. It has shown the cause for fostering best 
practices, raising awareness and helping us to improve our processes especially in this area 
of financial stability in the region in general. 
Finally, I hope that you will find this workshop stimulating and that you will enjoy your stay in 
Zambia. With these remarks, I declare this workshop officially open. 
I Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
