Benoît Cœuré: Euro banknotes – a secure means of payment and a 
symbol of Europe 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  conference  “Preparations  for  the  launch  of  the  second  series  of  euro  banknotes: 
challenges  and  opportunities”,  organised  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Central 
Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 22 April 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Henk  Esselink  for  his  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to have been invited to speak at this conference, even though – because 
of my responsibilities for Payments and Market Infrastructures – my focus is more on policies 
concerned with cashless payments than with banknotes. I am, however, convinced that cash 
and electronic payments do not compete with each other, but complement each other. The 
existence of each is justified; the one needs the other.  
As regards the role of cash in the Eurosystem, we should bear in mind that its importance for 
central banks goes beyond the issuance of banknotes. From a macroeconomic point of view 
we  are  especially  interested  in  the  share  of  euro  cash  in  circulation,  which  is  used  for 
domestic transactions in the euro area, since this is a key variable for measuring economic 
activity and price developments. Furthermore, the demand for euro banknotes is one of the 
drivers of liquidity required by the banks, which is a relevant indicator for our monetary policy 
operations. I should add, though, that banknotes are currently less relevant for the liquidity 
required by banks due to the non-standard measures taken by the Eurosystem. That said, 
the profit made on banknotes in circulation, the so-called seigniorage, remains an important 
source of income for the Eurosystem.  
However,  even  though  seigniorage  is  an  important  part  of  the  total  income  of  the 
Eurosystem,  the  ECB  has  a  neutral  stance  on  the  use  of  banknotes  as  opposed  to  other 
means  of  payment.  In  other  words,  we  neither  promote  nor  prevent  the  use  of  cash,  and 
regard  its  use  as  a  demand-driven  process.  But  neutrality  should  not  be  mistaken  for 
indifference.  On  the  contrary,  cash  is  fiduciary  money,  which  comes  from  the  Latin  word 
“fiducia”,  meaning  confidence  or  trust.  This  means  that  its  value  depends  on  whether  it  is 
trusted as a means of exchange. This is a crucial point: maintaining trust is the fundamental 
principle underlying all the Eurosystem’s activities and decisions in the field of banknotes. 
Fortunately, we can say that euro banknotes can be trusted if we look at the counterfeiting 
levels  in  recent  years.  In  2012  just  over  half  a  million  counterfeits  were  detected  and 
withdrawn – a very small proportion of the total average circulation of 14.9 billion banknotes. 
By the way, the fact that euro banknotes can be trusted is not only evident from the statistics, 
but  also  from  everyday  observation.  In  supermarkets,  for  example,  you  can  see  people 
carefully checking strawberries that cost less than €3. But the same people don’t seem to 
worry  about  checking  the  €10  banknote  they  receive  as  change  when  they  buy  those 
strawberries.  
Also, the increase in euro banknote circulation itself shows that we have built and maintained 
trust  in  the  banknotes.  At  the  end  of  last  month,  there  were  15.2  billion  banknotes  in 
circulation with a value of €896.4 billion; that’s around 150% more than at the end of 2002. 
This increase can, however, only be explained to a very small extent by the growth in the use 
of cash for transaction purposes. We estimate that around one-third of the current circulation 
value is used for transactions in the euro area. Another 25% is estimated to be in use outside 
the euro area. This means that the remaining part – around 40% – is being used as store of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
value  in  the  euro  area.  The  fact  that  around  one-third  of  the  circulation  value  is  used  for 
transactions  in  the  euro  area  means  that  any  change  in  this  proportion  will  only  affect  a 
relatively small part of the banknote circulation. And even this relatively small share is only 
affected to a limited extent by changes in payment behaviour. This is because a banknote in 
circulation can be used for many transactions during a year. In other words, a 5% increase in 
card transactions does not mean a 5% fall in banknote circulation.  
This  is  probably  one  reason  why  the  circulation  of  euro  banknotes,  even  of  the 
denominations typically used for transactions, has not declined in the last ten years despite 
the  strong  increase  in  the  number  and  value  of  card  transactions.  Indeed,  the  average 
number of card transactions in the euro area almost doubled between 2002 and 2011, from 
36  transactions  per  inhabitant  to  67.  Also  in  terms  of  value,  card  payments  saw  a  strong 
increase, from €600 billion in 2002 to €1.1 trillion in 2011.1 Nevertheless, to judge by several 
studies,  we  estimate  that  in  the  euro  area  70–80%  of  the  number  of  transactions  and  
50–60% of the value of all transactions at the point of sale are still made in cash.2 
However,  despite  the  predominance  of  cash  in  daily  payments  there  are  indications  that 
things  are  changing,  although  very  gradually.  One  indication  from  surveys  carried  out  by 
different central banks is that the share of cash payments in retail payments appears to be 
slowly diminishing. This decline seems to be somewhat more pronounced for the value than 
for the number of cash payments, meaning that the average value of a cash payment is also 
falling.  A  study  on  payments  carried  out  by  the  ECB  in  eight  euro  area  countries  in  2008 
revealed that cash is most often used for transactions below €20. On average 55% of the 
respondents  said  they  normally  paid  cash  for  typical  daily  purchases  of  between  €30  and 
€100. But on average 87% said they always or often used cash for purchases below €20. 
This  behaviour  is  reflected  in  the  average  value  of  a  cash  payment,  which  in  2011  was 
around  €20  in  Germany  and  Austria,  and  only  just  over  €12  in  the  Netherlands.3  In  other 
words,  cash  is  still  the  most  common  form  of  daily  retail  payment,  but  largely  and 
increasingly because it is used for frequent small purchases.  
However, this does not mean that cash is no longer used for high-value payments. Our 2008 
survey showed that on average 20% of the interviewees in the eight countries said they used 
cash always or almost always for purchases of between €200 and €1,000. 4% even said they 
normally used cash for purchases above €10,000. 
There is another function of banknotes, namely their function as store of value. Under normal 
circumstances  low  interest  rates  result  in  low  opportunity  costs  of  holding  cash,  and 
consequently in an increase in the demand for banknotes used for store of value purposes. 
However,  as  we  have  seen  in  recent  years,  extraordinary  circumstances  can  create  an 
additional  demand  for  banknotes  for  store-of-value  purposes.  This  became  clear  after  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers, when in a period of only three weeks euro banknote circulation 
increased  by  €35  billion.  Also  during  the  periods  of  high  uncertainty  in  Greece  banknote 
demand increased strongly in that country, although a backflow of banknotes to the central 
bank was also observed after the situation stabilised. Likewise, we saw a sharp increase in 
the demand for cash in Cyprus in March and at the beginning of April. Let me also add that 
                                                
1  ECB, Statistical Data Warehouse. 
2  Deutsche Bundesbank (2012) “Zahlungsverhalten in Deutschland 2011”; Jonker, N., Kosse, A. Hernández, L. 
(2012)  “Cash  usage  in  the  Netherlands:  How  much,  where,  when,  who  and  whenever  one  wants?”,  DNB 
Occasional  Studies,  Vol.10,  No.  2;  Mooslechner,  P.,  Stix,  H.,  Wagner,  K.  (2013)  “The  Use  of  Payment 
Instruments in Austria”, Monetary Policy and the Economy, Q4/12, Oesterreichische Nationalbank. Schmiedel, 
H.,  Kostova,  G.,  Ruttenberg,  W.  (2012)  “The  social  costs  of  retail  payment  instruments:  A  European 
Perspective”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 137. 
3  De  Nederlandsche  Bank 
(2012) 
“Factsheet:  Contante  Betalingen  Geteld  2011”,  available  at 
http://www.dnb.nl/en/news/news-and-archive/dnbulletin-2012/dnb274102.jsp. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  Eurosystem  stood  ready  to  accommodate  the  resulting  precautionary  demand  for 
banknotes to avoid further disruptions. 
The situation in Cyprus has also reminded us that cash is both a means of payment and a 
store of value of last resort. If banks are closed, cheques are no longer accepted and even 
the payment cards of stressed banks are no longer trusted, so cash appears to be the only 
way to settle a transaction immediately and without credit risk. At the same time, it has to be 
said  that  while  some  retailers  preferred  cash,  payment  cards  continued  to  be  used  for 
payments  at  point-of-sale  and  for  cash  withdrawals.  This  reminds  us  also  of  the 
interdependence  of  cash  and  payment  cards.  When  banks  are  closed,  ATMs  are  the  only 
source of cash. But in order to withdraw cash from ATMs people need a payment card, and 
cards and ATM networks must be fully operational.  
Now, how do all these developments influence the Eurosystem’s perception of cash? 
First, even though we do not expect a major changes any time soon, electronic payments will 
continue  to  grow.  But  it  will  be  a  gradual  process  and  it  will  lead  to  a  reduced  need  for 
banknotes for transaction purposes. And just for you to understand the possible implications: 
if the payment pattern in the whole of the euro area was like that in the Netherlands, where 
62% of the number and 37% of the value of all retail payments were made in cash in 2011, 
the value of the cash withdrawals in the euro area would be only half the value of the current 
cash withdrawals. As a result, the social cost of making cash payments will continue to rise 
relative to the social cost of making an electronic payment. In one way or another, this will 
put pressure on the cash sector to become more efficient.  
Second, we feel that because of national differences in the use of cash, and differences in 
geography and cultures, it is neither possible nor desirable to have one way of organising the 
cash cycle in the euro area. We should, however, at least move in the same direction and 
adopt a number of common rules and principles relating to the organisation of the cash cycle. 
A good example is the ECB Recirculation Decision, which lays down the rules under which 
third parties are allowed to re-circulate banknotes, and which applies to the whole of the euro 
area. This should  ensure  that  in  the  whole  of the  euro  area  the  public  can  be  certain  that 
banknotes provided by ATMs are genuine.  
Third, while there can be no objections to a society with less cash, a cashless society is not 
possible in the foreseeable future. Decisions and initiatives taken in various countries to limit 
the value of cash payments by law are not incompatible with the legal tender status of euro 
banknotes  and  coins,  provided  that  other  lawful  means  of  payments  are  available. 
Furthermore, limitations can be accepted if they are proportionate to the objectives pursued. 
But although it is understandable that merchants wish to reduce the amounts of cash they 
handle and hold for efficiency and security reasons, we feel that it is problematic that shops 
will  become  cashless  on  a  large  scale.  It  would  ignore  the  will  of  a  large  share  of  the 
population,  and  it  would  also  go  against  the  principle  of  the  legal  tender  status,  and  the 
universal acceptance, of cash.  
Fourth,  as  the  events  of  2008  and  the  more recent  developments  in  some  countries  have 
shown,  there  is  a  relationship  between  the  demand  for  banknotes  and  public  trust  in  the 
banking sector. Although people clearly trust euro banknotes, it would be much better if they 
did not feel the need to store banknotes because of concerns about the health of a bank or 
the  banking  sector.  That  is  why  we  are  working  hard  to  establish  a  European  banking 
supervisor, and why we should take all necessary measures as soon as possible to restore 
confidence in the banking sector. 
Now,  let  me  come  back  to  the  main  purpose  of  our  event  today:  the  launch  of  the 
€5 banknote of the Europa series. The main reason for the new series is that the first euro 
banknotes were issued over 11 years ago and the technology in those banknotes is more 
than 15 years old. Even though the number of counterfeits is relatively low, it is important to 
maintain trust in euro banknotes and to stay ahead of developments. So on 2 May we are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
launching  the  €5  banknote  as  the  first  denomination  of  the  new  series.  The  other 
denominations will follow in ascending order in the next few years. 
Apart  from  the  more  vivid  colour  of  the  €5  banknotes,  the  most  visible  change  in  the 
banknotes is probably the emerald number on the front and the portrait of Europa in both the 
watermark and the hologram. However, maybe the most important changes are those which 
are invisible to the human eye. We have not only applied a special coating, which will make 
the banknotes more durable and should extend their life, but have also incorporated several 
new  or  enhanced  security  features  which  are  used  by  banknote  authenticity  devices  and 
banknote handling machines.  
In most countries the €5 banknotes will be mainly brought into circulation via bank counters 
and the cash ordered as change by retailers. As a result, the new €5 banknotes will gradually 
arrive  in  everyone’s  wallets.  Only  in  some  countries  will  €5  banknotes  also  be  issued  via 
ATMs,  but  even  in  these  countries  banks  seem  to  be  reducing  the  availability  of 
€5 banknotes  in  ATMs.  We  don’t  see  this  as  a  good  development;  banks  should  consider 
issuing more €5 banknotes via ATMs. It would be convenient both for the public, which tends 
to  pay  cash  for  small-ticket  items,  and  for  retailers,  which  would  need  less  change. 
Additionally,  it  would  also  mean  that  the  overall  quality  of  the  €5  banknotes  in  circulation 
would be higher in many countries. 
In the presentations today and tomorrow you will learn more about the design and security 
features  of  the  new  euro  banknotes  and  about the  preparations for  the  introduction  of  the 
Europa  series  by  central  banks  and  the  various  stakeholders  in  the  cash  cycle.  These 
presentations will make clear that the design, development and printing of a new banknote 
represent only half the work behind the issuance of a new series. The other half has to be 
done by the various stakeholders in the cash cycle. 
When  introducing  a  new  banknote  it  is  essential  to  inform  the  public  about  its  security 
features  and  to  encourage  them  to  look  at  the  banknotes.  This  is  not  easy  for  a  product 
which the public has been using every day for the past 11 years. So, the public information 
campaign which we have launched aims to make people aware of the Europa series and its 
security features. In this respect, it is encouraging that after the unveiling of the new €5 on 
10 January 2013 a public opinion survey showed that no fewer than 51% of people in the 
euro area were aware of the new series. This probably reflects the spontaneous interest that 
people and the media have in banknotes. But this survey also indicated that more efforts are 
needed to ensure the public not only knows about the new banknote series but also about 
the security features. 
I have talked about euro banknotes as a means of payment and a store of value, but would 
like to conclude by mentioning the third Aristotelian function of money: as a unit of account4. 
Over  the  years  the  euro  banknotes,  as  our  unit  of  account,  have  become  an  important 
symbol of European integration. Just as a euro banknote is worth the same everywhere in 
the euro area, one euro of commercial money should be worth everywhere the same. The 
Single Supervisory Mechanism will contribute to restore the singleness of euro area banks’ 
liabilities provided that it is complemented by a single mechanism, with a common financial 
backstop, to wind down failed banks. The ECB will not let trust in the euro as a standard of 
value  be  undermined  by  fears  of  a  euro  break-up  and  by  financial  fragmentation,  and  will 
continue to act appropriately within the limits of its mandate. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
4  Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics, Book V, and Politics, Book I. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
