Ravi Menon: The global economy – securing a return to normalcy 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Citibank  10th  Annual  Asia-Pacific  Investor  Conference,  Singapore, 
30 January 2013. 
 Mr Stephen Bird, Asia Pacific CEO, Citigroup, 
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
The long shadow of the financial crisis 
1. The global economy is stuck in a hesitant and uneven recovery. In a way, we should not 
be surprised. The seminal work by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff suggests that exits 
from severe financial crisis take at least a decade. By this metric, we have already passed 
the mid-way point of the healing process. But the experience of countries emerging from the 
long shadow of the 2008/2009 financial crisis has been different. 
US: steady deleveraging plagued by fiscal uncertainty 
2.  The  US  economy  has  already  exceeded  its  pre-crisis  peak.  This  is  encouraging, 
considering that the recent recession was the deepest the country had experienced since the 
Great Depression. 
• 
Fiscal  and  monetary  stimuli  have  been  decisive,  putting  the  US  on  a  stronger 
recovery compared with Europe. 
Private  sector  deleveraging  has  proceeded  steadily.  Household  debt  has  come 
down to 113% of disposable incomes in Q3 2012, from 134% in Q3 2007. 
The biggest drag on the economy – the housing market – is turning around. House 
prices  have  been  rising  steadily  since  February  2012  and  new  houses  are  being 
built at a healthy pace. 
  3.  Fiscal  uncertainty  has,  however,  emerged  as  the  clear  and  present  danger  facing  the 
US economy.  The  partial  deal  in  Congress  earlier  this  month  has  prevented  the  economy 
from falling over the fiscal cliff. But three inter-related fiscal challenges remain. 
• 
First, the deferred budget sequester or spending cuts that kick in from March this 
year. 
Second, the debt ceiling that needs to be raised, beyond just the next six months. 
Third, and most important, a medium-term deficit reduction deal. 
• 
• 
4. As it is, the partial expiry of previous tax cuts and exemptions could already be causing a 
fiscal  withdrawal  of  about  1–1½  percentage  points  of  GDP.  If  Congress  fails  to  reach  an 
agreement, the automatic spending cuts could impose an additional drag of 0.4% of GDP. 
Europe: strengthening the fiscal union while fighting a crisis 
5.  Europe  has  fared  less  well.  As  of  2012,  the  Eurozone  economies  have  recovered  less 
than 60% of the output lost during the crisis. For the last two years, the Eurozone has been 
caught in a vicious cycle between weak sovereigns and weak banks. The crisis has exposed 
basic design flaws in the architecture of the European Monetary Union, chiefly the absence 
of a fiscal union. 
6. The challenges facing European policymakers are not trivial. They have to put in place the 
structures and policies necessary to address the design flaws of the currency union, while at 
the same time fight a recurrent crisis of confidence in the financial markets. Restoring market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
confidence, in turn, requires achieving fiscal sustainability  while spurring economic growth. 
Some have described the task as akin to redesigning an aircraft in mid-flight amidst severe 
turbulence! 
7.  Nonetheless,  important  progress  has  been  achieved  and  the  situation  today  is  visibly 
better than it was even six months ago. 
• 
The  European  Central  Bank’s  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  programme  has 
materially reduced the tail risk of a disorderly breakup of the monetary union. 
Sovereign  bond  yields  in  Italy  and  Spain  have  come  down,  on  average,  some 
200 basis points from their peak levels in the middle of last year. 
Bank  deposits  in  the  peripheral  countries  of  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Spain 
have shown signs of stabilisation. 
  8.  But  Europe  remains  mired  in  recession.  There  is  still  no  compelling  growth  agenda. 
Domestic  demand  is  weak  amidst  fiscal  consolidation.  Banks  are  not  lending  amidst  an 
uncertain  investment  environment.  And  several  structural  issues  remain  unresolved.  It  will 
not take much to reignite financial market stresses. In short, the crisis in the Eurozone is not 
over. 
Japan: dealing with deflation, demographics, and a natural disaster 
9. Japan has a different set of problems. Its economy has recovered less than two-thirds of 
the output lost during the crisis. It has fallen prey to weak external demand and is still reeling 
from the aftershocks of a major natural disaster. 
10. Japan is caught in the pincer grip of prolonged deflation and unfavourable demographics. 
Real interest rates in Japan are probably higher than warranted by the state of its economy. 
But the effects of further monetary easing are not expected to be decisive. Nor is it clear that 
fiscal stimulus will lift the economy on a sustained basis. 
11. The biggest drag on the Japanese economy is its demographics. Japan’s working age 
population has been growing by just 0.2% per annum over the last ten years. Together with a 
declining  participation  rate,  the  labour  force  has  contributed  negatively  to  GDP  growth  in 
almost  every  year  since  1998.  A  firm  turnaround  in  the  Japanese  economy  requires  a 
sustained  increase  in  productivity,  which  entails  structural  reforms  to  enhance  product 
market flexibility and spur competition and innovation in the services sector. 
Emerging Asia: the rise of domestic demand 
12. In comparison, Emerging Asia has weathered the financial storm best, with the region’s 
total production now one-third higher than what it was in 2008. 
13. China secured a quick and vigorous rebound from the depths of the global trade collapse 
in  early  2009.  It  has  since  reined  in  inflationary  pressures  and  indications  are  that  it  has 
achieved a “soft landing” of its economy, registering an estimated 7.8% growth last year on 
the  back  of  solid  consumer  demand  and  infrastructure  investment.  While  China  faces 
significant economic restructuring challenges, its impressive growth trajectory appears intact 
for now. 
14. India too rode through the global financial crisis comfortably but is now going through a 
weak patch. But if it regains its reform momentum and begins to address its infrastructure 
deficit, growth should pick up to levels closer to those seen in the last decade. 
15.  In  the  ASEAN–4  economies  of  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Thailand  and  the  Philippines, 
domestic  demand  has  displayed  surprising  resilience.  This  has  held  up  economic  growth, 
despite prolonged weakness in external demand and continuous terms-of-trade shocks. 
16.  But  Emerging  Asia  is  also  not  without  its  risks.  While  the  advanced  economies  are 
deleveraging, Emerging Asia is re-leveraging. Credit growth has been climbing steadily, from 
an  average  8%  in  2009  to  15%  in  2011,  before  easing  to  12%  in  last  year.  The  private 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
credit-to-GDP ratio for the region, at 120%, is higher than during the Asian financial crisis. 
There is good reason for policymakers to be on their guard. 
Macro policies: the unfinished agenda 
17. So, where is the global economy on its post-crisis journey? While economic prospects for 
2013 look slightly brighter and tail risks have diminished, the global economy and financial 
markets remain fragile and vulnerable to shocks. 
18.  But  this  halfway  point  provides  us,  perhaps  for  the  first  time  since  the  crisis,  the 
opportunity  to  look  ahead  and  pose  the  question  of  what  is  required  to  ensure  a  smooth 
return to normalcy. 
• 
The advanced economies need to achieve fiscal consolidation alongside economic 
growth and chart an effective exit strategy from unconventional monetary policies. 
The  emerging  market  economies  need  to  deal  with  a  weak  external  environment 
and  incipient  domestic  cost  pressures  especially  in  the  context  of  volatile  capital 
flows and asset market pressures. 
And  both  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies  must  undertake  structural 
reforms to boost their economies’ potential and create jobs for their people. 
  Let me elaborate on each of these three themes. 
Advanced economies: restoring time-consistent macroeconomic policies 
19. First, the advanced economies need to restore time-consistency in their macroeconomic 
policies. Governments are borrowing money and central banks are printing money. This is 
unsustainable. 
Implementing growth-consistent fiscal consolidation 
20.  The  choice  in  Europe  and  in  America  is  not  between  growth  and  austerity.  Debt 
sustainability requires both a reduction in the numerator, by reducing deficits and borrowing, 
as  well  as  an  increase  in  the  denominator,  by  restoring  economic  growth.  Focusing 
excessively on the former will lead to an ever-deepening recession that will only make the 
debt trajectory unsustainable. Equally important, fiscal consolidation should not compromise 
long-term growth potential. 
21.  The  debate  on  fiscal  policy  should  focus  on  the  pace  and  composition  of  fiscal 
consolidation and not just its scale. 
22. Pace matters. It is more important to reduce the fiscal deficit of 2016 than of 2013. But it 
is equally important that something be done in 2013 that will reduce the 2016 deficit than to 
leave  it  to  2016  to  do  so.  Only  then  will  markets  have  confidence  that  policies  are 
time-consistent. A growth-consistent fiscal strategy entails making binding commitments now 
that will deliver medium-term fiscal savings rather than achieve immediate deficit reduction. 
Tax and pension reforms are good examples. 
23.  Composition  matters  even  more.  Consolidation  should  focus  on  broadening  tax  bases 
and cutting non-productive entitlement spending. Programmes that underpin future growth – 
for example, infrastructure, education, and worker retraining – should not be cut sharply. It is 
not just the macroeconomics of fiscal policy that matters but the microeconomics as well. 
Unwinding unconventional monetary policies 
24. The unprecedented crisis of 2008/2009 evoked an unprecedented response from fiscal 
and monetary policy-makers around the world. This decisive response helped avert a global 
depression.  But  five  years  after  the  emergency  resuscitation  measures,  monetary  policy 
settings in the advanced economies are still in “crisis mode”. Interest rates are close to zero 
and central bank balance sheets have seen a relentless expansion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
25. Nearly every major central bank in the advanced world is buying non-traditional assets to 
resurrect its domestic economy. 
• 
The US Fed is buying mortgage-backed securities. Its balance sheet has more than 
tripled to US$3 trillion, or 19% of GDP. 
The ECB has made long-tenured loans to banks through its LTRO programme and 
is prepared to buy sovereign bonds through its OMT programme. The Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet has more than doubled to €3 trillion, or 31% of GDP. 
The Bank of Japan is buying government bonds, but has also purchased corporate 
bonds  and  real  estate  investment  funds.  Quantitative  easing  by  the  BoJ  has 
amounted to 100 trillion yen, or 21% of GDP. 
The  Bank  of  England  is  buying  gilts,  and  some  commercial  paper  and  corporate 
bonds. Its Asset Purchase Programme is now £375 billion, or 24% of GDP. 
   26. Central banks cannot expand their balance sheets indefinitely. The incremental benefits 
of further monetary easing are diminishing while the potential costs are increasing. 
27. On the benefit side, it is not clear that additional monetary stimulus is an appropriate tool 
at this stage of the cycle. We would do well to remember the words of John Maynard Keynes 
in 1936, “If .... money is the drink which stimulates the system to activity, we must remind 
ourselves that there may be several slips between the cup and the lip.” 
28. The problem is not liquidity but credit. Capital-strapped banks are unwilling to lend and 
the private sector is unwilling to borrow, a reflection of uncertainty over fiscal policies, high 
indebtedness, and low income growth. 
29.  And  we  should  be  vigilant  of  the  potential  costs  of  cheap  money.  As  market  stresses 
subside  and  money  multipliers  recover,  the  abundance  of  liquidity  could  fuel  a  strong 
monetary expansion with adverse consequences for prices, which would eventually require 
large hikes in interest rates to counter. Easy money over a prolonged period can also lead to 
a mispricing of risks and unsustainable asset prices, compromising both price stability and 
financial stability. 
30. Given the long lags in monetary policy, central banks must look forward now and prepare 
a strategy for a smooth transition back to normalcy. 
Asian economies: dealing with desynchronised global macroeconomic cycles 
31.  The  second  key  aspect  in  securing  a  return  to  normalcy  is  the  adjustment  of 
macroeconomic policies in the emerging market economies to spillovers from the advanced 
world. I will speak with reference to Emerging Asia. 
Continually shifting gears in monetary and fiscal policies 
32.  In  the  early  stages  of  the  financial  crisis,  most  Asian  countries  responded  with 
expansionary  macroeconomic  policies  to  dampen  the  effects  of  a  collapse  in  exports. 
Between August 2008 and August 2009, policy rates across Asia were more than halved, on 
average. Substantial fiscal stimulus was injected, ranging from higher investment spending in 
China  to  significant  tax  cuts  in  Indonesia.  Fiscal  deficits  across  Asia  widened  from  an 
average of 0.6% of GDP in 2008 to 3.0% in 2009. 
33.  From  2010  onwards,  a  two-speed  recovery  took  hold  in  the  global  economy,  with 
advanced  economies  growing  sluggishly  and  Emerging  Asia  staging  a  vigorous  rebound. 
Incipient inflationary pressures prompted central banks in the region to raise policy rates from 
mid–2010 onwards. Although renewed risks stemming from the Eurozone crisis led to a fresh 
round  of  easing  in  some  economies  in  late–2011,  policy  rates  in  Emerging  Asia  are  on 
average 75 basis points higher now vis-à-vis their troughs during the crisis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
34. Fiscal stimulus has also been withdrawn progressively. As of 2011, fiscal deficits in the 
region have narrowed once more to an average of 1.1% of GDP. 
35.  Asian  economies  must  continually  recalibrate  their  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  as 
external  demand  conditions  and  domestic  cost  pressures  pull  in  opposite  directions. 
Maintaining  flexibility  in  macroeconomic  policies  must  go  hand-in-hand  with  reforms  to 
strengthen domestic demand. 
Breaking new ground in macroprudential policies 
36.  The  de-synchronisation  of  global  macroeconomic  cycles  between  the  advanced 
economies and emerging market economies poses more challenges for the latter than the 
former. As long as monetary conditions in the advanced economies remain easy, emerging 
market economies face the risk of misallocated resources and disruptive capital flows, which 
in turn can affect both price stability and financial stability. 
37. Low interest rates and abundant liquidity have contributed to asset price accelerations in 
some Asian countries, especially in real estate markets. Residential property prices in Korea, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore, for example, have increased by 35% on average since 
2009, while nominal wages have risen by only 13%. 
38.  No  doubt,  increased  capital  flows  to  emerging  market  economies  reflect  the  superior 
growth prospects of these economies. There is a structural rebalancing of global investment 
portfolios  towards  emerging  markets  in  general,  and  Emerging  Asia  in  particular.  A 
multi-pronged  policy  response  is  needed  to  ensure  that  inflationary  pressures  remain 
contained in the face of this “wall of money” – including a gradual appreciation of nominal 
effective exchange rates. And indeed, since mid-2009, when capital flows began to return to 
Emerging  Asia,  most  regional  currencies  have  appreciated  by  3–10%  in  nominal  effective 
terms. 
39. But exchange rates alone cannot shoulder the burden of adjustment to low global interest 
rates and large capital inflows. In fact, strong and sustained exchange rate appreciation may 
well attract even more capital inflows. And excessively rapid currency appreciation runs the 
risk  of  sharply  curtailing  exports  and  dragging  down  the  economy.  Nor  is  it  clear  that 
exchange rate appreciation alone could have mitigated the increased demand for credit and 
consequent surge in property prices that we have seen in Emerging Asia. 
40. Likewise, interest rates are too blunt a tool to deal with sector-specific excesses, such as 
in real estate. An interest rate policy that is sufficiently aggressive to affect credit conditions 
and asset prices is likely to impose quite a high cost on the rest of the economy. 
41.  Asian  policymakers  have  therefore  been  experimenting  with  a  variety  of  so-called 
macroprudential policies, to rein in asset price inflation and avoid a build-up of imbalances 
amidst a low interest rate environment. Macroprudential measures as practised in Asia fall 
into two broad categories: 
• 
One, prudential measures to restrain credit extended to the property market. These 
include loan-to-value ratios, debt service ratios, and caps on property lending. 
Two,  fiscal  measures  to  discourage  property  transactions  of  a  speculative  nature. 
These include transaction taxes, such as stamp duties and capital gains taxes. 
 42. With multiple policy objectives and a challenging economic environment, macroprudential 
tools have given additional degrees of freedom to Asian policymakers who want to avoid a 
build-up of financial imbalances and unsustainable asset prices, but do not want to give up 
domestic  monetary  sovereignty,  allow  excessive  exchange  rate  appreciation,  or  impose 
capital controls. 
43.  While 
interventions  have  achieved  a  measure  of  success, 
macroprudential  policies  in  Emerging  Asia  have  been  deployed  in  a  relatively  eclectic  and 
even  ad-hoc  manner.  As  these  countries  return  to  more  normal  times,  there  is  a  need  to 
targeted 
these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
formalise and institutionalise the modus operandi of these policies, for greater transparency 
and policy effectiveness. 
Reforms to strengthen the underlying potential of economies 
44.  Let  me  now  turn  to  the  last,  and  perhaps  most  important,  set  of  policies  that  will 
determine how successfully the global economy secures a return to normalcy. These are the 
structural  reforms  needed  to  strengthen  the  underlying  potential  of  economies.  Let  me 
highlight those which I think are most important. 
Advanced economies: labour reform, tax reform, pension reform 
45. In the advanced economies, I would put labour market reform, tax reform, and pension 
reform at the top of the list. 
46.  Labour  markets  need  to  become  more  flexible,  especially  in  Europe.  Even  in  the  US, 
production  patterns  are  changing  rapidly,  increasing  skills  mismatches  and  generating 
structural unemployment. Labour market policies must seek to facilitate the shift of workers 
from domestically-oriented sectors facing weak demand to export-oriented sectors, and from 
depressed regions to resurgent ones. And wages must become more flexible, so that firms 
can ride out cyclical downturns without losing competitiveness. 
47. Next, tax reform. The debate needs to shift from the rate of taxation to the structure of the 
tax  system.  The  US  could  do  with  a  broader  tax  base,  simpler  tax  codes,  and  less 
exemptions. In Europe, similarly, there are opportunities to increase the efficiency of the VAT 
system including in broadening its base. 
48. Lastly, pension reform. Government spending in many advanced economies needs to be 
overhauled  in  the  face  of  impending  demographic  challenges.  Effective  pension  reform 
requires a judicious combination of increases in the statutory retirement age and reductions 
in the generosity of benefits, with the balance varying from country to country. 
Emerging Asia: domestic demand, financial deepening, productivity 
49.  In  Emerging  Asia,  the  key  structural  reforms  are  in  the  areas  of  boosting  domestic 
demand, deepening financial markets, and raising efficiency and productivity. 
50.  Boosting  domestic  demand  is  perhaps  the  most  important  medium-term  imperative  for 
Emerging  Asia.  Public  and  private  sector  deleveraging  in  the  advanced  economies  has  at 
least  dented,  if  not  extinguished,  the  export-powered  growth  model  that  has  been  largely 
responsible for the “Asian Miracle”. Reforms are needed to stimulate private consumption in 
some Asian economies, and investment in others. 
51. In China, the issue is consumption, not investment. China needs to lift its consumption 
ratio from its current low of 36%. Ongoing efforts to bolster the social safety net, enhance 
consumer protection, reform tax systems, and liberalise interest rates, are steps in the right 
direction. 
52. In India and the ASEAN economies, the challenge is to increase investment spending, 
especially in infrastructure. This will not only generate indigenous demand, but also alleviate 
supply-side constraints that have become increasingly evident in recent years. 
53. Second, Asia must deepen and broaden its financial markets. Asia needs to do a better 
job  in  efficiently  intermediating  its  large  savings  pool,  as  well  as  directing  capital  inflows 
towards  more  productive  investment  in  the  region.  Asian  financial  systems  are  still  too 
dependent  on  banks.  Deep  corporate  bond  markets  can  play  a  complementary  role  in 
enabling private and institutional investors to invest for the long term. 
54.  Third,  increasing  productivity.  Countries  in  Emerging  Asia  are  still  far  from  the 
technological frontier, and there is ample room for gains in productivity. However, unlocking 
these gains will require different policies across the region. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
55.  China  can  unleash  higher  productivity  by  removing  inefficiencies  and  distortions  in  its 
economy.  The  prescriptions  are  well-known  –  overhaul  state-owned  enterprises,  liberalise 
the financial sector, instil cost of capital discipline. But delivering them will take determination 
and  political  will.  In  India  and  the  ASEAN  countries,  improvements  in  governance  and 
regulation  will  be  key  to  attracting  investments  that  can  raise  supply  capacity  and 
productivity. 
Conclusion 
56. Let me conclude. The world has coped relatively well with the numerous shockwaves that 
have  rocked  the  global  economy  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  Now  that  we  are 
advancing  on  the  road  to  recovery,  policy-makers  must  lay  the  ground  for  a  return  to 
normalcy. We would do well to recall the words of Winston Churchill, “Success is not final, 
failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts”. 
Thank you, and I wish you a successful conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
