Fabio Panetta: Macroprudential tools – where do we stand? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Fabio  Panetta,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  during  the 
presentation  of  the  2013  Financial  Stability  Review,  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg, 
Luxembourg, 14 May 2013. 
 It 
therefore, 
is  essential, 
Introduction 
1. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Banque  Centrale  du  Luxembourg  (BCL)  for  inviting  me  to  this 
conference. It  is  a  pleasure to  be  here,  and  to  discuss the  challenges associated with the 
implementation of macroprudential (MAP) policy. It  is  a  very topical subject. The unusually 
expansionary  stance  of  monetary  policy  in  the  major  regions  is  putting  pressure  on 
asset prices and, in a context of weak economic activity and low inflation, may soon require 
appropriate  macroprudential  measures. 
to  deepen  our 
understanding of MAP policy implementation and the optimal choice of MAP tools. 
The debate on MAP policy that is taking place in academic and policy circles has produced 
consensus  on  a  few  issues.  First,  macroprudential  policy  should  aim  to  contain systemic 
risk. However, this is by no means a univocal statement of objectives, as systemic risk  has 
multiple  facets,  and  defies  clear  measurement.  Even  the  usual  distinction  between  the 
cross-sectional  dimension  and  the  time-series  dimension  of  systemic  risk,1  although 
conceptually important,  does  not  provide  an  operational definition  of  the  objective  of  MAP 
policy.  Second,  MAP  policies  have  important  interactions  with  other  policies,  such  as 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  and  microprudential  policy.  Yet,  these  interactions  are  largely 
unexplored. Third, selected MAP instruments seem to have some effectiveness. However, the 
experience  gathered  thus  far  on  the  use  of  these  instruments  is  still  limited,  and  refers 
largely to developing economies. 
This  brief  discussion  suggests  that  in  spite  of  the  progress  made,  our  understanding  of 
MAP  tools  and  their  impact  on  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy  remains  very 
incomplete. Several  important  questions  await  an  answer.  For  example,  when  imbalances 
emerge, should we prefer broad-based or narrow instruments? How to monitor and minimize 
elusion? What definition of the various instruments (e.g. the LTV) should be used? Do MAP 
authorities have the statistical information or the legal basis to implement MAP policies? The 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) recently found that, as of September 2012, only two 
countries were fully compliant with its recommendation on the macroprudential mandate of 
national  authorities,  suggesting  that  the  answers  to  the  previous  questions  are  at  best 
unclear. Moreover, a survey on euro-area countries recently conducted by the Bank of Italy 
indicates  a  surprisingly  poor  state  of  affairs  concerning  statistics  on  residential  LTVs: 
information  is  often  of  poor  quality  or  even  missing  altogether.  Definitions  are  barely 
harmonized across countries. 
Clearly, substantial progress is still necessary in this field. Given our limited experience,  we 
must  rely  on  a  learning-by-doing  approach:  start  experimenting  with  MAP  tools  and 
observe the consequences, focusing on (not-so-glamorous) technical details. 
My  comments  today  are  devoted  to  operational  issues.  I  will  focus  on  three  aspects  in 
particular.  First,  I  shall  briefly  look  at  recent  experience  with  MAP  tools  (Section  2).  I  will 
                                                 
1   The  cross-sectional  dimension  of  systemic  risk  refers  to  the  interconnectedness  and  common  exposures 
in  the  financial  system,  while  the  time-series  dimension  refers  to  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial 
system.  See,  for example, Bank of England (2009), “The Role of Macroprudential Policy”, Discussion Paper, 
November;  C. Borio  (2010),  Implementing  a  macroprudential  framework:  Blending  boldness  and  realism, 
BIS;  J.  Caruana  (2010), Systemic risk: how to deal with it?, BIS, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
then  review  some  conceptual  issues  on  the  implementation  of  MAP  tools  (Section  3).  In 
Section 4 I will focus on operational challenges in the euro area. Conclusions are drawn in 
Section 5. 
Previous experience with macroprudential tools 
2. 
Most  of  the  previous  experience  in  practical  implementation  of  MAP  policies  relates  to 
emerging/non-G10  economies,  such  as  South  Korea,  Brazil,  Turkey,  and  several  others.2 
By  contrast,  experience  in  developed  economies  is  very  limited.  Exceptions  are  Spain, 
where  dynamic  provisioning  has  been  applied  since  2000;  Switzerland,  which  recently 
introduced  countercyclical  capital  requirements;  New  Zealand,  which  has  autonomously 
applied a structural liquidity measure similar to the Basel III Net Stable Funding Ratio; and 
the  UK, where  a  fully-fledged operational  framework  for  MAP  policy has  been  set  up  and 
the  authorities  are  ready  to  start  experimenting  with  countercyclical  and  sector-specific 
capital requirements. Many other countries are likely to enter this uncharted territory, partly 
in connection with the implementation of Basel III. 
The  non-advanced economies’ lead  in  applying MAP  policies is  probably due  to  two  main 
reasons.  First,  these  economies  started  pioneering  MAP  tools  following  the  systemic 
crises  and  severe  financial  instability  episodes  experienced  since  the  1990s.  By  contrast, 
most  developed  countries  started  considering  MAP  tools  only  after  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis and in most cases have not yet used them in practice. With the benefit of hindsight, we 
now know that the cushions accumulated in the run-up to the crisis (capital buffers, liquidity 
reserves) were too small, so that when the crisis erupted there was little that policymakers 
could do in the way of releasing instruments in a countercyclical fashion. In other words, in 
many countries MAP policies were “at their lower bound”, leaving little room for policy action.3 
Second,  the  distinction  between  MAP  measures  and  unsophisticated  monetary  policy 
measures  is  often  not  clear-cut.  At  least  some  policies  and  tools  that  are  labelled 
“macroprudential”  in  emerging  economies  were  de  facto  substituting  for  insufficiently 
developed  monetary  policy  frameworks.  This,  for  example,  is  the  case  of  reserve 
requirements  and  quantitative  limits  on  credit.4  Hence,  the  available  empirical  evidence 
from  emerging economies about MAP policy effectiveness may have to be interpreted with 
caution. 
This  caveat  notwithstanding, the  available  empirical  evidence  suggests  that  MAP  tools  do 
have  some  effectiveness.5  Moreover,  recent  research  conducted  at  the  Bank  of  Italy 
                                                 
2   These  countries  experienced  both  time-varying  and  structural  measures.  For  example,  the  Brazilian 
authorities  have  experimented  with  capital  requirements  on  new  loans  to  households  and  reserve 
requirements; Turkey with foreign- exchange intervention and policy-induced volatility on short-term rates (to 
counteract large capital inflows), reserve requirements, LTV limits, and increases in risk-weights and general 
provisions on new consumer loans. Korea has implemented LTV and DTI limits on mortgage lending, levies 
on non-core foreign exchange liabilities and ceilings on  banks’  foreign  exchange  derivatives positions.  Hong 
Kong  has  also  used  LTV  and  debt  servicing  ratios  and  haircuts  on  share  margin  financing  and  repo 
transactions. 
3   P.  Angelini,  S.  Nicoletti-Altimari  and  I.  Visco  (2013),  “Macroprudential,  microprudential  and  monetary 
policies:  conflicts,  complementarities  and  trade-offs”,  in  Stability  of  the  Financial  System  –  Illusion  or 
Feasible  Concept?, edited by A. Dombret and O. Lucius, Edward Elgar, and Bank of Italy, Occasional Papers, 
140, November (2012). 
4   For example, in Italy, administrative controls on loans were used to steer monetary policy in the 1970s, when 
there was no liquid money market. Reserve requirements were used to absorb excessive monetary base. 
5   Among  others,  see  G.  Dell’Ariccia,  D.  Igan,  and  L.  Laeven  (2008),  “Credit  Booms  and  Lending 
Standards: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, CEPR Discussion Papers  6683; G. Dell’Ariccia, 
D. Igan, L. Laeven, and H. Tong with B. Bakker and J. Vandenbussche (2012), “Policies for Macroprudential 
Stability: How to Deal with Credit Booms”, IMF Staff  Discussion Note 12/6; C.H. Lim, F. Columba, A. Costa, 
P.  Kongsamut,  A. Otani, M. Saiyid, T. Wezel, and X. Wu (2011), “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and elsewhere, also using theoretical calibrated or estimated models, finds that cooperation 
between monetary and macroprudential policies in  targeting financial imbalances may lead 
to significant gains.6 
All in all, in developed and emerging economies alike, there seems to be a lot to learn in this 
field:  about  the  true  degree  of  independence  of  MAP  tools  from  other  policies;  about  the 
independence  of  the  various  MAP  tools  from  each  other.  And  about  some  important 
conceptual  and  practical  issues  that  deserve  attention  to  make  MAP  instruments  fully 
operational, an issue to which I turn in the next two sections. 
Conceptual issues on the use of macroprudential tools 
3. 
Lists of potential MAP tools have been drawn up by many authorities.7 The ESRB has put up 
for  internal  use  a  list  so  exhaustive as  to  earn  the  label  “the  yellow  pages”.  But  nowhere 
more  than  in  this  field  is  actual  progress  likely  to  come  from  a  learn-by-doing  approach. 
Therefore, in this section I will focus on some of the issues that might challenge the effective 
implementation of MAP policy, such as 1) the scope of application of MAP tools and the risk 
of  policy  circumvention  and  leakages;  2)  the  possibility of  symmetric  (versus  asymmetric) 
impact  of  the  MAP  measures;  and  3)  the  speed  at  which  policy  tools  can  be  adjusted. 
Finally, in Section 4 I shall discuss a number of operational challenges in Europe. 
3.1 
Scope of application of MAP tools: broad or targeted? Circumvention and 
leakages 
Broad  versus targeted  instruments. A first issue relates to the scope of application of MAP 
tools.  Some  instruments  are  system-wide,  and  therefore  well-suited  to  lean  against  the 
build-  up  of  imbalances  or  risks  in  the  entire  financial  system.  For  instance,  during  a 
generalized  credit  bubble  system-wide  countercyclical  capital  buffers,  or  liquidity  and 
reserve  requirements,  are  likely  to  be  effective  in  curbing  the  build-up  of  risks  and 
endowing  the  system  with  loss  absorption  capacity.  However,  they  can  be  blunt  tools  to 
counter a sector- specific  overheating.  In  this  case,  the  tightening  required  for  a  system-
wide  tool  to  work would be unrealistically high, not cost-effective and rife with side-effects. 
Targeted  instruments  may  be  more  suitable  for  dealing  with  risks  arising  in  particular 
segments  or  subsectors  of  the  financial  system  (examples  are  sector-specific  capital 
requirements,  LTVs,  and  limits  on  foreign  exposures).8 However,  targeted  measures  tend 
                                                                                                                                                      
and  How  to  Use  Them?  Lessons  from  Country  Experiences”,  IMF  Working  Papers  11/238;  G.  Terrier, 
R.O. Valdés,  C.E.  Tovar,  J.A.  Chan-  Lau,  C.  Fernández-Valdovinos,  M.  García-Escribano,  C.  Medeiros, 
M. Tang,  M.  Vera  Martin,  and  C.W.  Walker (2011), “Policy Instruments to  Lean Against the Wind in  Latin 
America”, IMF Working Papers  11/159. 
6   P. Angelini, S. Neri, and F. Panetta (2011), “Monetary and Macroprudential Policies”, Bank of Italy Working 
Paper 801; Angelini, Nicoletti-Altimari and Visco, (2013), op. cit.; L. Gambacorta and F.M. Signoretti (2013), 
“Should Monetary Policy Lean against the Wind? An analysis based on a DSGE model with banking”, Bank 
of Italy, Working Paper,  forthcoming; S. Claessens, K. Habermeier, E. Nier, H. Kang, T. Mancini-Griffoli, and 
F.  Valencia  (2013),  “The  Interaction  of  Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies”,  IMF  Policy  Paper; 
O. Blanchard,  G.  Dell’Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro  (2013),  “Rethinking  Macro  Policy  II:  Getting  Granular”,  IMF 
Staff  Discussion Note, 13/03. 
7   The  set  of  core  instruments  includes  the  countercyclical  bank  capital  buffer,  envisioned  in  the  Basel  III 
regulation; changes in  sectoral risk  weights, a  tool recently assigned to  the  UK Financial policy committee; 
limits on loan-to- value, on debt-to-income ratios; and so on. 
8   The  scope  of  the  instruments  can  be  very  narrow,  to  the  point  that  one  may  question  whether  they  are 
really  macroprudential  in  nature.  For  example,  in  Korea  LTV  limits  were  envisaged  for  mortgages  in 
specific  areas  of Seoul, where real-estate conditions were considered speculative. See D. Igan and H. Kang 
(2011),  “Do  Loan-to-Value  and  Debt-to-Income  Limits  Work?  Evidence  from  Korea”,  IMF  Working  Paper 
11/297. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  be  more  prone  to  two  related  problems:  circumvention/elusion  and  leakages/waterbed 
effects. 
Circumvention/elusion  occurs  when  the  agents  to  which  the  policy  measure  is  directed 
find ways to mitigate or even neutralize it. Leakages/waterbed effects arise when the agents 
to which the measure is directed are fully affected, but other sectors are also affected and 
adjust  their  behaviour so  as  to  contain  the  impact  of  the  measures. Due  to  these  effects, 
MAP policy can at best lose effectiveness; at worst, it can exacerbate imbalances in parts of 
the system. 
Circumvention/elusion. Macroprudential  tools  and  policies  are  prone  to  circumvention, but 
this is also true of most regulation. Is  there anything that makes MAP tools different? Two 
remarks are in order. 
First,  the  problem  of  circumvention  tends  to  be  more  acute  when  MAP  measures  are 
targeted. A few examples may help to clarify this claim. First, consider the case of LTV limits 
on  mortgages.  Faced  with  these  limits,  banks  may  use  alternative  products,  such  as 
personal loans, to expand their real-estate exposure beyond the established limits, reducing 
the measure’s effectiveness. Similarly, intermediaries may circumvent sector-specific capital 
requirements  by  extending  personal  loans  to  entrepreneurs  rather  than  to  their  firms, 
hence avoiding additional capital absorption. By the same token, borrowers may elude limits 
on  the  debt-to-income  (DTI)  ratio  by  tapping  multiple  lenders,  who  have  no  way  of 
controlling  circumvention  unless  a  central  credit  register  is  in  place.  Even  where  such  an 
infrastructure  exists,  the  borrower  would  still  be  able  to  elude  the  limit  by  having  other 
household members apply for the loan. 
Finally, consider also the case of instruments targeted to maturity mismatches, such as the 
limit on long-term foreign currency lending established in South Korea in the 1990s: at least 
70  per  cent  of  foreign-currency  loans  with  maturity  above  3  years  had  to  be  matched 
by foreign currency liabilities with the same maturity threshold. As Korean banks had little if 
any  access  to  long-term  foreign  currency  funding,  they  entered  funding  contracts  with 
maturity of 3  or  more  years  but  with  early  reimbursement clauses,  so  that  in  practice  the 
maturity was much shorter (1 year or so).9  This allowed them to borrow at relatively cheap 
rates, formally complying with the regulation but de facto eluding it. 
My second  remark is  that  elusion is  more  likely to  occur during cyclical upturns. Consider 
again  one  of  the  above  examples:  lenders  know  well  that  the  credit  risk  of  lending  to  an 
entrepreneur is the same as that of lending to his/her firm. When optimism prevails and risk 
aversion  is  low,  they  will  be  more  willing  to  overlook  prudency.  Indeed,  elusion  requires 
lenders and borrowers to  collude, and this tends to be more likely in the positive phase of 
the business cycle, exactly when the tightening measures should be taken. As I shall argue 
below, this may have consequences for the effectiveness of MAP policies over the cycle. 
Leakages/waterbed effects.  A related problem is the risk of leakages (or waterbed effects), 
which occur when MAP policy measures propel imbalances elsewhere in the system. This is 
also  a  special  case  of  the  tendency  of  regulation  to  push  activity  towards  the  less 
regulated  part  of  the  financial  system  (such  as  the  shadow  banking  system).  But  the 
effect  may also arise within the regulated financial system. For example, in the UK, between 
1998 and  2007, the  resident  branches  of  foreign  banks  –  which  unlike  subsidiaries,  are 
not  subject  to  host  country  regulation  –  increased  lending  in  response  to  tighter  capital 
requirements  on  domestic  regulated  banks,  thereby  offsetting  about  one  third  of  the 
tightening  manoeuvre.10  The  reciprocity  arrangements  included  in  the  Basel  III  package 
                                                 
9   J.  Kyu  Lee  (2013), “The  Operation of  Macroprudential Policy Measures: The  Case  of  Korea in  the  2000s”, 
Bank of Korea Working Paper,  2013–1. 
10   S.  Aiyar,  C.W.  Calomiris,  and  T.  Wieladek  (2012),  “Does  macropru  leak?  Evidence  from  a  UK  policy 
experiment”, Bank of England Working Paper  No. 445. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  elude  sector-specific  capital  requirements  or  LTV 
and  the  CRD-IV/CRR package address  the waterbed  effect  for the Countercyclical  Capital 
Buffer, although  other  tools remain uncovered by formal reciprocity provisions. 
What  are  the  solutions?  What,  if  any,  are  the  solutions  to  circumvention  and  waterbed 
effect? There clearly is no silver bullet, but policies can help to mitigate problems. 
First,  effective  micro  supervision can  go  a  long  way  towards  addressing circumvention. In 
particular, a system that relies heavily on on-site inspections would create a strong deterrent 
against  elusive  behaviour.  Refer  to  one  of  the  above  examples,  in  which  a  bank  uses 
personal  loans 
limits:  on-site 
inspections would very likely uncover this  behaviour. Effective supervision would also  alert 
the  authorities  to  waterbed  effects,  allowing  them  to  take  swift  corrective  action.  While 
effective supervision and extensive on-site inspections are costly, for both the supervisor and 
the intermediaries, the crisis has demonstrated that the cost of inadequate supervision can 
be huge. To the extent that elusion requires collusion between lenders and  borrowers, on-
site  supervision  should  be  intense also during positive phases of the business or financial 
cycle. 
Second, in response to elusion and waterbed effects, authorities may broaden the scope of 
their  policies,  e.g.  with  the  simultaneous  use  of  complementary  macroprudential  tools, 
rather  than  a  single  targeted  tool.  The  possibility  to  circumvent  an  LTV  limit  could  be 
substantially reduced if it were used together with a DTI limit consolidated at borrower level. 
In  fact,  while  the  former  would  limit  the  loan  exposure  relative  to  the  collateral  value,  the 
latter would constrain the level of  overall lending to  each given customer based on his/her 
income. A similar argument can also be made for the sector-specific capital requirements and 
DTI.11 
Third,  authorities  can  extend  the  perimeter  of  regulation  dynamically  in  order  to  include 
segments  of  the  system  that  have  become  systemically  relevant  (UK  legislation  has 
granted  this  power to  the FPC).12  In  this  respect, the  comprehensive approach adopted in 
Italy  –  where  all  financial  intermediaries  are  subject  to  supervision,  with  appropriate 
proportionality – has some merits.13 
Finally, it  should be clear from the above examples that effective cross-border cooperation 
among authorities is another important method of fighting spillovers. My assessment is that at 
present, unfortunately, centrifugal forces seem to prevail, in Europe as elsewhere. 
Is the functioning  of macroprudential tools symmetric or asymmetric? 
3.2 
Another issue to address in order to make MAP tools operational relates to their symmetric 
or  asymmetric effectiveness along  the  financial  cycle.  The  premise  is  that  MAP measures 
are effective if and only if they impose – or remove – economically binding limits, that is, if 
they  are  more  stringent  than  the  constraints  imposed  on  intermediaries  by  voluntary 
decisions or by market pressures. For example, if during recessions risk aversion or market 
pressures  raise  banks’  desired  capital  ratios  above  regulatory  thresholds  (a  situation 
that  applies  to  many  economies  in  the  current  environment),  a  policy  of  releasing  capital 
constraints  (e.g.  via  the  countercyclical buffer)  would  have  no  effect:14 the  authority would 
find itself pushing on a string. This reasoning suggests two considerations. 
                                                 
11   As pointed out by Blanchard et. al. (2013), op. cit. 
12   Bank  of  England  (2013),  The Financial  Policy  Committee’s powers  to  supplement capital  requirements,  A 
Draft Policy Statement, January. 
13   Under this approach, regulatory and supervisory actions are proportional to the intermediary’s importance. 
14   D.  Diamond  and  R.G.  Rajan  (2009),  “The  Credit  Crisis:  Conjectures about  Causes  and  Remedies”,  NBER 
Working  Paper  No.  14379;  R.G.  Rajan  (2005),  “Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?”, 
NBER Working Paper  No. 11728. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
First, MAP tools should in principle be more effective during upswings of the financial cycle: 
when  optimism  prevails,  market  constraints  are  weaker  and  banks  typically  hold  less 
excess  capital  or  liquid  buffers.  However,  as  already  mentioned,  during  such  times 
incentives  towards  elusion  are  likely  to  be  stronger.  These  two  offsetting  effects  make  it 
hard to gauge whether MAP instruments are more effective during upturns than downturns. 
Second, for an effective release of some MAP tools in bad times, there must have been an 
adequate tightening in good times. This is vividly illustrated by the behavior of capital ratios 
during the current crisis. Large banks, typically endowed with thin capital buffers, reacted to 
the downturn by increasing capital procyclically. By contrast, small banks, which entered the 
crisis with large capital buffers, effectively acted as stabilizers. There is clear evidence of this 
behaviour for both the US and the European banking systems (see Figure 1).15 
The  IMF  has  recently analysed the  degree of  symmetry of  MAP  policies, without reaching 
firm conclusions. In the 36 countries examined, between 2000 and 2011 the cases of policy 
tightening  far  outnumbered  the  episodes  of  loosening.  Most  of  the  loosening  measures, 
often consisting  in  the  relaxation  of  previously tightened  instruments,  occurred  after  2008. 
The  econometric  exercise  is  inconclusive  on  whether  MAP  measures  have  symmetric  or 
asymmetric  effects,  but  the  results  have  to  be  interpreted  with  caution,  as  the  incidence 
of loosening events may be too small to detect statistically significant differences.16 
Adjustment of policy tools: speed, size 
3.3 
The speed at which policy tools can be adjusted also deserves attention. In the Netherlands, 
a recent decision by the government (contained in the 2012 Stability Programme) forsees a 
gradual lowering of the maximum LTV ratio from 106 per cent in 2012 to 100 per cent. The 
decline  is  expected  to  take  place  at  a  pace  of  about  1  percentage  point  per  year.  As  a 
comparison,  in  Italy  the  average  LTV  declined  by  almost  10  percentage  points from 2006 
to 2012 – about 1.6 percentage points per year. This is a much faster adjustment – note that 
it  was  not  driven  by  the  regulator,  but  by  banks’  autonomously  adopted  policies. What is 
the  right  adjustment  speed?  A  look  at  housing  market  cycles  provides  insights  in  this 
respect.  Both  upturns  and  downturns  in  housing  cycles  in  advanced  countries  last  on 
average  around  5  years.17  This  suggests  that  the  tightening  pace  adopted  in  the 
Netherlands  might  be  too  slow,  with  risks  that  the  countercyclical  policy  could  be  fully 
effective only at the turning point of the cycle. This is not a criticism;18 I just mean to illustrate 
a general point. My assessment is that our knowledge in this area is particularly poor, and 
that we must make the most of the empirical evidence that will accumulate from future policy 
experiments. 
The speed of adjustment is  clearly related to the  size of the adjustment. For example, the 
countercyclical capital buffer will have to be managed taking into account that an increase, 
say,  will  affect  all  banks  at  the  same  time.  Therefore,  a  sudden,  sharp  increase  could 
                                                 
15   S.G.  Hanson,  A.K.  Kashyap,  and  J.C.  Stein  (2011),  “A  Macroprudential  Approach 
to  Financial 
Regulation”, Journal  of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 3–28 and Angelini, Nicoletti-Altimari and Visco (2013), 
op. cit.. 
16   E.  Nier,  H.  Kang,  T.  Mancini-Griffoli, H.  Hesse,  F.  Columba,  R.  Tchaidze,  and  J.  Vandenbussche  (2012), 
“The  Interaction  of  Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies  –  Background  Paper”,  IMF  Policy  Paper.  The 
analysis  suggests  that  the  effect  on  credit  growth  of  changing  the  reserve  requirement  is  stronger  when 
loosening  than  when  tightening.  On  the  other  hand,  the  effect  on  house  prices  of  changing  LTV  ratios  is 
stronger for tightening than for loosening. For the other macroprudential tools considered there is no significant 
difference. 
17   S. Claessens, A. Kose, M. Terrones (2011), “Financial Cycles: What? How? When?”, IMF Working  Papers, 
11/76. 
18   The  policy  move  in  the  Netherlands  may  be  structural  in  nature,  since  LTVs  exceeding  100  per  cent  are 
probably questionable apart from cyclical considerations. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
send  many  banks  scrambling  for  funds  at  the  same  time,  generating  a  system-wide 
dearth  of capital. Of course, this makes this tool potentially very powerful. 
Operational challenges in Europe 
4. 
Let me now turn to two practical aspects in the implementation of macroprudential tools on 
which significant progress is required, with a focus on Europe. 
Gaps  in the statistical  framework 
4.1 
One  not  very  glamorous  but  key  issue  is  the  question  whether  statistical  reporting  is 
adequate to  help  ensure  policy implementation and  instrument effectiveness. Consider the 
housing  market.  Housing  market  cycles  differ  substantially  across  countries  (Figure  2), 
suggesting  that  MAP  policies  aimed  at  curbing  problems  of  overheating  in  the  real-
estate sector should be tailored to the national situation. The regulation being finalized in the 
EU  (CRD-IV/CRR)  properly  allows  for  national  leeway.  In  line  with  this  evidence,  a 
recent survey  among  euro-area  NCBs,  conducted  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  presented  in 
our  latest  Financial  Stability Report,  shows  that  there  is  substantial  dispersion  of  average 
LTV ratios in the euro area.19 Ratios on new loans in 2011 ranged from below 60 per cent in 
some countries to more than 100 per cent in others (Figure 3; one must bear in mind that 
LTV is not yet a MAP instrument in most EU countries). 
There is  also significant heterogeneity in the underlying statistics. For  example, the survey 
just  mentioned  showed  differences  with  regard  to  the  LTV  definitions  and  the  methods  of 
collecting  and  aggregating  data  across  Europe.  Should  the  value  of  the  real  estate  be 
recorded at  mortgage  issuance?  Or,  should  it  be  updated?  If  so,  how?  Should  there  be 
a  difference between first homes and other houses? The list could continue. Each different 
answer  to  any  of 
these  questions  may  give  rise  to  methodological  differences  in 
computed  LTVs.  These  discrepancies  hamper  cross-country  comparisons;  going  forward, 
they can hinder MAP implementation and coordination among the euro-area countries. Work 
to harmonize statistics in this field is beginning in the light of the forthcoming establishment 
of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
Consider next non-performing loans (NPLs). These are arguably key pieces of information for 
micro as well as for macroprudential policies. But lack of a harmonized definition, even at the 
European level,  prevents  robust  cross-country comparisons. As  an  example, the  definition 
used  by Italian banks –  which is  set  by the  Bank of  Italy –  is  generally broader and  more 
rigorous than elsewhere in  Europe.20  Our analyses show that, controlling for  differences in 
the  way  collateralized  positions  are  treated  in  the  definition  of  NPLs,  Italian  banks  would 
display  on  average  substantially  better  NPL  and  coverage  ratios  (Figure  4).  Also,  the 
dynamics of  the two  ratios  would  change  substantially: whereas  the  official  coverage ratio 
decreased by 1.5 percentage points between 2009 and 2012, the “adjusted” ratio (computed 
according to the methodology used by a  sample of  large European banks) would increase 
by  3.3  points.  What  is  more,  this  is  just  one  of  the  factors  affecting  cross-country 
comparison  of  NPLs.  Other  differences  emerge,  e.g.  with  respect  to  the  definition  of 
restructured  loans.  A  cross-country  comparison  that  fails  to  take  these  methodological 
problems properly into  account  would  be misleading.  The  issue  is  clearly thorny,  because 
changing  well-established  national  practices  to  converge  to  a  uniform  standard  entails 
                                                 
19   Bank of Italy (2013), Financial  Stability Report, No. 5, April. (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/stabilita- 
finanziaria/rapporto-stabilita-finanziaria/2013/rsf_2013_5/en_stabfin_5_2013/Financial-Stability-Report-5.pdf).  
20   See  S.  Barisitz  (2013),  “Nonperforming  Loans  in  Western  Europe  –  A  Selective  Comparison  of  Countries 
and  National  Definitions”,  in  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  Focus  on  European  Economic  Integration, 
Q1/13  (http://www.oenb.at/de/img/feei_2013_q1_studies_barisitz_tcm14-253775.pdf).  The  study  suggests 
that, in international comparisons, NPL ratios for Italian banks are biased upwards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
adjustment  costs,  which  generate  resistance.  The asset quality review that planned under 
the developing SSM should address these problems. 
A  last  example  concerns  indicators  of  banks’  funding/liquidity  conditions.  For  lack  of 
data,  the  funding  gap  is  often  approximated  by  the  loans-to-deposits  ratio  (this  was 
standard  practice  in  the  IMF  GFSR  until  recently,  and  it  still  is  in  the  FSR  of  the 
European  Central  Bank).  However,  correct  measurement  of  the  gap  should  consider  all 
sources of retail funding, including bank bonds subscribed by retail customers (which proved 
to be as stable as retail deposits). Given large cross-country differences (for example, retail 
bonds  are  an  important  source  of  funding  in  Italy,  but  not  in  other  countries),  the  use  of 
rough  measures,  sometimes  induced  by  lack  of  publicly  available  data,  may  misrepresent 
the  true  funding  conditions of banks in some countries and alter international comparisons 
(Figure 5).21 
The institutional framework in Europe 
4.2 
A  full  assessment  of  the  institutional  set-up  for  MAP  policy  in  the  European  Union  is 
premature, also in the light of the implementation uncertainties for the SSM. However, it  is 
clear  that  the  various  reforms  and  regulations  introduced  have  produced  a  very  complex 
framework. An effort is necessary to minimize inefficiencies and foster an effective interaction 
among the different actors involved. Several key issues remain to be addressed. 
The first has to do with the respective roles and powers of the SSM and the National MAP 
Authorities  (NAs).  The  legislation  being  finalized  (CRD-IV/CRR  and  the  SSM  Regulation) 
gives  asymmetric  powers  to  the  two  parties,  with  the  ECB  able  only  to  tighten 
macroprudential tools above the regulatory minima and the NAs empowered to implement bi- 
directional policies.  At  the  same  time,  however,  a  symmetric feature  is  also  envisaged  by 
the rules: the ECB can object to policy decisions taken by the NAs, which will in turn have 
to  “duly  consider”  any  such  objections;  the  NAs  can  do  the  same  with  regard  to  ECB’s 
decisions, and the ECB has also to “duly consider” the NAs’ objections. As for this symmetry 
of “objection” powers, it remains to be seen who will have the final say if the objections are 
not  duly  taken  into  account.  Without  a  tie-breaking  mechanism,  the  risk  of  a  stalemate 
seems by no means negligible. 
A  related  issue  is  that  of  cooperation/coordination between  the  SSM  and  the  NAs.  This  is 
explicitly addressed only for the tools included in the CRD-IV/CRR package. It  is  essential 
that  work  continue  on  the  definition  of  a  coordination 
framework  also  for  instruments 
currently excluded from the European regulation, such as the LTV or the DTI ratios, as an 
equilibrium  relying  mainly  on  authorities’  good  will  could  turn  out  to  be  unstable.  Such  a 
framework  would  help  address  the  risk  that  measures  taken  with  a  purely  domestic 
perspective have negative spillovers on other countries. 
A final issue concerns the interaction between the ESRB and the SSM, which is also likely to 
be complex. Should the ESRB be strengthened and made more independent from the ECB- 
SSM?  Or  should  it  be  kept  as  a  lean  institution,  in  charge  of  coordination  among  SSM 
countries  and  other  EU  countries,  and  among  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities 
not  represented in  the  SSM?  The  debate  is  in  its  early stages.  Much  will  depend on  how 
many EU countries join the SSM. While each solution has its pros and cons, the risk of an 
overcrowded arena in the MAP field is material. 
                                                 
21   In the October 2012 GFSR the IMF calculated a 176 per cent loan-to-deposit ratio for Italian banks. For the 
same date,  a figure of  117 per cent can  be derived once  retail bonds are  taken  into  account (see Bank of 
Italy  (2012),  Financial  stability  report,  No.  4,  November).  In  the  GFSR  published  last  April,  following 
discussions  with  the  Bank  of  Italy,  the  IMF  itself  included  the  correct  definition  of  retail  liabilities  in  their 
analysis. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To maximize the effectiveness of the MAP framework in Europe, a principle that should be 
heeded  is  that  strong microprudential  supervision is  a  necessary precondition for  effective 
macroprudential  policy. Indeed, MAP policy is to a large extent the use  of microprudential 
tools with a macro perspective. It is therefore crucial to coordinate the use of prudential tools 
for  both  purposes.  As  an  example,  consider  the  actions  that  the  Bank  of  Italy  recently 
undertook  with  the  aim  of  increasing  bank  provisioning,  in  order  to  improve  investor 
confidence  in  Italian  banks.  With  a  macroprudential  perspective,  in  order  to  avoid 
procyclicality  the  Bank  of  Italy  at  the  same  time  asked  banks  to  increase  internally-
generated  resources  by  containing  costs,  disposing  of  non-strategic  assets  and  aligning 
dividend policies to  their  balance-sheet  and  income  strength.  These  actions  should  limit 
the  risk  that,  in  a  context  of  weak  economic  activity  and  tight  credit  conditions,  the 
increase  in  provisioning might lead to a deterioration in the availability of credit to the private 
sector. 
long  way 
Conclusions 
5. 
Macroprudential policy may play a crucial role in preserving financial stability. But in this new 
field  of  policymaking,  more  than  in  others,  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  no  solution  is 
obviously right or wrong. More experience is needed on the functioning of macroprudential 
authorities and the use of tools. As progress will inevitably follow from a learn-by-doing type 
of approach, policymakers should not shy away from carefully planned but bold experiments. 
Some  countries  are  already  moving  in  this  direction.  The  signs  of  overheating  that  are 
emerging  in  some  segments  of  the  financial  system  may  soon  require  appropriate 
macroprudential measures.  Policymakers should  not  repeat  the  errors  made  in  the  run-up 
to the crisis, when many supervisors turned a blind eye to the imbalances that were building 
up in their economies. 
Some conceptual steps need to be taken. First, elusion and waterbed effects may hamper 
the effectiveness of MAP policies, especially when measures are narrow. A system of tight 
micro  supervision  can  go  a 
towards  addressing  circumvention.  The 
simultaneous  use  of  complementary  macroprudential  tools,  rather  than  a  single  targeted 
tool,  can  also  help.  Effective  cross-border  cooperation 
fight  spillovers. 
Unfortunately, at present centrifugal forces seem to prevail, in Europe as elsewhere. 
Second,  we  need  to  explore  carefully  the  degree  of  asymmetry  of  MAP  tools  over  the 
financial cycle.  In  principle, MAP tools should be more effective during upswings, whereas 
during  downturns  market  pressures  may  impose  excessive  constraints  on  intermediaries, 
making the policies of releasing the previously accumulated buffers less effective. In practice, 
however,  during  upswings  incentives  towards  elusion  are  likely  to  be  stronger.  These  two 
offsetting  effects  make  it  hard  to  establish  whether  MAP  instruments  are  more  effective 
during upturns than downturns. Also, for an effective release of some macroprudential tools in 
bad times, there must have been a substantial tightening in good times. The speed at which 
policy tools can be adjusted also deserves attention. 
Third,  a  prerequisite  to  make  progress  in  all  of  the  above  areas  is  to  have  a  reliable 
statistical  framework.  The  amount  of  work  needed  to  harmonize  key  indicators  for  MAP 
policy is immense, even within the EU. 
Finally, progress is needed in the definition of the institutional and legal framework for MAP 
policy.  At  the  global  level,  the  design  of  financial  regulation involves,  in  different degrees, 
several authorities and supranational bodies (the G20, the FSB, the IMF, the BIS, to name 
just the main ones). The macroprudential arena is also very crowded. In Europe, tasks are 
today (or will be shortly) shared among the ESRB, the ECB, the European Commission, and 
the NAs. There is a material risk that such a proliferation of fora and decision-making bodies 
could end up complicating coordination and synergies. In this context, I believe that serious 
thought should be given to institutional simplification and a clear allocation of tasks. 
 
is  key 
to 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Tier 1 risk-based capital ratios for commercial banks, by bank size 
Figure 1 
(percentage points) 
a) USA 
  b) Europe 
 c) Italy 
  Source: Panel (a): Hanson, Kashyap and Stein (2011); panel (b): ECB; panel (c): Angelini, 
Nicoletti-Altimari and Visco (2013), op. cit. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2 
House prices in Europe 
(current prices; indices, 2000=100) 
Figure 3 
Loan-to-value ratio in selected euro area countries (1) 
(per cent) 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
Figure 4 
Effect of collateral and guarantees on 
the Italian banking system’s NPL and coverage ratios (1) 
(per cent) 
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 5 
Loan-to-deposit ratio in selected countries 
(per cent) 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
