Duvvuri Subbarao: Five years of leading the Reserve Bank – looking 
ahead by looking back 
Text of the Tenth Nani A Palkhivala Memorial Lecture by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of 
the Reserve Bank of India, at the Nani Palkhivala Memorial Trust, Mumbai, 29 August 2013. 
 First  of  all,  my  sincere  thanks  to  the  Nani  Palkhivala  Memorial  Trust,  particularly 
Shri Y.H. Malegam, the widely respected Chairman of the Trust, for extending me the honour 
of  delivering  the  Palkhivala  Memorial  Lecture  for  this  year.  I  know  many  eminent  thought 
leaders had delivered this memorial lecture in the past, and I attach a lot of value to adding 
my name to that very select list. 
Nani Palkhivala 
2. 
I  did  not  have  the  privilege  of  meeting  or  interacting  with  late  Shri  Palkhivala.  He 
was already a preeminent public intellectual in the country by the time I had entered the IAS 
in  the  early  1970s.  But  I  count  myself  among  the  millions  of  educated  Indians  who  were 
deeply  impressed  by  Shri  Palkhivala’s  commitment  to  protecting  India’s  democratic 
institutions,  and the  intellectual  vigour  with  which  he  did  so.  In  a  career  spanning  over  six 
decades,  he  distinguished  himself  as  a  brilliant  lawyer,  a  perceptive  political  scientist,  an 
intelligent communicator and an erudite diplomat, leaving behind a legacy that continues to 
influence our public discourse in several areas. 
Topic of my lecture 
3. 
I deliberated quite a bit on an appropriate topic for a lecture to honour the memory of 
such an eminent public intellectual. I was also conscious of the fact that this will be my last 
public  lecture  as  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI).  Quite  understandably, 
given the Palkhivala context, my thoughts started centering around the role and responsibility 
of a central bank in a democratic structure. Central banks make macroeconomic policy that 
influences the everyday life of people; yet they are managed by unelected officials appointed 
by the government. Such an arrangement is deliberate, based on the logic that an apolitical 
central  bank,  operating  autonomously  within  a  statutorily  prescribed  mandate  and  with  a 
longer time perspective, is an effective counterpoise to a democratically elected government 
which typically operates with a political mandate within the time horizon of an electoral cycle. 
4. 
An autonomous and apolitical central bank is a delicate arrangement too, and will 
work only if the government respects the autonomy of the central bank, and the central bank 
itself  stays  within  its  mandate,  delivers  on  that mandate  and renders  accountability  for the 
outcomes of its policies and actions. 
5. 
Putting  the  three  elements  of  today’s  lecture  context  together  –  Shri  Palkhivala’s 
exemplary  commitment  to  preserve  and  promote  values  and  institutions  of  democracy  in 
India; the Reserve Bank’s role in the democratic edifice of India; and the completion of my 
term as the Governor of the Reserve Bank – I determined that the best way I can pay tribute 
to  Shri  Palkhivala  is  to  focus  on  a  topic  that  threads  together  these  three  elements.  That 
explains  my  topic  for  today:  “Five  Years  of  Leading  the  Reserve  Bank:  Looking  Ahead  by 
Looking Back”. 
“May you live in interesting times?” 
6. 
The  Chinese  have  an  adage:  “May  you  live  in  interesting  times.”  I  can  hardly 
complain  on  that  count.  I  had  come  into  the  Reserve  Bank  five  years  ago  as  the  “Great 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Recession” was setting in, and I am finishing now as the “Great Exit” is taking shape, with not 
a week of respite from the crisis over the five years. 
7. 
From  a  central  banking  perspective,  history  will  mark  the  last  five  years  for  two 
distinct developments. The first is the extraordinary show of policy force with which central 
banks responded to the global financial crisis. This has generated a vigorous debate on the 
short-term  and  long  term  implications  of  unconventional  monetary  policies  as  also  on  the 
responsibility  of  central  banks  for  the  cross  border  spillover  impact  of  their  policies.  The 
second historical marker will be the manner in which, reflecting the lessons of the crisis, the 
mandate,  autonomy  and  accountability  of  central  banks  are  being  redefined  in  several 
countries  around  the  world.  Notwithstanding  all  the  tensions  and  anxieties  of  policy 
management  during  an  admittedly  challenging  period,  I  consider  myself  privileged  to  have 
led one of the finest central banks in the world during such an intellectually vigorous period. 
8. 
Against that context, I want to divide my lecture today on “Five Years of Leading the 
Reserve Bank: Looking Ahead by Looking Back” into two segments. In the first segment, I 
want to look back over the last five years and give my assessment of the macroeconomic 
developments during this period and the Reserve Bank’s response. In the second segment, I 
will address the major challenges for the Reserve Bank on the way forward. 
Macroeconomic developments over the last five years and RBI’s response 
I. 
9. 
For analytical purposes, macroeconomic developments over the last five years can 
be  divided  into  three  distinct  phases:  (i)  The  global  financial  crisis  and  RBI’s  response; 
(ii) Exit  from  the  crisis  and  RBI’s  struggle  with  growth-inflation  dynamics;  and  (iii)  The 
external sector strains which have accentuated over the last few months and RBI’s efforts to 
restore stability in the currency market. 
First phase (2008/09) – Crisis management 
10. 
Given all the water that has flown under the bridge since then, the Lehman crisis of 
2008  seems  an  eternity  away.  Yet,  that  was  the  reality  that  I  faced  within  less  than  two 
weeks of taking over as Governor. My intent here is not to rehash the events of those days, 
but try and put that crisis – and therefore the policy response – in perspective. 
11. 
In  order to  appreciate  that  perspective,  just throw  your  mind  back  to those  heady 
days  of  2008.  Recall  that  India  was  on  the  verge  of  being  christened  the  next  miracle 
economy. Growth was surging along at 9 per cent. Fiscal deficit was on the mend. The rupee 
was appreciating and asset prices were rising. There were inflation pressures but the general 
perception was that inflation was a problem of success, not of failure. Most importantly, we 
thought  we  had  “decoupled”  –  that  even  if  advanced  economies  went  into  a  down  turn, 
emerging market economies will not be affected because of their improved macroeconomic 
management, robust external reserves and sound banking sectors. 
12. 
The  crisis  dented,  if  not  fully  discredited,  the  decoupling  hypothesis.  It  affected 
virtually every country in the world, including India. So, why did India get hit? The reason was 
that by 2008, India was more integrated into the global economy than we recognized. India’s 
two  way  trade  (merchandize  exports  plus  imports),  as  a  proportion  to  GDP,  more  than 
doubled  over  the  past  decade:  from  about  20  per  cent  in  1998/99,  the  year  of  the  Asian 
crisis, to over 40 per cent in 2008/09, the year of the global crisis. 
13. 
If  our  trade  integration  was  deep,  our  financial  integration  was  even  deeper.  A 
measure  of  financial  integration  is  the  ratio  of  total  external  transactions  (gross  current 
account flows plus gross capital account flows) to GDP. This ratio had more than doubled 
from  44  per  cent  in  1998/99  to  112  per  cent  in  2008/09,  evidencing  the  depth  of  India’s 
financial integration. 
14. 
What this meant was that as the global financial and economic conditions went into 
a  turmoil,  we  were  affected  through  trade, finance  and  confidence  channels.  The  Reserve 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bank  responded  to  the  crisis  with  alacrity,  with  policies  aimed  at  keeping  our  financial 
markets functioning, providing adequate rupee liquidity, and maintaining the flow of credit to 
the productive sectors of the economy. 
Lessons in crisis management 
15. 
As  someone  said,  this  crisis  was  too  valuable  to  waste.  In  the  event,  we  learnt 
several lessons in crisis management. I will only list the important ones. First, we learnt that 
in a global environment of such uncertainty and unpredictability, policy action has to be swift, 
certain  and  reassuring.  Also,  during  crisis  times,  it  helps  enormously  if  governments  and 
central  banks  act,  and  are  seen  to  be  acting,  in  concert.  Second,  we  learnt  that  action  is 
important,  but  communication  is  even  more  important. When  the  economic  environment  is 
uncertain, market players and economic agents look up to governments and central banks 
for both reassurance and clarity. Indeed, communication was a critical tool all central banks, 
including India, adopted in those heady autumn days of 2008. 
16. 
The  third  lesson  we  learnt  is  that  even  in  a  multi-nation  crisis,  governments  and 
central  banks  have  to  adapt  their  response  to  domestic  conditions.  There  is  typically 
pressure  on  every  country  to  copy  the  crisis  response  of  other  countries,  especially  of 
advanced economies (AEs). For example, AEs were forced to resort to quantitative easing 
(QE) to loosen monetary conditions, raise inflation expectations and lower real interest rates. 
Was there any need for emerging market (EM) central banks to do so? I believe there wasn’t 
because they had sufficient conventional ammunition left. Instead, what we had to show was 
that we were fully prepared to use it. 
17. 
While  on  the  subject  of  crisis,  I  also  want  to  share  with  you  a  dilemma.  Crisis 
management is a percentage game. We have to do what we think has the best chance of 
reversing the momentum. At the same time, we have to weigh the short-term benefits against 
the longer term consequences, including moral hazards. In 2008, massive infusion of liquidity 
was seen as the best bet. Indeed, in uncharted waters, erring on the side of caution meant 
providing  the  system  with  more  liquidity  than  considered  adequate.  This  strategy  was 
effective  in  the  short-term,  but  with  hindsight,  we  know  that  excess  liquidity  may  have 
reinforced inflation pressures. In the thick of the crisis, the judgement call we had to make 
was  about  balancing  the  benefits  from  preventing  a  crisis  against  the  costs  of  potential 
inflation down the line. Remember we were acting in real time. Analysts who are criticising us 
are doing so with the benefit of hindsight. 
Second phase (2010/11) – Exit from the crisis 
18. 
India  recovered  from  the  crisis  sooner  than  even  other  emerging  economies,  but 
inflation  too  caught  up  with  us  sooner  than  elsewhere.  Inflation,  as  measured  by  the 
wholesale price index (WPI), which actually went into negative territory for a brief period in 
mid-2009, started rising in late 2009, and had remained around 9–10 per cent for all of 2010 
and much of 2011, reflecting both supply and demand pressures. Supply pressures stemmed 
from  elevated  domestic  food  prices  and  rising  global  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities. 
Demand pressures stemmed from rising incomes and sudden release of pent up demand as 
recovery  began.  The  supply  shocks  and  demand  pressures  combined  to  trigger  a  wider 
inflationary  process.  We  were  caught  in  the  quintessential  central  banking  dilemma  of 
balancing growth and inflation. 
19. 
In response to the inflation pressures, the Reserve Bank reversed its crisis driven 
accommodative monetary policy as early as October 2009 and started tightening. We have 
been criticized for our anti-inflationary stance, ironically from two opposite directions. From 
one side, there were critics who argued that we were too soft on inflation, that we were late in 
recognizing  the  inflation  pressures,  and  that  even  after  recognizing  such  pressures,  our 
“baby  step”  tightening  was  a  timid  and  hesitant  response.  Had  the  Reserve  Bank  acted 
quickly and more decisively, inflation could have been brought under control much sooner. 
From the other side of the spectrum, we were criticized for being too hawkish, mainly on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let  me  now  respond  to  the  doves  who  argue  that  the  Reserve  Bank  was  too 
argument that there was no need for the Reserve Bank to respond to inflation driven largely 
by food and supply shocks, and that we only ended up stifling growth without easing inflation 
pressures. 
Let me respond to this criticism from both ends of the spectrum. 
20. 
21. 
To those who say that we were behind the curve, my simple response is to recall the 
context  of  the  years  2010  and  2011.  Much  of  the  world  was  still  in  a  crisis  mode,  the 
eurozone crisis was in full bloom and there was a lot of uncertainty globally. And as we learnt 
from  the  experience  of  the  2008  Lehman  episode,  we  remained  vulnerable  to  adverse 
external  developments.  Our  “baby  steps”  were  therefore  a  delicate  balancing  act  between 
preserving growth on the one hand and restraining inflation on the other. 
22. 
With the benefit of hindsight, of course, I must admit in all honesty that the economy 
would have been better served if our monetary tightening had started sooner and had been 
faster  and  stronger.  Why  do  I  say  that?  I  say  that  because  we  now  know  that  we  had  a 
classic V-shaped recovery from the crisis, that growth had not dipped in the Lehman crisis 
year as low as had been feared, and that growth in the subsequent two years was stronger 
than earlier thought. But remember, all this is hindsight whereas we were making policy in 
real  time,  operating  within  the  universe  of  knowledge  at  that  time.  Just  as  an  aside,  this 
episode  highlights  the  importance  of  faster  and  more  reliable  economic  data  for  effective 
monetary policy calibration. 
23. 
hawkish in its anti-inflationary stance. 
First,  I  do  not  agree  with  the  argument  that  the  Reserve  Bank  failed  to  control 
24. 
inflation but only ended up stifling growth. WPI inflation has come down from double digits to 
around  5  per  cent;  core  inflation  has  declined  to  around  2  per  cent.  Yes,  growth  has 
moderated,  but  to  attribute  all  of  that  moderation  to  tight  monetary  policy  would  be 
inaccurate, unfair, and importantly, misleading as a policy lesson. India’s economic activity 
slowed owing to a host of supply side constraints and governance issues, clearly beyond the 
purview of the Reserve Bank. If the Reserve Bank’s repo rate was the only factor inhibiting 
growth, growth should have responded to our rate cuts of 125 bps between April 2012 and 
May 2013, CRR cut of 200 bps and open market operations (OMOs) of `1.5 trillion last year. 
25. 
Admittedly, some growth slowdown is attributable to monetary tightening. Note that 
the  objective  of  monetary  tightening  is  to  compress  aggregate  demand,  and  so  some 
sacrifice of growth is programmed into monetary tightening. But this sacrifice is only in the 
short-term;  there  is  no  sacrifice  in  the  medium  term.  Indeed,  low  and  steady  inflation  is  a 
necessary precondition for sustained growth. Any growth sacrifice in the short term would be 
more than offset by sustained medium term growth. I want to reiterate once again that the 
Reserve Bank had run a tight monetary policy not because it does not care for growth, but 
because it does care for growth. 
26. 
Critics of our monetary tightening must also note that our degrees of freedom were 
curtailed  by  the  loose  fiscal  stance  of  the  government  during  2009–12.  Had  the  fiscal 
consolidation been faster, it is possible that monetary policy calibration could have been less 
tight. 
27. 
And now let me respond to the criticism that monetary policy is an ineffective tool 
against supply shocks. This is an ageless and timeless issue. I am not the first Governor to 
have  to  respond  to  this,  and  I  know  I  won’t  be  the  last.  My  response  should  come  as  no 
surprise. In a $1500 per-capita economy – where food is a large fraction of the expenditure 
basket  –  food  inflation  quickly  spills  into  wage  inflation,  and  therefore  into  core  inflation. 
Indeed,  this  transmission  was  institutionalized  in  the  rural  areas  where  MGNREGA  wages 
are  formally  indexed  to  inflation.  Besides,  when  food  is  such  a  dominant  share  of  the 
expenditure basket, sustained food inflation is bound to ignite inflationary expectations. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
28. 
As  it  turned  out,  both  these  phenomena  did  play  out  –  wages  and  inflation 
expectations began to rise. More generally, this was all against a context of consumption-led 
growth, large fiscal deficits, and increased implementation bottlenecks. If ever there was a 
potent cocktail for core inflation to rise this was it. And it did – rising from under 3 per cent at 
the start of 2010 to almost 8 per cent by the end of the next year. It is against this backdrop 
that our anti-inflationary stance in 2010 and 2011 needs to be evaluated. 
Third phase (2012/13) – Pressures in the external sector 
29. 
Remember,  I  began  my  speech  with  the  old  Chinese  saying  –  “May  you  live  in 
interesting times.” So, as inflation began to moderate yielding space for monetary easing to 
support growth, we got caught up with external sector strains over the last two years and a 
sharp depreciation of the rupee over the last three months. There has been dismay about the 
ferocity of depreciation; there has also been a growing tendency to attribute all of this to the 
“tapering” of its ultra easy monetary policy by the US Fed. 
30. 
Such a diagnosis, I believe, is misleading. Admittedly, the speed and timing of the 
rupee depreciation have been due to the markets factoring in “tapering” by the US Fed, but 
we will go astray both in the diagnosis and remedy, if we do not acknowledge that the root 
cause of the problem is domestic structural factors. 
What  are  these  structural  factors?  At  its  root,  the  problem  is  that  we  have  been 
31. 
running a current account deficit (CAD) well above the sustainable level for three years in a 
row, and possibly for a fourth year this year. We were able to finance the CAD because of 
the easy liquidity in the global system. Had we used the breathing time that this gave us to 
address the structural factors and brought the CAD down to its sustainable level, we would 
have  been  able  to  withstand  the  “taper”.  In  the  event,  we  did  not.  We  therefore  made 
ourselves vulnerable to sudden stop and exit of capital flows driven by global sentiment; the 
eventual cost of adjustment too went up sharply. 
32. 
But what drives the CAD so high? Basic economics tells us that the CAD rises when 
aggregate  demand  exceeds  aggregate  supply.  There  is  an  argument  that  this  logic  is  not 
applicable to us in the current juncture given the sharp slowdown in growth. But we need to 
recognize that the CAD can increase substantially even in a low growth environment if supply 
constraints impact both growth and external trade as has been the case with us. 
33. 
The only lasting solution to our external sector problem is to reduce the CAD to its 
sustainable level and to finance the reduced CAD through stable, and to the extent possible, 
non-debt flows. Reducing the CAD requires structural solutions – RBI has very  little policy 
space or instruments to deliver the needed structural solution. They fall within the ambit of 
the government. Structural adjustment will also take time. In the interim, we need to stabilize 
the market volatility, a task that falls within the domain of the Reserve Bank. 
34. 
It is the avowed policy of the Reserve Bank not to target a level of exchange rate 
and we have stayed true to that policy. Our efforts over the last few years, particularly the 
last  three  months,  have  been  to  smoothen  volatility  as  the  exchange  rate  adjusts  to  its 
market  determined  level  so  as  to  make  the  near-term  cost  of  adjustment  less  onerous  for 
firms, households and banks. 
35. 
There  has  been  criticism  that  the  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  measures  have  been 
confusing  and  betray  a  lack  of  resolve  to  curb  exchange  rate  volatility.  Let  me  first  of  all 
reiterate  that  our  commitment  to  curbing  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  is  total  and 
unequivocal. I admit that we could have communicated the rationale of our measures more 
effectively. 
36. 
But  our  actions  were  consistent.  Our  capital  account  measures  were  aimed  at 
encouraging inflows and discouraging outflows. Also, we tightened liquidity at the short end 
to raise the cost of short-term money so as to curb volatility. At the same time, we wanted to 
inhibit the transmission of the interest rate signal from the short end to the long end as that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
would hurt flow of credit to the productive sector of the economy. So, we instituted an Indian 
version of “operation twist”. 
37. 
I must reiterate here that it is not the policy of the Reserve Bank to resort to capital 
controls or reverse the direction of capital account liberalization. Notably, the measures that 
we took did not restrict inflows or outflows by non-residents. 
II. 
Challenges for the Reserve Bank on the way forward 
38. 
Now let me turn to the second part of my lecture. Several times over the last five 
years.  I  have  often  been  asked  about  the  challenges  for  the  Reserve  Bank  on  the  way 
forward. As I finish my term as Governor of this great institution, this is a question that has 
been playing repeatedly in my mind. I am deeply conscious that this is not a seminar, so I will 
highlight, but only briefly, four challenges that the Reserve Bank will need to address in order 
to remain a premiere policy institution. 
Managing policy in a globalizing world 
39. 
The  first  challenge  on  my  list  is  for  the  Reserve  Bank  to  learn  to  manage  both 
economic  and  regulatory  policies  in  a  globalizing  world.  The  global  financial  crisis,  the 
eurozone  sovereign  debt  crisis  as  well  as  the  currency  market  volatility  over  the  last  few 
months have emphatically demonstrated how external developments influence our domestic 
macroeconomic  situation  in  complex,  uncertain  and  even  capricious  ways.  In  making  our 
policies, we have to factor in external developments, particularly the spillover impact of the 
policies  of  advanced  economies  on  our  macroeconomy.  This  will  become  even  more 
important as India’s integration with the global economy increases. Surely, globalization is a 
double edged sword. It comes with costs and benefits. The Reserve Bank needs to sharpen 
the  analytical  and  intellectual  rigour  to  make  policies  that  exploit  the  advantages  of 
globalization and mitigate its risks. 
40. 
Over the last five years, as an institution, we have learnt quite a lot about managing 
policy  in  a  globalizing  world.  Yet  the  learning  curve  ahead  is  steep.  My  wish  is  that  the 
Reserve Bank should take the lead in setting standards for how an emerging market central 
bank manages  policies  in  a  globalizing  world.  In  other  words,  we  should  become the  best 
practice that other central banks emulate. 
Knowledge institution 
41. 
The second on my list of challenges is that the Reserve Bank must position itself as 
a knowledge institution. The crisis has shown that knowledge matters. Those central banks 
which  are  at  the  frontiers  of  domain  knowledge  and  are  pushing  the  envelope  in  terms  of 
policies and actions will be better equipped to deal with the complexities of macroeconomic 
management in an increasingly dynamic and interconnected world. 
42. 
There is obviously no template or manual for becoming a knowledge institution nor 
is there a comprehensive list of attributes. Becoming a knowledge institution is a continuous 
process of learning from the best practices in the world, oftentimes reinventing them to suit 
our home context, pushing the envelope, asking questions, being open minded, acting with 
professionalism  and  integrity  and  encouraging  an  institutional  culture  that  cuts  through 
hierarchies. The Reserve Bank will also need to review its HR policies so as to build a talent 
endowment that can meet the challenges on the way forward. 
Keep your ear close to the ground 
43. 
When I was appointed Governor of the Reserve Bank in 2008, I went to call on the 
Prime  Minister  before  I  took  charge.  A man  of few  words  as  we  all  know,  he  told  me  one 
thing that stuck in my mind: “Subbarao, you are moving from long experience in the IAS into 
the Reserve Bank. In the Reserve Bank, one runs the risk of losing touch with the real world. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With your mind space fully taken up by issues like interest rates, liquidity traps and monetary 
policy transmission, it is easy to forget that monetary policy  is also about reducing hunger 
and  malnutrition,  putting  children  in  school,  creating  jobs,  building  roads  and  bridges  and 
increasing the productivity of our farms and firms. Keep your ear close to the ground.” 
44. 
In  the five  years  that  I have  been  at  the  Reserve  Bank,  I  have followed  this  wise 
counsel to the best of my ability. We have introduced a number of initiatives. The outreach 
programme  of  village  visits  by  top  executives  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  village  immersion 
programme  for  our  younger  officers,  town  hall  shows  and  meetings  with  focus  groups, 
conferences  with  frontline  managers,  conventions  of  business  correspondents,  to  mention 
some of the important ones. 
45. 
As a result of all these initiatives, the Reserve Bank is more conscious today than 
before  that  the  policies  it  makes  have  a  meaning  if,  and  only  if,  they  make  a  positive 
difference to the real world. For example, one of the core concerns of the Reserve Bank’s 
anti-inflationary stance is that inflation hurts, but hurts the poor much more than the better 
off.  But  the  poor  are  not  an  organized,  articulate  lobby.  As  a  public  policy  institution,  the 
Reserve Bank has the responsibility to make that extra effort to listen to the silent “voice of 
the poor”. 
46. 
Outreach  is  not  a  discrete  task;  it  is  a  continuous  process.  As  I  said  earlier,  the 
policies  of  the  Reserve  Bank  impact  the  everyday  lives  of  people.  The  Reserve  Bank  will 
remain  a  useful  and  relevant  institution  only  if  it  is  able  to  understand  the  hopes  and 
aspirations of ordinary people and factor them into its policy calculus. 
Autonomy and accountability 
47. 
The crisis over the last five years has reopened some fundamental questions about 
central  banks  –  their  mandates,  the  limits  to  their  autonomy  and  the  mechanisms  through 
which  they  render  accountability.  These  questions  are  playing  out  in  India  too.  Several 
committees have suggested that the mandate of the Reserve Bank should be narrowed on 
the argument that its currently broad mandate is diluting its focus on price stability – the core 
concern of monetary policy. The Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) 
which submitted its report to the Government in March this year has argued that the mandate 
of the Reserve Bank should be restricted to monetary policy and regulation of banks and the 
payment system. 
48. 
In the context of the mandate of central banks, one needs to keep in mind that the 
global financial crisis was a powerful rebuke to central banks for neglecting financial stability 
in the pursuit of price stability. In the immediate aftermath of the crisis, which saw the US Fed 
and  other  central  banks  provide  liquidity  in  spades  and  use  unconventional  tools,  a 
consensus  had  emerged  that  financial  stability  needed  to  be  explicit  in  the  objectives  of 
monetary  policy.  Then  the  euro  zone  debt  crisis  forced  the  ECB  to  bend  and  stretch  its 
mandate  to  bail  out  sovereigns,  in  essence  implying  that  a  central  bank  committed  to 
financial  stability  could  not  ignore  sovereign  debt  sustainability.  Put  differently,  the 
fundamentalist view of a central bank with a single-minded objective (price stability), and a 
single instrument (short-term interest rate) is being reassessed across the world. 
49. 
The jury is still out, but a consensus is building around the view that central banks 
now need to balance price stability, financial stability and sovereign debt sustainability. How 
this is to be achieved is the big question. 
50. 
Clearly there are no easy answers. But there are certain tenets that must inform the 
thinking  over  this  issue.  First,  the  fundamental  responsibility  of  central  banks  for  price 
stability  should  not  be  compromised.  Second,  central  banks  should  have  a  lead,  but  not 
exclusive,  responsibility  for  financial  stability.  Third,  the  boundaries  of  central  bank 
responsibility for sovereign debt sustainability should be clearly defined. Fourth, in the matter 
of ensuring financial stability, the government must normally  leave the responsibility to the 
regulators, assuming an activist role only in times of crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
It is also important that the mandate of the Reserve Bank is written into the statute, 
51. 
The crisis has made a strong case for a more expanded role for central banks. Do 
we ignore all that, and fall back on the old understanding of what a central bank should or 
should not do to change the RBI’s remit and scope of influence? That could turn out to be 
sub-optimal, even risky. 
52. 
Related to all this is the question about the limits to the autonomy of the Reserve 
Bank and where and to what extent it should defer to the executive. Finally, there are also 
questions about the accountability of the Reserve Bank for the outcomes of its policies. 
53. 
As Governor of the Reserve Bank, I not only welcomed the debate on these issues, 
but even encouraged it, in the firm belief that such a debate is in the larger public interest. At 
various times and in various contexts, I have responded to the issues in the debate. This is 
not  the  time  and  platform for  extensive  engagement  on  these  issues. Here, I  only  want  to 
give my broad view. 
54. 
Admittedly, the Reserve Bank has a mandate that is wider than that of most central 
banks. This is an arrangement that has served the economy well. There are synergies in the 
various  components  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  mandate  and  we  should  not  forefeit  those 
synergies.  Surely,  our  institutional  structures  must  adapt  to  the  changing  socioeconomic 
context,  but  any  such  change  must  be  brought  about  only  after  extensive  debate  and 
discussion. 
55. 
Notably, in a full length feature on the Reserve Bank in 2012, The Economist had 
said that the RBI is a role model for the kind of full service central bank that is back in fashion 
worldwide. There is something to that. 
56. 
so that it is protected from the political dynamics of changing governments. 
57. 
In the opening part of my lecture today, I explained the rationale for an autonomous 
central  bank.  Like  in  most  other  developing  economies,  the  Reserve  Bank  was  not  born 
autonomous;  it  gained  its  autonomy  over  time  as  a  result  of  the  lessons  of  international 
experience and the maturity of our political executive who saw the benefits of preserving the 
autonomy  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  On  its  part,  the  Reserve  Bank  earned  this  autonomy  by 
staying committed to the pursuit of larger public interest. 
58. 
Accountability is the flipside of autonomy. The Reserve Bank of India Act does not 
prescribe  any formal  mechanism for  accountability.  Over  the  years,  however,  certain good 
practices have evolved. Let me briefly illustrate. We explain the rationale of our policies, and 
where possible indicate expected outcomes. The Governor holds a regular media conference 
after every quarterly policy review which is an open house for questions, not just related to 
monetary policy, but the entire domain of activities of the Reserve Bank. 
59. 
The  Reserve  Bank  also  services  the  Finance  Minister  in  answering  parliament 
questions  relating  to  its  domain.  Most  importantly,  the  Governor  appears  before  the 
Parliament’s Standing Committee on Finance whenever summoned, which happens on the 
average three to four times a year. 
It  has  often  struck  me  that  for  a  public  policy  institution  with  such  a  powerful 
60. 
mandate,  these  mechanisms  for  accountability  are  both  inadequate  and  unstructured. 
Perhaps,  we  should  institute  an  arrangement  whereby  the  Governor  goes  before  the 
Parliament Standing Committee on Finance twice a year to present a report on the Reserve 
Bank’s policies and outcomes and answers questions from the members of the Committee. 
In my view, this will not only secure the accountability structure but also protect the Reserve 
Bank from any potential assaults on its autonomy. 
61. 
I have dwelt a bit longer on this last challenge of autonomy and accountability if only 
because we have not debated this in the larger public domain as much as we should have. 
And to the Reserve Bank staff, I want to say that they must be as zealous about rendering 
accountability as they are about guarding its autonomy. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Thank God, the Reserve Bank exists 
62. 
A final thought on this issue of autonomy and accountability. There has been a lot of 
media  coverage  on  policy  differences  between  the  government  and  the  Reserve  Bank. 
Gerard Schroeder, the former German Chancellor, once said, “I am often frustrated by the 
the Bundesbank. But thank God, it exists.” I do hope Finance Minister Chidambaram will one 
day say, “I am often frustrated by the Reserve Bank, so frustrated that I want to go for a walk, 
even if I have to walk alone. But thank God, the Reserve Bank exists.” 
Conclusion 
63. 
Let me now conclude. Over the course of this lecture, I have looked back to the last 
five years and indicated how that period divided into three different phases of complex policy 
challenges. I  made  an assessment  of the  Reserve  Bank’s  policy  response  and  addressed 
some of the criticism of that policy response at a broad level. Then, I looked ahead to four 
challenges that the Reserve Bank must address in order to remain a responsible, relevant 
and intellectually agile policy institution. 
64. 
It has been an enormous privilege for me to serve the Reserve Bank of India over 
the last five years. There were taxing times, testing times, anxious times. But at all times, I 
moved on with the confidence that there is a great institution behind me that will keep me in 
the right direction. I have been deeply impressed by the professionalism, intellectual agility 
and commitment of the staff and officers of the Reserve Bank. This is an institution that has 
served the country with dignity and distinction and will continue to set exacting standards for 
professional integrity and work ethic. 
Dharma 
65. 
Nani  Palkhivala  said,  “Dharma  lives  in  the  hearts  of  public  men;  when  it  dies,  no 
constitution, no law, no amendment can save it.” If I can extend that thought a little, a nation 
prospers only if its public institutions are guided by dharma. The Reserve Bank of India tops 
the list of India’s public institutions that are guided by Dharma and Dharma alone. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
