Gill Marcus: Challenges for young professionals in South Africa 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the  Black 
Management Forum Young Professionals, Sandton, 27 September 2013. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to address you this evening. As young professionals you are 
the  future  of  this  country.  Some  among  you  may  well  be  the  first  in  your  family  to  have 
attained this level of professional education or earning potential. As professionals you are in 
a particularly privileged position at a time when the global economy is still trying to recover 
from the financial crisis that began in 2007. While millions of people around the world lost 
their  jobs,  and  many  have  lost  hope  of  ever  getting  a  job  again,  a  global  skills  shortage 
exists. This shortage is even more severe in South Africa, and without appropriate skills in 
the country, and without a strong and sustained global recovery from the crisis, the domestic 
economy  will  struggle  to  grow  sufficiently  to  make  appreciable  inroads  into  our  persistent 
unemployment problem. 
As has been well documented, the global crisis hit different countries in different ways, and 
how  countries  were  affected  was  determined  in  part  by  policy  responses  as  well  as  by 
different structural features. 
Whereas  the  recession  in  South  Africa  was  relatively  brief  and  shallow,  in  line  with  most 
emerging  market  economies,  the  recovery  has  lagged  that  of  our  peers.  Furthermore,  we 
were an outlier in terms of the number of jobs lost during the crisis, with almost one million 
jobs lost. Five years later we are barely back to the levels of employment achieved before 
the crisis. The official unemployment rate stands at 25,6 per cent, while youth unemployment 
is 52,8 per cent. It is probably true to say that the longer a young person stays unemployed 
after leaving school, the lower their chances are of ever getting a job and they get deskilled, 
demotivated  and  disaffected,  leading  to  social  hardships  and  a  drain  on  society.  It  is  also 
probably the case that if people over the age of 50 lose their jobs they are unlikely to ever 
work again. 
Most  of  you  here  this  evening,  as  young  professionals,  are  university  graduates.  You  are 
among the fortunate ones who have been relatively protected from the fallout of the crisis. 
And  where  skills  shortages  are  more  severe,  the  more  protected  are  graduates  as  they 
command a premium in the labour market. A lot will clearly depend on the type of skills and 
qualification,  and  the  quality  of  that  qualification.  But  globally,  there  appear  to  be  mixed 
experiences regarding the impact of the crisis on graduate employment. There have been a 
number of anecdotal reports of the challenges facing graduates in finding employment. This 
has certainly been the case in Europe and the UK, with reports of graduates having to take 
on temporary and relatively menial jobs. This not only affects their lifetime earnings, but also 
causes a ripple effect by depriving less skilled workers of access to these jobs. According to 
a recent survey conducted by the Trendence Institute in Berlin, the number of applications 
European business school graduates expect to send out before they get their first job has 
increased  from  28,5  in  2002  to  38;  and,  on  average,  European  graduates  now  expect  to 
spend almost six months looking for a job. But in Greece and Spain, where unemployment is 
above 25 per cent and youth unemployment double that, the expectation is ten months. 
There are indications that, while the crisis has no doubt had a devastating effect on unskilled 
and  even  semi-skilled  workers,  South  African  graduates  appear  to  have  fared  better  than 
their  European  counterparts.  Recent  research  suggests  that  South  African  university 
graduates  are  relatively  better  off,  but  perhaps  not  surprisingly  so.  According  to  research 
conducted  by  Hendrik  van  Broekhuizen  and  Servaas  van  der  Berg  at  Stellenbosch 
University,  and  published  by  the  Center  for  Development  Enterprise,  the  stock  of  South 
African university graduates more than doubled to about 1,1 million between 1995 and 2012, 
but the broad unemployment rate of graduates has remained below 6 per cent. At the same 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
time the labour force participation rate for graduates is around 90 per cent, compared with 
59 per cent for people with only a school education. 
However,  these  figures  hide  a  racial  disparity.  While  the  number  of  black  graduates 
employed has trebled over this period, the unemployment rate of black graduates has been 
consistently higher than that of whites, although the gap has narrowed significantly over time. 
The above-mentioned study shows that in 2012 the unemployment rate of black graduates 
was 8,6 per cent, compared with 3,0 per cent for white graduates. This is still a significant 
difference, and I am sure we would find this compounded by gender bias if this was to be 
analysed. 
It is perhaps also worth noting that their research distinguishes between university graduates 
and other tertiary education. In the latter category, the experience of graduates has not been 
as  positive,  and  may  well  reflect  the  state  of  the  economy  as  well  as  some  quality 
constraints. They show a general tendency for unemployment of graduates, irrespective of 
race, to follow the business cycle, but worsening economic conditions seem to have less of 
an impact on graduate unemployment than on people without degrees. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  education  matters  for  employment  prospects.  According  to  the 
Quarterly Labour Force Survey, in the second quarter of 2013 the unemployment rate was 
5,2  per cent for  university  graduates;  12,6  per cent for those  with  other tertiary  education; 
27,0 per cent for those with matric and 30,3 per cent for those with less than matric. 
This  relatively  favourable  trend  of  graduate  employment  is  consistent  with  results  of  the 
Professional Provident Society of South Africa (PPS) Professional Confidence Index Survey, 
which shows that graduate professionals are relatively confident about the future. The most 
recent survey revealed a 70 per cent confidence level when respondents were asked about 
the  future  of  their  profession  over  the  next  five  years.  However,  the  results  show  that 
professionals are increasingly concerned about the outlook for the local economy, with only 
55 per cent feeling confident. Nevertheless, 77 per cent of respondents were confident about 
remaining in the country for the foreseeable future. 
Because the outlook for the domestic economy is intricately tied to the global prospects, it is 
appropriate to consider whether or not we are out of the crisis yet. There is little doubt that 
the  global  financial  crisis  is  still  with  us,  although  it  has  continued  to  mutate.  While  the 
general global outlook seems to be a bit more positive, we appear to have moved into a new 
phase, which is no less risky or uncertain than previous phases. And even if things don’t get 
worse, they will take a long time to get better. 
How has the crisis mutated? What started off as a banking crisis, spurred by questionable 
banking  practices  in  the  advanced  economies  in  particular,  a  failure  of  regulation  in  some 
jurisdictions  and  excessive  household  borrowing,  developed  into  a  synchronised  global 
recession. World trade, commodity prices and asset prices collapsed, and millions of people 
around the globe lost their jobs. Fortunately, policy makers in the advanced economies had 
learned  from  the  mistakes  of  their  predecessors  during  the  Great  Depression  of  the  early 
1930s,  and  a  repeat  of  that  era  was  avoided.  So,  although  things  were  bad  enough,  they 
could have been much worse. 
But  the  path  to  recovery  has  not  been  easy.  Expansionary  fiscal  policies  were  soon 
constrained as government debt ratios became unsustainable and the crisis mutated into a 
sovereign debt crisis, particularly in a number of European economies, which threatened the 
existence  of  the  Eurozone  as  a  single  currency  area.  Increasing  reliance  was  placed  on 
monetary  policy  and,  as  interest  rates  reached  their  zero  lower  bound  in  a  number  of  the 
advanced  economies,  a  range  of  unconventional  policies  were  introduced,  including 
quantitative  easing,  which  is  a  process  whereby  the  central  bank  injects  money  into  the 
economy by buying government bonds or other assets. The subsequent combination of high 
liquidity and low interest rates led to a global search for yield, and consequently reinforced 
strong  capital flows  into  emerging market  economies,  which  had  generally  recovered  from 
the recession by late 2009. Emerging markets, led by China, were seen to be the new engine 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for  global  growth,  and  this  development  was  seen  as  a  tectonic  shift  in  the  balance  of 
economic power around the globe. 
However,  these  capital  inflows  created  challenges for  emerging market economies,  as  the 
resulting exchange rate appreciation undermined competitiveness. Some emerging markets 
complained  about  “currency  wars”  and  various  policies  were  implemented  to  stem  these 
inflows, with very mixed success. But at the same time, stronger exchange rates did help to 
constrain  inflationary  pressures,  allowing  monetary  policy  more  freedom  to  focus  on 
providing some stimulus to the hesitant growth recovery. 
A  notable  structural  change  in  the  nature  of  these  capital  flows  was  the  predominance  of 
flows  into  domestic  currency  bond  markets  in  emerging  market  economies,  with  non-
residents holding increasing proportions of domestic bonds. South Africa‘s experience was 
no  different.  In the  pre-crisis  period, the  bulk  of portfolio flows  to  South Africa  were  to  the 
equity  market.  Since  2009  until  recently,  bond  flows  predominated  and  non-resident 
ownership of the outstanding stock of bonds increased from around 12 per cent in 2007 to 
around 38 per cent currently. This change in the pattern of flows reinforced the downward 
pressure on long term bond yields. Although this did not have the positive effect on private 
sector investment that one would generally have expected, it did have a significant effect on 
the  cost  of  borrowing  by  government  at  a  time  when  the  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policy  of 
National  Treasury  was  relatively  expansionary.  These  flows  also  helped  to  finance  the 
widening current account of the balance of payments. 
So what has changed? We now appear to be entering a new but still highly uncertain phase 
of the crisis. Growth in the emerging market economies, including China, has been declining, 
and earlier optimism that emerging markets could decouple from the advanced economies 
has faded somewhat. At the same time, there are some signs of recovery in the US, which 
prompted the US Fed to begin to consider slowing the pace of extraordinary monetary policy 
accommodation it has been providing. This does not mean an imminent tightening of policy 
by  raising  short  term  interest  rates,  but  rather  beginning  to  cut  back  on  the  pace  of  asset 
purchases, currently at US$85 billion per month. 
The  reaction  to  the  announcement  by  the  Fed  in  May  that  tapering  would  begin  relatively 
soon  took  many  analysts  and  market  participants  by  surprise,  and  underlined  just  how 
nervous markets are, and how elevated the uncertainty is. What was meant to be an orderly 
adjustment threatened to become precisely the opposite, despite the assurances by the Fed 
that tapering would be done in a responsible manner. Long-term bond yields and mortgage 
rates  in  the  US  increased  by  about  100  basis  points.  The  spillover  effect  on  emerging 
markets was intense, with bond yields generally increasing by more than in the US, as bond 
flows  reversed  sharply  –  since  May  about  US$20  billion  has  flowed  out  of  emerging  bond 
markets, with R17 billion net sales by non-residents in the domestic bond market between 
22 May  and  the  end  of  August;  and  emerging  market  currencies,  including  the  rand, 
depreciated markedly across the board. 
Although there was a general expectation that tapering of quantitative easing would begin in 
September, there was a great deal of uncertainty around the pace and timing, and the period 
between the May and the September FOMC meeting was highly volatile. In the event, the 
Fed refrained from tapering in September, out of concern about the slow pace of recovery in 
the US labour market; the unresolved fiscal issues in the US which could lead to further fiscal 
contraction  when  the  debt  ceiling  is  reached,  possibly  in  mid-October;  and  the  negative 
impact of tight financial conditions and higher long term interest rates on the nascent housing 
market recovery in the US. 
The reaction of the markets to this surprise was dramatic, with strong recoveries in bond and 
equity markets, while the dollar weakened across the board. However, it is inevitable that the 
Fed will have to begin tapering at some stage, and markets are likely to react or over-react to 
any  data  coming  out  of  the  US  that  is  likely  to  have  a  bearing  on  US  monetary  policy 
decisions. We have been given a taste of what is to come, and we are in for a difficult and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
volatile  period  ahead.  This  is  unchartered  territory,  and  whatever  the  US  does  is  going  to 
have spillover effects onto the rest of the world. This is why we pay such close attention to 
developments in the US, including who will replace Ben Bernanke when his term expires at 
the end of January 2014. 
While the news from the US appears relatively positive, the same cannot be said about the 
prospects for the Eurozone, where the outlook for growth is poor, despite the fact that the 
region as a whole emerged from recession in the second quarter of this year. A number of 
European  countries  are  still  experiencing  negative  growth  and,  even  where  growth  is 
positive, it remains very weak. The July World Economic Outlook (WEO) update of the IMF 
forecasts growth of –0,6 per cent in 2013 and 0,9 per cent in 2014, with the risks still seen to 
be on the downside. One of the constraints facing these countries is the weak state of their 
banking sectors, which have not recovered sufficiently to resume lending on a large scale, 
and there is still very slow progress towards a banking union in the region. At the same time, 
fiscal consolidation continues to be quite severe in some countries and the debt ratios are 
still deteriorating in the  peripheral countries, for example, the debt to GDP ratio in Greece 
now stands at around 160 per cent, and that of Italy at around 130 per cent. 
From  a  South  African  perspective,  given  our  trade  and  investment  links,  this  is  not  good 
news,  and  implies  that  the  crisis  will  be  with  us  for  some  time.  Europe  is  still  our  major 
trading partner, despite accounting for a declining share of our manufacturing exports, from 
around  38  per  cent to  25  per  cent  between  2007  and  2012.  The  importance  of  Europe  to 
South Africa is further underlined by its weight as a source of foreign investment into South 
Africa. According to the Census of Foreign Transaction, Liabilities and Assets, published by 
the South African Reserve Bank earlier this month, European countries and the UK are the 
main  sources  of  foreign  capital  to  the  South  African  economy,  with  the  relative  share 
unchanged at around two-thirds since 2001. However, the share of the UK has declined from 
45,5 per cent in 2001 to 37,6 per cent in 2011. 
The  recent  July  WEO  downgraded  its  global  growth  forecasts  for  emerging  markets,  and 
unfortunately  the  BRICS  countries  featured  strongly  in  this  downgrade.  The  2013  growth 
forecast for China was reduced from 7,8 per cent to 7,5 per cent; Russia from 3,4 per cent to 
2,5 per cent; and Brazil from 3,0 per cent to 2,5 per cent. Although China is not an important 
destination for our manufacturing exports, it remains our main trading partner, mainly as a 
destination for  our  commodities.  China  also  has  an  important  impact  on  global  commodity 
price trends, and the recent weakness in a number of commodity prices has been ascribed to 
the slowdown in that country. 
While the crisis has curtailed domestic growth, it is not the only contributory factor. After all, 
our  emerging  market  peers  have  faced  the  same  challenging  environment  and  yet 
outperformed  South  Africa  in  the  post-crisis  period.  The  World  Economic  Forum  (WEF) 
Global  Competitiveness  report  paints  a  mixed  picture  of  how  South  Africa  stands  up  to 
international comparison. It shows that, with respect to the financial sector, we are up there 
with the best. South Africa was ranked first out of 148 countries for regulation of securities 
exchanges; first for strength of auditing and reporting standards; first for efficacy of corporate 
boards  and  the  protection  of  minority  shareholders’  interests;  second for financing  through 
local equity markets; and third for overall financial market development. This reflects well on 
the sector, and also on the quality of the professionals that make up that sector, including 
accountants, economists, etc. Many of you here this evening are part of that sector. What is 
important to bear in mind is that, while there is recognition of the excellence of South Africa’s 
financial  sector,  and  it  is  a  critically  important  asset  for  the  country  and  our  future 
development, it must serve the needs of the real economy. 
South Africa cannot simply aspire to be a world leader in the financial sector. We need to 
encourage  more  productive  real  sector  investment  and  employment  and,  crucially, 
encourage  exports,  given  our  dependence  on  imports  of  capital  goods.  Unfortunately, 
according to the WEF, we are have slipped in the overall competitiveness ranking from 40th 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to 53rd, and we have been surpassed by Mauritius as the most competitive country in Africa. 
For years we have been somewhat complacent about being the biggest economy in Africa. 
With the current growth rates, we could be overtaken by Nigeria within a decade. We fare 
even worse when it comes to labour relations where we are ranked worst in the survey of 
148 countries. 
This declining competitiveness is reflected in South Africa’s widening current account deficit 
at 6,5 per cent of GDP in the second quarter of this year, driven to an important degree by a 
weak export performance, which can only be partly explained by weak demand growth. Our 
exports  have  also  suffered  due  to  widespread  strikes:  not  only  do  current  export  volumes 
decline,  whether  commodities  or  manufactured  goods  such  as  motor  vehicles,  but  South 
Africa’s  attractiveness  as  an  investment  destination  suffers,  and  this  has  the  potential  to 
undermine future investment in the economy. South Africa is part of the global manufacturing 
supply chain, and reliability of supply is key to maintaining and improving our position in this 
chain.  South  Africa’s  competitiveness  is  further  undermined  by  unit  labour  costs  rising 
relative  to  competitor  countries,  and  a  weaker  exchange  rate  only  helps  improve 
competitiveness if not offset by wage and price increases. 
In  order  to  improve  our  growth  prospects  we  need  a  sustained  increase  in  fixed  capital 
formation. Having reached a peak of around 24 per cent of GDP in 2008, the ratio of gross 
fixed capital formation to GDP has now declined to around 19 per cent. This is well short of 
the 25 per cent ratio that is generally seen to be the minimum to sustain the growth rates that 
we require to make inroads on unemployment, and even further away from the 30 per cent 
aspired to in the National Development Plan. The decline in the investment ratio has been 
mainly  a  result  of  a  collapse  in  investment  expenditure  by  the  private  sector  which,  at the 
height of the crisis, was faced with relatively low levels of capacity utilisation and uncertainty 
about the future. Growth in gross fixed capital formation remains weak, at 2,7 per cent in the 
second quarter of 2013. 
Since the crisis, infrastructure expenditure by the state-owned enterprises has been the main 
driver of fixed investment. The emphasis on infrastructure investment is appropriate as it is 
likely to contribute to improved economic efficiencies and helps with the alleviation of existing 
bottlenecks in the economy. But the focus on infrastructure is not new, and the plans must 
come to fruition. 
But it is not only the government and state-owned enterprises that need to invest. In his book 
“The  Next  Convergence”  Michael  Spence,  the  respected  growth  theorist,  has  shown  that 
countries  which  have  sustained  growth  rates  of  around  7  per  cent  or  more  for  25  years 
generally have government and public sector investment ratios of between 5 and 7 per cent 
of GDP, and total investment rates of at least 25 per cent of GDP. A consistent growth rate of 
7 per cent will allow for a doubling of income every 10 years, whereas a growth rate of 3 per 
cent  will  take  24  years  to  double  incomes.  Currently  our  problem  is  that  private  sector 
investment is weak, which may partly reflect excess capacity in some sectors, but also a lack 
of  general  business  confidence.  There  are  indications  that  private  sector  fixed  capital 
formation has begun to improve, but this appears to be gradual and tentative. In the second 
quarter of 2013, growth of 4,4 per cent was recorded. 
Michael Spence sums it up appropriately as follows: “Put bluntly, growth requires investment, 
and that means present sacrifice for future gain. The job of leaders is in part to get everyone 
on board, to build a consensus behind a forward-looking vision, underpinned by a growth and 
development  strategy  that  is  credible.  Multiple  classes  of  participants  and  organised 
stakeholders need to be willing participants. These include labour, unions, businesses and 
entrepreneurs,  civil  society  organisations,  and  households  at  various  levels  in  the  income 
distribution.” Unfortunately, while there is a common view that we need investment, there is 
no consensus around how this should be achieved, and how the sacrifices should be shared. 
This  brings  us  back  to  where  I  began  this  evening,  and  that  is  the  need  for  education  or 
investment in human capital. I have on numerous occasions in the past stressed the need to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
improve the quality of education in South Africa and to fix the parlous state of many of our 
dysfunctional schools. We need to value education and, thereby, knowledge, and not simply 
the certificate of qualification. But we also need to ensure that the education we do receive is 
of value. The CDE report referred to earlier suggests that, while not perfect, the university 
system is turning out appropriate and good quality skills. But we also need to focus on other 
technical skills that are not taught in universities but are no less important to the economy. 
Not only does an undertrained and undereducated workforce constrain economic growth, it 
reinforces  the  cycle  of  unemployment  and  widening  inequalities.  As  Michael  Spence  has 
noted, in a  world in  which knowledge and connectivity are increasingly  the basis for value 
creation, failures in the educational system are the surest form of exclusion there is. 
In conclusion, the crisis is still with us, and South Africa faces a challenging future. However, 
the doom and gloom associated with the emerging markets is probably overstated: whereas 
there  will  be  global  adjustments  in  response  to  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  in  the 
advanced  economies,  and  this  means  volatility  in  emerging  market  financial  markets,  it  is 
hard to see a recovery of global demand or demand from the advanced economies as being 
anything but good news in the medium to long term. This is what we have been waiting for. 
But we have to ensure that we are well-positioned to take advantage of the global recovery 
and minimise the impact of the uncertainty and volatility that will surely accompany such a 
recovery. 
And as professionals, all of you here this evening have an important role to play. 
With your personal achievements comes responsibility – to your immediate families, to those 
who have supported you throughout your studies, to your communities and to society as a 
whole. You have dreams, ambitions, and visions of the future South Africa we are all striving 
to build. So where is your voice, your passion, your purpose in the vibrant debate that rages 
as we work to build our common future? We all have the ability to exercise both reason and 
choice. The future will be what you make it. 
I wish you all well in your personal and professional lives. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
