Prasarn Trairatvorakul: From here to there – transition in emerging 
markets 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  delivered  in  the 
Thailand@Harvard  Series,  Harvard  Kennedy  School,  Boston,  Massachusetts,  7  October 
2013. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be back here at Harvard and to have a chance to contribute to the 
Thailand@Harvard  series.  Boston  has  certainly  changed  a  lot  since  I  graduated  over 
30 years ago. But the warmth and sense of intellectual purpose that I still feel here makes it 
all seem like yesterday. And by that I don’t necessarily mean the stress of studying for my 
general exam! 
Later  this  week  I  will  be  attending  the  Annual  Meetings  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank. 
Undoubtedly one of the key issues that will be discussed is the recent growth slowdown in 
many  emerging  market  economies.  Certainly,  among  market  commentators  and  in  policy 
circles, the medium-term growth prospects for China, India, Brazil and other emerging 
economies  have  become  the  talk  of  the  town.  And  it  will  be  the  focus  of  my  remarks 
today. 
What happens in emerging markets matter. Together, they account for more than half of 
world GDP.1 Since the early 2000s, when Jim O’Neill at Goldman Sachs coined the acronym 
BRIC for Brazil, Russia, India and China, emerging markets have powered global economic 
growth.  By  mid-2009,  these  economies  were  growing  7  percentage  points  faster  than  the 
G7 economies and contributed around two-thirds of world output growth. 
With growth slowing sharply, the crux of the debate right now is whether the slowdown is 
temporary,  reflecting  one-off  negative  shocks,  or  long-lasting,  as  the  initial  growth  spurt 
from  undertaking  “low-hanging  fruit”  reforms  dissipate  and  the  transition  towards  a  more 
sophisticated growth model not yet accomplished. 
I will not argue for or against either of these views. Rather, let me put on my economist’s hat 
and say that “it depends”. But don’t worry, I will not spend the next 10 minutes boring you by 
spelling  out  all  the  arguments  on  each  side  or  listing  all  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of 
emerging  market  countries.  Instead,  I  will  highlight  what  I  see  as  the  critical  steps 
needed to successfully see these countries through the current transition. This leads me to a 
focus on domestic factors. 
Ultimately,  growth  depends  primarily  on  what  happens  at  home.  External  conditions 
alternately  provide  headwinds  or  tailwinds,  but  the  ability  to  counter  or  take  advantage  of 
these  shifts  is  determined  by  domestic  capabilities.  Now  some  of  you  may  think  of 
endowment of resources, such as land and labour, as the most fundamental domestic factor. 
And you are right. Factor endowments do give some countries a head-start over others. Oil 
exporting countries are a prime example. 
But  the  long-run  prosperity  of  nations  is  not  bound  by  their  endowments.  Times 
magazine recently ran an article on the fact that Holland is Europe’s largest tomato exporter. 
One of the most critical ingredients in growing tomatoes is sunshine. Holland is cold and gets 
little sunshine. Greece is hot and has plenty of sunshine. Yet the Dutch can produce 70kg of 
tomatoes per year in a square metre of his temperature controlled greenhouse whilst Greek 
and  other  Mediterranean  grower  get  approximately  7kg  through  traditional  open-air 
                                                
1  
In purchasing power parity terms.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
plantations. Ironically, in the summer Greece imports tomatoes from Holland because local 
farmers are unable to grow enough during the hottest time of the year. 
Natural  and  geographical  constraints  can  be  overcome.  Japan  and  Singapore  also 
spring to mind as countries that have made much of their limited resources. Critical to long- 
run  growth  is  how  you  make  use  of  and  develop  your  resources.  Doing  so  requires 
constant reshuffling of factors of production. Workers, capital, and land has to be devoted to 
activities  that  generate  the  most  value  added  for  the  economy.  In  other  words,  growth 
requires structural change. Advanced economies are simply not blown-up versions of 
developing  economies.  They  are  structurally  different.  Development  entails  more  than 
just aggregate growth. It requires significant transformation in the productive structure of the 
economy. 
In  Thailand  the  average  worker  in  the  manufacturing  sector  is  roughly  10  times  more 
productive than those in agriculture. Yet, the latter employ about 40 percent of our workforce 
compared  to  15  percent  in  manufacturing.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  simply  moving  workers 
from agriculture to industry can lift our income tremendously. In fact, this was precisely 
one of the key drivers of Thailand’s growth in the 20 years prior to the 1997 crisis. During this 
time, the  share  of  employment  in  agriculture fell  by  a  third,  releasing  workers  to the  more 
productive manufacturing and service sectors. Thailand’s experience is quite typical of many 
others in Asia. 
Emerging  market  countries  have  not  only  grown  rapidly  over  the  last  few  decades, 
they  have  also  changed  dramatically.  Sustaining  growth  going  forward  hinges  on  the 
continuation of this process of change and upgrading. For Asia, industrializing the agriculture 
sector through the adoption of modern methods and the development of agribusinesses will 
be a key source of productivity growth. Similarly, the composition of the service sector, which 
is also quite large, has to shift from low-productivity activities to modern, high value-added 
services. 
Countries that have achieved sustained growth are those that are better at removing 
the bottlenecks that impede such transformation. This typically requires a number of key 
fundamental capabilities, such as macroeconomic stability, rule of law, good education, strict 
enforcement of contracts, a competent bureaucracy, good governance, and low tolerance of 
corruption. These are often encapsulated under the rubric of strong institutions. One 
can think of institutions as the set of rules and norms that both governs the incentives 
of  economic  agents  as  well  as  constrains  their  behavior.  Good  institutions  encourage 
growth, bad institutions stifle it. Entrepreneurship, a critical driver of structural change, relies 
heavily on the institutional environment. The contrast between North and South Korea serves 
as  a  striking  example  of  how  institutional  differences  can  lead  to  wildly  divergent  paths 
between two regions that were initially very similar culturally and geographically. 
This  does  not  mean  that  a  country  needs  to  achieve  comprehensive  institutional 
development before growth can occur. “Big bang” institutional reform is typically infeasible. 
Instead, tackling the most binding constraints one-by-one can yield substantial growth 
benefits. A country does not need to attain Swiss level of institutional quality in order to be 
able  to  compete  with  Swiss  producers  in  many  products.  For  example,  China’s  growth 
miracle  has  occurred  through  selective  market-oriented  reforms  against  a  backdrop  of 
pervasive economic and political institutional weaknesses. 
But  eventually, the  growth  process  has  to  evolve  to  be  sustained.  At  this  point  weak 
institutions  will  hamper  growth.  Transitioning  towards  a  diverse  and  sophisticated  growth 
model  is  only  possible  once  institutional  strength  is  achieved  along  sufficiently  many 
dimensions. This reflects the existence of large complementarities. A strong legal system 
and  enforcement  of  property  rights,  for  example,  won’t  boost  innovation  much  if  the 
education system fails to produce a skilled workforce. A highly educated workforce cannot 
contribute meaningfully  if macroeconomic  stability  is  lacking. Good  macro  policy  will  make 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
little difference if corruption is rampant. The individual institutional elements complement 
each other in such a way that the whole is greater than the sum. 
Without  sufficiently  broad  institutional  development,  growth  will  stall.  Many  analysts 
actually  believe  that  several  emerging market  countries  are  already  at  this  point.  As  such, 
moving forward  will  be  possible  only  with  further  institutional  reforms.  Such  a  sentiment  is 
echoed 
in  former  premier  Wen  Jiabao’s  description  of  China’s  impressive  growth 
performance as “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and unsustainable”. 
So we know, by and large, what is needed. Indeed, economists have done a very good job at 
explaining the importance of institutions for growth. But how do we achieve institutional 
change? Why  do  some  countries  manage  to  improve  their  fundamental  capabilities  while 
others languish? This is the heart of the matter. It is not hard to spot bad institutions when we 
see  it  and  propose  changes  that  would  seemingly  yield  large  benefits.  It  is  another  issue 
entirely  how  to  make  the  change  happen.  In  this  regard,  policy  prescriptions  that  call  for 
“growth enhancing structural reforms” or “strong institutions” alone is partial at best. That’s 
like saying that if you want to get fit, you should exercise. Good advice, but not very useful. 
A practical reform strategy must be based on a ground-level perspective of how institutional 
change  happens.  Policy  can  then  be  tailored to  maximize  the  chance  of  success.  So  how 
does  institutional  change  happen?  The  answer  seems  to  be  a  mixture  of  history,  will 
power, and luck. It relates to the complex power dynamics in a country. Structural reforms 
create  winners  and  losers.  The  winners  are  often  diffused  and  dispersed.  Conversely,  the 
losers are often easily identifiable, powerful and well-organised. Institutional change must go 
up against vested interests. This process falls squarely in the political domain. And as we are 
reminded by the events in Egypt and elsewhere, the political process and power struggles 
are rarely clean. Exercise is sweaty and messy. 
The  fact  is,  institutional  reform  is  highly  contingent.  They  depend  upon  events 
transpiring in a particular way at critical junctures. This is shaped by the prevailing political 
economy  context  and  social  attitudes  at  the  time,  as  well  as  luck.  There  was  nothing 
inevitable  in  Deng Xiaoping’s  rise to  power  in  China  in  the  late  1970s,  which  was  the  key 
pivotal moment that set China towards economic reforms that bolstered the role of market 
forces. The set of events that transpired were highly contingent on the outcome of a power 
struggle between remnants of the Cultural Revolution leadership, namely the Gang of Four, 
and more reform-minded members of the Communist Party. In other countries, such power 
struggles have come out on the other side and oppressive economic institutions remained. 
A confluence of factors, especially at critical junctures, largely determines the path of 
institutional change and development. The window of opportunity comes and goes. We 
must  be  ready  to  seize  it  as  a  society.  Successful  growth-promoting  reforms  are 
pragmatic  and  opportunistic.  Building  institutions  is  not  like  building  a  house  –  brick  by 
brick in a linear fashion. It is more like scoring a goal in soccer. There are many moving parts 
at  the  same  time,  the  play  is  unpredictable,  and  it  involves  an  enormous  amount  of  tacit 
unseen  coordination  among  players.  Ability,  hard  work,  and  team  spirit  have  to  come 
together  in  a  harmonious  manner.  Moreover,  the  outcome  is  highly  contingent  on  certain 
events at pivotal moments. A foul here, a red card there can make all the difference. Sports 
commentators call these “momentum swings”. 
Countries  must  seek  to  make  the  most  of  these  windows  of  opportunities  to  build  reform 
momentum.  Successful  policies  will  be  those  that  are  mindful  of  a  country’s  history  and 
leverage  on  prevailing  political  economy  contexts.  The  long-run  performance  of  countries 
hinges critically on this because the outcomes of institutional change tend to be highly 
persistent.  How  rules  and  norms  evolve  depends  heavily  on  what  they  are  today.  Thus 
institutional development often follows a virtuous circle, such as in South Korea, or a vicious 
spiral, as in the case of Zimbabwe. 
From this perspective, there is an enormous amount of heterogeneity among emerging 
market  economies.  Where  a  country  stands  in  terms  of  its  history  and  readiness  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
institutional  change  will  distinguish  those  which  are  just  experiencing  a  temporary 
deceleration from those that might be facing more of a structural slowdown. The destinies of 
emerging markets are not strictly bound to each other. Some will succeed, and a few may 
not. It is not useful to lump countries together into one group or under one catchy acronym or 
another. Going forward, each country needs to be analyzed more as individual stories. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Emerging  market  countries  are  at  a  critical  juncture.  Much  has  been  accomplished,  and 
much  potential  remains.  This  is  the  key  transition  point.  How  successfully  a  nation 
manages this transition will depend primarily on domestic factors. Specifically, its ability 
to  instigate  structural  change  and  implement  institutional  reforms.  I  believe  that  big  strides 
can be achieved if we can push through our individual glass ceilings. But I am also realistic 
that  realizing  this  potential  and  coordinating  societies  on  the  good  outcome  will  be 
enormously challenging. 
To  move  forward,  there  needs  to  be  a  collective  change  of  attitudes  and  mindsets  – 
particularly towards things like corruption, good governance, and consideration for the public 
good. Here there is good news and bad news. On the positive side, mindsets and attitudes 
are  things  within  our  control.  The  bad  news  is  that  changing  attitudes  and  mindsets  is 
perhaps  one  of  the  most  difficult  things  to  do.  As  Leo  Tolstoy  once  wrote  “Everyone 
thinks of changing the world, but no one thinks of changing himself.” 
For many of you here who will go on to serve in public policy, I urge you to embrace this 
challenge  and  give  you  my  wholehearted  support.  Today  is  a  legacy  of  the  past,  but 
history is not destiny. You can make a difference and we need more people who devote 
themselves to do so. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
