Daniel Mminele: Reflections on 2013 and challenges ahead for South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Phalaborwa Chamber of Business Year-End Function, Phalaborwa, 1 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen and thank you to the Phalaborwa Chamber of Business 
for the kind invitation to address you tonight. This was a particularly special invitation for me, 
as it brings me back home, back to the place of my birth, back to a place of good memories 
of a happy childhood. Phalaborwa and nearby Namakgale will always be very special to me. 
It is indeed an honour not only to be given the opportunity to address you, but also to join you 
as  we  pay  tribute,  acknowledge  and  celebrate  those  who  have  been  nominated  for  the 
various awards which will be presented tonight. 
In  my  remarks  tonight,  given  that  the  curtain  is  slowly  coming  down  on  2013,  I  thought  I 
would look back at the year that was, reflect on where we are and also on the challenges that 
lie before us, both on the domestic and international front. 
Looking in the rear view mirror 
2. 
For over six years now, the global economy has been operating in “crisis mode”. The global 
financial  crisis  unfolded  in  three  phases:  the  US  subprime  crisis,  leading  to  a  severe 
economic and employment crisis, and then mutating into a banking and sovereign debt crisis. 
These events spilled over into other advanced and emerging market countries, both through 
trade channels, by way of declining exports, negatively impacting growth and employment, 
and  through  financial  linkages,  which  increased  volatility  in  financial  markets  and  led  to 
uncertainty and declining confidence levels. 
The  South  African  real  economy  certainly  felt  the  impact,  being  closely  tied  to  the  global 
economy  through  trade  linkages,  and  also  through  financial  linkages  given  our  deep  and 
liquid  financial  markets.  The  latter  fact  means  that  we  are  very  often  used  as  a  proxy  for 
other emerging market currencies, as the depth and liquidity of our markets makes it easier 
for investors to move in and out of South African financial markets. This fact also therefore 
partly explains the heightened volatility we experienced in recent years, and why volatility of 
the South African rand exchange rate tends to be generally more elevated than the volatility 
experienced with most other emerging market currencies. 
On the economic front, South Africa lost proportionally more jobs during the recession than 
any  other  country  more  directly  affected.  The  2011  Budget  Review  showed  that  for  a 
2.6 per cent contraction in output during the crisis, South Africa’s employment contracted by 
7.5 per cent, which if measured as the responsiveness to a 1 per cent contraction in output, 
equated  to  –2.9 per  cent.  This  was  significantly  higher  than  the  list  of  10  other  countries 
compared. If one takes another emerging market country such as Turkey, which contracted 
by  a  much  larger  12.8 per cent,  employment  contracted  a  lesser  –1.8 per cent  which  for 
every 1 per cent contraction in output translates to –0.1 per cent. 
As  accommodative  and  unconventional  monetary  policy  helped  bring  the  global  economy 
back from the brink, and the recession ended, stronger import demand was observed from 
trading partners. However, South Africa continued to lag behind and did not benefit as much 
from the increase in global trade as other emerging markets did, with export volumes failing 
to  return  to  pre-crisis  levels.  The  euro  zone  debt  crisis  weighed  on  South  Africa’s  export 
recovery, exacerbated by domestic factors such as infrastructure bottlenecks and a lack of 
competitiveness. The situation grew decidedly worse during the second half of 2012 as our 
financial  markets  decoupled  from  global  developments,  following  the  tragic  events  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Lonmin’s  Marikana  mine.  Wild-cat  strike  action  spilled  over  to  other  parts  of  the  platinum 
industry,  later  moving  to  rest  of  the  mining  sector,  and  to  the  transport  and  agricultural 
sectors,  resulting  in  a  significant  dent  in  global  investor  confidence  in  the  country,  which 
contributed to sovereign credit ratings downgrades by all three major  rating agencies, and 
ultimately  resulted  in  a  further  weakening  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  and  higher 
borrowing costs for the country. 
In the absence of strong support from the export sector, domestic demand became the main 
driver  of  growth,  supported  by  low  nominal  interest  rates,  rising  disposable  income  and 
increased household debt levels. Fixed investment also provided a boost to growth, although 
this remained far below levels one would have liked to see, especially the private sector’s 
contribution to fixed investment. Since 2009, South Africa’s real GDP growth lagged that of 
other emerging markets, averaging 3 per cent as compared to the average of around 5 per 
cent for emerging markets. 
As  Phalaborwa  is  a  mining  town,  and  has  had  a  long  and  rich  history  with  the  mining 
industry, allow me to say a little more about mining. The mining sector’s contribution to real 
gross domestic product has halved since 1995, accounting for just over 5 per cent of GDP 
today. This fact does not make the mining sector irrelevant to the economy, far from it. The 
sector is important because it generates the bulk of foreign currency earnings – exports of 
minerals and metals account for approximately 60 per cent of all export revenue, hence the 
sensitivity of the foreign exchange  value of the rand to mineral and metal prices and their 
production. Mining accounts for approximately one third of market capitalisation on the JSE; 
has  been  a  strong  attraction  for  Foreign  Direct  Investment  and  contributes  handsomely  to 
government’s tax revenue. The mining sector has shed a fair amount of jobs in the wake of 
the Marikana debacle – in the period between December 2009 to June 2012, employment 
picked up from 488 000 to 534 000, but has since declined to 511 000 in the second quarter 
of 2013. Although employing just shy of 3 per cent of South Africa’s total formal and informal 
labour force, the mining sector indirectly employs another 500 000 people, through linkages 
to other sectors, such as manufacturing. 
Given the importance of the mining industry for our economy we can ill-afford the fractious 
labour relations environment and the violence we have seen. 
Reflecting on 2013 
3. 
As we entered 2013 there was a fair degree of  optimism globally and locally, informed by 
some bold policy measures that had been taken in the latter part of 2012 and early 2013. In 
particular, the launch of the Outright Monetary Transactions programme (OMT) in the euro 
zone and in January 2013, as the US managed to avert the fiscal cliff. Both of these events 
provided a significant boost to confidence and helped to contain the most immediate threats 
to  the  global  financial  system,  and  thereby  restored  calm  to  financial  markets.  There  was 
hope that reduced volatility in financial markets and improved confidence would eventually 
be transmitted into the real economy and provide for a more durable recovery. The domestic 
economy was expected to continue growing at a moderate pace (after a growth rate of 2.5 
per cent for 2012), thanks to encouraging prospects for the global economy and improved 
sentiment  following  a  successful  ANC  elective  conference,  which  adopted  the  National 
Development  Plan  and  provided  some  clarity  in  respect  of  policy  positions  around 
nationalisation in the mining industry. 
The IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) released in January 2013 indicated that “Global 
growth is projected to increase during 2013, as the factors underlying soft global activity are 
expected  to  subside”.  Admittedly,  the  IMF  also  warned  about  downside  risks  that  still 
remained. Based on data available so far, and recent information and developments in the 
global and domestic economy, a stronger recovery in 2013 will unfortunately in all likelihood 
turn out to be rather more elusive than what we had hoped for, and this is borne out by the 
latest release of the WEO which has seen a downgrade of global growth forecasts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  we  moved  deeper  into  2013,  some  of  the  headwinds  identified  by  the  IMF  WEO  and 
others  as  contributing  to  downside  risks  to  the  global  outlook  did  indeed  materialise,  in 
particular expectations of an earlier than anticipated withdrawal of unconventional monetary 
policies  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve.  These  headwinds  also  registered  in  the  form  of  less 
progress being made in the eurozone on various fronts to help underpin the recovery there. 
More recently the picture is more promising, considering the euro zone has finally exited from 
a recession in the second quarter led by Germany and France, after six quarters of economic 
contraction.  The  Spanish  economy  exited  two  years  of  recession  in  the  second  quarter, 
growing by 0.1 per cent despite tough austerity measures which have brought thousands to 
the  streets  in  protest.  The  US  has  been  one  of  the  more  convincing  bright  spots  when  it 
comes  to  stronger  underlying  momentum  in  economic  growth  during  2013,  although,  like 
Japan,  their  fiscal  outlook  continues  to  weigh  on  future  prospects.  Slower  growth  rates  in 
China, lower commodity prices, and moderating growth in emerging market economies, and 
generally  a  global  economy  moving  at  varying  speeds  across  regions  are  some  of  the 
downside risks that have materialised. 
On  the  domestic  front,  unfortunately  risks  that  industrial  action  could  become  more 
widespread  and  disruptive  during  2013  in  the  wake  of  wage  negotiations  in  centralised 
bargaining agreements that were up for renewal also did come to pass and has damaged 
growth  prospects  for  2013.  A  dismal  growth  rate  of  0.9 per cent  was  recorded  in  the  first 
quarter of the year on account of a severe contraction in the manufacturing sector which was 
followed  by  a  growth  rate  of  3 per cent  in  the  second  quarter,  but  which  mainly  related  to 
normalisation  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  and  was  not  reflective  of  improving  underlying 
economic conditions. The third quarter of this year will be affected by the widespread strike 
action  experienced,  but  hopefully  this  will  be  partly  offset  by  more  improved  growth 
performance in advanced economy trading partner countries, as noted earlier. 
The rand exchange rate has been somewhat slow to act as a shock absorber or adjustment 
mechanism  to  provide  support  to  the  trade  account  and  the  Balance  of  Payments.  South 
Africa’s current account deficit widened from 2.8 per cent of GDP in 2010 to 6.3 per cent in 
2012.  The  trade  deficit  grew  on  account  of  increased  imports  related  to  the  infrastructure 
investment  programme,  and  lacklustre  exports,  as  well  as  declining  terms  of  trade.  The 
depreciation  of  the  rand  exchange  rate  resulted  in  a  deterioration  in  the  Bank’s  inflation 
outlook,  and  the  targeted  measure  of  inflation  increased  from  just  below  5.0 per cent  in 
August 2012 to 6.4 per cent in August 2013. Still, however, there was little evidence of any 
demand pressures, with much of this increase driven by cost push factors.  
It is the improvement in growth prospects for advanced economies, in particular the US, that 
saw the rand again recouple with global developments on talk of asset purchase tapering. 
Expectations  of  tapering  had  a  profound  impact  on  financial  markets  of  both  advanced 
economies  and  emerging  markets,  but  more  particularly  for  the  latter  as  it  is  deemed  that 
such a withdrawal of stimulus will negatively impact on portfolio flows to emerging markets. 
Indeed,  capital  inflows  retreated  somewhat,  and  in  South  Africa  we  witnessed  a  pull-back 
especially  in  bond  inflows.  During  May  and  June  this  year,  we  witnessed  a  net  outflow  of 
over  R17  billion  from  our  bond  market  although  this  was  partially  offset  by  equity  inflows. 
From the beginning of May the rand exchange rate depreciated from R8.90 against the USD 
to levels of R10.40 in August. 
A  number  of  central  banks  in  emerging  markets  reacted  quite  differently  to  these 
movements, with some tightening monetary policy despite an evident slowdown in growth, 
others  intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  others  draining  liquidity  in  local 
markets. The central bank of Brazil has since April this year, increased its policy rate by a 
total  of  225  basis  points  to  9.5 per cent  due  to  inflation  pressures  and  to  shore-up  the 
currency  and  limit  capital  outflows,  while  also  lifting  previous  taxes  on  capital  inflows.  The 
central bank in Indonesia increased the policy rate by 150 basis points thus far in 2013 to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
7.25 per cent, but in emerging Europe we have seen various interest rate reductions.1 The 
People’s Bank of China (PBoC) reacted by initially tightening liquidity conditions, only to be 
relaxed  soon  thereafter  to  reverse  a  substantial  increase  in  money-market  rates  and  to 
resolve liquidity issues. 
Although markets have retraced following the Fed’s decision not to taper after all, it should 
be remembered that this is only a delay, and has helped to buy time for emerging markets to 
prepare as best as they can for when tapering actually takes place. 
Emerging markets that defended their currencies during May and June of this year through 
the sale of foreign exchange reserves, have rebuilt these buffers, reflecting a resumption of 
significant  capital  flows  into  emerging  markets.  Countries  such  as  Mexico,  Turkey,  Brazil, 
South Korea and Indonesia, have in the past two months erased losses in foreign exchange 
holdings  that  totalled  about  US$40  billion  between  April  and  July,  according  to  data  from 
JPMorgan.  In  addition,  China  appears  to  have  added  about  US$163  billion  in  the  third 
quarter, bringing its stock of reserves to a record US$3.66 trillion.2 South Africa studied what 
other emerging markets were doing, but given its own particular circumstances deemed it not 
appropriate to tighten policy during that period, nor to implement any measures aimed at the 
foreign exchange market. 
Outlook 
4. 
Clearly, asset purchase tapering by the Fed has been put on hold for now, but this will surely 
commence at some point. Is there need for alarm over emerging markets in light of tapering 
and  is  the  slowdown  in  emerging  markets  really  that  severe?  The  IMF’s  latest  Global 
Financial  Stability  Report3  (GFSR)  poses  the  question  of  what  would  happen  if  flows 
reversed  more  sharply  in  emerging  markets?  The  GFSR  suggests  that  while  emerging 
markets  may  have  become  more  vulnerable,  they  are  also  in  a  much  better  position  than 
prevailed  at  the  time  of  the  2008  crisis.  In  the  12  weeks  following  the  reversal  of  risk 
sentiment  during  May  2012,  assets  under  management  for  emerging  market  fixed-income 
funds fell by 7.6 per cent (or US$19 billion), much smaller than in 2008, when assets under 
management fell by 36 per cent (or US$26 billion) during the first round of the asset sell-off in 
September–October  2008,  although  the  impact  on  local  currency  bond  yields  was  similar 
across the two episodes. 
Emerging market countries have come a long way in the last two decades and are not as 
fragile today as they would have been in the past. Foreign exchange reserve levels are much 
higher; monetary policy has greater credibility and there is a better track record of managing 
inflation; while fiscal positions are healthier than in many advanced economies; and they are 
less vulnerable to sudden stops given that there are less dollar liabilities. Macro-economic 
fundamentals have also improved significantly and while emerging markets may be slowing, 
they remain the biggest contributors to global growth, and this may well be a correction to 
more sustainable levels of growth after period of somewhat spectacular growth. 
But,  as  we  witnessed  at  the  time  of  tapering  talk,  emerging  markets  did  react.  Exchange 
rates weakened, yields on fixed income instruments spiked and the equity markets sold off. It 
is likely that there will be a further reaction when tapering eventually becomes a reality, and 
while some of the effects of tapering may already be priced into markets, we cannot be sure 
of how much is priced in and therefore how much still needs to be reflected in asset prices. 
                                                 
1  Hungary and Poland (–175 basis points), Turkey (–150 basis points) 
2  Emerging markets rebuild fx reserves after recent turmoil, Financial Times, 22 October 2013 
3  www.imf.org, GFSR, October 2013 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  I  indicated  earlier,  South  Africa’s  economic  performance  has  lagged  behind  other 
emerging  market  economies  through  the  crisis,  and  continues  to  reflect  lacklustre  growth. 
The Bank has repeatedly raised its inflation forecasts and lowered the growth forecasts since 
the  end  of  2012.  The  2013  forecast  for  the  CPI  inflation  was  raised  from  5.5 per cent  in 
December 2012 to 5.9 per cent in September 2013, while the forecast for 2014 was raised 
from 5.0 per cent to 5.8 per cent over the same period. Real GDP forecasts for 2013 were 
lowered from 2.9 per cent at the end of 2012, to 2.0 per cent more recently, and for 2014 
from 3.6 per cent to 3.3 per cent. The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), faced with 
such an environment has found it prudent to keep the policy rate steady throughout 2013, as 
despite the rising trend in inflation, the MPC deemed inflationary pressures stemming from 
the demand side of the economy to be subdued, and therefore that inflation pressures largely 
related to supply shocks and the weaker exchange rate. 
However, as noted in the most recent MPC statement, the upward drift in core inflation in the 
absence  of  any  obvious  demand  pressures  would  suggest  that  there  may  be  emerging 
underlying pressures owing to lagged effects of the exchange rate depreciation as well as 
higher unit labour costs. Although the rand has appreciated from the levels of R10.40 during 
August  2013,  it  remains  vulnerable  to  changes  in  the  global  and  domestic  environment. 
Furthermore,  while  inflation  expectations  appear  to  be  anchored  and  relatively  stable, 
expectations are uncomfortably close to the upper end of the inflation target range. 
Growth remains below potential with a widening output gap and is expected to average only 
2.0 per cent  in  2013  and  3.3 per cent  in  2014.  The  leading  indicator  of  the  Bank  suggests 
that the moderate growth rates are set to continue, while protracted work stoppages in the 
mining and manufacturing sectors are likely to detract from growth going forward. Consumer 
spending  is  also  expected  to  remain  modest,  capped  by  high  household  debt  levels,  low 
employment creation and rising administered prices. 
More  recently,  concerns  over  the  current  account  deficit  have  heightened,  and  these 
concerns  have  been  propelled  by  the  fact  that  South  Africa’s  terms  of  trade  have 
deteriorated,  exports  have  failed  to  react  sufficiently  to  the  weaker  rand,  and  the  global 
environment characterised for the best part of five years by easy liquidity, is in the process of 
transforming.  Investors  have  shifted  their  focus  to  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  have 
become  increasingly  concerned  about  countries  with  high  current  account  and  budget 
deficits, which rely heavily on international capital flows. Along with monetary policy slowly 
turning  the  corner  in  advanced  economies,  a  fundamental  reassessment  of  the  emerging 
market investment case appears to be under way, as the recent impact of the announcement 
of the intentions of the Fed to soon embark on a withdrawal from unconventional monetary 
policy  seems  to  have  exposed  vulnerabilities  in  certain  countries  that  may  have  been 
underestimated previously. 
Although  the  recent  breach  of  the  inflation  target  is  expected  to  be  temporary,  and  we 
recently  saw  CPI  inflation  decelerate  from  6.4 per cent  in  August  to  6.0 per cent  in 
September,  there  are  significant  upside  risks,  not  least  of  which  relate  to  wages  and  the 
exchange  rate.  In  line  with  its  mandate,  the  Bank  continues  to  monitor  developments 
carefully. Indications that inflation will deteriorate significantly or remain outside of target for a 
protracted  period  and  affect  inflation  expectations,  will  require  the  appropriate  policy 
response from the MPC. 
As we approach 2014, while there appears to be reason for optimism overall as the global 
recovery gathers momentum, we will have to contend with an environment that continues to 
be  characterised  by  uncertainty  and  volatility.  The  extent  of  the  impact  of  the  exit  from 
unconventional monetary policy measures remains unclear. Given the many uncertainties in 
the  global  environment  that  are  beyond  our  control,  there  is  little  room  to  get  wrong  that 
which is within our control, such as focused, effective and efficient implementation of reforms 
and  policies  that  will  improve  our  competitiveness  and  enhance  our  attractiveness  as  an 
investment  destination,  labour  representatives  and  employers  taking  full  ownership  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
responsibility  for  restoring  orderly  industrial  relations,  and  maintaining  credible  fiscal  and 
monetary policies. 
In  closing,  may  I  be  the  first  to  congratulate  all  of  you  who  have  been  nominated  for  this 
year’s awards. It is always gratifying and a special honour to have one’s hard work, efforts 
and contribution in your profession appreciated and recognised by peers in this manner. We 
thank you for your inspiration and leadership and for serving as an example to many of us. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
