Jörg Asmussen: Cooperation and diversity – principles for a stable euro 
area 
Acceptance speech by Mr Jörg Asmussen, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at Bocconi University on the occasion of the award ceremony “Alumnus of the 
Year”, Milan, 25 October 2013. 
 Dear Professor Monti, dear Mario, 
Dear Professor Sironi, 
Dear Mr Guindani, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I was a bit surprised when my assistant told me that Professor Monti would like to have a 
telephone  conversation  with  me.  I  thought,  when  the  former  Italian  Prime  Minister  wants 
something from the ECB, why doesn’t he call the other “Super Mario”, the ECB President. 
But I returned his call immediately, of course. Surprise and joy were tremendous when he 
informed me about the decision of Bocconi University to grant me the award “Alumnus of the 
Year 2013”. 
I feel very honoured and I am very grateful to receive this award and I see it as an obligation 
for the future at the same time. 
I would like to thank Mario Monti for his very kind introduction. It is generous of Mario to say 
repeatedly that he knew me during my MBA here in 1991-92, but I suspect there was some 
asymmetry in the relationship. I was a student and he was the Rector, so I think it was rather 
that I knew him!  
My choice to study an MBA degree at Bocconi may have had something to do with the old 
German craving for Italy. If there is such thing as an emotional relationship between peoples, 
then for sure between Germans and Italians, just think of Goethe’s Italian Journey and the 
quest  for  Arcadia  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  long-standing  Italian  admiration  for  German 
efficiency and our sense of order. 
The time I spent at Bocconi I look back on with great fondness. It was a privilege to study in 
one  of  the  great  seats  of  learning  in  Italy  and  Europe.  And  I  see  this  period  as  one  that 
helped forge the views that later served me as a European civil servant and policy-maker.  
When  I  studied  here  aged  25,  I  was  coming  from  northern  Germany  with  little  first-hand 
experience of other cultures besides the Danish one. But being here at Bocconi changed all 
that.  It  was  a  truly  multicultural  environment,  with  students  from  26  different  nations  from 
around the globe, working side by side. I shared a flat with two Turkish students. All these 
experiences taught me some key lessons.  
The first lesson was the value of cooperation. We learnt at Bocconi that on average teams 
achieve better results than individuals. Only brilliant individuals are better than groups, but 
most of us are not brilliant. Our work was always conducted in groups and we got one mark. 
We had to stand or fall together. 
The  second  lesson  was  the  value  of  diversity.  I  brought  with  me  my  German  traditions, 
others brought their own cultures. But none was better or worse – in fact, this diversity simply 
provided an opportunity for more learning. 
It is not hard to see how these lessons have helped me in my professional life, in particular in 
tackling the crisis. In the euro area, ultimately, we also only get one mark. We cannot have a 
stable monetary union where some succeed and others fail – we have to advance together. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Yet we also need diversity. There is no single economic model that fits all countries. This is 
why we need to learn from each other about which kind of policies produce jobs, increase 
our growth potential, secure equality of opportunity as well as participation, and find ways to 
apply them in our national contexts. 
In keeping with these themes, I would like to use my remarks today to lay out a pragmatic 
vision  for  combining  cooperation  and  diversity  in  the  euro  area  –  or  put  differently,  for 
building  a  more  integrated  economic  and  monetary  union  that  respects  our  differences.  In 
particular, I would like to present what I see as the rationale for a banking union and sketch 
some first ideas about a fiscal union in the euro area in the medium term. My focus is the 
euro  area,  which  in  my  opinion  is  the  core  of  future  integration.  But  it  is  an  open  core  – 
whoever is willing and able to join is welcome. 
For reasons of time, I will today not tackle economic union, which is an essential part of a 
complete economic and monetary union, and neither will I touch upon political union, without 
downplaying its importance. Progress on fiscal union can only be achieved by progressing on 
political  union  in  parallel.  In  general,  as  Mario  Monti  and  Sylvie  Goulard  highlight  in  their 
recent book1, greater European integration has to be accompanied by greater “democracy by 
the people”. At the end of my speech, I will use Italy as an example of what should be done 
at the level of the Member States in the euro area. 
Banking union 
Let me start with banking union.  
Here  I  think  the key  problem  in  the  past  was  that  there  was  too  little  cooperation  and  too 
much diversity – we lacked a coherent European approach to financial sector policies. But 
there is clearly scope for more cooperation today as, particularly after the experience of the 
crisis, preferences are more aligned in Europe. We all want banks that are well supervised 
and that can be resolved at minimum cost to the taxpayer. 
To  achieve  this,  I  think  we  need  not  reinvent  the  wheel.  There  are  elements  of  the  US 
approach that have worked and that we can usefully borrow in Europe. These fall into two 
basic categories: first, what I call the US’s “public banking union” – its federal institutions for 
dealing  with  banking  crises.  Second,  what  I  dub  its  “private  banking  union”–  its  integrated 
financial market that dissipates the costs of crises. 
Public banking union 
Clearly, the key difference between Europe and the US is that banking problems in the US 
have  been  mainly  taken  care  of  at  the  federal  level,  whereas  in  Europe  responsibility  for 
troubled banking has thus far remained national.  
During  the  crisis  in  the  US,  it  was  federal  institutions  that  stepped  into  the  breach.  The 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) resolved 490 unviable banks, using resources 
from  its  deposit  insurance  fund  financed  by  all  the  banks.  The  US  Treasury  provided 
recapitalisation support and guarantees through its Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). 
The Federal Reserve undertook a thorough stress-test, determining banks’ additional capital 
needs.  
To understand the situation we are in in Europe, it is useful to make a thought-experiment, 
and  imagine  that  no  such  federal  institutions  exist  in  the  US.  Imagine  that  the  state  of 
California would have had to come up with the TARP money for Wells Fargo instead of the 
US Treasury. Imagine that the state of New York would have had to provide the guarantees 
to Citigroup. Think about how the markets would have treated these states? And how they 
                                                
1  M. Monti and S. Goulard, Democracy in Europe (2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
would have treated these banks? The lesson for the euro area is clear: federal institutions 
can prevent local crises from becoming systemic. 
In Europe, we do not yet have these federal institutions that can act as shock absorbers. So 
far,  responsibility  for  dealing  with  bank  problems  lies  exclusively  with  the  individual  EU 
countries. The result is that – to quote an FT editorial – “national taxpayers subsidise banks 
implicitly in good times, explicitly in bad times, and suicidally in a sovereign debt crisis”. 
Indeed, the crisis in Ireland has shown that problems in domestic banks can overwhelm the 
fiscal capacity of national sovereigns. The causality can also be the other way around, as the 
case of Greece has shown, where fiscal problems have dragged down the banking system. 
These countries got caught in a vicious fiscal-financial feedback loop, which in the end also 
drags  down  the  economy,  breaks  up  the  internal  market,  and  impairs  our  monetary  policy 
conduct. Removing this vicious feedback loop is what Banking Union is all about.  
Creating a banking union will be good for the euro, good for the internal market, and good for 
the recovery. It will be good for the euro, because it will help to repair our monetary policy 
transmission mechanism. In other words, it will ensure that the ECB’s low interest rates will 
be effectively passed on to those countries that probably need them most. It will be good for 
the internal market, because it will be of help to reverse the significant financial fragmentation 
that  we  have  seen  so  far.  And  it  will  be  good  for  the  recovery,  as  banks  will  be  put  on  a 
stronger footing, confidence will be improved, and ultimately credit will start to flow again to 
enterprises on affordable terms.  
But  what  are the  necessary  elements  of  a  banking  union? To  our mind,  two  elements  are 
indispensable: a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a Single Resolution Mechanism 
(SRM). 
Let me start with the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The ECB has been asked to assume 
responsibility for this mechanism, and to mould the existing national supervisory authorities 
into an effective and efficient federal supervisory team. We are making good progress on this 
front, and the SSM should become fully operational in the last quarter of 2014.  
Before we take on this task, we want to get an adequate view of what we will be supervising. 
In the coming months, the ECB will therefore undertake a balance sheet assessment. The 
importance  of  this  exercise  cannot  be  overestimated.  It  is  an  extraordinary  opportunity  to 
rebuild  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  and  promote  the  long  overdue  repair  of  bank 
balance sheets, which in turn is a precondition for a sustainable economic recovery. 
One particular point needs to be stressed: credible national backstops must be put in place. 
If  not,  the  credibility  of  the  whole  exercise  is  put  at  risk  as  the  outcome  will  then  almost 
certainly  be  negatively  perceived  by  market  participants.  Doing  this  balance  sheet 
assessment  without  a  backstop  in  place  would  be  a  bit  like  getting  on  a  boat  in  rough 
weather  conditions,  and  not  taking  a  life  jacket  on  board.  Any  recapitalisation  needs 
uncovered  by  the  exercise  should  of  course  first  and  foremost  be  covered  by  the  market. 
National  budgets  may  intervene  as  a  second  line.  Finally,  a  European  backstop,  the  ESM 
with its existing instruments, may be available.  
The second key element of a banking union is the Single Resolution Mechanism, a European 
equivalent to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The crisis has shown that simple 
coordination among Member States has been inadequate to organise the resolution of cross-
border banks in an efficient, least-cost manner.  
The Single Resolution Mechanism contains three essential elements: first, a single regulatory 
framework.  This  has  been  established  but  has  not  yet  entered  into  force  with  the  Bank 
Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD).  The  second  element  is  the  single  resolution 
authority  and  the  third,  a  single  resolution  fund,  funded  by  contributions  from  the  financial 
industry.  The  last  two  elements  are  currently  in  the  legislative  process  and  we  strongly 
support the envisaged timeline for their entering into force (1 January 2015), as it ensures 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
that  the  establishment  of  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  would  follow  shortly  after  the 
effective start of the Single Supervisory Mechanism.  
Private banking union 
The  “private  banking  union”  in  the  US  is  created  by  its  integrated  financial  market,  which 
includes both the banking sector and capital markets. 
In the banking sector, the US has genuinely nationwide banks, which allows them to better 
diversify risk. If such a bank makes losses on loans in one state it can offset them with gains 
in  another  – thus  at  least  in  part  internalising  the  costs.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  banks 
tend  to  have  a  more  domestic  focus,  meaning  losses  in  one  country  are  more  likely  to 
exhaust the capital of the domestic banks.  
In the capital markets, the US has integrated equity and debt markets, allowing losses from 
bank  failures  and  corporate  insolvencies  to  be  dispersed  across  the  whole  market.  In  the 
euro  area,  by  contrast,  cross-border  capital  markets  are  only  partially  developed,  which 
means the effect of a negative economic shock is fully concentrated at home. In Germany 
and France, for example, around 85% of equity is held domestically.  
One should not underestimate the importance of this: it has been estimated in a paper that 
two-thirds of economic shocks in the US are absorbed via the integrated financial market.2 
While the launch of the euro seems to have encouraged more private risk-sharing between 
EMU countries, it remains at much lower levels than between US states, and markets are 
vulnerable to fragmentation.3  
This point underscores that the private and public banking unions are to a significant extent 
interdependent. Having a strong set of federal institutions can stop market failures such as a 
fragmentation during a crisis. Similarly, having a single financial market can make the task of 
federal institutions easier, in particular for resolution, as it allows mergers and takeovers to 
be used as a primary resolution strategy. 
Indeed, 450 out of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s 490 bank resolutions since 
2008  have  involved  what  is  called  “Purchase  and  Assumption”  –  selling  parts  of  banks  to 
other banks, often located in different states.  
The conclusion from this is simple: completing the banking union and completing the single 
financial market go hand in hand. 
Fiscal union 
Let me now turn to the fiscal union. 
For the fiscal union, finding the balance between cooperation and diversity is more difficult. 
National preferences for taxing and spending are stronger, and the case for elevating certain 
functions to the European level is more complex.  
And there can be no taxation without representation, meaning any shift to a more European 
fiscal policy must be accompanied by the same shift towards European democratic control. 
So  to  frame  the  discussion,  I  think  it  is  helpful  to  recall  the  taxonomy  of  economic  policy 
functions described by Richard Musgrave. He distinguished between stabilisation, allocation 
and distribution. Broadly speaking, stabilisation helps smooth the business cycle, allocation 
                                                
2  B.  Sørensen  and  O.  Yosha  (1996),  “Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  (1963-1990)”,  The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp. 1081–1111. 
3  Y.  Demyanyk,  C.  Ostergaard  and  B.  Sørensen  (2008),  “Risk  sharing  and  portfolio  allocation  in  EMU”, 
DG Ecfin Economic Papers 334. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
ensures that resources are used efficiently and distribution ensures an equitable sharing of 
income.  
Which  of  these  functions  do  we  need  at  the  European  level  for  fiscal  policy,  and  in  what 
form? 
Stabilisation 
Starting with stabilisation, there is a long-standing debate in Europe about whether monetary 
union needs a federal budget to support counter-cyclical stabilisation. As you may know, the 
report by the four Presidents on a genuine EMU suggested that a small fiscal capacity could 
be used for this purpose.  
I  do  not  want  to  comment  on  the  specifics  of this  proposal,  but there  are  questions  about 
whether national preferences are sufficiently aligned to permit it. For that reason, we have to 
think  carefully  about  whether  it  is  essential  for  the  euro  area.  In  particular,  we  have  to 
consider how having a genuine banking union might change the debate. 
As  you  know,  stabilisation  in  Europe  takes  place  through  national  budgets  and,  in  normal 
circumstances, they are sufficient to smooth the cycle. A recent study demonstrates that 47% 
of an unemployment shock is absorbed by the automatic stabilisers in the EU, compared with 
only 34% in the US.4 They were insufficient in some countries during the crisis only because 
they faced an exceptional circumstance: a very large shock from the financial sector. 
With a genuine banking union, however, the risk of this happening again should be lower. 
First,  we  expect  the  SSM  to  increase  the  quality  of  supervision  and  the  assessment  of 
systemic risk. Second, if a financial shock were still to appear, national budgets should be 
better insulated. The costs of banking sector repair would be shared with the private sector 
through the Single Resolution Mechanism and a more integrated European financial market.  
All this suggests that stabilisation at the national level could be more effective in future. Or 
put differently, the more successful we are in building a genuine banking union, the less we 
would need a central budget for stabilisation purposes. 
However, this does not mean I see no role for fiscal union in the stabilisation area.  
First,  we  would  need  the  public  backstop,  namely  for  the  resolution  fund,  which  would  be 
fiscally neutral over the medium-term. In my view the ESM could play this role. 
Second, we would need an insurance mechanism against tail events that may still arise and 
endanger euro area financial stability. Here we already have the ESM to act as lender of last 
resort to sovereigns. 
Allocation 
Turning  from  stabilisation  to  allocation,  I  see  a  role  for  a  fiscal  union  that  performs  an 
allocative function – ensuring resources are used efficiently. 
In the literature, this typically refers to the provision of public goods, and in this context one 
possibility is to use common funds to incentivise growth-enhancing reforms. However, I will 
not discuss this in detail today, even if I think that this is a good idea, especially for the euro 
area, including an own revenue source. 
                                                
4  A recent study demonstrates that automatic stabilisers absorb 38% of a proportional income shock in the EU, 
compared with 32% in the US. In the case of an unemployment shock 47% of the shock is absorbed in the 
EU, compared with 34% in the US. This cushioning of disposable income leads to a demand stabilisation of up 
to  30%  in  the  EU  and  up  to  20%  in  the  US.  See:  M.  Dolls,  C.  Fuest  and  A.  Peichl  (2012),  “Automatic 
stabilizers  and  economic  crisis:  US  vs.  Europe;  Journal  of  Public  Economics”,  Elsevier,  vol.  96(3),  
pp 279–294. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Instead,  I  want  to  focus  on  a  different  aspect  of  allocation:  taxation.  Differences  in  tax 
regimes create hidden barriers and inefficiencies in the single market, and in my view one 
function of the fiscal union should be to remove them. 
These  hidden  barriers  hinder  both  financial  and  economic  integration.  Different  rules  for 
taxing  dividends,  for  example,  discourage  cross-border  investments  in  equity.5  Different 
corporate tax regimes mean companies do not necessarily invest where production is most 
efficient, but where they receive the higher after-tax return.6 While the Commission has made 
some  progress  in  addressing  these  issues,  the  overall  approach  to  tax  policy  in  Europe 
remains piecemeal. Yet at this time, when growth is stalling and markets are fragmented, I 
see  clear  benefits  to  greater  cooperation  that  deepens  the  single  market,  focusing  on  the 
taxes that are most important for the functioning of the single market, e.g. corporate taxation 
and capital taxation. 
In my view, this implies a more coherent strategy based on three prongs. 
The  first  is  harmonising  tax  codes.  This  would  mean  removing  distortions  to  cross-border 
activity created by problems such as double taxation or different treatment of residents and 
non-residents. 
The second is harmonising tax bases. I see the common consolidated corporate tax base as 
a good way forward here, as it would make tax levels more comparable and allow firms to file 
a single consolidated tax return for their EU activity, thus supporting the single market. 
The third step would be to focus on harmonising tax rates. Some tax competition is healthy, 
but in a single market it has to be within limits. For example, we could think of agreeing a 
minimum floor for corporation taxes. 
Ideally, such a strategy would involve all EU countries. But if this is not feasible, euro area 
countries could lead the way by deepening the fiscal union in this area. 
Distribution 
A harmonised approach to tax policies could also have a distributive function – the third part 
of Musgrave’s taxonomy. I see this as an appropriate role for a euro area fiscal union to play.  
We  have  witnessed  several  examples  in  recent  years  of  multinationals  arbitraging  tax 
systems to pay less than their fair share to society. We have also witnessed the possibility for 
cross-border tax evasion from wealthy individuals. A more cooperative approach to tax policy 
could counteract this and would be in the interest of all countries. It would also be a timely 
reminder to citizens of how the Union can defend their interests. 
It goes without saying, however, that there is too much diversity on the wider questions of 
distribution for these to be answered at the European level in the medium term. 
To sum up: a functioning banking union reduces the need for the stabilisation function of a 
fiscal union, but not to zero. Greater efforts should be invested in the allocation function.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  have  laid  out  what  I  see  as  a  realistic  medium-term  vision  for  the  euro  area,  which 
combines the twin needs: cooperation and diversity.  
                                                
5  European Commission (2012), “Taxation of cross-border dividends within the EU”. 
6  S. Bond et al (2000), “Corporate Tax Harmonisation in Europe: A Guide to the Debate”, Institute for Fiscal 
Studies. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But for the euro area to prosper, we also need a third concept: responsibility. As we are all in 
the same boat, every country has a responsibility to pull its weight. Diversity is welcome but it 
cannot become a shield against change. 
Having lived here for two years, I would not be as pessimistic as Barry Eichengreen, who in a 
recent commentary wrote: “And the biggest problem is yet to come, namely an Italy that is 
unable  to grow,  incapable  of reforming,  and  burdened  with  what  increasingly  looks  like  an 
unsustainable debt.”7 
Indeed, the euro area cannot prosper if its third largest economy has a potential growth rate 
of  zero.  Italy  has  to  grow,  and  this  will  not  happen  by  waiting  for  the  cycle  to  turn.  The 
challenges  for  Italy  are  long-term  and  the  solution  is  structural. We  need  only  look  at  the 
trends  to  see  this:  its  real  growth  rate  was  5%  in  the  1950s,  4%  in  the  1960s,  3%  in  the 
1970s, 2% in the 1980s, 1% in the 1990s, and 0% in the 2000s.  
Italy is too big to be rescued from the outside, it has to make the turnaround on its own. Its 
fate will critically determine the fate of the euro area. In this sense, the future of the euro area 
will not be decided in Paris or Berlin, or in Frankfurt or Brussels. It will be decided in Rome. 
But because of my personal experiences in this country, I neither worry about the future of 
this country nor about the future of the euro area. On the contrary: the vivid entrepreneurship 
in  this  country,  its  world-famous  creativity,  the  power  of  its  civil  society  and  citizens,  its 
educational system with institutions such as Bocconi and now maybe the evolution of a new 
political system are promising.  
I hope that Italian citizens will rally behind such efforts, because reforms will lead to growth, 
growth  leads  to  maintain  debt  sustainability,  and  growth  can  be  shared  with  the  whole  of 
society. 
As I said: the turnaround is in your hands, but your friends will be with you.  
Let me again thank you for the award given to me. I am touched and honoured and promise 
to keep on working to further build our European house in the 21st century. 
                                                
7  Finanz  und  Wirtschaft,  15  October  2013,  “Germany’s  Complacency  Problem”;  (http://www.fuw.ch/article/ 
germanys-complacency-problem/). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
