Øystein Olsen: The role of monetary policy revisited – welcome address 
Welcome address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the Norges Bank conference “The role of monetary policy revisited”, Oslo, 26 September 
2013. 
 It is a great honour and pleasure for me to welcome you all to this Norges Bank conference: 
The role of monetary policy revisited. 
In his famous 1967 presidential address before the American Economic Association, Milton 
Friedman set out to answer three interrelated questions. What should be the role of monetary 
policy?  What  can  it  contribute  to  achieving  the  major  goals  of  economic  policy?  And  how 
should it be conducted to contribute the most? 
Five years after the onset of the global financial crisis, these questions are yet again at the 
forefront  of  our  minds.  The  crisis  and  subsequent  recession  have  presented  substantial 
challenges to monetary policy. Central banks have responded with great activism and have 
resorted  to  unconventional  policies  such  as  quantitative  easing  and  an  increasing  use  of 
forward  guidance.  And  the  crisis  has  led  to  a  review  of  monetary  policy  frameworks. 
Successful as monetary policy has been in safeguarding low and stable inflation, many argue 
that  it  should  take  risks  to  financial  stability  into  account.  Moreover,  a  new  set  of 
macroprudential  policy  tools  has  been  proposed  to  address  systemic  risks  in  financial 
markets directly. 
In  Norway,  inflation  targeting  was  introduced  in  2001.  Since  2005,  we  have  published  a 
projection of the future path of our key policy rate. This path reflects our view on the role of 
monetary  policy.  We  consider  an  interest  rate  path  to  be  appropriate  when  it  meets  three 
criteria.  First,  the  interest  rate  should  be  set  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation  at  our 
2.5 percent  target.  Second,  the  interest  rate  path  should  provide  a  reasonable  balance 
between the path for inflation and the path for overall capacity utilisation. This implies that 
inflation targeting is flexible. Notwithstanding new macroprudential tools, we see a need to 
add a third criterion: The interest rate should be set so that monetary policy leans against a 
build-up of financial imbalances. 
At Norges Bank, we remain firmly committed to our flexible inflation targeting framework. But 
the global financial crisis has taught us to be both modest and inquisitive. Experience with 
new  macroprudential  policy  tools  is  limited,  and  institutional  frameworks  are  still  in  the 
making. Leaning against financial winds remains subject to debate. It is therefore important 
that  we  actively  seek  knowledge.  It  is  our  obligation  as  central  bankers  to  continuously 
search  for  the  best  practice  for  monetary  policy.  And  we  do  not  have  to  agree  with 
Friedman's  prescriptions  to  revisit  the  important  questions  he  posed.  We  are  privileged  to 
have  such  a  distinguished  group  of  central  bankers  and  academics  present  at  this 
conference to help us with this task. 
I  am  looking  forward  to  learning  from  what  I  hope  will  be  both  an  open-minded  and  a 
constructive dialogue about the future of monetary and macroprudential policies. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
