Javier Guzmán Calafell: Challenges for macroprudential policy and the 
Mexican case 
Remarks  by  Mr  Javier  Guzmán  Calafell,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the 
panel on “Macroprudential policies for securing financial stability in a volatile external liquidity 
environment”,  Fifth  Summit  Meeting  of  Central  Banks  on  Inflation  Targeting,  Santiago  de 
Chile, 15–16 November 2013. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal and do not necessarily coincide with those of Banco 
de México.  
I  wish  to  start  by  thanking  governor  Vergara  for  his  kind  invitation  to  participate  in  this 
interesting  conference.  I  will  focus  my  remarks  on  some  of  the  challenges  faced  by 
macroprudential  policies  at  this  stage,  and  on  the  Mexican  experience  with  these 
instruments, and more generally with policies aimed at preserving financial stability.  
Challenges for macroprudential policy  
1. 
Financial stability has been at the center of policy makers’ attention during the last five years. 
This is explained not only by the nature of the global financial crisis itself, but also by the side 
effects of the measures that have been put in place to overcome it.  
Indeed, the unconventional monetary policies that were set in motion to face the crisis have 
allowed  us  to  prevent  a  collapse  of  the  world  financial  system  and  have  rendered  other 
beneficial effects. Nevertheless, they have also given rise to a number of financial stability 
risks for the world economy, deriving to a large extent from the potential consequences of a 
prolonged period of extremely low interest rates in the advanced countries, and subsequently 
from the return to more normal monetary policies and interest rates in these nations.  
Initially,  one  of  the  main  concerns  in  emerging  markets  were  related  to  the  strong  capital 
inflows to their economies fostered by these policies. More recently, with the expectation that 
the Federal Reserve of the United States may begin to reduce its monetary stimulus, anxiety 
has shifted to the implications of an increase in long-term interest rates in that country for 
emerging  economies’  exchange  rates,  domestic  financial  markets,  and  access  to  external 
financing. In any event, it is clear that the need to look for adequate instruments to preserve 
financial stability has become imperative after the crisis.  
One  of  the  important  lessons  of  the  crisis  is  that  price  stability  is  a  necessary  but  not  a 
sufficient  condition  for  maintaining  financial  stability.  Given  the  limitations  that  monetary 
policy faces in this respect, there is overall agreement that it is indispensable to complement 
available instruments with others which are more direct, and with a systemic perspective on 
the financial system. Thus, macroprudential policy has gained growing importance at a global 
level.  
In  very  general  terms,  this  policy  has  been  identified  with  the  use  of  prudential  tools  to 
confront  financial  weaknesses  of  a  systemic  nature.  Although  no  consensus  exists  with 
respect  to  the  precise  meaning  of  the  term  macroprudential,  a  definition  frequently  used 
considers  the  key  elements  of  macroprudential  policy  to  be:  its  objective  of  containing 
systemic risk, its focus on the financial system as a whole, and the use of prudential tools 
(and non-prudential tools as long as they are focused on systemic risk).1  
                                                
1  Financial  Stability  Board, 
“Macroprudential Policy Tools and Frameworks,” Progress Report to the G20, October 27, 2011. 
International  Monetary  Fund,  and  Bank 
for 
International  Settlements, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The benefits of seeking financial stability through an approach that places greater emphasis 
on  the  use  of  macroprudential  tools  are  clear.  However,  until  recently,  the  supporting 
analytical  work  underpinning  macroprudential  policy  was  very  limited.  Over  the  last  few 
years,  with  the  importance  given  to  the  subject  as  a  result  of  the  crisis,  research  on  the 
subject has grown rapidly.2  
Recent  literature  has  identified  multiple  challenges  for  the  design  and  implementation  of 
macroprudential policy. Among them, I would like to emphasize the following:  
First, it is necessary to have adequate measures of systemic risk. This concept has various 
dimensions:  1)  the  time  dimension,  i.e.,  the  amplification  of  risk  over  time  through 
interactions  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy,  or  through  pro-cyclical 
factors of microprudential regulation; and 2) the transversal dimension, a result of common 
risk  exposures  undertaken  by  financial  institutions,  or  the  contagion  of  problems  in  one  of 
them to the rest of the sector.3  
In this context, part of the research has focused on the measurement of systemic risk on the 
basis  of  estimates  based  on  bank  balances  and  other  market  indicators,  early  warning 
indicators,  vector  autoregressive  (VAR)  models,  and  stress  tests,  among  others.4  At  the 
same  time,  another  line  of  research  has  focused  on  those  institutions  with  systemic 
importance due to their size or interconnectivity.5  
Despite  these  efforts,  currently  there  are  no  reliable  and  generally  accepted  measures  of 
systemic  risk.  The  absence  of  precise  and  complete  indicators  to  evaluate  risk  is  not 
exclusive  to  the  macroprudential  arena.  However,  for  the  aforementioned  reasons,  the 
problem is particularly acute in this case. In other words, the margin for error is high.  
Second, the theoretical foundation for macroprudential policy is at an incipient stage and still 
far from being able to provide the bases required to design integrated policy frameworks in 
this area. I am referring specifically to the need for a better understanding of the relationship 
of the financial system with the macro-economy, and to the importance of devising models 
that capture this relationship adequately.  
Until  recently,  most  macroeconomic  and  monetary  models  did  not  explicitly  consider  the 
financial  system.  Various  research  efforts  after  the  crisis  have  been  oriented  toward  filling 
this gap. Thus, for example, financial frictions have been incorporated in DSGE models, the 
role  of  bank  capital  has  been  studied  in  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanisms, 
macroeconomic factors have been incorporated in detailed models of financial intermediation 
cycles, and the theoretical and empirical aspects of the so-called risk channel of monetary 
policy have been analyzed (i.e., the mechanisms through which monetary policy decisions 
can affect the perception of or tolerance to risk).  
However,  generally  accepted  theoretical models for the  implementation  of  macroprudential 
policy do not exist. Therefore, the evaluation of the possible role of these instruments in the 
containment of systemic risk, as well as the possible costs involved, is much more complex. 
                                                
2  See  Gabriele  Galati  and  Richhild  Moessner,  “Macroprudential  Policy  –  A  Literature  Review”,  Journal  of 
Economic Surveys, 2012. 
3  See Stefan Ingves et al., “Central Bank Governance and Financial Stability – A Report by a Study Group”, 
Bank for International Settlements, May 2011. 
4  See Borio, Claudio and Mathias Drehman, “Towards an Operational Framework for Financial Stability: Fuzzy 
Measurement  and  its  Consequences,”  Central  Banking,  Analysis,  and  Economic  Policies  Book  Series,  in: 
Rodrigo  Alfaro  (ed.),  Financial  Stability,  Monetary  Policy,  and  Central  Banking,  Ed.  1,  Vol.  15,  Ch.  4,  
pp. 63–123, Central Bank of Chile, 2011. 
5  See,  for  example,  Zhou,  C.,  “Are  Banks  Too  Big  to  Fail?  Measuring  Systemic  Importance  of  Financial 
Institutions”, International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 6(4):205–250, December 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
for 
indicators 
fragility.  On 
financial  system 
the  other  hand, 
Thus, the basis for a deep evaluation of the effectiveness of macroprudential policy  is still 
weak.6  
Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  areas  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  there  are 
numerous  other  factors  on  which  greater  analytical  work  is  required.  These  include  the 
interactions  between  distinct  macroprudential  policies,  better 
the 
implementation of these policies, the definition of the right moment to activate or discontinue 
the  corresponding  instruments,  mechanisms  for  preventing  evasion  risks,  and  appropriate 
communication policies, among others.  
Third, there are interactions between macroprudential policy and other policies that should 
be carefully taken into account and which, to date, have not been sufficiently analyzed. This 
is in virtue of the fact that the use of one of these instruments can enter into conflict with, or 
amplify the effects of, other policy instruments. The most obvious interaction is with monetary 
policy.  
In  general,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  work  in  a 
complementary  way  toward  the  achievement  of  their  objectives,  and  thus  mutually 
strengthen  one  another.7  However,  the  possibility  of  conflict  exists.  Thus,  for  example, 
evidence  shows  that  loose  monetary  policy  can  fuel  risk  taking  and  excessive  leverage, 
accentuating 
introduction  of 
macroprudendial  measures  can  affect  domestic  demand  in  a  direction  different  from  that 
sought by monetary policy.  
Thus, mechanisms are needed which permit adequate coordination between monetary and 
macroprudential  policies.  In  this  context,  there  is  growing  acceptance  of  the  idea  that 
monetary  policy  should  preserve  as  its  primary  objective  the  control  over  inflation,  and 
macroprudential  policy  should  adopt  a  role  of  greater  importance  in  the  alleviation  of  pro-
cyclical and transversal risks in the financial system.8 On the other hand, it is important to 
emphasize that macroprudential policy also interacts with other policies (among them, fiscal, 
microprudential,  crisis  management  and  resolution,  and  competition  policies)  and  that  the 
corresponding implications should be taken into account.9  
Fourth,  empirical  evidence  on  the  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  tools  is  scarce.  This  is 
understandable,  given  the  fact  that  recognition  of  the  important  role  that  macroprudential 
policy  can  play  in  financial  stability  surfaced  only  recently,  and  given  the  great  variety  of 
measures  that  have  been  called  macroprudential,  which  makes  it  hard  to  compile, 
homogenize and evaluate the information. Furthermore, the simultaneity with which different 
macroprudential policies are in some cases applied makes it difficult to isolate the specific 
effect of a given policy.  
The  importance  of  evaluating  concrete  results  is  clear,  since  the  effectiveness  of 
macroprudential policies is not assured, in addition to the fact that these tools can have costs 
or  generate  distortions.  For  example,  loan-value  relationships  limit  credit  risk,  but  under 
certain circumstances they can reduce the efficiency of the market in allocating resources, by 
introducing incentives in favor of, or to the detriment of, a certain sector. In a similar way, 
dynamic provisioning can overreact to information or premature trends and become a heavy 
burden for financial institutions.  
the 
                                                
6  See  Giese,  J.  et  al.,  “How  Could  Macroprudential  Policy  Affect  Financial  System  Resilience  and  Credit? 
Lessons from the Literature.” The Bank of England, Financial Stability Paper No. 21, May 2013. 
7  See  F.S.  Mishkin  et  al.,  “Macroprudential  Policies  in  Open  Emerging  Economies,”  NBER  Working  Paper 
Series, Working Paper 17780, January 2012. 
8  See  Stijn  Claessens  et  al.,  “The  Interaction  of  Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies,”  the  International 
Monetary Fund, January 29, 2013. 
IMF, “Key Aspects of Macroprudential Policies,” June 10, 2013. 
9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Despite  the  difficulties  faced,  there  have  been  important  efforts  aimed  at  identifying  the 
conditions  under  which  macroprudential  policies  are  likely  to  be  effective  in  mitigating 
systemic risk.10 Most post-crisis studies in this regard have focused on the costs and benefits 
of  these  tools  from  a  long-term  perspective.11  More  recently,  a  conceptual  framework  has 
been developed to analyze, in addition to the expected costs and benefits, the unintended 
consequences of the application of these measures.12 Logically, this is work in progress, and 
it is still necessary to refine the models as well as the empirical evidence used.  
Fifth, it is indispensable to establish adequate institutional arrangements for the design and 
implementation  of  macroprudential  policies.  In  general,  such  institutional  arrangements 
should  be  effective,  in  the  sense  that  they  enable  the  corresponding  authorities  to  take 
preventive  action,  in  a  timely  and  coordinated  fashion.  Nonetheless,  I  would  like  to 
emphasize that there is no one recipe that works in all cases. In reality, the selection of an 
adequate arrangement depends on the specific characteristics of each country, including its 
legal and political context.  
Given the above, more than the details of the institutional arrangement, I would emphasize 
some  of  the  principles  which,  from  my  point  of  view,  are  essential  for  the  adequate 
functioning of these kinds of arrangements.  
a) 
The agencies responsible for macroprudential policy should be given an adequate 
mandate for complying with this responsibility.  
The authorities with this duty should have the information and analytical capability 
needed  to  quickly  identify  when  systemic  risks  surface,  and  the  required  tools  to 
face them.  
The  decision-making  process  should  be  transparent  and  isolated  from  political  or 
interest groups pressures.  
Adequate  accountability  mechanisms  should  exist,  including  among  others  strict 
requirements for the supply of information to the public.  
b) 
c) 
d) 
It  is  widely  accepted  that  central  banks  should  play  a  very  important  role  in  these  efforts, 
given  their  deep  analytical  and  operational  experience  in  macroeconomic  and  financial 
subjects,  the  tight  relationship  between  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies,  and  the 
responsibility  these  institutions  have  as  lenders  of  last  resort.13  In  addition,  the  empirical 
evidence  shows  that  there  is  a  negative  relationship  between  the  response  time  of 
macroprudential policy to developments challenging financial stability, and the involvement of 
the central bank in institutional arrangements for these policies.14  
As can be seen, despite the considerable increase in research on macroprudential policy, an 
enormous  effort  is  still  needed  to  develop  adequate  foundations  for  the  design  and 
implementation of these policies. Overcoming these challenges is very important given the 
                                                
10  See,  for  instance:  Lim  et  al.,  “Macroprudential  Policy:  What  Instruments  and  How  to  Use  Them?”, 
IMF Working Paper 11/238. October 2011. 
11  See, for example, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “An Assessment of the Long Term Economic 
Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements,” 2010. 
12  See Nicolas Arregui et al., “Evaluating the Net Benefits of Macroprudential Policy: A Cookbook”, IMF Working 
Paper WP/13/167, July 2013. 
13  See  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  “Operationalizing  the  Selection  and  Application  of 
Macroprudential Instruments,” CGFS Papers, No. 48, Bank for International Settlements, December 2012; and 
Erlend  W.  Nier  et  al.,  “Institutional  Models  for  Macroprudential  Policy,”  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Note, 
November 1, 2011. 
14  See  Cheng  Hoon  Lim  et  al.,  “The  Macroprudential  Framework:  Policy  Responsiveness  and  Institutional 
Arrangements.” IMF Working Paper, WP/13/166, July 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
current circumstances, since what is under consideration is not only the possibility of a more 
generalized  use  of  macroprudential  policy,  but  also  assigning  it  a  role  of  much  greater 
importance in the attainment of financial stability both at the domestic and global levels.  
Mexico´s recent experience with macroprudential policies and financial stability might help to 
add some clarity to the issues that surround the use of these instruments.  
The Mexican case  
2. 
As in many other countries, the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and its repercussions at a 
global level represented a big challenge for financial stability in Mexico. Suffice to say that 
GDP fell by 4.7 percent in 2009; the exchange rate depreciated more than 50 percent from 
early August 2008 to early March 2009; long-term government interest rates spiked (at the 
moment of greatest pressure rising almost 400 basis points) and remained high with respect 
to the monetary policy target; rates on corporate bonds rose almost 240 basis points above 
the reference rate, and country risk as measured by the EMBI increased by more than 600 
basis points.  
Despite the magnitude of these shocks, and the fact that the crisis gave rise to substantial 
losses for various financial entities in advanced economies that are parent banks of Mexican 
banks, the financial system showed great resilience, mainly as a result of a combination of 
macroeconomic, microprudential and macroprudential policies.  
To start with, the implementation of prudent monetary and fiscal policies, combined with a 
flexible  exchange-rate  regime  and  high  levels  of  international  reserves,  strengthened  the 
nation’s economic fundamentals considerably.  
These efforts were complemented with a number of microprudential policies undertaken in 
the  aftermath  of  the  1995  crisis  to  improve  the  legal  framework  and  the  regulatory  and 
financial  supervisory  processes.  This  allowed  Mexico  to  have  an  efficient  and  modern 
payments  system,  with  profitable  and  well-capitalized  financial  intermediaries,  and  deep 
financial  markets.  It  is  worth  to  point  out  in  this  respect  that  in  August  2008,  a  few  days 
before  Lehman´s  bankruptcy,  the  Mexican  banking  system  had  a  capitalization  ratio  of 
15 percent,  a  non-performing  loan  ratio  of  3  percent,  and  a  loan-loss  reserve  ratio  of 
156 percent.  
Furthermore, Mexican legislation requires financial institutions offering services in Mexico to 
operate through subsidiaries, so that even if foreign entities have a participation in them, they 
are  separate  legal  entities  and  have  their  own  capital.  In  addition  to  lowering  the  risks  of 
direct contagion between the parent bank and the entity established in Mexico, all banks in 
the country are required by law to the same rules and supervisory processes regardless of 
the  nationality  or  other  characteristics  of  shareholders.  This  is  particularly  important  in 
Mexico, since a little more than 70 percent of assets in the banking systems are owned by 
foreign institutions.  
The above was reinforced by modest Mexican banks direct exposure to assets linked to the 
U.S.  mortgage  market  and  to  the  euro  zone,  and  by  the  fact  that  retail  deposits  in  the 
domestic  market  are  the  main  source  of  financing  for  Mexican  banks.  This  allowed  the 
financial system to respond more flexibly to liquidity problems in international markets.  
Macroprudential  policies  implemented  before  and  in  response  to  the  crisis  contributed  to 
maintaining a solid financial system in this difficult period. I would highlight in particular six 
measures in this connection:  
a. 
Regulations  for  banks’  foreign-currency  operations  (structural  and  short-term 
liquidity and exchange rate risk positions), which allow banks not to be exposed to a 
structural  imbalance  due  to  funding  long-term  foreign-currency  assets  with  short-
term  liabilities,  insufficient  liquid  assets  to  face  short-term  obligations,  and  an 
imbalance between assets and liabilities in the face of significant foreign-exchange 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
the  requirement 
moves.  Together,  these  rules  limited  structural  currency  gaps  and  kept  abrupt 
foreign  exchange  movements  in  2008–09  from  having  an  effect  on  the  banking 
system through this channel.  
The establishment of a cap on exposure to related counterparties. In 2011, the rules 
on  capital  were  changed  with  the  aim  of  requiring  banks  to  limit  exposure  to 
25 percent  of  capital.  The  key  aim  of  these  measures  was  to  prevent  possible 
contagion  of  problems  from  related  counterparties,  including  difficulties  in  foreign 
parent banks passed to subsidiaries, which is of great importance to Mexico given 
the proportion of assets held by foreign banks.  
In  October  2012,  Banco  de  México  established 
to  seek 
authorization from the central bank to make transfers of assets and implement other 
operations  among  banks  operating  in  Mexico  and  related  counterparties,  when  in 
one year these operations exceed 25 percent of Tier-1 capital. The objective is to 
ensure that these operations are carried out under market conditions.  
Caps  on  interbank  exposures,  including  among  other  instruments  net  positions  in 
derivatives  and  repurchase  agreements.  The  financing  cap  among  banks  is 
equivalent  to  one  time  the  Tier-1  capital  of  the  lending  institution.  This  rule  has 
reduced the risk of interbank contagion.  
Higher  limits  on  value  at  risk  (VaR)  for  pension  fund  portfolios  at  times  of  high 
volatility.  When  a  pension  fund  reaches  its  risk  limit  according  to  the  VaR,  it  is 
required to unwind positions to reduce risk. During 2009–2010, taking into account 
the magnitude of the financial crisis, the size of these funds´ positions, and the effect 
that a massive sale of assets would have had at a time of great turmoil, funds were 
allowed  to  surpass  the  VaR  limits.  This  prevented  a  precipitous  re-composition  of 
portfolios which would have triggered a vicious circle.  
The  constitution  of  loan  provisions  as  a  function  of  expected  rather  than  actual 
losses,  for  revolving  consumer  loans  starting  in  2009  and  for  mortgage  portfolios, 
non-revolving  consumer  loans,  and  loans  to  federal  and  municipal  entities  since 
2011.15 In addition, the corresponding methodologies for commercial portfolios were 
published in June 2013. This allows the constitution of loan provisions in a gradual 
way and not at the moment losses materialize.  
Despite  the  resilience  shown  by  the  Mexican  financial  system  to  the  effects  of  the  global 
crisis, the crisis highlighted the need to continuously evaluate possible sources of risk that 
could affect the functioning of the financial system as a whole, as well as the real sector. In 
this  context,  other  macroprudential  measures,  among 
them  counter-cyclical  capital 
requirements and regulatory requirements for systemically important financial institutions, are 
under  consideration.  At  the  same  time,  the  crisis  demonstrated  the  importance  of 
establishing  mechanisms  for  coordination  among  different  authorities  with  the  aim  of 
preventing or facing this type of crises.  
Thus,  in  mid-2009  the  authorities  decided  to  create  the  Financial  System  Stability  Council 
(CESF).  This  is  an  entity  of  evaluation,  analysis,  and  coordination  among  financial 
authorities,  oriented  toward  identifying  risks  to  financial  stability  and  proposing  preventive 
policies  or,  should  those  risks  materialize,  minimize  their  impact.  The  Council  is  not  a 
decision-making body, but rather a forum for cooperation and recommendation of courses of 
action, in which each participating authority is committed to promoting, in the context of its 
                                                
15  Dynamic  provisioning,  an  increasingly  popular  macroprudential  tool,  comprises  in  addition  to  expected  loss 
provisioning systems as the one used in Mexico, through-the-cycle accumulation systems and trigger-based 
surcharge systems. See T. Wezel et. al., “Dynamic Loan Loss Provisioning: Simulations on Effectiveness and 
Guide to Implementation”. IMF Working Paper, WP/12/110, May 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
faculties and subject to the laws that govern it, the implementation of the recommendations 
formulated in accordance with the applicable laws.  
The  Council  is  comprised  of  the  Finance  Ministry,  the  Central  Bank,  the  National  Banking 
and  Securities  Commission  (CNBV),  the  Insurance  and  Surety  National  Commission 
(CNSF), the National Commission for Retirement Savings (CONSAR), and the Bank Savings 
Protection Institute (IPAB).  
The  Council  complies  with,  or  is  oriented  toward  complying  with,  the  four  principles  I 
mentioned that are essential for these kinds of arrangements to work: the CESF has a clear 
mandate  for  performing  its  duties  in  this  area,  specified  in  the  statutes  of  each  of  the 
institutions that comprise it and in its own statutes; the CESF works in a transparent way and 
with complete respect for the responsibilities and, if applicable, autonomy of the institutions 
involved;  and  the  CESF  operates  on  the  basis  of  a  mechanism  of  accountability,  based 
mainly on periodic reports to the general public. Finally, the composition of the Council has 
served as a basis for underpinning the availability of information and the analytical foundation 
for  evaluating  the  risks  that  could  affect  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  the 
instruments  needed  for  facing  them,  although  much  remains  to  be  done  in  this  respect. 
Given  the  importance  of  this  entity,  the  Executive  has  requested  Congress  to  approve  its 
incorporation into law.  
Conclusion  
requires  simultaneous  and  coordinated  efforts  at 
4. 
One of the main lessons from the global economic crisis is that financial stability requires a 
new  policy  approach  in  which  two  features  are  particularly  noteworthy:  1.  macroprudential 
policy is likely to adopt a more important role than before; and 2. the achievement of financial 
stability 
the  macroeconomic, 
microprudential and macroprudential levels.  
Although  macroprudential  policy  is  not  a  new  concept,  the  issue  at  this  stage  is  radically 
different from the experience of previous years, both in reach and relevance. In particular, 
the focus today is on the potential for a generalized use of these instruments at a global level 
and for a greater responsibility in the achievement of financial stability. The problem is that 
despite  an  explosion  of  research  in  this  area,  we  still  find  ourselves  with  many  gaps  from 
theoretical and empirical standpoints.  
A number of measures need to be implemented at the domestic and international levels if 
these challenges are to be overcome. This comprises research, more and better statistics, 
building the appropriate analytical capacity, and adjusting national institutional frameworks as 
needed,  among  other  measures.  Furthermore,  in  view  of  the  implications  of  financial 
globalization  for  contagion  and  regulatory  arbitrage,  cooperation  from  the  international 
community is of the essence.  
It is also important to emphasize that expectations on the role of macroprudential policies in 
financial  stability  must  be  kept  within  realistic  boundaries.  While  it  is  true  that  these 
instruments may have many possible advantages, we should not lose sight of the limitations 
that we still face. With more experience, additional empirical evidence and a better analytical 
foundation, we will be in a better position to evaluate their real potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
