Tiff Macklem: $5 and $10 bank note issue 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to 
the Vancouver Train Station, Vancouver, British Columbia, 7 November 2013. 
 Good morning friends and colleagues and welcome to this event to launch the new $5 and 
$10 polymer notes. 
I am very pleased to be here in beautiful Vancouver, representing the Bank of Canada. 
And like the Governor, I am proud of these bank notes. They are making history: a first for 
Canada and, indeed, the world. 
With these notes, Canada breaks new ground. They are safer, cheaper, and greener. 
Safer,  because  all  the  notes  have  the  same  state-of-the-art  security  features,  using 
holography, transparency and other elements that make them very difficult to counterfeit but 
easy for everyone, especially those behind the counter, to verify. 
We are the first – and for now, the only country – to have a hologram within a transparent 
window on our bank notes. 
Cheaper, because they last longer than paper notes. This means fewer notes will need to be 
printed and transported, making the series more economical. 
Greener, because over the life of the series, fewer notes will be produced. And when they do 
wear  out,  they  will  be  recycled.  It’s  possible  that  they’ll  be  recycled  into  new  products  – 
products, such as this flowerpot.  
Those are some facts about the new notes. But let me put to rest a few urban myths that 
have been making the rounds about the polymer notes. 
My favourite myth is that the notes smell like maple syrup. They don’t. So if you get a new 
bank note and it doesn’t smell of maple syrup, don’t worry. That’s a good thing.  
And you can rest assured; there is no chance these notes will melt if you put them on the 
dashboard of your car. Trust me on this. There is a chance, however, that your car might be 
broken into, so I don’t recommend it. 
Starting today, these safer, cheaper, greener, bank notes will be rolled out across Canada; 
and over time, they will make it into everyone’s hands. 
Given the striking imagery on the $10 bank note, it is entirely appropriate that we are here on 
National Railway Day. This day marks the anniversary of the hammering of the last spike into 
the railbed in Craigellachie, British Columbia. That act, 128 years ago today, concluded the 
construction of the railway system upon which Canada was built. 
We are very lucky to have the last spike with us here today. 
Well, sort of the last spike. Every spike has a story. In actual fact, there were three spikes. 
The  first  was  damaged  when  it  was  hammered  in,  so  it  was  removed  and  turned  into 
jewellery. The second “last” spike was removed shortly after it was driven in to make sure 
that no souvenir hunters grabbed it. It was eventually transformed into a carving knife. 
The spike we have here today truly is the “last” spike, in that it’s the one that has lasted. It 
was  supposed  to  be  driven  in  by  the  Governor  General  of  the  time,  Lord  Lansdowne.  An 
unforeseen glitch that Canadians throughout history can relate to – a snowstorm – prevented 
Lord Lansdowne from attending the ceremony, so he mounted the spike and sent it to Sir 
William Van Horne, the CPR executive who led the project. 
But to tell us more about Canada’s railway, I would like to ask Marc Laliberté, President and 
CEO of VIA Rail, to come to the podium. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
