Glenn Stevens: Reflections on the global economy and recent economic 
and financial developments in Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Canberra,  18  December 
2013. 
 Madam Chair 
Members of the Committee  
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  meet  with  you  today.  I  look  forward  to  constructive 
engagement with you during the 44th Parliament.  
As we reach the close of an eventful year, it is perhaps worth reflecting on some key themes, 
starting  with  the  global economy.  At  the  meeting  with  the  previous  Committee  early  in  the 
year, we noted several developments. Fears of a euro area break-up had abated. The United 
States economy  was gradually recovering, and the slowdown in China had run its course. 
These outcomes were roughly as expected, though perhaps of greater significance at that 
time  was  the  fact  that  various  “downside  risks”  had  not  materialised.  Global  growth  was 
running below average, though not disastrously so. It was thought likely to pick up a bit in 
2013.  
The  period  since  then  has  been  largely  more  of  the  same.  The  euro  area  economy 
contracted  in  the  first  part  of  the  year,  but  may  be  starting  to  grow  again.  It  still  faces 
immense challenges with its banks and public finances, and some years of uncertainty. But 
once again the worst fears have not been realised. The United States continues a path of 
gradual  recovery,  despite  the  budget  “sequester”  and  the  divisive  debate  about  the  debt 
ceiling. The recovery is more gradual than policymakers there would like but that often is the 
nature of things after a financial crisis. China is growing at a solid pace, about in line with 
policymakers’  announced  intentions,  despite  concerns  it  might  slow  more  sharply.  Global 
growth  was  probably  about  3  per  cent  in  2013,  just  a  little  less  than  in  2012.  The  pick-up 
expected has not eventuated as yet, though most forecasters still seem to see reasonable 
prospects of it occurring next year.  
So the past year can perhaps be labelled as: not quite good as hoped for, but not as bad as 
feared.  
Looking ahead, the issue that most people are focusing on is the so-called “tapering” of US 
monetary  policy.  What  is  meant  by  this  is  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  expected,  at  some 
point,  to  moderate  the  rate  at  which  it  buys  securities  in  the  market,  which  is  presently 
US$85 billion  per  month,  and  eventually  to  stop  purchases.  We  don’t  know  when  that 
process will begin. The Fed has said that it will depend on economic conditions, as obviously 
it must. Moreover it will only be a step on what is likely to be a fairly long path back towards 
“normal” monetary policy.  
We  can  be  fairly  sure,  though,  that  there  is  ample  potential  for  this  shift  in  direction  to 
reverberate  around  global  markets.  That’s  what  usually  occurs  when  the  Fed  changes 
course.  The  anticipation  of  this  has  already  been  a  factor  affecting  markets,  including  in 
particular those in some important “emerging market economies”, at various points this year. 
It is sensible to assume that this will be the case over the period ahead, as “tapering” begins 
and as market participants try to ascertain its extent and pace.  
Turning to the Australian economy, in February we felt that growth had moderated somewhat 
and  would  be  below  trend  for  a  while,  within  a  range  of  2–3  per  cent  for  2013.  Broadly 
speaking that is what has occurred. Our most recent Statement on Monetary Policy, released 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in  November,  put  likely  GDP  growth  within  that  range.  The  recently  released  September 
quarter data don’t cause any material change to that view.  
This result reflects quite subdued growth in private domestic demand, partly offset by quite 
strong growth in exports. The very large run-up in mining investment has reached its peak, 
while non-mining investment remains at a low ebb, and dwelling investment spending is only 
in the early stages of an upturn. Consumer spending has been rising, but at a below average 
pace, as people adjust to slower growth in income and look to contain or reduce debt.  
Inflation has remained consistent with the 2–3 per cent target. For the year to December, it 
looks  as  though  the  Consumer  Price  Index  will  have  risen  by  about  2½  per  cent,  with 
underlying  inflation  perhaps  a  little  below  that.  Our  assessment  is  that  inflation will  remain 
consistent with the target over the next one to two years.  
Looking ahead, resource sector investment will decline – gradually at first but more quickly 
thereafter.  It  will  most  likely  fall  considerably  over  the  next  few  years.  There  is  therefore 
scope for other forms of private demand to grow more quickly, the more so as government 
spending  is  scheduled  to  be  subdued.  Investment  in  dwellings  shows  clear  signs  of  a 
significant  increase,  and  exports  of  resources  will  continue  to  rise  strongly.  It  is  likely  that 
capital spending by firms in some sectors outside the resources sector will eventually pick 
up,  but  this  will  take  some  time  yet  and  it  will  be  against  the  backdrop  of  a  challenging 
environment. Consumer demand is likely to grow at a rate close to that of income. Higher 
wealth and confidence could see the saving rate decline a little, but consumption will not be 
the same driver of growth that it was before the financial crisis.  
Putting all this together, our expectation is that the below-trend growth in GDP we have seen 
for a while now will probably continue for a bit longer yet. Over the more medium term, there 
are good grounds to think that growth can strengthen. Eventually more capital spending will 
be required in some of those sectors where it is very low at present. The corporate sector in 
aggregate has high reserves of cash, financial intermediaries and capital markets are willing 
to lend, and interest rates are low. If the nascent improvement in “confidence” we have seen 
can be sustained, that will help to achieve better growth. In fact, we could aspire to a period 
during  which  growth  could  be  a  bit  above  trend  for  a  while,  since  spare  capacity  in  the 
economy has increased a bit over the past eighteen months or so. 
Monetary  policy  has  been  playing  its  part  to  support  demand.  Because  inflation  has  been 
consistent  with  the  target,  the  Board  has  been  quite  comfortable  in  easing  policy  by  a 
significant amount. The cash rate has been reduced twice more since we last met with the 
Committee, and by a total of 225 basis points over the past two years. Borrowing rates are at 
their  lowest  levels  in  a  long  time.  The  returns  to  savers  for  holding  safe  assets  have 
commensurately declined, and this has clearly prompted substitution towards other assets, 
including equities and dwellings. The rate of credit growth has remained quite low thus far, 
though it is now increasing a little, as housing loan approvals have moved up quite noticeably 
over recent months. Low interest rates are doing the sorts of things we expect them to do. 
This is the way expansionary monetary policy works.  
The  exchange  rate  has  also  behaved,  of  late,  more  as  might  be  expected  in  such 
circumstances: that is, it has declined. From about US$1.03 at the February hearing, it has 
fallen by about 13 per cent. The Bank has described the exchange rate as “uncomfortably 
high”, and suggested that balanced growth in the economy would probably require a lower 
exchange rate.  
The Board has maintained an open mind about whether we may need to lower interest rates 
further. At this point, however, there are few serious claims that the cost of borrowing per se 
is holding back growth. On the contrary, monetary policy is supporting higher spending by 
altering incentives as between spending and saving, and working to create an environment in 
asset and credit markets that eases the restraints on some sorts of activity.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the end, though, firms and individuals have to have the confidence to take advantage of 
that situation. They have to be willing to take a risk – on a new project, a new product, a new 
market, a new worker. Monetary policy can’t force spending to occur.  
That  is  why  the  conduct  of  other  policies  is  also  important.  The  myriad  things  which  can 
make it harder or easier for businesses to innovate, to change their ways of doing things, to 
avoid unnecessary costs and to be more productive, all matter. No single one is decisive in 
itself; but collectively, they are crucial. It is hard to escape the feeling that we as a society 
have  tended,  for  quite  a  long  time  now,  to  go  about  our  decisions  on  such  matters  while 
making  the  assumption,  perhaps  without  realising  it,  that  solid  growth  of  the  economy  will 
simply continue, and that it won’t be affected by these other choices of various kinds. We are 
at a moment now when that assumption has to be questioned.  
The  path  of  pro-growth,  pro-productivity,  confidence-building  reforms  would  mean  that  the 
basis  for  investment  and  growth  in  real  incomes  would  improve.  That  would  allow 
consumption  to  grow  without  recourse  to  excessive  borrowing.  It  would  provide  a  revenue 
base for governments to provide the services and infrastructure the community needs. And 
so on.  
The alternative path is a much less attractive one.  
Before I conclude, a few words on payments and regulatory matters. As I mentioned at the 
February hearing the Payments System Board has been working to encourage industry to 
put  in  place  the  infrastructure  to  make  real-time  payments  capability  for  the  community  a 
reality over the next few years. Good progress has been made, though there is a long way to 
go.  An  early  milestone  was  reached  a  few  weeks  ago  when  the  settlement  of  direct  entry 
payments,  amounting  to  about  $50  billion  per  day,  moved  to  same-day  settlement,  as 
opposed  to  the  previous  practice  of  settling  the  next  day.  Quite  substantial  changes  to 
operational arrangements in the private sector, and in the Reserve Bank itself, were required 
to achieve this. But it was worth doing because it lowers risk in the system and helps faster 
access to funds.  
On  financial  regulation,  the  global  effort  at  building  a  stronger  framework  continues.  The 
Financial Stability Board has been clear about the priorities over the coming year, under the 
headings of implementation of Basel III changes, continuing towards completion of a regime 
for “too big to fail” financial institutions, making derivatives markets safer and making sure 
“shadow  banking”  activities  have  appropriate  oversight.  Australia,  as  chair  of  the  G20  this 
year, welcomes this prioritisation and has indicated that it supports the FSB as it seeks to 
achieve  concrete  results  by  the  time  of  the  Leaders’  meeting  in  Brisbane  next  November. 
Australian regulatory authorities continue, meanwhile, carefully to implement internationally 
agreed reforms, with due regard to local conditions.  
With those remarks, Chair, we are here to respond to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
