William C Dudley: US and regional economic conditions 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing on Private For-Profit Institutions 
in Higher Education, New York City, 20 November 2013. 
 Good morning  and  welcome  once  again  to  the New  York  Fed’s  Regional  Economic  Press 
Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you – and, through you, to the 
people in our District. I am going to discuss conditions in the national economy and then on 
conditions  in  our  region,  with  a focus  on  private, for-profit  institutions,  which  have  become 
more visible in the U.S. higher education market. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
National economic conditions 
Let  me  begin  by  taking  stock  of  where  we  are  at  the  moment.  Then  I  will  address  my 
expectations for the performance of the economy in 2014 and 2015. 
Since the end of what is now called the Great Recession in mid-2009, the U.S. economy has 
experienced  17  consecutive  calendar  quarters  of  positive  growth  of  real  GDP  (gross 
domestic product). However, the compound annual rate of growth over that period has only 
been  around  2¼  percent,  close  to  prevailing  estimates  of  the  economy’s  potential  growth 
rate.  Thus,  we  have  made  limited  progress  in  closing  the  substantial  output  gap  that  was 
created during the recession. 
A similar conclusion is drawn from an assessment of labor market conditions. Although the 
unemployment  rate  has  declined  by  about  2  ¾  percentage  points  since  peaking  at 
10 percent  in  October  of  2009,  a  significant  portion  of  that  decline  reflects  the  substantial 
decline of the labor force participation rate over that period. It should also be noted that since 
the  previous  business  cycle  peak  at  the  end  of  2007,  the  decline  of  the  labor  force 
participation rate has been more than accounted for by a decline in participation of people in 
the prime working age of 25 to 54. 
The inflation data are also consistent with this overall picture of an economy operating well 
below  its  full  potential.  Total  inflation,  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures (PCE) deflator, has been quite volatile in recent years due to sharp fluctuations 
in energy prices. Core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components and 
thereby  may  be  a  better  guide  as  to  underlying inflation,  slowed  from  around  2  percent  in 
early  2012  to  just  above  1  percent  in  mid-2013.  In  recent  months  it  has  shown  signs  of 
stabilizing, but remains well below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent for total inflation. 
Fortunately,  inflation  expectations  remain  relatively  stable  at  levels  somewhat  above  the 
current inflation rate. This stability should help prevent an undesirable further drop in inflation 
relative to our 2 percent objective. 
That  said,  there  are  some  nascent  signs  that  the  economy  may  be  doing  better.  For 
example, based on the first estimate, which is subject to revision, real GDP increased at a 
2.8 percent annual rate in the third quarter of 2013, above the trend of the past four years. 
And the most recent payroll employment report showed a pickup in the monthly pace of job 
gains. The 3-month moving average rose back above a 200,000 pace after slowing to about 
150,000 as of July of this year. I hope that this marks a turning point for the economy. 
But  before  we  rush  to  this  conclusion,  a  few  more  cautionary  comments  are  appropriate. 
With  respect  to  GDP  growth,  it  turns  out  that  inventory  investment  contributed  ¾  of  a 
percentage point to that overall growth rate. Thus, because this impetus from inventories will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
likely reverse this quarter, the real GDP growth rate is likely to slow to around a 2 percent 
annual rate or a bit less in the fourth quarter. With respect to payroll employment, we have 
seen  such  bursts  in  payroll  growth  before  over  the  past  few  years  and  have  been 
disappointed  when  the  pickups  proved  temporary  and  did  not  lead  to  a  rise  in  the  overall 
growth rate. 
But, I have to admit that I am getting more hopeful. Not only do we have some better data in 
hand, but also the fiscal drag, which has been holding the economy back, is likely to abate 
considerably over the next few years at the same time that the fundamental underpinnings of 
the economy are improving. 
The first thing to note is that federal fiscal policy in 2013 has been unusually contractionary. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  year  the  payroll  tax  cut  expired  while  tax  rates  on  higher  income 
households  were  raised,  a  series  of  taxes  associated  with  the  Affordable  Care  Act  took 
effect,  and  spending  was  reduced  due  to  the  sequester  and  the  gradual  winding  down  of 
foreign  military  operations.  According  to  the  Congressional  Budget  Office,  the  cyclically-
adjusted or full-employment budget balance increased by roughly 1 ¾ percentage points of 
GDP in fiscal year 2013. Over the past 50 years there have been only two other episodes of 
fiscal  contraction  of  this  order  of  magnitude,  and  both  of  those  occurred  when  the 
unemployment rate was substantially lower than it has been of late. Under current law, the 
amount of federal fiscal restraint will decline in 2014 and then decline further in 2015. At the 
same  time,  the  sustained  contraction  in  spending  and  employment  by  state  and  local 
governments appears to be over. 
The fact that the U.S. economy has continued to grow at around a 2 percent pace in 2013 
despite this quite intense fiscal restraint provides evidence to the second key point, which is 
that the private sector of the economy has largely completed its healing process and is now 
poised to ramp up its level of activity. Key measures of household leverage have declined 
and are now near the lowest levels they have been in  well over a decade. Household net 
worth, expressed as a percent of disposable income, has increased back to its average of 
the previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining debt. Recently, 
banks  have  eased  credit  standards  somewhat  after  a  prolonged  period  of  tightness.  As  a 
result,  we  are  now  experiencing  a fairly  typical  cyclical  recovery  of  consumer  spending  on 
durable  goods.  For  example,  sales  of  light-weight  motor  vehicles  have  increased  steadily 
over the past four years, reaching an annual rate of 15.7 million in the third quarter of 2013, 
though sales in September and October have been somewhat below that average. 
Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with 
underlying demographic trends and the replacement demand for houses, it now appears that 
we have worked off the excess supply of housing built up during the boom years of the last 
decade. Housing market activity has begun to recover, and a widely followed national home 
price  index  is  up  12  percent  over  the  12 months  ending  in  September.1  Anecdotal  reports 
suggest  that  this  higher-than-expected  increase  in  home  prices  is  due  to  a  relatively  low 
number  of  homes  for  sale.  Due  to  this  shortness  of  supply,  there  is  reason  to  expect 
increases in starts going forward. 
Yet  another  bright  spot  on  the  horizon  is  the  fact  that  growth  prospects  among  our  major 
trading  partners  have  improved  following  a  few  years  of  lackluster  performance  which 
induced a sharp slowing of growth of U.S. exports. In particular, the euro area appears to 
have emerged from a protracted recession and is experiencing modest but positive growth. 
To summarize, while growth in 2013 has been disappointing, I believe a good case can be 
made that the pace of growth will pick up some in 2014 and then somewhat more in 2015. 
The private sector of the economy should continue to heal, while the amount of fiscal drag 
                                                
1  
 Based on the CoreLogic home price index including distressed sales. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
should  subside.  Despite  near-term  concerns,  growth  prospects  among  our  major  trading 
partners  will  improve  further  next  year.  This  combination  of  events  is  likely  to  create  an 
environment  in  which  business  investment  spending  will  strengthen.  As  growth  picks  up,  I 
expect to see more substantial improvement in labor market conditions and a gradual updrift 
in inflation back towards the FOMC’s target rate. 
However, the notion that the economy will grow more swiftly remains a forecast rather than a 
reality at this point. As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this 
forecast. Moreover, there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will 
continue  to  monitor  U.S.  and  global  economic  conditions  very  carefully  and  will  adjust  our 
views on the likely path for growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly. 
Regional economic conditions 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  regional  economy.  A  year  has  passed  since  Superstorm  Sandy 
devastated  the  tri-state  region.  And  even  today,  many  of  the  hardest-hit  places  are  still 
struggling to recover and rebuild from the storm. In fact, reminders of the storm’s damage 
remain  visible  in  neighborhoods  across  Brooklyn,  Queens  and  Staten  Island,  as  well  as 
along the coasts of Long Island and New Jersey. On a more encouraging note, however, the 
broader regional economy has proven to be remarkably resilient. After a brief dip following 
the  storm,  the  regional  economy  quickly  rebounded  and  has  continued  to  add  jobs  at  a 
reasonably  good  pace.  Moreover,  the  region’s  housing  markets  have  continued  to  show 
steady improvement throughout the year. 
To help monitor the performance of the regional economy more generally, the New York Fed 
produces  economic  activity  indexes  for  New  York  State,  New  York  City  and  New  Jersey. 
Based  on  these  measures,  New  York  City’s  economy  has  continued  to  grow  strongly 
throughout the year, and both New York State and New Jersey have seen some pickup in 
growth in recent months. As a result, a growing number of places in the region have either 
recovered or are close to recovering the jobs that were lost during the Great Recession. 
More troubling, however, is that Puerto Rico’s economy remains exceptionally weak; activity 
and employment on the Island continue to decline. Our economists will elaborate on these 
trends this morning. 
Private for profit institutions in the higher education landscape 
The important role of post-secondary education is undeniable given the key role that human 
capital  plays  in  economic  growth.  However,  the  higher  education  landscape  comprises 
different types of post-secondary institutions that provide different educational experiences. 
One  such group  of  institutions  –  private for-profit  institutions  –  have  progressively  become 
more visible in the U.S. higher education market. For-profit institutions and their growth in the 
market  for  student  loans  and  federal  need-based  aid  is  the  subject  of  the  special  topic  in 
today’s briefing. 
Analysis done here at the New York Fed reveals that enrollment in for-profit colleges showed 
explosive  growth  nationally  during,  and  for  some  time  after,  the  Great  Recession. 
Interestingly, this growth in enrollment has leveled off perceptibly as the economic recovery 
has  taken  hold.  These  patterns  suggest  that  workers  who  were  displaced  from  their  jobs 
during  the  Great  Recession  chose  to  enroll  in  two-year  and  less-than-two-year  colleges, 
mostly in for-profits but also in public community colleges. Now, with improved labor market 
conditions, individuals have less reason to get a short-term degree or may have returned to 
the labor force. 
Stark  patterns  are  also  observed  in  the  market  for  student  loans.  Both  the  incidence  of 
student  loans  and  average  loan  size  are  by  far  greater  in  for-profit  institutions  than  in 
comparable  public  colleges.  Given  the  importance  of  post-secondary  education  in  our 
nation’s future, and the key role that human capital plays in our nation’s growth, we at the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
New York Fed will continue to analyze the growth of the private for-profits in particular, and 
post-secondary institutions in general, in our region and the nation. 
I will now ask Jaison Abel to discuss economic conditions in our region. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
