Michael Gondwe: Encouraging local content and business linkages – 
role of the financial sector 
Opening remarks by Dr Michael Gondwe, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the 2013 SME 
Local Content and Business Linkage Forum, Lusaka, 28 November 2013. 
  The  Guest  of  Honour,  Minister  of  Finance,  Honourable  Alexander  B. 
Chikwanda, MP; 
The World Bank Country Director, Ms Kundhavi Kadiresan; 
Senior Government Officials and Development Partners present;  
Heads and Representatives of Financial Institutions; 
Business Industry and Associations represented; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, I wish to extend a very warm 
welcome to you all to this very important Forum. Some of you may recall that in June last 
year, together with the World Bank, we organised a strategic forum for small and medium 
enterprises (SME) on the “role of finance for unleashing the potential of local Zambian 
businesses”. 
The  objective  of  that  Forum  was  to  facilitate  strategic  policy  dialogue  between  the 
Government, Bank of Zambia, the financial sector and the private sector on issues central to 
facilitating access to finance by Zambian businesses including SMEs. As Bank of Zambia, 
we believe that it is important to sustain this dialogue to facilitate an inclusive strategy in the 
financial sector development. 
Guest of Honour 
Following on the success of the 2012 Forum, it was felt that the momentum gained from that 
forum should not be lost. This Forum is, therefore, a follow up event from the one held last 
year.  The  theme  of  this  year’s  event  is  “Encouraging  Local  Content  and  Business 
Linkages: Role of the Financial Sector” 
Arising from last year’s event, nine major recommendations were made as follows: 
i. 
ii. 
Set up of a credit guarantee facility; 
Establish a credit line to be provided by a wholesale institution such as DBZ coupled 
with training for financial institutions; 
Training for MSMEs/financial education to be an integral part of on-going efforts to 
support access to finance; 
Establish a central collateral registry; 
Develop a national MSMEs financing policy; 
Initiate  legal  reforms  for  speedy  settlement  of  commercial  transactions  and 
resolution of disputes; 
Develop incentives for financial institutions that service the needs of MSMEs; 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Develop a legal framework for consumer protection and data protection; and 
Monitoring and regulation of Money lenders. 
viii. 
ix. 
I am happy to report that seven out of the nine proposals made have been progressed with 
the other two still under discussions. 
The Government and World Bank are already in negotiations for a financing arrangement that 
may incorporate a form of guarantee scheme and financial education elements while DBZ has 
been recapitalized and has disbursed some funding through other financial institutions. A legal 
framework for consumer protection as well as possible incentives have already been taken 
account  of  through  adequate  provisions  in  the  revised  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Act 
which is under Government consideration for possible legislation in 2014. 
Guest of Honour 
We  all  agree  that  one  of the  major  barriers  to  growth  of  the  SME  sector  in  Zambia  is  the 
shortage of financing despite its high potential to catalyze growth and employment creation. 
It  therefore  makes  business  sense  that  the  financial  sector  should  start  to  look  at  the 
financing  problems  for  SMEs  in  a  holistic  manner  which  takes  into  consideration  other 
developmental  constraints  which  may  impede  sustainable  growth  and  render  the financing 
ineffective. 
In line with Government’s desire to enhance local content through SMEs and use of locally- 
manufactured inputs in the Zambian mining industry, a study in the mining sector is being 
under taken by the Zambia Local Content Initiative (ZMLCI) facilitated by the World Bank and 
co-financed by DFID. The goal is to build sustainable collaboration between SMEs and the 
mining industry. 
It is our hope that the above initiative will be extended to non-mining related SMEs such as 
those in agribusiness, tourism and retail. 
Honourable Minister 
You may wish to note the following topics that will be discussed during this forum: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Further,  the  programme  will  include  panel  discussions  on  policy  recommendations  and  an 
interactive session. 
The  discussion  panel  will,  among  others,  cover  policy  issues  and  outline  some  possible 
recommendations for action. 
Chairperson 
As I conclude, allow me to thank the presenters and panelists for accepting to facilitate our 
deliberations at this Forum. I urge all delegates to engage fully in these discussions so that 
we can collectively develop pragmatic solutions to the financing challenges facing Zambian 
businesses. 
Thank you for listening.  
SME Financing and Business Linkages, IFC Experiences in Africa; 
SME Financing and Experiences and Lessons Learned – AfDB; 
Promoting Business Linkages in Zambia – DFID Zambia; and 
SME Financing and Business Linkages in Zambia – Focus Financial Services. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
