Paul Tucker: Solving too big to fail – where do things stand on 
resolution? 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Member of the Financial Policy Committee and 
Member of the Prudential Regulation Authority Board, at the Institute of International Finance 
2013 Annual Membership meeting, Washington DC, 12 October 2013. 
 By way of setting the scene for this morning’s discussion, I shall make five broad and big 
points about where the international community has got to on addressing the Too Big To Fail 
problem through planning for orderly resolution. Before continuing, I should stress that these 
are my views and do not necessarily represent the views of any of the UK and international 
bodies of which I have been a member. 
The US authorities could resolve most US SIFIs right now 
(1) 
First, I repeat what I said in London recently. I cannot see how the US Administration could 
persuade  Congress  to  provide  taxpayer  solvency  support  to  –  ie  bailout  –  some  of  the 
biggest US banks and dealers. In short, the US authorities have the technology – via Title II 
of  Dodd  Frank;  and,  just  as  important,  most  US  bank  and  dealer  groups  are,  through  an 
accident of history,1 organised in way that lends them to top-down resolution on a group-wide 
basis. I don’t mean it would be completely smooth right now; it would be smoother in a year 
or  so  as  more  progress  is  made.  But  in  extremis,  it  could  be  done  now.  That  surely  is  a 
massive signal to bankers and markets. 
Europe  has  not  yet  reached  the  same  point,  but  contrary  to  some  commentary  is  not  far 
behind.  The  necessary  legislative  regime  is  close  to  completion.  In  contrast  to  the  US, 
however,  many  of  the  largest  European  –  including  UK  –  banking  groups  will  need  to 
reorganise in order to make themselves susceptible to either Single Point of Entry or Multiple 
Point of Entry resolution. 
That brings me to my second point.  
(2) 
The Single Point of Entry versus Multiple Point of Entry resolution strategy 
distinction may be the most important innovation in banking policy in decades 
We will learn to speak of banks and dealers as either “SPE groups” or “MPE groups”. Some 
technical developments don’t matter hugely. This one does. A lot will follow from it, as I will 
sketch in a moment. But first I should recap the difference between SPE and MPE resolution 
strategies. 
A single-point-of-entry or SPE resolution works downwards from the group’s top company – 
most simply, a pure holding company (Holdco). Losses in subsidiaries are first transferred up 
to Holdco. If Holdco is bankrupt as a result, the group needs resolving. The “bailin” tool is 
applied to Holdco, with the equity being written off and bonds converted as necessary into 
equity  to  recapitalise  the  group.  Those  bondholders  become  the  new  owners.  The  group 
stays together. 
Under multiple-point-of-entry or MPE resolutions, by contrast, a group would be split up into 
some of its parts. Healthy parts might be sold or be maintained as a residual group shorn of 
                                                 
1   The  accident  of  history  arose  from  the  McFadden  Act  ban  on  interstate  banking.  Banks  set  up  holding 
companies so that they could own banks in different states. A variant of that story applies to broker dealer 
groups. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
their distressed sister companies. The resolution of the distressed parts might be effected via 
bailin  of  bonds  that  had  been  issued  to  the  market  by  a  regional  intermediate  holding 
company.  
This is, of course, no more than a brief sketch, but I hope it will suffice for me to draw out 
some of the implications for the industry and regulators.2 
For many financial groups, it is fairly obvious which broad resolution strategy (SPE or MPE) 
they are currently most suited to. But few major groups will escape having to make significant 
changes to their legal, organisational and financial structure to remove obstacles to effective 
resolution under that preferred strategy. 
For example, outside of the US, many “SPE groups” will need to establish holding companies 
from  which  to  issue  bonds  that  can  absorb  losses  and  be  converted  into  equity  through  a 
resolution. And even in the US, nearly all “SPE groups” will need to ensure that there exists 
intra-group debt, issued by key subsidiaries around the world to the holding company, that 
can be written down when a distressed subsidiary would otherwise need to be resolved. 
For  “MPE  groups”,  many  will  need  to  do  more  to  organise  themselves  into  well-defined 
regional and functional subgroups, perhaps with regional or functional intermediate holding 
companies,  which  could  be  subjected  to  SPE  resolutions.  And  these  groups  will  need  to 
ensure  that  common  services,  such  as  IT,  are  provided  by  stand-alone  entities  under 
contracts that are robust enough to survive the break up of the group. 
There will be implications for the regulatory regime too. As I see it, the amount of equity that 
a host regulator requires to be held in a subsidiary over and above the Basel minimum may 
vary according to whether it is part of an “SPE group” in which the parent/holding company is 
a source of strength through resolution. 
Where that is the case, it may be possible to shade the subsidiary’s capital structure from 
equity  to  subordinated  debt  issued  to  the  HoldCo.  Where  the  group  as  a  whole  is  not  a 
source of strength in resolution, a subsidiary may need more equity than otherwise. What I 
am describing would entail some recasting of the key pillars of international supervisory co-
operation: the Basel Concordat, Core Principles of Supervision, and Capital Accord.3 
(3) 
There is no such thing as a “bailin bond”. Bailin is a resolution tool. All 
creditors can face having to absorb losses. What matters is the creditor 
hierarchy 
Notwithstanding  the  clarity  in  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  international  standard  on 
resolution,4  and  in  the  US  and  draft  EU  legislative  regimes,  it  is  still  common  for 
commentators and industry participants to refer to “bailin bonds”.5 
As I have said before, “bailin” is a verb not a noun. It is a power, not a special kind of bond. 
Like other resolution tools, it can be applied to any kind of debt obligation. 
What is true is that if bonds are issued from a holding company and the resolution is top-
down  (SPE),  then  those  bonds  will  absorb  losses  before  any  creditors  of  the  operating 
                                                 
2   See Financial Stability Board (2013), “Recovery and Resolution Planning for Systemically Important Financial 
Institutions: Guidance on Developing Effective Resolution Strategies” and Tucker (2013), “Resolution and the 
future of finance”. 
3   See Tucker (2013), “The reform of international banking: some remaining challenges”. 
4   See  Financial  Stability  Board  (2011),  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions”. 
5   Most  recently  in  Chapter  3,  “Changes  in  bank  funding  patterns  and  financial  stability  risks”,  of  the  IMF’s 
October GFSR, which misleadingly refers throughout to “bail-in debt”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
subsidiaries; holdco creditors are structurally subordinated to opco creditors. But if the losses 
are  vast  enough,  then  the  haircuts  imposed  by  the  resolution  authority  can  in  principle 
permeate to any level of the creditor stack. 
In  the  case  of  insured  deposits,  that  means  Deposit  Guarantee  Schemes  (DGS)  suffering 
losses, as they would in Purchase & Assumption-style resolutions of an operating bank. But, 
due  to  less  destruction  of  value,  those  losses  under  bailin  would  be  smaller  (and  never 
greater)  than  the  losses  the  DGS  would  have  suffered  in  a  liquidation.  Insured  deposits 
themselves do not get haircut under any resolution techniques; the losses of the DGS get 
picked  up  by  the  rest  of  the  industry  standing  behind  it.  Bailin  is  no  different  from  other 
resolution tools in that respect.  
The  point  I  have  been  labouring  about  all  creditors  being  exposed  to  loss  needs  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  quite  separate  issue  of  whether  the  authorities  should  mandate  a 
specified  amount  of  bonded  debt  to  act  as  required  layer  of  gone-concern  loss-absorbing 
capacity (GCLAC). That may be issued from a holding company, or it might be subordinated 
debt issued by an operating company. through such requirements, the authorities would in 
effect be determining part of the creditor hierarchy – the order in which creditor classes take 
losses  –  in  order  to  reduce  spillovers  into  the  wider  financial  system  when  a  distressed 
financial group is resolved. The G20 Leaders’ Summit have asked the FSB to develop such a 
regime over the coming year. 
Some impediments to smooth cross-border resolution need to be removed 
(4) 
I  said  earlier  that  the  resolution  process  will  become  smoother  over  time.  A  range  of 
impediments have been identified.6 
Some of them require steps by policymakers. For example, I have said on behalf of the Bank 
of England7 that in principle the Bank, as the UK’s resolution authority, would be prepared to 
step aside and allow UK subsidiaries of the big US financial groups to be resolved as part of 
a group-wide resolution led by the US authorities.  
To take this further, the Bank of England needs to set out the conditions that would need to 
be met in practice for it to deliver on its “in principle policy”. Second, the UK needs the US 
authorities to make a reciprocal “in principle statement” about their being prepared to step 
back to facilitate a UK-led top-down whole-group resolution of UK groups with a presence in 
the US. That cannot, in my view, wait very long after the EU’s Resolution Directive is passed. 
And,  third,  similar  commitments  need  to  be  made  between  other  pairs  of  countries  – 
particularly the major jurisdictions in which the headquarters of global systemically important 
financial  institutions  are  domiciled.  On  that,  I  can  tell  you  that  progress  in  this  field  is  not 
limited to the US and UK. 
Separately,  some  technical  impediments  need  to  be  removed.  Perhaps  most  obviously  for 
this  audience,  the  standard  market  agreements  for  derivatives  and  repos  need  to  be 
amended so that putting a firm into resolution or the exercise of a resolution power is not an 
event of default. If necessary, there will have to be regulatory changes to induce or require 
this. That too is on the FSB’s agenda for the next year. 
                                                 
6   See Financial Stability Board (2013), “Progress and Next Steps Towards Ending “Too-Big-To-Fail””. 
7   For  example,  at  the  FDIC  Systemic  Resolution  Advisory  Committee  Meeting  on  10th  December  2012.  The 
webcast for the meeting is available online at: http://www.fdic.gov/about/srac/2012/2012_12_10_agenda.html 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
(5) 
The resolution agenda is not just about banks and dealers. It is about central 
counterparties too, for example 
Banks  became  TBTF  by  accident.  The  G20  Leaders  having  mandated  that  standardised 
OTC derivatives must be centrally cleared, there is a risk that central counterparties (CCPs) 
will come to be seen as too important to fail as a matter of policy. 
That  makes  it  incredibly  important  that  CCPs  are  robust,  effectively  managed,  effectively 
supervised,  and  have  first  rate  recovery  plans.  And,  beyond  that,  they  absolutely  must  be 
subject to a credible resolution regime. 
I worry that CCPs are “for profit”, or are typically part of “for profit” groups. If a CCP fails and 
it turns out that its risk management was slack, this point is bound to come up in the public 
response.  Policymakers  should  think  about  that  now  in  the  context  of  the  governance 
structure they want for CCPs embedded in vertically integrated groups. 
Meanwhile, work is underway in CPSS/ IOSCO8 on loss-allocation rules. Unlike banks, CCPs 
are essentially rule-based machines for netting and allocating risks. Those rules need to be 
enriched so that it is clear what happens when, due to a member’s default , both the initial 
margin  and  default  fund  are  exhausted.  The  guidance  which  CPSS/  IOSCO  produce 
following the current consultation will need to be unambiguous.  
That  work  can  build  a  solid  defence  against  failure.  But  one  of  the  central  lessons  of  the 
crisis is that we must be able to cater for the worst, when all defences are breached. The 
FSB has therefore been consulting on how resolution regimes can be applied to CCPs (and 
other financial-infrastructure providers). I hope that G20 Ministers will keep the FSB’s feet to 
the fire on this.  
If CCPs are probably the most important example of where resolution regimes need to be 
extended,  they  are  not  the  only  one.  Insurance  is  another.  And  you  won’t  be  surprised  to 
hear me say that, given the ubiquity of regulatory arbitrage, shadow banking and the world of 
funds and special purpose vehicles could be another. That makes it important that resolution 
is not the special preserve of the G20 jurisdictions. With many asset management vehicles 
domiciled in offshore centres, we are going to need them to get on the resolution bandwagon 
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me say just this. 
It is absolutely essential that the TBTF problem is cracked. Nothing is more important to the 
success of the international reform agenda. Without it, global finance would remain fragile; 
and to protect against that, the international financial system would balkanise as individual 
countries sought to protect themselves. The stakes are high. 
My  final  point,  therefore,  is  that  the  authorities  will  have  no  excuse  if  they  don’t  solve  the 
TBTF problem through resolution regimes and reforms. The necessary technology is clear. 
The  necessary  restructuring  of  firms  is  clear.  The  necessary  degrees  and  forms  of 
cross-border co-operation are clear. It is a matter of: just do it. 
 
                                                 
8   Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  International  Organization  of  Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
