Patrick Honohan: Adverse selection and moral hazard in forecasting and 
limiting arrears and loan losses on mortgages 
Speech  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  based  on  an 
address  on  7  October  to  the  Society  of  Actuaries  in  Ireland,  on  the  occasion  of  his  being 
conferred with an Honorary Fellowship of the Society, Dublin, 10 October 2013. 
 Home ground for the actuary is measurement and evaluation of financial risk over time as it 
relates to human life and human behaviour; insurance has been the canonical application. It 
is  instructive  to  use  some  insurance  analogies  to  help  describe  how  the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland is performing the underlying forecasting and policy analysis around the important and 
topical issue challenge of mortgage arrears. 
As  with  much  insurance  business,  the  standard  Irish  residential  mortgage  is  a  long-lived 
contract requiring calculations involving complex interest and the time dimension of evolving 
uncertainty. In addition, behavioural issues such as moral hazard and adverse selection also 
come into play. The fact that the mortgage has long been seen as a very simple, very safe, 
product  for  the  lender,  because  of  secular  rises  in  (nominal)  house  prices,  sizable  tax 
preference for the borrower and a strong credit discipline, has masked these complexities. 
But  they  are  now  coming  to  the  fore  in  Ireland  following  the  sharp  fall  in  house  prices, 
accompanied by the unprecedented decline in overall employment and a lengthy recession, 
from which recovery remains extremely gradual. 
Two key policy questions that arise in the current situation and which we are studying closely 
at the Central Bank, are (i) the assessment of what the overall future loan-losses (over a few 
decades  ahead)  of  the  banks  from  their  existing  mortgage  portfolio  might  be,  in  order  to 
guide  provisioning  and  capital  requirements  and  (ii)  the  design  of  optimal  treatment  by 
lenders  of  distressed  mortgages.  The  insurance  analogy  can  help  direct  analysis  of  these 
questions,  for  which  indeed  there  no  adequate  standard  answers  in  the  international 
literature  on  mortgage  lending.  Lessons  have  been  learnt  from  banking  crises  in  other 
countries,  but  those  which  have  experienced  banking  crises  on  a  comparable  scale  have 
faced very different legal, institutional and macroeconomic circumstances. Nevertheless, we 
need good answers to these questions. 
Our Prudential Capital Adequacy Review (PCAR) of March 2011 forms the basis of current 
capital  requirements  on  the  Irish  banks.  I  have  previously  explained  in  some  detail  the 
timeline that led up to this assessment and the flow of partial information which defeated our 
attempts  to  manage  expectations  and  stabilise  the  capital  adequacy  needs.  Following  the 
March 2011 exercise, we decided that there was no need to revisit this matter on an annual 
basis, as the banks evidently had plenty of capital for the immediate future, and it was also 
evident  that  the  great  uncertainties  surrounding  macroeconomic  developments  and  other 
factors likely to influence the recoverability of loans would not diminish for some time. 
Now we are embarking once again on an update of the capital adequacy assessment, this 
time  designed  as  far  as  possible  to  anticipate  the  methodology  for  the  balance  sheet 
assessment  soon  to  be  launched  by  the  ECB  in  anticipation  of  the  start  of  the  European 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  The  Irish  exercise  comprises  three  main  phases: 
(a) a  static,  point-in-time  data  integrity  validation  and  asset  quality  review  to  be  completed 
later  this  year1,  (b)  a  forward-looking  expected  loan-loss  exercise  and  (c)  the  full  balance 
                                                
1   Although  accounting  practices  are  evolving, existing methods  typically  do not  take  full account  of expected 
loan losses. When expected loan losses are higher than provided for in the accounts, and when uncertainty 
surrounding  future  developments  is  high,  banks  need  more  capital  if  they  are  to  operate  effectively  in  the 
market without dependence on Government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
sheet  assessment,  inclusive  of  macroeconomic  stress  tests,  expected  to  be  completed  by 
mid-2014. Ideally, the outcome of this exercise will need little or no adaptation to comply with 
the  final  specification  of  the  SSM  balance  sheet  assessment.  Liquidity,  operating  margins 
and loan-losses on such non-mortgage parts of the banks’ assets as commercial real estate 
and  SME  lending  will  all  be  important  and  very  material  elements  of  this  exercise.  At  the 
Central  Bank,  we  have  been  developing  in-house  our  methodologies  for  most  of  these 
elements, and not just for the residential mortgages on which I will concentrate today. 
In  updating  our  estimates,  we  are  therefore  not  just  comparing  the  overall  economic 
conditions  of  the  past  three  years  with  what  had  been  assumed  in  early  2011,  and  the 
changed prospects for 2014 and beyond; we are also refining the forecasting methods using 
the greatly enlarged data we have collected and processed over the past three years and a 
wider range of credible methodologies. 
As far as the overall environment is concerned, national economic activity and employment 
have  been  somewhat  weaker  than  was  projected  in  2011.  This  is  largely  attributable  to 
weaker external conditions; the negative impact of the national fiscal adjustment having been 
sufficiently built-in to the forecasts. 
But  some  key  elements  have  shown  a  stronger  evolution.  House  prices  are  an  important 
determinant of predicted loan losses in most models; having fallen during 2011 faster than 
we  had  expected,  the  average  price  of  Irish  residential  property  then  stabilised  and  now 
stands well above (about 10% more than) where we expected it to be. Banks also managed 
to make the scheduled disposals of non-core assets at much better prices than was pencilled 
into the 2011 exercise. 
However, the percentage of residential mortgages in arrears has trended a lot higher than 
was projected in early 2011. How this trend will map into future loan losses is one of the key 
questions that need to be answered for the 2014 exercise. 
Despite a large amount of relatively sophisticated work at the Central Bank,2 it is important to 
acknowledge  that  our  state  of  knowledge  still  does  not  allow  us  to  be  very  definite  and 
precise  about  prospective  residential  loan-losses.  The  main  problem  is  a  lack  of  sufficient 
detailed history covering analogous falling house-price episodes in Ireland. But we do have a 
growing collection of loan-by-loan data covering this downturn – part of half a business cycle 
if  you  will.  This  allows  us  to  uncover  statistical  regularities  that  should  help  improve 
predictions at least to some extent. 
Just as a life or disability assurance actuary needs to begin by modelling the probability of 
each  insured  person  passing  from  the  living  to  the  dead  state  in  each  year  going  forward 
from the present, the typical loan-loss forecasting approach for a long-lived mortgage models 
migration of the loan from performing to non-performing. The loan may be cured (that is to 
say returned to performing status); so that has to be modelled also. Finally, there is the need 
to calculate how much can be recovered by the lender in the case that cure is not possible 
and the loan moves from default into loss. 
Based on loan-by-loan data for as many as 660,000 loans collected from the relevant banks 
at annual or bi-annual frequency, and covering the period from the end of 2008, it is possible 
to model some of the determinants of a loan’s migration from performing to non-performing, 
and  of  cures.  But,  although  lenders  record  borrower  and  loan  characteristics  at  loan 
origination, they do not track the income and employment status of each mortgage borrower 
on  an  on-going  basis.  Therefore  the  impact  of  changing  economic  conditions  on  the 
probability of a given loan’s default or cure can only be detected at the level of regional (e.g. 
county level) data on, for example, unemployment or house prices: the former an indicator of 
                                                
2   The Central Bank’s new loan-loss models have been validated by BlackRock Solutions, who conducted the 
loan-loss projection exercise for us in March 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  estimated 
ratio  and  of  other 
loan-to-collateral-value 
affordability, the latter contributing to a measure of negative equity. The probabilistic impact 
on  a  given  loan’s  migration  from  performing to  non-performing (or the  reverse)  of  regional 
unemployment,  of 
loan 
characteristics  has  been  estimated  by  Central  Bank  researchers  using  relatively  complex 
econometric  techniques.  Given  estimates  of  future  macroeconomic  developments,  the 
estimated model can be used to simulate the evolving performance of the loans in the period 
ahead. 
With  over  half-a-million  loans  and  five  years  of  records  it  might  seem  that  there  is  no 
shortage of data; but this is not the case. Indeed, to some extent it is a question of “water, 
water  everywhere,  nor  any  drop  to  drink”,  not  just  because  the  current  household 
circumstances  are  not  recorded,  but  also  because  so  few  loans  have  been  remediated 
and/or so few loan losses have been crystallised 
How  then  are  we  to  model  the  extent  to  which  persistently  non-performing  loans  turn  into 
lender  losses?  An  important  modelling  judgement  call  is  how  far  forward  to  model  the 
process  of  loan  migration  and  at  what  point  losses  on  delinquent  loans  are  assumed  to 
crystallise.  In  practice  there  has  been  so  little  loss  crystallisation  that  the  data  is  not  very 
informative on this. But the reliability of the migration model as a forecasting tool presumably 
deteriorates the longer it is projected forward, i.e. the more remote the migration simulation 
horizon. So it is sensible to draw a line a few years ahead. Having chosen this simulation 
horizon, and assuming crystallisation of the defaulted loans at that point3, the loss forecast 
requires  calculating  the  lender’s  exposure  at  the  time  of  crystallisation,  and,  above  all, 
estimating the loss-given-default. This loss-given-default will of course be influenced by the 
projected loan-to-collateral value ratio at the horizon; that is why projecting future property 
prices is important. Indeed, absent a track record of successful loan long-term modifications 
designed  to  turn  defaulting  loans  into  sustainable  loans,  the  bank  needs  to  hold  enough 
capital  to  enable  it  to  absorb  losses  on  the  assumption  that,  when  crystallised,  defaulted 
loans will not recover more than the collateral value (at distressed prices) less the costs of 
repossession. 
At the Central Bank we have also been developing a complementary loan-loss forecasting 
model which, instead of simply evaluating collateral recovery, assumes that the lender uses 
a loan modification strategy designed to make distressed loans sustainable. This alternative 
effort  is  using  a  richer  household-level  data  set,  with,  for  example,  current  income  and 
employment,  but  on  a  much  smaller  sample  of  loans.  The  assumed  loan  modification  is 
calibrated to ensure sustainability given current household circumstances. However, it may 
not  be  possible  to  rely  for  capital  stress-testing  purposes  on  the  results  of  this  alternative 
exercise  until  there  is  sufficient  evidence  of  the  banks  actually  using  such  modifications, 
which could in fact reduce the overall ultimate loan-loss that will have to be absorbed, and 
hence reduce the need for additional capital injections to meet the losses. 
Bank behaviour around loan modification and loss crystallisation introduces what are classic 
insurance issues of moral hazard and especially adverse selection. 
Of course, the whole mortgage concept depends on the lender having the ability to recover 
the collateral; not every loan can be modified: repossession has to be an option. 
But  over-reliance  on  repossession  also  entails  costs.  A  growing  economics  literature 
considers why it is that banks in the United States have been proceeding aggressively with 
collateral  repossession/foreclosure  even  in  circumstances  where  a  narrow  calculation 
suggests that an affordable loan modification would offer better long-term loan recovery to 
the  lender,  especially  considering  the  significant  value  destruction  and  costs  entailed  in 
                                                
3   Some account also has to be taken of the potential for subsequent defaults of loans that are current at the 
simulation horizon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
repossession  of  residential  property.  It  seems  that  these  US  bankers  are  fearful  that  a 
strategy of loan modification could prove more costly to the lender if it resulted in numerous 
borrowers opting for the offered modification even though they actually could afford to return 
to  the  original  payment  schedule.  After  all,  from  the  lender’s  point  of  view,  the  overall 
success  of  a  loan  modification  strategy  hinges  on  the  lender’s  ability  to  solve  the  adverse 
selection problem, i.e. to distinguish effectively between borrowers who can pay and those 
who can’t: between those who can be expected to return to the original payment schedule, 
and those who cannot. 
If a lender believes itself to be unable to achieve this triage with sufficient accuracy, it may 
indeed  seem  rational  for  it  to  deal  with  adverse  selection  by  over-use  of  repossession. 
Because  of  the  collateral  damage  to  the  economy,  many  specialist  economists  regard  the 
rate of repossessions in the United States in the current crisis as socially excessive. 
In  contrast  to  the  Americans,  Irish  banks  have  traditionally  been  very  slow  to  move  to 
repossession.  Over  the  years,  this  may  have  reflected  better  information  about  their 
borrowers,  allowing  them  to  solve  the  adverse  selection  problem.  It  may  also  reflect  the 
market structure: banks with a large market share will partly internalise, and take account of, 
the  systemic  damage  caused  by  widespread  unresolved  debt  distress  and  excessive 
repossessions. 
The  current  crisis,  though,  is  on  a  scale  that  has  challenged  the  Irish  banks’  capacity  to 
respond. Their reluctance to provide deep or lasting loan modifications has protected them 
from  adverse  selection.  But  the  lack  of  clarity  about  the  consequences  of  accumulating 
arrears has likely contributed to moral hazard for the lender, as growing numbers of stressed 
borrowers decide for whatever reasons to deprioritise mortgage servicing. 
We  have  all  heard  the  anecdotes  about  well-heeled  borrowers  flatly  refusing  to  pay  their 
mortgage instalments despite having plenty of money in a current account to do so, and still 
taking expensive holidays or buying new 132 reg cars. I don’t deny that there may be such 
people who feel that is possible to rationalise such behaviour). 
Who  could  endorse  such  behaviour?  But  does  it  really  characterise  the  attitude  of  most 
arrears case? Of course many arrears cases are characterised by absolute cash squeezes – 
where the household simply does not have the resources to maintain consumption above, 
say the minima set out by the Insolvency Service of Ireland. 
There also seem (on the basis of such limited survey evidence as exists4 to be many other 
households who could continue to pay their mortgages but, for the moment, are not doing so. 
Identifying these cases robustly can only be done on a loan-by-loan basis by the lenders as 
they seek to solve the adverse selection problem. But I suspect that most such households 
are not simply refusing to pay on a “won’t pay: come-and-get-me-if-you-can” strategic default 
basis. 
Indeed, I have a gripe about the term “strategic defaulter” being increasingly thrown around 
in  Ireland  to  characterise  the  mortgage  arrears  problem.  This  term,  ill-defined  in  the  Irish 
context, is a transplant from the United States (where it is used mainly to refer to people who 
have decided to walk-away from their non-recourse mortgage loans, but are living on in the 
property for a last few cost-free month.5 The context being so different here, I find much of 
                                                
4   Examination of the Standard Financial Statement (SFS) returns of defaulting borrowers in Ireland has shown 
that, indeed, monthly amounts due on the original monthly schedule represent a remarkably small portion of 
current monthly income, for a relatively high fraction of borrowers. 
5   Evidence that default is correlated with factors other than affordability is often taken in the US as indicating 
that “strategic default” is present. For example, if the extent of negative equity of a household is correlated 
with default status, this could be seen as indicating “strategic default”. Such a correlation exists in Irish data; 
however,  forthcoming  research  from  the  Central  Bank  seems  to suggest  that,  once  affordability  factors are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  Irish  use  of  this  value-loaded6  term  inauthentic;  a  rhetorical  use,  which  obscures  the 
diversity and complexity of arrears circumstances. 
But  we  need  to  understand  the  multiplicity  of  causes  for  such  behaviour  if  we  are  to  be 
effective in correcting it. Among other cases contributing to the persistent surge of mortgage 
arrears, is it not plausible that some, perhaps many, would be better characterised as some 
variety  of  “wait-and-see”  behaviour?  Though  different  to  the  US  archetype  of  “strategic 
default,” “wait and see” is not a safe or viable plan for the borrower, or for society, and clearly 
calls for corrective action. Let me elaborate on a few examples of situations which I would 
characterise as “wait-and-see.” 
• 
Slow  to  face  facts.  It  takes  time  for  many  borrowers  to  understand  and  come  to 
terms  with  their  own  changed  circumstances  and  the  consequences  of  their  past 
investment  and/or  borrowing  decisions.  The  over-indebtedness  which  many  now 
face may seem to them to be something for which they themselves bear at most a 
part  of  the  responsibility.  The  fact  of  their  legal  obligation  to  pay  debts,  including 
those assumed to finance leveraged property investments, is blurred in their minds 
by  a  sense  of  moral  outrage  directed  at  others:  co-decisionmakers,  lenders,  the 
wider  political  and  economic  system.  Though,  deep  down,  they  know  their  legal 
obligations will likely catch up with them sooner or later, they choose to wait-and-
see. 
Management of multiple debts. Accumulating arrears on credit-card and utility debts, 
for example, can impose immediate costs in higher interest or in having the utilities 
cut-off. Non-mortgage debt will often be prioritised as a temporary coping strategy. 
Repossession  of  one’s  home  can  seem  a  remote  risk  in  the  face  of  more 
immediately pressing financial issues resulting again in wait-and-see behaviour on 
mortgage debt in order to pay bills or service other debts. 
Consumption-smoothing.  Micro-economics  text-books  generally  explain  household 
borrowing and saving behaviour as a strategy for life-time consumption-smoothing. 
No reader of such texts should be surprised to see households seeking to manage 
an  income-shock  by  borrowing  from  the  cheapest  source.  It  can  appear  to 
households that, for a time, accumulation of mortgage arrears is the cheapest form 
of borrowing, in the hope that the income shock might prove transitory. Given the 
passivity of Irish banks, such households can be tempted to postpone adjustments 
to their consumption pattern; to wait-and-see. 
  But, for good reasons, mortgage contracts do not contain “wait-and see” clauses. “Wait-and-
see” erodes the remaining life-time resources of the household available to service long-term 
debt,  it  heightens  aggregate  economic  uncertainty,  and  can  have  spillover  effects  on  the 
behaviour  of  others,  ultimately  undermining  the  functioning  of  the  economic  and  financial 
system. 
The scale to which the unresolved arrears situation has grown in Ireland reflects the absence 
of  immediate  consequences  for  non-payment.  This  lack  of  consequences  has  created  a 
degree of moral hazard. 
                                                                                                                                                   
taken into account, there is no evidence of a marked change in arrears behaviour when a borrower moves into 
a negative equity position. 
6   Even in the US, and in the States where it is impossible for the lender to pursue a defaulting mortgage holder 
for the deficiency after sale of the collateral, the vast majority of borrowers (over 80 per cent) tell surveys that 
they  regard  not  paying  debts  when  one  can  afford  to  do  so  as  morally  wrong.  Nevertheless  (according  to 
research  carried  out  at  the  US  Federal  Reserve)  the  existence  of  negative  equity  greatly  increases  the 
probability of default in non-recourse States, but not in recourse States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Admittedly, this is not only down to banker behaviour.7 To an extent, necessary policy rightly 
designed  to  prevent  over-aggressive  recovery  tactics  from  lenders,  as  defined  in  earlier 
versions  of  the  Central  Bank’s  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage  Arrears,  will  also  have 
contributed  to  reducing  the  risk  to  households  of  employing  “wait-and-see”  tactics.  The 
temporary removal of some repossession risk during the “Dunne judgement” period may also 
have emboldened those who wait-and-see. But these barriers have been removed, and the 
introduction of credible personal insolvency legislation also creates a new environment less 
conducive to “wait-and-see”. 
In  sum,  resolving  the  mortgage  arrears  problem  is  not  just  a  question  of  modifying 
unbearable debts. It also requires action to end the procrastination of those whose situation 
is not unsustainable, including moving to repossession if necessary. 
It’s not an easy job. It will take time and skill: having allowed such a large build-up of arrears 
cases  working  through  them  individually  and  determining  the  correct  treatment  will  be  the 
work  of  the  coming  year  to  eighteen  months.  Ensuring  that  this  happens  effectively  is  the 
biggest  challenge  currently  facing  the  Central  Bank.  As  the  banks  secure  the  information 
needed  to  implement  sustainable  solutions  without  too  much  adverse  selection,  which  will 
include  getting  those  who  can  afford  to  pay  back  onto  a  full  repayment  schedule,  and  in 
some cases (especially, but not exclusively buy-to-lets) will have to involve repossession, the 
share of wait-and-sees in aggregate arrears will diminish. 
Resolving  the  deep  and  protracted  banking  crisis  calls  on  the  use  of  advanced  analytical 
techniques to measure and design solutions, as well as ensuring that they are implemented 
by the banks. Though challenging, and although concrete results on the ground have been 
slower coming than we want to see, this work is now well advanced at the Central Bank and 
will continue to be pushed forward energetically. 
                                                
7   Though three out of every four arrears cases have not yet been re-arranged by the lender. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
