Dimitar Bogov: We will need foreign loans also in the coming years 
Interview  with  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, in Utrinski Vesnik, conducted by Ms Nina Nineska-Fidanoska and published on 
22 August 2013. 
 Mr. Bogov, in June, lending grew by only 3.7 percent, which is considered a very low 
rate.  Few  months  ago,  businessmen  called  for  an  annual  credit  growth  rate  of  8  to 
10 percent. Is there a chance to reach that goal and when? 
It  is  usually  considered  that  credit  growth  should  be  two  times  the  nominal  growth  of  the 
gross domestic product. This means that if we want to achieve long-term real GDP growth of 
some four to five percent and inflation of two to three percent, then certainly I would say that 
credit growth of 10 to 15 percent is normal and desirable. But we were in a period of slower 
economic growth, so that the credit growth rate was relatively low in the last year. This year it 
continued, and in June we had an annual credit growth rate of 3.7 percent. It is low, but in 
line  with  our  projections.  For  the  entire  year  we  expect  credit  growth  of  7  percent  and  we 
believe we will achieve that rate. In June and July we already have a more intensive monthly 
credit growth compared to the previous months and we expect that trend to continue. For the 
next year,  we are more optimistic, and in our projections we expect credit growth of up to 
9 percent. 
In July, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia made changes in the reserve 
requirement  and  also  reduced  the  key  interest  rate  to  3.25  percent,  which  is  the 
historically lowest level. When do you expect the effects? 
We  made  some  changes,  so  that  we  reduced  the  reserve  requirement  ratio  for  denar 
deposits  and  we  increased  that  for  the  foreign  currency  deposits.  Our  goal  is  to  stimulate 
denar saving at the expense of the saving in foreign currency, which in this way will become 
more expensive, while saving in denars will become cheaper. Shortly after that, we reduced 
the key interest rate to 3.25 percent, thus sending a signal to the banks that there is room for 
greater lending activity. 
Even  that  small  amount  of  loans  does  not  go  to  the  companies,  but  mainly  to  the 
citizens. Why is that so and when will it change? 
In  2009,  soon  after  the  outbreak  of  the  global  economic  crisis,  banks  here  immediately 
stopped lending to households, while they continued to lend to companies. It allowed banks 
to clean the loan portfolio of the households, i.e. to eliminate the bad loans in the meantime. 
Therefore, now they have room to re-start lending to the households, and they are doing it. 
The process of cleaning the credit portfolios of the companies, however, was left out at that 
point, so it began more intensively last year, and continued this year. Therefore, we have a 
small increase in bad loans, which reached about 12 percent. I think this process will slowly 
wind down. Then, together with the reduction of the risks that banks see in the real sector, 
and  which  will  come  to  the  surface  now  after  the  positive  signals  from  the  European 
economy, lending to companies will become a little more intensive. 
In one of its reports NBRM has pointed out that one of the limiting factors for higher 
credit  growth  are  some  conservative  strategies  in  the  local  banking  groups.  What 
specifically did you mean? 
Yes, we pointed out the conservative strategies. And it is no secret that here we primarily 
think  of  the  problems  that  some  of  the  banks  present  in  Macedonia  have  in  their  home 
countries. Banks in Slovenia and Greece are in serious problems, even though their banks in 
Macedonia are among the best, by both the quality of corporate governance and the credit 
risk management, and also the level of capital and liquidity they have is the highest in our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
banking  system.  So,  their  banks  in  Macedonia  have  no  impediment  to  normally  work  and 
grant loans. 
But don’t they grant loans normally? 
Well, some of them are quite restrained. We constantly talk to them and they promise to be 
more active in the market. 
Which of them are restrained? 
Stopanska Banka has been quite restrained in recent years, but it always had positive rates 
of credit growth. It has never cut lending. But I must say that NLB Tutunska Banka registered 
a reduction in the credit growth last year, and this year it continues. I had serious discussions 
with  the  Supervisory  Board  from  Ljubljana,  where  we  claimed  that  such  behavior  is 
inappropriate  and  could  adversely  affect  the  reputation  of  the  bank.  They  promised  to 
reconsider  their  policy,  particularly  as  there  is  no  reason  for  NLB  Tutunska  Banka  not  to 
grant loans in Macedonia. The bank does not rely on funding from the parent bank, it is fully 
financed from its own resources here in the country, it has one of the best credit portfolios, it 
is profitable, it has excellent liquidity, outstanding quality systems of credit risk management, 
probably one of the best in the country. 
Then why don’t they grant loans? 
This is the strategy of the parent bank, which must reduce its credit exposure for the entire 
group, and they impose those targets for all banks in the group proportionally, regardless of 
the situation in individual banks. 
Can our monetary authority tell a foreign bank that it has to increase lending? 
The bank should make rational decisions, and the decision they made is irrational because in 
that way they lose the profits they would make here. It would be more rational for the banks 
that have problems, to reduce their loan portfolio, while those that have no problems should 
expand it. And of course, NBRM is a regulator that constantly evaluates the shareholders, 
i.e. their eligibility to be shareholders in our banks. So there is a ground. We may asses that 
the shareholder in Slovenia is currently in unfavorable condition and is unable to financially 
support the bank in Macedonia. Not only financially, but also from a functional point of view. 
We have not yet made that assessment, but we could. It is an argument that we could use at 
any time if the shareholders from Slovenia do not perceive the situation here realistically and 
do not take the right decisions for their bank in Macedonia. 
The Euro area is out of recession. You were the most optimistic, even more than the 
government, and projected growth of 2.2 percent for this year. Do you remain at this 
projection or will it go up? 
The  latest  projection  is  still  2.2  percent,  although  we  make  a  reassessment  every  month. 
Currently,  developments  are  somewhat  more  favorable  than  those  we  have  taken  into 
account in our projection of 2.2 percent. It is true that at the very beginning we came out with 
the highest estimate for the economic growth this year. The data available so far suggest that 
we  would  be  the  closest  to  the  actual  development,  which  could  be  even  better.  In  the 
beginning, in the first and second quarters, growth in the Macedonian economy was driven 
by some factors that were not very much related to the situation in the euro area, but our 
expectations for the second half of the year were that the European economy will recover, 
and that it will contribute positively to growth. It is true when the companies say that here the 
effects are felt with a time lag of one to two quarters. So, if in the European economy the 
second  quarter  is  positive,  here  it  is  to  give  effect  in  the  third  and  fourth  quarters.  Some 
industrial sectors in the country registered growth in the first half of the year, and those are 
mainly  related  to  the  new  foreign  facilities,  while  many  sectors  still  have  no  growth.  We 
expect these facilities to experience the benefits of the recovery in the European economy in 
the second half of the year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Mr. Bogov, there are ongoing opinions that as long as we stand “glued” to the fixed 
exchange rate, the economy cannot get a meaningful flywheel. Have you been thinking 
about this issue, or you stay firmly at your position – the exchange rate will not be 
changed? 
First, economic theory and practice have shown that economic growth does not depend on 
whether  the  exchange  rate  is  fixed  or  floating.  Economic  growth  depends  on  economic 
policies and factors of production. So, completely different factors, other than the exchange 
rate,  affect  economic  growth.  It  is  irrelevant  whether  the  exchange  rate  will  be  fixed  or 
floating, it is important that it is realistically determined. In Macedonia, the exchange rate is 
on an adequate level, all our analyses show that. Not just our analyses, but the IMF analyses 
show that, too. After we have determined this, then it is better for a small and open economy, 
such as the Macedonian, it to be fixed. Why? Because if we have a floating exchange rate, 
we  will  have  higher  inflation  and  higher  interest  rates  for  the  real  sector.  So,  I  cannot 
understand  those  who  stand  for  a  floating  exchange  rate,  though  they  are  a  minority, 
because the vast majority already agrees that the current exchange rate regime best suited 
our economy. And those who are most vocal about the floating exchange rate, are the same 
ones who claim that current interest rates are high. Well, then they would be even higher. 
Therefore, I do not see what would be the benefit, how it will contribute to higher growth. 
There are opinions that it is easier to be Governor of a fixed rate, that it requires less 
managing of the monetary policy. Is that so? 
It  is  true.  It  is  easier  to  manage  a  fixed  exchange  rate  than  a  floating  one.  However, 
regarding  the  advantage  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  for  the  economy  I  would  point  out  the 
experience of Serbia. Serbia has a floating exchange rate and since 2008 the exchange rate 
has  depreciated  some  50  percent.  During  the  entire  period,  however,  Serbia  has  had  an 
inflation of over 10 percent, and the interest rates for the real sector have constantly been 
around 14 to 15 percent. Therefore, lately, the Serbian Central Bank stabilized the exchange 
rate,  too.  Large  economies  like  Turkey  or  Poland  can  afford  a  floating  exchange  rate,  but 
small  economies  cannot.  It  is  much  better  to  have  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  disciplined 
policies. 
A few weeks ago you said that a reduction of the budget deficit to the level that does 
not increase the public debt should be considered. What did you actually want to say? 
I gave the same or similar statement a few times in the past. And it is not very different from 
what competent ministers think and say. In 2008, after the outbreak of the global economic 
crisis, we had a large room for fiscal support, because we had a low public debt, previously 
we had no budget deficit and the fiscal policy significantly supported the economic growth in 
the period when private consumption and external demand were shrinking. But in the past 
four years, the level of government debt increased to 34 percent of GDP. Although it is still a 
moderate level, a gradual reduction of the budget deficit to a level that will stabilize the level 
of public debt should be considered. 
What is the level of budget deficit that is optimal for Macedonia? 
There is no clear limit as to that level. Any limit we set might be a mistake. It depends on a 
number of factors – what is the economic growth in the country, at what interest rate we are 
borrowing, what is the creditors’ trust in our economy. Therefore, you cannot set a limit and 
say  that  if  we  exceed  that  level,  then the  situation  is  very  bad.  Generally,  when  economic 
growth is slower there is a room for fiscal stimulus and higher deficit, and when economic 
growth is faster, there is no need for fiscal stimulus and the deficit should be minimized. 
Isn’t the Maastricht criterion that level? 
The Maastricht criterion of three percent for the budget deficit is set as a criterion in the euro 
area.  It  does  not  mean  that  Macedonia  should  meet  that  level.  Perhaps  in  periods  when 
fiscal  stimulus  is  needed.  In  the  next  period  for  Macedonia,  perhaps  the  level  of  budget 
deficit, which would stabilize the public debt, is even lower. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
What is the limit that the government debt must not exceed? 
There is more room for the government, but that room will slowly be used up. Therefore fiscal 
consolidation should start to be considered, in order to avoid a situation of starting with the 
fiscal consolidation after this room is used up. As for the external borrowing, we will have it 
for a long period. And that is good, because even when we repay old liabilities, it is good to 
have a new loan that would compensate for that. It is not good to make repayment of the 
external  liabilities  overnight,  and  not to  have  a  new  inflow.  Then  the funds  will  have  to  be 
provided from home, which will adversely affect both the credit and the economic growth. So, 
we should gradually pay back our debt, but when an old debt falls due it is common to take a 
new loan to repay the old one, and if it can be reduced, it will be even better. 
What will we do when in 2015 an installment of 500 million euros falls due? 
The amount that will fall due in the public sector is around Euro 380 million. The rest is in the 
private sector. We have in mind those payments maturing in the next period. We have the 
potential, in both the foreign reserves and the economy, and certainly we expect that there 
will be new loans from abroad, which will repay part of the liabilities that will mature. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
