Luis M Linde: The exit from the crisis and the firming of the recovery in 
the euro area and in Spain 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of the  Bank  of  Spain,  at the  Círculo  de  Economía, 
Barcelona, 13 November 2013. 
 their 
institutional 
frameworks  and  economic  policies 
Let  me  begin  by  conveying  my  sincere  thanks  to  the  Círculo  de  Economía  and  to  its 
Chairman – who is unable to accompany us – for the invitation to join you today. It offers me 
the opportunity to share with you some thoughts on the major issue our economy faces: the 
exit from the crisis and the conditions under which a recovery may firm.  
More than five years back now, the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy triggered the most serious 
international  economic  crisis  since  the  Second World War.  It  has severely  affected growth 
and employment in the advanced economies and, among these, the European countries. At 
certain junctures, most particularly in summer last year, monetary union and the very process 
of European integration were subjected to serious tensions.  
But the latest economic indicators point to an incipient pick-up in activity in the euro area, 
and most international agencies and private analysts forecast a firming of economic growth 
over the next two years.  
To  assess  the  scope  of  this  turnaround,  we  should  recall  what  were  the  underlying 
weaknesses over this long phase of crisis and recession.  
In  the  euro  area,  the  crisis  has  most  acutely  affected  those  countries  whose  economies 
evidenced greater dependency on external funding (i.e. those running bigger current-account 
deficits)  and  less  flexible  economic  structures.  Most  of  these  countries  had  not  sufficiently 
adapted 
the  membership 
requirements of a monetary union, in which exchange rate devaluation is no longer available 
to bring about rapid adjustments in competitiveness, and in which the basic parameters of 
monetary  policy  have  ceased  to  be  set  independently  by  the  authorities  of  each  Member 
State. 
Having  entrusted  themselves  to  the  macroeconomic  stability  provided  by  monetary  union 
membership and scarcely pressured by markets that remained indifferent, for some time, to 
the  problems  being  incubated,  some  of  these  economies  built  up  significant  imbalances, 
failing to undertake the reforms needed to withstand the shocks that could seriously affect 
them.  
The  institutional  arrangements  designed  20  years  ago  in  Maastricht  did  not  have  the 
wherewithal  to  prevent  and,  where  appropriate,  correct  this  lack  of  adaptation  of  national 
policies to the requirements of a monetary union; and nor did they have the mechanisms to 
manage the far-reaching and protracted crisis we have experienced.  
These  shortcomings  have  translated  into  losses  in  well-being  for  the  public  at  large.  The 
impact in terms of output and employment has been enormous. On the projections available, 
the euro area will not regain the level of GDP existing at the start of 2008 until 2015, at the 
earliest. And in terms of employment, the gap will take even longer to close.  
Despite recent positive indicators, the current situation continues to pose challenges of the 
highest  order  to  both  European  and  national  economic  authorities.  But  it  should  be 
acknowledged  that  they  have  undertaken  what  are,  in  many  cases,  politically  difficult  and 
technically  complex  reforms.  Irrespective  of  the  identifiable  aspects  of  these  reforms  that 
could be improved, they have prevented the situation from worsening considerably and have 
laid the foundations for the incipient recovery we are witnessing today.  
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In this respect, let me begin by mentioning the role of the European Central Bank which, in 
my opinion, has successfully lived up to its responsibilities.  
From the onset of the crisis, the ECB applied a series of measures with a three-pronged aim: 
to relax the monetary policy stance in order to accommodate it to the cyclical circumstances 
of  the  economy;  to  prevent  liquidity  tensions  from  triggering  bouts  of  instability  that  would 
have compounded the loss of output and employment; and, at the height of the tensions, to 
dispel the risk of the euro area potentially breaking up, a risk that was very real in 2012.  
The monetary policy measures adopted involved both conventional actions and exceptional 
measures, tailored to the circumstances experienced over the course of the crisis. 
As  regards  conventional  measures,  the  ECB  has  progressively  cut  official  interest  rates, 
placing them at an all-time low 400 bp below the September 2008 levels. As you know, the 
latest cut was just a week ago. Further, like the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, it 
has  pursued  a  very  expansionary  liquidity-provision  policy,  which  can  be  measured  by  the 
sizeable increase of over 50% in its balance sheet since 2008. 
Among the extraordinary measures, I would highlight the long-term (as long as three years) 
refinancing operations; the extension of the list of assets accepted as collateral for the loans 
made  to  banks;  and  the  launch  of  asset  purchase  programmes,  such  as  the  Securities 
Market Programme, the two Covered Bonds Purchase Programmes (including Spain's) and 
the announcement, in August 2012, of the Outright Monetary Transactions programme. More 
recently, in July this year, a policy of forward guidance has been adopted, involving the more 
accurate communication of the projected behaviour of official interest rates in the future.  
Yet we should remember that the capacity of monetary policy to resolve the problems at the 
root of this crisis is very limited. What it can do, and is doing, is making time so that other 
players  who  do  have  the  proper  tools  to  resolve  the  problems  can  adopt  the  measures 
needed, and so that such measures may take effect.  
The  other  European  economic  authorities,  starting  with  the  Commission,  have  –  in  close 
collaboration  with  national  governments  –  taken  significant  steps  towards  correcting  the 
weaknesses exposed in the euro's institutional arrangements.  
Thus, a permanent mechanism, the European Stability Mechanism, has been set up, with the 
capacity to provide funds to the Member States deprived of access to the capital markets. 
And an ambitious reform of overall economic governance has been launched, strengthening 
the mechanisms to align national economic policies with the aims of the Union as a whole 
and designing a plan to move towards a deeper and sounder union in four stages: banking 
union, economic union, fiscal union and, finally, political union.  
Highly  significant  progress  has  already  been  made  in  the  first  of  these  four  areas.  In 
November next year the new Single Supervisory Mechanism will begin to operate within the 
ECB, and it should be complemented by a single bank resolution system and, later, a Single 
Resolution  Authority  and  a  Common  Resolution  Fund  although,  as  is  known,  these  latter 
steps pose complex legal and political problems that might delay their effective start-up.  
National  governments,  too,  have  reacted  within  their  remit.  On  one  hand,  to  contain  the 
worsening of public finances, one of the main imbalances underlying the European strand of 
the  crisis.  And  on  the  other,  to  make  markets  more  flexible  and  to  promote  investment, 
growth and employment.  
Since late last year the quantitative and, above all, the qualitative indicators have improved 
markedly. In the second quarter this year, there was a year-on-year increase of 0.3% in euro 
area GDP. This positive figure has put an end to six consecutive quarters of contraction. The 
rise in output has been across the board, spanning both domestic and external demand.  
Looking  ahead,  the  estimates  available  indicate  that  GDP  in  the  euro  area  will  grow  once 
more in the third and fourth quarters of the year, albeit at moderate rates, underpinned by the 
improved  international  setting  and  by  an  accommodative  monetary  policy,  both  of  which 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
factors are potentially conducive to exports and investment. A pick-up in private consumption 
is also expected, owing to the rise in household disposable income, but not so in government 
consumption, which will remain affected by fiscal adjustment processes.  
It should be stressed that the continuing looseness of monetary policy is fully compatible with 
the  projection  that,  in  the  medium  term,  inflation  will  hold  substantially  below  the  ECB 
objective of 2%, while in the long run expectations remain anchored at this level.  
Naturally, the exit by the euro area from this phase of very low interest rates and abundant 
liquidity, as from the time at which the start of the recovery and the resumption of growth are 
considered to be entrenched, will pose problems for the ECB’s monetary policy, as they have 
already begun to do so for the Federal Reserve. But, as matters currently stand, this is not 
yet our problem.  
All  told,  this  more  favourable  baseline  scenario  for  the  euro  area,  if  it  is  to  materialise, 
requires  the  economic  authorities  to  persevere  with  the  policies  that  have  contributed  to 
stabilisation and to what appears to be the onset of the recovery.  
The banking union should contribute to breaking the still-prevalent link between banking and 
sovereign  risks,  a  link  that  largely  explains  the  persistence  of  an  appreciable  degree  of 
European  money  and  financial  market  fragmentation.  This  is  incompatible  with  the  normal 
functioning of the monetary union and prevents the loose single monetary policy stance from 
being transmitted uniformly to households and firms throughout the area.  
I shall now move on to the Spanish economy.  
In  Spain,  our  experience  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis  has  been  extremely  difficult.  We 
have  witnessed  a  double-dip  recession,  something  unprecedented  in  our  economic  history 
over the last half-century.  
Adjustments were needed to overcome the serious real and financial imbalances – namely 
the budget deficit, private and public debt, the external imbalance and unsustainable activity 
in the construction sector – which began to build up in 2002-2003, during the period of real 
negative interest rates in the United States and in the EU. And matters worsened with the 
international financial crisis and the confidence crisis in the euro area, the latter driven by the 
public finances crisis in several countries, Spain among them.  
Three figures suffice to illustrate the severity of the crisis in Spain: in 2013 our GDP will be 
7–8% below the cyclical peak (marked by the second quarter of 2008); national demand will 
be 16% lower; and employment 20% down.  
But  we  are  correcting  these  imbalances.  Headway  is  most  visible  in  our  improved 
competitiveness,  and  more  incipient  in  the  recomposition  of  the  contribution  of  domestic 
demand  to  activity,  or  in  the  reallocation  of  productive  and  financial  resources  towards 
industries with higher growth potential.  
The  Spanish  economy  grew  slightly  in  the  third  quarter  –  the  first  rise  in  output  since  the 
opening  quarter  of  2011  –  amid  a  somewhat  more  favourable  external  setting,  and  with 
financial tensions lifting and confidence indicators improving. As in the rest of the euro area, 
the  coming  quarters  will  foreseeably  see  a  prolongation  of  the  path  of  gradual  recovery, 
which is expected in its initial phases to continue to be driven by the external sector.  
In recent quarters, net external demand has played a key role in sustaining activity, owing to 
the sound export performance, the weakness of imports and the highly favourable tourism 
figures. 
Moreover, the decline in private domestic demand is being checked as a result of the rise in 
investment in equipment and of the stabilising of private consumption.  
The adjustment in competitiveness, in its various different strands, is playing a central role. In 
Spain,  this  has  been  done  through  what  is  known  as  “internal  devaluation”,  the  direct 
containment of costs and margins, not through the nominal depreciation mechanism, which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
was  the  normal  device  prior  to  our  joining  the  monetary  union.  Internal  devaluation  is, 
evidently, more complicated and slower than nominal depreciation; but, in turn, the gains to 
be had are more durable.  
In terms of competitiveness, progress since 2008 has been most significant. On Banco de 
España estimates, we will by early 2014 have regained, relative to the average of the euro 
area countries, all the competitiveness forgone from 2000 to 2008.  
These  gains  in  competitiveness  have  been  underpinned,  above  all,  by  the  moderation  of 
wage costs, a trend to which the labour market reform approved in early 2012 has proven 
conducive in respect of collective bargaining. Along the same lines, inflation has been very 
contained since 2009, and this has naturally contributed to the recovery in competitiveness.  
The  export  sector  has  shown  great  capacity  and  has  notably  increased  its  presence  and 
sales both in the euro area and in other markets. Suffice it to say that this year, from January 
to  August,  the  trade  surplus,  excluding  energy,  was  almost  double  that  of  2012,  climbing 
from €12 billion to €24 billion.  
These  developments  have  been  upheld  by  corporate  restructuring  that  has  enabled  the 
average  value  exported  per  company  and  the  export  base  to  increase.  The  sustained 
increase in the number of exporting companies over the past five years is due mainly to the 
growing participation of SMEs.  
Our  trade  balance  with  all  regions  has  improved,  with  the  exception  of  the  oil-exporting 
countries.  Spain  is  running  a  surplus  both  with  the  euro  area  and  with  the  rest  of  the 
European  Union.  This  has  entailed  a  turnaround  in  our  balance  of  payment  on  current 
account,  and  will  lead  in  2013  to  a  positive  contribution  of  the  external  sector  to  GDP  of 
around 2%, the best performance by this variable in recent decades.  
Competitiveness  and  export  capacity  also  depend  on  how  productive  resources  are 
distributed  across  sectors  and  across  companies  within  a  single  sector.  One  fundamental 
challenge  the  Spanish  economy  faces  is  to  reallocate  the  surplus  productive  resources  in 
non-tradeable sectors to others with higher growth and export potential.  
At  the  aggregate  level,  8%  of  the  firms  existing  in  2007  have  been  destroyed  in  the  
2007–2012 period, while in the construction sector this figure exceeds 30%. In the industrial 
and services sectors, and having due regard to their high heterogeneity, positive signs are 
discernible.  
The  sectoral  reallocation  is  only  just  beginning  and  still  has  a  long  way  to  run.  Economic 
policy has to contribute to completing this process by removing the obstacles associated with 
barriers to competition and the red tape hindering business start-ups. Some recent legislative 
initiatives which pursue these objectives are the law on business support measures, the law 
to ensure market unity and the future law on professional services and colleges. Market unity 
and legal certainty are absolutely necessary for sustained growth and job creation, and can 
and should be objectives shared by government at all levels. 
Another task is that of completing the adjustment of Spanish corporate and household debt. 
This  is  progressing  slowly  because  their  income  is  weak  and  so  the  adjustment  has  to 
proceed mainly through the contraction of credit. Under these conditions, aggregate credit to 
the private sector will probably still take some time to achieve positive rates. 
This situation at aggregate level can and should be compatible with differing behaviours of 
credit to firms and to households, so as to allow financial resources to flow to those sectors 
in a solid position to undertake viable spending, investment and hiring projects. 
The results of preliminary analyses at the Banco de España indicate that such reallocation of 
financial resources is already taking place. However, there are still some frictions affecting 
most notably lending to SMEs, which as you know are particularly vulnerable to crises such 
as that we have witnessed.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Under  its remit, the  Banco  de  España  has  recently  adopted  specific measures  addressing 
this sector, such as the redefinition of SME for the purposes of prudential regulation or the 
early application of the supporting factor for capital requirements associated with SME loans. 
The  Banco  de  España  has  also  identified  possible  courses  of  action  in  other  areas.  A 
far-from-exhaustive  list  would  include  exploring  ways  of  strengthening  the  role  of  the  ICO, 
simplifying the current public framework of financial support to SMEs and, in the longer term, 
designing  mechanisms  to  capture  homogeneous  high-quality  information  on  the  most 
significant aspects of SMEs’ business to make it easier for them to access bank credit.  
Conclusion  
To conclude, the latest data on the euro area and on the Spanish economy give us a glimpse 
of  a  horizon  in  which  the  serious  difficulties  besetting  us  have  been  overcome.  But  the 
firming of the recovery and the absorption of the burdensome legacy of the crisis will require 
perseverance  in  the  strategy  adopted  to  complete  and  strengthen  the  design  of  Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  and  to  lay  sound  foundations  for  sustained  growth  in  all  member 
countries.  
In the arena of national policies, there is a risk that a degree of reform fatigue may emerge 
as  the  situation  improves.  On the  contrary,  the favourable  effects  now  becoming  apparent 
from  the  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reform  measures  should  encourage  us  to 
maintain these policies.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
