Cyril Roux: Supervision and financial regulation at the Central Bank of 
Ireland 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, to the Financial Services Ireland Annual Dinner, Dublin, 4 December 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen. Many thanks for this opportunity to share my thoughts and views on 
supervision  as  I  begin  my  term  as  Deputy  Governor  for  financial  regulation  at  the  Central 
Bank. I’ve started in my new role at a very busy period for supervision and regulation, both 
here in Ireland and internationally. It has certainly become very clear to me in the two months 
I have been here that supervision and financial regulation is high on the Irish public agenda 
and an area which elicits many opinions and views from the general public, the media, and 
the regulated firms themselves that you represent. 
In recent weeks financial firms and the Central Bank's supervisory activities have been very 
much in the public eye. Some of this attention has cast a public light on individual firms, their 
provisioning practices and their solvency, some has been on topics touching the main banks, 
namely the balance sheet assessment (BSAs) the Central Bank has recently concluded, and 
its relevance for our supervisory dialogue on provisions and capital requirements, as well as 
some broader issues such as mortgage arrears and conduct of business. You will be aware 
that we have confirmed the outcomes of the balance sheet assessments with the respective 
banks in recent days. The BSA exercise was conducted by the Central Bank at this particular 
juncture as it was necessary to do so before Ireland exited the EU/IMF programme. The BSA 
exercise conducted by the Central Bank will now feed into the ECB’s assessment of banks 
within  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  which  will  culminate  with  the  European 
stress testing next year. As such, the results of the BSA were not published separately by the 
Central  Bank,  as  to  do  so  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  broader  European  approach.  Of 
course,  the  banks  themselves  may  have  an  obligation  to  make  certain  disclosures  under 
their own reporting requirements and we have seen some of that over the past few days. 
All the issues I have mentioned have a common thread – they pit the corporate and client 
facing behaviours of your firms against our proactive and assertive, risk based, supervisory 
engagement aimed at ensuring the appropriate outcomes that protect both financial stability 
and consumers. 
As  an  issuer  of  guidelines  and  regulations,  the  Central  Bank  has  stepped  up  its  game  on 
prudential  issues,  such  as  insurance  reserves  and  banking  provisions,  as  well  as  on 
enforcement, client asset rules and consumer protection areas. 
In this context it is timely that I have been offered this opportunity, at the start of my time in 
Ireland, to discuss the evolving nature of financial supervision at the Central Bank. I will do 
so  by  stressing,  at  every  turn,  the  interplay  of  the  domestic  and  the  international  sides  of 
these issues, as I believe that they are equally important, and equally present on your mind 
and on ours. 
Financial  supervision  operates  on  several  levels.  The  first  and  most  ambitious  one  is 
systemic: to provide, or at least significantly contribute to, financial stability. The second is 
more traditional: to protect the financial interests of the customers by assessing and, when 
necessary, enforcing compliance with prudential regulation. The third emerged later, around 
conduct towards customers. Indeed the Central Bank’s own mission statement focuses on 
these priorities at a very high level – ‘Safeguarding Stability, Protecting Consumers’. 
Let’s look at these 3 areas in more detail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Financial stability 
There is a widely shared view that supervisors have failed to provide the financial stability 
that  they  are  tasked  with.  Ireland,  in  particular,  has  experienced  the  effects  of  this,  with  a 
regulatory system that in the past failed to stop runaway lending. 
Notwithstanding  this  egregious  national  failure  there  are  three  main  reasons  that  make  a 
difficult task. 
First, calling out imbalances and financial bubbles is a contentious area. Is there a housing 
bubble building up now in Dublin, London, or elsewhere? Is the stock market overvalued in 
Europe or in the US? People disagree and can adduce data and reasoning to make opposite 
cases. When  bubbles  do  grow,  vested  interests  work  at  all  levels  of  media,  the  economy, 
public administration and elected officials to explain why this time it is different. So only by 
thinking against the tide can one signal and maintain, while the economy is growing and jobs 
abound, that something is rotten and will fall apart eventually. Contrarians are inherently rare; 
contrarian public institutions which are run collegially rarer still. 
The second reason is that financial regulators are first and foremost organisations set up to 
conduct individual firm supervision. This is what they have been originally set up to do, and 
where the core of their responsibilities lie. Although they do conduct sector-wide reviews and 
assessments, their core powers, deposits of knowledge and history are rooted in the micro-
prudential arena. 
The  third  reason  for  this  failure,  even  when,  against  the  odds,  the  financial  regulator  has 
rightly adopted a contrarian outlook, is that it may not be in a position to force this contrarian 
outlook on the economy. The institutional power of domestic unelected regulators is naturally 
less than that of elected governments and parliaments. To take one familiar example, when 
the elected representatives in the US decided to promote home ownership through subprime 
lenders, (also helping the labour-intensive construction sector), the democratic force of that 
decision was unassailable, and its financial stability consequences could hardly have been 
wholly contained by the regulators – even if they had tried more single-mindedly to do so. 
More generally, few regulators anywhere have  been granted the autonomy to take actions 
that  will  clearly  slow  overall  economic  growth,  even  if  this  course  is  more  sustainable,  or 
more conducive to financial stability. Of course, very often regulators didn’t even try. 
Given these three structural reasons for the repeated failures of financial regulators to ensure 
financial  stability,  should  we  abandon  this  mandate  as  being  simply  beyond  our  reach?  I 
would rather say these failures call for a radical rethink of the tools and institutional set-up 
required to succeed. This is why the combination of the SSM and the macro-prudential tools 
of the Basel 3 accord make such a potent change in the likelihood of success in the euro 
area. The ECB is an institution of great influence, whose strength, powers and independence 
are  safeguarded  by  the  Treaties  of  the  EU.  It  wields  more  power  and  can  draw  on  more 
resources than most domestic euro area regulators. And this institutional weight can help it 
wield the macro-prudential tools that its national predecessors did not have, or did not use. 
Never  in  Europe  will  the  banking  regulator  be  better  positioned  to  discharge  its  financial 
stability mandate than the ECB. 
Supervisory activity 
Let me turn now to the practice of micro-prudential supervision. This is the less grandiose 
mainstay of our work. This is also the level on which we interact daily with your firms. Here 
our  mandate  is  to  protect  the  interests  of  your  customers  by  ensuring  a  great  number  of 
things: that your firms are run in a responsible manner by competent people who are fit and 
proper; that the firms that you run do not take undue risks with their customers’ funds, that 
regulated firms know; mitigate and reserve appropriately for the risks that they do take; and 
that  they  have  sufficient  capital  and  appropriate  funding  structures,  amongst  other 
responsibilities, not least, appropriate governance structures 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  carrying  out these tasks  the  Central  Bank  has  undertaken  significant  changes  in  recent 
years  with  our  new  regulatory,  risk  based  approach  to  supervision  introduced  by  my 
predecessor Matthew Elderfield and the management team. The now familiar-to-you PRISM 
approach underpins our practice of micro-prudential supervision. As you know, this approach 
segments  the  firms  we  regulate  by  measuring  the  potential  impact  of  their  failure  and 
engaging accordingly. We focus our resources on the areas of greater relevance and try to 
ensure the risks therein are mitigated as appropriate. That involves ensuring that regulations 
are  complied  with,  but  there  are  few  better  ways  to  raise  our  hackles  than  to  call  this 
supervision glorified box-ticking, as was done recently by a commentator. We certainly give 
ourselves  higher  goals  than  routine  compliance  checks.  We  devote  time  and  effort  to 
understand  deeply  the  firms’  business  models.  We  put  great  stress  on  forward-looking 
assessments rather than snapshots of past situations, looking for the exercise of supervisory 
judgment throughout our engagement with regulated entities, and we constantly review our 
actions  to  make  sure  they  achieve  satisfactory  outcomes,  and  don’t  just  satisfy  internal 
metrics.  This  is  why  we  put  great  store  in  the  remedial  programs  that  we  ask  of  you  and 
monitor energetically their implementation 
However,  business  models  evolve, 
international  regulatory  standards  develop,  and 
responsive supervision is not static. The procedures and processes that are in place today 
may need to be revised so that they are relevant tomorrow. For supervision to be successful 
it must continually adapt and change to new environments and activities, and as part of this 
you can expect that our engagement with your firms will evolve. A number of forces are at 
play  in  this  regard.  The  first  is  the  Reports  on  the  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes 
(ROSC) review that we asked the IMF to conduct. The IMF has examined our markets, funds 
and banking supervisory practice in the light of international standards put forward by IOSCO 
and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. I expect the final report of the IMF will be 
published  shortly  and  we  will  take  on  board  their  recommendations,  as  applicable  to  the 
organisation. 
We have  also  launched  a  review  of  our  PRISM  engagement  model  in which  a  few  of  you 
have been invited to participate. Our reviewers are to report to the Bank’s Commission early 
next year about potential areas for development or amendment in our current engagement 
model. It is likely that the focus on supervisory outcomes will be given even greater weight as 
a result – supervisory engagement is all to the good, but only so far as it leads to successful, 
transformative outcomes. 
Observers may sometimes suggest that our calibration of PRISM overemphasizes the high 
impact  firms  at  the  expense  of  assigning  fewer  resources  to  low  and  medium  low  impact 
firms. Probably that is not the majority view in the present audience, and I think it is clearly 
wrong  during  this  period  of  post-crisis  repair  of  the  main  firms.  However,  it  is  something 
which we are keeping under review. 
Our  engagement  model  will  also  evolve  in  tandem  with  European  developments.  The 
convergence of prudential supervisory practice and enforcement policy has long been talked 
about  and  stated  as  a  worthy  aim,  while  national  supervisory  authorities  went  about  their 
ordinary  business.  Only  Colleges  of  Supervisors,  for  internationally  active  insurance  and 
banking groups, gave a modicum of substance to this aim. But the time of actual common 
supervisory  practice  and  enforcement,  as  set  out  by  European  authorities  with  the  powers 
and  the  resources  to  ensure  adherence,  is  about  to  come.  For  euro  area  banking 
supervision,  the  SSM  is  actively  writing  a  supervisory  manual  which  already  runs  to  700 
pages, and it has commenced the recruitment of staff in Frankfurt to implement the model in 
the  banks  it  will  supervise.  Much  of  the  PRISM  model  approach  and  reasoning  has  been 
taken  on  board  by  the  SSM;  it  will  have  been  one  of  the  main  precursors  of  the  SSM 
approach  –  but  it  will  be  superseded  like  all  national  models  by  the  single  euro  area 
supervisory approach in banking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In insurance, convergence will not be as strong nor come as fast. There is no institution that 
can play the role of the ECB, and Solvency II will come into force two years after CRD 4. Yet, 
in the coming years, EIOPA will endeavour to work on increased convergence of supervisory 
practices. EIOPA and its staff will step up its review of national approaches, and will likely 
develop a cohesive supervisory manual for insurance in Europe. 
Enforcement 
For  supervision  to  be  successful  it  must  be  underpinned  by  an  appropriate  recourse  to 
enforcement. Enforcement is a necessary component of any effective regulatory framework. 
Where regulated entities fail to comply with their regulatory requirements, enforcement is an 
important tool to effect deterrence, achieve compliance and promote the behaviours and high 
standards  that  we  expect. We  aim,  through  our  approach,  to  leave  little  doubt  that  where 
there is clear evidence of regulatory breaches, enforcement action by the Central Bank may 
follow. We have been active in taking enforcement cases against regulated firms. Last year 
alone,  fines  totalling  over  €8.4  million  were  imposed  on  firms.  Enforcement  will  remain  an 
integral part of our strategy and this is in keeping with best international practice. 
The  responsibility  for  ensuring  regulatory  compliance,  of  course,  lies  not  only  with  the 
regulated entity, but also with those holding relevant functions within the firms. On the basis 
of  the  Central  Bank  Reform  Act  2010,  we  have  put  in  place  a  pre-approval  process  for 
persons who apply for relevant positions (called Pre-Approval Controlled Functions or PCFs) 
in  regulated  firms,  to  ensure  that  they  meet  the  required  standards  of  fitness  and  probity. 
This approach is very important since business decisions do not just happen, it is the people 
who run business who take them. If concerns arise that a person or persons in Controlled 
Functions in a regulated firm do not meet the required standards of fitness and probity, they 
may be investigated by the Central Bank and could ultimately be prohibited from carrying out 
a  Controlled  Function  in  their  firm,  or  any  other  regulated  firm.  These  powers  equip  us  to 
ensure that the people in senior roles are capable, competent and act with integrity. 
The Central Bank will continue to focus on anti-money laundering compliance. In early 2016, 
the Financial Action Task Force will review our compliance and Ireland has much to lose if its 
adherence  with  the  highest  standards  of  anti-money  laundering  procedures  is  left  open  to 
doubt  or  criticism.  Our  current  self-assessment  is  that  we  have  a  distance  to  travel  in  this 
area if we are to reach international standards or best practice. It is likely that the current IMF 
review will concur with this view. It is therefore important that we continue to focus on this 
area and you can expect our supervisory focus on AML to remain high. 
Consumer protection 
The third level upon which financial regulation operates is that of customer protection – one 
in which the Central Bank of Ireland has been very active at a domestic, EU and international 
level, not least in 2013. Our overarching aim here is “to get it right for consumers” and this 
mission  is  underpinned  by  our  5Cs  framework.  This  framework  focuses  on  achieving 
outcomes  for  consumers  under  key  headings:  Placing  the  Consumer  at  the  centre  of  the 
regulatory  framework,  promoting  a  consumer-focused  Culture  (as  in  our  ongoing  work  on 
sales  incentives  across  the  sectors,  the  importance  of  which  is  borne  out  by  the  level  of 
redress we are requiring in the area of payment protection insurance), enforcing Compliance 
including  through  sanctions  where  appropriate,  instilling  Confidence  in  financial  services, 
products  and  regulation  (including  through  the  extension  of  our  remit  into  emerging  areas 
such as debt management) and Challenging ourselves, those we regulate and others to get it 
right  for  consumers.  As  we  draw  up  our  plans  for  2014,  we  continue  to  enhance  this 
framework and challenge the firms we regulate. I believe that by putting the long term needs 
of consumers at the heart of your business models you can not only deliver quality financial 
services  but  also  play  your  part  in  restoring  confidence  and  contribute  to  safeguarding 
stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A key element of our consumer protection framework is the Code of Conduct on Mortgage 
Arrears  (CCMA),  which  is  a  central  part  of  the  framework  being  used  to  address  the 
challenges of mortgage arrears. Mortgage arrears have been a key priority for the Central 
Bank for some time and we are now starting to see some progress in terms of addressing 
these issues. Our work has been driven by the need to ensure fair and reasonable treatment 
of  consumers through the  CCMA  and  the  need for  lenders to move  away  from  short term 
forbearance measures to long term sustainable solutions. The Central Bank has pushed hard 
for  lenders  to  resolve  the  high  levels  of  arrears  cases  by  applying  long  term  sustainable 
solutions. 
We have recently published the outcomes of the targets set for the main mortgage lending 
banks for the second and third quarters, which the banks were found to have met. However, 
a  key  focus  of  our  work  was  not  just  in  determining  a  pass/fail  for  the  banks,  but  on  a 
comprehensive  audit  of  the  banks’  processes  of  determining  and  proposing  sustainable 
solutions. A number of issues were identified which will need to be addressed by lenders to 
ensure that the solutions they are applying are sustainable in the longer term. 
Another central  area  of focus for  our  consumer protection  mandate  is  the  Safeguarding  of 
Client  Assets,. Our review  published  in  March  2012,  made  a  number of  recommendations 
aimed at improving the Client Asset Regime in Ireland. It recognised that the existing rules 
could  be  improved  so  as  to  provide  better  protections  for  investors  and  so  as  to  be  more 
workable  for  investment  firms.  As  a  result  we  formed The  Client  Asset  Specialist  Team  in 
June 2012. It works with the other supervisory teams to fulfil its specific mandate of ensuring 
that  firms  are  safeguarding  client  assets.  With  the  enactment  of  the  new  Central  Bank 
(Supervision  and  Enforcement)  Act  2013,  new  client  asset  rules  will  come  into  effect  next 
year. 
We  will  continue  to  work  to  enhance  our  consumer  protection  framework  at  a  domestic, 
European and international level. This will include renewing our attention to the SME lending 
sector, where we will be conducting a review of our code, as well as a review of compliance 
with  the  CCMA  and  following  through  on  our  sales  incentives,  pensions  and  property 
insurance  claims  reviews.  Sales  channels  will  remain  an  area  of  focus  for  us  (including 
dealing  with  those  intermediaries  who  have  not  been  engaging  with  us  or  fail  to  meet  our 
authorisation  standards),  as  will  bedding  down  a  robust  regulatory  regime  for  debt 
management  firms.  Whether  one  looks  to  the  (at-times  confusing)  array  of  options  for 
consumers in key staple areas (witness for example the position on health insurance, where 
VHI’s anticipated application for authorisation would give us full coverage of this market for 
the first time), the challenges faced by consumers in understanding the implications of long 
term pension investments in these uncertain times or key European initiatives such as the 
Payment Accounts Directive, it is clear that our consumer protection mandate is a live issue 
of relevance to citizens’ daily lives. 
Conclusion 
Our  regulatory  agenda  continues  to  be  a  full  and  challenging  one.  The  continuing 
developments  at  European  and  international  level  will  ensure  we  have  a  full  schedule  for 
2014, notwithstanding the issues at home. 
I  am  keenly  aware  of  the  importance  of  a  level  playing  field  for  your  firms.  Some  of  your 
activities  are  mobile  and  the  Irish  regulator  cannot  go  it  alone  to  make  up  for  issues  that 
arose  in  the  past.  But  equally  Ireland  will  not  align  itself  with  every  piece  of  domestic 
regulation in Europe that appears more favourable to the financial industry. Your regulator 
works  under  the  watchful  eyes  of  the  country  and  heightened  international  standards  and 
reviews. Past failures are still very much with us. And the last few months have uncovered 
new  instances of ill-advised underwriting and debatable provisioning judgments, ineffective 
internal and external auditing or follow-up to such auditing, and weak governance in areas 
across  all  of  the  financial  sector  that  remain  still  too  frequent  for  comfort  or  complacency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Each instance works against the rebuilding of the public trust that you work hard to foster. 
The knock-on effect of new failures on costs, reputations, and the country, would be severe. 
Hence  our  renewed  commitment  to  the  high  standard  of  supervision  introduced  by  my 
predecessor. I am confident that with it, the Central Bank is on the right path to deliver its 
mandate,  and  our  work  in  recent  times  has  shown,  in  practical  terms,  the  outcomes  of 
successful supervisory engagement. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
