Mark Carney: The UK at the heart of a renewed globalisation 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  an  event  to  celebrate  the  125th  anniversary  of  the  Financial  Times, 
London, 24 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
When the Financial Times opened for business in 1888 London was the world’s preeminent 
financial  centre.  It  had  the  most  international  banks,  the  largest  capital  markets,  and  the 
deepest money and gold markets. It backed projects all over the world, and most of world 
trade was financed by bills drawn on London. Supporting the critical mass of banks, insurers 
and investors was an army of solicitors, accountants and clerks.1 
What London had lacked, at least until the FT’s great rival Financial News was founded in 
1884,  was  a  ready  provider  of  financial  news.  The  FT  famously  set  out  to  report  “Without 
Fear  and Without  Favour”,  and  declared  itself  to  be  the  friend  of  the  honest  financier,  the 
respectable  broker  and  the  legitimate  speculator;  and  the  enemy  of  the  closed  stock 
exchange, the unprincipled promoter and the gambling operator. Perhaps as a consequence, 
its initial circulation was modest.  
The preoccupations of 1888 were not very different than today. Editions of the FT 125 years 
ago contained stories on economic development in China, the health of Spanish government 
finances, and the state of Irish banks.  
What  is  clear  in  those  early  editions  is  the  decidedly  international  flavour  of  a  London 
investor’s  interests  –  from  tramways  in  Buenos  Aires  to  copper  mines  in  Portugal.  Since 
then, London has been a truly international financial centre. In 1913, at the twilight of the last 
great wave of globalisation, 71 foreign banks had London offices. A century later, there are 
nearly  four  times  as  many.  Today,  almost  twice  as  much  international  banking  activity  is 
booked here as anywhere else. 
London is the home of global markets as well as global banks. Almost half of all turnover in 
over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives  takes  place  here.  London’s  share  of  global  foreign 
exchange  turnover  is  almost  as  high  and  it  remains  a  major  hub  for  trading  in  gold.  UK 
insurance companies have around 10% of the global market.2 Extending the net further, the 
UK is home to the third largest “shadow banking system” with assets of $9 trillion.3 
The emergence of London as a financial centre in the nineteenth century owed a lot to the 
UK’s  position  as  the  world’s  greatest  trading  nation.  Britain  accounted  for  as  much  as  a 
quarter  of  world  trade  and  produced  around  a  tenth  of  global  GDP.4  Over  the  following 
                                                
1  At around this time there were 701 accountancy firms operating in the City, and over 2000 firms of solicitors. See David 
Kynaston’s book “City of London: The History” (Chatto & Windus, London, 2011). 
2  See  “Fund  Management  September  2013”  published  by  TheCityUK,  available  at  http://www.thecityuk.com/research/our-
work/reports-list/fund-management-2013/. 
the  Financial  Stability  Board’s 
3  See 
www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_121118c.pdf. 
“Global  Shadow  Banking  Monitoring  Report  2012”,  available  at 
4  The world trade share estimate is constructed using data from Dimsdale et al. (2010), Lewis (1981), ONS, UN, World Bank 
and WTO. Full references are: Dimsdale, N., Hills, S., and Thomas, R. (2010), “The UK recession in context: what do three 
centuries of data tell us?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, No. 50, December; Lewis, W. A. (1981), “The rate of growth 
of world trade, 1830–1973”, in Grassman, S. and Lundberg, E. (eds) The World Economic Orders: Pasts and Prospects, 
Palgrave Macmillan. For the output share, the source is Maddison. International comparisons of historical output are fraught 
with measurement issues. Data are available only for 1870 (9%) and 1900 (9.4%), and cover a relatively small sample of 
countries, hence the stated share for 1888 is only an approximation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
125 years the UK’s shares of world trade and output have fallen to around 3%. Despite some 
ups and downs, London has remained a centre of global finance.  
Partly  as  a  consequence,  the  size  of  the  UK’s financial  sector  relative  to  its  economy  has 
increased dramatically. When the FT was in its infancy, the assets of UK banks amounted to 
around 40% of GDP. By the end of last year, that ratio had risen tenfold.  
As  we  have  recently  been  painfully  reminded,  a  specialisation  in  financial  services  carries 
risks as well as rewards. And those risks will grow, unless we put global banks and markets 
on a sounder footing. Suppose, for example, that UK-owned banks’ share of global banking 
activity remains the same and that financial deepening in foreign economies increases in line 
with historical norms. By 2050, UK banks’ assets could exceed nine times GDP, and that is 
to say nothing of the potentially rapid growth of foreign banking and shadow banking based 
in London. 
Some  would  react  to  this  prospect  with  horror.  They  would  prefer  that  the  UK  financial 
services  industry  be  slimmed  down  if  not  shut  down.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  such 
sentiments have gone largely unchallenged.  
But,  if  organised  properly,  a  vibrant  financial  sector  brings  substantial  benefits.  Today 
financial services account for a tenth of UK GDP and are the source of over 1 million jobs.5 
Two thirds of those are outside London, including jobs in asset management in Edinburgh, 
transaction processing in Bournemouth and insurance in Norwich. Being at the heart of the 
global  financial  system  also  broadens  the  investment  opportunities  for  the  institutions  that 
look  after  British  savings,  and  reinforces  the  ability  of  UK  manufacturing  and  creative 
industries  to  compete  globally.  Not  to  mention  that  financial  services  represent  one  of  the 
UK’s largest exports.  
More broadly, London’s markets serve a vital global role. London acts as Europe’s window to 
global capital; is a centre of emerging market finance; and can play an important role in the 
financial opening of China.  
The UK’s financial sector can be both a global good and a national asset – if it is resilient. 
It is not for the Bank of England to decide how big the financial sector should be. Our job is to 
ensure that it is safe. The UK can host a large and expanding financial sector safely, if we 
implement a reform agenda that extends well beyond domestic banking.  
That  is  not  to  suggest  that  the  focus  on  reforming  domestic  banks  has  been  misplaced. 
Following the crisis, it was imperative to fix first the fault lines at the core of our system, with 
initiatives  ranging  from  rebuilding  the  capital  of  major  UK  banks  and  building  societies,  to 
changing the structure of compensation and the responsibilities of senior officers. In tandem, 
some major banks are working to change their cultures.6 
But reforms of domestic banking are far from sufficient for a global hub like London. Now is 
the time for a greater focus on what’s needed for resilient international banking and robust 
global markets. This will require sustained international engagement. Unlike in the early days 
of the FT, the UK can no longer dictate standards. Rather than ruling the waves, we must 
spur collective action through a demonstrated commitment to openness and the promotion of 
better ideas in Europe and at the G20 via the Financial Stability Board (FSB).  
                                                
5  As  Andy  Haldane  has  noted,  the  methodology  used  to  calculate output  statistics  related  to  financial  services  is  likely  to 
overstate their true contribution, especially when compensation for risk is high. See “The contribution of the financial sector: 
Miracle  or  Mirage?”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2010/speech442.pdf.  As  banks’ 
balance sheets have shrunk since the crisis this effect is likely to have lessened.  
6  Martin Wheatley spoke yesterday about fairness and the importance of cultural reform, arguing that “the financial world is 
responding to the cultural change around it”; see http://www.fca.org.uk/news/the-fairness-challenge.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
More fundamentally, such engagement would be timely because globalisation itself is under 
siege.  Cross-border  capital  flows  have  fallen  sharply  since  the  crisis.  Multilateral  trade 
liberalisation has stalled, to the detriment of global prosperity.  
If we are to stem this tide towards financial fragmentation we must make global finance more 
resilient. That serves both national and global interests.  
Accordingly, I will concentrate today on three core elements of the Bank of England’s new 
Financial  Stability  strategy:  creating  resilient  global  banks,  building  robust  markets  and 
conducting central banking for global markets. These initiatives support a fourth leg of our 
strategy:  improving  the  supply  of  finance  in  the  UK.  You  will  hear  more  about  supply-side 
initiatives,  aimed  for  example  at  rebuilding  securitisation  and  supporting  SME  lending,  in 
coming months. 
Strengthening the resilience of international banking 
2. 
Making international banks safer is fundamental to a renewed globalisation. 
To  this  end,  new  global  standards  for  capital  and  liquidity  have  been  agreed.  The  major 
global  banks  have  raised  $500  billion  of  new  equity  over  the  past  few  years  and  are  on 
course as a group to meet the Basel III standards more than four years in advance of the 
deadline. In the UK, all major banks and building societies now have in place credible plans 
to achieve the Bank of England’s thresholds for capital and leverage. 
To  finish  the  job,  international  regulators  need  to  agree  over  the  next  year  new  rules  for 
capital  to  be  held  in  banks’  trading  books,  a  simple  leverage  ratio  and  a  guideline  which 
governs the stability of banks’ funding. 
Alongside these efforts to increase resilience, our focus is on solving the problem of banks 
that are too big to fail. Systemic resilience depends on being able to resolve failing banks in a 
way that does not threaten the entire system. Fairness demands the end of a system that 
privatises  gains  but  socialises  losses.  And  simple  economics  dictates  that  the  UK  state 
cannot stand behind a banking system that is already many times the size of the economy.  
Moreover,  without  a  credible  means  to  resolve  failing  banks,  regulatory  Balkanisation  will 
continue as national regulators seek to protect their own interests, threatening the efficient 
operation of the international financial system and accordingly London’s competitiveness. 
To avoid these risks, we need to make the resolution of global banks a real option. 
Successful  cross-border 
requires  coordination  and  cooperation  between 
authorities across multiple jurisdictions. This will only work if all authorities are confident that 
global  resolutions  will  deliver  domestic  financial  stability  and  protect  local  services.  Cross-
border cooperative agreements will help, but fine words must also be backed up by harsh 
economic  incentives.  Operating  structures  of  banks  must  be  made  consistent  with 
resolvability  and,  above  all,  banks  must  have  substantial  loss-absorbing  capacity  that 
cascades through their group structures. 
At the St Petersburg summit in September, G20 leaders mandated the FSB to develop these 
proposals.  The  Bank  of  England  is  now  working  intensively  with  other  authorities  and  the 
financial industry. Our aim is to complete the job by the next G20 Summit in Brisbane. 
By increasing the resilience of banks and tackling too big to fail we can help make London a 
safe global banking centre. But that is far from sufficient; we must also dramatically improve 
the resilience of global markets. 
resolution 
Creating robust markets 
3. 
To do so, we need first to consider how measures to increase the resilience of banks affect 
the  functioning  of  markets.  For  example,  the  combination  of  higher  capital  held  against 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
trading books, the new leverage ratio, and the proposed Volcker restrictions on proprietary 
trading  have  already  combined  to  reduce  dealer  inventories  across  a  range  of  securities.7 
With  dealers  less  willing  to  deploy  capital  against  large  market  moves,  volatility  has 
increased and liquidity fallen in the face of shocks such as the potential shift in US monetary 
policy earlier this year. 
On  the  other  hand,  with  limited  proprietary  positions,  banks  generally  emerged  from  a 
summer  of  stress  unscathed.  Certainly,  no  one  wants  to  return  to  the  days  when  major 
dealers’ trading books were crushed under the weight of worthless leveraged super senior 
debt.  
To strike a balance between making banks safer and maintaining adequate market liquidity, 
we  need  to  draw  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis,  when  contagion  from  stressed  banks 
spread rapidly through the global financial system via counterparty credit concerns, liquidity 
hoarding  and  mass  deleveraging.  In  this  environment,  core  funding  and  OTC  derivative 
markets seized up and conditions were set for the panic that ensued.  
By  contrast,  markets  with  greater  transparency  and  more  robust  trading  and  settlement 
infrastructure, such as equity markets and exchange-traded futures and options, performed 
rather  better.  Prices  were  not  always  to  participants’  liking,  but  these  markets  remained 
open. 
London should lead the way in ensuring that fixed income and derivative markets meet such 
standards.  At  the  FSB,  the  Bank  of  England  is  helping  to  devise  reforms  that  increase 
transparency, build more robust infrastructure and encourage better collateral management.  
Since collateral management is a cornerstone of resilient markets and goes to the heart of 
central  banking,  let  me  take  a  few  minutes  to  expand  on  it.8  Collateral  reduces  credit  risk 
between  market  participants  and  supports  market-based  sources  of  credit  to  the  real 
economy. It is central to the functioning of OTC derivatives markets and the funding of the 
shadow  banking  system.  Since  market-based  finance  needs  good  collateral  to  grow 
sustainably, its availability directly influences the supply of finance to British households and 
businesses. 
The  use  of  collateral  is  not  without  risks. When  collateral  values  rise,  fixed  haircuts  allow 
banks and non-banks to borrow more, pushing up asset values further. The reverse is also 
true.  This  inherent  pro-cyclicality  exposes  the  system  to  sharp  corrections  in  collateral 
values. In extremis, a sell-off in financial markets leads to higher haircuts, a run on repo and 
ultimately a market freeze.  
To  reduce  these  risks,  the  FSB  has  proposed  minimum  regulatory  standards  for  collateral 
valuation  and  management  as  well  as  a  schedule  of  numerical  haircut  floors  to  repo 
transactions.  The  FSB  also  now  requires  central  clearing  of  “standardised”  derivative 
transactions to limit exposures between counterparties, promote efficient netting of positions 
and  moderate  collateral  cycles.  New  minimum  capital  and  margining  requirements  for 
bilateral  OTC  derivative 
their 
counterparties while reducing procyclicality in the system.  
The combination of such reforms and the experience of the crisis will mean that institutions 
both need more collateral and need to manage it better.9 Fortunately financial markets know 
trades  will  similarly  protect  banks 
from  defaults  of 
                                                
7  The ratio of US primary dealer fixed income holdings to bonds outstanding has fallen by between 70% and 85% since 2007. 
This measure includes US investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds, non-agency MBS and commercial paper, and 
excludes government securities and Agency MBS. 
8  For a more detailed review of the issues considered here see “The future of repo: ‘too much’ or ‘too little’?”, a speech by 
Andrew Hauser, available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech665.pdf.  
9  Estimates reported by the Basel Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) suggest that the combined impact of 
liquidity  regulation  and  OTC  derivatives  reforms  could  generate  additional  collateral  demand  to  the  tune  of  $4  trillion. 
Depending on the data used, that amounts to at least a third of the high quality collateral in active circulation today. But it is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
how  to  innovate.  Investor  expectations  for  liquidity  are  changing  and  models  for  risk 
intermediation should evolve in ways that reduce balance sheet usage. 
Central banking in global markets 
4. 
Central  banks  need  to keep  up.  In  particular,  we  can  catalyse  more  efficient  and  effective 
private collateral management by backstopping private markets. 
140  years  ago  in  Lombard  Street,  Walter  Bagehot  expounded  the  duty  of  the  Bank  of 
England to lend freely to stem a panic and to make loans on “everything which in common 
times is good “banking security”.” Bagehot was particularly scathing on the Bank’s failure at 
that time to state a “clear and sound policy” on this general topic writing “...until we have on 
this point a clear understanding with the Bank of England, both our liability to crises and our 
terror at crises will always be greater than they would otherwise be.”10 
140  years  on,  the  Bank  has  a  clear  and  sound  policy.  It  is  set  out  in  a  revised  Sterling 
Monetary  Framework  (SMF),  published  today.11  The  new  framework  builds  on  the  lessons 
learned  throughout  the  financial  crisis  and  draws  on  the  recommendations  made  by  Bill 
Winters in his review of our system.12  
Five simple words describe our approach: we are open for business.  
Our facilities are not ornamental. They are there to be used by banks to access money and 
high-quality collateral. We are offering money and collateral for longer terms. The range of 
assets  we  will  accept  in  exchange  will  be  wider,  extending  to  raw  loans  and,  in  fact,  any 
asset  of  which  we  are  capable  of  assessing  the  risks.  And  using  our  facilities  will  be 
cheaper. In some cases the fees are being more than halved.  
Banks  can  be  confident  that,  when  they  want  to  use  our  facilities,  they  will  be  allowed  to 
access  them.  Because  we  are  both  the  supervisor  and  the  central  bank,  the  strong 
presumption is now that, if a bank meets the supervisory threshold conditions to operate and 
has signed up to our framework, it will be able to use our facilities.  
Our Discount Window will be open every day for those firms requiring a bespoke facility with 
lagged  disclosure.  Its  price  will  be  lower.  We  will  hold  monthly  repo  auctions  to  provide 
predictable and regular access to high-quality collateral in exchange for a very broad range 
of  collateral.  And  in  times  of  actual  or  prospective  stressed  conditions  we  stand  ready  to 
provide cheap, plentiful money through more frequent auctions.  
None of this means financial institutions are excused from the need to manage their balance 
sheets  prudently.  But  as  Bill Winters  observed, more  exacting  liquidity  requirements  mean 
the conditions for using central bank facilities can be less stringent (and more effective). This 
is  one  example  of  the  synergies  that  arise  from  the  return  of  banking  supervision  to  the 
central bank.  
With  our  announcements  today,  we  are  building  a  liquidity  framework  for  the  markets  of 
tomorrow. In the markets of today, initial usage of these facilities is likely to be limited. The 
MPC’s stock of asset purchases and the Funding for Lending Scheme currently provide all 
the liquidity and collateral that the sterling system needs. But as these operations are wound 
                                                                                                                                                   
small relative to the global supply of assets capable of meeting this demand. As the CGFS has recently shown, the stock of 
non-cash  collateral  eligible  for  derivatives  transactions  is  some  $50  trillion,  and  the  supply  of  AAA–  and  AA–  rated 
government bonds alone has risen by nearly $11 trillion since 2007. See the CGFS report, “Asset encumbrance, financial 
reform and the demand for collateral assets” available at http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs49.pdf.  
10  Bagehot, W. (1873) “Lombard Street”, particularly pages 205–207.  
11  See “Liquidity insurance at the Bank of England: developments in the Sterling Monetary Framework”, available at 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/liquidityinsurance.pdf. 
12  The Winters Review is available on the Bank’s website at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr2winters.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
down  over  time,  we  expect  to  see  banks  making  increasing  use  of  our  new  permanent 
facilities.  
While today’s announcement is significant, it does not mark the end of history for the Bank of 
England’s market operations. We will continue to evolve our approach as the financial sector 
changes. In particular, we need to respond to two big questions.  
First, should the Bank of England allow non-banks to have access to our regular facilities? 
After  all,  our  responsibilities  for  financial  stability  run  much  wider  than  the  banking  sector. 
Institutions  that  play  a  central  role  in  markets,  like  broker-dealers,  are  obvious  first 
candidates. We will also consider the case for opening them to other participants including 
financial market infrastructures. If the scope of access to central bank facilities increases, the 
scope of regulation can be expected to expand in a proportionate manner.13 Backstopping 
the collateral management of a range of institutions should reduce the need for the Bank to 
act as a Market Maker of Last Resort.14  
Second,  given  that  we  host  an  international  banking  system  and  global  markets,  to  what 
extent  should  the  Bank  of  England  provide  liquidity  in  currencies  other  than  sterling?  As 
markets evolve, banks and markets here may need backstops in other currencies in our time 
zone before business opens for the Federal Reserve and after it has closed for the Bank of 
Japan.  
Although  the  Bank  of  England  can  supply  limitless  quantities  of  sterling,  we  rely  on  other 
central  banks  for  access  to  their  currencies.  In  response  to  the  crisis,  a  network  of  swap 
agreements between advanced economy central banks was established giving us the ability 
to provide a range of currencies to UK-based institutions.  
This network of swap lines should not necessarily be limited to the G7 economies. In June, 
the Bank of England signed such an agreement with the People’s Bank of China, reflecting 
the  growing  international  role  of  the  Renminbi.  That  dovetails  with  the  possibility  of 
establishing  a  Renminbi  clearing  bank  in  London  and  our  decision  to  include  branches  of 
Chinese  banks  in  our  broader  policy  of  openness  to  hosting  foreign  wholesale  banking 
activities.  
Helping the internationalisation of the Renminbi is a global good, consistent with London’s 
historic role. But rest assured that the Bank will act in a manner consistent with our domestic 
responsibilities. As my colleague Andrew Bailey said last week, our risk appetite for foreign 
branches  will  largely  be  determined  by  whether  their  activities  in  the  UK  are  covered  by 
credible  recovery  and  resolution  plans.15  As  always,  renewing  globalisation  and  building 
resilience go hand in hand. 
Conclusion 
5. 
After  perhaps  the  worst  financial  crisis  in  the  FT’s  long  lifetime,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect 
financial services will again grow in importance. 
The process of financial deepening in emerging markets is only beginning. In Europe, there 
is a strong case for greater reliance on robust financial markets relative to weakened banks.  
The  UK  stands  to  benefit  because  of  London’s  place  at  the  heart  of  the  global  financial 
system.  Properly  structured,  this  creates  investment  opportunities  for  British  savers, 
reinforces  trading  ties  for  UK  firms  and  improves  access  to  credit  for  the  real  economy 
                                                
13  See the FSB’s “Policy Framework for Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking Entities”, 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_130829c.htm. 
14  Nevertheless, there can sometimes be a case for such action, and the Bank will be considering what it should stand ready 
to do and in what circumstances. Clearly the Bank should not support any market that would otherwise be unviable. But we 
have, for example, intervened in the corporate bond market, buying and selling bonds to maintain the market during the 
crisis until it again became self-sustaining.  
15  See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2013/687.aspx.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
across this country. London’s international markets in turn provide a valuable service to the 
global economy. These benefits, on both sides, will be greatest as part of an open, integrated 
global financial system.  
The Bank of England’s task is to ensure that the UK can host a large and expanding financial 
sector in a way that promotes financial stability. Only then can it be both a global good and a 
national asset. 
To  those  ends,  we  are  working  to  complete  the  jobs  of  making  banks  more  resilient  and 
tackling  too  big  to  fail.  We  are  making  markets  more  robust  in  order  to  turn  the  shadow 
banking system from a source of risk to a pillar of resilience. And we are changing how we 
backstop private firms’ liquidity management. These efforts will help set the stage to improve 
further the supply of credit within the UK. 
Let  me  put  my  point  more  succinctly,  in  the  style  of  the  FT  125  years  ago.  The  Bank  of 
England today is the friend of resilient banks, continuous markets, and good collateral; and 
we are the enemy of taxpayer bailouts, fragile markets and financial instability.  
Our circle of friends – like the FT’s readership in its infancy – is expanding. As it does, the 
UK is helping to renew globalisation to the benefit of all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
