Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy – amidst global 
headwinds, leveraging on domestic tailwinds to stay the course 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Foreign Correspondents Association of the Philippines 
(FOCAP) Media Forum, Manila 29 November 2013. 
 Good morning. 
In the American tradition, today, the day after Thanksgiving Day, is called “Black Friday” – 
the “official” first day of Christmas shopping. Picture herds of early birds lining up retail stores 
to catch the biggest sales. Consumer watchdogs in America would be detailing on Monday 
whether  this  year’s  Black  Friday  recorded  a  larger  sales  number  than  previous  years. 
Undoubtedly, the result of the surveys  would provide the Fed  with additional input as they 
decide whether to taper sooner rather than later. The numbers could also help answer the 
question of whether the Fed has been successful in steering domestic consumption enough 
to sustain positive economic growth. 
So far, so good… 
In  the  last  few  years,  external  factors,  particularly,  the  Fed  signals  have  exerted  greater 
impact on the domestic market. This has been the case on two fronts – 1) financial market 
volatility and, 2) external trade. The other external risks we have been  watchful of are the 
tepid recovery in Europe, the impact of Abenomics, and the growth story in China. 
So far, our calibrated use of our economic policy tool kit – both traditional policy tools and 
macroprudential measures – has been successful in taming financial market volatility and in 
supporting  domestic  aggregate  demand  to  help  make  up  for  any  weaknesses  in  external 
trade. Just to cite some indicators. Q3 2013 growth at 7.0 percent is the 59th consecutive 
quarter of positive GDP growth since 1999. The last five consecutive quarters all registered 
growth  rates  of  7  percent  or  more.  This  is  not  a  fluke.  The  Philippine  growth  story  has 
structural roots. Inflation has been within target for the last four years. Our current account 
has  consistently  been  in  surplus  for  over  a  decade  now.  Our  gross  international  reserves 
have been at record highs. And our banking system balance sheets remain strong, with NPL 
ratios continuing their decline to levels lower than pre-1997 crisis. 
Shall we, however, continue to live in this Goldilocks world – where everything seems to be 
just right – where the porridge is not too hot, or too cold. Where the bed is neither too hard 
nor too soft. Where the chair is not too big or not too small? Are there other risks that lurk? 
How do we intend to respond to these? Would we be surprised like Goldilocks was when the 
Bear family arrived and found Goldilocks sleeping in one of the beds? 
Then came the storm… 
In a way, Yolanda can be considered as a “surprise” that hit us. Regions 6, 7, and 8 account 
for  about  12.7  pct  of  2012  GDP.  Latest  estimates  from  the  NDRRMC,  put  damage  to 
property, industry and agriculture in these regions at P24.5B (as of 26 Nov 2013). 
What  is  the  impact  of  Yolanda  on  domestic  growth?  On  domestic  inflation?  Current 
assessments  show  that  the  impact  on  overall  GDP  in  2013  would  be  manageable.  The 
expected  expenditures  for  relief,  rehab  and  reconstruction  should  help  keep  GDP  in  2013 
and 2014 within the NG target. 
Inflation, on the other hand, will likely increase in November and December from the October 
level  of  2.9  pct.  But  given  that  the  weight  of  the  affected  regions  in  the  national  CPI  is 
relatively small, the impact of the regional price increases over the two month period on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
overall  inflation  in  2013  should  also  not  be  that  significant.  Over  the  balance  of  the  policy 
horizon, inflation is expected to stay around the middle of the target range. 
Risks remain… 
Before  Yolanda,  BSP  had  been  keeping  a  close  watch  on  the  spillover  effects  of  global 
developments.  Specifically,  1)  rapid  domestic  liquidity  growth,  2)  strong  domestic  credit 
growth;  and  3)  potential  asset  bubbles.  I  am  often  asked  the  questions  –  Is  the  BSP  not 
worried about strong liquidity growth, which tipped 30 percent in August and September? Is 
the BSP not concerned with credit growth, which has been growing at double digit for over a 
year now? Does the BSP see an asset bubble? Let me consider each briefly. 
On liquidity growth – The uptick in liquidity growth will only be for a short transition period, as 
banks adjust to operational refinements to the access to the BSP’s SDA facility. With banks 
rebalancing portfolios to take these changes into consideration, banks could be expected to 
more expeditiously and effectively channel the SDA funds to the productive sectors. 
On  credit  growth  –  In  our  assessment,  the  banks  have  made  very  deliberate  choices  to 
continue to lend bulk of their funds to the relatively capital-intensive productive sectors of the 
economy, i.e., the manufacturing and real estate sectors. Our surveys show also that even 
as  banks  have  increased  their  lending  activities,  they  have  not  relaxed  their  lending 
standards. We  are  confident  that  given  the  current  regulatory  environment  and  the  banks’ 
observed risk appetite, banks will continue to be discriminating in the projects they will fund. 
Indeed, there is room to grow further in this respect, given our ratio of credit to GDP remains 
below that of our peers in the region. 
On strong asset prices – We do not yet see asset bubbles forming. But developments bear 
watching.  Our  assessments  show  that  demand  for  real  property  assets  continues  to  be 
based  on  fundamentals,  i.e.,  there  is  real  demand  from  OFWs,  expatriates,  and  the  BPO 
sector. The demand is also indicative of the increase in the incomes of these sectors, as well 
as the growing young professional segment of the economy. The changing lifestyle of these 
workers has led to an increase in requirements for housing near the workplace during the 
week as they go home to the province only on weekends. 
The  BSP  has  been  “criticized”  as  fuelling  a  credit  and  asset  bubble  through  low  interest 
rates. I would say, this view is rather narrow. The BSP has reduced its policy rates to support 
growth  to  the  extent  the  inflation  outlook  has  allowed  it  to.  In  addition,  we  have  deployed 
macroprudential measures during the early stages of strong capital inflows and even earlier 
to help tighten regulatory screws. These include concentration limits on real estate lending, 
limits on open FX positions, and higher risk weight for NDF transactions. The BSP is mindful 
that there are many moving parts to the economic equation, and we will always consider the 
financial stability implications of our policy actions. 
What is our game plan for dealing with these issues and their attendant risks? 
The country has sufficient policy space to deal with external shocks and their spillovers to the 
domestic economy. 
For  one,  the  benign  inflation  environment  affords  the  BSP  the  flexibility  to  fine-tune  policy 
settings, as necessary, to support the domestic economy. The emerging estimates over the 
policy horizon continue to show within-target inflation. Therefore at this time, policy settings 
appear to continue to be appropriate. Even as inflation is within our comfort zones, we have it 
at the front burner. Our commitment to price stability is not only for its own sake but because 
this lays down the conditions for sustainable and balanced growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
At the same time, prudent fiscal management has enabled the NG to keep the fiscal deficit 
within target and on track with fiscal objectives.1 The NG has gained fiscal space that could 
be utilized to boost the economy, when necessary. 
In addition, the BSP has also enhanced its policy toolkit to include macroprudential measures 
that would address the financial stability pressures of external factors such as capital flows. 
The  BSP  will  continue  to  maintain  a  flexible  exchange  rate  policy  that  allows  the  market 
essentially to determine the exchange rate, but with scope for official action to ensure against 
excessive volatilities. 
We  have  also  been  actively  pursuing  banking  sector  reforms  that  will  enhance  the 
soundness of the system, engender healthy domestic competition while enabling our banks 
to  level  up  against  peers  in  the  region.  Alongside  beefing  up  the  banking  sector,  we  will 
continue to broaden our efforts at financial literacy and inclusion. 
Conclusion: 
While the country is exposed to global headwinds, and some domestic storm surges, we are 
focused on our price and financial stability mandates. In the presence of global headwinds, 
we have the tools that would allow us to capitalize on domestic tailwinds. 
Warren Buffet once said, “You only find out who is swimming naked when the tide goes out”. 
Well, ladies and gentlemen, I am confident that when the tide does go out, the Philippines 
will be found well-clothed.  
                                                
1  Jan–Sept 2013 Programmed deficit is P144.5B vs. Actual deficit of P101.2B. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
