Ignazio Visco: The aftermath of the crisis – regulation, supervision and 
the role of central banks 
Lecture  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  Harvard  Kennedy  School, 
Cambridge (USA), 16 October 2013. 
 Previous versions of this text were used for lectures at the Imperial College in London and at the Accademia dei 
Lincei  in  Rome  in  March  2013.  I  wish  to  thank  for  useful  discussions  and  help  Fabrizio  Balassone,  Paolo  Del 
Giovane, Alessio De Vincenzo and Giuseppe Grande. 
Introduction 
The  financial  crisis  has  brought  to  the  fore  a  number  of  issues.  It  has  been  severe  and 
widespread,  and  has  affected  many  economies  in  different  and  long-lasting  ways. 
Maintaining  financial  stability  has  once  again  become  a  major  concern  of  policy  makers; 
central banks are being heavily involved in this endeavour. A clear need has emerged for a 
substantial overhaul in financial regulation and supervision, also considering that the financial 
system of tomorrow will most likely be rather different from the one that has developed over 
the  last  two  decades.  Scepticism  has  grown  about  the  role  of  finance  in  the  economic 
system,  and  especially  its  apparent  separation from,  if  not conflict  with, the  real  economy. 
We should take stock of what has gone wrong, and in so doing reflect on the way forward, as 
it  is  already  taking  shape,  as  well  as  on  how  to  better  link  our  theories  to  real  world 
developments.  
In  the  decade  before  the  crisis  both  the  size  of  the  financial  system  and  its  role  and 
pervasiveness  in the economy increased dramatically. The process has only  slowed down 
with the crisis. In the euro area, the overall amount of financial resources collected by the 
private sector (bank credit, bonds issued domestically and stock market capitalization) rose 
from 140 per cent of GDP in 1996 to 210 in 2007, to further increase to 240 in 2012. Broadly 
similar patterns are found for the United States, where the ratio rose from 230 per cent in 
1996  to  360  in  2007  and  then  declined  to  310  in  2012,  and  for  the  UK,  where  the  ratio 
increased from 280 to 440 per cent and then remained stable. The total outstanding notional 
amount of over-the-counter (OTC) and exchange-traded derivatives has risen from less than 
100 trillion US dollars at the end of 1998 to around 500 trillion at the end of 2006, 700 at the 
end of 2007 and still 700 trillion in December 2012. 
Financial deepening, by allowing greater diversification of risk and making finance accessible 
to  larger  numbers  of  countries  and  firms,  can  be  instrumental  to  broadening  economic 
development. But there is a risk that finance turns into an end in itself, with consequences 
that can be more damaging as the system becomes more interconnected and the potential 
for externalities increases. 
At  the  same  time,  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  becomes 
more relevant as heightened financial complexity amplifies the widespread non-linearities in 
the dynamics of financial and economic variables and the consequences of interconnections 
between  the  financial  and  the  real  side  of  the  economy.  In  these  conditions,  the  risk  of 
systemic crises increases. 
The correct conduct of financial business requires competence and good faith on the part of 
intermediaries,  as  well  as  appropriate  regulatory,  supervisory  and  policy  regimes. The fact 
that fragilities in the financial system were not properly and timely identified, and that their 
potential consequences for macroeconomic and price stability  were largely underestimated 
reflects inadequacies in regulation and supervision, as well as in the analytical framework for 
monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The financial crisis has provided two main lessons for policy-makers: first, complexity is not a 
justification  for  a  light-touch  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision,  quite  the  contrary; 
second,  financial  stability  is  a  precondition  for  price  stability.  Two  implications,  then,  have 
followed  suit:  on  the  one  hand,  a  deep  and  far-reaching  reform  in  financial  regulation  and 
supervision  was  needed  (including  tighter  international  cooperation),  on  the  other  hand, 
central banks had to rethink their role and the tools of their trade, specifically concerning the 
relationship between monetary and macroprudential policies. 
“Good” finance as a force for good  
Finance has long been viewed as a morally dubious activity. My appeal to authority on this 
matter is a reference to a lecture delivered by Amartya Sen more than twenty years ago as 
the  first  Paolo  Baffi  Lecture  on  Money  and  Finance  at  the  Banca  d’Italia.  Sen  wondered: 
“How  is  it  possible  that  an  activity  that  is  so  useful  has  been  viewed  as  being  morally  so 
dubious?”.1  He recalled a series of historical episodes: Jesus driving the money lenders out 
of  the  temple,  Solon  cancelling  debts  and  prohibiting  many  types  of  lending  in  ancient 
Greece, Aristotle describing interest as an unnatural and unjustified breeding of money from 
money. 
Superimposed  on  this  “structural”  mistrust,  one  can  detect  cyclical  patterns  in  the  public’s 
attitude  towards  finance,  affected  by  the  conditions  of  financial  systems  and  shifts  in  the 
political  mood  about  state  intervention  in  the  economy.  Until  the  1970s  it  was  taken  for 
granted  that  market  failures  required  the  presence  and  response  of  a  regulator  to  avoid 
suboptimal  results.  Then  came  the  great  inflation  of  the  1970s,  combined  with  high 
unemployment,  and  the  emphasis  shifted  to  government  failures.  Governments,  central 
banks  and  other  regulators  were  blamed  for  failing  to  prevent  these  developments.  This 
eventually led to an ideological swing: a push to reduce the extent of state intervention. The 
failures  of  the  “regulated  economy,”  the  pace  of  technological  advance  and  the  rapid 
expansion of international trade after the end of the Cold War fuelled a protracted process of 
financial deregulation that was halted only by the financial crisis that broke out in 2007. The 
latter triggered a move toward re-regulation – or better regulation – that is still under way. 
The pendulum keeps swinging and will certainly continue to do so. 
The  global  financial  crisis,  with  its  huge  costs  for  the  whole  society,  has  caused  a  further 
deep erosion of the trust in financial institutions. Witness to this are the widespread protests 
against the financial industry, from the Occupy Wall Street movement to the “Indignados” in 
Spain and their counterparts in other European countries. Anger has been fuelled not only by 
the discovery of wrongdoings and perverse incentives, but also by a perceived lack of action 
against those responsible, in a context of exceptionally high remunerations. The integrity of 
financial  intermediaries’  codes  of  conduct  has  been  called  into  question  under  many 
dimensions: honesty, the ability to manage financial risks and the commitment to take care of 
the interests of their clients. 
In the first place, public attention was caught by cases of investment fraud, in which Ponzi 
schemes  or  other  types  of  malpractice  and  malfeasance  led  many  people  to  lose  their 
savings.  Feelings  were  exacerbated  by  the  generous  severance  packages  paid  to  top 
managers after distressed financial institutions were rescued with taxpayer money. Dubious 
practices  were  found  in  key  junctures  of  the  financial  systems,  such  as  credit  ratings  and 
interbank reference rates, not to mention the allegations of financial institutions’ involvement 
in activities related to money laundering and other fraudulent practices. 
Most  importantly,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  market  participants  were  not  capable  of 
mastering  the  inherent  complexity  of  the  system  that  they  themselves  had  contributed  to 
                                                
1  A. Sen, Money and value: on the ethics and economics of finance, Paolo Baffi Lecture on Money and Finance, 
Rome, Bank of Italy, 1991, p. 28. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial 
regulated 
the  OTD 
took  place 
transparency, 
technology  and 
through  scarcely 
telecommunications, 
finance  products  and 
favoured  excessive  risk 
intermediation  model  can 
develop  over  the  course  of  the  last  two  decades.  Favoured  by  the  breakthroughs  in 
information 
the  securitization  of  banks’  assets 
expanded considerably, together with the supply of so-called structured financial instruments 
(ABSs, CDOs, etc.). The traditional model of credit intermediation gave way, especially but 
not only in the United States, to a system in which loans granted were rapidly transformed 
into other financial products having these loans as collateral and sold on the market: the so-
called originate-to-distribute model (OTD). To the inherent difficulty of evaluating the quality 
of loans, these developments added the problem of fully understanding the role of structured 
finance products. 
Structured 
facilitate  risk 
management.  The  granting  of  mortgages  to  households  is  favoured  by  the  possibility  of 
managing the related interest-rate risk; the internationalization of firms depends crucially on 
the  possibility  of  hedging  foreign  exchange  risk;  and  the  provision  of  retirement  saving 
products  at  low  cost  over  very  long  time  horizons  benefits  from  the  ability  to  mitigate  the 
impact of fluctuations in security prices. With the OTD model, credit risk is not concentrated 
in the banks’ books, but is potentially dispersed among a multitude of investors. By making 
bank loans tradable, it reduces their illiquidity premium thus decreasing their cost. 
However, we now understand that structured finance and OTD intermediation, coupled with 
lack  of 
taking  and  opportunistic  behaviour. 
Transactions  often 
intermediaries 
characterized by high leverage and risk exposure, whose valuation (in which a crucial role 
was  played  by  rating  agencies,  without  any  particular  control  by  regulatory  authorities  or 
information providers) was carried out by means of statistical models and often on the basis 
of  incomplete  and  insufficient  data.  In  many  instances  complexity  was  instrumental  to 
opportunistic behaviour fuelled by a distorted system of incentives especially with reference 
to executive compensation. The high leverage and complexity typical of structured financial 
instruments allowed them to be used to take high-risk, speculative positions. 
Unnecessarily  complex  and  opaque  assets  were  used  to  prevent  a  correct  assessment  of 
creditworthiness or mask the economic impact of previous transactions, exploiting the ample 
scope  for  interpretation  allowed  by  accounting  standards.  Banks’  misuse  of  these 
instruments  may  also  be  linked  to  the  drying-up  of  the  sources  of  income  from  traditional 
credit business. This may have triggered actions designed to conceal from the market and 
from supervisors the real object of derivatives transactions. 
The bottom line is that financial innovation can allow more efficient allocation of credit risk, 
but it also entails a number of dangers, some of them intrinsic to its mechanism, others more 
generally  related  to  the  greater  interdependence  of  the  financial  system.  The  process  of 
financial  consolidation  and  the  OTD  model  have  produced  intermediaries  that  are  closely 
intertwined with the capital markets. This has had some important consequences for financial 
stability: a more connected world improves risk diversification and can make markets more 
resilient, but when contagion is actually set off, an interlinked financial system heightens the 
risk that it may spread more widely. 
But the negative perception of banking and finance should not lead to a blind backlash. As 
Amartya  Sen  argued,  “finance  plays  an  important  part  in  the  prosperity  and  well-being  of 
nations”.2  It  is  crucial  for  sharing  and  allocating  risk,  especially  for  poorer  societies  and 
people, insofar as risk aversion decreases with wealth. It is crucial for transferring resources 
over  time  and  removing  the  liquidity  constraints  that  hamper  the  economy  and  the 
exploitation  of  ideas.  It  is  very  important  in  promoting  economic  growth,  especially  by 
fostering innovation. 
                                                
2  A. Sen, ibidem, p. 28. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Indeed,  we  have  countless  historical  examples  of  good  financial  innovations.  Think,  for 
example,  of  the  “letters  of  exchange”  introduced  by  Italian  merchants  in  the  Middle  Ages: 
they  were  probably  the  first  fiduciary  money,  and  trade  benefited  enormously  from  this 
financial  instrument.  More  recently,  consider  the  development  of  “micro-finance”  in  the 
1970s:  an  innovation  that  has  enhanced  financial  inclusion,  helping  poor  borrowers  to 
smooth  their  income  and  cope  with  illness  or  other  temporary  shocks.  And,  in  the  last 
decades of the past century, recall the role of the “venture capital” industry in the promotion 
of successful innovative corporations such as Apple, Google or Intel. 
Some countries are now increasingly investing in efforts to improve the financial literacy of 
the public, and this too is important. On the one hand, it helps to build the demand side of a 
more inclusive finance. On the other, financially literate citizens are better able to understand 
the efforts of regulators and policy makers to improve supervision and regulation, and less 
likely to subscribe to the simplistic view that “finance is evil”. But we should realise that – as 
the case of Bernard Madoff and others in the US and elsewhere clearly show – this is no 
panacea (Madoff’s customers were surely much better educated than average). Therefore, 
for purposes of consumer protection in the financial services industry, regulation and good 
supervision are the necessary complements to education and inclusion. 
Complexity  was  used,  somewhat  perversely,  as  an  argument  in favour of  a  sort  of  benign 
neglect  on  the  part  of  regulators.  The  big  financial  players  argued  successfully  that 
innovation  was  too  complex  and  too  opaque  for  the  regulators  to  get  their  heads  around. 
Indeed, they said, to safeguard the international financial system from systemic risk, the main 
priority  was  promoting  an  “industry-led”  effort  to  improve  internal  risk  management  and 
related  systems.  This,  in  a  nutshell,  was  the  view  espoused  by  the  Group  of  Thirty  report 
following  the  outbreak  of  the  Asian  crisis.3  But  this  thesis  was  often  accompanied  by  the 
argument to the effect that “you, regulators and supervisors, will always be behind financial 
innovation;  it  would  be  better  to  allow  us,  the  big  financial  international  players,  to  self-
regulate;  we  are  grown-ups,  we  can  take  care  of  ourselves”.  And,  after  all,  “if  someone 
makes mistakes some will gain what others lose; why can’t we be left alone to play this zero-
sum game of ours?” 
The regulators did not, in fact, have either the ability, or the right incentives to acquire the 
necessary information to deal with complexity, for two reasons. First, the big financial players 
are global, and national regulators had powers too narrow to be able to confront them. The 
difficulties  in  coordinating  the  regulators’  actions,  in  the  face  of  a  natural  tendency  to 
preserve each one’s particular sphere of influence, was a powerful drag on the ability to rise 
to  the  challenge  posed  by  a  finance  gone  global.  Second,  the  phenomenon  of  regulatory 
capture was a definite reality. Powerful political and economic influences were at play, and in 
some cases prevailed. 
Accepting the idea that benign neglect was the right course of action was, however, a critical 
mistake. The global financial crisis has highlighted the limits of the idea that self-regulation 
and  market  discipline  are  sufficient  to  ensure  stable  financial  systems.  Regulation  and 
supervision have to keep pace with developments in the industry. National authorities need 
to be aware of the risk that their powers become narrow compared to the sphere of influence 
of the global players; the coordination of supervision across borders and across sectors is a 
key condition for the stability of the global financial system. More importantly, regulators and 
supervisors have to pay attention to keeping industry lobbies at due distance.  
To a significant extent, the recent crisis also owes to insufficient market discipline (including 
the role played by credit rating agencies), which failed to reign in (or even counter) in a timely 
                                                
3  Group  of  Thirty,  Global  institutions,  national  supervision  and  systemic  risk,  1997.  See  also  the  article  by 
J. Heimann, with the same title, and comments therein, in the special issue of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro 
Quarterly Review on “Globalization and stable financial markets”, March 1998. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
way  imprudent  behaviour,  excessive  leverage,  or  over-borrowing  on  the  part  of  financial 
intermediaries (and sovereigns as well). At the same time, monetary policy overlooked the 
risks for price stability coming from the financial sector. The idea that it is optimal to “mop-up” 
after a bubble has burst rather than implementing “leaning against the wind” policies, which 
seemed  to  have  passed  the  test  of  the  dot-com  bubble,  led  to  a  long  period  of  excessive 
monetary accommodation.  
It has now indeed become clear that financial stability is a precondition for price stability and 
that the “mop-up” approach is not always the best strategy. Notwithstanding huge monetary 
and  fiscal  interventions, six  years  after  the  burst  of  the  credit-fuelled  housing  bubble  most 
advanced economies are not yet back on stable growth trajectories. A key lesson of the last 
decade,  also  supported  by  an  increasing  number  of  theoretical  and  empirical  analyses,  is 
that too low for too long interest rates can stimulate risk taking and sow the seeds for the 
next crisis if left unchecked by regulators and markets alike. 
All this called for a major effort, at a national but especially at an international level, to adjust 
and  strengthen  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  financial  framework.  It  has  also  suggested 
that central banks should rethink their role and their instruments. This I will attempt to review 
and  assess  in  what  follows.  I  will  also  briefly  discuss  the  importance  of  advances  in  our 
analytical understanding of the workings of financial markets and of its deviations from the 
stationarity assumption.  
In search of a better regulatory and supervisory regime 
Over  the  last  few  years  the  crisis  has  heightened  appreciation  of  the  benefits  of  a  more 
stringent regulatory regime. At an international level, under the political impulse of the G-20, 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS) have introduced substantial regulatory changes to reduce the frequency of financial 
crises and increase the resilience of economic systems. Much has been achieved.  
The quantity and quality of capital that banks need to hold has been significantly enhanced to 
ensure  that  they  operate  on  a  safe  and  sound  basis.  Minimum  capital  requirements  have 
been raised. The improvement in the quality of capital aims to ensure that banks are better 
able to absorb losses on both a going concern and a gone concern basis. The risk coverage 
has been increased, in particular for trading activities, securitisations and exposures related 
to  off-balance  sheet  vehicles  and  arising  from  derivatives.  An  internationally  harmonised 
minimum leverage ratio is going to be introduced, to serve as a backstop to the risk-based 
capital measure and to contain the build-up of excessive leverage in the system. 
The  BCBS  has  also  introduced  international  standards  for  bank  liquidity  and  funding, 
designed to promote the resilience of banks to liquidity shocks. A minimum requirement for 
the ratio between high quality liquid assets and net liquidity outflows that banks would face 
over a one-month horizon in stress conditions (Liquidity Coverage Ratio – LCR) will soon be 
adopted. The minimum LCR will increase gradually in the coming years, so as to ensure that 
the new liquidity standard will not hinder the ability of the global banking system to finance 
the recovery. 
At the behest of the G-20, the FSB has promoted initiatives to strengthen the regulation of 
the  OTC  derivatives  market.  The  aim  is  to  reinforce  market  infrastructures,  in  order  to 
minimise contagion and spill-over effects among players that have become more and more 
interconnected. These initiatives will increase transparency through requirements to trade on 
organised  platforms  and  to  report  transactions  to  trade  repositories.  They  will  also  reduce 
and allow more systematic control of cross-exposures between financial firms in this market, 
by  ensuring  that  central  counterparties  are  placed  between  the  two  participants  in 
standardised transactions and by setting minimum capital and margining requirements. 
But further progress is needed in important areas. Work should focus on internal risk control 
arrangements and disincentives to excessive risk-taking, on the rapid implementation of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
set  of  policies  developed  to  address  systemic  risks  from  shadow  banking,  on  reducing 
market  participants’  mechanistic  reliance  on  credit  rating  agencies,  on 
increasing 
transparency,  including  by  completing  international  convergence  of  accounting  standards. 
Board  members  and  senior  managers  should  possess  a  thorough  understanding  of  the 
financial firms’ overall operational structure and risks. 
It is also fundamental that supervisors regularly assess banks’ corporate governance policies 
and  practices.  Compensation  policies  need  to  be  revised,  in  order  to  better  align 
remuneration with risk-adjusted long-term performance and avoid excessive risk-taking and 
short-termism. In particular, when designing compensation policies, banks should take into 
account a number of issues: the variable portion of the compensation of risk takers must be 
paid on the basis of individual, business-unit and firm-wide measures that adequately assess 
risk-adjusted  performance;  bonuses  must  reward  the  achievement  of  stable  earnings,  not 
simply  the  fruit  of  extraordinary  operations;  executives’  severance  packages  too  must  be 
clearly and effectively bound to the results attained, and reflect a more general evaluation of 
the manager’s performance; compensation must be deferred long enough to validate the true 
quality of management. 
The debate that has started with the so-called Volcker rule on the organizational structure of 
banks and the need to separate traditional credit business from activity in the financial field 
has been reinvigorated at a European level by the reports of the Vickers Commission in the 
United Kingdom and the Liikanen Group for the whole European Union. Both the Volcker rule 
and these reports call for a much needed discussion around business size and complexity in 
the financial sector; the experience of the crisis has indeed shown that we should not be shy 
to thoroughly re-assess relative merits and costs of both (size and complexity). These reports 
trace out possible lines of intervention. Protecting retail deposits and taxpayers’ money from 
the  risks  implicit  in  trading  activities  (what  used  to  be  called  “speculation”)  –  the  rationale 
behind these proposals – is crucial. The experience of the crisis has shown that, even if no 
specific business model has performed particularly well or poorly, the banks’ organizational 
structure  has  an  impact  on  the  propensity  of  managers  to  engage  in  excessively  risky 
activities.  
At all events, in today’s globalized world it is crucial to make sure that countries cooperate 
and  agree  on  the  appropriate  stringency  of  financial  regulation.  Countries  should  not 
compete by relaxing rules in order to attract financial business, as this generates negative 
externalities  for  other  countries.  This  is  a  most  delicate  issue,  and  while  a  perfectly  level 
playing  field  may  not  be  achievable,  we  have  to  be  conscious  of  the  consequences  of  a 
“beggar-thy-neighbour”  approach  to  regulation.  The  transition  to  a  uniform  system  of  rules 
and  oversight  of  the  financial  sector  must  be  hastened.  In  the  euro  area  the  plan  for  a 
banking union is ambitious; it goes in the right direction.  
Some  progress  has  been  made  on  the  convergence  towards  a  single  set  of  global 
accounting standards; but much remains to be done. The International Accounting Standards 
Board  and the  US  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  expect to make  progress  on  the 
two  key  outstanding  issues  of  impairment  of  loans,  where  their  deliberations  should  be 
completed  in  the  next  months,  and  insurance  contracts,  where  both  Boards  are  holding 
public consultations. Of these two outstanding issues, the need for convergence on a new 
forward-looking  expected  loss  approach  to  provisioning  is  of  most  immediate  concern  for 
end-users and from a financial stability perspective. 
One element that is essential for guaranteeing systemic stability is the method of measuring 
risk-weighted  assets  (RWA),  the  denominator  of  capital  adequacy  ratios.  RWA  measures 
have  recently  attracted  increasing  attention  from  market  analysts,  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities.  It  has  been  argued  –  and  this  seems  to  be  actually  the  case  –  that  the 
methodologies  for  computing  RWAs  may  not  be  comparable  across  institutions  and, 
especially,  across  jurisdictions,  and  that  they  should  more  properly  reflect  risk  in  order  to 
avoid  ultimately  jeopardising  financial  stability.  These  problems  highlight  the  relevance  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
supervisory practices in determining banks’ capital requirements (for example, in validating 
internal  banks’  models  for  calculating  risk  weights).  Here,  rigorous  micro-prudential 
supervision  is  essential.  We  really  need  to  work  out  a  single  rulebook,  to  move  with 
determination towards taking joint responsibility and using peer reviews as much as possible 
in our supervisory activity. Overcoming differences in accounting and supervisory practices is 
proving a major challenge on the way to the banking union in the euro area.  
As  for  the  initiatives  to  strengthen  the  regulation  of  the  OTC  derivatives  market,  these 
complex  reforms  are  taking  somewhat  longer  than  originally  planned.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  to  pick  up  the  pace,  overcoming  the  difficulties  of  implementation  and  the 
industry’s  resistance.  Authorities  must  make  all  efforts  to  remove  the  uncertainties  arising 
when  transactions  involve  a  cross-border  dimension,  which  is  a  recurrent  condition  in  a 
global market. This is necessary to pre-empt regulatory arbitrage and, ultimately, to achieve 
the G20 objectives. Work is also in progress on other relevant issues at an international level 
(capital requirements for exposures to central counterparties, margining standards for non-
centrally cleared transactions, as well as on authorities’ access to trade repository data) and 
at a regional and national level. 
It will be crucial to ensure that stricter regulation and supervision of banks will not push bank-
like activities and risks towards non – or less – regulated institutions (the so-called “shadow 
banking” sector). Let us not forget that the financial crisis originated in the US securitization 
market, largely populated by unregulated or scantily regulated operators. While we have to 
address  bank-like  risks  to  financial  stability  emerging  from  outside  the  regular  banking 
system, the approach should be proportionate, focussed on those activities that are material 
to the system, using as a starting point those that were a source of risk during the crisis. The 
FSB has released a final set of recommendations in August 2013.4 One should bear in mind, 
however, that the new recommendations will be able to address the specific risks that arose 
during the crisis, and we all recognise the ability of the shadow banking sector to innovate.  
Although new regulations on systemically important financial institutions have recently been 
approved,  the  “too-big-to-fail”  issue  is  still  a  major  concern,  and  it  merits  strict  monitoring. 
Systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs)  are  being  identified  in  different  sectors, 
and  three  types  of  measures  will  be  applied  to  sharply  reduce  the  threat  that  their  failure 
poses to the wider system. First, legal and operational regimes will be changed to enable all 
financial  institutions,  including  those  operating  across  borders,  to  be  resolved  safely  and 
without  taxpayer  loss  if  they  fail.  Second,  requirements  that  SIFIs  have  higher  loss 
absorption capacity will be introduced. Third, supervisory oversight (including sharing of risk 
data)  will  be  stepped  up  to  reflect  the  additional  complexity  of  these  institutions  and  the 
systemic risks they pose. 
Negative externalities associated with banks’ behaviour (especially for large, interconnected 
financial firms) must be taken into account. A broad consensus has emerged on the idea that 
“macroprudential” policies directed towards preserving financial stability should limit systemic 
risk by addressing both the cross-sectional dimension of the financial system, with the aim of 
strengthening its resilience to adverse real or financial shocks, and its temporal dimension, to 
contain the accumulation of risk over the business or financial cycle.  
Finally, even after the completion of the regulatory overhaul, it would be foolish to pretend 
that defaults can always be avoided. They may be the result of imprudent behaviour or of 
fraudulent operations. We need to be prepared for their occurrence, as the costs of public 
support  tend  to  be  very  high.  In  Europe,  according  to  the  latest  data  gathered  by  the 
European  Commission, the  outstanding  amount of  public  recapitalizations  as  of  December 
2012 came to 0.3 per cent of GDP in France, 1.8 in Germany, 5.5 in Spain, 4.2 in the UK, 
4.3 in Belgium, 5.1 per cent in the Netherlands, and 40 per cent in Ireland. For Spain and 
                                                
4  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_130829b.pdf.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Ireland these amounts are at their highest since 2008, in the other countries they are lower 
than  the  peaks  reached  in  2009.  For  the  Spanish  banks,  a  programme  of  recapitalization 
using European funds of up to €100 billion was authorized in July 2012, of which €41 billion 
(3.9 per cent of GDP) has already been disbursed. In Italy, taking also into consideration the 
additional  public  support  provided 
to  Banca  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena,  public 
recapitalizations  currently  amount  to  0.2  per  cent  of  GDP.  These  figures  indicate  that  the 
ongoing  work  on  resolution  regimes  is  very  important  in  this  regard,  and  rapid  progress 
should definitely be made. This is particularly relevant in the euro area, where the new single 
supervisory mechanism (the SSM) is being implemented. 
Observations on the analytical implications of economic and financial instability 
Economic systems constantly evolve and transform. Changes in institutional arrangements, 
technological  innovation  and  revisions  in  economic  policy  paradigms  continuously  reshape 
the framework in which economic agents (consumers and businesses) make their decisions. 
This  in  turn  leads  to  changes  in  economic  agents’  behavioural  patterns.  When  there  is 
marked discontinuity with the past, such changes may be far-reaching and the past fails to 
provide  enough  guidance  for  the  present  (never  mind  the  future).  We  should  always 
remember  that  the  financial  system  is  part  of  a  richer  social,  economic  and  political 
environment.  The  real  world  is  subject  to  shocks  that  at  times  may  have  dramatic 
consequences, such as those that we have experienced in the last twenty years or so, with 
the  end  of  the  cold  war,  globalization  and  the  sudden  emergence  of  new  major  economic 
actors,  the  ICT  revolution,  and  substantial  (not  completely  anticipated)  demographic 
changes. 
However, a stationarity assumption of sorts underpins our theoretical and statistical models, 
in  the  case  of  economic  forecasting  and  (macro)  policy  making  as  well  as  in  the  case  of 
financial analysis and risk management. In general, the basic tenet is that future outcomes 
will  be  drawn  from  the  same  population  that  generated  past  outcomes,  so  that  the  time 
average of future outcomes cannot be persistently different from averages calculated from 
past  observations,  and  future  events  can  be  predicted  with  a  certain  degree  of  statistical 
accuracy. In non-ergodic environments, on the contrary, at least some economic processes 
are  such  that  expectations  based  on  past  probability  distribution  functions  can  differ 
persistently from the time averages that will be generated as the future unfolds.5 In case of 
acute  uncertainty,  no  analysis  of  past  data  can  provide  reliable  signals  regarding  future 
prospects.  
The  challenges  posed  by  the  non-ergodic  nature  of  economic  systems  may  be  met  by 
recognizing  that  our  models  are  by  necessity  “local”  approximations  of  very  complex 
economic and financial developments. One needs to be modest, using theory and empirical 
models  as  starting  points for,  not  straightjackets  in,  our  decision making.  And  perhaps  not 
enough  attention  has  been  paid  by  the  financial  community  to  the  need  for  establishing 
institutional and behavioural norms to reign on patterns of instability and developing proper 
learning devices to deal with major shocks and regime changes.  
These  challenges  are  compounded  by  another  general  characteristic  of  the  quantitative 
analysis of economic phenomena: the difficulty of running parallel worlds, i.e. producing data 
through experiments designed and controlled by the researcher. Even when economic forces 
do  follow  repetitive  patterns,  it  may  not  be  easy  to  spot  empirical  regularities,  because 
contingencies  –  especially  the  exceptional  ones  –  cannot  be  re-created  at  will,  in  the 
laboratory, for cognitive purposes. Our experience will always be limited, partial and episodic. 
These  aspects  are  not  always  taken  into  account  in  economics  or  finance.  As  Charles 
                                                
5  P.  Davidson,  “Is  probability  theory  relevant  for  uncertainty?  A  Post  Keynesian  perspective”,  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, 5, 1, 1991. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Kindleberger noticed: “For historians each event is unique. Economics, however, maintains 
that forces in society and nature behave in repetitive ways”.6  
Why  is  it  that  the  parameters  and  laws  governing  economic  systems  tend  to  change  over 
time?  A  distinction  can  be  made  between  exogenous  uncertainty,  when  an  individual’s 
actions do not affect the probability of an event occurring, and endogenous (or behavioural) 
uncertainty,  when  they  do.7  In  economic  systems,  this  second  type  of  uncertainty  can  be 
particularly  important.  This  has  not  been  sufficiently  recognized,  I  believe,  in  the  way 
(applied) macroeconomics and finance have evolved since the 1980s, with the ascendency 
of the rational expectations revolution in the former and the efficient market hypothesis in the 
latter.  
In  macroeconomics  this  may  have  led  to  placing  too  much  faith  in  the  ability  of  dynamic 
stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  models  to  represent  or  sufficiently  approximate  the 
real world on which economic policy is applied. These fundamentally linear models are the 
result of the intertemporal optimization by representative agents of objective functions under 
conditions of uncertainty, given technological and budget constraints and the “rationality” of 
their expectations (i.e. perfect foresight barring a random error). Indeed, going beyond the 
assumption that society and nature always behave uniformly and consistently over time has 
deep implications in policy making as well. This can be easily seen in monetary policy, where 
no  mechanistic  use  of  forecasting  models  can  be  made  if  one  allows  for  the  possibility  of 
structural changes.8  
An  important  lesson  of  the  financial  crisis  –  one  that  is  generating  substantial  research 
activity – is that the interactions and feedbacks between the real and the financial sectors 
and the non-linearities that emerge especially during crises are not adequately captured by 
the  available  models.  Many  of  the  effects  associated  with  financial  and  asset  price 
imbalances are likely to be highly non-linear and complex. The reaction of monetary policy 
should  then  also  be  non-linear  and  it  should  respond  to  asset  price  misalignments  and 
financial  imbalances. When  the  probability  of  a crisis  becomes  non-trivial,  the  interest  rate 
path towards ensuring monetary stability might be different than in ordinary circumstances. 
These  aspects  were  not  well  captured  in  the  empirical  models  used  to  support  monetary 
policy  decisions,  something  understood  but  perhaps  not  adequately  recognized 
in 
discussions on flexible inflation targeting frameworks that took place a decade or so ago.9 
One of my preferred quotes is from Herbert Simon:10 
Good predictions have two requisites that are often hard to come by. First they 
require either a theoretical understanding of the phenomena to be predicted, as a 
basis  for  the  prediction  model,  or  phenomena  that  are  sufficiently  regular  that 
they can be simply extrapolated. Since the latter condition is seldom satisfied by 
data about human affairs (or even by the weather), our predictions will generally 
be  only  as  good  as  our  theories.  The  second  requisite  for  prediction  is  having 
                                                
6  C. P. Kindleberger, Manias, panics and crashes: a history of financial crises, New York: Basic Books, 1989, 
p. 14. 
I.  Visco,  “On  the  role  of  expectations  in  Keynesian  and  today’s  economics  (and  economies)”,  Convegno 
Internazionale  dell’Accademia  Nazionale  dei  Lincei,  “Gli  economisti  postkeynesiani  di  Cambridge  e  l’Italia”, 
Rome, 11–12 March 2009 (http://www.bancaditalia.it/interventi/intaltri_mdir/en_Visco_110309.pdf). 
7 
8  See, among others, J. Vickers, “Inflation targeting in practice: the UK experience”, Bank of England Quarterly 
Bulletin, November 1998. 
9  See C. Borio and P. Lowe, “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the nexus”, BIS Working 
Papers,  114,  July  2002  (http://www.bis.org/publ/work114.pdf).  See  also  C.  Bean,  “Asset  prices,  financial 
imbalances and monetary policy: are inflation targets enough?”, BIS Working Papers, 140 (with discussions by 
I. Visco and S. Wadhwani, http://www.bis.org/publ/work140.pdf). 
10  H. A. Simon, The sciences of the artificial, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1972, p. 170. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
reliable  data  about  the  initial  conditions  –  the  starting  point  from  which  the 
extrapolation is to be made. 
We must recognize that empirical models reflect historical experience in the values of their 
parameters  and  are  mostly  reliable  when  it  is  “business  as  usual”,  that  is,  as  long  as  our 
systems  are  not  subjected  to  unusual  pressure.  It  can  be  argued  that  their  contribution  to 
making  informed  decisions  is  limited,  as  they  tend  to  become  unreliable  precisely  when, 
following  signs  of  structural  discontinuity,  the  benefits  of  correct  forecasting  are  greatest. 
Indeed, anomalous observations that do not fit the main mechanisms at work in the historical 
period  used  for  statistical  estimates  are  frequently  put  aside  (“dummied-out”),  their 
information  content  is  neutralized.  This  is  reasonable,  as  episodic  observations  of 
exceptional phenomena are generally inadequate to capture complex inter-relations between 
economic and financial variables. And yet those very deviations from the norm may contain 
precious  information  on  how  the  economy  works  in  conditions  other  than  those  usually 
prevailing.  
Much of the same reasoning applies to the analysis of financial market developments. The 
wave  of  financial  innovation  in  the  last  two  decades  was  fuelled  by  the  idea,  in  principle 
correct and fruitful, that the proliferation of new (and complex) financial instruments, allowing 
agents to insure against many dimensions of risk, was a way to “complete the markets”, to 
get  closer  to  the  theoretical  Arrow-Debreu  world,  enabling  investors  to  transfer  resources 
efficiently across time, space and states of the world. But this idea relied on the presumption 
that the world is basically stationary, that the future is pretty much the same as the past, that 
we can extrapolate from relatively small samples, and that there is a single “data generating 
process” that we can identify and understand. 
But we know that the real world is more complex. The determinants of asset prices are not 
fixed, but vary over time. Asset returns do not follow a normal distribution, as it is assumed 
by conventional valuation formulas. Myopic behaviour, herding and other types of distorted 
incentives  on  the  part  of  individuals  and  financial  institutions  can  generate  negative 
externalities  and  move  financial  markets’  expectations  and  risk  premia  away  from 
fundamentals.  And,  lately,  scholarly  work  has  been  attributing  a  new,  enhanced  role  to 
psychological elements and the recognition that there are limits to what one can know. In the 
field of the so-called behavioural finance this may even go as far as to validate “irrational” 
actions.  And  eminent  economists  argue  that these  elements  play  a  role  in  explaining  both 
conservative attitudes and speculative bubbles.11 
The  potential 
to 
macroeconomics, econometric modelling and forecasting but also apply to finance. And they 
may have dire consequences. The case of the CDOs is instructive. These credit derivatives, 
that in the first half of the last decade recorded an impressive growth, were priced according 
to valuation models  whose results were very sensitive to modest imprecision in parameter 
estimates and highly exposed to systemic risk (i.e. strongly affected by the performance of 
the  economy  as  a  whole).12  As  a  result,  CDOs  not  only  did  not  increase  the  risk  bearing 
capacity of the economies, but their implosion between mid-2007 and mid-2008 was at the 
core  of the global financial  crisis.  Innovative  financial  instruments  with  unsound  theoretical 
foundations may exacerbate negative externalities and be sources of instability in their own 
right. 
Rather  than  in  the  development  of  unlikely  “catch-all”  models,  the  key  to  tackling  the 
problems created by discontinuity must lie, first of all, in a better understanding of its nature 
limitations  of  quantitative  analysis  are 
therefore  not 
restricted 
                                                
11  G. A. Akerlof and R. J. Shiller, Animal spirits: how human psychology drives the economy and why it matters 
for global capitalism, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2009. 
12  See  J.  Coval,  J.  Jurek  and  E.  Stafford,  “The  economics  of  structured  finance”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, 23, 1, 2009. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and so in defining models in which the relations are based on parameters that remain stable 
in  the  long  term.  Research  must  therefore  aim  to  identify  sufficiently  fundamental  and 
reasonably  dependable  mechanisms  that  do  not  change  over  time.  To  provide  sensible 
accounts  of  rational  choices,  quantitative  models  necessarily  have  to  focus  on  systematic 
factors,  and  draw  their  own  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  key  relations.  In  this  respect  it  is 
worth  recalling  Bruno  De  Finetti’s  argument  for  a  “theory  of  finance”,  made  as  early  as 
1957:13 
In  order  for  a  theory  of  behaviour  to  say  something,  it  must  necessarily  be 
restricted  to that  which  is  derived  as  the  consequence  of  a few  main  concepts 
and  criteria  and  which  can  accordingly  (if  somewhat  arbitrarily)  be  defined  as 
‘rational behaviour’. Then the theory will set out conclusions that are valid in the 
absence  of  accessory  factors.  This  is  not  to  deny  or  downplay  the  possible 
presence or importance of such factors; only, it is preferable to shift the study of 
deviations from the ‘theoretical’ behaviour implied by those conclusions to a later 
moment  and  to  the  detailed  plane  of  complementary  observations,  rather  than 
cloud  all  distinctions  in  a  single  theoretical  construct  which,  in  the  attempt  to 
embrace and set on an equal plane the congeries of systematic and accessory 
factors,  would  be  reduced  to  a  non-theory  suitable  solely  to  conclude  that  all 
kinds of behaviour are equally possible (for caprice or madness, even, as is in 
fact the case). 
Obviously, De Finetti’s “later moment” should not be overlooked in applied research. Against 
the  risk  that  the  theoretical  paradigms  underlying  the  approximation  of  reality  implicit  in  a 
model may prove particularly inadequate in certain situations, it is useful to employ a battery 
of  different  models  and  cross-checks.  This  “multi-pronged”  approach  to  modelling  and 
forecasting also makes it possible to more effectively filter and interpret the great mass of 
partial  and fragmentary  or  even  contradictory  data  that gradually  become  available.  But  in 
dealing with non-ergodic processes, what really is all the more essential is to integrate the 
signals  provided  by  quantitative  models  with  information  outside  the  models,  take  stock of 
related  historical  experience  in  its  entirety,  and  intervene  on  the  basis  of  both  theory  and 
sound practical judgement (good sense).  
In both empirical microeconomics and finance, work is under way to deal with the issues that 
have been considered here. Deviations from the assumption of normal distributions, “fat tails” 
and  the  modelling  of  extreme  events  are  being  taken  into  account  both  in  research  and 
applications. And it should be recognized that the importance of human behaviour does not 
imply  that  economic  systems  necessarily  have  to  be  prone  to  instability.  In  fact,  the  very 
existence  of  behavioural  uncertainty  may  tend  to  create  a  set  of  institutions,  as  well  as 
conventions and habits, which help to deal with the problems highlighted in Keynes’ “beauty 
context” example and ensure the stability of the main economic processes, as emphasized 
by  Herbert  Simon.14  Still,  I  believe,  more  attention  should  be  paid  to  how  to  account  for 
learning in the crucial adjustment periods that follow extreme events that cannot be simply 
taken  as  random  extractions  from  a  stable,  even  if  non-normal,  probability  distribution. 
Widening  the  class  of  probability  distributions  remains  however,  for  the  time  being,  the 
practical response to phenomena such as the ones we have been dealing with in this difficult 
period. 
                                                
13  B. De Finetti, Lezioni di matematica attuariale, Roma: Edizioni Ricerche, 1957, p. 71 (my translation). 
14  H.  A.  Simon,  “The  role  of  expectations  in  an  adaptive  or  behavioristic  model”,  in  M.  J.  Bowman  (ed.) 
Expectations, uncertainty and business behavior, New York, Social Sciences Research Council, 1958.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
Rethinking monetary policy and the role of central banks 
The  crisis  has  raised  important  questions  on  the  appropriate  tools  −  conventional  versus 
unconventional  measures  −  and  objectives  −  price  versus  financial  stability  −  of  monetary 
policy,  and  more  generally  on  the  role  of  central  banks  and  their  relationships  with  other 
economic and financial authorities. 
I would first observe that the crisis has shown that there are crucial advantages in “not tying 
central banks’ hands too tight”. This was very important in allowing monetary authorities to 
adopt  the  appropriate  measures  to  counteract  the  crisis.  Had  monetary  policy  been 
constrained by a too rigid framework (such as in the past a commodity standard) or too strict 
pre-specified rules, its ability to react to the crisis would have been severely impaired. The 
capacity of central banks to adapt the size, scope and type of interventions to the evolution of 
financial disruptions and to differences in the structure of financial systems was in fact crucial 
to avoid the occurrence of destructive scenarios and to restore trust. 
Measures  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  were  ultimately  addressed  to  ensure  the  proper 
functioning of the monetary transmission mechanism, necessary to pursue the final monetary 
policy objectives of the respective central banks. But the interventions have been tailored to 
the  specific  circumstances  and  to  the  characteristics  of  the  different  economies.  For 
example, the quantitative-easing measures of the Federal Reserve (in a “zero lower bound” 
context)  were  aimed  at  promoting  stronger  economic  growth  and  a  level  of  inflation 
consistent with its mandate by intervening on specific segments of the financial markets and 
of the yield curve. The unconventional measures adopted by the Governing Council of the 
ECB addressed the malfunctioning of specific markets hit strongly by the crisis and aimed at 
avoiding major repercussions on bank credit, which plays a predominant role in the financing 
of the euro area economy. 
In  the  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  these  measures  we  need  to  keep  in  mind  the 
counterfactual.  This  is  especially  evident  in  the  euro  area,  where  the  ECB  3-year  LTROs 
decided at the end of 2011 prevented a liquidity crisis in the banking system and the likely 
major credit crunch that would have followed. Similarly, the announcement in the summer of 
2012 of the possibility of intervening in the secondary market for government securities with 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  was  prompted  by  the  need  to  address  market 
malfunctions  and  distortions  due  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which  were  hampering  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  risking  to  ignite  a  financial  collapse  with  potentially 
devastating consequences for the European economy. 
Widening yield spreads between government bonds in the euro area are the consequence of 
two factors, one national and the other European, linked respectively to the weaknesses of 
some  countries’  economies  and  public 
the 
incompleteness of  the  European  construction  and  the  attendant fears  of  a  break-up  of  the 
monetary  union  (redenomination  risk).  Consequently,  Europe’s  response  to  the  sovereign 
debt crisis has had to be two-pronged: individual countries have pledged to adopt prudent 
budgetary policies and structural reforms to support competiveness; a far-reaching reform of 
EU economic governance has been undertaken.  
The time needed to implement Europe’s complex strategy to counter the economic crisis will 
be long. The distortions that have affected financial markets and have resulted in significant 
financial fragmentation across countries can in the meanwhile undermine the transmission of 
monetary policy and jeopardize the entire process. In July 2012 the yield differential between 
10-year Italian BTPs and the equivalent German Bunds was still just over 500 basis points, 
compared with estimates of about 200 basis points consistent with the predominant Italian 
and  German  economic  fundamentals.  It  is  in  this  context  that  the  ECB  Governing  Council 
announced  the  introduction  of  the  OMT  program.  Countering  an  excessive  increase  in 
sovereign  yields  when  it  stems  from  redenomination  risk  and  distorts  monetary  policy 
transmission is fully within the Eurosystem’s mandate. 
(sustainability 
risk),  and 
finances 
to 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The OMT will only be activated in the presence of severe market strains and are confined to 
the  securities  of  countries  adhering  to  a  macroeconomic  adjustment  or  precautionary 
programme  financed  with  the  resources  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM,  a 
financial  backstop  jointly funded  by  EU  countries  set  up  during  the  crisis). Their  continued 
operation then depends on observing the conditions attached to the programme. There are 
no ex ante limitations on the duration or amount of the intervention. 
This initiative has been made possible by the credibility of the Eurosystem and the progress 
made with both national reforms and the design of European governance. The two factors 
fuelling the crisis are not independent. On the one hand, fears of euro reversibility are linked 
in  the  first  place  to  those  concerning  the  sustainability  of  public  debts  and  the 
competitiveness of member countries. On the other hand, the financing of the programmes 
with ESM resources is an incentive to further strengthen the governance of the Union, which 
is  essential  to  achieve  a  permanent  reduction  in  the  redenomination  risk  and  the  related 
component of the interest rate differential. Monetary policy can guarantee stability only if the 
euro-area’s economic fundamentals and institutional architecture are consistent with it.  
The announcement of OMT produced immediate benefits: medium- and long-term yields in 
the  countries  under  pressure  decreased  and  the  fragmentation  of  markets  along  national 
borders was attenuated. Albeit with fluctuations linked to temporary tensions at the national 
level  and  to  the  remaining,  pronounced  uncertainty  about  the  determination  of  all  member 
states to proceed with the strengthening of the Union, the yield spreads between euro-area 
government  securities  remained  on  a  downward  trend.  That  between  ten-year  BTPs  and 
Bunds is about 250 basis points today. 
To  ensure  stability  over  the  longer  run,  the  effort  to  reform  the  European  governance  has 
been  stepped  up.  The  subsequent  stages  are  outlined  in  the  report  Towards  a  Genuine 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (presented  in  June  2012  and  updated  in  December  by  the 
President  of  the  European  Council,  working  closely  with  the  Presidents  of  the  European 
Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  the  ECB)  and  in  the  Blueprint  for  a  Deep  and  Genuine 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  published  by  the  Commission  last  November.  Both 
documents envisage a banking union, the introduction of autonomous fiscal capacity for the 
whole euro area, and a common budget; they set the scene for the eventual political union.  
The  Banking  Union  is  a  keystone  of  institutional  reform.  It  has  three  key  components:  a 
single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM),  a  single  bank  resolution  mechanism,  and  a 
harmonized deposit insurance scheme. Such an important institutional innovation will require 
an organizational adaptation as far-reaching and at least as complex as that leading to the 
single  monetary  policy,  with  substantial  investment  in  human  resources  and  technical 
infrastructure.  Priority  has  been  given  to  the  launch  of  the  SSM,  but  work  must  progress 
expeditiously also on the other two components, which are both crucial to align supervisory 
and  crisis  management  responsibilities,  as  well  as  to  break  the  perverse  bank-sovereign 
loop.  The  harmonization  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices  is  a  precondition  for 
success; it will be crucial in the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets that will 
be carried out before the launch of the SSM.   
Related to the debate on the appropriate measures, the crisis has raised concerns about the 
interaction and possible conflicts between policies addressed to maintain price stability and 
those aimed at preserving financial stability. It has also raised the question of whether central 
banks should revise their objectives or strategies. 
In my view there is no need to question the current objectives; in the case of the Eurosystem, 
that of preserving (medium term) price stability. I do not believe, in particular, that financial 
stability should become an explicit objective of monetary policy at the par with price stability, 
for two main reasons: first, the benefits of our monetary framework have become more – not 
less  –  evident  during  the  crisis,  with  inflation  expectations  remaining  well-anchored 
throughout;  second,  assigning  financial  stability  as  an  explicit  additional  objective  to 
monetary  policy  could  risk  blurring  responsibilities,  increasing  moral  hazard  and  creating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
potential  conflicts.  However,  I  believe  that  there  is  no  question  that  preserving  financial 
stability resides fully within the responsibilities of (even if perhaps not only) central banks.  
Indeed,  the  crisis  has  not  put  into  question  the  idea  that  over  longer  horizons  there  is  no 
trade-off between price stability and financial stability objectives – rather, there are synergies. 
But it has shown that short-term interactions may be very complex and conflicts cannot be 
excluded. It has become clearer than it was before the crisis that price and financial stability 
are directly and strongly interconnected, that risks to any of these two objectives can quickly 
spread to the other, create dangerous loops and quickly undermine trust in financial markets. 
This certainly implies that the instruments of monetary policy are not neutral with respect to 
financial stability. It also calls to address the latter with specific policy tools. 
But  it  also  calls  for  efforts  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  along  three  dimensions:  the 
information set used in the assessment of the risks for price stability; pre-emptive reaction to 
signals  of  financial  instability;  and  effective  communication.  Monetary  authorities  need  to 
monitor a broader range of indicators, look for early signals of financial instability, develop 
models  capable  to  capture  the  interactions  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real 
economy and be cautious in using standard macro-econometric models in circumstances of 
financial  unrest.  Although  central  banks  should  not  regularly  intervene  to  exert  a  direct 
control on asset prices, they should not wait until a crash occurs before acting, given that the 
costs  of  this  strategy  have  proved  to  be  very  large;  rather  they  should  lean  against  the 
formation  of  financial  imbalances  and  not  be  shy  to  react  to  early  signals  of  financial 
instability. Indeed, this is something of which one could have been convinced of even before 
the last crisis. Monetary authorities should not overlook the potential impact, not only of their 
actions  (or  inactions),  but  also  of  their  communication  on  the  solution  of  financial  stability 
problems and the consequent repercussions on price stability.  
The implementation of new frameworks of policies, however, is all but easy. Building models 
which are able to capture interactions between price and financial stability is difficult. As to 
macroprudential  policy,  we  still  lack  a  well  defined  analytical  apparatus  and  operational 
definitions  of  its  objectives  and  instruments.  Indicators  and  early  warning  signals  are 
available,  but  a  coherent framework  to  interpret them  and to measure  the  effectiveness of 
macroprudential policy is still lacking. Preliminary results confirm that it has some potential to 
stabilise the economy over and above what can be achieved by monetary policy alone, but 
that this varies depending on the type of shock or setup considered.15 I would dare to say that 
proper understanding of how this can be effectively achieved is still in the making. 
Final remarks 
The crisis has shown that benign neglect should never have been an option. It has called for 
a  major  overhaul  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  financial  framework,  especially  at  an 
international level. In a globalized financial marketplace, with large and powerful participants, 
individual  action  by  national  authorities  would  be  bound  to  fail.  By  the  same  token,  the 
boundaries  of  supervision  should  be  widened  to  encompass  all  relevant  intermediaries, 
regardless  of  the  specific  industry  sector  they  belong  to.  I  have  discussed  the  work 
underway,  highlighted  the  results  achieved  and  stressed  the  areas  where  more  effort  is 
needed.  
                                                
15  P. Angelini, S. Neri and F. Panetta, “Monetary and macroprudential policies,” Banca d’Italia, Working Papers, 
801,  March  2011  (http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/econo/temidi/td11/td801_11/td_801/tema_801.pdf). 
See  also  P.  Angelini,  S.  Nicoletti-Altimari  and  I.  Visco,  “Macroprudential,  microprudential  and  monetary 
policies:  conflicts,  complementarities  and  trade-offs”,  in  A.  Dombret  and  O.  Lucius  (eds.),  Stability  of  the 
Financial System: Illusion or Feasible Concept?, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 2013 (also Banca d’Italia, 
Occasional  Papers,  140,  November  2012,  http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/econo/quest_ecofin_2/-
qef140/QEF_140.pdf). 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The correct  conduct  of financial  business  also  requires  competence  and  good faith  on  the 
part of intermediaries, both factors being decisive to ensure sound and prudent management 
and preserve the confidence of savers. This necessity is heightened by the complexity of the 
external  environment,  by  the  presence  of  large  intermediaries,  and  by  the  economic  and 
reputational  damage  that  can  result  from  illicit  behaviour.  No  market  can  function  without 
rules,  nor  is  prudent  management  possible  without  correct  conduct,  embodied  not  only  in 
scrupulous  compliance  with  the  law  and  the  supervisory  rules  but  also  in  complete 
adherence to business ethics.  
The dramatic events of the past five years have highlighted the limitations of modelling and 
quantitative analysis in finance and in economics. The common assumption of stationarity is 
at odds with the unpredictably changeable nature of the real world. This is not to say that all 
the analytical efforts of the past and the progress achieved should be disregarded. It means 
rather that in order to make the best out of them one needs to remember that models are by 
necessity “local” approximations to very complex phenomena and they should be used with 
sound  practical  judgment  as  a  framework,  not  a  straightjacket,  for  our  decision-making. 
Quantitative analysis and modelling can also help to establish institutional and behavioural 
norms  to rein  in  patterns  of  instability  and  developing  proper  learning  devices  to  deal  with 
major shocks and regime changes. In turn, models should take into account the impact of 
such norms on economic developments.  
Central  banks  have  a  crucial  role  to  play.  There  are  clear  complementarities  between 
financial  and  monetary  stability.  Sometimes  these  are  formally  recognized  in  their  official 
mandate, but even when this is not the case, central banks must take them into account in 
their policy decisions. In this respect, I would like to quote from a book by the brilliant Banca 
d’Italia  economist  Curzio  Giannini,  who  passed  away  prematurely  about  ten  years  ago.  In 
that  “beautifully  written  and  illuminating”  work,  as  Charles  Goodhart  describes  it  in  his 
foreword,  Curzio  clearly  saw  the  likely  consequences  of  financial  developments,  and 
concluded:16  
In  the  years  to  come,  the  most  interesting  developments  will  probably  be 
precisely in the sphere of supervision and regulation. […] Whatever its detractors 
may  say,  the  central  bank  has  no  need  to  move  into  new  lines  of  business. 
Capitalism generated the central bank and capitalism will come to it again, even if 
the current infatuation with the financial markets’ self-regulating capacity were to 
endure. […] The central bank produces an intangible but essential good – trust – 
of which capitalism (based as it is on a pyramid of paper if not mere electronic 
signals)  has  an  immense  need.  We  must  not  forget  that  trust,  or  its  synonym 
“confidence”,  derives  from  the  Latin  fides,  meaning  faith,  which  cannot  be 
produced simply by contract. In fact the legitimacy of central banks does not lie in 
their policy activism, or the ability to generate income, or even, save in a highly 
indirect  sense,  their  efficiency.  Rather,  […]  it  derives  from  competence, 
moderation,  the  long-term  approach,  and  the  refusal  to  take  any  tasks  beyond 
their primary role. If, as I am sure, there is another phase in the development of 
central banking, it will spring from these values. 
In the end this is, perhaps, what society should expect, if not from the financial sector, from 
those who are called to look after financial stability. 
                                                
16  C. Giannini, The age of central banks, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 2011, p. 255 and pp. 258–259, English 
translation, L’età delle banche centrali, Bologna, Il Mulino, 2004. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
