Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Partnerships against poverty 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2013  Microcredit  Summit  “Partnerships  against 
poverty“, Manila, 9 October 2013. 
 Good  morning!  The  Philippines  is  pleased  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  2013  Microcredit 
Summit: Partnerships Against Poverty. 
That  the  summit  is  being  held  in  this  part  of  the  world  at  this  time  is  deeply  appreciated. 
According to the Asian Development Bank, two-thirds of the world’s poor are in Asia and the 
Pacific. Indeed, while economic growth has improved lives by the millions, many still live in 
poverty. 
Clearly,  there  is  a  need  for  intervention  to  accelerate  the  process  of  bringing  down  the 
benefits of growth to the grassroots. Organized broad-based programs... such as this summit 
address this need. This is where stakeholders across the world can learn from each other 
and benchmark with international best practices. 
Empowering people to get out of poverty by giving them access to microcredit from formal 
financial  service  providers  is  a  winning  strategy.  How  to  reach  out  to  the  teeming  millions 
who  live  in  poverty  is  the  challenge  before  us.  This  is  where  partnerships  against  poverty 
come in. 
We are fortunate therefore that we have hundreds of participants here at the summit who will 
share what they have learned: in challenging times as well as in good times. 
In  particular,  we  are  honored  that  we  have  with  us  leading  champions  and  enablers  of 
microfinance, led by: Nobel Laureate Professor Muhammad Yunus; Minister Syarief Hasan 
of  Indonesia,  Ambassador  Jorge  Domecq  Fernandez  of  Spain,  Director  Larry  Reed  of  the 
Microcredit  Summit  Campaign;  Chair  of  the  Microfinance  Council  of  the  Philippines  Mila 
Mercado-Bunker; and no less than Philippine Budget Secretary Florencio Abad. 
Here  in  the  Philippines,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  which  is  the  central  bank  of  the 
Philippines, plays a key role in the development of the microfinance sector. 
As a central bank, our principal mandate is to ensure the stability of prices and the banking 
sector. In this connection, one of our principal thrusts is to develop a financial system that is 
inclusive and reaches out to the unbanked. To us, an inclusive financial system makes for a 
more stable financial system; equally important, it enables us to help improve the lives of our 
people. 
This is particularly true for microfinance, our flagship program for poverty alleviation  which 
we have been nurturing since 2000. Thirteen years hence, we have issued over 40 policies 
and regulations to guide the operations of banks that have made the business decision to 
engage in microfinance. 
So far, so good. For five consecutive years – from 2009 to 2013 – the Economist Intelligence 
Unit has consistently ranked the Philippine regulatory environment for microfinance as one of 
the best in the world. Thus, delegations from other countries have been visiting our central 
bank to learn about microfinance development. 
And as a pioneer in developing prudential regulation of microfinance, the Bangko Sentral is 
part  of  the  working  group  responsible  for  drafting  the  guidance  paper  on  “Microfinance 
activities  and  core  principles  for  effective  banking  supervision”  issued  by  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. 
But more than these, we take pride in the actual results that we see on the ground. As of 
end-June 2013, for instance, there were 186 banks with microfinance operations, from just a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
handful in 2000. These banks now serve over a million clients with consolidated outstanding 
loans of over 8 billion pesos. 
Even better, the combined savings of the banks’ microfinance clients have reached 8.9 billion 
pesos, an amount surpassing their total loans. This tells us that these microfinance clients 
have attained a level of financial independence from gaining access to microcredit. 
I  can  personally  attest  how  successful  Filipino  microentrepreneurs  are  able  to  increase 
household  income,  send  children  to  school,  improve  their  health  and  housing  condition, 
generally lead a better life and serve as catalyst for community development – all because 
they were able to access a microfinance loan. Indeed, microcredit empowers the poor to start 
or expand their microenterprise. 
At the same time, our banks find that their bottom line is getting better from microfinance. 
Today, an increasing number of microfinance banks offer a wider range of products including 
housing microfinance, micro-agri loans and the distribution of microinsurance. 
Microfinance therefore is a win-win program. 
In  the  Philippines,  this  did  not  happen  overnight.  The  policymaking  process  evolved  from 
dialogues with our regulated entities, as well as consultations with other stakeholders in the 
microfinance industry. We institutionalized such meetings with bank associations... to discuss 
emerging  regulatory  and  market  issues.  We  also  expose  draft  regulations  prior  to  their 
issuance, and administer feedback surveys. 
We maintain open lines of communication with associations of microfinance institutions and 
other  concerned  regulators  and  policymakers.  And  key  officers  of  the  central  bank  go  on 
exposure visits to see how our policies are implemented on the ground, and to find ways to 
make the program more effective. 
Ladies and gentlemen. We do all these because every stakeholder is a valuable partner in 
the policymaking process. This participative process has surely enriched our understanding 
and appreciation of the needs of the poor, the unbanked and the financially excluded. It has 
also made us more aware of our strategic role in enabling market players to best serve these 
needs. 
The result is a regulatory environment which recognizes that the financial needs of the poor 
and the unbanked are as varied as those of the regular financial consumer. 
Regulations  also  provide  a  good  level  of  market  contestability  where  new  players  and 
innovative business models can enter and flourish. NGOs have a clear path to formalization, 
should this be their desired track. New players, such as electronic money (e-money) issuers, 
can be part of an ecosystem that delivers financial services. 
Our regulatory environment also empowers banks to expand their coverage and reach out to 
underserved markets through scaled-down branches called micro-banking offices (MBOs), or 
through  the  e-money  platform.  These  allow  banks  to  increase  their  efficiency  and  lower 
costs,  enabling  them  to  reach  markets  which  are  otherwise  not  economically  feasible  to 
serve. 
Regulations  also  reduce  the  barriers  for  the  poor  to  transact  with  banks.  Aside  from  the 
expansion of possible financial service access points, we have also expanded the range of 
acceptable IDs that  may  be  used  to  open  a  bank  account. This  addresses  one  of the key 
obstacles faced by the poor and excluded to transact with a formal financial institution. 
In addition, we have developed a regulatory environment which ensures that consumers are 
informed, educated and protected. Among others, the Bangko Sentral has issued regulations 
that promote true price transparency and disclosure to allow clients to compare similar loan 
products.  We  have  also  institutionalized  a  consumer  assistance  mechanism  to  address 
complaints  against  BSP-supervised  institutions.  We  are  also  in  the  process  of  crafting  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rating  system  that  will  assess  financial  institutions’  compliance  to  various  consumer 
protection laws, rules and regulations. 
To  complement  these  regulations,  the  BSP  implements  a  comprehensive  Economic  and 
Financial  Learning  Program  (EFLP). One  component  of  this  program  is  a  financial  literacy 
session  for  microfinance  clients  and  beneficiaries  of  the  government’s  conditional  cash 
transfer (CCT) program, many of whom are unbanked. 
The sessions are designed to enhance their capacity to manage resources and make wise 
financial  decisions  that  would  eventually  benefit  their  household,  their  community,  and 
eventually  the  larger  economy.  These  sessions  are  conducted  in  partnership  with  our 
Department of Social Welfare and Development, the lead administrator of our CCT program. 
Indeed,  we  continue  to  view  multi-stakeholder  partnership  as  an  important  strategy  to 
facilitate the expansion and deepening of our financial system. 
Moving forward, we see the value of collecting evidence and data that conclusively affirms 
what we believe to be true: 
• 
that  access  to  financial  services  empowers  households  to  better  manage  their 
resources and improve the quality of their lives; and 
that broad-based access to finance and financial inclusion support financial stability 
and facilitate inclusive growth. 
 Aside from anecdotal evidence, it would be ideal to have metrics that will give us solid data 
on how we are doing and how we can make things even better. 
To implement this commitment, we will engage various institutions in further consultations... 
to develop a national financial inclusion strategy. With a unified vision, synergy of action and 
complementarity  of  initiatives,  we  should  make  financial  inclusion  a  reality  across  our 
country. 
Our ultimate goal is to provide every Filipino the opportunity to benefit from having access to 
appropriate financial services. 
Ladies and gentlemen. We are here because we share the same vision: to fight poverty and 
improve lives across the world. Let us therefore leverage on each others’ competencies and 
expertise by forging effective partnerships, and moving in unison toward our common goal of 
poverty reduction, financial inclusion and inclusive growth. 
Together, we can cover a lot of ground. 
Once  again,  I  welcome  all  of  you  to  the  Philippines  for  the  2013  Microcredit  Summit  on 
Partnerships Against Poverty. 
Thank you! And as we say in the Philippines: Mabuhay! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
