Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Monetary policy in an interconnected global 
economy 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  a 
conference  co-hosted  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund, 
Bangkok, 1 November 2013. 
 Distinguished Participants, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to welcome you to this conference on “Monetary Policy in an Interconnected 
Global Economy,” co-hosted by the Bank of Thailand and the International Monetary Fund. I 
would like to especially thank our international guests who have travelled a long way to be 
with  us  today.  This  conference  will  focus  on  several  issues  pertaining  to  cross-country 
linkages, international shock transmission, and how monetary policy should be conducted in 
response to global spillovers. 
One  of  the  most  important  trends  over  the  past  decades  is  the  rapid  integration  of 
international trade and finance. Trade in goods and services, as a share of world GDP, 
increased from around 15 percent in the early 1980s to around 25 percent before the start of 
the crisis in 2007. These developments reflect, in part, the increasing internationalization of 
production  through  vertical  trade  linkages.  We  have  also  seen  a  significant  increase  in 
financial  integration.  While  the  annual  growth  in  world  trade  over  the  past  40  years  has 
exceeded the growth in world GDP by around 2.6 percent on average, growth in international 
external positions outpaced growth in world GDP by almost double that – around 4.8 percent. 
What  are  the  implications  of  these  tighter  trade  and  financial  linkages?  Most 
prominently, global interconnectedness implies large and swift transmission of shocks across 
countries. A seemingly localized supply shock, such as the tsunami in Japan or the floods 
in Thailand two years ago, created ripple effects in various parts of the world by disrupting 
the global supply chain  of production. From the perspective of most Asian economies, the 
abrupt  economic  contraction  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area  during  the  financial  crisis  were 
examples of external demand shocks. 
While  such  “real  spillovers”  generated  by  supply  or  demand  shocks  can  be  quite 
damaging, 
them  are  apparent  and  relatively 
uncontroversial. Fiscal automatic stabilizers should be allowed to work fully and monetary 
policy could be eased to cushion the impact so long as medium-term inflation expectations 
are contained. Calibrating the policy response to these shocks may not be straightforward, 
but they do not, in of themselves, pose challenges to the underlying framework of policy. On 
the  contrary,  “financial  spillovers”  associated  with  extraordinary  monetary  policy 
easing in advanced economies have prompted many central banks and academics to 
do  some  soul  searching  about  the  appropriate  framework,  not  just  for  monetary 
policy,  but  also  for  regulatory  and  capital  account  policies  that  can  best  deal  with 
these shocks. 
It has been around five years that the US federal funds rate has been kept at the zero lower 
bound, and this has been supplemented with multiple rounds of large-scale asset purchases. 
The federal funds rate would likely remain unchanged for another year or two, based on the 
information  available  today,  and  the  winding  down  of  the  bond-buying  program  will  come 
eventually.  Monetary  authorities  in  other  advanced  economies  have  also  employed  policy 
tools with similar features albeit with some variations in the timing, scope, and size. 
This configuration of monetary policies in major countries has created a challenging 
environment for small open economies to conduct policy. In the post-crisis period, the 
relative  fundamental  strength  of  emerging  market  economies  was  already  drawing  in 
substantial  capital  inflows.  The  additional  push  from  this  extraordinary  stimulus,  and  the 
for  dealing  with 
the  avenues 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reach-for-yield  behavior  associated  with  it, has  compounded the  pressure.  Many  emerging 
market central banks have found themselves at critical junctures where broad reappraisals of 
their monetary and capital account policy frameworks were necessary. 
Take Thailand as an example. Since the beginning of the episode, we have adopted a 
multi-dimensional  response  to  the  spillovers.  Currency  appreciation  was  the  main 
cushion against rising inflows. At times when exchange rate volatility became excessive in 
our  view,  we  undertook  some  foreign  exchange  intervention.  But  we  were  mindful  of 
intervention  costs  and  its  limited  effectiveness.  We  also  further  deregulated  controls  on 
outflows. This was part and parcel of our longer-term plan to encourage outward investment 
by  Thais.  At  the  same  time,  we  raised  the  policy  interest  rate  in  response  to  expanding 
domestic  demand,  rising  price  pressures,  and  strong  credit  growth.  There  was  a  spirited 
public debate whether such rate increases would invite more capital inflows. But we viewed 
that other factors, such as the strength of the domestic economy and high risk appetite of 
international investors, played a larger role in inducing capital inflows than a gradual increase 
in the policy rate. Our concern for medium-term financial stability was also a key element of 
policy deliberations at the time. 
Subsequently,  things  became  more  challenging  as  the  Thai  economy  suffered 
domestic  setbacks.  As  the  boost  from  the  government’s  temporary  stimulus  measures 
dissipated at the start of this year, domestic demand slowed down markedly. At the same 
time,  domestic  credit  growth  was  still  quite  high,  stock  prices  continued  to  advance,  and 
activity  in  the  housing  market  remained  brisk. Moreover,  portfolio  capital  inflows  continued 
and  the  baht  was  appreciating.  This  presented  a  dilemma  and  was  an  example  of  the 
difficulties posed by policy spillovers. Against the backdrop of weak global demand, we 
cut  the  policy  interest  rate.  We  contemplated  the  use  of  certain  prudential  measures, 
including those on capital flows, in order to complement domestic monetary policy as well as 
offset some of the impact of capital inflows on domestic financial conditions. But since the 
QE  tapering  talk  began  in  earnest  in  May,  the  global  financial  environment  changed 
dramatically, and with it the nature of the policy trade-offs. 
The  communication  by  the  Federal  Reserve  about  possible  tapering  of  its  bond 
purchases  was  a  key  turning  point  for  global  financial  markets.  Financial  conditions 
suddenly  tightened  in  response.  Long-term  interest  rates  rose  in  the  US  and  emerging 
market yields increased even more, reflecting a reversal in risk appetite. The prospect of Fed 
tapering  became  a key  consideration for monetary  policy  in  emerging market  countries.  In 
most  countries monetary  policy  remained  tight  in  order  to  lean  against excessive  currency 
depreciation; a few countries raised their policy rates in an attempt to stem capital outflows. 
For  some  countries,  as  economic  activity  softened  and  inflation  fell,  monetary  policy  may 
have ended up being tighter than intended as a result of tensions caused by policy spillovers. 
At  this  juncture,  the  key  question  is  how  to  design  or  adjust  policy  frameworks  to 
cope  better  with  global 
interconnectedness  while  preserving  monetary  policy 
independence. I hope the conference will help shed further light on this. 
In  doing  so,  we  have  to  be  mindful  that  global  liquidity  conditions  will  continue  to 
largely  depend  on  the  macroeconomic  conditions  of  the  reserve-issuing  countries. 
Currently  the  US  dollar  dominates  the  international  reserve  system  as  a  safe  asset.  The 
continuation of this role rests on some basic requirements. A reserve-issuing country has to 
illustrate a good track record of prudent macroeconomic policy. And as recent events have 
reminded us, there is a large fiscal element to this. One cannot separate the status of a 
reserve  currency  from  the  solvency  of  the  sovereign.  The  use  of  the  US  dollar  as  an 
international store of value and medium of exchange very much depends on the continued 
credibility of the US Treasury in honoring its debt obligations. 
In terms of monetary policy, it is understandable and will continue to be the case that 
the  Federal  Reserve  will  focus  on  its  own  mandate  in  setting  policy.  But  as  the  US 
dollar is used heavily abroad, the effective US dollar currency area extends well beyond US 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
borders.  The  Federal  Reserve  sets  policy  for  this  wider  currency  area,  not  just  the  50  US 
states. There have been a lot of discussions about how policy cooperation and coordination 
may offer scope for improvement. But a practical solution still seems elusive. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In closing, let me offer my special thanks to the distinguished speakers for taking part in this 
important  endeavor  and  for  sharing  with  us  your  expertise.  All  of  us  here  very  much  look 
forward to your contributions throughout today and tomorrow. I would also like to thank the 
IMF – in particular, the Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific – for kindly co-hosting this 
event. To all conference participants, I welcome your spirited discussions as I have already 
noticed there are many experts present among us. Thank you for being here. I wish you a 
fruitful conference and a pleasant stay in Thailand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
