Karnit Flug: Israel’s challenge to fulfil its economic growth potential 
Main points of remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Incoming Governor of the Bank of Israel, at The 
Prime Minister’s Conference “Partnership and growth”, Tel Aviv, 29 October 2013. 
 When I decided, several weeks ago, to accept the invitation to participate in this Conference, 
I did not know that it would be my first lecture following my appointment as Governor of the 
Bank of Israel. Nonetheless, I am very happy that the hand of fate has led to my speaking 
here  today,  two  days  after  the  government’s  decision  to  appoint  me  as  Governor,  and 
economic advisor to the government, because I believe that this Conference deals with one 
of the most important issues on the socioeconomic agenda in the State of Israel. The topic of 
the Conference – the Arab sector’s partnership in the economy and in growth – is a major 
issue  in  terms  of  the  Israeli  economy’s  ability  to  fulfill  its  growth  potential  in  the  next  few 
years and to reduce the scope of poverty and the gaps in Israeli society, which are among 
the highest in the OECD, and about which much has already been written and said. 
The successful integration of the Arab public into the labor market in particular, and into the 
economy in general, is a very important, even essential, component of the Israeli economy’s 
ability  to  continue  to  grow,  and  to  support  a  higher  standard  of  living  for  all  Israelis.  This 
Conference,  which  deals  with  various  aspects  of  the  impediments  to  the  successful 
integration of the Arab population in the labor market, is therefore particularly important. 
I will begin with a few words about the recent state of the economy: from the macroeconomic 
standpoint  of  growth  rates,  the  economy  is  in  good  shape,  particularly  compared  to  other 
developed  countries.  In  the  past  decade,  the  economy  has  enjoyed  significantly  higher 
growth rates than most other advanced economies, and the global financial crisis, which was 
reflected in a deep and sometimes prolonged recession in many economies, was weathered 
by the Israeli economy with relatively minor damage. Unemployment, which jumped in many 
economies  during  the  crisis  and  remains  very  high  in  most  of  them,  increased  relatively 
moderately in Israel, and resumed its decline immediately following the crisis, so that we are 
currently at historically low unemployment levels. 
The  labor  force  participation  rate,  and  in  turn  the  employment  rate,  are  increasing  on  a 
consistent basis, among other things as a result of the continuing entry to the labor market of 
Arabs, ultra-Orthodox Jews and women. Inflation – the main policy variable with which the 
Bank of Israel is entrusted – has been within the target range for a long time, which provides 
monetary policy the required degrees of freedom to support growth and employment in the 
short  term,  thus  moderating  the  effects  of  the  global  slowdown  which  is  still  a  restraining 
force on activity here as well. 
From a long-term view, the Israeli economy suffers from a low rate of increase in productivity 
(product per hour of work). The average Israeli worker produces lower output per given work 
hour  than  his  peers  in  most  OECD  countries.  Not  only  is  the  increase  in  productivity  not 
closing the gap with the other developed countries, the gap is growing. For instance, the ratio 
between  product  per  work  hour  in  Israel  and  that  in  the  US  has  been  declining  over  the 
years. In the Bank of Israel Annual Report for 2012, the Research Department analyzed the 
phenomenon and noted a number of reasons for the low productivity. One major reason is a 
low rate of investment, which leads to lower stock of capital for production available to the 
Israeli worker than what is available to a worker in other OECD countries. A further issue is 
bureaucratic  impediments,  or  in  broader  terms,  the  business  environment,  which  impede 
accelerated development of the business sector. 
Returning to employment: Despite the significant improvement that has taken place in recent 
years,  and  which  has  led  to  the  fact  that  our  employment  rates  are  no  longer  low  when 
compared  internationally,  there  are  still  two  groups  that  stand  out  for  their  particularly  low 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
rates: Ultra-Orthodox Jewish men and Arab women, each with their own characteristics and 
specific reasons. In these two sectors, even those who are integrated into the labor market 
generally  earn  a  relatively  low  salary,  which  indicates  relatively  low  productivity.  This  is 
mainly the result of a level of education and training that does not earn a high return in the 
labor market. The incidence of discrimination must also not be ignored, and we know that the 
Arab public has difficulty integrating into certain industries, even if the appropriate training is 
provided. One such example is the high tech industry where, for various reasons, few Arabs 
successfully integrate. Since this industry has one of the highest levels  of productivity and 
salary  in  the  economy,  that  fact  has  far-reaching  effects  on  the  ability  to  fulfill  economic 
potential with given talent such that it will be reflected in an appropriate standard of living. 
In  the  long  term,  demographics  are  expected  to  have  far-reaching  ramifications  on 
employment,  output  and  the  standard  of  living.  While  those  sectors  with  low  levels  of 
employment are expected to grow as a share of the population, the working age population is 
expected to decline as a share of the total population. If there are no changes in employment 
patterns, these demographic trends will reduce the annual growth rate by about 1.3 percent, 
every year. This is a strategic threat for the Israeli economy and for Israeli society – one that 
we must not ignore. Even if labor force participation increases, it is vital that we create the 
conditions required for workers to be absorbed in industries typified by a high level of human 
capital as well. Otherwise, employment growth will be able to make only a limited contribution 
to GDP growth, a reduction in poverty and an increase in the standard of living. 
The government has recognized the importance of integrating these population groups into 
the labor force and, in 2010, it adopted detailed employment targets to which the economy is 
supposed  to  converge  in  2020.  The  target  rates  set  for  the  Arab  population  in  2020  
– 41 percent employment for women and 78 percent for men – are ambitious but possible. At 
the same time, the rate of progress toward the goals thus far is not sufficient, and much more 
effort  is  required  in  order  to  meet  them  on  time.  The  government  made  many  important 
decisions that delineate a policy intended to help in achieving these goals. It is very important 
to continue implementing this policy, which is supposed to give the appropriate weight to the 
relevant  issues  in future  budget priorities.  Among  others,  these  include raising the  level  of 
education and skills relevant to the labor market, expanded early childhood care solutions, 
improved  transit  accessibility  between  places  of  residence  and  employment  centers, 
methods for removing cultural obstacles to participation in the labor force, encouraging small 
businesses in the Arab sector in various ways, encouraging the integration of workers from 
the Arab sector who have the appropriate talents in industries typified by low rates from this 
population group, and combating discrimination. 
The  Arab  population  in  Israel  contains  immense  untapped  potential  from  the  standpoint of 
the  Israeli  economy’s  growth  capability.  Beyond  the  economic  potential,  the  issue  also 
contains highly significant social potential. The correct policy, and its correct implementation, 
will bear fruit both from the standpoint of the Arab sector, increasing its integration in Israeli 
society  and  improving  its  economic  situation,  and  from  the  standpoint  of  the  general 
population and the economy as a whole. Our ability to continue existing as a society that is 
both multi-faceted and socially cohesive depends, among other things, on how employment 
develops in Arab society in the next few years. If we know how to maximize the potential for 
increased  growth  and  how  to  reduce  the  gaps, we  will  all  –  Jews  and  Arabs  –  be  able  to 
enjoy the fruits of this process. If we can’t manage to do this, then in my estimation, we will 
pay a heavy economic and social price in the years to come. 
Later  in  the  conference,  there  will  be  an  in-depth  discussion  of  the  details,  solutions  and 
plans on the agenda. I wish us all an interesting and productive conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
