Barry Whiteside: Risk focused supervision 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  APEC-
FRTI workshop on “Risk focused supervision”, Nadi, 18 November 2013. 
 Dr Sungbok Lee – APEC FRTI/KSP Secretariat 
Ms Sue Jefferey – APEC FRTI/KSP Secretariat 
Distinguished Resource Persons 
Workshop Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory Comments 
Good morning and Bula Vinaka. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  asked  to  deliver  the  welcome  address  and  open  this  very  important 
workshop  organised  by  the  APEC  Financial  Regulators  Training  Initiative  (FRTI)  in 
conjunction with the Knowledge Sharing Programme of the Republic of Korea (KSP). I might 
add  that  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  is  also  honoured  to  host  this  event  and  showcase  our 
country to our visitors. 
Let me take this opportunity to extend to you, and especially to our foreign guests, a warm 
Fijian  welcome  to  this  workshop,  which  is  being  held  at  this  famous  tourist  destination  of 
Denarau Island. 
I am informed that apart from the resource persons who are from Korea, the Philippines and 
Australia,  we  have  assembled  with  us  participants  from  as  far  away  as  Mongolia  and 
Zambia. We don’t often have visitors from these parts of the world, so let me say a warm 
welcome to Gaadulam, Said and Joseph! Indeed I see this gathering as an opportunity for 
great  cultural  exchanges,  in  addition  to  the  specialised  knowledge  and  skills  you  will  be 
acquiring. 
Importance of the workshop 
Ladies and Gentlemen, there could not have been a better time for this workshop than now, 
given  the  strategic  importance  of  financial  stability  to  the  overall  performance  of  our 
economies.  Risk-Based  or  Risk-Focused  Supervision  is  a  subject  area  which  continues  to 
receive the attention of supervisory authorities worldwide. 
The  international  banking  scene  has,  in  recent  years,  witnessed  strong  trends  towards 
globalization  and  consolidation  of  financial  systems.  Stability  of  our  respective  financial 
systems  has  become  the  central  challenge  to  bank  regulators  and  supervisors  throughout 
the world. The multi-lateral initiatives leading to the evolution of international standards and 
codes,  and  evaluation  of  our  compliance  to  these  standards  and  codes,  represent  solid 
attempts to address this challenge. 
The  key  objective  of  prudential  supervision  is  to  maintain  stability  and  confidence  in  the 
financial system in our jurisdictions, thereby reducing the risk of loss to depositors and other 
creditors. In addition, supervision is also directed towards verifying compliance with laws and 
regulations governing financial institutions and their activities. 
We cannot deny that the growing diversities and complexities of banking business, the spate 
of product innovation with complex risk phenomena, the contagion effects that a crisis can 
spread  given  the  linkages  and  interdependence  of  financial  institutions,  and  the  growing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
trend  of  businesses  without  borders,  all  call  for  a  new  approach  to  ensuring  the  financial 
health of our economies. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is what Risk-Focused Supervision 
is all about. 
Role of the supervisor in risk focused supervision 
The role of the supervisor in modern financial system supervision is to ensure that the risk 
management  systems  in  place  and  the  capital  held,  are  appropriate  for  the  variety  of 
identifiable risks to which supervised financial institutions expose themselves on a day-to-day 
basis. 
The  supervisor  must  have  the  authority  and  expertise  to  review  and  intervene  in  risk 
management  processes,  where  necessary.  This  involves  monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the 
risk  profiles  of  supervised  institutions  in  relation  to  their  business  strategies  and  risks. 
Regulators and supervisors must fully understand any new financial innovations, instruments 
and  market  practices  in  order  to  have  the  expertise  to  develop  models,  assumptions  and 
views  of  financial  institutions,  and  certify  the  risk  management  of  those  supervised 
institutions. 
Of course, the effectiveness of any risk-based approach owes a lot to the supervisor’s ability 
for early identification and monitoring of new and emerging risks. Supervisors can devote a 
lot of time and effort toward trying to prevent or mitigate a risk incident but, as we have been 
taught, a good supervisor should target patterns of behaviour that give rise to excessive risk-
taking in the first place. 
When it comes to supervising for risk, behaviours matter. Things like: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
corporate governance 
risk appetite; 
risk management; 
alignment of incentives to risk taking; and 
organisational culture; 
are all important. 
takes 
Institutions  that  have,  and  effectively  implement  these  things,  are  likely  to  be  well-run  and 
would portray a good grasp of their risk environment. Institutions that merely have them and 
do not effectively take action in ensuring that these are implemented, are inviting trouble. 
Ladies and gentlemen, getting to grips with matters of risk management requires a more pro-
active approach from supervisors. 
• 
interaction  with  regulated 
It takes a deep understanding of an institution’s operations and appetite for risk for 
its significant activities; 
It 
frequent 
management levels; 
It takes a capacity to assess the effectiveness of risk management and control 
functions, (including how the institution is governed and the prevailing risk culture); 
and, 
It takes a capacity and willingness to act when inadequacies are identified. 
institutions  at  both  board  and 
• 
None of these are easy to implement. Risk-based approaches are resource-intensive. They 
require  a  hands-on,  active  approach  to  prudential  supervision.  They  require  experienced 
supervisors  with  deep  industry  knowledge.  Even  after  all  that,  there  is  no  guarantee  that 
supervisors will always make the right calls on risk. 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
However in spite of such isolated moments where we as supervisors may not have made the 
right  call,  by  targeting  specific  risk  outcomes,  risk-focused  approaches  to  prudential 
supervision  are  better  placed  to  enable  us  to  make  a  material  difference  to  the  prudential 
health of the institutions we supervise, for any given level of resources. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me take this opportunity to thank the APEC Financial Regulators Training Initiative and 
the Knowledge Sharing Programme of the Republic of Korea for organising this workshop. 
I wish you a productive and exciting week and encourage you all to draw on the wealth of 
knowledge of the facilitators, as well as the rich experience of your fellow participants. 
Do  take  some  time  to  explore  our  wonderful  islands,  if  this  is  at  all  possible.  Your  Fijian 
colleagues will only be too pleased to assist. We are known to be pretty friendly! 
On  this  final  note,  it  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  declare  this  Workshop  on  Risk-Based 
Supervision open. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
