Christian Noyer: The ECB is ready to fight deflation 
Opinion piece by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in  Wall  Street  Journal, 
21 November 2013. 
 There  is  a  lot  of  talk  nowadays  about  the  risk  of  a  “lost  decade”  in  the  euro  zone,  with  a 
conjunction  of  no  growth  and  deflation.  Current  forecasts  point  to  very  low  inflation  in  the 
foreseeable future. For the euro area as a whole, inflation is projected to remain at around 
1.5% in the coming year. 
However,  low  inflation  is  very  different from  deflation.  Deflation  is  a  cumulative  process  of 
decreasing  prices,  wages  and  output  fueled  by  negative  expectations.  Deflation  is  a 
pernicious  spiral.  It  increases  the  burden  of  debt  and  creates  an  incentive  to  defer 
consumption  and  investment.  Deflation  is  especially  dangerous  because  once  the  process 
becomes entrenched, it becomes very difficult to stop. 
At the moment there are no signs of general deflation in the euro area and most indicators 
point to a very low risk. Inflation expectations in particular remain firmly anchored in positive 
territory and, for the long term, stand at levels close to the European Central Bank’s definition 
of price stability. 
As usual, inflation rates vary in the different economies of the euro area. In some peripheral 
countries,  inflation  is  particularly  low.  This,  in  a  way,  is  a  good  thing,  as  it  contributes  to 
restoring  their  competitiveness,  as  witnessed  by  their  strong  export  growth.  However,  the 
lower inflation is, the greater the risk that unexpected shocks could push the economy into 
deflationary  territory.  Since  this  could,  in  turn,  have  consequences  for  overall  euro-area 
inflation, it is perfectly justified to ask what should be done to minimize that risk. 
The best protection and the first line of defense against the risk of a lost decade is structural 
reform.  Structural  reforms  stimulate  private  consumption  and  make  investment  more 
profitable.  In  particular,  they  increase  the  return  on  capital  and,  as  a  consequence,  the 
economy  spontaneously  moves  towards  an  equilibrium  with  higher  interest  rates.  In  turn, 
higher equilibrium interest rates would make it easier for the European Central Bank to set its 
own  policy  rate  at  levels  consistent  with  those  needed  by  the  economy.  The chances that 
monetary policy becomes constrained by the lower bound of 0% interest rates are reduced. 
Higher  equilibrium  rates  also  benefit  savers,  a  legitimate  concern  in  many  countries. 
Basically,  savers  have  a  claim  on  future  output.  They  are  best  protected  when  growth  is 
sustained and widespread, allowing them to earn high returns and diversify their risks.  
That said, deflation, like inflation, is ultimately a monetary phenomenon. And central banks 
must  fight  all  risks  to  price  stability  with  determination.  Under  the  Eurosystem  mandate, 
which  is  the  cornerstone  of  all  our  actions,  price  stability  is  our  priority  objective.  The 
definition  of  price  stability  is  therefore  an  essential  feature  of  our  monetary  framework. 
Originally,  when  the  euro  was  created,  price  stability  was  defined  as  a  “less  than  2%” 
increase in the overall price index. That would theoretically allow for zero or even negative 
inflation. 
The definition was described as “asymmetric,” meaning that the Eurosystem would react to 
excess inflation but would be indifferent to low inflation or even deflation. But that was never 
the intention. In 2003 the definition was adjusted in order to eliminate any ambiguity. Price 
stability is now defined as “less than but close to 2%.” The current definition is therefore fully 
symmetric. It makes it clear that the central bank is equally concerned by inflation that is too 
low or too high. 
This  is  not  only  a  question  of  semantics.  Central  banks’  perceived  objectives  determine 
expectations  and  the  behavior  of  private  agents.  If  a  central  bank  is  seen  as  equally 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
intolerant  of  both  high  and  low  inflation,  the  economy  will  more  easily  stabilize  within  the 
acceptable  inflation  range.  Stability  of  inflation  expectations  has  improved  the  capacity  of 
euro-area economies to absorb the post-Lehman shock: While inflation became negative for 
a few months in 2009, expectations did not change and deflation was never a threat. This 
episode illustrates the credibility achieved by the Eurosystem in approaching price stability in 
a symmetric fashion. 
Together with the definition of price stability, the “two pillars” approach is another important 
feature of the Eurosystem’s framework. In parallel to assessing future economic prospects, 
the  European  Central  Bank’s  governing  council  looks  independently  at  the  dynamics  of 
money  and  credit  aggregates.  This  has  proved  very  useful  in  the  past  to  detect  long-term 
risks to price stability, in both directions. The message today is clear: both money and credit 
are growing very slowly in the euro area as a whole. The M3 money-supply aggregate grew 
by  2.1%  in  September.  These  trends  do  not  signal  deflation,  but  warrant  monitoring  and 
vigilance when facing an uncertain future. 
Obviously,  intentions  may  not  always  suffice  and  must  be  backed,  when  necessary,  by 
appropriate  and  timely  actions.  Recent  decisions  by  the  governing  council  regarding  both 
policy rates and liquidity provision show that we are ready to make the necessary decisions. 
Many  instruments  remain  available  should  further  risks  materialize.  There  should  be  no 
doubt  that  the  Eurosystem  will  ensure  that  price  stability,  as  currently  defined,  will  be 
maintained in the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
