Sabine Lautenschläger: The leverage ratio – a simple and comparable 
measure? 
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
evening  reception  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank/SAFE  Conference  “Supervising  banks  in 
complex financial systems”, Frankfurt am Main, 21 October 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very happy to welcome you to the Guest House at the Deutsche Bundesbank’s Central 
Office. It’s a pleasure to have you here. 
Although you will have noticed that our premises are located somewhat outside of the city 
centre, it’s only a ten-minute walk to the Goethe University’s campus from here. This isn’t just 
convenient for those of you who decided to walk from the University to the headquarters of 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  Having  a  walking  distance  between  the  Bundesbank  and  the 
Goethe  University  also  facilitates  exchange  and  cooperation  between  the  two  institutions, 
which  both  have  a  strong  stake  in  financial  market  and  regulation  research.  I  value  this 
exchange very highly and I am convinced that cooperation in this field is indeed a very good 
idea. I therefore also would like to thank the SAFE Center at the Goethe University, who has 
organised this conference together with the Deutsche Bundesbank. 
I would also like to extend a particularly warm welcome to all of the contributors to today’s 
conference sessions. 
The conference asks a very fundamental question: how can we, how should we supervise 
banks given that the financial system is inherently complex? 
Many books were and still will be written to examine this question comprehensively, and they 
will  offer  different  and  sometimes  contradictory  answers;  at  least,  that  is  my  prediction.  I 
nevertheless  want  to  share  my  fundamental  view  of  this  topic  with  you.  So,  how  can  or 
should  supervisors  deal  with  complexity?  I  am  convinced  that  in  a  complex  world  –  first  – 
supervisors  need  a  toolbox  with  different  instruments  to  cope  with  this  complexity,  and  
– second – those tools will not generally be that simple. 
As I’m sure you are aware, I am not an academic but a practitioner. And as a practitioner I’ll 
give you a practical example to make my point. I’d like to talk about a measure you all know 
very well: the leverage ratio. It’s not really a new concept, but it’s certainly a fashionable one. 
It has been claimed to be a simple fallback measure for dealing with an increasingly complex 
banking system, a kind of panacea for complexity. 
Sometimes  one  could  even  get  the  impression  that  some  supporters  of  the  leverage  ratio 
actually think they have found the fount of all knowledge. I don’t. I am very well aware that 
the concept has its benefits – but it also has its limitations. And I will argue that it is certainly 
not  wise  to  think  a  leverage  ratio  could  simultaneously  be  simple,  comprehensive  and 
comparable. 
The buzz about the leverage ratio 
2. 
Before I come to the truths and myths regarding the leverage ratio, I want to briefly remind us 
why  capital  ratios  are  sensible  concepts  and  therefore  rightly  used  by  regulators  and 
supervisors. 
Bank equity is supposed to cover the first losses in the event of a default before the claims of 
debt holders, and potentially depositors, are affected. If we take a bank’s assets as given, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
more equity strengthens the debt holders’ position at default and makes the bank safer. And 
that is basically it. By the way, regulators and supervisors like safe banks. 
There are, however, two competing concepts. Ratios following the first concept take aspects 
of banks’ asset risk into account and divide capital by assets subject to some risk-weighting – 
the well-known Basel II Tier 1 capital ratio is a prominent example. By contrast, the second 
concept  is  risk-insensitive.  The  ratio  is  defined  as  capital  over  a  non-risk  based  exposure 
measure, such as total bank assets. This is the world of the leverage ratio. 
In the recent past, some regulators and academics have been very active in pointing out the 
advantages of using the non-risk based leverage ratio as an element, possibly even the main 
one, in banking regulation. Andy Haldane’s already famous example of a dog which is able to 
catch  a  frisbee  without  knowing  the  underlying  physical  laws  points  to  the  problem  of 
complexity in current regulatory standards. To some extent, the discussion paper released by 
the  Basel  Committee’s  Task  Force  on  Simplicity  and  Comparability  also  emphasises  the 
future  role  of  a  non-risk  based  leverage  ratio.  Essentially,  these  voices recognize  the  high 
degree of complexity in today’s banking, but they doubt that this complexity can be handled 
appropriately with complex supervisory tools. Therefore they suggest relying on more simple 
measures such as the leverage ratio. 
Over  the  next  few  minutes,  I  will  attempt  to  test  some  of  the  advantages  of  the  non-risk 
based leverage ratio – particularly its alleged simplicity – against reality. I would like to go 
through three questions with you. Firstly, is the leverage ratio really a simple, comprehensive 
and comparable measure? Secondly, is it an advantage or a disadvantage that the leverage 
ratio  is  risk-insensitive  by  definition?  Thirdly,  should  we  move  away  from  risk-oriented 
banking regulation? 
3. 
Myths and truths regarding the leverage ratio 
Is it a simple, comprehensive and comparable measure? 
3.1 
How  should  we  define  a  simple,  comprehensive  and  comparable  measure?  The  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  been  working  on  such  a  measure  for  about  three 
years, without a final outcome. It is apparently not as easy to agree on a sensible concept for 
a  leverage  ratio  as  it  might  appear.  However,  proponents  of the  leverage  ratio  may  argue 
that its obvious definition would simply be the bank’s accounting equity divided by  its total 
assets.  Yet  a  leverage  ratio  defined  in  such  a  simple  way  has  two  major  drawbacks:  it  is 
neither comparable nor comprehensive. 
Why isn’t it comparable? Banks use different accounting standards. For example, it is well 
known that the netting rules for derivatives under IFRS are much more restrictive than under 
US GAAP putting banks reporting under IFRS at a comparative disadvantage. 
Another example is the definition of the eligible capital: the Basel Committee has had a hard 
time  reaching  a  consensus  on  a  consistent  and  internationally  harmonised  definition  of 
regulatory capital, as the approach of simply using the accounting equity was found wanting 
by the respective expert group. It is important to note that while it is often possible to plug 
these gaps by making some adjustments, this always comes at the price of a more complex 
and  therefore  less  transparent  leverage  ratio.  And  it  should  also  be  noted  that  accounting 
standards are not simple per se, and their application is subject to some discretion. This is 
another  potential  risk  for  the  comparability  of  an  accounting-based  measure.  And,  what  is 
worse, this area is largely outside the control of banking supervisors. 
The lack of comparability has implications: comparing the leverage ratios in the United States 
with those in Canada, Switzerland or with the Basel III leverage ratio is like comparing apples 
with  oranges.  This  implies  that  the  proposal  by  the  two  US  Senators  Sherrad  Brown  and 
David  Vitter,  which  requires  minimum  ratios  of  8  to  15  per  cent,  depending  on  bank  size, 
cannot be compared to the calibration of the Basel III leverage ratio, for example. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In a nutshell: a simple accounting-equity-over-assets ratio is not comparable across different 
countries.  Yet  another  problem  with  such  a  simple  ratio  is  that  it  is  not  comprehensive.  I 
would like to illustrate this by looking at three different aspects of the Basel III leverage ratio 
definition: 
The  starting  point  is  the  asset  side  of  the  balance  sheet,  or  more  precisely,  the  total 
on-balance  sheet  assets  under  applicable  accounting  standards.  First,  knowing  that  off-
balance  sheet  activities  may  constitute  leverage  as  well,  we  decided  to  include  positions 
such as credit commitments, too. 
Second, recognising that derivatives may be offset if certain accounting conditions hold, we 
preferred to rely on regulatory netting rules instead and require banks to apply a further add-
on for “potential future exposure”. 
Third, the accounting value of securities financing transactions such as repo agreements is 
replaced  by  a  more  prudent  and  internationally  comparable  measure;  it  consists  of  gross 
assets, before netting, and an add-on for counterparty risk. Those adjustments are perfectly 
justifiable  and  necessary  from  a  supervisor’s  perspective.  They  are  clearly  sensible.  But 
remember that any of these adjustments will come at the expense of simplicity. In short, a 
simple accounting-equity-over-assets ratio is not comprehensive either. 
Given these limitations, let me reiterate that it seems impossible to define a simple leverage 
ratio that is also comparable and comprehensive. Hence, some of its claimed advantages will 
not materialise in reality. 
Is it an advantage to be insensitive towards risk?  
3.2 
A leverage ratio is risk-insensitive by definition. Is this an advantage or a disadvantage? As 
we  all  know,  there  is  currently  an  intensive  debate  on  how  much  we  can  trust  the  model-
based calculation of risk-weighted assets and how we should understand the corresponding 
measures.  Tomorrow’s  presentation  by  Sujit  Kapadia  on  “Taking  uncertainty  seriously: 
simplicity versus complexity in financial regulation” will undoubtedly shed some more light on 
this issue. 
For me it is quite clear that our system of risk weightings has some shortcomings; just think 
of the treatment of government bonds, which allegedly carry zero risk. These shortcomings, 
however, do not prove that the leverage ratio is superior. 
The  leverage  ratio  has  its  own  deficiencies.  It  punishes  low-risk  business  models,  and  it 
favours high-risk businesses, encouraging banks to engage in more risk-taking, for example. 
This  is  the  world  of  Basel  I,  which  was  relatively  indifferent  towards  credit  risk.  Let’s  not 
forget that a decade ago, the Basel II framework was developed as a response to the Basel I 
rules of 1988. 
Moving away from risk-oriented banking regulation? 
3.3 
Introducing the leverage ratio as the primary regulatory requirement would mean taking two 
steps back to the risk-insensitivity of Basel I and even beyond. Why is this a headache for 
me? There is a danger that we will effectively end up with a leverage ratio only, because a 
sufficiently  high  leverage  ratio  requirement  will  override  the  calculation  of  risk-weighted 
assets. Why is this? 
Let  me  draw  your  attention  to  one  result  from  the  recently  published  Basel  III  monitoring 
exercise. Only 30% of the large, international banks analysed is more easily able to fulfil a 
risk-based  Tier  1  capital  ratio  of  8.5%  (including  the  capital  conservation  buffer)  than  a 
3% leverage ratio, which is the ratio the Basel Committee favours. This does not look very 
balanced  to  me,  yet  voices  from  the  regulatory  community,  such  as  FDIC  Vice  Chairman 
Thomas  Hoenig  or  Fed  Governor  Daniel  Tarullo,  have  recently  proposed  going  higher. 
Daniel Tarullo is advocating a leverage ratio of 6% for globally systemically important banks 
(G-SIBs), for example. And economists like Martin Hellwig are even more radical; they are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
suggesting that banks should hold minimum capital of 20% to 30%, relative to their non-risk 
weighted assets. As a practitioner I can only marvel at such notions. Such a step requires 
thorough consideration and careful analysis – not only regarding the definition and level of 
capital,  but  also  regarding  the  transitional  period  –  and  I  am  therefore  far  from  being 
convinced that we should take such a radical step. 
What should we do instead? My answer is straightforward: we should stick to the Basel III 
timeline. Under the Basel III timeline, banks will be required to disclose their leverage ratios 
as of 2015, which allows both the supervisors and the investors to use it as an indicator for 
bank  risk.  However,  the  definition  will  remain  under  review  until  2018,  when  the  decision 
about  its  introduction  as  a  binding  “Pillar  1”  requirement  will  eventually  be  taken.  I  believe 
that we should use this parallel run period for further analyses regarding the leverage ratio’s 
interaction with risk-based capital requirements, regarding the undesirable incentives it may 
potentially create, and regarding its impact on low-risk business models. 
Conclusions 
4. 
To be absolutely clear: I am not against a leverage ratio. Supervisors should actually make 
use of a leverage ratio, but they should also rely on a risk-sensitive measure. 
A sensible concept for a leverage ratio will, however, require a certain degree of complexity. 
You probably know that physicist Albert Einstein once stressed that we should “make things 
as  simple  as  possible,  but  no  simpler”,  and  this  applies  very  much  to  the  design  of  a 
consistent, comparable and comprehensive regulatory measure. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  have  already  discussed  complexity  in  various  forms  at  this 
conference.  I  hope  my  thoughts  about  the  leverage  ratio  will  help  to  stimulate  your 
discussions at this joint Bundesbank/SAFE conference. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
References: 
DeAngelo,  Harry  and  Stulz,  Rene  M.  (August  2013),  “Why  High  Leverage  is  Optimal  for 
Banks”, Fisher College of Business Working Paper No. 2013-03-08; ECGI - Finance Working 
Paper No. 356, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2254998. 
Miles,  David,  Yang,  Jing  and  Marcheggiano,  Gilberto  (2013),  “Optimal  Bank  Capital”,  The 
Economic Journal, Vol. 123, pp. 1–37, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2012.02521.x. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
