Jean-Pierre Danthine: Causes and consequences of low interest rates 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Danthine,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Swisscanto Market Outlook 2014, Lausanne, 14 November 2013. 
 I would like to thank Till Ebner, Fabian Gunzinger and Patrick Saner for their very valuable support in drafting this 
speech. 
Introduction 
In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  long-term  and  short-term  interest  rates  have  been  at 
historically  low  levels  for  several  years  already.  This  holds  for  advanced  economies,  in 
general,  and  for  Switzerland,  in  particular.  Central  banks  have  certainly  been  important 
actors in this play, as the financial crisis and its economic consequences called for decisive 
action: central banks around the world lowered their policy rates sharply; they then adopted 
unconventional measures, often to exert direct downward pressure on long-term rates and 
risk premia. 
But interest rates developments are not just about monetary policy; they reflect the economic 
and  financial  circumstances  that  prevail  in  a  given  situation,  circumstances  to  which 
monetary authorities have to adapt. With this in mind, I will, in the first part of my speech, 
review the facts behind the currently low interest rates. In doing so, I will focus on the two 
phenomena  highlighted  in  chart  1:  a  secular  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  since  the 
1980s,  which  had  already  brought  interest  rates  to  low  levels  before  the  financial  crisis 
began, and a cyclical component that led to the extreme lows we have seen over the last few 
years. This cyclical component is the direct consequence of the financial and economic crisis 
itself,  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  reaction  to  the  crisis  and  the  increased  demand  for 
safe assets which has fuelled capital flows into perceived safe havens such as Switzerland. 
In the second part, I will describe the risks that accompany such a prolonged period of low 
interest rates. In particular, I will argue that while a period of this kind does not pose a threat 
to price stability in the foreseeable future, it may be a breeding ground for financial instability. 
Finally,  I  will  examine  the  implications  of  our  analysis  for  interest  rate  perspectives.  I  will 
argue  that,  while  the  current  weakness  of  the  global  economy  still  weighs  on  market  and 
policy rates, the cyclical downturn will eventually reverse, and, over time, interest rates will 
gradually recover to more normal levels. 
Causes of low interest rates 
But first things first. Why are interest rates so low? 
When discussing the determinants of nominal long-term interest rates, it is useful to think of 
them as the sum of two elements, the real long-term interest rate and the inflation premium. 
Economic  theory  tells  us  that  the real  interest  rate  is  the  price  that  matches  the  supply  of 
savings with the demand for capital used for investment. Supply and demand for funds, in 
turn,  are  determined  by  fundamental  economic  factors  such  as  the  time  preference  of 
households to consume today relative to consuming tomorrow, as well as the productivity of 
capital and demographic factors which determine future growth prospects. 
To arrive at market-quoted nominal interest rates, one must add to the real rate an inflation 
premium, which compensates the investor for the potential loss in the purchasing power of 
money over the term of the security. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So, to shed light on the movement towards lower nominal interest rates since the 1980s, let 
us examine how these two components – the real interest rate and the inflation premium – 
have changed over that period. 
A secular downward shift 
A considerable part of the secular decline in nominal rates is the result of lower and more 
stable inflation rates in advanced economies, translating into reduced inflation expectations 
and  a  lower  inflation  premium  (chart  2).  Reduced  volatility  of  inflation  rates  since  the  mid-
1980s – a development associated with the “Great Moderation” – has probably contributed to 
this.1 This reduction in the inflation premium and in volatility can, at least partly, be attributed 
to  the  success  of  central  banks’  policies  and  their  credible  commitment  to  low  and  stable 
inflation, a commitment which has become the hallmark of modern central banking. 
Realised real rates – calculated as observed nominal rates minus the realised inflation rates 
–  have  also  declined,  and  have  been  substantially  lower  in  the  2000s  than  in  the  1980s 
(chart 3). There are several potential explanations for this development. 
A first explanation is the “global savings glut” hypothesis, which states that the decline in real 
interest  rates  was  the  result  of  an  increase  in  savings  from  emerging  economies  and  oil-
producing economies. It is argued that this increase was driven by, among other things, an 
accumulation  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  elevated  oil  prices  and  precautionary  savings 
(chart 4).2 
But the decline in real rates could also result from a decrease in growth prospects – itself 
caused,  for  instance,  by  a  decline  in  the  growth  of  productivity  or  population,  or  by 
demographic  shifts,  particularly  a  reduction  in  the  working  population  relative  to  the  non-
working population (charts 5 and 6).3 
None  of  these  possible  explanations  for  the  reduction  in  real  interest  rates  has  been  fully 
confirmed, and therefore they do not constitute a sound basis for forecasting future interest 
rate developments. But the discussion highlights the fact that, in order to understand longer-
term trends in real interest rates, we have to rely on low frequency changes in fundamental 
economic factors, while monetary policy does not play a primary role here. 
The cyclical downturn 
Let us now turn to more recent interest rate developments. As mentioned, since the financial 
crisis and the global economic slump that followed,  we have seen a further fall in rates to 
very low levels. Three explanations are particularly relevant for this cyclical development. 
First, low or negative output growth like that observed in times of recession together with the 
associated pessimism about future prospects, all have a negative impact on interest rates. 
Low growth and excess capacities reduce the anticipated return on capital, thus diminishing 
the  incentives  to  invest  and  lowering  the  demand  for funds.  At  the  same  time,  the  lack of 
confidence depresses demand and increases the level of savings. This combination of low 
demand and a high supply of funds leads to low interest rates. 
The  low  interest  rates  we  currently  observe  are  thus,  first  and  foremost,  a  natural 
consequence  of  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy,  characterised  by  a  substantial 
slowdown of economic activity after the financial crisis and a comparatively weak recovery, 
                                                
1  For a more detailed description of the “Great Moderation” cf., for instance, Bernanke (2004). 
2  Cf. Bernanke (2007).  
3  Cf., for instance, Gordon (2012) for a provocative thesis on future productivity and GDP growth and Bloom et 
al. (2001) for an extensive survey of the impact of demographics on growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
with  marked  underutilisation  of  production  factors,  notably  labour,  in  many  advanced 
economies (chart 7). 
Second,  as  mentioned  before,  the  central  banks  of  most  mature  economies  have  also 
contributed  to  the  current  environment  of  low  interest  rates.  They  responded  swiftly  and 
decisively  to  the  crisis  by  first  lowering  short-term  rates  practically  to  zero,  then  exerting 
direct pressure on longer rates. To achieve this, they engaged in “quantitative easing” and 
“credit easing” policies by expanding and changing the composition of their balance sheets. 
The goal of these measures was to mitigate the effects of the economic slump and stabilise 
financial markets in the face of high uncertainty (charts 8 and 9). 
One may wonder – and many people do – whether these policies have gone too far. While 
the jury is still out on unconventional measures,4 there is no doubt that the policy of lowering 
short rates to virtually zero and keeping them there was fully justified. Had this policy been 
too  expansionary,  it  would  have  translated  into  inflationary  pressures.  Yet,  much  to  the 
contrary,  inflation  in most  advanced  economies  has  been  subdued  and  is,  in  some  cases, 
still falling  even five  years  into  the  crisis.  Finally,  heightened  uncertainty  in global financial 
markets has increased the demand for safe assets like government bonds. At the same time, 
the supply of such safe assets has decreased as investors have increasingly questioned the 
relative security of assets that were previously considered safe, a fact that is reflected in the 
down-grading  of  several  sovereign  bonds.  With  an  increased  demand  for  and  decreased 
supply of safe assets, their price has been bid up and their yield pushed down. 
The Swiss case 
These changes in the supply and demand for safe assets are of particular relevance in the 
case of Switzerland. While Switzerland has historically experienced lower interest rates than 
its  peers,  the  exceptionally  low  levels  that  have  prevailed  since  2009  can  largely  be 
explained by the increased demand for risk-free investments and the perception that Swiss 
franc  assets  constitute one  of the  ultimate  safe  havens  in  times  of global  uncertainty. The 
reasons  for  this  are  well  known.  The  country  has  managed  to  maintain  a  long-standing 
reputation  for  political  and  economic  stability.  In  relative  terms,  the  Swiss  economy 
weathered the 2007 financial crisis rather well, being one of the first advanced countries to 
reach its pre-crisis level of output. And, at less than 40%, its debt-to-GDP ratio is relatively 
low. 
The  surge  in  the  demand  for  Swiss  franc  assets  has  pushed  Swiss  interest  rates  to 
unprecedented  lows  (chart  10).  In  September  2011,  the  three-month  Libor  fell  to  a  low  of 
0.003% while the yield on 10-year Swiss government bonds fell to an all-time low of 0.376% 
in  December  2012.  Temporarily,  futures  contracts  on  the  three-month  Libor  even  implied 
negative future rates. 
At  the  same  time,  the  safe  haven  flows  have  put  unprecedented  upward  pressure  on  the 
Swiss  franc.  At  its  peak  in  early  August  2011,  nominal  appreciation  reached  about  60% 
against the euro and the US dollar compared to mid-2007 levels (chart 11). 
In  combination  with  weak  global  demand,  the  very  substantial  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss 
franc posed an acute threat of recession and carried the risk of deflationary developments. 
To  contain  these  risks,  the  SNB  took  unprecedented  measures,  first  increasing  liquidity  to 
historically unparalleled levels, then introducing a minimum exchange rate against the euro. 
                                                
4  Estimates suggest that the first round of US quantitative easing has reduced yields on 10-year U.S. treasuries 
by 50 to 100 basis points, see e.g. Christensen and Rudebusch (2012) or Gagnon et al (2011). However, we 
are  not  yet  in  a  position  to  undertake  a  final  assessment  of  the  broader  macroeconomic  effects  of  these 
programmes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Summing up our investigation into the causes of low interest rates, the main message is that 
interest rates reflect the prevailing economic and financial circumstances and the reaction of 
monetary  policy  to  these  circumstances.  The  low  levels  we  currently  observe  can  be 
explained by a secular downward trend that began in the 1980s, a cyclical downturn due to 
the financial crisis, the correspondingly accommodative monetary policy and, in the case of 
Switzerland, additional downward pressure resulting from the safe-haven demand. 
But – and this brings me to my next point – such low interest rate levels are not without risk. 
Consequences of a long period of low interest rates 
An extended period of very accommodative monetary policy, even when fully justified as a 
reaction to prevailing economic circumstances, is not without risks and side-effects. Let me 
raise two issues: the risk to price stability, and the risk to financial stability. 
I  will  start  with  the former.  An  extended  period of  low  interest rates  and  abundant  liquidity 
inevitably  generates  the  fear  of  a  resurgence  of  the  high  levels  of  inflation  that  we  have 
witnessed in the past. Given the current situation, these fears are unwarranted. 
In  most  advanced  economies,  capacities  are  still  underutilised  and  output  gaps  are  set  to 
close only very gradually (chart 12). Money, despite having been made available by central 
banks  in  unprecedented  amounts,  has  not  showed  up  proportionally  in  investment  and 
consumption. This reality implies that inflation pressures will be contained for some time to 
come. 
Moreover,  central  banks  have  the  necessary  instruments  at  hand  to  counter  inflation 
pressures, if and when they manifest themselves. The implication for our analysis is that the 
inflation premium in interest rates is set to remain small in the future.5 
But even though the currently low policy rates are adapted to current economic realities and 
do  not  pose  a  threat  to  price  stability  in  the  foreseeable  future,  they  may  pose  a  risk  to 
financial stability through various channels. 
First,  by  lowering  the  cost  of  credit  and  increasing  the  value  of  assets,  low  interest  rates 
could  provide  the  breeding  ground  for  asset  price  and  credit  booms.  In  this  regard,  the 
current  developments  in  Swiss  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  are  telling:  real  estate 
prices  and  mortgage  credit  have  been  growing  with  considerable  momentum  for  several 
years already. Importantly, the growth rates of both prices and credit volumes are at levels 
which  cannot  be  fully  explained  by  fundamental  factors.  This  has  led  to  the  built-up  of 
imbalances  which  increase  the  risk  of  a  substantial  price  corrections  and  of  loan  losses 
(charts 13 and 14).6 
A  second,  related,  danger  is  that  low  rates  may  induce  excessive  risk-taking  in  financial 
markets – as opposed to reviving productive risk-taking, which is one of the objectives of low 
policy rates. Here, the economic literature stresses two channels: investors who are unable 
or  unwilling  to  accept  low  returns  are  liable  to  take  higher  risks  and  increase  leverage  to 
reach  their  return  objective,  a  phenomenon  known  as  “search  for  yield”  (chart  15).7  In 
addition, by pushing up asset prices and dampening price volatility, low interest rates reduce 
                                                
5  This  view  is  also  reflected  in  market  expectations.  For  instance,  10  year  inflation  expectations  for  the  US, 
derived from the yield differential of inflation-linked government bonds and nominal government bonds, stood 
slightly below 2.25% in August 2013. 
6  Empirical evidence suggest that a simultaneous built-up of imbalances in real estate and credit markets is a 
key  leading  indicator  of  subsequent  financial  instability.  Cf.,  for  instance,  Schularick  and  Taylor  (2012)  and 
Borio (2012). 
7  Cf. Borio and Zhu (2008) and Gambacorta (2009).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
measured risk and may lead investors to misjudge the true risk of a given investment.8 A long 
period  of  low  rates,  for  example,  may  lead  borrowers  and  lenders  to  overestimate  debt 
affordability and underestimate the risk of higher debt servicing costs in the future. 
Third, financial stability may be in danger when strong action by central banks during a crisis 
leads  market  participants  to  rely  excessively  on  central  banks  as  a  backstop  in  case  of 
negative shocks. This is the moral hazard problem.9 
Taken  together,  these  channels  underline  the  risks  the  current  “low-for-long”-situation 
presents for financial stability. These risks have to be acknowledged and acted upon. The 
fact  that  it  is  possible  for  these  risks  to  exist  while  monetary  policy  is  responding 
appropriately  to  the  macroeconomic  situation  perfectly  illustrates  the  Tinbergen  principle  
–  the  number  of  instruments  must  equal  the  number  of  policy  goals.10  In  the  current 
environment,  the  interest  rate  cannot  be  the  instrument  of  choice  for  addressing  financial 
stability risks. 
The  answer  is  to  give  more  weight  to  what  are  known  as  macroprudential  instruments 
implemented  as  a  complement  to,  and  along-side  a  monetary  policy  that  remains  firmly 
focused  on  price  stability.  These  instruments  directly  target  the  risk-taking  behaviour 
underlying financial stability risks. This is exactly the approach chosen in Switzerland with the 
activation of the countercyclical capital buffer. By forcing banks to build up additional capital 
in the current phase of strong credit growth, the regulators aim at improving the capacity of 
the banking system to bear losses in the event that the identified risks materialise, while also 
limiting the further build-up of these risks. 
Outlook 
We  are  now  in  a  position  to  derive  the  implications  of  our  analysis  for  the  interest  rate 
outlook. With respect to the secular trend toward lower interest rates, two observations are in 
order. First, I do not think the current situation bears the seeds for a return to the inflation 
rates of the seventies, despite the fears that are sometimes expressed. As argued, I thus do 
not  see  the  reasons  for  a  significant  increase  in  the  inflation  premium.  Second,  as  to  the 
other defining element of the secular trend, lower real rates, it is harder to make definitive 
statements.  The  ultimate  drivers  of  this  development  and  their  respective  roles  have  not 
been unambiguously clarified. For this reason, it is not possible to argue convincingly that the 
secular  downward  trend  has  run  its  course  or  that  it  is  likely  to  revert.  This  is  the  main 
unknown in our equation. 
What  is  certain,  however,  is  that  the  crisis-induced  cyclical  downturn  will  eventually  be 
reversed. At some point, economies will return to more robust growth paths. Interest rates 
and monetary policy  will accompany this change in circumstances. Thus, making sense of 
our assessment of the likely future path of interest rates hinges on our assessment of the 
economic outlook. Let me be more specific here. 
For  the  global  economy,  the  SNB  forecasts  the  continuation  of  a  gradual,  albeit  subpar 
recovery.  In  the  near  term,  indicators  for  the  US,  Europe  and  China  suggest  that  global 
growth  should  gradually  gain  in  momentum  and  become  more  broad  based  (chart  16). 
Nevertheless, the recovery is likely to remain subdued. Households, governments and banks 
in many advanced economies are still in deleveraging mode, and this attempt to reduce the 
debt overhang is likely to weigh on short-term growth prospects. Moreover, persistently high 
                                                
8  Cf., e.g., Adrian and Shin (2009). 
9  Cf., e.g., Miller et al (2002).  
10  Cf. Tinbergen (1956).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
that  exports  are  gaining  momentum,  driven  by 
unemployment  rates  and  tight  financial  conditions  continue  to  dampen  consumption 
spending and business investment in several euro area countries. 
Against  this  background,  the  Swiss  economy  is  expected  to  continue  its  expansion  in  the 
quarters  to  come.  Available  indicators  hint  at  a  fairly  robust  second  term  in  2013.  For 
instance,  monthly  data  show 
the 
strengthening of foreign demand. For 2013, we expect the Swiss economy to grow between 
1.5% and 2%. 
Despite  this  moderately  optimistic  outlook,  we  must  be  aware  that  downside  risks  remain 
substantial. Let me name three: first, structural problems in Europe persist, and could cause 
new  market  tensions.  In  particular,  the  European  banking  system  remains  vulnerable. 
Second, a negative fiscal shock in the US in early 2014, caused, for instance, by renewed 
political  deadlock  over  public  budget  negotiations,  would  probably  be  a drag  on  the global 
economy. Third, adjustments of the monetary policy stance in one area (e.g. the US) may 
create undesired spillovers in other regions (e.g. emerging markets or Europe). This could 
lead to increased volatility in financial markets. 
What  does  this  economic  outlook  imply  for  the  likely  evolution  of  interest  rates?  In  the 
analysis  of  potential  future  paths,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  policy  rates  and  market 
rates.  Market  rates,  in  general,  respond  faster  to  changes  in  the  economic  situation  and 
outlook than policy rates. 
The low inflation environment, subdued economic outlook and downside risks that prevail all 
warrant  the  continuation  of  a  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  with  low  interest  rates. 
Given  the  fragile  state  of  the  global  economy,  a  premature  increase  in  policy  rates  would 
carry the risk of choking off the recovery. In Switzerland, specifically, the subdued inflation 
outlook  (chart  17),  the  highly  valued  currency  and  the  fact  that  a  recurrence  of  financial 
market tensions cannot be excluded warrant a continuation of the minimum exchange rate 
policy. In the current situation, the minimum exchange rate remains an essential instrument 
for preventing an undesirable tightening in monetary conditions should the upward pressure 
on the Swiss franc intensify again. 
Market  rates  are  still  determined  by  the  current  cyclical  weakness  of  the  global  economy. 
Once  the  global  economy  gets  back  on  a  stronger  and  broader-based  growth  path  and 
uncertainty  wanes,  rates  should  return  to  more  normal  levels.  For  Switzerland,  this  would 
mean that safe haven forces would become less relevant, removing some of the additional 
negative pressures on domestic interest rates. 
Conclusion 
In  sum,  given  that  we  expect  a  slow,  but  continued  improvement  of  the  world  economy, 
market rates are set to gradually recover to more normal levels over time. Such a scenario 
will allow central banks to progressively scale back their crisis measures and, eventually, lift 
policy  rates  off  the  zero  lower  bound.  We  are  clearly  not  there  yet,  however.  The  global 
economy is still fragile and the level of uncertainty remains elevated. Markets understandably 
expect policy rates to remain low for several quarters in the future. 
While at a qualitative level the outlook is thus relatively clear, the road back to normality will 
probably  be  long  and  possibly  bumpy.  After  all  there  is  no  precedent  for  the  situation  we 
have  experienced  and  for  the  exceptional  measures  taken  by  monetary  authorities.  At  the 
same  time,  as  we  have  discussed,  an  extended  period  of  low  interest  rates  may  entail 
significant risks for financial stability. These require the full attention of the authorities, who 
should be ready to use appropriate instruments, if needed, to keep these risks in check. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
imbalances  – 
(2007).  Global 
recent  developments  and  prospects. 
References 
Adrian,  T.,  Shin,  H.  (2009).  Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary  Economics.  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 398. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2004).  The  Great  Moderation.  http://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS-
/SPEECHES/2004/20040220/default.htm 
Bernanke,  B. 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070911a.htm 
Bloom,  D.,  Canning,  D.,  Sevilla,  J.  (2001).  Economic  Growth  and  the  Demographic 
Transition. NBER Working Paper No 8685. 
Borio,  C.  (2012).  The  financial  cycle  and  macroeconomics:  What  have  we  learnt?  BIS 
Working Paper No 395. 
Borio, C., Zhu, H. (2012). Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link 
in the transmission mechanism? Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 8, pages 236–251. 
Christensen,  J.,  Rudebusch,  G.  (2012).  The  Response  of  Interest  Rates  to  US  and  UK 
Quantitative  Easing.  The  Economic  Journal,  Royal  Economic  Society,  vol.  122,  
pages 385–414. 
Gagnon, J., Raskin, M., Remache, J., Sack, B. (2011). The Financial Markets Effects of the 
Federal  Reserve’s  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchases.  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking, 
vol. 7 (1), pages 3–43. 
Gambacorta, L. (2009). Monetary policy and the risk-taking channel. BIS Quarterly Review, 
December 2009, pages 43–53. 
Gordon, R. (2012). Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six 
Headwinds. NBER Working Paper No. 18315. 
Miller, M., Weller, P., Zhang, L. (2002). Moral Hazard and the US Stock Market: Analysing 
the  “Greenspan  Put”.  The  Economic  Journal,  Royal  Economic  Society,  vol.  112,  
pages 171–186. 
Schularick,  M.,  Taylor,  A.  (2012).  Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy,  Leverage 
Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review, American Economic 
Association, vol. 102(2), pages 1029–61. 
Tinbergen,  J.  (1954).  Economic  Policy:  Principles  and  Design.  North  Holland  Publishing 
Company. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
