Benoît Cœuré: The political dimension of European economic integration 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  19th  Université  d’automne  de  la  Ligue  des  droits  de  l’Homme,  Paris,  23  November 
2013. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Jean-Francois  Jamet  for  his  contribution.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Before I start, let me thank the Ligue des droits de l’Homme for inviting me to speak today.  
As we approach the 100th anniversary of the First World War, it is worth remembering that 
the European project emerged from a moral imperative. Following two tragic episodes of self-
destruction  and  the  abandonment  of  the  most  fundamental  humanistic  values,  Europeans 
acknowledged that, in the words of Robert Schuman 50 years ago: “Serving mankind is a 
duty demanded of us equal to that of national loyalty”.1  
Europe thus became our common political project, a project of peace, democracy, freedom 
and  economic  reconstruction.  And  in  fact  the  European  Union  has  succeeded  on  each  of 
these accounts.  
The  people  of  Europe  have  also  expected  European  integration  to  promote  convergence 
towards  high  standards  of  living  and  social  protection.  An  enlarged  European  Union  has 
welcomed  poorer  countries  which  fully  belong  to  the  European  project.  The  resulting 
dispersion in income levels has been a first challenge to the convergence process. The crisis 
has then reversed this process across Europe, with states having to launch debt reduction 
programmes  accompanied  by  structural  reforms,  and  rising  unemployment  bringing 
widespread  social  hardship.  Faced  with  the  costs  of  this  adjustment,  many  people  are 
tempted to turn their backs on Europe.  
And the more they do so, the further we are from a solution. 
It  is,  I  think,  acknowledged  that  the  crisis  had  its  roots  in  a  flawed  vision  of  European 
integration that should now be corrected. But this reconstruction work will only be legitimate if 
it  creates  the  conditions  for  growth  and  employment.  So  I  want  to  consider  three  issues 
today:  
First, I’d like to make a case for the EU and the euro’s achievements, which are too often 
overlooked in the current crisis. 
Second, I’ll explain how policies at European and national levels can help to restore growth 
and reduce unemployment, with a focus on what the European Central Bank (ECB) can – 
and cannot – achieve. 
Finally,  explore  ways  to  strengthen  the  political  legitimacy  of  our  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union (EMU) and revive the political dimension of the European project. 
The benefits of European integration 
1. 
European  integration  has  been  our  quest  to  achieve  a  common  civilisation.  Today,  we 
frequently  forget  how  much  it  has  contributed  to  the  reconstruction  of  Europe  –  morally, 
politically and economically. In what ways? 
                                                 
1   Servir l’humanité est un devoir à l’égal de celui que nous dicte notre fidélité à la nation”. Schuman R. (1963), 
Pour l’Europe, Éditions Nagel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
European integration means peace in Europe. Not only did it end the long-standing Franco-
German  confrontation,  it  also  reunified  the  continent  after  the  Cold  War  –  a  point  which 
resonates  even  more  strongly  for  people  of  my  generation.2  There  is  however  a  creeping 
temptation  to  take  this  achievement  for  granted  and  to  underestimate  the  risks  posed  by 
nationalist tendencies being stirred up by the crisis in Europe.  
European integration has contributed to the spread of democracy, freedom and the rule of 
law.  For  the  founding  countries,  the  European  project  was  a  unique  chance  to  anchor 
democracy  on  this  side  of  the  Iron  Curtain.  The  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  has 
helped to strengthen democratic principles in countries that suffered years of dictatorship.3 
European integration supported post-war economic reconstruction in Europe. For Europe’s 
founding  fathers,  making  war  impossible  meant  making  Europe  resistant  to  another  Great 
Depression. This was obtained by way of a “de facto solidarity”4 based on the pooling of coal 
and  steel  production,  and  the  gradual  creation  of  a  single  market,  and  subsequently 
complemented by cohesion policies and the creation of the euro.  
Let me also say a few words on the benefits of our common currency. 
The  euro  is  the  most  visible  and  most  internationally  known  symbol  of  a  united  Europe. 
Surveys  show  it  has  become  the  first  element  of  the  European  identity:  when  asked  to 
identify  the  most  important  elements  that  make  up  that  European  identity,  41%  of 
respondents in the euro area first mention the common currency, just ahead of democratic 
values (40%).5 Moreover, the euro is the world’s second reserve currency after the US dollar: 
in 2012, around 24% of declared foreign reserves were held in euros. 
With the euro, we enjoy the benefits of price stability, which preserves the value of incomes 
and savings, especially for the most fragile in society, who hold their savings as cash or bank 
deposits  and  can’t  protect  themselves  against  inflation.  Since  the  creation  of  the  euro, 
inflation has risen on average almost exactly 2% per year in the euro area. By comparison, 
inflation from 1961 to 1991 (when the convergence criteria for participation in Economic and 
Monetary Union were decided) averaged over 10% in Portugal, Greece and Spain, but also 
6.6% in France and 3.4% in Germany.6  
The  euro  reduces  transaction  costs  for  producers,  their  employees  and  end  clients.  It 
facilitates price comparisons and bank transfers, while eliminating currency risks in intra-euro 
area trade and investment. Note that close to 50% of France’s exports go to other members 
of the euro area. 
Finally,  and  above  all,  the  interdependence  and  shared  responsibility  implied  by  the  euro 
create a European solidarity imperative in the face of the crisis. This “de facto solidarity” is 
the  greatest  challenge  that  the  European  Union  faces  today,  against  the  background  of  a 
greater disparity across countries. If I may turn Schuman’s formula on its head, it now calls 
for “concrete achievements”. The temptation to go it alone in economic affairs, so evident in 
the  past  (remember  the  competitive  devaluations  of  the  1980s  and  90s)  is  no  longer 
                                                 
2   This logic also underpins the gradual integration of countries that emerged from the Yugoslav wars. 
3  
In  particular,  the  so-called  “Copenhagen  criteria”  notably  require  that  national  institutions  guarantee 
“democracy,  the  rule  of  law,  human  rights  and  respect  for  and  protection  of  minorities”.  It  also  makes 
membership  conditional  on  “adherence  to  the  aims  of  political,  economic  and  monetary  union”.  Presidency 
Conclusions, Copenhagen European Council, 21–22 June 1993. 
4   “Europe  will  not  be  made  all  at  once,  or  according  to  a  single  plan.  It  will  be  built  through  concrete 
achievements which first create a de facto solidarity”, Robert Schuman’s Declaration, 9 May 1950. 
5   Standard Eurobarometer 77, European Citizenship, Spring 2012. 
6   Source: AMECO database (European Commission). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
appropriate.  This  does  not  preclude  countries  from  having  different  views  or  different 
interests, but it creates a duty to overcome these differences and act together. 
Reducing unemployment 
2. 
The current crisis, with its associated fall in incomes and rise in unemployment, has however 
bred misunderstanding and sometimes anger in many parts of Europe. Unemployment in the 
euro area stood at 12.2% in September 2013, compared with 7.6% at the beginning of the 
financial crisis in the second quarter of 2007. Young people have been hit especially hard: 
more than 3.5 million persons under 25 are now without a job in the euro area – that’s almost 
one in four. In Greece and Spain the youth unemployment rate is over 50%. Absent a strong 
push for growth, there is a tangible risk to create a “lost generation”, as Europe has done in a 
more tragic way in 1914-1918. 
This situation is undermining trust in national and EU institutions.7 And it is worrying because 
we cannot resolve this problem by resorting to the nationalist solutions of the past. Only a 
joint  effort  can  reduce  unemployment  in  a  sustainable  manner,  using  both  national  and 
European instruments.  
Our  first  objective  must  be  to  reduce  financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area,  which  is 
illustrated by the different borrowing conditions in the various euro area countries and which 
has contributed – among other factors – to a divergence of investment and unemployment 
rates. Stressed economies are also those where investment has decreased the most.8 As a 
result, the average unemployment rate now stands above 18% on average for the group of 
countries  hit  by  financial  stress,9  whereas  it  is  below  8%  on  average  in  non-stressed 
countries. Interestingly, these average unemployment rates were essentially the same before 
the financial crisis.  
Against this background, what can European institutions do?  
The  ECB  has  reduced  its  key  interest  rate,  the  rate  at  which  banks  refinance  themselves 
every week, to a historic low of 0.25%. We have said that, in view of the subdued outlook for 
inflation, we expect interest rates to remain at current or lower levels for an extended period 
of time. Additionally, we have taken several measures to ensure that euro area banks can 
pass on these low interest rates to the real economy, in particular where they are needed the 
most. The measures include providing banks with as much liquidity as they need – against 
adequate collateral. We have offered them the possibility of depositing additional collateral 
consisting of credit claims from their clients (for example, SMEs) directly with the ECB and 
have  announced  that  we  would  intervene  via  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs)  to 
remove  unwarranted  risks  to  the  integrity  of  the  euro  area.  Such  support  has  benefited 
directly to the stressed economies, even though they ultimately benefit the entire region. 
These measures have been entirely in line with the ECB’s primary mandate of medium-term 
price stability. Contrary to what is sometimes said, this objective has in no way constrained 
our  ability  to  act  and  support  the  euro  area  economy  at  a  time  of  crisis,  when  downward 
pressures on prices have appeared. 
These measures will however be efficient only if banks pass on to their clients the favourable 
financing conditions (in terms of price and quantity). The priority is to re-establish trust in the 
strength of the European banking sector and its capacity to finance the economy. With this 
                                                 
7   Roth, F., Nowak-Lehmann F., Otter, T. (2012), “Crisis and Trust in National and European Union Institutions: 
Panel Evidence for the EU, 1999 to 2012”, EUI Working Papers, RSCAS 2013/31. 
8   Some  figures  from  the  second  quarter  of  2007  to  the  first  quarter  of  2013:  Greece  –60%,  Slovenia  –55%, 
Ireland –50%, Cyprus –49%, Portugal –41%, Spain –39% and Italy –32%. 
9   Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain, Cyprus, Slovenia and Italy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
aim in mind, the ECB will become the single supervisor of around 130 of the most significant 
euro area banks in November 2014.10 Until then, it will conduct a comprehensive assessment 
of  their  balance  sheets  to  create  greater  transparency  in  respect  of  the  risks  and  ensure, 
should  the  assessment  reveal  excessive  risks  or  insufficient  capital,  that  they  take  prompt 
corrective action when warranted.  
Rules  recently  adopted  or  still  under  discussion  in  the  European  Union  also  ensure  that 
shareholders and creditors will have a strong interest in banks avoiding excessive risk-taking, 
for  a  simple  reason:  they  will  now  be  first  in  line  to  absorb  possible  losses,  rather  than 
taxpayers.11  Let  me  be  clear  on  this:  the  time  when  taxpayers  were  first  in  line  to  bail  out 
banks  is  behind  us.  Banks’  senior  managers  will  also  be  held  responsible:  the  new 
framework  sets  a  cap  on  executive  remuneration  as  long  as  a  given  bank  is  undergoing 
restructuring or relying on state support.12  
These new principles complement all the international rules adopted under the auspices of 
the Financial Stability Board and which aim to put the financial system on a sounder footing, 
as  well  as  other  measures  under  discussion,  such  as  the  separation  of  banks’  proprietary 
trading,  on  which  the  European  Commission  will  shortly  submit  a  proposal.  For  many 
European citizens, these reforms take too much time and they question the reassuring words 
they can hear. I understand their impatience, but this is about changing a system as a whole, 
and it takes time.  
While making the financial system sounder is key to recovering investment, further steps are 
needed to support job creation in a sustainable way. These measures are the responsibility 
of states, either individually or in a coordinated way.  
 
The euro area economies can become fairer and more competitive, for instance, by 
removing the barriers to entry in the labour market, which protect those with a job 
but  reduce  opportunities  for  the  unemployed,  especially  the  young.  Likewise,  it  is 
also  possible  to  reduce  barriers  to  entry  in  goods  and  products  markets,  which 
maintain  artificially  high  prices  for  the  benefit  of  a  few,  and  create  obstacles  to 
entrepreneurship.  It  is  a  matter  of  both  efficiency  and  fairness,  and  imposes  no 
burdens on public finances. 
It  is  necessary  to  create  a  climate  that  favours  business  investment.  Given  the 
above figures, there will be no sustainable recovery in employment without a pick-up 
in  productive  investment,  and  that  pick-up  is  also  likely  to  rebalance  growth  in 
Europe, which is weak today because it relies too much on demand from the rest of 
the world, which is uncertain. 
Our  social  model(s)  are  only  as  sustainable  as  our  public  finances.  We  therefore 
need  to  rebalance  fiscal  revenues  and  expenditures.  This  rebalancing  will 
undoubtedly weigh down on growth over the short term. But not keeping public debt 
and deficit in check would be tantamount to accepting that an ever greater share of 
fiscal revenues is channelled towards servicing debt instead of financing collective 
action – which comes down to accepting a loss of sovereignty. It is also as if the 
state,  in  the  future,  gives  up  performing  its  function  of  consolidating  the  economy 
                                                   
10   See  Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  1024/2013  of  15  October  2013  conferring  specific  tasks  on  the  European 
Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. 
11   See the press release from the Council of 27 June 2013 on the draft bank recovery and resolution directive. 
12   See the “Communication from the European Commission on the application, from 1 August 2013, of State aid 
rules to support measures in favour of banks in the context of the financial crisis”. Article 37 thereof states: 
“…if  recourse  to  State  aid  could  have  reasonably  been  averted  through…management  action,  any  entity 
relying on State aid for its restructuring…should normally replace the Chief Executive Officer of the bank, as 
well as other board members if appropriate”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
during a slowdown or a crisis – but there will be other downturns and other crises. 
When debt does not result from crisis action or from socially valuable investment, it 
is unfair to future generations. We cannot build future growth on new debt. 
This consolidation will promote growth sooner or later only if it is used as a lever to 
make public spending more efficient, notably in the form of investment in R&D, and 
education and training.  
 These  adjustments  to  our  social  model  are  not  forced  by  the  crisis,  and  even  less  so  by 
Europe.  In  all  the  large  countries,  the  crisis  has  simply  revealed  trends  that  were 
unsustainable,  encouraged  by  an  unchecked  financial  environment  which  allowed  the 
financing of untenable promises. In the five years preceding the financial crisis, the annual 
rate of growth of public spending exceeded that of GDP by 0.25 points in the euro area, by 
1.5 points in the United States and 2 points in Japan. 
For each of these steps, there is both a national and a European dimension: each Member 
State has to act in the knowledge that what happens domestically has direct implications for 
the rest of the monetary union, while recognising that what happens in the rest of the union 
will also impact on its own situation. This is the only way we can create the basis for shared 
responsibility and solidarity in EMU.  
This leads me to my third point: if we are to strengthen responsibility and solidarity in EMU, 
we need a strong political dimension to accompany financial, economic and fiscal integration. 
Reinstating the political dimension of the European project 
3. 
Together, we Europeans have created and developed public goods that make us stronger, 
such as the euro. These are our shared res publicae. To be properly managed, they need a 
well-functioning and legitimate political system. In words which will be familiar to us, the res 
publica needs a republic. The European “republic”13 in my view does not mean a European 
state, but rather a widely shared agreement on the scale and management of the goods we 
have  in  common,  with  a  view  to  contributing  to  our  ultimate  goals:  peace,  democracy  and 
shared prosperity.  
So what could be the pillars of a renewed political project for Europe? 
First, a common culture 
It is often suggested that Jean Monnet said “if I had to do it again, I would first start through 
culture”.14  Given  the  emphasis  on  social  and  economic  policies  in  European  integration,  a 
shared  European  culture  should  include  common  economic  and  social  understanding  and 
values.15  
In this respect, and limiting myself to the economic domain, if something can be learnt from 
the  crisis,  it  is  that  we  share  responsibility  for  preserving  financial  stability  in  the  light  of 
spillover effects and interlinkages within Economic and Monetary Union. In addition, growth 
should not be pursued at all costs, and certainly not on the back of unsustainable policies 
leading  to  debt  overhang  and  macroeconomic  imbalances,  which  inevitably  lead  to  costly 
                                                 
13   An expression borrowed from S. Collignon (2004). Vive la République européenne ! Éditions de La Martinière. 
14   Quoted by J.-C. Trichet in “Building Europe, building institutions”, speech delivered on receiving the Karlspreis 
in Aachen, 2 June 2011. 
15   Incidentally, an increasing body of literature emphasises the importance of economic “culture” on economic 
outcomes.  See  for  instance  S.  Bützer,  C.  Jordan  and  L.  Stracca  (2013).  Macroeconomic  imbalances,  a 
question  of  trust?  ECB  Working  Paper  Series,  No  1584  /  August  2013.  See  also  Y.  Algan  and  P.  Cahuc 
(2007), La société de défiance. Comment le modèle social français s’autodétruit. Editions Rue d’Ulm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
adjustments in terms of activity, employment and social protection. At the same time, risk-
taking must be at the service of entrepreneurship, not of financial speculation.  
Common values imply exemplary institutions. This is true in terms of ethics; in this respect, 
EU institutions in general and the ECB in particular have enacted strict codes of conduct for 
their  staff  members  and  senior  executives.  This  is  also  true  in  terms  of  offering  equal 
opportunities  and  promoting  diversity.  In  the  words  of  Jorge  Semprun,  “Europe  cannot  be 
based on the exclusion of diversity; it must be built on the essential unity of diversity”.16 The 
ECB  has  recently  launched  an  initiative  to  promote  gender  diversity,  including  detailed 
targets at management level. These efforts would be significantly complemented if Member 
States  were  also  to  promote  this  diversity  in  the  ECB’s  top  decision-making  body,  the 
Governing Council – which consists solely of men.  
A second pillar should be European cohesion 
From the domestic perspective, cohesion entails having a common understanding of fairness 
and  showing  solidarity.  Cohesion  also  –  and  notably  –  means  clarifying  the  rights  and 
responsibilities between member countries so that it is based on mutual trust. It also implies 
that Member States should submit to stronger fiscal, economic and financial governance.  
Once  trust  is  established,  the  social  contract  between  member  countries  –  solidity  with 
solidarity – can be expressed in a variety of ways.  
One  way  is  by  having  public  and  private  mutual  insurance  against  shocks:  the  European 
Stability  Mechanism  already  provides  a  public  safety  net,  while  Europe-wide  insurance 
mechanisms financed by banks would allow the costs arising from the resolution of banks to 
be covered (Single Resolution Fund) and, ultimately, depositors to be protected (European 
deposit guarantee fund).  
Another way is to combine resources for the provision of public goods at European level. For 
instance,  shared  public  investment  in  research  and  development  (R&D)  and  network 
infrastructures help to “denationalise” industrial policy, thereby aiding the functioning of the 
Single Market.  
Any steps beyond that would imply identifying common sources of funding, either in the form 
of common tax resources or of common issuance of public debt. Tax or financial techniques 
are,  however,  no  substitute  to  politics.  Such  common  sources  of  funding  could  only  be 
envisaged after the establishment of a genuine fiscal union among euro area Member States 
that includes a sharing of fiscal sovereignty and proper accountability vis-à-vis the European 
Parliament and national parliaments. Without that framework, the fiscal union would not be 
democratic.  This  does  not  imply  that  it  will  never  happen:  for  instance,  it  could  start  on  a 
limited  scale  around  common  projects,  jointly  financed  and  aimed  at  enhancing  long-term 
growth in the region in a way that benefits to all. 
There is also an external dimension to cohesion. It is in our relationship with the world that 
we become aware of our European identity. When asked in Eurobarometer surveys which 
policies they would want to see transferred to the European level, a majority of Europeans 
point to foreign policy. However, the external dimension of the European project has so far 
remained  underdeveloped.  Strong  external  powers  were  transferred  to  the  European  level 
only  as  regards  trade.17  More  could  be  done,  with  a  view  to  bringing  together  scarce 
                                                 
16   “L’Europe ne peut pas se fonder sur l’exclusion de la différence ; elle doit se construire sur l’unité essentielle 
de sa diversité”. Jorge Semprun, Une tombe au creux des nuages : Essais sur l'Europe d'hier et d'aujourd'hui, 
Flammarion, 2011. 
17   On  the  connection  between  the  wishes  of  Europeans  in  the  field  of  external  relations  and  the  existing 
institutional  arrangements,  see  Cœuré,  B.,  and  J.  Pisani-Ferry  (2007).  “The  Governance  of  the  European 
Union’s  International  Economic  Relations:  How  Many  Voices?”,  in  Sapir,  A.  (editor),  Fragmented  Power: 
Europe and the Global Economy, Bruegel. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resources,  defending  European  interests  globally  and  pushing  the  European  agenda  in 
respect of “global common goods” (e.g. improving global economic and financial governance, 
protecting  human  rights).  This  is  not  only  about  selling  products  that  create  jobs  in  our 
economies, but also about being able to exert influence on the future course of globalisation. 
Europe,  if  it  were  to  speak  with  one  voice  in  international  financial  fora,  would  be  in  a 
stronger position to shape global policy outcomes. In this regard, creating a unified euro area 
representation  in  global  economic  fora  would  be  consistent  with  the  very  high  level  of 
economic  and  financial  integration in  EMU.  The  two  euro area  countries  that each  have  a 
permanent seat on the IMF Executive Board, France and Germany, could lead by example 
and merge their seats. 
The third pillar would be the strengthening of democratic accountability at European 
level 
Trust in EU institutions rests on both input legitimacy (the legitimacy of their mandate) and 
output legitimacy (the achievement of the objectives set in the mandate they have received). 
Concretely,  this  means  citizens  must  be  confident  that  EU  institutions  are  democratically 
accountable.  
For  the  ECB,  this  means  fulfilling  its  democratically  assigned  mandate  of  price  stability.  It 
also implies resisting the temptation to act in ways that are not compliant with this mandate. 
To give a few examples: it is within our mandate to provide liquidity to banks so that they can 
fund the economy, but it is not in our mandate to provide them with capital in place of their 
shareholders and investors. It is within our mandate to eliminate financial market distortions 
that hamper the effectiveness of our monetary policy, but it is not in our mandate to ensure 
the  solvency  of  states  or  to  aim  at  distributing  wealth  between  countries  in  place  of 
democratically elected governments.  
There is sometimes a thin line between these choices, which call for the monetary authorities 
to  show  judgement.  Hence,  we  need  transparency  and  accountability  vis-à-vis  the  general 
public and the European Parliament.  
This takes the form of a monthly press conference, extensive reporting, public hearings in the 
European Parliament and replies to MEPs’ written questions. The Governing Council of the 
ECB  will  also  be  examining  how  it  can  enhance  the  transparency  of  its  decision-making 
processes and how it could publish an account of its monetary policy discussions. This will 
also be the case for the new bank supervisory tasks that the ECB will assume. In this regard, 
the ECB has agreed to an Inter-Institutional Agreement with the European Parliament that 
foresees extensive information and reporting. 
Ensuring  a  high  degree  of  democratic  accountability  is  also  key  for  European  political 
institutions. This is particularly important given the increase during the crisis of the degree of 
European  intrusion  into  national  economic  and  fiscal  policies,  which  have  re-distributional 
consequences. For instance, concerns have been voiced that European support to countries 
under stress, and the conditions on which it is granted, are decided only by the Eurogroup, 
i.e. by governments of euro area countries, themselves subject to parliamentary controls of 
very different kinds. 
Stronger involvement by the European Parliament could be a way to alleviate such concerns. 
It would be similarly important for European issues to feature more prominently in national 
parliamentary affairs and in national conversations so that citizens can allow their voices to 
be  heard.  But  above  all,  only  in  a  truly  European  public  space  can  common  solutions 
emerge.  We  can  witness  today  a  renationalisation  of  European  politics,  including  when  it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
comes to protest against European policies.18 This renationalisation carries with it the seeds 
of an erosion of our common values.  
Conclusion 
In 1935, the German philosopher Edmund Husserl warned us that “Europe’s greatest danger 
is weariness”.19 History has proved him right already and risks proving him right once again. 
To  counteract  that  danger,  we  should  continuously  reaffirm  our  commitment  to  improving 
institutions and policies in Europe, in line with our common values. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                 
18   See Á. Vasconcelos, « Portugal: o destino da Europa? », Público, 18 November 2013. 
19   Lecture delivered by Edmund Husserl in Vienna on 10 May 1935. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
