P Vijaya Bhaskar: Financial inclusion in India – an assessment 
Speech  by  Mr  P  Vijaya  Bhaskar,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
MFIN  (Micro  Finance 
Institutions  Network)  and  Access-Assist  Summit,  New  Delhi,  
10 December 2013. 
The assistance provided by Shri M. Sreeramulu, AGM, DNBS, RBI, CO is heartily acknowledged. 
 “Overcoming  poverty  is  not  a  gesture  of  charity.  It  is  an  act  of  justice.  It  is  the 
protection  of  a  fundamental  human  right,  the  right  to  dignity  and  a  decent  life. 
While poverty persists, there is no true freedom. 
Sometimes  it  falls  upon  a  generation  to  be  great.  You  can  be  that  great 
generation. Let your greatness blossom. Of course, the task will not be easy. But 
not to do this would be a crime against humanity, against which I ask all humanity 
now to rise up." 
Nelson Mandela 
“The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those 
who have much; it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little.” 
Franklin D. Roosevelt 
“Poverty is the worst form of violence.” 
Mahatma Gandhi 
“If  the  misery  of  the  poor  be  caused  not  by  the  laws  of  nature,  but  by  our 
institutions, great is our sin.” 
Charles Darwin 
Introduction 
The Government of India and the Reserve Bank of India have been making concerted efforts 
to  promote  financial  inclusion  as  one  of  the  important  national  objectives  of  the  country. 
Some of the major efforts made in the last five decades include – nationalization of banks, 
building  up  of  robust  branch  network  of  scheduled  commercial  banks,  co-operatives  and 
regional  rural  banks,  introduction  of  mandated  priority  sector  lending  targets,  lead  bank 
scheme,  formation  of  self-help  groups,  permitting  BCs/BFs  to  be  appointed  by  banks  to 
provide  door  step  delivery  of  banking  services,  zero  balance  BSBD  accounts,  etc.  The 
fundamental  objective  of  all  these  initiatives  is  to  reach  the  large  sections  of  the  hitherto 
financially excluded Indian population. 
The speech is organized in five sections: 
Section 1 – Definitions 
Section 2 – Extent of Financial Exclusion 
Section 3 – RBI Policy Initiatives and Progress in Financial Inclusion 
Section 4 – Stakeholder-wise Issues in Financial Inclusion 
Section 5 – Conclusion and Way forward 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Section 1 
Definitions 
1.1 
1.2 
Financial  inclusion  may  be  defined  as  the  process  of  ensuring  access  to  financial 
services and timely and adequate credit where needed by vulnerable groups such 
as weaker sections and low income groups at an affordable cost (The Committee on 
Financial Inclusion, Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan). 
Financial  Inclusion,  broadly  defined,  refers  to  universal  access  to  a  wide  range  of 
financial services at a reasonable cost. These include not only banking products but 
also other financial services such as insurance and equity products (The Committee 
on Financial Sector Reforms, Chairman: Dr.Raghuram G. Rajan). Household access 
to financial services is depicted in Figure I. 
 1.3  
he  essence  of  financial  inclusion  is  to  ensure  delivery  of  financial  services  which 
include – bank accounts for savings and transactional purposes, low cost credit for 
productive,  personal  and  other  purposes,  financial  advisory  services,  insurance 
facilities (life and non-life) etc. 
Why financial inclusion? 
1.4 
Financial  inclusion  broadens  the  resource  base  of  the  financial  system  by 
developing a culture of savings among large segment of rural population and plays 
its  own  role  in  the  process  of  economic  development.  Further,  by  bringing  low 
income  groups  within  the  perimeter  of  formal  banking  sector;  financial  inclusion 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
protects  their  financial  wealth  and  other  resources  in  exigent  circumstances. 
Financial  inclusion  also  mitigates  the  exploitation  of  vulnerable  sections  by  the 
usurious money lenders by facilitating easy access to formal credit. 
In rural areas, the Gini’s1 coefficient rose to 0.28 in 2011–12 from 0.26 in 2004–05 
and during the same period to an all-time high of 0.37 from 0.35 in urban areas. 
1.5 
Section 2 
Extent of financial exclusion 
In this section, the extent of financial exclusion from different perspectives / angularities is 
presented based on five different data sources viz.: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
NSSO 59th Round Survey Results, 
Government of India Population Census 2011, 
CRISIL-Inclusix 
RBI Working Paper Series Study on ‘Financial Inclusion in India: A Case-study of 
West Bengal’ and 
World Bank ‘Financial Access Survey’ Results. 
NSSO 59th Round Survey Results2 
51.4%  of  farmer  households  are  financially  excluded  from  both  formal/  informal 
sources. 
Of the total farmer households, only 27% access formal sources of credit; one third 
of this group also borrowed from non-formal sources. 
Overall, 73% of farmer households have no access to formal sources of credit. 
Across  regions,  financial  exclusion  is  more  acute  in  Central,  Eastern  and  North-
Eastern  regions.  All  three  regions  together  accounted  for  64%  of  all  financially 
excluded farmer households in the country. Overall indebtedness to formal sources 
of finance of these three regions accounted for only 19.66%. 
However,  over  the  period  of  five  decades,  there  has  been  overall  improvement  in 
access to formal sources3 of credit by the rural households (Chart 1). 
(e) 
2.1 
 
                                                    
1  Source: National Sample Survey on household consumption expenditure. The coefficient ranges from zero to 
one, with zero representing perfect equality and one showing perfect inequality. 
2  All India Debt and Investment Survey, NSSO 59th Round. 
3  Formal sources include credit from SCBs (including RRBs) and credit from Co-op society/bank and informal 
sources include credit from agricultural and professional money lenders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
2.2 
 
Government of India population census 2011 
As per census 2011, only 58.7% of households are availing banking services in the 
country.  However,  as  compared  with  previous  census  2001,  availing  of  banking 
services increased significantly largely on account of increase in banking services in 
rural areas (Chart 2).  
 2.3 
 
CRISIL financial inclusion index (Inclusix) 
In June 2013, CRISIL first time published a comprehensive financial inclusion index 
(viz.,Inclusix). For constructing the index, CRISIL identified three critical parameters 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  basic  banking  services  namely  branch  penetration4,  deposit  penetration5  and 
credit penetration6.  
The  CRISIL  Inclusix  indicate  that  there  is  an  overall  improvement  in  the  financial 
inclusion in India (Chart 3).  
CRISIL –Inclusix (on a scale of 100) increased from 35.4 in March 2009 to 37.6 in 
March 2010 and to 40.1 in March 2011. 
   2.4 
 
2.5 
 
RBI Working Paper Study 
Sadhan  Kumar7  (2011)  worked  out  an  Index  on  financial  inclusion  (IFI)  based  on 
three  variables  namely  penetration  (number  of  adults  having  bank  account), 
availability of banking services (number of bank branches per 1000 population) and 
usage  (measured  as  outstanding  credit  and  deposit).  The  results  indicate  that 
Kerala, Maharashtra and Karnataka has achieved high financial inclusion (IFI >0.5), 
while Tamil Nadu, Punjab, A.P, H.P, Sikkim, and Haryana identified as a group of 
medium financial inclusion (0.3 <IFI< financial low very have states remaining the 
and> 
World Bank “Financial Access Survey” results  
From  the  table  1  given  below,  it  would  be  observed  that  in  our  country,  financial 
exclusion  measured  in  terms  of  bank  branch  density,  ATM  density,  bank  credit  to 
GDP and bank deposits to GDP is quite low as compared with most of developing 
countries in the world.  
                                                 
4  Bank branch penetration is measured as number of bank branches per one lakh population. 
5  Measured as number of saving deposit accounts per one lakh population. 
6  Average  of  three  measures  (namely  number  of  loan  accounts  per  one  lakh  population,  number  of  small 
borrower loan accounts per one lakh population and number of agriculture advances per one lakh population) 
used for credit penetration. 
7  RBI Working Paper Series (WPS (DEPR):8/2011), Sadhan Kumar Chattopadhyay. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Section 3 
 3.1 
 
 6 
 Financial inclusion – RBI policy initiatives 
RBI has adopted a bank-led model for achieving financial inclusion and removed all 
regulatory  bottle  necks  in  achieving  greater  financial  inclusion  in  the  country. 
Further,  for  achieving  the  targeted  goals,  RBI  has  created  conducive  regulatory 
environment  and  provided  institutional  support  for  banks  in  accelerating  their 
financial inclusion efforts (Box I).  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
        Financial inclusion initiatives 
Box 1 
Advised all banks to open Basic Saving Bank Deposit (BSBD) accounts with minimum common 
facilities such as no minimum balance, deposit and withdrawal of cash at bank branch and ATMs, 
receipt/ credit of money through electronic payment channels, facility of providing ATM card. 
Relaxed and simplified KYC norms to facilitate easy opening of bank accounts, especially for 
small accounts with balances not exceeding Rs. 50,000 and aggregate credits in the accounts not 
exceeding Rs. one lakh a year. Further, banks are advised not to insist on introduction for opening 
bank accounts of customers. In addition, banks are allowed to use Aadhar Card as a proof of both 
identity and address8. 
Simplified Branch Authorization Policy, to address the issue of uneven spread bank branches, 
domestic SCBs are permitted to freely open branches in Tier 2 to Tier 6 centers with population of 
less  than  1  lakh  under  general  permission,  subject  to  reporting.  In  North-Eastern  Sates  and 
Sikkim  domestic  SCBs  can  open  branches  without  having  any  permission  from  RBI.  With  the 
objective  of  further  liberalizing,  general  permission  to  domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks 
(other than RRBs) for opening branches in Tier 1 centres, subject to certain conditions. 
Compulsory Requirement of Opening Branches in Un-banked Villages, banks are directed to 
allocate at least 25% of the total number of branches to be opened during the year in un-banked 
(Tier 5 and Tier 6) rural centers. 
Opening  of  intermediate  brick  and  mortar  structure,  for  effective  cash  management, 
documentation, redressal of customer grievances and close supervision of BC operations, banks 
have  been  advised  to  open  intermediate  structures  between  the  present  base  branch  and  BC 
locations.  This  branch  could  be  in  the  form  of  a  low  cost  simple  brick  and  mortar  structure 
consisting of minimum  infrastructure such core banking solution  terminal  linked  to  a  pass book 
printer and a safe for cash retention for operating larger customer transactions. 
Public and private sector banks had been advised to submit board approved three year Financial 
Inclusion  Plan  (FIP)  starting  from  April  2010.  These  policies  aim  at  keeping  self-set  targets  in 
respect  of  rural  brick  and  mortar  branches  opened,  BCs  employed,  coverage  of  un-banked 
villages with population above 2000 and as well as below 2000, BSBD accounts opened, KCCs, 
GCCs issued and others. RBI has been monitoring these plans on a monthly basis. 
Banks have been advised that their FIPs should be disaggregated and percolated down up to 
the branch level. This would ensure the involvement of all stakeholders in the financial inclusion 
efforts. 
In  June  2012,  revised  guidelines  on  Financial  Literacy  Centres  (FLCs).  Accordingly,  it  was 
advised  that  FLCs  and  all  the  rural  branches  of  scheduled  commercial  banks  should  scale  up 
financial  literacy  efforts  through  conduct  of  outdoor  Financial  Literacy  Camps  at  least  once  a 
month, to facilitate financial inclusion through provision of two essentials i.e. “Financial Literacy” 
and easy ‘Financial Access’. Accordingly, 718 FLCs have been set up as at end of March 2013. A 
total of 2.2 million people have been educated through awareness camps / choupals, seminars 
and lectures during April 2012 to March 2013. 
3.2 
 
Recent measures 
Licensing of new banks: The present round of licensing new banks is essentially 
aimed  at  giving  further  fillip  to  financial  inclusion  efforts  in  our  country.  Innovative 
                                                 
8  Although RBI has relaxed KYC norms by considering Aadhar Card as a proof of both identity and address, 
large  number  of  people  still  are  not  having  Aadhaar  Cards  and  incidentally,  Supreme  Court  ruled  that  the 
centre and states should not insist on Aadhaar cards for providing essential services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  business models aimed at furthering financial inclusion efforts would be looked into 
closely in processing applications for banking license. Financial inclusion plan would 
be an important criterion for procuring new bank licenses (Dr. D Subbarao).  
Discussion  paper  on  banking  structure  in  India  –  The  way  forward:  The  RBI 
has  put  out  a  discussion  paper  in  August  2013  on  Banking  Structure  for  public 
comments. One of the main issues relates to “Differentiated Banking Licenses”. The 
subject  of  licensing  “small  banks  and  financial  inclusion”  has  been  discussed 
therein.  A  view  will  be  taken  by  RBI  after  factoring  in  the  comments/suggestions 
received from the general public. 
In  this  context,  it  needs  to  be  mentioned  that  Urban  Co-operative  Banks  (UCBs), 
Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and Local Area Banks (LABs) numbering 1606, 64, 
and 4 respectively are, in fact, Small Finance Banks operating in this country. These 
apart, there is a 3-Tier rural co-operative structure with State Co-operative Central 
Banks  (SCCBs)  at  the  apex,  District  Central  Co-operative  Banks(DCCBs)  at  the 
intermediary level and Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACs) at the grass root 
level, which number 31, 371 and 92,432 respectively. Furthermore, we have around 
12,225 NBFCs as on March 2013, which could be conceptually construed as semi-
banks undertaking predominantly credit/investment activities.  
3.3 
 
Progress in financial inclusion 
Progress  of  financial  inclusion  since  the  launch  of  financial  inclusion  plans  clearly 
indicates  that  banks  are  progressing  in  areas  like  opening  of  banking  outlets, 
deploying  BCs,  opening  of  BSBD  accounts,  grant  of  credit  through  KCCs  and 
GCCs. Detailed trends are furnished in the following charts.  
3.3.1  Number of branches opened (including RRBs) 
 
Due  to  RBI’s  concerted  efforts  since  2005,  the  number  of  branches  of  Scheduled 
Commercial  Banks  increased  manifold  from  68,681  in  March  2006  to  1,02,343  in 
March 2013, spread across length and breadth of the country (Chart 4).  
In  rural  areas,  the  number  of  branches  increased  from  30,572  to  37,953  during 
March 2006 to March 2013. As compared with rural areas, number of branches in 
semi-urban areas increased more rapidly.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 8 
 3.3.2 
 
Villages covered 
The number of banking outlets in villages with population more than 2000 as well as 
less than 2000 increased consistently since March 2010 (Chart 5).  
Chart 5 
Villages covered 
 3.3.3 
 
Total bank outlets (including RRBs) 
Total number of banking outlets in villages increased from 67,694 in March 2010 to 
2,68,454 in March 2013 (increased around 4 times during the period of three years). 
Of total branches, banking outlets through BCs increased from 34,174 to 2,21,341 
during the same period (increased around 6.5 times).  
3.3.4  BSBD accounts Opened 
 
The number of BSBD accounts opened increased from 73.45 million in March 2010 
to 182.06 million in March 2013 (Chart 6).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Chart 6 
Number of BSBD accounts 
  RBI advised banks to provide small overdrafts in BSBD accounts. Accordingly up to 
March  2013,  3.95  million  BSBD  accounts  availed  OD  facility  of  Rs.  1.55  billion 
(These figures respectively, were 0.18 million and 0.10 billion in March 2010).  
3.3.5  Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) Issued 
 
Banks have been advised to issue KCCs to small farmers for meeting their credit 
requirements.  Up  to  March  2013,  the  total  number  of  KCCs  issued  to  farmers 
remained  at  33.79  million  with  a  total  outstanding  credit  of  Rs.2622.98  billion 
(Chart 7).  
Chart 7 
Number of KCCs 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 3.3.6  General Credit Cards (GCC) issued 
 
Banks  have  been  advised  to  introduce  General  Credit  Card  facility  up  to 
Rs. 25,000/– at their rural and semi-urban branches. Up to March 2013, banks had 
provided  credit  aggregating  to  Rs.76.34  billion  in  3.63  million  GCC  accounts 
(Chart 8).  
Chart 8 
Number of KCCs 
 3.3.7 
 
 ICT based accounts – through BCs 
In order to provide efficient and cost-effective banking services in the un-banked and 
remote corners of the country, RBI directed commercial banks to provide ICT based 
banking  services  –  through  BCs.  These  ICT  enabled  banking  services  have  CBS 
connectivity  to  provide  all  banking  services  including  deposit  and  withdrawal  of 
money in the financially excluded regions. 
The number of ICT-based transactions through BCs increased from 26.52 million in 
March 2010 to 250.46 million in March 2013, while transactions amount increased 
steadily from Rs.6.92 billion to Rs.233.88billion during the same period (Chart 9). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Chart 9 
ICT based accounts – BCs 
3.3.8 
 
Expansion of ATM network: 
The total number of ATMs in rural India witnessed a CAGR of 30.6% during March 
2010  to  March  2013.  The  number  of  rural  ATMs  increased  from  5,196  in  March 
2010 to 11,564 in March 2013 (Chart 10).  
 Chart 10 
ATM Network – By population group 
3.3.9 
 
Financial literacy initiatives 
Financial education, financial inclusion and financial stability are three elements of 
an integral strategy, as shown in the diagram below. While financial inclusion works 
from  supply  side  of  providing  access  to  various  financial  services,  financial 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
education  feeds  the  demand  side  by  promoting  awareness  among  the  people 
regarding the needs and benefits of financial services offered by banks and other 
institutions. Going forward, these two strategies promote greater financial stability.  
   Financial  Stability  Development  Council  (FSDC)  has  explicit  mandate  to  focus  on 
financial inclusion and financial literacy simultaneously. 
RBI has issued revised guidelines on the Financial literacy Centres (FLC) on June 6, 
2012, for setting up FLCs, as detailed in Box 1 above.  
3.3.10  Growth in SHG–bank linkage 
 
This model helps in bringing more people under sustainable development in a cost 
effective manner within a short span of time. As on March 2011, there are around 
7.46  million  saving  linked  SHGs  with  aggregate  savings  of  Rs.70.16  billion  and 
1.19 million credit linked SHGs with credit of Rs. 145.57 billion (Source: NABARD, 
Status of Microfinance in India).  
3.3.11  Growth of MFIs: 
 
Though  RBI  has  adopted  the  bank-led  model  for  achieving  financial  inclusion, 
certain  NBFCs  which  were  supplementing  financial  inclusion  efforts  at  the  ground 
level, specializing in micro credit have been recognized as a separate category of 
NBFCs as NBFC-MFIs.  
At  present,  around  30  MFIs  have  been  approved  by  RBI.  Their  asset  size  has 
progressively increased to reach Rs. 19,000 crore as at end Sept 2013. 
 3.3.12  Bank Credit to MSME9 
 
MSME  sector  which  has  large  employment  potential  of  59.7  million  persons  over 
26.1  million  enterprises,  is  considered  as  an  engine  for  economic  growth  and 
promoting financial inclusion in rural areas. MSMEs primarily depend on bank credit 
for their operations.  
                                                 
9  Micro  small  and  medium  enterprises  have  been  considered  as  engine  for  economic  growth  and  promoting 
equitable  development  of  the  country  because  of  its  employment  and  export  potential  and  economic 
empowerment  of  a  vast  section  of  the  population.  MSME  sector  employs  59.7  million  persons  spread  over 
26.1 million enterprises. This sector accounts for around 45 per cent of the manufacturing output and around 
40  per  cent  of  total  export  of  the  country  (based  on  the  4th  census  of  MSME  sector,  Ministry  of  MSME, 
Government of India). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
 Bank credit to MSME sector witnessed a CAGR of 31.4% during the period March 
2006 to March 2012. Of total credit to MSME, public sector banks contributed the 
major  share  of  76%,  while  private  sector  banks  accounted  for  20.2%  and  foreign 
banks accounted for only 3.8% as on March 31, 201210 (Chart 11).  
Chart 11 
Bank credit to MSME 
 3.3.13 
 
Insurance penetration in the country 
The total insurance (life and non-life) penetration, in terms of the ratio of insurance 
premium  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  increased  from  2.32  in  2000–01  to  5.10  in  
2010–11. The life insurance penetration as a percentage of GDP stood at 4.40 in 
2010–11 while the non-life insurance penetration remained at 0.71 during the same 
period11.  In  other  words,  there  is  vast  untapped  potential  as  regards  insurance 
penetration.  
3.3.14  Equity penetration in the country  
 
The number of investor accounts accounted for a meagre 1.71% of total population 
of the country12.  
3.3.15  Financial inclusion initiatives – private corporates 
 
A  few  large  private  corporate  have  undertaken  projects  such  as  E–Choupal/ 
E–Sagar(ITC), Haryali Kisan Bazaar (DCM), Project Shakti (HUL), etc. Reportedly, 
these pioneering projects have brought about vast improvement in the lives of the 
participants  and  set  the  tone  for  economic  development  in  their  command  areas; 
                                                 
10  MSME Annual Report, 2012–13, pg. 267. 
11  Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority. 
12  Based on NSDL/CDSL data. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
which  is  a  pre-requisite  for  Financial  Inclusion  efforts  to  be  undertaken  by  the 
banking system.  
Section 4 
4.1 
 
Stakeholder–wise issues in financial inclusion 
Taking into account the achievements stated in the previous section and based on 
our interactions with the stakeholders during our various outreach programmes, as 
also the feedback received from our meetings with the frontline managers, the more 
important issues which need to be attended; stakeholder-wise are listed in the table 
below. 
Table 2 
Stakeholder–wise issues 
Issues 
Remarks 
Business Correspondents (BC):  
For  effective  functioning  of  BC  model  in  reaching  poor  villagers,  the 
following need to be addressed: 
 
BCs  are  not  making  enough  income  due  to  catering  of  services  to 
low-income  customers  with  low  volume  transactions.  For  optimum 
usage  of  BCs  in  reaching  the  poor  villagers,  BCs  have  to  be 
adequately compensated so that they are sufficiently incentivized to 
promote financial inclusion as a viable business opportunity.  
The  usefulness  of  BC  model  is  dependent  on  the  kind  of  support 
provided  by  the  bank  branches.  For  effective  supervision  of  BC 
operations  and  for  addressing  cash  management  issues  as  also  to 
take care of customer grievances, banks should open small brick and 
mortar branches at a reasonable distance.  
Further, banks should initiate suitable training and skill development 
programes for effective functioning of BCs.  
   Tailor Made Services:  
 
Innovative Products: Designing suitable innovative products to cater 
to the requirements of poor villagers at affordable rates is an absolute 
imperative. 
To wean away villagers from borrowing from money lenders, banks 
should  develop  simplified  credit  disbursement  procedures  and  also 
flexibility in their work processes. 
 Technology Applications:  
 
In an ICT enabled environment, technology is the main lever to 
achieve the eventual goal of financial inclusion at the earliest. 
 Banks 
 Banks 
Banks/RRBs, 
Co-op Banks 
 
S. No 
1) 
 2) 
 3) 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
3) 
     ticket 
transactions 
ATM-Network: ATM Network in rural areas accounted for only 10.1% 
of total ATMs in the country as on March 31, 201313. Banks should 
enhance  their  ATM  network  in  rural  and  un-banked  areas  to  serve 
poor  villagers.  While  doing  so,  adequate  care  should  be  taken 
regarding  safety/  security  issues,  which  have  come  to  the  fore  in 
recent times.  
Rupay  Network:  To  reduce  the  overall  transaction  costs 
associated  with  small 
in  rural  areas, 
domestic RuPay cards may be utilized14.  
KCC/GCCs:To  enable 
from  ATMs 
anywhere  in  the  country,  banks  need  to  convert  KCCs/GCCs  to 
electronic  credit  card.  Further,  banks  may  explore  the  possibility  of 
issuing multipurpose cards which could function as debit cards, KCC 
and GCC as per the requirements in rural areas.  
Mobile  Banking:  In  rural  India,  there  are  323.27  million15  mobile 
subscribers  as  on  March  2012  (TRAI  Annual  Report,  2012).  To 
examine  the  options/  alternatives,  including  the  feasibility  of  using 
encrypted  SMS  based  funds  transfer  using  an  application  that  can 
run  on  any  type  of  handset  for  expansion  of  mobile  banking  in  the 
country, RBI constituted a committee (Chairman: B. Sambamurthy)  
Technology Service Providers (TSPs): There are a number of 
issues involving TSPs via-a-vis several banks. 
to  withdraw  cash 
farmers 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
BSBD Accounts:  
It is understood that nearly half of the BSBD accounts are dormant. For 
effective use of BSBD accounts economic activity needs to be improved. 
Use of PACs and Primary Cooperatives as BCs: 
PACs penetration in rural areas is far more than that of bank branches. 
Banks may make use of this largest rural network of cooperatives as 
business correspondents. Recent NABARD circular also envisaged that 
PACs can be utilized as BCs for CCBs/SCBs. 
Financial Inclusion in Urban Areas:  
Generally, urban financial inclusion leaves vast scope for improvement. 
Migration from rural to urban centres is also accentuating the problem. 
Remittance Corridors:  
Remittance facility for migrant population is of paramount importance. 
Providing of easy and cheap remittance facilities to migrant population is an 
absolute imperative. 
Migrants are not Adequately Covered: 
Migrants are facing difficulties in opening bank accounts. Commercial banks 
need to take care of the needs of the migrant population in their financial 
inclusion plans. 
Banks/RRBs, 
Co-op Banks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Banks/RRBs 
 
 
 
Banks 
 
 
 
Banks 
 
Governments 
– Central and 
State; Banks, 
Co-op Banks, 
RRBs 
Banks, RRBs, 
State 
Governments 
Banks 
Banks 
RBI and 
Banks 
                                                 
13  Source: Department of Financial Services, Government of India. 
14  There  are  some  85,000  PoS  terminals  existing  where  RuPay  cards  are  already  accepted.  So  far, 
25 Commercial Banks, 25 RRBs and 30 Urban Co-op Banks have issued over 2 million Rupay cards. 
15  Number mobile subscribers in rural India increased more than 9 times from just 33.14 million in March 2007 to 
323.27 million in March 2012 (Source: TRAI Annual Report 2011–12) 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Human Face of Banking: 
To deal with poor villagers, banks need to initiate training programmes to 
frontline staff and managers as well as BCs on the human side of banking. 
Agriculture Advances:  
While the number of farmers accounts with SCBs’ increased from just 63 
lakh in March 2006 to 176 lakh in March 201016; in terms of credit, farmers 
with land holdings ‘above 5 acre’ accounted for largest share of 44% of total 
bank credit. To achieve meaningful financial inclusion, banks should give 
priority for small farmers as compared to large farmers while sanctioning 
credit. 
Scalability of CBS Platform:  
In order to handle the growing amount of work due to intensive financial 
inclusion efforts of country, banks/RRBs should ensure scalability of their 
CBS platforms. 
Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT):  
The EBT scheme being an important and integral part of the overall 
Financial Inclusion with its attendant benefits, banks should promote EBT 
systems effectively for boosting their financial inclusion plans. 
Ultra Small Branches17:  
Ultra Small Branches may be set up between the base branch and BCs to 
provide support to about 8-10 BC units at a reasonable distance 
Low Credit Share of Rural Areas: Although, in terms of number of 
branches, rural areas account for nearly 30% of total branches of scheduled 
commercial banks, the share of rural credit account for less than 10% of 
total credit. Govt./Banks should initiate steps to increase the credit 
absorption capacity in rural areas by promoting employment and other 
opportunities. 
Private Sector banks need to open more branches in rural areas: In the 
case of private sector banks, rural branches accounted for just 13.3% of 
their total branches in March 2013 (while in the case of public sector the 
same stood at 33.1%). There is an imperative need to ramp up the number 
of rural branches by the private sector banks 
Penetration of RRBs in Financially excluded Regions: Though RRBs 
have more presence in central (30.7% as on March 2012) and eastern 
regions (23.1%), financial exclusion is more acute in these regions. 
Infrastructure Development:  
For up-scaling financial inclusion, adequate infrastructure such as digital 
and physical connectivity, uninterrupted power supply etc are prerequisites. 
Reportedly, out of six lakh villages in India, around 80,000 villages have no 
electricity and the constraints of electricity directly impact the working of 
banks. 
 Banks 
Banks 
Banks/RRBs 
Banks 
New Private 
Banks/ RRBs 
Banks/GoI 
Private Banks 
RRBs 
Central & 
State 
Governments 
9) 
10) 
11) 
12) 
13) 
14) 
15) 
16) 
17) 
                                                  
16  Source: Hand Book of Statistics on Indian Economy. 
17  RPCD CO.RRB.No.BL.BC/08/03.05.90/13-14. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
18) 
19) 
20) 
Vernacular Languages 
Financial inclusion efforts should necessarily be done in vernacular 
languages. In this context, the need for vernacularisation of all forms 
(including legal forms) is an absolute must, at least in major languages. As 
per Akosha18 there are 10,506 consumer complaints received19 against 
financial sector (includes banking, finance, insurance, real estate and 
construction) during the period January 2013 to March 2013. 
As part of Financial Literacy initiatives, if banks were to undertake pro-
active steps in helping the common public to get over their English phobia, it 
is felt that the number of complaints would increase manifold. 
Private Corporate Initiatives  
A few large private corporates have undertaken projects such as E-Choupal / 
E- Sagar (ITC), Hariyali Kisan Bazar (DCM), Project Shakti (HUL), etc. 
Reportedly, these pioneering projects have brought about vast improvement 
in the lives of the participants and set the tone for economic development in 
their command areas; which is a pre-requisite for Financial Inclusion efforts 
to be undertaken by the banking system.  
Post-offices: 
Post offices (POs) are closest to the rural people compared to bank 
branches. As on March 31, 2011, there are 1,54,866 post offices in India, of 
which 1,39,040 (89.8%) were in rural areas. All round efforts should be 
made to ensure that Post Offices play a greater and more active role due to 
known advantages. Progressively, more POs may be engaged to become 
BCs of banks due to well-known advantages.  
21)  White Label ATMs:  
RBI has already started allowing eligible private entities to establish White 
Label ATMs. There is case for its acceleration.  
22)  MSME – Financial Exclusion:  
The statistics based on 4th Census on MSME sector revealed that only 
5.18% of the units (both registered and un-registered) had availed finance 
through institutional sources, 2.05% got finance from non-institutional 
sources. The majority of units i.e., 92.77% had no finance or depended on 
self-finance. SIDBI should go into the reasons for not getting access to 
formal sources of credit by the majority of MSME units. 
SHG-Bank Linkage – Penetration: Although SHG-Bank Linkage model is 
successful in rural areas, it has not spread evenly throughout India, the 
spread is poor especially in the financially excluded regions namely central 
and north-eastern. 
SHG-Bank Linkage Outstanding Bank Credit:  
Outstanding bank loans against SHGs accounted for only 1.93% of gross 
bank credit as on March 31, 2011. It was observed that SHGs are not 
getting loans from banks even after more than one year of its formation and 
group activities. Certain difficulties are being experienced by SHGs in 
obtaining bank credit which NABARD should look into and inform RBI of the 
same.  
 23) 
24) 
 Banks & Other 
FIs 
Private 
Corporates 
RBI and 
Government 
 
RBI, Private 
Corporates 
 
SIDBI/ Banks 
 
NABARD 
NABARD 
 
                                                 
18  An online company working towards consumer complaints redressal. 
19  Related to problem in ATM transactions (18.02%  of total  complaints) and mis-selling of insurance products 
(16.30%),  credit  cards  (13.83%),  loan(10.88%),  saving  bank  account  (11.78%),  medical  insurance  (8.34%), 
debit card (6.65%), general insurance (4.15%), motor insurance (3.55%) and others (6.5%). 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
25) 
26 
Insurance for Rural India:  
Over 70% of total population resides in the rural areas of the country. 
However, insurance reaches less than 3% of the total population. Due to 
high competition and relatively high market saturation in the urban areas, 
rural areas provide ample business opportunities for insurance firms –both 
life and non-life.  
Scope for Further Research: In financial inclusion, there are a few 
potentially interesting areas for future research –viz., (a) the most 
appropriate delivery model (which banks are still trying to figure out) for 
different geographical regions given their unique characteristics, (b) The 
unbanked segments- beit in rural, urban or metropolitan areas are largely 
served by the un-organized sector even today. Research into the products, 
practices and procedures of this unorganized sectors an absolute 
imperative, to identify and understand the same which the bottom of the 
pyramid populace finds so convenient and comfortable to deal with. This 
could throw up valuable leads for the organized sector – banks and financial 
institutions to follow (c) Further, in order to measure the intensity of money 
lenders especially in rural areas, research agencies should, inter alia, 
conduct a census of money lenders in rural India.  
IRDA 
 
Research 
Agencies 
 Section 5 
Conclusion & Way Forward 
Let  me  conclude  by  repeating  what  I  have  endeavoured  to  convey  about  assessment  of 
Financial Inclusion efforts in our country. I began with a brief introduction of the subject and 
provided  two  major  definitions  of  Financial  Inclusion.  Thereafter,  the  important  policy 
initiatives of RBI and progress achieved / identified trends in Financial Inclusion have been 
explained to assess where we stand at the present juncture. I tried to identify stakeholder-
wise  issues  in  Financial  Inclusion,  based  on  such  an  assessment  as  also  on  the  basis  of 
feedback received by us during our financial outreach programmes and the conferences of 
front  line  managers  which  we  have  been  conducting  for  the  past  few  years.  It  is  one’s 
earnest hope and desire that the issues raised herein would trigger an informed debate and 
discussion,  which  could  provide  an  invaluable  feedback  in  the  run  up  to  the  Report  of 
Nachiket  Mor  Committee,  which  at  present  is  examining  the  entire  gamut  of  issues 
surrounding Financial Inclusion. Further on, the research community may like to go into such 
aspects of Financial Inclusion, which would provide valuable leads to the regulators and all 
the  stakeholders  concerned  in  achieving  meaningful  and  holistic  Financial  Inclusion  at  the 
earliest in our country.  
Thank You. 
References 
Anand Sinha (2012), “Financial Inclusion and Urban Cooperative Banks”, edited transcript at 
the launch of the financial inclusion program of COSMOS Bank at Pune. 
Chakrabarty  K.C  (2011),  “Financial  Inclusion  and  Banks:  Issues  and  Perspectives”,  RBI 
Bulletin, November, 2011. 
Chakrabarty K.C (2011), “Financial Inclusion: A Road India Needs to Travel”, RBI Bulletin, 
November, 2011. 
Chakrabarty K.C (2012), “Empowering MSMEs for Financial Inclusion and Growth – Role of 
Banks and Industry Associations”, address at SME Banking Conclave 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
Chakrabarty K.C (2013), “Financial Inclusion in India: Journey So Far And the Way Forward”, 
Key note address at Finance Inclusion Conclave Organised by CNBC TV 18 at New Delhi.  
Chakrabarty  K.C  (2013),  “Revving  up  the  Growth  Engine  through  Financial  Inclusion”, 
address at the 32th SKOCH Summit held at Mumbai. 
Leeladhar V (2005), “Taking Banking Services to the Common Man – Financial Inclusion”, 
Commemorative Lecture at the FedbankHormis Memorial Foundation at Ernakulam. 
Mira Mendoza (2009), “Addressing Financial Exclusion through Microfinance: Lessons from 
the  State  of  Madhya  Pradesh,  India”,  The  journal  of  International  Policy  Solutions,  Vol  11, 
pp 25–35. 
Narayan Chandra Pradhan (2013), “Persistence of Informal Credit in Rural India: Evidence 
from All-India Debt and Investment Survey and Beyond”, RBI Working Paper Series, WPS 
(DEPR): 5/2013 
Radhika  Dixit  and  M.  Ghosh  (2013)  “Financial  Inclusion  For  Inclusive  Growth  of  India  –  A 
Study”,  International  Journal  of  Business  Management  &  Research,  Vol.3,  Issue  1,  
pp. 147–156. 
Rangarajan C (2008), “Report of the Committee on Financial Inclusion” 
Raghuram G. Rajan (2009), “A Hundred Small Steps – Report of the Committee on Financial 
Sector Reforms”. 
Reserve Bank of India – “Annual Reports and ‘Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in 
India”, various issues. 
Sadhan  Kumar  Chattopadhyay  (2011),  “Financial  Inclusion  in  India:  A  Case-study  of  West 
Bengal”. RBI Working Paper Series, WPS (DEPR): 8/2011. 
Sarkar  A.N  (2013),  “Financial  Inclusion:  Fostering  Sustainable  Economic  Growth  in  India”, 
The Banker, Vol. VIII, No.4, pp.44–53. 
Sarkar  A.N  (2013),  “Financial  Inclusion  Part–II:  Fostering  Sustainable  Economic  Growth  in 
India”, The Banker, Vol. VIII, No.5, pp.32–40. 
Status of Microfinance in India: 2010–11, NABARD. 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
