Jens Weidmann: Europe’s Monetary Union – making it prosperous and 
resilient 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  Harvard 
University, Cambridge, 25 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Hans-Helmut Kotz, 
dear Professor Friedman, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. 
President Harry Truman is famously said to have asked to be sent a one-armed economist. 
He was tired of having exponents of the dismal science proclaiming “On the one hand, this” 
and “On the other hand, that”. 
Today,  it  sometimes  seems  like  the  opposite  is  true.  In  the  eyes  of  many  politicians, 
economists, at least if they are central bankers, cannot have enough arms now – arms with 
which  they  are  to  pull  all  the  levers  to  simultaneously  deliver  price  stability,  lower 
unemployment, supervise banks, deal with sovereign credit troubles, shape the yield curve, 
resolve balance sheet problems, and manage exchange rates. 
It is probably safe to say that this change in attitude is not just due to a sudden surge in the 
popularity  of  economists  and  central  bankers.  Rather,  it  reflects  the  widespread  view  that 
central banking has come to be the only game in town. And quite a few economists seem to 
agree with this notion. 
To  some,  the  notion  that  the  primary  goal  of  central  banks  is  to  keep  prices  stable  has 
become old-fashioned. Against the backdrop of the financial crisis, they argue that financial 
stability has become just as important, if not more so, than price stability. 
Consequently, many contend that the central bank’s role as a lender of last resort applies not 
only to banks, but to sovereigns as well. This demand is aimed particularly at the European 
Monetary Union (EMU). 
But such a move would run counter to the current institutional framework, under which fiscal 
policy  remains  a  national  responsibility  –  and  under  which, for this  and  other reasons, the 
Eurosystem is forbidden from financing European institutions or member states. 
To others, the idea of central bank omnipotence is illusory and fraught with risk. If financial 
and fiscal concerns dominate central bank decision-making, it is no longer independent in its 
decisions on how to keep prices stable. Omnipotence then turns into impotence. 
So the question remains: How do we make the EMU robust and resilient? In my remarks, I 
wish to argue that by piling more and more stabilisation tasks on to monetary policy, stability 
will prove ever more elusive. What seems to be true in general holds especially within the 
specific setting of the EMU. Rather, we need to make sure that the functioning of EMU as a 
whole is shielded from the failure of a constituent part – be it a bank or a sovereign. 
Monetary policy and the art of separation 
2. 
Former Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti once said: “Germans view economics as a branch 
of  moral  philosophy.”  I  am  not  sure  whether  he  meant  this  as  a  compliment.  But  John 
Maynard Keynes probably would have taken it as one. For him an economist must “possess 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
a  rare  combination  of  gifts…  He  must  be  mathematician,  historian,  statesman,  and 
philosopher“. 
So,  at  the  risk  of  confirming  Mario  Monti’s  suspicions,  I  will  seize  this  opportunity  to  be  a 
Keynesian. I will try to illustrate the economic rationale behind the Bundesbank’s approach to 
monetary policy by borrowing from political philosophy. And maybe Mario Monti will let me 
get away with it after all, since it is a concept from political, rather than moral, philosophy. 
The concept I am referring to is Michael Walzer’s “art of separation”. According to Walzer, 
liberties are created by walls – walls between the different spheres of society. In pre-liberal 
times,  “church  and  state,  church-state  and  university,  civil  society  and  political  community, 
dynasty  and  government,  office  and  property,  public  life  and  private  life,  home  and  shop: 
each pair was, mysteriously or unmysteriously, two-in-one, inseparable. 
Confronting this world, liberal theorists preached and practiced an art of separation. The wall 
between church and state creates a sphere of religious activity, of public and private worship, 
congregations  and  consciences,  into  which  politicians  and  bureaucrats  may  not  intrude. 
Similarly, again, the separation of civil society and political community creates the sphere of 
economic competition and free enterprise, the market in commodities, labor, and capital”. 
The  walls  of  liberty  concept  can  be  applied  to  explain  the  success  of  independent  central 
banks  in  fighting  inflation  as  well.  Assigning  central  banks  a  specific  responsibility  and 
granting  them  independence  gave  central  banks  the  freedom  to  concentrate  on  the  one 
objective for which they had the tools to achieve it. 
Many  scholars,  among  them  Alberto  Alesina  and  Larry  Summers1, have  shown  empirically 
that  having  an  independent  central  bank  amounts  to  one  of  the  rare  free  lunches  in 
economics: benefits in the form of low and stable inflation, but no costs in terms of growth. 
By  tearing  down  the  walls  between  monetary,  fiscal  and  financial  policy,  the  freedom  of 
central  banks  to  achieve  different  ends  will  diminish  rather  than  flourish.  Put  in  economic 
terms: Monetary policy runs the risk of becoming subject to financial and fiscal dominance. 
Let me explain these mechanisms a bit more in detail, starting with financial dominance. 
The  financial  crisis  has  provided  a  vivid  example  of  how  financial  instability  can  force  the 
hand  of  monetary  policy.  When  the  burst  of  an  asset  bubble  threatens  a  collapse  of  the 
financial system, the meltdown  will in all likelihood have severe consequences for the real 
economy, with corresponding downside risks to price stability. 
In that case, monetary policy is forced to mop up the damage after a bubble has burst. And, 
confronted  with  a  financial  system  that  is  still  in  a  fragile  state,  monetary  policy  might  be 
reluctant to embrace policies that could aggravate financial instability. 
This  underscores  the  importance  of  a  well-capitalised  and  tightly-supervised  financial 
system, a precondition for stable prices which monetary policy cannot establish, and which is 
the  responsibility  of  other  policy  makers  instead. The  contribution  of monetary  policy  is  by 
seeking,  through  conducting  a  more  symmetric  monetary  policy,  to  prevent  financial 
turbulence, which could pose a threat to price stability. 
But often, the interest rate might prove too crude an instrument – it might not be efficient to 
punish the whole economy for the exuberance of a single sector. Therefore, financial policy 
needs its own toolbox. 
According  to  the  first  Nobel  Prize  winner  in  economics,  Jan  Tinbergen,  every  economic 
policy objective requires its own instrument, otherwise success will be uncertain. By heeding 
his advice, we are practicing the art of separation. 
                                                
1   Alesina,  A.  and  L.  Summers  (1993):  Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic  Performance:  Some 
Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 25, 151–62. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Strict financial regulation and supervision is needed to increase the resilience of banks and 
the financial  system  as a  whole.  And  macro-prudential  instruments  provide  solutions  more 
tailored than the interest rate can offer. 
Unconventional monetary policy measures, such as the very long-term provision of liquidity 
to banks or forward guidance that the central bank interest rate will not be increased within a 
foreseeable timeframe, cannot eliminate this problem. Their contribution to monetary policy is 
that  they  represent  possible  actions  even  in  cases  where  the  boundaries  of  interest  rate 
policy have been reached: if interest rates are near the lower zero bound, or if the stimulus 
from interest rate cuts is not transmitted to the real economy. 
To avoid any misunderstanding: This does not mean that central banks have no role to play 
in financial stability. The necessary separation pertains to the policies, not to the institution. 
But  it  does  mean,  for  example,  that  the  decision-making  body  responsible  for  monetary 
policy should not be in charge of supervising banks as well. In Europe, under current plans 
ultimate  responsibility  for  the  new  European  banking  supervision  mechanism  will  rest  with 
the ECB Governing Council. To avoid possible conflicts of interest, this should not become a 
permanent solution. 
A change of the European treaties is required to allow for a body within the ECB other than 
the  Governing  Council  to  have  the  final  say  in  supervisory  matters.  If  this  avenue  is  not 
taken, an independent supervisory institution will become necessary, in my view. 
When  it  comes  to  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  however,  the  separation  should  go  a  little 
further,  even.  Mervyn  King  once  quipped  that  “central  banks  are  often  accused  of  being 
obsessed  with  inflation.  This  is  untrue.  If  they  are  obsessed  with  anything,  it  is  with  fiscal 
policy.” 
Let us delve a bit into the origins of this obsession. Public debt and inflation are related on 
account  of  monetary  policy’s  power  to  accommodate  high  levels  of  public  debt.  Thus,  the 
higher  public  debt  becomes,  the  greater  the  pressure  that  might  be  applied  to  monetary 
policy to respond accordingly. 
Suddenly it might be fiscal policy that calls the shots – monetary policy no longer follows the 
objective of price stability but rather the concerns of fiscal policy. A state of fiscal dominance 
has been reached. 
Technically, fiscal dominance refers to a regime where monetary policy ensures the solvency 
of the government. Practically, this could take the form of central banks buying government 
debt or keeping interest rates low for a longer period of time than it would be necessary to 
ensure  price  stability.  Then,  traditional  roles  are  reversed:  monetary  policy  stabilises  real 
government debt while inflation is determined by the needs of fiscal policy. 
For monetary policy to deliver price stability, it is ultimately dependent on sustainable fiscal 
policy.  This  is  why  acting  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  for  governments  can  prove  a  slippery 
slope. If governments can expect to be bailed out by central banks, chances are that they will 
adjust their behaviour accordingly. 
And in the euro area, a lender-of-last-resort role for the Eurosystem does not square with the 
institutional architecture. The monetary union differs from other currency areas in one crucial 
aspect:  While  monetary  policy  is  a  common  undertaking,  fiscal  policy  remains  a  national 
prerogative. 
Evidently, the unsound fiscal policies of one member state can have repercussions on the 
union  as  a  whole.  Conversely,  the  negative  consequences  of  bad  policies  can  be  better 
externalised to the rest of the currency area, thereby undermining incentives for sustainable 
policies. 
To mitigate this risk, precautions were taken in the form of fiscal rules, the no-bail-out clause 
and  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing.  The  guiding  principle  was  self-responsibility: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Member states are free to pursue their own fiscal policies. But they are subject to common 
rules and market discipline – and they are liable for their decisions. 
A lender-of-last-resort role would violate this principle of self-responsibility – in that same way 
as Eurobonds in this setting are at odds with it. Therefore, it would aggravate, rather than 
alleviate, the problems besetting the euro area. 
Separating banks and sovereigns 
3. 
If monetary policy cannot disentangle the euro area’s fiscal and financial conundrums, what 
can? 
Central  to  any  stable framework  is  a  balance  between  liability  and  control:  Those  who  act 
must also be liable for their actions. 
Substantial  measures  were  taken  to  contain  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  These  measures  
– notably the two European stability mechanisms, the EFSF and the ESM – stabilised the 
euro area in the short term by offering financial assistance in exchange for structural reforms. 
This  approach  of  buying  time  for  adjustment  is  bearing  fruit:  current  account  imbalances 
have improved structurally and fiscal deficits have been significantly reduced. 
But in the process, the balance between liability and control has been thrown out of kilter. 
While  fiscal  policy  remains  essentially  a  national  domain,  liability  has  been  increasingly 
transferred to the European level. Going forward, the balance between  control and liability 
has  to  be restored  –  otherwise  the  hard-fought  gains  in fighting  the  crisis  will  come  at  the 
expense of new vulnerabilities. 
One possible option to balance control and liability would be a true fiscal union, i.e. a transfer 
of  fiscal  decision-making  powers  to  the  European  level.  In  this  scenario,  control  and 
intervention rights would be shifted to the European level. If this prerequisite were fulfilled, a 
greater mutualisation of liabilities would become feasible – and may be justified. 
But judging by the reluctance of governments and electorates to let Brussels have a say in 
fiscal matters, this avenue seems blocked, at least for the foreseeable future. Therefore, the 
answer  is  to  re-establish  the  principle  of  member  states’  individual  responsibility.  In  other 
words, it is to practice the art of separation. 
To strengthen the framework laid down in the European Treaties implies stiffening the fiscal 
rules,  which  were  bent  and  ignored  too  often  in  the  past,  with  Germany  being  one  of  the 
culprits.  The  new  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  But  the  mere 
existence of these rules will not suffice. We need to actually apply them. And the European 
Commission  is  responsible  for  enforcing  them.  However,  up  to  now  the  Commission  has 
adopted a rather lenient interpretation. 
In addition to stronger rules, we need to make sure that, in a system of national control and 
national responsibility, banks and sovereigns can default without bringing down the financial 
system. Hence, breaking the “sovereign-bank doom loop” will be central to solving the euro-
area crisis. 
What does this mean? In the crisis, this sovereign-bank nexus has developed into a vicious 
circle. Wobbling banks and stumbling sovereigns clasp at each other to avoid falling but are 
in fact dragging each other down. 
If many banks get into trouble at the same time, possibly due to the burst of a large asset 
bubble, financial stability as a whole is threatened. The state then often has no other option 
but to step in if it wants to prevent a meltdown of the real economy. But this rescue can be a 
huge burden on government finances – this is what happened in Ireland where the need to 
prop up the financial system pushed the public debt ratio up by nearly 30 percentage points. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conversely,  weak  government  positions  can  destabilise  banks  –  directly  through  their 
exposure to sovereign bonds, and indirectly through worsening macroeconomic conditions. 
This was the case in Greece. 
How can we break this “doom loop”? With regard to spillovers from banks to sovereigns, we 
need  to  make  sure  that  taxpayers  do  not  foot  the  bill  when  banks  run  into  problems.  The 
strengthened Basel III capital rules are a first step in that direction, as they increase equity 
buffers  and  therefore  the  capacity  of  banks  to  absorb  losses.  The  banking  union,  with  its 
Single Supervisory Mechanism, is another one. Strict and stringent supervision ensures that 
tough rules are equally applied to all. The Single Restructuring Mechanism currently under 
discussion is necessary in order to establish a bail-in regime that assigns a clear hierarchy of 
creditors.  Only  then  will  credit  costs  adequately  reflect  credit  risk;  and  shareholders  and 
creditors instead of taxpayers will be first in line to bear banks’ losses. 
But  the  sovereign-bank  nexus  goes  both  ways.  We  also  have  to  address  spillovers  from 
sovereigns to banks. We therefore need to end the preferential treatment for sovereign debt. 
The Basel capital rules allow governments bonds issued in domestic currency to be given a 
zero risk weighting. But with regard to the euro area, the assumption that all sovereign bonds 
are  risk-free  means  that  all  bonds  are  treated  alike  regardless  of  fundamentals.  This  calls 
into  question  market  discipline,  and  is,  obviously,  not  in  line  with  recent  history.  Hence, 
sovereign bonds should be adequately risk-weighted, and exposure to individual sovereign 
debt should be capped, as is already the case for private debt. 
An adequate risk-weighting of sovereign bonds would make banks more resilient if the fiscal 
position of the respective sovereign were to deteriorate; and it would bring spreads more into 
line with the underlying risk, thus giving a disciplining signal to the sovereign. In an interview 
with  the  German  newspaper  “Die  Welt”,  Ken  Rogoff  pointed  out  that  the  adequate  risk-
weighting of sovereign bonds constitutes a far more effective debt brake than any fiscal rule 
ever could. 
Besides, many European banks hold bonds from one sovereign only – their home country. 
Large  and  undiversified  exposure  is  what  makes  sovereign  default  a  potentially  systemic 
event. Hence, the large exposure regime which caps the investment in one single debtor has 
to be applied to sovereigns as well. 
Ending  the  preferential  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  would  greatly  reduce  the  risk  of  a 
financial  crisis  in  case  of  sovereign  default.  It  would  therefore  go  a  long  way  towards  re-
establishing the principle of individual responsibility in fiscal affairs. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
The idea of monetary policy safeguarding stability on multiple fronts is alluring. But by giving 
in to that allure, we would likely end up in a world even less stable than before. This holds 
true especially for the euro area, where a Eurosystem acting as a lender-of-last-resort role 
for governments would upend the delicate institutional balance. 
To disentangle the euro area’s fiscal and financial conundrums, we should practice the art of 
separation  –  especially  with  regard to  the  sovereign-bank  doom  loop. Or  let  me  put  it this 
way:  Rather  than  for  monetary  policy  to  waltz  with  fiscal  and  financial  policy,  we  need  to 
erect walls between banks and sovereigns. 
I would be pleased to answer your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
