Jens Weidmann: The euro area caught between individual responsibility 
and joint liability – might Switzerland point the way? 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Swiss-
German Chamber of Commerce, Basel, 11 November 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for your invitation. I am delighted to have the 
opportunity to speak to you today. 
The  title  “birthplace  of  the  euro”  has  not  been  officially  given,  but  in  the  public  perception 
there is probably one clear favourite. If an opinion poll were held, the Dutch city of Maastricht 
would  surely  have  the  best  chance  of  taking  the  title.  After  all,  the  treaty  was  signed  in 
Maastricht  in  1992  and  has  since  been  the  foundation  underpinning  European  Monetary 
Union. 
Yet  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  the  result  of  long  and  intensive  negotiations  which,  in  turn, 
were largely based on the report presented by a group of high-level experts under Jacques 
Delors, then President of the European Commission. Between June 1988 and April 1989, the 
Delors Committee, as it was called, met here in Basel – on neutral ground, as it were. Thus, 
Basel would also have some justification in calling itself the “birthplace of the euro”. 
Up until then, the birth of the euro was the pinnacle of the process towards European unity, a 
process which many did not imagine possible following the devastations of the Second World 
War.  Yet  the  inconceivable  became  conceivable  as  a  result,  amongst  other  things,  of  a 
speech which Konrad Adenauer later described in his memoirs as giving “decisive impetus” 
to European unity. That celebrated “speech to the academic youth” was delivered by Winston 
Churchill at the University of Zurich in September 1946. 
After  reminding  his  audience  in  vivid  terms  of  the  horrors  of  the  Second  World  War,  he 
painted  a  vision  of  a  united  Europe:  “Yet  all  the  while  there  is  a  remedy  which,  if  it  were 
generally and spontaneously adopted by the great majority of people in many lands, would 
as if by a miracle transform the whole scene, and would in a few years make all Europe, or 
the greater part of it, as free and as happy as Switzerland is today. What is this sovereign 
remedy? It is to recreate the European Family, or as much of it as we can, and to provide it 
with a structure under which it can dwell in peace, in safety and in freedom. We must build a 
kind of United States of Europe.” 
True, Switzerland is not a member of the European Union, but on a number of occasions it 
has proved itself to be the midwife to European ideas – and when we compare Switzerland 
with the euro area it soon becomes obvious that it can continue to play this part. 
The debt crisis has laid bare cracks in the architecture of monetary union. The founders of 
the  single  currency  area  were  only  too  aware  thatexcessively  high  public  or  private  debt 
levels  or  a  lack  of  competitiveness  on  the  part  of  individual  countries  could  jeopardise the 
stability of monetary union as a whole. But as we discovered the hard way, the precautions 
that had been taken to ward off these dangers were insufficient. 
By contrast, Switzerland shows itself to be remarkably stable – even though the Swiss fiscal 
policy structures in particular resemble those in the euro area in many respects. This is the 
case, for instance, with regard to the high degree of autonomy the Swiss cantons enjoy in 
defining their fiscal policy. 
That is why I  want to talk today about what the euro area can learn from Switzerland. My 
speech is composed of two parts. In the first part I will look at the institutional framework of 
European  Monetary  Union  and  examine  what  caused  the  euro  area  to  flounder.  In  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
second part, based on my comparison with Switzerland, I will make some suggestions as to 
how European Monetary Union might be strengthened. So let me begin with the architecture 
of monetary union. 
The flaws in European Monetary Union 
2. 
The introduction of the euro was, at that point, the most significant step towards economic 
integration  in  the  history  of  the  European  Union.  Given  its  vast  implications,  it  was  a  leap 
rather than a step. The remarkable thing about this jump is its asymmetry. In ski jumping one 
would speak of a Telemark landing, for whereas monetary policy was communitised, fiscal 
policy remained a matter of national responsibility. 
This is not necessarily a bad thing in itself – after all, the Telemark landing has become an 
established standard in ski jumping. But to be sure of a safe landing and to maintain control 
after landing, certain points have to be heeded. 
And  so  it  is  with  monetary  union.  The  combination  of  a  single  monetary  policy  and 
decentralised  fiscal  policy  can  further  compound  the  tendency  of  governments  to  finance 
their spending through debt, thereby undermining the stability of monetary union. 
If all the other countries were to leave their fiscal policy unchanged, the additional debts of 
one country would have the effect of increasing the overall demand for loans, and with it the 
level of capital market interest rates in the euro area, only slightly. Nevertheless, the increase 
would affect all the countries because part of the cost of debt would be passed on to others, 
producing a greater incentive to take on more debt. 
To  keep  monetary  union  on  track  in  spite  of  these  dangers,  the  founders  of  European 
Monetary Union drew up the fiscal rules enshrined in the Stability and Growth Pact, which 
cap deficits at 3% and total debt at 60% of GDP. 
However, these rules had only a limited effect. If one country breached the rules, it was down 
to  the  finance  ministers  of  the  other  euro-area  countries  to  decide  on  possible  sanctions. 
Game theory leaves us in little doubt as to the outcome of such an arrangement. Or to be 
more blunt, we might use the words of Otmar Issing,former chief economist of the ECB, who 
described the situation as one in which potential sinners pass judgement on actual sinners. 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was  not  the  only  safeguard  against  excessive  government 
debt, however. National responsibility also means that member states be held responsible for 
the consequences of their own decisions. That is why the Maastricht Treaty explicitly rules 
out the assumption of debt by the European Unionor by other member states. This liability 
principle was intended to have a disciplining effect in that member states running unsound 
fiscal  policies  or  dubious  economic  policies  would  only  be  able  to  borrow  at  worse  terms, 
since investors would demand compensation for the risk they were taking. 
However, the disciplining by the markets which, it was hoped, would result from the no bail-
out clause failed to materialise. For many years, Greece was highly indebted, but paid little 
more for its debt than Germany or France. Why that should be is quite easy to explain. And 
this is where Basel again enters the scene to play an important role. 
At around the same time as the Delors Committee, another committee was meeting in Basel 
– the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision – and made what proved to be a momentous 
decision for the euro area. The new common set of international capital rules stipulated that 
government bonds issued by developed countries in their own currency be valued as risk-
free assets. This meant that banks did not have to back them with capital. 
The European Union, too, translated these rules into European law, despite the no bail-out 
clause  anchored  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  That,  of  course,  robbed  the  no  bail-out  rule  of 
some  of  its  credibility.  After  all,  classifying  government  bonds  as  risk-free  and  therefore 
default-proof  is  at  odds with  the  no  bail-out rule.  And  if  banks  do  not  build  up  any  kind  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
buffers  against  sovereign  exposures,  sovereign  default  will  pose  a  direct  threat  to  their 
solvency: a financial crisis cannot then be ruled out. 
That is why the principle of individual national responsibility has so far only been applied to a 
limited extent. Nor did the measures that were taken to combat the crisis exactly bolster this 
principle. It was in response to the risk of contagion which emerged when the crisis broke out 
–  and  which  was  probably  underestimated  when  monetary  union  was  created  –  that  the 
rescue packages were set up. 
Although they have helped stabilise the euro area, the balance between liability and control 
has been thrown even more out of kilter because of them. While fiscal policy decisions are 
ultimately  still  made  at  the  national  level,  joint  liability  has  been  considerably  expanded. 
Rather than the Telemark landing, this increasingly invites comparisons with performing the 
splits – which does not make a safe landing any more likely. 
Might Switzerland point the way? 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, so what can the euro area learn from Switzerland about restoring the 
balance  between  control  and  liability?  Before  I  look  into  this  question,  it  is  worth 
remembering  that  for  all  the  structural  similarities  between  these  two  currency  areas, 
Switzerland and the euro area differ considerably in a number of respects, one of which is 
fiscal policy. 
A key component of Swiss fiscal policy – albeit one which cannot be readily transposed to 
the euro area – is the principle of direct democracy which gives the general public a say in 
fiscal decisions, especially at the cantonal and local government level. 
Studies1 suggest that cantonal referendums tend to curb spending. This effect is hard-wired 
into their very design – referendums can only be used to reduce spending, not increase it. In 
some  cantons,  they  are  mandatory  for  projects  costing  more  than  a  certain  threshold;  in 
others, they are optional. 
Yet one thing remains consistent throughout. The taxpayer, who ultimately foots the bill, has 
a direct say in how much money is spent. In my view, this way of striking a balance between 
control and liability is not a model which can be transposed to the euro area. But its general 
thrust does point the way. 
Referendums are not the only instruments which Swiss cantons and local governments use 
to strike a balance between control and liability. Another crucial element in their fiscal policy 
toolkit is the no bail-out regime for local governments.2 
But up until ten years ago, no one was quite sure whether a canton really was exempt from 
the obligation to bail out an insolvent municipality  within its jurisdiction. The answer to this 
question came in the court ruling handed down in the Leukerbad case, which stated that the 
canton  in  question,  Valais,  was  not  obliged  to  bail  out  its  highly  indebted  municipality 
Leukerbad. Ever since, the financial markets have also acknowledged the no bail-out regime 
as  a  credible  policy,  as  indicated,  amongst  other  things,  by  the  fact  that  yields  on  bonds 
issued by cantons which are home to municipalities facing financial problems have dropped 
since the court ruling. 
Yet how can the principle of individual fiscal responsibility be reinforced among the member 
states of the euro area? It is a journey which begins in Basel, or, to be more precise, with the 
                                                
1   Kirchgässner, Gebhard (2013): Fiscal Institutions at the Cantonal Level in Switzerland University of St. Gallen 
Discussion Paper no. 2013–04. 
2   Feld, Lars P, A Kalb, M-D Moessinger and S Osterloh (2013), Sovereign, Bond Market Reactions to Fiscal 
Rules  and  No-Bailout  Clauses:  The  Swiss  Experience,  Centre  for  European  Economic  Research  (ZEW), 
Discussion Paper No.13–034. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
preferential regulatory treatment afforded to sovereign bonds. As I mentioned earlier in my 
speech,  this  preferential  treatment  not  only  sends  out  conflicting  signals  about  whether  a 
sovereign  insolvency  is  even  a  permissible  concept  for  legislators.  It  also  makes  such  a 
scenario appear unrealistic not least because a sovereign default without appropriate capital 
buffers at banks would quite likely trigger a financial crisis. 
So  first,  government  bonds  should  be  adequately  backed  with  capital,  and  second,  banks 
should hold loans to individual sovereign debtors only up to a certain level. In a nutshell, over 
a medium-term horizon, government bonds need to be treated just like other bonds or loans 
to enterprises. 
From a financial stability perspective, particular problems are posed by the fact that banks 
often only hold government bonds issued by a single country in their books – those of their 
home  country.  The  consequences  of  this  are  two-fold.  Not  only  do  banks  have  no  capital 
backing for these government bonds; their risk is also concentrated in just one country. This 
will need to change to give credence to the no bail-out regime. 
The bottom line of national responsibility is that sovereign insolvencies and insolvencies of 
large  banks  should  also  be  possible  without  jeopardising  the  stability  of  the  European 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  tightened  capital  rules  for  banks,  which  are  designed  to 
enhance financial sector resilience, naturally also contribute to achieving this goal. So this is 
another area in which Basel plays a crucial role. But this time, it is Basel III which I am talking 
about. No less important is a stricter supervisory regime like the one which Europe is looking 
to achieve by establishing the banking union. 
But  even  a  credible  no-bailout  regime  will  only  have  the  intended  disciplining  effect  when 
doubts begin to emerge over a country’s fiscal soundness. That is why it is also important to 
combat the particular incentives inherent in a monetary union to run up debts – a goal which 
the monetary union’s founders had originally sought to achieve – so that things don’t get out 
of hand in the first place. 
Hence the need for effective fiscal rules. Switzerland has a wealth of experience in applying 
fiscal rules. Its national debt brake has been up and running since 2003, since which time 
debt has roughly levelled off, and the debt ratio has been on the decline. But we can glean 
more detailed insights from the cantonal fiscal rules, which are now in place in nearly all the 
country’s cantons. Available research reveals that stricter cantonal debt brakes also prove to 
be more effective.3 
Bearing this in mind, a rule allowing potential sinners to pass judgement on actual sinners 
would have little prospect of success. The euro-area member states have already tightened 
the groundrules by rolling out the revised Stability and Growth Pact and the Fiscal Compact, 
making  it  much  more  difficult  now  for  finance  ministers  to  turn  down  the  Commission’s 
recommendations. 
So  it  is  now  mainly  up  to  the  Commission  to  make  the  next  move.  The  first  time  the 
Commission applied the new rules, it showed itself to be very elastic, granting Spain, France, 
Slovenia and Cyprus longer deadlines to make adjustments than those actually envisaged in 
the Stability and Growth Pact. 
I believe that such exemptions should be made only in well-founded exceptional cases. For 
this ultimately weakens the structural consolidation requirements and pushes them into the 
future.  Making  exceptions  for  a  large  number  of  countries  simultaneously  undermines  the 
disciplining effect of the fiscal rules. 
                                                
3   See Feld et. al. (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
So  it  remains  to  be  seen  how,  and  to  what  extent,  the  new  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  will 
actually reinforce fiscal discipline. Perhaps enshrining debt brakes in national legislation, as 
envisaged by the Fiscal Compact, can provide a further impetus in that direction. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  crisis  may  be  widely  dubbed  the  “sovereign  debt  crisis”,  but 
excessive public sector debt was not its only cause. A lack of competitiveness on the part of 
some  member  states,  and  excessive  developments  in  the  banking  sector  also  played  a 
decisive  role  in  bringing  about  the  crisis.  But  if  I  were  to  now  discuss  the  macroeconomic 
imbalance  procedure  which  was  set  up 
in  response 
the  excessive  economic 
misalignments, or the banking union, I would take all evening. 
That’s why I have confined my speech to just a few aspects of the regulatory framework, not 
least because these are precisely the areas in which Switzerland can offer valuable insights 
into how existing weaknesses can be rectified. While it is true that not all the components of 
Switzerland’s fiscal federalism can be transposed to the euro area, the concept at the heart 
of the Swiss model – striking a balance between control and liability – can, and should, offer 
us some guidance for reforms in the euro area. 
Restoring a regulatory framework that can stand the test of time is a challenging task. But I 
am  certain  that  we  will  only  bring  about  a  more  stable  monetary  union  once  this  task  has 
been  overcome.  Or,  as  Winston  Churchill  once  aptly  put  it,  “difficulties  mastered  are 
opportunities won”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
