Mario Draghi: Opening speech at the European Banking Congress “The 
future of Europe” 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
European Banking Congress “The future of Europe”, Frankfurt am Main, 22 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. 
While the situation in the euro area has improved greatly over the last year, we are still faced 
with considerable challenges. 
We  need  to  secure  the  economic  recovery,  reduce  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  and 
continue the process of institutional and structural reform.  
To achieve this, it is essential that we do not retreat into purely national perspectives, with a 
narrow view of our interest. We must keep our European perspective – and stand up for our 
common interests.  
I would like to use my remarks today to highlight two areas where this European perspective 
is key. 
The  first  is  the  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  with  a  single  currency  will  always  have 
different  effects  in  different  places.  But  it  is  essential  to  understand  that  the  ECB,  by  its 
mandate,  must  act  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  And  in  doing  so,  it  makes  the  best 
contribution to prosperity for European society at large. 
The second area is the creation of banking union, notably the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
(SSM). The SSM will create the first ever genuinely European supervision and we must take 
advantage of the opportunities this provides. 
For banks, it offers a unique opportunity to restore confidence and attract private investors, 
also  through  the  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment.  For  the  wider  euro  area,  it  offers  a 
possibility to deepen financial integration and reduce fragmentation. For this process to be 
effective, a strong Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) is essential.  
The ECB’s monetary policy 
Starting  with  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  our  mandate  is  inherently  European  –  it  is  to 
maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole. And this mandate is symmetric; don’t 
forget that price stability works in both directions. We need to act as much when there is a 
risk that inflation in the medium term might become too low as well as too high. 
As  I  had  the  opportunity  to  explain  yesterday,  when  we  took  our  recent  decision  to  cut 
interest rates, we saw a situation where the inflation outlook deviated too strongly away to 
the downside from our price stability mandate. Our decision was necessary to comply with 
our mandate.  
I also had the opportunity to address some concerns this decision has raised. Let me briefly 
come back to this.  
One  concern  is that  low  interest  rates  erode people’s  savings.  Another  is that  low  interest 
rates  create  risks  for  financial  stability.  A  third  is  that  they  reduce  the  incentives  for 
governments to reform. 
Allow me to address each of these concerns in turn. 
First, I understand the concerns about a prolonged period of low returns on savings. But it is 
important  to  understand  that  interest  rates  are  low  because  the  economy  is  weak.  If  we 
raised rates, we would further depress the economy, people would lose their jobs, and then 
their savings would be lower for longer. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
By keeping interest rates at a level that supports the recovery, we should see higher interest 
rates for savers going forward. 
Moreover, the interest rate that matters most to long-term savers is not the main ECB rate, 
but the rate on safe long-term investments – in Germany, that is long-term Bunds. 
It is wrong to think that these rates are solely determined by the ECB. Since the crisis, more 
powerful  factors  have  been  at  play.  In  particular,  the  low  return  on  long-term  Bunds  was 
largely explained by investors seeking safety as other parts of the euro area struggled. 
Second, low interest rates can over time threaten financial stability, but we do not see any 
evidence of this at present.  
If  we  do  see  low  interest  rates  creating  localised  risks,  then  local  tools  should  be  used  to 
address  them.  In  particular,  national  authorities  should  make  full  use  of  macro-prudential 
tools that they have available. 
The third concern is that low interest rates undermine incentives for reform in the euro area. 
Certainly,  monetary  policy  always  has  side  effects  –  this  is  inherent  and  unavoidable.  But 
one  should  never  forget  that  the  ECB  acts  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  in  line  with  our 
mandate. 
I have already reacted to the nationalistic tone that this concern has provoked in some recent 
commentary.  In  their  deliberations  and  decisions,  Governing  Council  members  are  neither 
German,  nor  French,  nor  Spanish,  nor  Italian  but  acting  as  Europeans  in  pursuit  of  a 
European mandate.  
To  maintain  the  right  incentives  for  economic  policies,  countries  need  to  strengthen  their 
frameworks  for  economic  governance.  Important  steps  to  strengthen  budgetary  discipline 
have  already  been  undertaken.  But  several  countries  are  further  behind  in  implementing 
structural  reforms.  It  is  therefore  high  time  to  bring  this  area  under  closer  European 
governance.  
The Single Supervisory Mechanism  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  part  of  my  remarks  today  –  the  creation  of  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism.  
The SSM offers a tremendous opportunity to move from different national approaches to the 
treatment  of  banks  to  a  genuinely  European  perspective.  That  is,  to  take  collective 
responsibility for our banks consistent with the single financial market in which they operate. 
The ECB’s comprehensive assessment 
It is clear that there needs to be much more confidence in banks within and across countries 
that are joining the SSM. 
This  is  the  objective  of  the  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment.  How  will  the  assessment 
boost confidence? 
Primarily, by giving all parties more transparency. Investors should have the facts they need 
to properly price assets and be assured that banks are sufficiently capitalised.  
The exercise aims to achieve this through a supervisory risk assessment, an asset quality 
review and a stress test. I will not go into the details here as they are being communicated 
separately, but the key point is that it will be comprehensive and consistent. 
Comprehensive because it will cover 128 banks and about 85% of the assets of countries 
participating in the SSM. 
And consistent because it will be centrally led with a rigorous common methodology – there 
will be no room for perceptions of national bias. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
There  should  be  no  doubt  about  the  credibility  and  rigour  of  the  assessment,  or  the 
comparability of the results.  
Let  me  add  here  that,  by  end-January,  we  expect  to  announce  the  key  parameters  of  the 
stress test exercise together with the European Banking Authority (EBA). 
We  have  recently  been  meeting  with  bank  top  management  along  with  their  national 
supervisors. We have emphasised in these meetings that to make the exercise a success we 
need  to  have  high-quality  information.  In  fact  our  first  data  request,  called  the  “portfolio 
selection”, has just been issued.  
We  are  aware  that  gathering  this  information  requires  an  extraordinary  effort  for  national 
supervisors and especially for banks. But it is important to note that this is not a permanent 
or recurrent feature of the SSM. 
Since  last  year  banks  have  been  improving  the  robustness  of  their  balance  sheets  by 
increasing capital and provisions. In this sense, the exercise is already producing results – 
and  I  encourage  banks  to  continue.  Given  the  improvement  in  market  conditions,  market-
based solutions should be more feasible than in the recent past.  
If private sector solutions cannot be achieved in a timely and realistic manner, there is also a 
responsibility for the public sector. To ensure the credibility of the exercise, we need clear 
public  backstops  at  the  national  and  European  levels.  If  they  are  drawn  upon,  the 
Commission has clarified that the state aid rules will provide for a level playing-field in terms 
of burden sharing, while financial stability will be fully safeguarded. 
The  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment  therefore  provides  the  first  step  towards  building 
confidence  in  euro  area  banks,  and  between  euro  area  countries  and  their  competent 
authorities.  
I call on all banks covered by the SSM to join our effort in the coming months by supplying 
the  necessary  information  to  the  ECB  and  the  national  authorities,  by  undertaking  prior 
actions where needed, and by proactively responding to the conclusions of the exercise. 
Fostering financial integration 
Once the SSM is established, it offers a real possibility to take a new, European approach 
towards  governance  of  the  financial  sector  –  and  hence  to  reverse  the  harmful  financial 
fragmentation we have seen during the crisis.  
There are three ways in which I see that the SSM can help. 
First,  the  SSM  can  supervise  in  the  European  interest.  As  European  supervisor  it  has  no 
incentives related to national champions and its mandate is fully aligned with its European 
financial stability objective.  
The  fact  that  the  new  European  supervisor  is  not  only  legally  independent  but  also 
independent of any single government or national financial system facilitates the pursuit of its 
objective. 
Second,  the  SSM  can  increase  confidence  among  supervisors.  During  the  crisis,  some 
supervisors, motivated  by uncertainty, engaged in defensive actions such as national ring-
fencing of liquidity and national asset-liability matching. This may have been rational given 
their mandates, but it reinforced fragmentation. 
Under  the  SSM,  all  supervisors  will  have  the  same  rules,  standards  and  decision-making 
procedures. As such, a supervisory assessment from the SSM that a bank is healthy will be 
a “seal of quality” that is valid from one country to the next. 
Third, the SSM can foster trust between banks.  
European  supervision  should  make  banks  more  confident  to  lend  to  one  another  across 
borders, in particular in the interbank market. And it could also make banks more willing to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
engage  in  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions.  This  would  deepen  financial  integration 
and make the euro area more resilient to fragmentation. 
Our  long-term  vision  for  the  SSM  involves  an  environment  where  a  creditworthy  firm  or 
household can get a loan from any bank in Europe at comparable conditions – and where 
location considerations would not be predominant.  
Yet, further improvements will be needed in other domains. It is not only different supervision 
that  holds  back  cross-border  banking  integration  and  activity.  Also  different  national  legal 
frameworks, different tax regimes and different rules for corporate governance contribute to 
fragmentation. These issues warrant consideration to facilitate financial reintegration.  
The Single Resolution Mechanism as an essential complement 
Another essential element in building a more integrated European banking market is greater 
harmonisation of how non-viable banks are resolved. 
This  requires  a  consistent  legal  framework  between  countries  and  a  single  resolution 
mechanism  to  enforce  that  framework.  The  first  part  has  already  been  agreed  by 
governments; the second part, the SRM, needs to be pursued as a matter of urgency. 
A robust SRM would encompass all banks established in member states participating in the 
SSM. It would have at its centre a strong and independent single resolution authority that can 
act evenly across countries and take decisions in the European interest. And it would have 
adequate powers, tools and financial resources to resolve institutions swiftly and effectively.  
The key to an effective resolution regime is that it creates legal certainty, consistency and 
predictability, thus helping to avoid ad hoc solutions. To this end, there are two points where I 
think more certainty is needed. 
First, while the new EU resolution framework provides the appropriate resolution toolbox, it 
would  be  better  to  have  it  available  right  from  the  start  of  the  SRM.  I  therefore  support 
implementing the bail-in tool well before 2018.  
Second,  to  price  risk  properly,  investors  need  to  see  a  clear  pecking  order  in  resolution 
financing  –  running  from  capital  write-downs  and  bail-in  to  use  of  a  bank-financed  single 
resolution fund.  
However,  it  would  be  difficult  to  make  such  a  pecking  order  credible  without  a  public 
backstop  for  the  single  resolution  fund  for  exceptional  cases  where  its  resources  are 
exhausted.  Otherwise,  investors  may  suspect  that  governments  would  at  some  point  be 
forced to step in again. 
Such a backstop would still result in the private sector paying as any borrowing by the fund 
would  have  to  be  repaid,  if  needed  through  ex  post levies  on  the  banking  sector.  In  other 
words, the future system would not be about bail-outs or mutualisation – it would be fiscally 
neutral; the taxpayer would not pay. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude.  
I  have  discussed  today  the  benefits  of  a  European  perspective  to  our  current  challenges. 
This is not the perspective of idealists. Rather, in a closely integrated monetary union, it is 
the perspective of realists.  
A European perspective is firmly enshrined in monetary policy. And it is equally enshrined in 
our  approach  for  establishing  the  SSM.  We  will  overcome  fragmentation  to  create  a  truly 
integrated financial market. There is still much more to be done to overcome the challenges 
that we face, but we have the right orientation.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
