Jwala Rambarran: Strengthening banking regulation and supervision in 
the Caribbean 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Basel II Implementation Workshop, Port of Spain, 17–20 September 2013. 
 Good morning, 
First, I wish to thank CARTAC for arranging this Basel II Implementation Workshop and for 
inviting me to give some brief opening remarks this morning.  
As we all know, safe and robust banks operating in a well regulated financial system play a 
key role in the economy and society. One of the main lessons of the recent global financial 
crisis is that banks must improve their ability to manage risk, so they do not inflict serious 
damage  on  the  economy.  This  calls  for  a  stronger  risk  management  culture  within  banks. 
This calls for stronger regulation and supervision within central banks and other regulatory 
agencies.  
In today’s discourse, most commentators assume that “strengthening regulation” is simply a 
matter  of  implementing  international  standards,  of  which  the  most  important  is  the  Basel 
Capital  Accord,  designed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  Other 
commentators,  however,  have  examined  alternative  approaches  to  prudential  regulation 
beyond standards. They argue that a strategy for prudential policy must address three main 
weaknesses:  the  impossibility  of  fine-tuning  bank  safety  margins  in  the  uncharted  territory 
that  is  banking  in  the  developing  world;  the  need  to  provide  insulation  against  the  large 
shocks to which these economies are prone; and the lack of enforcement that results from 
the concentration of political power in many such countries. 
This year marks the 25th anniversary of the 1998 Basel Capital Accord, which through its two 
incarnations has emerged as the international gold standard for banks’ capital requirements. 
The  first  manifestation  came  in  June  2004  when  the  Basel  Committee  wholly  rewrote  the 
original Basel Accord, which has a number of flaws. For instance, it is risk insensitive, it does 
not differentiate between credit risk and other risks a bank typically faces, and it can easily 
be circumvented by regulatory arbitrage.  
The  new  Accord,  generally  known  as  Basel  2,  represented  a  fundamental  change  of 
approach 
its 
understanding and implementation a great challenge, not only to regulators but also to the 
regulated community. Basel 2, for example, assumes that discipline by the markets and by 
supervisors  is  beneficial.  Yet,  as  we  have  seen,  particularly  over  the  last  five  years,  both 
markets and governments can, and do, fail. 
The second incarnation of the original Basel Accord has seen most G-20 countries starting to 
implement  the  Basel  3  capital  rules,  which  has  delivered  what  many  consider  to  be  the 
world’s first global liquidity standard for banks. The jury is still out on Basel 3.  
As many of you know (or at least I hope you know), the Basel Committee does not have the 
right to impose the standards it produces on others, and has never, at least explicitly, sought 
to  constrain  national  authorities  to  do  so.  Nevertheless,  more  than  100  countries  are 
implementing the three versions of the Basel Accord in different forms at varying speeds.  
Here in the Caribbean, most jurisdictions are still seeking to fully comply with Basel 1 before 
moving  to  Basel  2,  while  others  are  focusing  on  first  satisfying  Pillar  2  of  the  Basel  2 
Framework. The region, as whole, decided to put the adoption of Basel 2 on hold following 
criticisms of the approach in the wake of the eruption of the international financial crisis in 
mid-2007. Five years later, one might even perhaps question why the region is not focusing 
on Basel 3 at this time. 
to  regulation.  The  revised  framework 
is  highly  complex  and  makes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
So why has the Caribbean region been grappling with implementation of the Basel Accord? 
Perhaps  the  answer,  in  my  respectful  view,  is  that  the  Basel  framework  was  never  really 
designed with developing countries in mind, and implementation of any version in developing 
countries is likely to be fraught with difficulties.  
There are a number of factors which determine the speed of Basel Accord implementation 
plans  in  different  countries  of  the  world.  These  include  the  size,  structure  and  degree  of 
financial  sector  development,  the  level  of  economic  development,  and  the  capacity  of  the 
existing regulatory and supervisory authorities. Application of these factors to the Caribbean 
reveals the following: 
First, the small island states in the Caribbean experience greater macroeconomic volatility, 
greater  volatility  of  external  flows  and  greater  vulnerability  to  external  shocks  than  the 
industrial  countries.  Secondly,  the  newer  versions  of  the  Basel  framework  rely  on  strong 
institutions.  In  the  Caribbean,  institutions  limiting  rent-seeking  are  weak:  banker  and 
bureaucrat  have  more  opportunity  and  incentive  to  reap  private  benefits  at  public  cost. 
Basel 3, for example, presumes that sophisticated and integrated risk management systems 
are in place, and for the Caribbean this is generally not the case. Thirdly, skills are scarce in 
the  Caribbean.  Supervision  and  market  discipline  require  skilled  supervisors  and  market 
participants.  
I,  therefore,  believe  it  is  timely  for  the  regional  Working  Committee  on  Basel  2 
implementation to start thinking about developing a regional prudential road map that is more 
appropriately  tailored  to  our  circumstances.  Such  a  road  map  should  take  at  least  three 
concerns into account. These are as follows: 
1. 
Pay more attention to the stability of the financial system, not only risk of the 
constituent  parts.  Remember,  two  banks  with  the  same  failure  probability  but 
different  size  present  the  same  risk  to  their  depositors  but  different  risks  to  the 
system. Macro-prudential data is most likely to give better warning to policymakers 
of a build-up of financial imbalances. 
Take away the punch bowl just when the party gets going. We have learned the 
hard  way  that  when  the  music  is  playing,  bankers  want  to  dance.  One  way  to 
restrain the excesses of booms is to impose countercyclical prudential requirements 
to  lessen  the  procyclical  nature  of  the  Basel  2  framework  for  credit  risk.  These 
countercyclical  prudential  requirements  include  minimum  capital  ratios,  collateral 
haircuts, liquidity and currency mismatch limits. 
Rely,  as  much  as  possible,  on  simple  rules  that  are  easy  to  write, 
communicate,  enforce  and  verify.  Agreement  and  implementation  of  the  global 
regulatory agenda has been gradual. The reform momentum is waning due to lack 
of agreement on specific issues especially when national political pressures trump a 
global  consensus.  These  delays  are  adding  to  regulatory  uncertainty  and  weigh 
heavily on the financial sector.  
2. 
3. 
In closing, I want to emphasize that no amount of regulation or intensive supervision will be 
able to catch poor financial conduct, malfeasance or unlawful activity, all the time. As Mark 
Carney,  current  Governor  at  the  Bank  of  England,  once  remarked  “virtue  cannot  be 
regulated.”  
I wish you all a productive Workshop.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
