Jwala Rambarran: The Trinidad and Tobago financial sector – creating 
the future we want 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Trinidad & Tobago Coalition of Service Industries (TTCSI) National Services 
Week, Port of Spain, 6 November 2013. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let  me  first  thank  the  Board  of  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Coalition  of  Service  Industries 
(TTCSI)  for  the  kind  invitation  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  on  my  vision  for  creating  a 
future financial system we all desire. I also commend TTCSI for continuing to stage “National 
Services  Week”.  Services  remain  integral  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  diversification  and 
competitiveness  thrust.  The  services  sector  employs  one  in  eight  persons  and  contributes 
more than 45 percent to the country’s GDP. 
The finance industry, of course, is part of the services sector. In the finance profession, most 
people  remember  September  15,  2008.  On  that  day,  the  venerable  US  investment  bank 
Lehman Brothers considered “too big to fail” collapsed and ignited the worse financial crisis 
in  generations,  a  crisis whose  reverberations  are  still  being  felt  in  different forms  and  with 
varying impacts on people’s lives. 
Here  at  home,  we  also  experienced  our  own  “Lehman”  meltdown.  I  am  sure  many  of  you 
remember  Friday  January  30,  2009. On that  day,  the  Central  Bank  announced  that  it  was 
assuming control of CLICO, the largest insurance company, and of CLICO Investment Bank 
(CIB),  the  largest  investment  bank.  Both  financial  institutions  were  subsidiaries  of  the  CL 
Financial  Group,  the  largest  conglomerate  in  the  Caribbean.  Large  scale  public  support 
would  eventually  be  needed  to  prevent  widespread  disruption  and  loss  of  economic 
confidence. 
The  CL  Financial  crisis  came  six  months  after  the  financial  implosion  of  the  Hindu  Credit 
Union,  which  also  left  thousands  financially  stranded  and  struggling  to  cope.  The  CL 
Financial crisis has cost this country over $20 billion dollars, while the HCU collapse though 
smaller, but just as devastating, was a burden to the tax payers in the long run, just as well. 
I will focus on the larger CL Financial crisis, which was a bigger blow to the Treasury and to 
the financial system, and from which two questions naturally emerge. 
First, “How did it all happen?” and, second, the question I have been asked most often since 
I assumed office, “What is being done to prevent a similar event from happening again?” 
Obviously these two questions are closely interlinked and quite justified. We have to learn 
from the past in order to shape the future of our financial system. 
So this morning, I want to speak about two things: 
• 
First, I will briefly outline my understanding of the causes behind the events which 
unfolded on January 30, 2009 and what the CLICO/CIB crisis has taught us; and 
Then, I will discuss five major initiatives the Central Bank has been undertaking to 
avoid another crisis. These initiatives will not just protect our financial system, but 
also help shape its future direction. 
 Learning from the past – what the clico/cib crisis taught us 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  at  the  outset  I  wish  to  indicate  that  the  CL  Financial  failure  is  the 
subject  of  three  major  investigations.  First,  the  Central  Bank  commissioned  a  forensic 
investigation  which  resulted  in  the  filing  of  a  civil  suit  claiming  damages  against  former 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
leading CL Financial executives and their related companies. Second, the Director of Public 
Prosecutions  is  investigating  the  prospect  of  laying  criminal  charges  against  these  former 
leading executives. Third, a Commission of Enquiry has completed its deliberations and is 
expected to produce a report into the circumstances behind the failure of CL Financial. 
As you may appreciate, these investigations quite naturally constrain my public disclosures 
on the causes of the CLICO/CIB crisis. I will therefore, confine my discussion to the public 
statements  made  by  Central  Bank  officials  at  the  Commission  of  Enquiry.  My  reading  of 
those  public  statements  suggests  that  the  following  could  be  interpreted  as  some  of  the 
reasons behind the failure of the CL Financial Group: 
• 
CL Financial reflected a highly complex and opaque business model. Poor corporate 
governance  and  weak  risk  management  practices  made  it  difficult  to  assess  the 
extent  of  exposures  and  potential  spillovers.  It  was  difficult to  determine who  was 
dancing  with  whom,  and  how  closely.  This  opacity  magnified  the  shock  to 
confidence as the CLICO/CIB crisis unfolded; 
the CL Financial Group became highly over leveraged and heavily interconnected. 
Both CLICO and CIB used aggressively high interest rates to finance equally high 
risk investments, much of which were in illiquid assets including real estate; 
actual  leverage  of  the  CL  Financial  Group  was  even  greater  than  immediately 
apparent.  Distorted 
incentive  structures  encouraged  excessive  related-party 
transactions, which were not specifically prohibited in regulation, but which carried 
significant contagion risks; 
liquidity risk was higher than recognized. CLICO and CIB took on excessive maturity 
mismatches while failing to build adequate liquidity asset buffers; 
capital, therefore, was inadequate as a buffer against the sharp drop in asset prices, 
especially a rapid fall in methanol prices (a major source of dividends for the Group) 
and plummeting real estate values; 
the  interconnectedness  of  institutions  meant  that  these  shocks  were  propagated 
across the Group, both in Trinidad & Tobago and the Caribbean; and 
CL  Financial  enjoyed 
implicit 
understanding was that if the Group ran into difficulties, the government would step 
in to prevent a systemic crisis. This made the too-big-to-fail problem even bigger. No 
one  really  knew  what  exactly  needed  to  happen  if  a  large  systemically  important 
institution became insolvent. At the end of the day, the decision to either bailout an 
institution or let it go bankrupt became a political not economic one. 
the  benefits  of  being 
“too-big-to-fail.”  The 
      My brief discussion has most certainly not fully captured all the details and the complexity of 
the  CL  Financial  crisis.  But  even  this  brief  overview  provides  some  valuable  lessons  for 
shaping our future financial system. 
We  learnt  the  hard  way  about  distorted  incentives,  we  learnt  about  a  severe  lack  of 
transparency, about inadequate capital and liquidity buffers and, most importantly, about the 
problem of “too-big-to-fail”. 
We must also learn that this failure partly resulted from systemic weakness in the regulatory 
architecture  and  partly  from  excessive  risk  taking,  both  in  regulated  institutions  and  those 
outside the perimeter. 
Looking to the future – how to prevent another crisis 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as the country’s prime financial regulator, the Central Bank has an 
almost fifty year record of maintaining the safety and soundness of the financial system. As 
an  independent  institution  with  national  responsibility,  we  are  guided  by  our  statutory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
obligations and by the long-term economic interests of the country. Our mandate goes well 
beyond the medium term horizon of the electoral cycle. 
Only  one  thing  is  important:  we  need  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to 
withstand shocks, no matter from which direction they emanate. 
The first of the five initiatives we are spearheading to enhance the resilience of the financial 
system is regulatory reform. 
recently,  passage  of 
Regulatory measures/reform 
Many of our financial reforms in the last ten years have been triggered by recommendations 
made  in  a  June  2004  document  entitled  “Reform  of  the  Financial  System  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago:  A  White  Paper.”  On  the  regulatory  side,  we  saw  passage  of  key  legislation  to 
improve  oversight  by  the  two  main  regulators  –  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Trinidad  and 
Tobago Securities and Exchange Commission (TTSEC). 
Passage  of  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  (FIA)  2008  allowed  for  enhanced  supervision  of 
commercial banks and non-banks, as well as strengthened the Central Bank’s enforcement 
powers.  More 
the  Securities  Act  2012  saw  adoption  of 
recommendations  to  improve  supervision  of  the  securities  market  by  the  Trinidad  and 
Tobago Securities and Exchange Commission (TTSEC). 
While the White Paper has served our financial services industry well, it is now dated. Crises 
such as CL Financial and Lehman, which erupted in the last six years, could not have been 
anticipated ten years ago when the Paper was written. Clearly, we need a new White Paper 
on  the  Financial  System  to  provide  a  new  roadmap  for  the  next  generation  of  financial 
reforms. 
For this reason, the Central Bank has been spearheading efforts to develop a Green Paper 
on the Financial System, as a precursor to the creation of a new White Paper. 
In  the  insightful  words  of  Independent  Senator the  Honorable  Subas  Ramkhelawan  during 
his December 2012 contribution to the debate on the Securities Bill, “financial regulation on 
the whole is like the building of a fortress, and it is important in the building of a fortress that 
all the walls must be equally fortified, because the marauders at the gate will always look for 
the weakest point to infiltrate.” 
A major weapon in the building of our regulatory fortress is the Insurance Bill 2013. 
New insurance legislation is coming. I want to stress the Insurance Bill is not in limbo. It is 
not collecting dust on a shelf in a government office. 
The Central Bank has been championing the Insurance Bill 2013, which is a meaningful and 
substantial piece of legislation. It contains a modern approach to insurance regulation and 
supervision,  calls  for  strengthening  corporate  governance  of  insurance  companies,  and 
establishes  more  effective  protection  of  policyholders.  The  Insurance  Bill  will  address 
fundamental  prudential  deficiencies  and  will  include  important  requirements  for  insurance 
companies which are consistent with international best practice. 
The Honourable Minister of Finance and the Economy is expected to lay the Insurance Bill 
before a Joint Select Committee of Parliament before the end of the year. 
Other  regulatory  reforms  relating  to  the  credit  union  sector  and  private  pension  funds  are 
currently being addressed as the respective pieces of legislation are substantially complete. 
While regulatory measures will give us a bigger bite, we are approaching the protection of 
our financial system from various angles. 
The CL Financial crisis taught us that vigilant supervision is critical. This is the second area 
in which the Central Bank is spending considerable time and resources. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Good supervision 
Good  supervision  is  an  extremely  challenging  and  often  underappreciated  task.  Two 
initiatives are supporting good supervision at the Central Bank: the ability to act and the will 
to  act.  The  Central  Bank  currently  regulates  the  banking,  insurance  and  private  pensions 
sectors of the financial system. As I just shared with you, we are also planning to regulate 
credit unions and other financial institutions. 
As the regulatory rulebook becomes more challenging, we do not have the luxury of time to 
grow  supervisors  from  entry  level  to  seasoned  professionals  –  a  process  that  can  take 
upwards of a decade. The country will not tolerate the excuse of not enough competent and 
highly-skilled supervisors. 
We  have,  therefore,  adopted  a  more  pragmatic  approach  to  building  supervisory  capacity 
and  shortening  the  time  period  for  creating  seasoned  supervisors.  Over  the  past  year,  we 
have  been  recruiting  top  talent  from  our  private  financial  sector  and  placing  them  in  key 
supervisory positions within the Financial Institutions Supervision Department (FISD) of the 
Central Bank. 
We have recruited a Second Deputy Inspector, brought in a highly sought after Chief Actuary 
and for the first time we have hired a Pension Fund Specialist and a Credit Risk Specialist. 
We will continue to head-hunt respected talent from the private sector. 
The  CLICO  crisis  has  also  taught  us  that  it  is  even  more  important  for  supervisors  at  all 
levels  to  keep  their  eyes  on  the  ball,  at  all  times.  The  Bank  is,  therefore,  deepening  its 
approach to supervision in five ways. 
First, our supervisors must not be afraid to be intrusive. They will not stay on the sidelines of 
regulated  financial  institutions,  relying  solely  on  the  results  of  institutions’  internal  controls 
and  risk  management  systems.  The  Central  Bank  is  ensuring  its  presence  is  continuously 
felt, keeping in mind the unique relationship between supervisors and the financial services 
industry. 
Second, our supervisors must be skeptical yet proactive. They will question the direction or 
actions of the financial services industry, especially in good times. The Central Bank is most 
valuable  when  it  performs  the  unpopular role  of taking  away  the  punchbowl  just  when  the 
party is about to rock. Let me just say we have indeed taken away a couple of punchbowls 
over the past year, particularly in the insurance industry. We are not in a popularity contest. 
I am going through the details of how we do what we do, so you can have confidence not just 
in the Central Bank, but in our financial system. When you walk out of here today I want you 
to leave feeling convinced the people in the Central Bank tower are not asleep behind the 
wheel. (We take the punchbowl away, we don’t drink from it!) 
So  if  you  would  indulge  me  a  bit  more  I  want  you  to  know  our  supervision  will  be 
comprehensive.  The  Central  Bank  is  not  simply  confining  its  interests to  risks faced  by  its 
regulated  entities.  Our  supervisors  will  go  beyond  to  risks  posed  by  other  entities  in  the 
financial system. 
Fourth, our supervisors must be adaptive. The Central Bank is adapting to changes at the 
regulatory perimeter, with an eye to new or unregulated areas. 
Finally, Central Bank supervisors must be conclusive. Supervisors will not be afraid to follow 
through conclusively on their inspection findings and to ensure matters identified reach their 
final  resolution.  The  Central  Bank  is  taking  every  identified  issue,  however  small,  to  its 
conclusion. 
The Central Bank is ensuring that its supervisors have both the will and the ability to act in 
order to prevent individual financial institutions from getting into trouble. What really defined 
the CLICO crisis, however, was the systemic aspect of a large financial institution failing and 
dragging others with it into the abyss. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This brings me to the fourth initiative the Central Bank is undertaking to manage our financial 
system. I speak about the Systemically Important Financial Institutions, or SIFIs 
Unit Trust Corporation (UTC); 
Home Mortgage Bank (HMB); 
Board of Management incorporated under the National Insurance Act (the NIB); 
Trinidad and Tobago Mortgage Finance Co. Ltd (TTMF); and 
Agricultural Development Bank of Trinidad and Tobago (ADB) 
Systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) 
Both  the  global  economic  crisis  and  our  own  CLICO  crisis  demonstrated  that  failure  of 
systemically important financial institutions (“SIFIs”) had the potential to disrupt the smooth 
functioning  of  markets  and  the  economy.  Accordingly,  the  regulation  of  SIFIs  has  been 
placed at the top of our regulatory reform agenda. 
The Central Bank has deemed five financial institutions as SIFIs. These are as follows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
In  the  case  of  the  UTC,  its  asset  size  (TT$23  billion)  is  about  one-tenth  the  assets  of  the 
financial  system.  This  is  twice  as  much  as  the  total  assets  of  all  institutions  licensed  to 
conduct the business of a financial nature under the FIA. The UTC is the country’s largest 
mutual funds provider. A collapse of UTC would threaten the smooth functioning of both the 
financial market and the local economy. 
It is important to note that in his Budget Statement of 2011, former Minister of Finance, the 
Honourable Winston Dookeran stated that the regulatory framework governing the Unit Trust 
Corporation is to be strengthened by, inter alia, placing the Corporation under the regulatory 
oversight of the Central Bank. 
The state-owned National Insurance Board (NIB), which is responsible for the administration 
of the country’s National Insurance System, commands around one-tenth of the assets of the 
financial  system.  The  last  actuarial  review  of  the  National  Insurance  System  revealed  a 
substantial shortfall in accumulated assets at the end of June 2010, essentially due to lower 
than expected investment returns. Since then, interest rates have fallen even lower and this 
is expected to further widen the deficit of the NIS Fund. 
Given  the  volume  of  financial  services  offered  by  the  NIB,  its  linkages  within  the  financial 
system  and  the  real  economy  and  the  need  to  ensure  that  the  fund  deficit  is  effectively 
managed  and  eventually  eliminated,  the  Central  Bank  has  deemed  the  institution  to  be 
systemically significant. 
In  respect  of  the  other  SIFIs,  while  their  asset  bases  may  be  relatively  small,  these 
institutions have significant linkages within the financial system and the real economy. They 
also  have  specialized  mandates  to  help  advance  Government’s  policies  in  areas  such  as 
housing and agriculture, thereby making it difficult for other financial institutions to carry out 
their functions. 
I  also  wish  to  point  out  that  some  of  these  financial  institutions  accept  deposits  from  the 
general  public  but  are  not  subject  to  prudential  supervision  by  the  Central  Bank.  These 
institutions form part of what is usually referred to as the “shadow banking” system. 
The Central Bank has commenced the process of seeking Cabinet approval to deem these 
five local financial institutions as Systemically Important Financial Institutions or SIFIs. 
We want to bring the UTC, NIB, HMB, TTMF and the ADB into the regulatory perimeter of 
the Bank. If successful, the Central Bank would be responsible for regulating almost all of the 
financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
We have, therefore, reached a critical juncture in which it is important to consider whether a 
single financial regulatory authority is the optimal model of financial regulation in Trinidad and 
Tobago. This is our fifth initiative for securing the financial system. 
Single financial regulatory authority 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the CLICO crisis was partly due to regulatory arbitrage across the 
two main regulators – the Central Bank and the TTSEC. I fully understand and appreciate the 
merit  in  having  checks  and  balances  and  healthy  tensions  across  multiple  regulators. 
However, a single financial regulatory authority can facilitate coordinated and comprehensive 
oversight of the entire financial services industry in the interest of promoting financial stability 
and more orderly markets. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  issue  of  integrated  financial  supervision  has  been 
engaging  the  attention  of  policymakers  worldwide.  Unfortunately,  there  is  no  global 
consensus on the best model for financial regulation. 
A few countries have made the transition to a single regulatory financial authority using their 
central banks. These are Ireland, Russia and Singapore. Other countries have established a 
single regulator to co-exist alongside their central banks. These include Barbados, Canada, 
Colombia,  Germany,  Japan,  Qatar  and  South  Korea.  Some  countries  have  opted  for  the 
“twin-peaks”  model  which  relies  on  two  separate  regulators:  prudential  regulation  and 
consumer protection. These include Australia, the Netherlands, South Africa and the United 
Kingdom. 
For  this  reason,  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Economy  in  his  Budget 
2013/2014  presentation  indicated  that  the  issue  of  the  single  financial  regulator  would  be 
deliberated upon in the coming year. 
I wish to affirm that the Central Bank stands ready to work with the Ministry of Finance and 
the Economy and the TTSEC to undertake research and consultation to determine whether a 
single  Financial  Regulatory  Authority  is  the  most  feasible  model  for  integrated  financial 
regulation and supervision in Trinidad and Tobago. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, suffice it to say that there is general consensus that the legacy of the 
CLICO/CIB crisis is expected to generate significant changes in our local financial landscape. 
There is perhaps less agreement on what shape the new financial landscape would take. 
Five  years after the CLICO/CIB crisis, the Central Bank is translating many of the lessons 
from the crisis into a new oversight framework. We are on the right path, but we have not yet 
reached our destination. At the Central Bank we are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
hiring new specialized supervisory staff; 
deepening our approach to supervision; 
seeking passage of stronger legislation such as the Insurance Bill; 
seeking  control  over  systemically  important  financial  institutions  such  as  the  Unit 
Trust Corporation; and 
examining the feasibility of a Single Financial Regulator. 
• 
These are just a few of the initiatives the Central Bank has been working on over the last 
fifteen  months  to  rebuild  confidence,  strengthen  financial  stability  and  to  help  create  our 
future financial system. 
However,  I  wish  to  make  one  thing  abundantly  clear. We  cannot  regulate  virtue.  Financial 
stability  must  reside  in  the  hearts  and  minds  of  those  who  work  in  finance:  bankers, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
investment analysts, insurance agents, insurance executives, brokers, and financial advisors. 
Financial  stability  must  reside  in  the  hearts  and  minds  of  our  university  students  who 
eventually enter the financial workplace. Financial stability must also reside in the hearts and 
minds  of  our  politicians  and  policymakers,  who  are  called  upon  to  make  life-changing 
financial decisions. 
We need a change of culture. The financial rakhshas (demons) who believe “greed is good” 
must be conquered. Only then would we see a financial system that is a true servant to the 
needs  of  the  real  economy.  Subscribing  to  this  notion  is  perhaps  the  most  important  step 
towards crafting the financial system we all want to see. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
