Simon M Potter: Recent developments in monetary policy implementation 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, before the Money Marketeers of New York University, 
New York City, 2 December 2013. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Deborah  Leonard  for  her  excellent  assistance  in  the  preparation  of  these  remarks  and 
colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for numerous insightful comments and suggestions. 
Thank you, Ray, for the introduction and to the Money Marketeers for hosting me. 
My remarks this evening will focus on the role played by the New York Fed’s Trading Desk 
(the  Desk)  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  how  our  operational  tools  have 
evolved  in  recent  years.  I’ll  focus  in  particular  on  the  potential  use  of  overnight,  fixed-rate 
reverse  repurchase  agreements,  also  known  as  reverse  repos,  which  we  began  testing  in 
September.  We’ve  been  testing  this  instrument  to  support  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee’s (FOMC) longer-run planning for the implementation of monetary policy, and its 
development  shouldn’t  be  interpreted  as  a  signal  of  the  FOMC’s  intentions  for  monetary 
policy or the path or timing of any future change in the level of policy accommodation. As 
always,  the  views  expressed  here  are my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of the 
New York Fed or the Federal Reserve System.  
The desk’s role in implementing monetary policy 
Before  discussing  overnight,  fixed-rate  reverse  repos,  I  think  it  would  be  helpful  to  lay  out 
some context for how we think about monetary policy implementation. 
As  you  well  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  charges  the  FOMC  with  formulating monetary 
policy to achieve what we call the “dual mandate” – stable prices and maximum employment. 
In normal times, the Committee would do this principally by changing the level of its target for 
the overnight fed funds rate, in order to influence the pricing of money and credit. Movements 
in this rate are passed on to other short-term interest rates that influence borrowing costs for 
households and businesses and financial conditions more broadly. Since December 2008, of 
course, the FOMC has held its target fed funds rate in a narrow range just above zero. Since 
then, in order to support a stronger economic recovery and help ensure that inflation, over 
time,  is  at  the  rate  most  consistent  with  its  mandate,  the  FOMC  has  provided  additional 
monetary policy accommodation using a number of unconventional tools. These tools include 
alterations in the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and forward 
guidance  on  the  target  federal  funds  rate.  Any  change  in  the  size  and  composition  of  the 
System Open Market Account (SOMA) decided upon by the FOMC is implemented by the 
Desk.  This  distinction  between  monetary  policy 
formulation  and  monetary  policy 
implementation is important. Open market operations are merely a means to an end – tools 
for implementing the FOMC’s decisions.1  
In designing these operational tools, the Desk aims to effectively and  efficiently implement 
the  FOMC’s  directives.2  Of  course,  Desk  operations  don’t  take  place  in  a  vacuum.  We 
                                                
1  Additional policy tools related to depository institutions, such as the discount window, interest on reserves, and 
the  Term  Deposit  Facility,  are  overseen  by  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and 
implemented by the Federal Reserve Banks. 
2  The  FOMC  issues  a  “directive”  to  the  New  York  Fed  after  each  of  its meetings.  The  directive  outlines  the 
approach  to  monetary  policy  that  the  FOMC  considers  appropriate  for  the  time  period  between  its  policy 
meetings (for example, its target fed funds rate or range, or an amount of long-term securities to purchase) 
and authorizes the Desk to conduct transactions in the SOMA in furtherance of it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
operate  in  the  open  market,  conducting  transactions  with  a  range  of  private  market 
participants  who  are  motivated  by  their  own  business  needs,  balance  sheet  constraints, 
regulatory  incentives  or  disincentives,  and  individual  perceptions  of  current  and  future 
economic  conditions  and  risks.  We  rely  on  both  internal  and  external  infrastructure  and 
systems to trade, settle, and clear our transactions. Our understanding of the dynamics of 
the markets in which we operate – including the motivation and behavior of different market 
participants,  linkages  among  financial  institutions,  and  the  microstructure  of  financial 
instruments – is therefore vital to our ability to structure and execute operations to achieve 
the  objectives  of  policymakers.3  By  monitoring  markets  and  maintaining  deep  expertise  in 
them, we remain  vigilant to changes in the financial market landscape that might alter our 
assessment of our operational toolkit. 
On that note, I’ll now turn to significant changes in U.S. money markets in recent years and 
their implications for the Desk’s implementation of monetary policy. 
The changing landscape of U.S. money markets 
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  the  Desk  met  the  FOMC’s  interest  rate  directives  primarily  by 
controlling the supply of reserves in the banking system.4 The Desk conducted open market 
operations  to  manage  a  supply  of  reserves  at  a  level  that  was  expected  to  match  the 
estimated quantity of reserves demanded at the FOMC’s overnight fed funds rate target. The 
rate prevailing in the market each day is the effective fed funds rate. In the aggregate, the 
system  at  that  time  was  operated  with  a  “structural  deficiency”,  meaning  that  permanent 
additions to the supply of reserve balances fell somewhat short of the total need, so the Desk 
conducted additional daily operations to add balances temporarily to get to the desired level. 
Even if we supplied the correct aggregate quantity of reserve balances, individual depository 
institutions with a deficiency of reserves had to find and trade with depository institutions with 
reserve  surpluses.  A  purchase  of  fed  funds  therefore  represented  the  marginal  source  of 
funding for a bank, and the fed funds rate paid by the bank was the marginal cost of bank 
funding.  The  Desk’s  daily  fine-tuning  operations  represented  a  marginal  adjustment  to  the 
aggregate  supply  of  reserves,  mostly  in  response  to  the  exogenous  impact  of  changes  in 
other  balance  sheet  items,  such  as  Federal  Reserve  notes  and  the  level  of  the  U.S. 
Treasury’s account balance at the Fed, which altered the level of aggregate reserves in the 
banking system. In the five years prior to the crisis, this system functioned with an average of 
$20 billion in reserve balances and about $1.5 billion in excess reserves. Although aspects of 
this approach evolved over time, this general method for implementing monetary policy was 
employed  by  the  Desk for  decades,  and  the  Desk’s  ability  to  reliably  achieve  the  FOMC’s 
policy  directive  was  judged  quite  favorably  by  market  participants.  In  fact,  with  increased 
transparency around the FOMC’s fed funds target (which the Committee began to officially 
announce in the mid-1990s) and with high confidence in the Desk’s ability to hit that target, 
markets often adjusted to announced changes in the FOMC’s target policy rate without the 
need for the Desk to conduct operations to effect the change. 
An important point to observe is that the rate for which the FOMC sets a target, the overnight 
federal  funds  rate,  represents  an  unsecured  lending  rate  between  banks.  But  the  Desk 
conducted  its  operations  with  its  primary  dealer  counterparties  –  government  securities 
dealers that have an established trading relationship with the New York Fed – in the secured 
financing  market  for  general  collateral  repurchase  agreements,  or  GC  repos.  This  market 
serves  as  a  hub  in  which  broker-dealers  and  other  market  participants  finance  their 
                                                
3  See my November 27, 2012, Remarks on the Role of Central Bank Interactions with Financial Markets. 
4  The Federal Reserve also established a baseline demand for reserves through reserve requirements. Since 
the  expansion  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  and  resultant  increase  in  reserve  levels,  however, 
these  requirements  have  been  so  far  below  the  level  of  actual  reserves  that  they  can  be  met  without  any 
additional Desk actions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
inventories  of  securities,  frequently  borrowing  from  cash-rich  investors,  such  as  money 
market funds. These financing arrangements are structured as repos, in which the security is 
technically  sold  with  an  agreement  to  repurchase  at  an  agreed-upon  later  date.  The 
transaction  can  be  thought  of  in  most  respects  as  economically  similar  to  a  collateralized 
loan. The growth of the GC repo market in recent decades has reflected the greater issuance 
of marketable securities in the United States, and the repo market and the broker-dealers, 
through  their  intermediation,  support  the  healthy  functioning  of  the  markets  for  such 
securities. 
Primary  dealers  have  accounts  at  the  tri-party  clearing  banks,  which  are  depository 
institutions.  Thus,  by  crediting  funds  to  the  dealers’  clearing  accounts,  the  Desk  literally 
created  reserve  balances  in  the  banking  system.  These  operations  didn’t  attempt  to  exert 
any  influence  directly  over  the  repo  markets  in  which  we  transacted,  and  in  fact  the  repo 
operations were conducted as fixed-quantity auctions in which the Desk took whatever rates 
the  market  offered  to  achieve  the  targeted  amount  of  repos.  The  related  adjustments  in 
reserve  conditions  directly  influenced  the  rate  in  the  fed  funds  market  used  by  banks  to 
borrow  reserves  to meet  reserve  requirements and  ensure  adequate  clearing  balances for 
payments activity. The fed funds rate, in turn, had strong linkages to other short-term interest 
rates,  thus  allowing  the  FOMC  to  affect  the  broad  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  even 
through its narrow policy target. Although there might have been relatively small deviations 
across  various  short-term  money  markets,  movements  were  generally  aligned,  and  we 
retained firm control over short-term interest rates. The Desk’s effectiveness in achieving the 
FOMC’s  fed  funds  target  through  operations  with  primary  dealers  in  the  repo  market  thus 
illustrates how its operations are just a technical means to an end. 
The  crisis  brought  on  several  important  changes  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  with 
implications for money markets. The first was the easing in the stance of monetary policy, 
with the FOMC’s reduction in its fed funds target from a point target of 5¼ percent in mid-
2007 to a target range of zero to ¼ percent by December 2008, where it remains today. The 
second change was a shift to liquidity and monetary policy operations that resulted in a high 
level of excess reserves. In the initial year or so of the crisis, the Desk offset the reserve-
adding nature of the Federal Reserve’s loans to support the liquidity of a range of financial 
institutions and to foster improved conditions in financial markets by reducing other assets on 
the  Fed’s  balance  sheet,  notably  holdings  of  short-term  U.S.  Treasury  securities.  By 
September  2008,  however,  amid  a  deepening  crisis  and  widening  policy  response,  the 
capacity to offset completely the increase in the balance sheet was effectively exhausted.5 
Consequently,  additional  credit  provision  and  the  initiation  of  large-scale  asset  purchase 
programs, the latter of which continue today to support continued progress toward maximum 
employment and price stability, began and continue to cause reserve balances to grow. 
A  third  and  related  change  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  was  the  introduction  of  our 
ability to pay interest on reserve balances held by depository institutions. Congress granted 
this authority to the Federal Reserve in the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, 
with an October 2011 effective date, but accelerated its implementation to October 2008 as 
part of the legislative response to the financial crisis. In particular, the ability to pay interest 
on excess reserves, or IOER – that is, reserve balances held by banks above the level of 
reserves they’re required to hold – enhanced the Federal Reserve’s ability to control short-
                                                
5  After  selling  a  significant  portion  of  its  holdings,  the  SOMA  eventually  lacked  a  sufficient  volume  of 
unencumbered Treasury securities to sell. However, some additional capacity came from the Supplementary 
Financing  Program  (SFP),  initiated  in  September  2008  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  U.S.  Treasury 
Department.  The  SFP  consisted  of  a  series  of  Treasury  bill  auctions,  separate  from  Treasury’s  regular 
borrowing program, with the proceeds maintained in an account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Funds in this account served to drain reserves from the banking system, offsetting the reserve impact of some 
of the Federal Reserve’s lending and liquidity initiatives. The SFP has not been used since July 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
term  interest  rates  amid  its  reserve-expanding  credit  programs  and  asset  purchases.6 
Without  payment  of  interest  on  reserves,  short-term  interest  rates  could  fall  to  zero  or 
negative  levels  given  the  increased  level  of  reserve  balances.  Interest  on  reserves 
represents  the  rate  of  return  on  a  riskless  overnight  deposit  at  the  Fed.7  Accordingly,  the 
interest rate paid on reserves represents the sure return a bank can earn and therefore the 
opportunity  cost  for  the  bank  to  make  an  alternative  investment,  such  as  a  loan  or  the 
purchase of a security. Theoretically, if all money market participants had access to deposits 
earning the IOER rate, the IOER rate should set a minimum rate – or floor, so to speak – on 
short-term interest rates, as there would be no incentive for institutions to make loans to any 
institution  at  a  lower  rate.  Even  in  a  market  without  universal  access  to  IOER,  depository 
institutions with access to it could borrow funds or take deposits from institutions that cannot 
earn  it,  then  leave  funds  invested  at  the  IOER  rate  until  there’s  no  further  economic 
advantage to borrower or lender. Competition among banks that can earn IOER would thus 
pull up other money market rates close to the IOER rate. 
Money  market  dynamics  in  recent  years  generally  reflect  these  changes.  In  a  world  with 
significantly elevated reserve balances and a ¼ percent interest rate paid on those balances, 
IOER has kept the federal funds rate and other money market rates at positive levels within 
the FOMC’s zero to ¼ percent target range. Contrary to the dynamics one would expect of 
an  idealized  perfect  market,  however,  short-term  rates  have  consistently  traded  at  levels 
below  the  IOER  rate,  and  Treasury  bill  and  repo  rates  have  occasionally  gone  negative, 
particularly when financial stresses increase the demand for very safe assets. Since IOER is 
available  only  to  depository  institutions  holding  balances  at  the  Fed,  many  other  money 
market participants cannot access it, either because they don’t earn interest on Fed account 
balances (like government-sponsored enterprises, or GSEs) or don’t have Fed accounts at 
all  (like  money  market  funds).  Without  such  access,  these  institutions  may  have  less 
bargaining power and may have to leave funds unremunerated at the Fed or place funds in 
the market at sub-IOER rates. This creates a potential arbitrage opportunity for banks, which 
can earn a spread between their costs of funds and their earnings on reserves, but not for 
other cash lenders. However, uncertain or rising balance sheet costs – likely related to new 
regulatory  changes,  including  higher  capital  requirements,  leverage  ratio  and  liquidity 
requirements,  and  changes  in  the  FDIC’s  insurance  fee  assessment  scheme  –  may  have 
altered  banks’  cost-benefit  evaluations  and  tempered  their  willingness  to  arbitrage  the 
differences  in  rates.  Additionally,  banks  are  reportedly  unable  to  attract  substantial  funds 
because of lenders’ concerns regarding credit risks associated with uncollateralized lending 
and  because  lenders  often  distribute their  investments  among  several  banks, making  their 
supplies of funds relatively insensitive to the interest rates offered by individual banks. Thus, 
while banks take some advantage of the arbitrage opportunity, competitive conditions in the 
unsecured money markets haven’t proven strong enough to narrow the spread between the 
fed funds rate and the IOER rate to very small and stable levels, and the floor on rates that 
IOER is meant to provide appears soft. 
Although  longer-term  correlations  remain  fairly  robust,  the  federal  funds  rate  and  other 
money  market  rates  are  no  longer  moving  as  closely  together  on  a  day-to-day  basis.  In 
recent years, the fed funds rate has been relatively stable on a day-to-day basis, while other 
                                                
6  The Federal Reserve also pays interest on required reserve balances, which reduces the opportunity cost that 
depository institutions incur by holding required reserves at a Federal Reserve Bank. The Federal Reserve 
Board is responsible for setting the rate of interest on reserves. Since December 16, 2008, the interest rates 
on required reserve balances and excess reserve balances have been ¼ percent, although the rates need not 
be the same. 
7  Although  interest  on  reserves  represents  an overnight  rate,  it  is calculated  and  paid  out on  a  lagged  basis 
according to two-week reserves management maintenance periods. The payment is based on daily account 
balances and a weighted average of applicable overnight rates over the maintenance period. More information 
can be found in Regulation D. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to 
rather 
focus  on  collateralized 
short-term rates like GC repo have tended to be more variable and have, more than in the 
past,  fluctuated  with  sometimes  unpredictable  spreads  to  federal  funds.  These  periodic 
episodes of weaker linkages suggest that although the IOER rate effectively influences the 
marginal  unsecured  funding  rate  for  eligible  depository  institutions,  it  may  not  be 
representative  of,  and  may  currently  lie  above,  the  marginal  cost  of  funds  more  broadly 
across  money  markets,  for  example,  secured  financing  costs  faced  by  repo  market 
participants. This weakening of the relationship between short-term interest rates represents 
a reduction in the precision with which the Desk is able to control them over the very short 
term. It’s difficult to know, though, whether the shift in dynamics across money markets we’re 
seeing  is  permanent  or  temporary.  While  some  of  the  changes  could  be  indicative  of  an 
increasing  desire  by  market  participants 
than 
uncollateralized markets, it could also reflect more transitory factors related to an elevated 
level  of  reserves  that  leaves  banks  with  no  need  to  borrow  funds given  the  abundance  of 
deposits. 
Of course, it’s also difficult to know with certainty how money market rate relationships will 
respond  when  the  FOMC  eventually  begins  to  remove  policy  accommodation  in  an 
environment with a high volume of reserve balances. An elevated level of reserve balances 
in the system, in and of itself, need not impede our ability to effectively control the level of 
short-term  interest  rates.8  Indeed,  there  are  other  central  banks,  for  example  Norway,  that 
show that with the right tools and operating framework, it’s possible to maintain rate control 
despite a large amount of central bank reserves in the system. It appears likely that reserves 
in the U.S. banking system will be at unprecedented levels when interest rates are eventually 
raised. As of November 27, reserve balances in the system stood at nearly $2.5 trillion, and 
the  level  continues  to  rise  as the  Fed’s  asset  purchases continue.  In  a recent  study  using 
median  policy  expectations  from  the  Desk’s  June  2013  Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  as  a 
baseline scenario, staff economists at the Federal Reserve Board estimated that the Fed’s 
securities portfolio will peak at a level of $3.9 trillion in mid-2014, with the corresponding level 
of reserve balances topping out at $2.7 trillion at that time.9 The Desk’s most recent survey, 
from  October,  would  put  these  numbers  even  higher,  owing  to  dealers’  expectations  for  a 
larger and longer-lasting purchase program than they previously anticipated.10  
This changing financial landscape therefore warrants a fresh evaluation of the operating tools 
we have to achieve the most effective and efficient implementation of monetary policy while 
operating with or exiting from a very large balance sheet. 
Enhancing the range of tools for monetary policy implementation 
Even  in  an  environment  of  abundant  reserves,  the  Desk’s  operating  objective  remains  the 
same:  to  maintain  control  over  the  policy  rate  as  directed  by  the  FOMC  in  support  of  the 
Committee’s monetary policy objectives. That said, the means by which we achieve that end 
may  require  alternative  approaches.  For  the  purpose  of  these  remarks,  I’m  assuming  that 
                                                
8  Antoine Martin, James McAndrews, and David Skeie, “Bank Lending in Times of Large Bank Reserves”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 497, May 2011, revised June 2013. 
9  Seth B. Carpenter, Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote, “The Federal 
Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections”, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2013-01, January 2013, revised September 
2013. 
10  The  October  2013  Survey  of  Primary  Dealers  indicates  median  expectations  for  a  domestic  securities 
portfolio that peaks at $4.3 trillion after an end to asset purchases at the conclusion of 2014. The survey did 
not  ask  respondents  to  provide  expectations  for  the  peak  level  of  reserve  balances,  but  reserve  balances 
would inevitably rise along with the larger expansion of securities holdings. The exact path of reserves in the 
banking system would depend on the interplay of numerous autonomous factors outside the Fed’s influence, 
such as currency growth and balances at the Federal Reserve held by the Treasury Department, as well as 
the usage of reverse repo and term deposit facilities.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
FOMC  policy  will  dictate  that  the  balance  sheet  remains  large,  and  that  open  market 
operations  would  be  designed  to  achieve  the  Committee’s  objectives  in  such  an 
environment.  With  this  in  mind,  a  well-rounded  toolkit  for  the  implementation  of  monetary 
policy would provide us with a selection of instruments that allow us to target either reserve 
levels or interest rates directly, while variables for each type of objective would include the 
term of the operation, the auction method, and the counterparty type. This would provide a 
flexible set of instruments to respond to market conditions as they evolve and as directed by 
the  FOMC.  Generally  speaking,  operations  that  target  reserve  levels,  like  those  we 
conducted  before  the  crisis,  might  be  implemented  most  efficiently  through  fixed-quantity 
auctions.  A  structure  of  several  overlapping  term  auctions,  for  example,  could  achieve 
significant  size  objectives  while  minimizing  the  rollover  risk  for  maturing  operations.  In 
contrast,  overnight,  fixed-rate  tools  that  are  also  full  allotment,  meaning  participants  could 
invest  as  much  as  they  want  at  the  administered  rate,  might  be more  effective  for  directly 
targeting interest rates. Such tools would allow participants to fine-tune the amount they want 
every day in response to changes in supply-and-demand conditions in the market and their 
cash  management  needs.  In  either  the  fixed-rate  or  fixed-quantity  case,  tools  offering  the 
ability  to  transact  directly  with  either  bank  or  non-bank  counterparties  would  enhance  the 
Desk’s operational capacity and strengthen the transmission of monetary policy in the face of 
some  of  the  rates  wedges  currently  seen  in  markets.  I  should  note  that  the  operations 
described above are all temporary liability management tools that don’t reduce the size of the 
Fed’s  balance  sheet;  they  shift  one  liability  item  –  reserve  balances  –  into  another  –  a 
reverse repo with the New York Fed, for example.11 In recent years, the Federal Reserve has 
developed  and  tested  several  tools,  including  term  and  overnight  reverse  repos  with  an 
expanded set of counterparties and the Term Deposit Facility, or TDF, available to nearly all 
depository institutions, that together with IOER represent most of this broad toolkit.12  
IOER and the TDF represent unsecured overnight and term tools, respectively, in which only 
depository  institutions  are  eligible.  I’ve  already  discussed  IOER.  The  TDF  is  a  program 
through which Federal Reserve Banks offer interest-bearing term deposits to eligible banks 
through an auction subscription that could be either fixed in quantity or fixed in rate with full 
allotment.  An  increase  in  term  deposits  outstanding  temporarily  reduces  reserve  balances 
because funds to pay for them are immobilized away from reserve accounts of participating 
institutions  for  the  life  of  the  term  deposit.  They  don’t,  however,  reduce  the  size  of  the 
participating  bank’s  balance  sheet,  as  they  substitute  reserve  balances  with  a  less  liquid 
instrument. 
Reverse  repos  are  a  type  of  open  market  operation  in  which  eligible  counterparties  place 
cash  at  the  Federal  Reserve  in  return  for  securities  from  the  Fed’s  portfolio.  Technically 
structured as a sale and repurchase agreement, a reverse repo is economically equivalent to 
a  collateralized  investment  with  the  Fed  (with  the  opposite  flow  of  cash  from  a  repo,  the 
traditional liquidity-adding open market operation described earlier). These transactions are 
arranged as auctions between the New York Fed and the Desk’s traditional primary dealer 
counterparties,  as  well  as  with  an  expanded  set  of  counterparty  types,  including  money 
market  funds  and  GSEs,  that  typically  provide  large  amounts  of  short-term  funding  to  the 
financial  markets.13  Reverse  repos  were  initially  envisioned  to  be  used  as  a  term,  fixed-
quantity tool. However, with the necessary operational infrastructure to support reverse repo 
                                                
11  Permanent  operations  such  as  asset  sales  would  also  remain  in  the  Desk’s  toolkit  and  would  result  in  a 
reduction in the size of the Fed’s securities portfolio and balance sheet. 
12  Operational  exercises  for  both  mortgage-backed  security  purchase  and  sale  operations  using  the  Desk’s 
proprietary trading system, FedTrade, were started on November 21, 2013. 
13  The  expanded  set  of  counterparties  is  intended  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  Desk’s  reverse  repo 
operations  beyond  that  provided  solely  by  the  primary  dealers.  Given  the  nature  of  their  business,  primary 
dealers are more likely to seek financing for their inventories of securities rather than look to invest cash in 
reverse repos with the Federal Reserve.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Instead,  overnight, 
level  of  reserve  balances. 
operations  through  tri-party  arrangements  and  an  expanded  set  of  counterparties  now  in 
place, we’re focusing on additional ways to tap the capabilities. Specifically, reverse repos 
with  expanded  counterparties  could  also  be  used  in  an  overnight,  fixed-rate,  full-allotment 
facility with same-day settlement that directly targets overnight interest rates. Such a facility  
– which is essentially an extension of IOER to a broader set of counterparties – might help 
strengthen  the  floor  and  tighten  control  over  short-term  interest  rates  by  increasing 
competition  in  the  market  and  diverting  deposits  from  banks,  potentially  improving  the 
integration  among  the  various  market  segments.  Reverse  repos  with  non-banks  would 
remove reserves from the banking system. 
The  TDF  and  term  reverse  repos  are  somewhat  parallel  tools,  in  that  they  were  initially 
envisioned to auction a fixed quantity of term investments (deposits or reverse repos) to bank 
and non-bank counterparties, respectively, in order to drain reserves. Their capabilities have 
been tested periodically over the past several years through small-value exercises in order to 
ensure that they’ll be ready to deploy in size if and when needed. Nevertheless, for reasons 
discussed earlier, achieving an interest rate target through the management of the supply of 
reserves  alone  may  not  offer  the  best  framework  for  implementing  monetary  policy  in  a 
system  with  an  elevated 
fixed-rate, 
full-allotment  reverse  repo  operations  with  expanded  counterparties,  coupled  with  IOER 
available  to  banks,  might  enhance  the  Fed’s  achievement  of  its  policy  objectives  in  this 
environment. 
Similar  to  IOER  for  banks,  an  overnight,  fixed-rate,  full-allotment  reverse  repo  facility  with 
same-day settlement would provide an essentially risk-free investment directly at a fixed rate, 
in this case to a broad range of non-bank counterparties. By reaching financial institutions 
that  are  ineligible  to  earn  IOER,  including,  for  example,  money  market  funds,  the  facility 
widens  the  universe  of  counterparties  that  should  generally  be  unwilling  to  lend  at  rates 
below  those  rates  available  through  the  central  bank.14  The  facility  should  also  enhance 
competition  in  the  markets  by  strengthening  the  bargaining  position  of  non-bank  lenders, 
which would now be able to place essentially unlimited funds overnight in the Fed’s facility.15 
In this way, the facility is expected to complement IOER, strengthening the floor on the level 
of overnight rates and tightening the relationship among various money market rates. 
Such a facility might also be expected to help reduce the volatility of short-term interest rates. 
By conducting a daily operation with a known, fixed rate in unlimited amounts, the Fed can 
reduce uncertainty and absorb day-to-day variations in the supply of and demand for funds 
and  collateral.  An  eligible  lender  that  cannot  earn  the  IOER  rate  and  that  has  an 
unexpectedly large amount of funds to invest would be able to place the funds in the reverse 
repo facility rather than sell them in the market at an unusually low rate. This should reduce 
downward pressure on money market rates. Meanwhile, the availability of risk-free assets to 
a  broader  pool  of  counterparties  could  help  to  satisfy  demand  when  the  appetite  for  safe 
assets  by  those  counterparties  increases,  but  only  indirectly.  The  Fed’s  counterparty  may 
hold a risk-free asset on its balance sheet – a reverse repo with the Fed collateralized by 
risk-free  securities.  However,  the  securities  sold  to  the  counterparty  are  in  the  tri-party 
system, making them unavailable for the counterparty to satisfy margin requirements. That 
said,  to  the  extent  that  the  counterparty  switches  its  investments  from  other  high-quality 
                                                
14  A separate, overnight reverse repo facility has long existed as an investment vehicle for foreign central banks 
and international accounts that hold dollars in their accounts at the New York Fed. Investments in this program 
are  pooled  and  are  arranged  in  mutually  agreed-upon  amounts.  Reverse  repos  with  foreign  official  and 
international accounts are reported as a separate line item in the Board of Governors’ weekly H.4.1 statistical 
release on factors affecting reserve balances. 
15  In  practice,  the  size  of  the  operation  would  be  limited  by  the  lesser  of  the  level  of  excess  reserves  or  the 
amount of securities held in the SOMA portfolio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
assets to reverse repos with the Federal Reserve, the distribution of safe assets within the 
system could become more efficient. 
This  type  of facility  represents  an  efficient  tool from  an  operational  and  market-functioning 
standpoint as well. Unlike Desk operations conducted with fixed quantities, the Desk wouldn’t 
need  to  estimate  the  appropriate  amount  of  reverse  repos  to  offer  each  day  in  order  to 
absorb  the  quantity  of  reserve  balances  at  the  target  rate.16  With  IOER  and  an  overnight, 
fixed-rate,  full-allotment  reverse  repo  facility,  counterparties  would  determine  the  level  of 
participation based on daily demand for overnight investments at a fixed rate that’s judged 
consistent with the FOMC’s overall policy stance. Market forces will therefore determine how 
to allocate the Federal Reserve’s liabilities between depository institutions holding them as 
reserves and money market funds, GSEs, and other non-bank financial institutions holding 
them as reverse repos. 
The  effectiveness  of  an  overnight,  fixed-rate,  full-allotment  facility  in  helping  to  control 
overnight  money  market  rates  will  depend  on  a  range  of  factors,  including  whether  a 
sufficiently  wide  set  of  non-bank  counterparties has  access to the facility.  Following  seven 
waves  of  counterparty  expansions  since  2009,  the  Desk  currently  has  139  reverse  repo 
counterparties, covering 94 of the largest 2a-7 money market funds, 6 GSEs, 18 banks, and 
the 21 primary dealers. Taken together, these institutions represent an estimated 25 percent 
of all overnight Treasury tri-party repo volume. More counterparties could certainly be added, 
and we’re in the process of considering how best to proceed. The efficacy of the facility will 
also  depend  on  factors  such  as  the  regulatory  and  balance  sheet  constraints  of 
counterparties  and  the  level  of  competition  in  the  markets.  However,  the  facility’s  value  in 
terms of monetary policy implementation wouldn’t necessarily be determined by the amount 
of  usage.  If  the  facility  increases  bargaining  power  for  market  participants,  it  could 
conceivably provide an effective floor for short-term rates, giving the Desk tighter control of 
money market conditions even with usage of the facility that’s low on average. 
At its September 2013 meeting, the FOMC unanimously approved a resolution that allowed 
the Desk to start an operational test of fixed-rate, overnight reverse repos.17 The exercise, 
which began on September 23 and is authorized to run until January 29, 2014, entails the 
conduct of a daily overnight, fixed-rate reverse repo auction in order to assess operational 
readiness  to  carry  out  such  transactions.  It  therefore  allows  the  Desk,  its  wide  range  of 
counterparties,  and the tri-party  clearing  banks to  utilize  and  fine-tune their  procedures for 
end-to-end processing of trades, from posting of the rate to running operations, moving cash 
and collateral, unwinding the trade, and integrating information with accounting systems. Like 
other technical exercises, this one isn’t intended to materially affect the current level of short-
term  interest  rates.  Accordingly,  for  the  purposes  of  the  exercise,  each  counterparty’s 
participation is capped. The maximum bid amount and rate have varied over the life of the 
exercise  in  order  to  ensure  usage  sufficient  to  generate  useful  observations  about 
counterparty demand under various market conditions during the testing period; however, as 
authorized  by  the  Committee,  they  cannot  exceed  $1  billion  per  counterparty  and  5  basis 
points, respectively.18 It bears emphasizing once again that, like the Federal Reserve’s other 
                                                
16  The facility does, however, raise new collateral management issues for the Desk, which would have to ensure 
that  SOMA  securities  are  appropriately  allocated  to  meet  policy  and  operational  needs  across  multiple 
operations. 
17  The  Desk  has  been  conducting  periodic,  small-value  term  reverse  repo  exercises  with  its  expanded 
counterparties  through  tri-party  arrangements  since  October  2009.  These  exercises  have  been  limited  to 
$5 billion  in  total amounts  outstanding and  have  been conducted  according  to  the  traditional,  fixed-quantity 
model  of  Desk  operations.  In  August  2013,  the  exercises  were  arranged  for  same-day  settlement  and 
overnight maturity in anticipation of initiating overnight fixed-rate reverse repos. 
18  All  139  counterparties  are  eligible  to  participate,  but  they  are  able  to  choose  whether  they  do  so.  Each 
counterparty was initially limited to a maximum bid of $500 million. This amount was raised to $1 billion on 
September  26,  after  we  ensured  that  the  initial  launch  of  the  exercise  did  not  operationally  overwhelm  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
operational  readiness  exercises,  this  one  is  a  matter  of  prudent  advance  planning.  The 
testing  operations  don’t  represent  a  change  in  the  stance  of  monetary  policy,  and  no 
inference should be drawn about the timing of any change in the stance of future policy. 
Not surprisingly, the exercise to date has confirmed that the level of facility use is sensitive to 
the  rate  offered  (Exhibit  1).  For  much  of  the  testing  period  thus  far,  the  spread  between 
market rates and the fixed rate offered on reverse repos has been relatively wide. However, 
we’ve seen take-up increase in instances where the spread narrowed. Also not surprisingly, 
participation  increased  on  quarter-  and month-end  dates, particularly  by  GSEs  and money 
funds, which noted that uncertain access to overnight secured investments on these dates, 
combined  with  lower  unsecured  overnight  rates,  increased  the  attractiveness  of  our 
operations.  We’ve  also  seen  that  different  counterparty  types  have  used  the  facility 
differently, reflecting their business models and investment alternatives. Through November, 
total  usage  of  the  facility  has  ranged  from  $345  million  to  $58  billion  and  the  number  of 
bidders has ranged from 4 to 87 per operation (Exhibit 2). Excluding the quarter- and month-
ends, daily bids have averaged $4.5 billion from 17 bidders. 
Operationally,  market  participants  generally  characterize  the  exercise  as  smooth,  with 
minimal disruptions. From a policy perspective, participants have indicated that they expect 
that a facility, if executed in full scale in the future, should be an effective tool for increasing 
the Federal Reserve’s control of short-term money market rates through a stronger floor. In 
addition,  money  market  experts  have  noted  the  exercise’s  importance  in  the  current 
environment  of  promoting  market  functioning;  for  example,  it  reduces  the  likelihood  of 
pervasive, negative short-term rates trading. 
Conclusion 
In the five years since the FOMC has set the target for the federal funds rate at its zero lower 
bound, the landscape for the implementation of monetary policy has changed. The tools to 
implement monetary policy have also changed, and I focused here primarily on a possible 
new overnight, fixed-rate, full-allotment reverse repo facility. Although the current overnight, 
reverse  repo  exercise  provides  us  with  useful  observations  that  allow  us  to  improve  the 
technical  execution  of  policy,  our  knowledge  is  naturally  limited  by  the  exercise’s  capped 
nature.  Important  questions  will  remain  about  the  broader  money  market  effects  of  a  fully 
operational facility. Larger policy and implementation questions will also entail whether – and 
if so how – other tools would be used in conjunction with this facility and IOER, and how the 
facility might or might not fit into the Federal Reserve’s longer-run policy framework. 
But  while  there’s  still  a  lot  to  learn,  the  potential  addition  of  an  overnight,  fixed-rate, 
full-allotment  reverse  repo  facility  offers  a  promising  new  technical  advance  in  the  Desk’s 
implementation of monetary policy. Used together with IOER, it may strengthen the floor for 
short-term interest rates and, with it, the Federal Reserve’s control of money market rates, by 
surmounting  the  competitive  and  balance  sheet  frictions  seen  in  money  markets  and  by 
extending  the  central  bank’s  payment  of  interest  to  a  wider  universe  of  relevant 
counterparties. Improved control over the level of money market rates and reduced volatility 
of  short-term  interest  rates  could  enhance  the  flexibility  of  the  Desk’s  operational  tools, 
ultimately  allowing  for  a  more  robust  and  effective  implementation  of  the  FOMC’s  policy 
directives both during the rate normalization period and when there is a very large balance 
sheet. 
Thank you. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Desk or its clearing banks. The initial fixed rate for the operation was set at 1 basis point, which was below 
current market rates; it was subsequently raised periodically in 1-basis point increments to a level of 5 basis 
points, which has been in effect since November 19. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
