Ardian Fullani: How the financial crisis has impacted central bank 
cooperation and EU economic, financial and regulatory developments 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the high-level conference 
“On international central bank cooperation before, during and after the crisis”, hosted by the 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 9 December 2013. 
 Dear Participants, 
It  is  an  honor  for  me  to  participate  in  this  important  conference  and  I  want  to  thank  the 
organizers for inviting me. In my speech I will focus on how the recent financial crisis has 
changed the central bank work with respect to the adoption of macro-prudential policy and its 
relationship with monetary policy. Then I will share some thoughts on the experience of SEE 
countries during the crisis, and highlight some of the challenges they face given the recent 
economic, financial and regulatory developments in the EU. 
The  crisis  we  are  going  through,  being  so  profound  and  lasting,  will  leave  its  mark  on 
economics  in  general,  and  central  banking  in  particular.  Up  until  the  Great  Recession, 
monetary policy was living in a world that we may call “the inflation targeting era”. In many 
ways inflation targeting made the central bank’s job relatively simple, as long as it followed 
the policy correctly. The Central Bank, seen by the public as an independent institution, had 
to  credibly  commit  to  an  explicit  inflation  target,  in  order  to  anchor  mid-term  inflation 
expectations.  Self-fulfilling  expectations  from  economic  agents  and  price  setters  would,  in 
turn, help deliver the objectives of monetary policy. Economists believed that by stabilizing 
consumer prices, financial assets would also behave in a stable and predictable way. The 
crisis painfully reminds us that behavior in financial markets is not always rational and lack of 
confidence  in  the  markets  can  spiral  out  of  control,  sending  shockwaves  throughout  the 
economy. Escalating asset prices and their sudden burst affected significantly the behavior 
and  balance  sheets  of  the  economic  agents  and  challenged  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  In  this  respect,  the  concept  of  financial  stability  was  seen  as  a  byproduct  of 
monetary stability. 
Micro-prudential  supervision  was  focusing  on  the  soundness  of  individual  financial 
institutions, with the belief that this was sufficient to ensure aggregate stability of the financial 
system. Again, the recent financial crisis made it clear that micro-prudential supervision was 
insufficient  to  detect  and  address  buildup  of  risks  in  the  entire  financial  system  due  to 
externalities,  herd  behaviors,  common  exposures  and  pro-cyclicality  in  financial  system 
activity. Moreover, financial institutions of systemic importance proved to be “too big to fail” 
and measures were needed to deal with existing systemic institutions on a global and local 
level. Recovery and resolution powers of financial institutions are being strengthened. 
Limiting  systemic  risk,  both  in  its  time  and  structural  dimension,  is  the  objective  of  macro-
prudential policy. In the last 3 years, there has been significant progress in the identification 
of several instruments designed: 
• 
• 
• 
to address the rapid expansion and concentration in lending activity; 
to ensure that banks have sufficient liquidity to cope with different shocks; 
and to discourage risky behavior by financial institutions by increasing demand for 
capital for such activities. 
These  measures  may  have  countercyclical  nature  and  could  apply  to  financial  institutions 
based on their systemic importance. 
These  standards  require  building  an  institutional  framework  with  clear  identification  of  the 
authority /authorities that will have macro-prudential powers, in accordance with the structure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
its involvement in developing the payments systems infrastructure; 
its access to wide market and financial system data; 
and, many times, its role as a regulator and supervisor of banks. 
and  level  of market  development.  Central  bank appears to  be  better  positioned  than  other 
authorities to perform the macro-prudential role. In addition to its exclusive responsibility on 
formulating  and  implementing  monetary  policy,  central  bank  has  other  advantages  related 
with: 
• 
• 
• 
Nowadays  it  is  widely  accepted  that  there  has  been  huge  progress  worldwide  in  ensuring 
legal and operational independence of the central bank and this is another important reason 
why it can be entrusted with macro-prudential policy. 
In order to correctly define the macro-prudential function of the central bank, it is important to 
establish the right relationship with monetary policy. This can be done with the understanding 
that both policies, if designed and implemented properly, complement each other. Monetary 
policy  can  still  pursue  its  course  following  low  inflationary  pressures,  while  the  macro-
prudential measures can be used to address early risks developing under a low interest rate 
environment. On  the  other  hand,  macro-prudential  measures  can  also  be  used  to  mitigate 
risks from incoming capital flows, in an environment of relatively high real interest rates. 
Instances  of  conflict  among  the  two  policies  should  not  be  neglected  though.  These 
instances can be more pronounced if the objectives of the two policies are wrongly defined in 
a certain financial situation, or respective tools are used out of their scope. For this reason, I 
believe that it might be helpful to uphold the monetary policy as the primary objective of the 
central bank. Stabilizing inflation should be something that central bankers may be proud of, 
something  that  we  should  cherish  and  continue  to  strive  for.  But  we  must  recognize  that 
financial  stability  issues  and  related  macro-prudential  measures  have  to  gain  significantly 
more grounds in central bank discussions and decisions. Clearly, the course of the monetary 
policy  will  continue  to  be  extensively  discussed  in  the  future,  based  on  our  improved 
understanding  of  the  role  of  asset  prices  and  financial  frictions.  Incorporating  financial 
stability objectives  with the inflation targeting regime we have considered in Albania as an 
opportunity  to  understand  and  address  economic  developments  and  potential  macro-
financial risks, in order to preserve long-run economic stability. 
While  the  mandate  on  macro-prudential  policy  and  its  tools  must  be  clear,  one  has  to 
recognize that it can have wider effects in financial system and the real economy. For this 
reason, discussions on macro-prudential policy and measures must involve other authorities, 
including the fiscal one. Many countries have now established an inter-institutional entity with 
soft  or  hard  powers  in  designing  and  implementing  macro-prudential  policy  to  mitigate 
systemic risk. The role of the central bank in these inter-institutional entities will reflect their 
legislation and tradition, and independence objective. Although central banks may not always 
chair such entities, central banks play a critical role in underpinning their functioning given 
the information and expertise they provide. 
How have such policies developed in the South Eastern Europe (SEE) region? 
In spite of solid growth in the run up to it, the global crisis found SEE in a vulnerable position. 
To a large extent, its growth model was based on encouraging domestic absorption which in 
turn  was  partly  financed  through  external  borrowing.  Financial  inflows  were  channeled  in 
SEE economies largely through EU bank subsidiaries. In SEE, they encouraged investment 
in  real  estate  and  services  sectors  and  were  reflected  in  large  current  account  deficits. 
External competitiveness and structural reforms slipped gradually through the policymaker’s 
agenda,  while  fiscal  positions  were  allowed  to  deteriorate  and  financial  safety  nets  were 
weak. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As  a  result,  when  the  crisis  hit  SEE  faced  both  a  structural  and  a  cyclical  problem.  The 
overall  economic  structure  was  not  competitive  while  growth  declined  as  external  demand 
collapsed and domestic demand suffered from higher uncertainties, higher risk premium and 
lack of funding. On the financial side, our economies suffered as foreign banks deleveraged 
and  reduced  their  exposure  to  SEE.  On  top  of  this,  several  countries  faced  high 
vulnerabilities in the financial system, as the NPL’s grew rapidly on a combination of weak 
growth and FX currency loans to un-hedged borrowers. 
This picture is of course a generalization. Different countries have had different experiences, 
depending  from  their  initial  conditions  and  policy  responses.  However,  the  crisis  exposed 
several weaknesses of this economic model. At the same time, to the extent that there are 
differences among countries, we can draw more conclusions from our experience: 
• 
Countries with favorable initial conditions suffered the least. Albania has been one 
such case. We have not entirely avoided the build-up in imbalances, but we have 
been  careful  enough  to  avoid  currency  mismatches  in  bank  lending,  to  foster  a 
prudent business model for the banking system, to avoid short-term currency inflows 
and to focus on overall stability as a precondition for long term growth. 
Countries with stability and long-term oriented policies have performed better. The 
policy  dilemma  in  SEE  has  largely  been  whether  to  support  economic  growth 
through  countercyclical  policies  or  to  prioritize  economic  and  financial  stability 
through tough corrective action. Providing macroeconomic stimulus if your economy 
is import-oriented may prove to be a futile exercise. As a result, in Albania we have 
increased  our  efforts  to  restructure  the  economy.  The  BoA  has  also  sought  to 
increase transparency in the banking system and to strengthen its balance sheets, 
both through capital increases and through tackling bad loans. The latter has been 
done through promoting credit restructuring or credit write-offs. In this regards the 
focus of bank of Albania will include a micro-approach in analyzing the bad debtors 
of systemic importance. 
International  cooperation  is  a  prerequisite  for  mitigating  contagion  effects  and  for 
successful  crisis  management.  Particularly, 
Initiative  has  been 
instrumental  in  limiting  the  deleveraging  process  of  the  private  banking  system  in 
our economies. 
Safety  nets  have  to  be  improved,  in  order  to  make  them  more  efficient  and 
sustainable. 
the  Vienna 
   Several issues remain to be solved. SEE economies have rightly chosen integration in EU as 
their main goal. It helps to anchor their political systems, their structural reforms, their legal 
and  regulatory  environment  and  their  macroeconomic  and  financial  policies.  However,  the 
economic growth model has to change. The main focus of national authorities in SEE should 
be  to  facilitate  the  allocation  of  capital  to  more  productive  sectors,  by  providing  the  right 
incentives structural reforms, legal environment, tax policies, and economic stability. 
In the financial system of these countries, dominated by banks, the deleveraging process is 
undergoing  under  the  pressure  of  the  deteriorating  loan  quality.  Credit  is  made  scarce  as 
banks  have  become  risk  averse  and  hesitate  to  lend  to  potential  borrowers  by  tightening 
lending terms. Hence, real sector agents, particularly firms operating in ailing sectors of the 
economy, are facing surmounting short-term financing difficulties and have lost sight of their 
future  objectives.  The  process  of  restructuring  in  these  firms  has  to  find  ways  for  their 
business to change and become efficient, in order to survive and restart growth. Finance and 
knowhow is particularly important during such restructuring phase. 
What role has the financial system in this process? We have to be clear on two issues: (1) 
we have constructed a financial system and pursued a financial integration strategy based on 
banks. In fact, they comprise more than 90% of the financial system throughout the region. 
We think this model is successful and with some minor revisions should serve our economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  the  future.  For  one,  foreign  banks  bring  expertise  and  mostly  stability  to  the  financial 
system. But, recent experience has softened this argument. (2) Banks should be the main 
vehicle of financial inflow. As converging economies SEE is expected to run current account 
deficits. As such, it is a capital hungry region which international banks should intermediate. 
A new business model relying purely on domestically generated deposits is a wrong answer 
to  the  previous  extreme  of  huge  capital  inflows.  A  more  happy  medium  should  be  sought, 
one based on careful and sustainable inflow of funds. 
How is the Single Supervisory Mechanism going to affect the work of the central 
banks in the region? 
I  believe  the  SSM  mechanism  is  going  to  have  a  positive  impact  on  central  bank  (and 
regulatory  authorities)  in  the  region  discharging  their  responsibilities  with  regard  to 
supervision and macro-prudential policies. Regulators in the region will now talk to a single 
“home” supervisor, and this is expected to bring more attention to their supervisory concerns. 
This process could be strengthened further if the central banks in the region improve their 
own cooperation and are able to identify common position in their communication with the 
European  Central  Bank.  This  could  address  better  the  concern  that  the  single  supervisor 
could be more distant to worries of regulators coming from small countries in the region. 
Being  able  to  cooperate  with  a  single  “home”  supervisor,  will  be  instrumental  in  achieving 
faster progress in the process of regulatory convergence, and establish a more level playing 
field for financial institutions in the region. This is something that is being closely guided by 
the  Vienna  II  Initiative.  In  addition  to  preparing  implementation  of  various  regulatory 
standards  related  with  countercyclical  macro-prudential  tools,  with  particular  short  term 
importance is the issue linked with recognition and the treatment of the NPL. 
In  the  recent  past,  some  of  the  countries  in  the  region  have  been  affected  by  the 
deleveraging process started in the EU financial system. This was mostly felt during 2012, 
following the higher capital requirements associated with EBA stress test of November 2011 
and relevant steps taken by national “home” authorities to comply with capital requirements. 
Next in line is the Asset Quality Review by the ECB. Our hope and belief is that this time, 
concerns  of  the  SEE  countries  regarding  potential  further  deleveraging,  will  be  considered 
more carefully and more specifically, to avoid further potential deleveraging. Let me reiterate 
that  the  economies  in  our  region  currently  rely  heavily  in  bank  financing  and  there  is  a 
growing need to make credit flow again in the economy. 
To  conclude,  allow  me  to  point  out  the  importance  of  establishing  a  sound  framework  for 
macro-prudential  policy,  both  in  terms  of  tools  and  institutional  approach,  in  order  to  deal 
effectively  and  timely  with  prevention  of  systemic  risk.  They  should  be  accompanied 
however,  by  measures  related  with  the  strengthening  of  crisis  management  framework.  If 
designed  properly,  macro-prudential  policy  should  avoid  any  conflict  with  monetary  policy, 
and  instead  should  complement  it  appropriately.  Countries  in  the  SEE  should  benefit from 
synergies  related  with  the  adoption  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  These  benefits 
could be larger if we manage to strengthen our regional cooperation. We are still concerned 
with  potential further  deleveraging following  the forthcoming  Asset  Quality  Review  process 
and we hope that ECB and other authorities in the Eurozone and EU, could design it to limit 
these impact in maximum. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
