G Padmanabhan: Administering FEMA (Foreign Exchange Management 
Act) – evolving challenges 
Inaugural address by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the Authorised Dealers’ Conference, Agra, 30 November 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri H S Mohanty in the preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
DG Shri H R Khan, Chairman, Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India, Officials from 
the Authorised Dealer Banks, and my colleagues from RBI from all over the country. 
1. 
A  very  good  morning  and  welcome  to  this  historic  city  of  Agra.  It  is  customary  in 
these annual gatherings to take stock of the developments in the area of foreign exchange 
management over the preceding one year and discuss the context and content of the in-the-
pipeline changes contemplated. The last one year since we met in December 2012 has been 
quite  tumultuous  and  challenging  but  we  have  been  able  to  hold  our  heads  above  water 
through appropriate policy responses. Now that FEMA is in its teens, let me attempt a self 
appraisal of how we have brought up or managed the baby (read FEMA), that was delivered 
at the turn of the century. Let me start with a few searching questions. Have we, during the 
past fourteen years, been able to charter the course we set out for ourselves when Foreign 
Exchange  Management  was  enacted  in  1999?  Do  we  find  ourselves  where  we  envisaged 
ourselves  to  be? Where  do  we  go  from  here? While  I  attempt  to  answer  these questions, 
please take them as more of an introspection rather than a judgment. 
2. 
Let  us  first  look  at  the  developments  during  the  past  year  that  would  provide  a 
setting for these questions. The  Dollar-Rupee  exchange  rate  acts  as  the  barometer  of  the 
external sector. After exhibiting relative stability after the post-Lehman turbulence and range-
bound  two-way  movement  till  about  August  2011,  US  debt  cap  problem  and  subsequent 
downgrade sent Rupee on a depreciating spree till almost end 2011. Rupee depreciated by 
about 20% during this period. It recovered significantly during the first quarter of 2012 due in 
some measure to the action that we had taken in mid-December 2011 to curb speculation 
and  panic  reaction  by  market  participants.  The  Rupee  started  depreciating  again  in  the 
second quarter of 2012, this time due to sovereign debt problem of the European peripheral 
countries and by the end of the quarter, Rupee had depreciated by about 16%. After relative 
stability  of  close  to  a  year  thereafter,  Rupee  exhibited  sharp  depreciation  again  after  May 
2013 on the back of fear of US exit from the asset purchase program the so called taper, 
accentuated by some geo-political factors precipitating at that time. Rupee has retracted from 
the lows it had reached, but the exchange rate often exhibits bouts of volatility. 
3. 
External factors have no doubt played an important role in determining the path not 
only of Rupee but also of the currencies of most emerging market economies. For instance 
between May and August 2013, the most volatile phase, when Rupee depreciated by about 
21%, Brazilian Lira too depreciated by about 16%, Indonesian Rupiah by 14%, South African 
rand by 13%, Turkish Lira by 13% and Thai Baht by 9%. While such company may provide 
some comfort to us, it does not mitigate the pain: the impact of heightened volatility, sharp 
movements and disorderly market conditions on the real sector cannot be overemphasized. 
4. 
The  impact  of  the  global  factors  on  the  Rupee  is  only  a  part  of  the  story.  On  the 
domestic front, the economy is not exactly in the best of health. The fiscal expansion to deal 
with the adverse impact of the global financial crisis and the reduced tax buoyancy on the 
back of a relatively slowed-down economy has left the fiscal position in a less than optimal 
state. The inflationary pressure continues. Most importantly, the current account deficit has 
burgeoned  to  4.6%  for  the  last  Fiscal.  Of  course,  the  current  account  balance  has  shown 
improvement  since  October  last  year  with  a  significant  reduction  in  trade  deficits  (48%), 
export  growth  (13.5%)  and  reduction  in  imports  (14.5%).  It  is  expected  that  the  current 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
account  deficit  will  be  within  3%  to  3.5% this fiscal  year  and  compared  with  the  last  year, 
much easier to finance. 
5. 
Let  me  briefly  recall  an  earlier  episode  when  the  Rupee  exhibited  heightened 
volatility,  but  in  the  other  direction.  After  reaching  a  sub-47  level  trough  in  July  2006,  it 
steadily appreciated till February-March 2008, even after the tremors of the global crisis had 
started  getting  noticed.  During  this  period,  momentum  of  Rupee  appreciation  could  be 
arrested  only  through  aggressive  intervention  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  During  2006–07  and 
2007–08,  RBI  purchased  US  Dollars  26.8  and  78.2  billion  respectively.  The  direct  (fiscal) 
cost of sterilisation operations to contain the expansionary impacts of RBI’s interventions was 
significant,  at  about  Rs.  8,000  crore  during  2007–08,  which  goes  to  show,  even  with  the 
benefit  of  hindsight,  that  intervening  in  the  market  to  buy  foreign  exchange  in  the  face  of 
surge in inflows is not necessarily an easy decision. 
6. 
The  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate,  particularly  episodes  of  large  unidirectional 
movement either way, calls for an effective set of policy tools to deal with it. I do not intend to 
go into the larger questions of whether the exchange rate movements need to be dealt with 
at  all  and  if  so,  what  constitutes  an  optimal  policy  choice.  For  the  purpose  of  the  present 
discussion, suffice to say that some form and extent of capital account management is an 
option to deal with episodic or structural vulnerabilities, which has gained wide acceptability 
amongst academics and policy makers. This brings us to the core of our discussion today: 
the nature and implementation of the regulatory regime for foreign exchange management in 
India. 
7. 
Regulation  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  has  a  long  history.  For  a  newly 
independent nation trying to unshackle itself from foreign political and economic domination, 
the  first  legislation,  The  Foreign  Exchange  Regulation  Act,  1947,  was  primarily  concerned 
with  regulation  of  inflow  of  foreign  capital  into  India,  increase  in  non-resident  interest  and 
deployment of imported capital. India faced an acute foreign exchange crisis in the 1960’s. It 
may be recalled that perhaps the most critical use of foreign exchange at that time was for 
import of food grains; during most of 1960’s over seven per cent of food grain requirement 
had  to  be  imported.  In  this  backdrop,  FERA,  1947  was  replaced  by  Foreign  Exchange 
Regulation  Act,  1974.  Given  the  importance  of  foreign  exchange,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the 
purpose of the new legislation as stated in the preamble to Act was “….for the conservation 
of the foreign exchange resources of the country and the proper utilisation thereof….” and 
mandated that any contravention of the provision of the Act was treated as a criminal offence 
punishable with imprisonment. However, by the late 1970’s Green Revolution had addressed 
our dependence on imported food grains and buoyant remittances from diaspora Indians had 
blunted the urgency of foreign exchange scarcity. The liberalisation of the exchange control 
regime  was  started  in  the  mid-1980’s  and  gathered  momentum  in  the  1990’s.  The 
liberalisation process ultimately culminated in replacement of FERA, 1973 with the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999. 
8. 
What did FEMA involve? For an economic agent or a market participant, the Act per 
se  did  not  bring  any  sea  change  in  the  way  he  was  dealing  with  his  foreign  exchange 
requirements.  Please  recall  that  we  had  already  attained  full  convertibility  on  the  current 
account and compliance with Article VIII of the IMF. Significant capital account liberalisation 
had  already  taken  place  to  enable  us  to  contemplate  full  capital  account  convertibility  in 
1997. Though FEMA did several things, the most important was that it changed the way we 
should look at issues relating to foreign exchange transactions. It heralded the move away 
from  conservation/restriction  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  to  their  facilitation.  The 
preamble  to  the  Act  read:  “An  Act  to  consolidate  and  amend  the  law  relating  to  foreign 
exchange with the objective of facilitating external trade and payments and for promoting the 
orderly  development  and  maintenance  of  foreign  exchange  market  in  India.”  The  earlier 
discussion relating to FERA 1947 and FERA 1973 had underscored the point that laws or 
regulations relating to foreign exchange has to respond to the evolving economic situation. 
The  objective  and  content  of  FEMA  made  it  explicit.  While  FEMA  formalised  the  current 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to 
transactions?  Lest 
facilitate  various  capital  account 
account convertibility with the Common Law principle “all that is not forbidden is permitted”, it 
did  the  reverse  with  respect  to  capital  account  transactions:  “all  that  is  not  permitted  is 
forbidden”. I shall discuss this at some length later. 
9. 
The regulatory framework provided under FEMA has another important ingredient – 
it  casts  a  great  responsibility  on  the  “Authorised  Persons”  the  immediate  and  necessary 
counterparty  to  every  agent/participant  for  any  foreign  exchange  transaction.  In  the  FERA 
regime, their job was pretty much simple; they just had to carry out a transaction as per the 
RBI permit. As and when we attain full capital account convertibility, their job will perhaps be 
simpler.  But  in  the  regime  that  obtains  now,  they  have  the  difficult  but  important  task  of 
making  a  judgement  on  permissibility  of  a  transaction.  Recognising  this,  FEMA  empowers 
“authorised persons” to satisfy themselves about any foreign exchange transaction that the 
customer may wish to carry out, but at the same time provides that in case an “authorised 
person” forms an opinion that a transaction is not permissible, it has to do so in writing and 
giving reasons. 
10. 
Let me go back to the preamble of FEMA. As we have seen an important part of the 
objective of FEMA is to facilitate trade and payments. With current account fully convertible, 
almost  entire  focus  of  the  regulatory  framework  under  FEMA  is  on  the  capital  account 
transactions. The question then is this. Is the regulatory framework that faces an economic 
agent  or  a  market  participant  –  be  it  an  investor  or  an  investee,  a  lender  or  a  borrower  – 
conducive  enough 
I  am 
misunderstood, let me clarify that I am not advocating a greater degree of capital account 
openness  or  being  more  permissive  in  respect  of  this  or  that  class  of  capital  account 
transactions. The pace of capital account liberalisation will be dictated by a host of factors 
including macroeconomic conditions, financial stability issues and so on. My limited point is 
that once the policy framework has been spelt out, the implementation has to be such that 
anyone  –  a  resident  or more  importantly  a  non-resident  –  contemplating  a  capital  account 
transaction  knows  clearly  and  unambiguously  what  can  be  done,  how  it  can  be  done  and 
within  what  timeframe  it  can  be  done.  I  do  not  think  we  have  succeeded  too  well  in  this 
objective, at least not as much as we should have. Let me elaborate. 
11. 
Let  us  start  with  the  regulatory  framework.  Excluding  the  26  original  notifications 
containing Regulations pertaining to mostly capital account transactions, there have been a 
total of 263 notifications amending the regulations originally made or subsequently amended. 
Another  dozen  or  so  amendments  are  in  the  pipeline.  After  FEMA  was  introduced,  the 
number of directives issued to the “authorised persons” was 36 in 2001–02; it had increased 
to 138 during 2011–12, 122 during 2012–13 and as many as 77 in less than 5 months in the 
current  year.  The  two  gigantic  volumes  of  Taxman’s  Exchange  Management  Manual  –  in 
small  and  close  prints  –  look  as  formidable  as  any  elaborate  commentary  on  the  most 
complex  law.  Indeed,  It  will  not  surprise  me  if  someone  points  out  an  inconsistency  or 
contradiction  between  two  different  directions  or  notifications.  So  have  we  simplified  or 
complicated? Is it time for a comprehensive review? To my mind, it is an emphatic yes. 
12. 
An  important  factor  in  this  context  is  that  capital  account  management  has  often 
been  used  as  an  instrument  in  dealing  with  rupee  volatility. When,  during  2006–2008,  we 
were  inundated  with  capital  inflows  and  market  intervention  was  unequal  to  the  task  of 
stemming  sharp  appreciation  of  the  Rupee,  we  took  measures  to  stem  inflows  and  spur 
outflows.  For  instance,  we  reduced  interest  rates  on  non-resident  deposits,  discouraged 
ECBs,  and  encouraged  capital  outflows.  Again,  between  December  2006  and  September 
2007, the annual limit for almost no-questions-asked remittance facility for individuals (under 
the Liberalised Remittance Scheme introduced in 2004) was raised in three stages from USD 
25,000  to  USD  200,000.  This  facility  was  used  by  several  people  to  pool  the  remittance 
allowed to each of their family members – a term left undefined in FEMA or the Regulations 
framed thereunder – to buy properties abroad. Indian corporates setting up subsidiaries or 
joint  ventures  abroad  were  permitted  to  remit  up  to  four  times  their  net  worth  under  the 
automatic route. I mention these two because these were the ones that were modified in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
wake  of  sharp  depreciation  of  the  Rupee  in  August  2013,  a  step  which  was  seen  a  few 
commentators as harbinger of capital controls. 
13. 
Similarly,  when  Rupee  exhibited  a  strong  depreciating  trend  creating  a  panic-like 
situation  in  the  market,  we  have  responded  with  some  tweaking  of  the  capital  account 
restrictions. For instance, we have expanded the scope of external commercial borrowings in 
regard to end use and eligible borrowers. We have increased the limit for FIIs’ investment in 
sovereign and corporate debt. We have also deregulated or increased the interest rates on 
non-resident deposits. Recently, we even encouraged FCNR deposits and banks borrowing 
from  their  branches,  principals,  correspondents  and  international/multilateral  institutions  by 
offering  a  concessional  swap  facility.  The  point  that  I  wish  to  make  is  that  since  capital 
account measures have been actively used for dealing with turbulence in foreign exchange 
markets,  has  it  perhaps  contributed  to  a  complex  and  if  I  may  say  so,  a  time-inconsistent 
regulatory framework? Does this approach therefore require re-calibration after a review? 
14. 
The  second  issue  I  wish  to  emphasize  on  is  the  evolution  in  the  way  business  is 
done and financial innovation. Let us remember that much of financial innovation is indeed 
what  is  often  called  regulatory  bypass.  Market  participants  always  explore  ways  to 
circumnavigate around the regulatory roadblocks, to which the regulators respond with a lag 
by erecting more roadblocks. In this game, it is inevitable that the regulatory framework ends 
up being complex. While too little regulation, particularly in the financial sector, runs the risk 
of financial instability, too much regulation throttles enterprise, makes innovation impossible 
and squeezes the ease of doing business. As T S Eliot observed, albeit in a different context, 
“the danger of freedom is deliquescence; the danger of strict order is petrification”. So, the 
question is: how to achieve the right balance? 
15. 
Let  us  take  the  area  of inbound foreign  investment for  example. The two  ways  of 
investment  in  an  enterprise  are  either  through  direct  investment  or  through  portfolio 
investment.  Direct  investment  is  defined  in  terms  of  “lasting  interest”  which  implies  the 
existence of a long-term relationship between the direct investor and the direct investment 
enterprise and a significant degree of influence on the management of the latter. A classic 
way of foreign direct investment would be when a non-resident entity sets up a wholly owned 
subsidiary  or  forms  a  joint  venture  in  the  host  country.  The  equity  shares  are  acquired 
simultaneously as they are created. What about a non-resident acquiring a lasting interest in 
a resident company through mergers, acquisitions and take-overs? Suppose a non-resident 
FDI  investor  wishes  to  increase  its  stake  by  progressively  buying  up  shares  in  the  stock 
exchange within the framework provided by the security regulator; should it be treated as FDI 
or portfolio investment? Recently when the Anglo-Dutch multinational Unilever increased its 
stake  in  Hindustan  Unilever  by  about  14.8%  at  a  cost  of  USD 3.6 billion  through  an  open 
offer,  the  extent  of  equity  shares  tendered  by  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  was  excluded 
from  FDI  in  our  system,  thanks  to  the  reporting  system  set  up  in  line  with  the  regulatory 
provisions. 
16. 
In  the  original  FEMA  regulations,  it  was  provided  that  it  was  in  order  to  issue  a 
partially convertible debenture against foreign direct investment. In 2006–07, when external 
commercial  borrowing  was  discouraged,  companies  responded  with  an  obvious  dodge:  a 
partially convertible debenture with a nominal part slated to be converted to equity was used 
to  camouflage  a  commercial  borrowing. We  responded  by  excluding  a  partially  convertible 
debenture from the list of securities that can be issues against FDI and to be treated as a 
debt. I am afraid the game is not yet over because the vice of treating a partially convertible 
debenture as debt is that someday, when appropriate incentives are there, it can be used to 
camouflage an equity investment. 
17. 
What about portfolio investment? It is true that there has not been much change in 
the  regime  as  far  as  portfolio  investment  in  equity  is  concerned  even  as  the  limit  of 
investment  in  fixed-income  market  has  been  progressively  increased.  This  is  a  very  fertile 
segment.  A  recent  study  indicates  that,  as  of  2012,  global  pension  assets  in  13  mostly 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
developed  countries  total  USD  29,754  billion.  You  can  add  the  other  classes  of  large 
investors: private trusts, university endowments, and so on. There is significant potential for 
tapping  these  sources.  Studies  seem  to  indicate  that  there  is  a  significant  extent  of  home 
bias in the investment strategy of the manager of these funds, particularly in regard to bond 
investment.  Thus  it  may  not  be  sufficient  to  lubricate  our  markets  in  the  hope  that  foreign 
investors would evince a great deal of interest. A time has come perhaps for us, within the 
broad contours of our capital account management, to take our assets to off-shore markets 
through  appropriate  institutional  framework.  A  starting  point  has  been  made  by  permitting 
IFC  to  issue  Rupee  denominated  bonds  overseas.  Depending  on  experience  gained,  this 
arrangement  can  be  further  opened.  Similarly,  the  Sahoo  Committee  to  review  the 
regulations relating to issue of DRs, is expected to address the issue of “home bias” of the 
overseas investors. 
18. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  another  area  –  External  Commercial  Borrowings.  Have 
regulations evolved to facilitate or hamper business? For instance, should we have a more 
liberal  access  regime  for  entities  who  are  forex  earners  and  thus  have  a  natural  hedge? 
Should we have more rigid rules for others? Another related issue. The thumb rule that we 
have followed in our approach is not to permit the Indian banking system to guarantee the 
forex loans raised by resident entities. Is this the right approach? Or should this decision be 
left to the commercial judgment of banks and their ability to price the risk, leaving the stability 
related issues to be addressed through appropriate micro-prudential measures such as risk 
weights and capital charges and disincentives for evergreening by other means? 
19. 
That brings me to the more esoteric world of foreign exchange derivatives. Though 
the market in its current shape is a little more than two decades old, it has taken great strides 
in terms of volumes, participants and infrastructure. Yet, times are pregnant with possibilities 
of developments in several directions. 
20. 
Derivatives are essentially inter-temporal transactions contingent on a future view of 
the state of the world. When in the underlying cash market, the exchange rate exhibits great 
deal of volatility, it is natural that there will be a spurt in activities in the derivatives market for 
different motivations: for hedging actual exposures, for arbitraging and also for speculation. 
So  far  we  have  responded  by  restricting  the  freedom  of  market  participants  to  enter  into 
derivative transactions with a view to curbing speculation and panic-driven trades. Looking 
ahead, we shall perhaps have to build a robust market which will provide ample opportunity 
for all kinds of trades, even speculative ones, without upsetting the apple cart. 
21. 
Hedging  is  an  agent’s  choice,  depending  on  his  risk  appetite.  The  market  must 
provide adequate instruments suiting every market participant’s hedging strategy. As of now 
the instruments available are the linear derivatives and the plain-vanilla options. Hedging is 
not cost-free. There is a view that an agent must have the freedom to choose which risk to 
what  extent  he  should  hedge  and  instruments  he  uses  to  hedge.  In  this  context,  it  is 
necessary to introduce different styles and structures of options which will enable the market 
participant to optimise on his hedging strategy. For this to happen, it is imperative that the 
risks and pay-offs of these instruments are properly understood and in  this the Authorised 
Dealers  as  market  makers  play  a  very  constructive  role.  As  Robert  Shiller  remarked, 
“Achieving radical financial innovation is never easy. Doing so requires careful attention to 
design,  experimentation  to  find  the  right  design,  and  extensive  marketing,  and  it  requires 
cooperation from more of our society than just the isolated innovating firms…..”1 
The  other  aspect  of  foreign  exchange  derivative  market  is  the  ever  increasing 
22. 
offshore segment. Though we do not have definitive information about the nature or impact 
of  the  NDF  market,  the  fact  that  it  has  been  growing  in  size  is  not  disputed.  In  times  of 
                                                
1   Shiller,  Robert,  Radical  Financial Innovation in  Entrepreneurship,  Innovation and  the  Growth  Mechanism  of 
the Free Market Economies, in Honor of William Baumol, Princeton University Press (2004). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
exchange  rate  volatility,  the  discussion  of  NDF  becomes  animated  and  a  large  part  of the 
blame  for  the  volatility  is  laid  at  its  door.  Be  that  as  it  may,  with  increasing  financial 
integration  with  the  global  economy  and  ever  growing  body  of  investors  with  an  Indian 
interest, it is no wonder that Rupee should attract global attention. The home country bias for 
the bond and equity investor is to a large measure due to exchange rate risk; perhaps even 
the hedging market too has a home country bias. We have to make all efforts to bring that 
market onshore. But the market that can entice them has to be complete and flexible with 
less restrictions on entry or exit. Can we lay out an action plan to achieve this objective in an 
efficient  or  largely  non-disruptive  way?  This  also  throws  up  the  challenge  of  synchronising 
the rules of the game for OTC vis a vis exchange traded markets. 
23. 
I have discussed about the crossroads at which we stand and the dilemmas we face 
in so far as the foreign exchange management framework is concerned. Please appreciate 
that the central theme running through all these issues is the same – the one that FSLRC 
has  also  flagged  and  which  is  not  specific  to  FEMA  regulations  alone.  Is  it  time  for  the 
country  to  move  away  from rule  based regulations  to  principle  based regulations  aimed  at 
addressing  stability  and  market  abuse/failure  concerns?  A  principle  based  regulatory 
framework  has  its  own  challenges.  The  greatest  challenge  perhaps  is  to  ensure  that  the 
myriads of different variations of cases that are covered by a single principle are dealt with in 
a uniform manner by the various agents of the regulators, in this case the authorised dealers. 
As I have mentioned earlier, the responsibility of the authorised dealers in the present regime 
is substantial; in a principle based regime it will increase manifold. 
24. 
Let me now conclude. What I have tried to communicate that a regulatory regime for 
foreign exchange management, within the four corners of the broader policy framework, has 
to be dynamic enough to accommodate the evolving nature of doing business. In an attempt 
to  accommodate  the  external  factors  including  the  external  sector  vulnerabilities,  the 
regulatory  framework  has  perhaps  become  complex  and  uninviting  for  enterprise  and 
investors. Efforts are already afoot to consolidate and rationalise the regulatory framework 
even  as  to  make  it  robust  enough  to  tend  to  our  ever-changing  future  needs.  Authorised 
Persons, as the interface between the regulator and the various stake holders and with great 
responsibility on themselves in smooth administration of the regulations, have a critical role 
to play. There is a difficult but interesting journey ahead. Bon Voyage and safe landing for all 
the stake holders. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
