Agustín Carstens: Emerging markets 
Text of The Bagehot Lecture by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at 
The Buttonwood Gathering 2013 “Searching for financial stability”, The Economist, New York 
City, 30 October 2013. 
 It is a great honor to have been invited to deliver this Bagehot Lecture. Quoting from Neal 
Irvin’s book The Alchemists, “Among central bankers (Walter Bagehot) has achieved iconic 
status for his 1873 book Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market… To this day it 
remains something of a bible for central bankers dealing with a financial panic.” 
Given that Bagehot is our “Galileo” in central banking, that this year’s Buttonwood Gathering 
theme  is  “Searching  for  Financial  Stability”  and  that  I  am  a  central  banker,  I  decided  to 
devote  my  speech  to  addressing  the  challenges  that  emerging  market  economies’  central 
banks are facing in today’s extraordinary times. 
Let me start by stating that central banking has become interesting and fun again. Not more 
than six years ago, it was simple and boring: in the conventional view it dealt with one main 
objective, – that is, keeping inflation under control, – and in a few cases with the additional 
objective of abating unemployment; the central bank was the main institution within the state 
with  the  mandate  to  achieve  such  objective(s);  and  it  was  also  empowered  with  the 
instrument to achieve this, namely the capacity  to set a short term reference interest rate. 
The  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime  seemed  to  work  extremely  well.  Asset  price 
considerations and financial stability tended to play a secondary role. 
But  this  ideal  world  changed  substantially,  and  indeed  abruptly,  in  2008  with  the  financial 
crisis that erupted just a few blocks away from here. 
Advanced  economies  entered  into  a  major  and  ongoing  crisis.  In  a  context  of  profound 
economic,  financial  and  political  problems,  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  have 
played  a  leading  role  in  the  crisis  resolution  process  -a  role  that  some  experts  claim  has 
“overextended” or “overburdened” central banks. Oftentimes one hears in some regions and 
countries affected by the crisis that they, the advanced economies’ central banks, are “the 
only game in town”. 
All these events certainly have had an impact on emerging market economies (EMEs). It is 
true that during the crisis EMEs have in general performed well, and they have proven to be 
resilient, based on strong fundamentals. No doubt EMEs have their merits, but at the same 
time  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact  for  most  of  this  century  they  experienced  two  very 
positive external shocks, namely  very high commodity prices, and abnormally low external 
interest rates in the context of abundant liquidity. These led to a very rapid rates of economic 
growth. 
But EMEs seem to be facing a turning point this year, as rapid economic growth, induced by 
high commodity prices and ample liquidity, seem to be coming to an end. 
At the same time, and of tremendous importance advanced economies’ (AE) central banks, 
having  followed  an  extremely  expansionary  monetary  policy,  are  in  the  process  of  starting 
the normalization of their monetary policy stance, which implies a more constrained liquidity 
and sharply higher interest rates. 
So the question is: in this new  world, what are the challenges facing EMEs’ central banks 
and what should be their response? 
The first challenge for EMEs’ central banks is not to drop the ball as they pursue their 
main  mandate  of  keeping  inflation  under  control.  In  EMEs  it  is  relatively  easier  for 
inflation to spin out of control, even though most countries in this category have autonomous 
central  banks.  But  these  institutions  are  young,  and  their  credibility  is  fragile.  So  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
challenge  is  to  resist  the  pressures  to  become  overburdened  with  multiple  mandates;  in 
particular, EMEs’ central banks should not play a very active role in applying countercyclical 
monetary policies. Countercyclical monetary policies should be applied as one should drink 
tequila: in moderation. 
Second challenge: Financial stability is a precondition for a conventional, simple and 
effective monetary policy. How does one assure the compliance of that precondition? 
Since  the  late  90s,  most  EMEs  have  adopted  appropriate financial  sector  supervisory  and 
regulatory  regimes,  and  they  have  kept  up  to  speed  with  the  adoption  of  the  new 
international standards. But unconventional monetary policies (UMP) in AE have generated 
massive, and oftentimes volatile, capital flows in and out of EMEs. An important fraction of 
these flows has been relatively stable, as it has been induced by medium to long term growth 
prospects of EMEs relative to AEs. But a not neglible portion of total capital flows, mostly the 
result  of  carry-trade  type  of  transactions,  is  short  term  and  jittery.  All  these  flows  have 
affected the level and volatility of domestic interest rates, credit and exchange rates, both in 
nominal  and  real  terms,  and  have  made  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  extremely 
difficult.  In  short,  UMP  in  AE  have  become  an  important  element  that  can  affect  financial 
stability in EMEs. 
Some  of  the flows  induced  by  UMP  have  been  intermediated  by  local  banking  systems  in 
EMEs, and some in the bond and equity markets. From a financial stability point of view, the 
flows  of  most  concern  are  those  intermediated  through  the  banking  system  and  the  fixed-
income markets. 
In the first case, excess liquidity has led in some instances to asset price bubbles, mostly in 
the real estate market, representing potential future vulnerabilities for the banking system. In 
bond markets, the spillover effects of UMP have manifested themselves in very rich prices, 
excessive  spread  compression  in  some  cases,  overdone  risk  taking  by  some  investors  as 
they  search  for  yield  in  “new  frontiers”  or  in  “covenant  lite”  and  high  yield  EME  corporate 
bonds. The unwinding of these investments could be a source of significant turbulence, as 
we saw recently in last May and June when the Fed’s “tapering talk” started. 
All  these  inflows  have  also  generated  important  nominal  and  real  exchange  rate 
appreciations that are not in line with fundamentals, and they have had real effects in EMEs, 
slowing down exports and economic growth. This is a way to shift part of the adjustment from 
AE to EMEs. 
As you can imagine, this scenario has represented a real dilemma for EMEs’ central banks. 
On  the  one  hand,  given  our  past  history  of  external  capital  deprivation,  we  tend  to  be 
conditioned  to  attract  as  much  capital  as  possible.  On  the  other  hand,  very  large  capital 
inflows in short periods of time can generate major damage to the economy, given its limited 
absorption  capacity.  Responses  have  varied  among  EMEs.  Some,  such  as  Mexico,  have 
allowed market adjustments (in interest and exchange rates) to play a stabilizing role, while 
others  have  intervened  heavily  in  the  markets,  and  in  not  a  few  cases  attempted 
macroprudential policies. 
I  would  venture  to  say  that  the  field  of  macroprudential  policies  is  a  promising  one. 
Nonetheless there are several reasons why it is not yet fully developed. 
The field is relatively new, and there are still some issues to be worked out, for example: the 
definition  and  content  of  macroprudential  policies  is  not  clear;  there  is  no  consensus  on 
which  authorities  should  direct  and  implement  them;  they  have  been  used  or  “abused”  to 
pursue inadequate objectives such as competitive currency manipulations or the adoption of 
protectionist measures. 
My suggestion for macroprudential policy is that the international community should develop 
“best  practices”.  Whenever  possible,  central  banks  should  be  entrusted  with  their 
management, drawing a clear line with monetary policy actions, and they should assure that, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
at a minimum, macroprudential policies are transparent; targeted to a specific market failure 
or externality; and preferably be transitory. 
In sum, in the case of rapid capital inflows, EMEs’ central banks should: pursue as a primary 
objective  a  low  and  stable  rate  of  inflation,  allowing  market  adjustments  in  interest  and 
exchange  rates,  unless  such  adjustments  could  lead  to  an  unacceptable  equilibrium  and 
threaten future financial stability; and second, 
If  such  non-equilibrium  adjustments  are  a  possibility,  use  transparent,  well  targeted  and 
transitory macroprudential measures. 
Now the third, and not unrelated, challenge. The recent  problems facing  EMEs’  central 
banks since May and June have not been related to capital inflows, but outflows. These have 
generated market responses that in some cases were more violent than those in the wake of 
the Lehman Brothers collapse, in terms of exchange rate volatility and increases in long term 
interest rate. 
A key point here is that by and large, markets have differentiated among EMEs – those with 
better fundamentals and fewer vulnerabilities have fared better. 
The main lessons for EMEs: 
– 
Today it is a must to have a strong external position, characterized by a low current 
account  deficit, substantial  international  reserves,  long  duration  in  the  public  debt, 
and  if  possible  contingent  international  financing,  as  in  the  cases  of  Mexico, 
Colombia  and  Poland  with  the  IMF  flexible  credit  line  (FCL).  Additionally,  it  is 
important to have a flexible exchange rate regime, in combination with a flexible and 
credible inflation targeting framework. 
Finally,  there  is  also  a  premium  for  conservative  fiscal  policies  and  sustainable 
public debt levels and projections. 
 Even with these elements in place, as UMP in AE are unwinded, capital outflows will follow, 
domestic interest rates will  increase, and financial conditions could become very turbulent. 
From the EMEs point of view the only adequate response, is one that is comprehensive and 
consistent, involving fiscal, financial and monetary policies. Central banks cannot deal with 
this kind of situation alone (say, by raising interest rates and/or selling foreign exchange in 
the  market).  To  overburden  central  banks  with  the  defense  of  financial  stability  by 
themselves  in  such  a  scenario  could  be  self-defeating.  A  key  element  is  to  get  the 
appropriate  policy  mix:  a  tighter  fiscal  policy,  to  reduce  the  financing  needs  of  the 
government and to control the current account deficit, could be combined with a moderately 
tighter monetary policy, so as to contain capital outflows and protect economic growth. 
Let  me  conclude  with  the  following  thought:  the  IMF  estimated  recently  that  2/3  of  spread 
compression in EMEs is explained by external factors. These external factors are reverting. If 
EMEs want to preserve such spread compression, they should: 
– 
First,  reinforce  their  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  keeping  the  central  bank 
focused on keeping inflation on track and playing a leading role in the design and 
implementation  of  macroprudential  policies;  assuring  the  sustainability  of  its  debt, 
and  upgrading  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  in  the  financial  sector,  and 
second, 
Proceed with structural reforms to enhance competitiveness and growth and at the 
same reduce the correlation with the world’s business cycle. 
 Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
