Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 5 December 2013. 
 Incoming 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to welcome you to our press conference. I will now 
report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council, which was also attended 
by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Rehn. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, we decided to keep the key ECB 
interest  rates  unchanged. 
information  and  analysis  have  confirmed  our 
assessment and monetary policy decisions of last month. Underlying price pressures in the 
euro  area  are  expected  to  remain  subdued  over  the  medium  term.  In  keeping  with  this 
picture,  monetary  and  credit  dynamics  remain  subdued.  At  the  same  time,  inflation 
expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be firmly anchored 
in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. Such a constellation 
suggests  that  we  may  experience  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation,  to  be  followed  by  a 
gradual  upward  movement  towards  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  later  on.  Our 
monetary policy stance will remain accommodative for as long as necessary, and will thereby 
continue  to  assist  the  gradual  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  context,  the 
Governing Council confirmed its forward guidance that it continues to expect the key ECB 
interest  rates  to  remain  at  present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  This 
expectation continues to be based on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into 
the medium term, given the broad-based weakness of the economy and subdued monetary 
dynamics.  With  regard  to  money  market  conditions  and  their  potential  impact  on  our 
monetary policy stance, we are monitoring developments closely and are ready to consider 
all available instruments.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following a rise of 0.3% in the second quarter of 2013, real GDP in the euro area increased 
by 0.1%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter. Developments in survey-based confidence 
indicators up to November are consistent with a positive growth rate also in the fourth quarter 
of the year. Looking ahead to 2014 and 2015, output is expected to recover at a slow pace, 
in  particular  owing 
the 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  Euro  area  economic  activity  should,  in  addition, 
benefit  from  a  gradual  strengthening  of  demand  for  exports.  Furthermore,  the  overall 
improvements  in  financial  markets  seen  since  last  year  appear  to  be  working  their  way 
through to the real economy, as should the progress made in fiscal consolidation. In addition, 
real  incomes  have  benefited  recently  from  lower  energy  price  inflation.  At  the  same  time, 
unemployment in the euro area remains high, and the necessary balance sheet adjustments 
in the public and the private sector will continue to weigh on economic activity. 
This assessment is also reflected in the December 2013 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections  for  the  euro  area,  which  foresee  annual  real  GDP  declining  by  0.4%  in  2013 
before increasing by 1.1% in 2014 and 1.5% in 2015. Compared with the September 2013 
ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  projection  for  real  GDP  growth  for  2013  has 
remained unchanged and it has been revised upwards by 0.1 percentage point for 2014. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  are  assessed  to  be  on  the 
downside.  Developments  in  global  money  and  financial  market  conditions  and  related 
uncertainties  may  have  the  potential  to  negatively  affect  economic  conditions.  Other 
downside  risks  include  higher  commodity  prices,  weaker  than  expected  domestic  demand 
and export growth, and slow or insufficient implementation of structural reforms in euro area 
countries. 
in  domestic  demand  supported  by 
improvement 
to  some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  increased  in 
November 2013 to 0.9%, from 0.7% in October. The increase was broadly as expected and 
reflected,  in  particular,  an  upward  base  effect  in  energy  prices  and  higher  services  price 
inflation.  On  the  basis  of  prevailing  futures  prices  for  energy,  annual  inflation  rates  are 
expected to remain at around current levels in the coming months. Over the medium term, 
underlying price pressures in the euro area are expected to remain subdued. At the same 
time, inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to be 
firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%.  
Broadly in line with this assessment, the December 2013 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.4% in 2013, at 1.1% in 2014 
and  at  1.3%  in  2015.  In  comparison  with  the  September  2013  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections,  the  projection  for 
inflation  for  2013  has  been  revised  downwards  by 
0.1 percentage point and for 2014 it has been revised downwards by 0.2 percentage point. 
The risks  to the  outlook for  price  developments  are  seen  to  be  broadly  balanced  over  the 
medium  term.  Upside  risks  relate  to  higher  commodity  prices  and  stronger  than  expected 
increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, while downside risks stem from weaker 
than expected economic activity. 
Concerning  the  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  let  me  inform  you  that  the  Governing 
Council  has  decided  to  publish  more  details  as  of  December  2013.  You  will  receive  this 
material today after the press conference.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  data  for  October  confirm  the  assessment  of  subdued 
underlying growth in broad money (M3) and credit. Annual growth in M3 moderated to 1.4% 
in  October,  from  2.0%  in  September.  This  moderation  was  partly  related  to  a  base  effect. 
Annual growth in M1 remained strong at 6.6%, reflecting a preference for liquidity, although it 
was  below  the  peak  of  8.7%  observed  in  April.  Net  capital  inflows  into  the  euro  area 
continued  to  be  the  main  factor  supporting  annual  M3  growth,  while  the  annual  rate  of 
change  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  remained  weak.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to 
households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  stood  at  0.3%  in  October,  broadly 
unchanged  since  the  beginning  of  the  year.  The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  
non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) was –2.9% in October, 
following  –2.8%  in  September  and  –2.9%  in  August.  Overall,  weak  loan  dynamics  for 
non-financial  corporations  continue  to  reflect  their  lagged  relationship  with  the  business 
cycle,  credit  risk  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance 
sheets.  
Since  the  summer  of  2012  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation  of  banks.  In  order  to  ensure  an  adequate  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the 
financing conditions in euro area countries, it is essential that the fragmentation of euro area 
credit  markets  declines  further  and  that  the  resilience  of  banks  is  strengthened  where 
needed. The ECB’s comprehensive assessment before it adopts its supervisory role under 
the single supervisory mechanism will further support this confidence-building process. It will 
enhance  the  quality  of  information  available  on  the  condition  of  banks  and  result  in  the 
identification and implementation of necessary corrective actions. Further decisive steps to 
establish a banking union will help to restore confidence in the financial system. 
To sum up, the economic analysis indicates that we may experience a prolonged period of 
low inflation, to be followed by a gradual upward movement towards inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% later on. A cross-check with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms 
this picture.  
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  European  Commission’s 
assessment of the 2014 draft budgetary plans which were submitted in October for the first 
time  under  the  “two-pack”  regulations.  This  new  surveillance  exercise  needs  to  be  fully 
effective. In order to put high public debt ratios on a downward path, governments should not 
unravel their efforts to reduce deficits and sustain fiscal adjustment over the medium term. In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particular,  consolidation  measures  should  be  growth-friendly  and  have  a  medium-term 
perspective, so as both to improve public services and minimise the distortionary effects of 
taxation. At the same time, there is a need to push ahead with product and labour market 
reforms, in order to improve competitiveness, raise potential growth, generate employment 
opportunities and foster the adaptability of our economies.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
