Richard W Fisher: Uncertainty matters (with reference to kinky monetary 
policy, two nickels and a dime) 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Causes & Macroeconomic Consequences of Uncertainty 
Conference, Dallas, Texas, 3 October 2013. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
The speaker is indebted to Dallas Fed Senior Vice President and Principal Policy Advisor Evan Koenig for his 
input in developing the themes articulated in this speech. 
Thank you, Evan [Koenig] 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  share  this  platform  with  John  Taylor.  I  first  met  John  at  a  Carnegie 
Foundation seminar when he was Undersecretary of the Treasury; I have been among the 
legions of his admirers ever since. He is thoughtful, no-nonsense and, importantly, dedicated 
to making monetary policy work with maximum efficacy. We at the Dallas Fed are grateful 
that he chairs the advisory board of our Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute. And we 
all, as Americans, are grateful for his service and dedication to our country. Thank you, John, 
for being the good patriot and man that you are. 
Uncertainty matters 
Uncertainty matters. A lot. 
This won’t be a surprise to many of you. The first thing you are taught in any MBA program, 
be  it  at  Stanford,  where  I  earned  my  degree,  or  anywhere  else,  is  that  “business”  is  the 
process of managing under conditions of uncertainty. All business executives worth their salt 
organize their teams and resources to minimize uncertainty of factors under their control; and 
they develop contingencies and operating tactics and strategies for factors over which they 
have  no  direct  control.  Obviously,  the  less-clear  external  influences  are,  the  greater  the 
degree of angst about budgeting and planning for the future. Even the saltiest of helmsmen 
cannot confidently navigate a ship in a dense fog. 
Going back to the earliest days of the current recovery, my business contacts have regularly 
complained  of  the  fog  of  uncertainty  emanating  from  Washington:  They  have  consistently 
cited  fiscal  and  regulatory  uncertainty  as  major  impediments  to  capital  investment  and 
expanding payrolls. Given uncertainty about the implications for overhead of the Affordable 
Care  Act  and  other  government  mandates,  they’ve  complained  of  not  knowing  what  their 
all-in labor and other costs will be and of how that lack of knowledge has made long-term 
employment  planning  nearly  impossible.  I’m  sure  that  many  of  you  have  heard  similar 
complaints – or have voiced them yourselves. 
What you may not realize is that until quite recently, economists who study business cycles 
and monetary policy paid scant attention to the effects of uncertainty on aggregate job and 
output growth. The profession’s standard models assume that the economy is populated with 
households and firms that are identical to one another, or that people and businesses can 
insure  away  individual  risk  and  so  are  effectively,  theoretically,  identical.  It’s  become 
standard practice, too, to assume that decision-makers are hyper-rational in how they form 
their expectations of future policy and future events; they are assumed to fully understand 
how the economy works. To be sure, the economy is subject to shocks, so that its course is 
unpredictable.  But  that  uncertainty,  according  to  this  school  of  theory,  is  of  no  real 
consequence  for  households’  decisions  about  how  much  to  save  and  consume,  or 
businesses’  decisions  about  how  much  to  hire  and  invest.  The  technical  term  is  “certainty 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
equivalence”: In standard models, choices depend on what you expect will happen and not 
on the degree to which you are confident in your predictions. 
Such thinking is far removed from reality and, thankfully, there’s increasing recognition of that 
fact.  A  variety  of  uncertainty  indexes  have  been  developed  and  their  importance  in  theory 
and  in  practice  examined.1  Pretty  uniformly,  these  studies  suggest  that  changes  in 
uncertainty  have  significant  economic  effects  and  that  uncertainty  has  been  elevated  in 
recent years.  
In theoretical analyses, the impact of uncertainty is especially great when realistic financial 
and  informational  frictions  prevent  risk  from  being  spread  optimally.  Because  of  such 
frictions,  for  example,  debt  contracts  often  require  that  borrowers  post  collateral.  When 
uncertainty  increases,  so  do  collateral  requirements,  tightening  credit  and  increasing  the 
value of “safe” assets relative to other assets.2 
There’s more than one type of uncertainty. There’s uncertainty about future average tax rates 
on investment income, for example, or the future pace of average labor productivity gains. 
This is aggregate uncertainty. There is also uncertainty that widens the distribution of asset 
returns across firms or the distribution of income prospects across households, while leaving 
aggregate average asset returns and aggregate average productivity prospects unchanged. 
This  is  cross-sectional  uncertainty.  Finally,  there’s  the  uncertainty  that  you  feel  when  you 
think  that  you  understand  how  the  world  works  and  then  discover  that  you  don’t  because 
something  happens  that  you  thought  unlikely  to  happen.3  In  the  extreme,  these  are “black 
swan”  events:  the  “oh  spit”  moments  we  experience  when  we  realize  that  we  have 
fundamentally and disastrously miscalculated.  
Black swans induce paradigm shifts: The world – or, at least, our thinking about the world – 
is never the same again. The Great Depression was one such event. The housing-market 
collapse  that  began  in  2006  and  then  spilled  over  to  financial  markets  is  another.  If  the 
U.S. government  defaults  on  its  debt  later  this  month,  we’ll  have  a  third  example.  The 
unthinkable will have become real, and the “full faith and credit” of the United States will be a 
mirage rather than accepted fact.  
There are myriad other events that, on a much smaller scale, lead people to question their 
understanding  of  the  rules.  For  example,  the  recent  decision  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) to maintain the pace of its large-scale asset purchases in the face of a 
generally  improving  labor  market  outlook  and  a  widespread  perception  within  financial 
markets, right or wrong, that the Fed had telegraphed a dialing back of the rate of purchases 
may  have  increased  uncertainty  about  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy.  That  was  one 
argument raised against the decision not to taper. I know, because I made the argument, and 
I was not alone. 
                                                
1  Uncertainty indexes are described and analyzed in the following recent papers: “Measuring Economic Policy 
Uncertainty,”  by  Scott  R.  Baker,  Nicholas  Bloom  and  Steven  J.  Davis,  unpublished  manuscript,  2013; 
“Surprise and Uncertainty Indexes: Real-Time Aggregation of Real-Activity Macro Surprises,” by Chiara Scotti, 
unpublished  manuscript,  2013;  “Fiscal  Volatility  Shocks  and  Economic  Activity,”  by  Jesús  Fernández-
Villaverde, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester and Juan Rubio-Ramírez, unpublished manuscript, 2012; 
“Risk Shocks,” by Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, NBER Working Paper no. 18682, January 2013; and “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand 
Shocks,”  by  Sylvain  Leduc  and  Zheng  Liu,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Working 
Paper no. 2012-10, January 2013. 
2  See  “The  Leverage  Cycle,”  by  John  Geanakoplos,  in  NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual  2009,  vol.  24,  Daron 
Acemoglu,  Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds.,  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  2010,  
pp. 1–65. See, also, “Reviewing the Leverage Cycle,” by Ana Fostel and John Geanakoplos, Yale University, 
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no. 1918, September 2013. 
3  This type of uncertainty is analyzed in “Understanding Uncertainty Shocks and the Role of Black Swans,” by 
Anna Orlik and Laura Veldkamp, unpublished manuscript, 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Most real-world fiscal and regulatory uncertainty  is a mix of aggregate and cross-sectional 
uncertainty. Given the aging of the U.S. population, we know that the revenues required to 
finance entitlement programs will certainly have to increase in coming decades. “Entitlement 
reform” may ameliorate the problem but won’t eliminate it. Government purchases will have 
to  be  cut,  relative  to  baseline  projections,  and  tax  revenues  will  certainly  have  to  be 
increased. But exactly which programs will be cut and which taxes increased, and when, is 
unclear and has been further muddled by the behavior of fiscal policy makers these past few 
days.  
The financial crisis and subsequent recession exacerbated these problems by increasing the 
outstanding  stock  of  debt.  U.S.  federal  government  debt  held  by  the  public  has  increased 
from  34  percent  of  potential  GDP  at  the  business-cycle  peak  in  first  quarter  2001  (shortly 
before  the  9/11  attacks)  to  36  percent  in  fourth  quarter  2007  (just  prior  to  the  Great 
Recession) to 70 percent of potential GDP today. 
This increased debt has been manageable as a result of a substantial fall in interest rates. 
Indeed, interest on the public debt has trended downward from 4.7 percent of potential GDP 
in  1990  to  3.2  percent  in  2007  to just  2.1  percent  in  2012  as the  average  interest rate  on 
Treasury  securities  has  dropped  from  9  percent  to  5  percent,  then  to  its  recent  level  of 
2½ percent. Rates obviously cannot continue to fall, though, so the cost of servicing debt is 
sure to increase, even if the size of the debt relative to the economy stabilizes. 
The canary in the mine: capital investment  
Capital investment is the economy’s canary in the mine because it’s often the first thing to 
succumb to uncertainty. Also, once undertaken, capital investment is costly to reverse.  
Investment has certainly been unusually sluggish in the wake of the recent recession. Going 
back to when our data begin, in 1947, net investment as a percent of GDP has fluctuated 
around a constant mean of 5.6 percent.4 It boomed in the late 1990s, reaching 8.1 percent of 
GDP, its highest level in over 50 years. The only higher quarter on record was the second 
quarter  of  1950  (shortly  after  John  Taylor  and  I  came  into  this  world,  although  I  am  not 
implying  causality).  Its  peak  during  the  2001–07  expansion  was  an  unremarkable 
6.9 percent,  but the  subsequent  plunge  was  unprecedented  in  the  post-World War  II  data: 
The  U.S.  capital  stock  actually  shrank  during  the  second  half  of  2009.  Relative  to  its 
5.6 percent long-run average, net investment as a percent of GDP fell by twice as far as it 
had in any prior postwar recession.  
More to the point, the recovery in investment has been exceptionally anemic. Today, four full 
years after the trough of the recession in second quarter 2009, net investment as a percent 
of GDP is still only 3.2 percent – a level typical of past recession lows. Net investment as a 
percent of GDP was last at or above its 5.6 percent long-run mean 6½ years ago.  
Small wonder then that nonfarm payroll employment has been slow to recover too. Through 
August  we  had  restored  less  than  80  percent  of  the  8.7  million  jobs  lost  during  the  Great 
Recession.  Less  well  known  is  the  fact  that  real  GDP  per  capita  only  recovered  its 
prerecession peak this past summer.5 That’s 5½ years to make up the ground lost during the 
recession. Previous post-WWII recoveries never required more than nine quarters maximum. 
A Dallas Fed analysis suggests that the recent financial crisis and its aftermath put the U.S. 
                                                
4  Net investment includes additions to fixed capital net of depreciation. 
5  Real GDP per capita was $49,655 in 2009 dollars in second quarter 2013 versus $49,610 in fourth quarter 
2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
back by more than an entire year’s worth of output, an equivalent of more than $120,000 per 
American household.6  
Baker-Bloom-Davis and better comprehending uncertainty 
And what of uncertainty? I mentioned earlier that we now have several uncertainty indexes. 
One  of  these,  focused  on  measuring  policy  uncertainty,  was  developed  by  our  moderator, 
Nick  Bloom,  together  with  Scott  Baker  at  Stanford  and  Steven  Davis  of  the  University  of 
Chicago. The index is based on three different types of information: (1) a count of articles 
referencing  uncertainty,  the  economy  and  policy  that  have  appeared  in  prominent  U.S. 
newspapers (including the nation’s premier paper, the Dallas Morning News); (2) a weighted 
count  of  tax-code  provisions  that  are  scheduled  to  expire;  and  (3)  the  extent  to  which 
professional  forecasters  disagree  with  one  another  about  future  levels  of  inflation  and 
government purchases.  
The  Baker-Bloom-Davis  index  begins  in  January  1985  and  runs  through  the  present.  High 
values  of  the  index  signal  an  elevated  level  of  economic  policy  uncertainty.  From  1985 
through 2007 – prior to the 2008–09 recession – the index has a mean of 94, and it exceeds 
150 only 2 percent of the time (one month in 50; just six times in over 23 years). The index 
rose to above-average levels in the fall of 2007 and stayed at or above 94 – but below 150 – 
through the summer of 2008. Then, between August and September 2008, the index nearly 
doubled,  rising  from  96  to  188.  Since  September  2008,  the  index  has  at  no  time  dropped 
below 100, and it has exceeded 150 on 31 occasions – more than half the time. It has soared 
above 200 twice: for two months in 2011, coincident with that year’s debt-ceiling debate, and 
in  December  2012,  when  a  compromise  implementation  of  sequestration  was  being 
hammered out. It’ll be interesting to see what happens with the index in the wake of the past 
week’s developments (or lack thereof) in Washington. 
The point is that starting with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, economic 
policy  uncertainty  has  been  consistently  high,  and  half the  time  it  has  been  extraordinarily 
high.  It’s  difficult  to  prove  “beyond  a  reasonable  doubt”  that  this  elevated  uncertainty  is 
causally  related  to  the  weak  recovery  we’ve  experienced.  But  the  hypothesis  is  surely 
sensible, the timing is certainly auspicious, and enough careful confirming analysis has been 
done to say that the preponderance of evidence favors the proposition that not just recent 
policy decisions, but also the manner in which those decisions were arrived at, have been a 
significant hindrance to economic expansion.  
The Kinky Stuff: monetary policy 
As to monetary policy, I would submit there are several links between monetary policy and 
economic uncertainty. First, though, some background. 
Ordinarily, monetary policy works by influencing the current and expected near-term levels of 
short-term interest rates. Once short-term interest rates hit zero, however, the Fed turned to 
unconventional policies. By using massive purchases of longer-term Treasuries and agency 
mortgage-backed securities, these policies helped hold down term premia and support the 
housing  recovery.  Simultaneously,  the  Fed  tried  –  and  I  emphasize  tried  because  the 
message  seems  to  have  been  garbled  in  the  minds  of  some  intended  recipients  –  to 
influence  expectations  of  its  own  behavior  once  asset  purchases  have  run  their  course. 
These  “asset-purchase”  and  “forward-guidance”  policies  are  relatively  unfamiliar,  and  their 
impact is uncertain.  
                                                
6  See “Assessing the Costs and Consequences of the 2007–09 Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath,” by David 
Luttrell, Tyler Atkinson and Harvey Rosenblum, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter, vol. 8, no. 7, 
2013, www.dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2013/el1307.cfm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
One  implication  is  that  aggregate  fiscal  shocks  –  and,  hence,  also  aggregate  fiscal 
uncertainties  –  are  likely  to  have  outsize  effects  in  current  circumstances.  Contractionary 
fiscal  policy  that  would  ordinarily  drive  down  interest  rates,  providing  offsetting  stimulus  to 
private expenditure, will have a larger-than-typical economic impact because this “crowding 
in” is absent once interest rates are confined to the zero lower bound. Expansionary fiscal 
policy, similarly, will fail to “crowd out” private expenditure if interest rates hold steady. 
Second,  because  the  zero  bound  complicates  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  short-
circuits fiscal crowding out, it introduces a “kink,” or discontinuity, in the economy’s behavior. 
The  existence  of  a  kink  means  that  uncertainty  matters  even  if  ordinarily  it  would  not: 
“Certainty  equivalence”  no  longer  applies. When  real  growth  and/or  inflation  prospects  are 
weak – so that the economy is operating near the zero bound – downside risks to growth and 
inflation loom larger than they ordinarily would. More-aggressive-than-usual policy responses 
may be appropriate to avoid the negative implications of an encounter with the zero bound. 
Paradoxically, though, once the lower bound on interest rates is binding, a less-than-usually-
aggressive  monetary  policy  response  may  be  appropriate.  I  have  tried  to  articulate  this  in 
FOMC  meetings  ever  since  we  started  down  the  path  of  quantitative  easing,  drawing  on 
anecdotal  reports from my  CEO  contacts  and what  I  thought  was  common  sense.  But  my 
arguments  fell  on  deaf  ears  until  my  more  learned  counterpart  at  the  San  Francisco  Fed, 
John  Williams,  produced  a  formal  study  that  posited  that  the  aggressive  use  of  unfamiliar 
policy  tools  like  quantitative  easing  and  Operation  Twist  add  to  aggregate  economic 
uncertainty and, if applied at all, should be deployed more cautiously than our more familiar 
tools.7  
Large margins of error 
In  general,  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  provide  households  and  firms  with  an 
economic  environment that  makes  it  attractive  to  use  money  as  medium  of  exchange  and 
store of value. Since many private contracts, including labor and debt contracts as well as 
capital expenditure commitments, extend out several years, a multiyear policy perspective is 
needed. A multiyear perspective is especially important when the economy may encounter 
the zero bound. The explanation is that by interfering with the normal conduct of monetary 
policy, the zero bound increases the likelihood that policy will miss its objectives year after 
year in the same direction, so that the errors accumulate over time.  
Over the past five years, for example, PCE inflation has averaged 1.2 percent per year. The 
FOMC’s  announced  long-term  inflation  objective  is  2.0  percent.  Over  a  single  year,  the 
difference between 1.2 percent and 2.0 percent inflation is inconsequential. Over five years, 
though,  that  small  difference  cumulates  to  a  4.26  percentage  point  difference  in  the  price 
level, which is not insignificant, perhaps, if back in 2008 you took out a mortgage with a five-
year  balloon.  Alternatively,  nominal  GDP  growth  over  the  past  five  years  has  averaged 
2.4 percent per year, when ordinarily one might have expected 4.5 percent average annual 
growth  (2.5  percent  real  growth  plus  2.0  percent  inflation).  Again,  the  difference  is 
inconsequential in any given year. Accumulated over five years, though, the level of nominal 
income  today  is  fully  12  percent  below  what  might  reasonably  have  been  expected  when 
mortgage and auto loan agreements were made back in 2008. 
Kindly note that I am not advocating any change to the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation target. My 
point  is  simply  to  highlight  the  longer-term  consequences  of  what  might  appear  to  be 
smallish, shorter-term deviations from the norm. Business operators plan capital expenditure 
and payrolls not in one- or two- or even three-year increments; they plan and budget over 
longer-term  horizons.  The  nominal  stability  that  people  need  if they  are  going  to  negotiate 
                                                
7  See  “A  Defense  of  Moderation  in  Monetary  Policy,”  by  John  C.  Williams,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San 
Francisco Working Paper no. 2013-15, July 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
multiyear contracts is a multiyear nominal stability. A policy that “lets bygones be bygones” 
from year to year may not achieve this kind of stability, especially when policy options can 
become constrained, in the short term, by the zero bound. A policy that takes a longer-term 
perspective  and  is  properly  communicated  and  executed  –  so  as  to  instill  confidence  that 
monetary policy will hew to a 2 percent inflation target rather than fixate on the run-rate of the 
past four quarters or the outlook for the next four – may better supply the longer-term comfort 
that households and businesses need to plan and budget. Such a policy would reduce the 
uncertainty  that  monetary  policy  as  it  is  currently  conducted  spawns  and  would  be  more 
effective in doing its part to assist in economic expansion.8 
A dime between two nickels 
I hope this is enough to get a conversation started. I will now turn the microphone over to 
John Taylor. In doing so, I am reminded of Ross Perot’s quip when he was placed between 
Bill  Clinton  and  George  H.W.  Bush  for  a  predebate  photograph  in  the  1992  presidential 
election. Noting that Mr. Perot was substantially shorter than the other two men, a reporter 
asked  him  how  he  felt.  His  reply:  “I  feel  like  a  dime  between  two  nickels.”  In  contrast, 
compared to John Taylor, I feel like an intellectual dwarf – a mere penny sitting on the dais 
next to John’s $100 bill brain. And I’m talking about the new, difficult to replicate $100 bill that 
will be released next Tuesday. Please join me in welcoming John Taylor to the podium. 
                                                
8  For more information about tightening control of inflation expectations by putting a five-year inflation rate, in 
place of the usual four-quarter inflation rate, in the Taylor rule, see “All in the Family: The Close Connection 
Between Nominal-GDP Targeting and the Taylor Rule,” by Evan Koenig, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Staff 
Papers, No. 17, March 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
