Benoît Cœuré: The future of Europe – building on our strengths 
Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  plenary  session  on  “The  future  of  Europe”,  during  the  fifth  German 
Economic Forum, Frankfurt am Main, 6 December 2013. 
 Summary: The crisis has raised some fundamental questions about Europe and the future 
of the euro area. We need to go back to first principles and complete our original vision – to 
fulfil the economic and monetary union based on price stability. We know what has worked in 
the euro area: an allocation of tasks based on the primacy of price stability. And we know 
what has not worked: a lack of stability orientation in other policy areas. 
The ability of the central bank to deliver price stability ultimately depends on other policies 
being  oriented  towards  stability  as  well.  Also,  the  ECB  needs  stable  banks  to  be  able  to 
implement its monetary policy successfully.  
Banking  union  will  not  be  achieved  by  mutualising  risks.  On  the  contrary,  banking  union 
reduces risks for taxpayers. 
Our common future cannot be found in the past. The world has changed too much in recent 
decades  to  go  back.  None  of  our  countries  are  strong  enough  to  survive  alone.  The  euro 
area  needs  solidarity  mechanisms  for  extreme  events  that  are  out  of  reach  of  national 
policies. But beyond that there is no strong case for further fiscal centralisation.  
Fiscal discipline starts at home. Governments have to take responsibility for delivering sound 
budgetary policies.  
Germany  also  has  challenges  to  confront  to  maintain  its  economic  performance.  One 
challenge is the effect of an ageing society on the workforce. Another challenge is to raise 
domestic demand with reforms and investment.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. It is an honour for me to speak in this place 
that  played  such  an  important  role  in  German  history.  Our  intention  today,  however,  is  to 
reflect on the future – and the future of Germany is tied to the future of Europe.  
The crisis has raised some fundamental questions about Europe and the future of the euro 
area.  How  can  we  restore  stability  and  sustainable  growth?  What  are  the  mutual 
responsibilities between different European countries, especially when they share a common 
currency? How can we take the people along? 
My main message today is that we need to go back to first principles. 
We know what has worked in the euro area – namely, an allocation of tasks based on the 
primacy  of  price  stability.  And  we  know  what  has  not  worked  –  namely,  a  lack  of  stability 
orientation in other policy areas. 
Our  task  today  is  therefore  to  build  on  our  strengths,  to  take  what  has  worked  and  to 
reinforce  it.  This  does  not  require  that  we  map  out  an  entirely  new  vision  for  Europe.  It 
requires  that  we  complete  our  original  vision  –  to  fulfil  the  economic  and  monetary  union 
(EMU) based on price stability that we set in motion in 1999.  
Where Europe works 
So what has worked well in Europe? 
First and foremost, the single market supported by the single currency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The benefits of having a single market and a single currency have been proven, especially in 
this country. Germany’s trade with the rest of the euro area increased from around 25% of 
GDP in 1999 to almost 40% of GDP in 2012. And contrary to a popular perception outside of 
Germany, its trade with its euro area partners is now broadly balanced. Similarly, almost 65% 
of foreign direct investment in Germany now comes from the euro area, and half of German 
foreign direct investment goes to other euro area countries.  
Over this period, value chains have also extended across Europe. On average, around 40% 
of  foreign  value  added  in  euro  area  exports  comes  from  other  euro  area  countries.  This 
means that increasingly we can talk about goods being “Made in Europe” – with the German 
Mittelstand standing at the centre of those supply chains. 
This  economic  deepening  means  that  it  makes  less  and  less  sense  to  think  of 
competitiveness  in  terms  of  countries  –  or  of  countries  being  better  off  alone.  Each 
EU country, even Germany, is too small to get along in a globalised world. It is connections 
between firms across Europe that will create our industrial strength and competitiveness in 
the future. And by the same token, the success of German firms is an asset to the rest of 
Europe. 
Our single currency, the euro, has been vital in reaping the gains of the single market. And it 
has put an end to competitive devaluations and trade wars between our countries.  
A key condition supporting this process of economic integration has been price stability. The 
ECB has delivered price stability continuously since 1999. And we will do so in the future.  
We have been successful in delivering price stability because we have a clear alignment of 
objectives and instruments – what is called by economists the “Tinbergen principle” after the 
Dutch economist Jan Tinbergen. We have a primary objective of euro area price stability that 
is established in the EU Treaty. And we have been given the instruments and independence 
necessary to fulfil that objective. 
This framework is important to understand our recent monetary policy decisions, in two ways. 
First, we have lowered interest rates with the sole purpose of ensuring medium-term price 
stability for the euro area. We understand this decision has implications on different groups. 
This is however a consequence, not an aim of a monetary policy focused on price stability. 
And it is not specific to the euro area. If we were now to start basing our decisions on factors 
that were not related to price stability, we would jeopardise our mandate. 
Second, we have a clear and verifiable definition of price stability that we communicated to 
the public – that is, euro area inflation at below but close to 2% over the medium-term. And 
average euro area inflation has been almost exactly equal to 2% since 1999. 
This has allowed citizens to develop well-anchored expectations of future inflation, and that 
in  turn keeps  inflation  under  control.  Indeed,  the  strong  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations 
has been the needle of the compass for the euro area as it has navigated the storms of the 
recent crisis. 
But for any central bank, the strategy to ensure price stability needs to be symmetric. In other 
words,  inflation  should  be  neither  too  high  nor  too  low.  If  we  were  to  react  only  to  high 
inflation, and ignore low inflation, citizens’ expectations would change – and we would risk 
losing the credibility we have established since 1999.  
As a result, doubts would be cast over our commitment to fight upwards risks to price stability 
–  and  this  could  lead  to  more  volatile  inflation  in  the  future.  This  is  a  risk  that  we  cannot 
afford to take. 
To summarise the current stance of our monetary policy: we are ensuring euro area inflation 
at below but close to 2% over the medium-term using the instruments conferred on us. This 
is our responsibility in the Treaty; it is what the people of Europe expect from us; and it is our 
best contribution to economic policy for the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Where Europe needs to be reinforced 
Yet we know that the central bank does not operate in a vacuum. The ability of the central 
bank  to  deliver  price  stability  ultimately  depends  on  other  policies  being  oriented  towards 
stability as well. Without this, the benefits of the single market and the single currency are put 
at risk – we have seen this clearly demonstrated in last few years. 
The  task  facing  Europe  today  is  therefore  to  secure  what  we  have  achieved  so  far  –  to 
ensure that monetary stability is matched by economic and financial stability.  
This does not require a quantum leap in integration. Rather, it requires that we finish what we 
started in 1999 and put the right framework in place to support EMU. 
Let me explain what I mean in more detail. 
Financial stability 
The  ECB  needs  stable  banks  to  be  able  to  implement  its  monetary  policy  successfully. 
European  companies  are  mostly  funded  by  banks,  and  banks  are  therefore  our  main 
counterparties  and  the  primary  channel  through  which  our  interest  rate  decisions  are 
transmitted to firms and households.  
However,  we  saw  during  the  crisis  the  drawbacks  of  a  system  of  national  banking 
supervision  with  integrated  financial  markets.  Our  monetary  policy  had  to  operate  in  very 
difficult  conditions  –  at  one  point  it  was  even  losing  effectiveness  in  some  countries.  The 
lesson  from  this  was  that  a  single  monetary  policy  could  ultimately  not  work  with  multiple 
approaches to banking supervision. 
The ongoing process of building a banking union in the euro area is a response to this. It 
puts us in a stronger position to defend European financial stability, which in turn will support 
the proper transmission of our monetary policy and price stability. 
And let me be clear: this will not be achieved by mutualising risks. On the contrary, banking 
union reduces risks for taxpayers. 
Having a European supervisor ensures that all banks in the euro area will be kept in check 
by the same rules and under reciprocal oversight. It therefore limits the likelihood of financial 
crises  and  contagion,  which  is  ultimately  what  leads  to  countries  needing  financial 
assistance.  
Moreover, having a European resolution mechanism will ensure that bank shareholders and 
bondholders will be first in line to absorb losses when a bank fails. The guiding rule should 
be “bail-in” of creditors, not “bail-out” by European taxpayers.  
And  both  stronger  supervision  and  resolution  will  reduce  potential  risks  for  the  ECB  by 
confirming the soundness of our counterparties. 
As  you  know,  the  European  governments  and  Parliament  have  decided  that  the  single 
supervisor should be the ECB. We take this task very seriously, but in line with the Tinbergen 
principle I mentioned earlier, we are adamant that additional objectives should not be added 
to monetary policy. 
We will therefore ensure strict separation between this new function and our monetary policy. 
This  will  help  ensure  that  the  European  supervisor  focuses  on  its  objective  to  keep  our 
banking system sound and stable, and has the instruments it needs to succeed. 
Economic stability 
Beyond financial stability, the euro area also needs economic stability. The ECB’s monetary 
policy  is  a  necessary  condition  for  economic  stability,  but  it  is  not  sufficient.  Governments 
also need to practice the right economic policies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
An ongoing question is how much responsibility for economic policies should be elevated to 
the European level. 
For banking supervision and resolution there is a strong case for centralisation. Clearly, the 
euro  area  also  needs  solidarity  mechanisms  for  extreme  events  that  are  out  of  reach  of 
national policies – that is the role of the European Stability Mechanism. And I see scope for 
common projects with a common funding if they enhance the resilience of the single currency 
area and come with appropriate democratic control. 
But beyond that, I do not see a strong case today for further fiscal centralisation. There are 
three reasons for this. 
First,  fiscal  discipline  starts  at  home.  Most  citizens  do  not  want  decisions  on  taxing  and 
spending  to  be  made  at  the  European  level,  at  least  for  the  time  being.  This  means  that 
governments have to take responsibility for delivering sound budgetary policies.  
Europe  has  a  role  to  play  in  guiding  governments  in  the  right  direction.  But  we  know  the 
Stability and Growth Pact was not properly enforced. That is why I am encouraged by the 
approach  taken  in  the  fiscal  compact.  This  enshrines  balanced  budget  rules  in  national 
constitutions or equivalent, under the vigilance of independent fiscal councils.  
The second reason why I do not see a strong case for fiscal centralisation is that economic 
adjustment can and should take place via flexible markets. 
If countries introduce structural reforms that allow their economies to adjust more quickly to 
economic downturns, there is less pressure on their national budgets, and hence less need 
for external budgetary support. 
And  flexibility  does  not  mean  social  unfairness.  Too  often,  what  delays  adjustment  is 
resistance by insiders who have managed to capture an unfair share of national wealth and 
oppose economic change. 
The third reason is that you do not buy an insurance policy when your house is already on 
fire. Fiscal centralisation can be properly discussed only when euro area countries, large and 
small, have put their houses in order fiscally, financially and economically. 
The good  news  is  that  it  seems governments  have  understood the message.  Budgets  are 
being  consolidated.  Structural  reforms  are  being  introduced.  Competitiveness  is  being 
regained.  
For example, the countries under full EU-IMF programmes have seen their unit labour costs 
fall by more than 15 percentage points since 2009 relative to the euro area average. Exports 
in Portugal and Spain are up by more than 20% since the start of the crisis.  
But reform is not a medicine only for countries under strain. Germany also has challenges to 
confront to maintain its economic performance. 
One such challenge is the effect of an ageing society on the workforce. As the labour force 
shrinks,  potential  growth  will  fall  and  this  economy  risks  losing  its  leading  status.  Another 
challenge is to raise domestic demand with reforms and investment. This would rebalance 
the economy without hurting the competitiveness and the exports of German companies. As I 
said, German competitiveness benefits the euro area as a whole and it would be foolish to try 
to curb it. 
To  sum  up,  achieving  lasting  economic  stability  must  involve  finding  a  new  balance  of 
discipline  and  flexibility  in  our  economies.  This  would  go  a  long  way  towards  securing  a 
strong  EMU  based  on  price  stability  –  and  to  do  so  without  exceeding  the  democratic 
mandate given by the citizens of Europe. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Our common future cannot be found in the past. The world has changed too much in recent 
decades to go back. None of our countries are strong enough to survive alone. 
Europe  faces  considerable  challenges,  yes,  but  the  answers  are  not  so  complicated.  The 
Europe  we  aspire  to  is  the  one  that  has  worked  well  so  far;  that  is  based  on  economic 
integration and price stability; and that is embedded in the EU Treaty. 
The  future  of  Europe  is  to  continue  on  the  course  we  set  ourselves  in  1999  –  but  follow 
through with it fully and to complete the original vision where it proves necessary. We at the 
ECB  will  continue  to  deliver  price  stability.  Governments,  companies  and  social  partners 
need to do their part.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
