Ardian Fullani: The development of, and challenges for, the Albanian 
economy 
Opinion  of  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  published  in  the  Albanian 
daily newspapers “Panorama” and “Albania Daily News”, 2 December 2013. 
 Soon enough representatives of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) will come to Albania 
to  judge  on  the  performance  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  its  perspective.  During  their 
mission  to  Tirana,  Fund  representatives  are  expected  to  discuss  the  country’s  economic 
outlook in the medium run, from the perspective of the IMF vis-à-vis the perspective of the 
Albanian  authorities.  Given  the  latest  economic developments  in  Albania,  the  possibility  of 
signing a new cooperation agreement between the IMF and Albanian authorities has been a 
persisting  question  in  public  debates.  My  approach  to  this  issue  has  been  to  fully  support 
negotiating a new agreement with the IMF. I am certain our economy will only benefit from it, 
especially  under  the  current  circumstances,  as  the  attitude  of  the  IMF  towards  developing 
economies has become more flexible. 
Presently,  the  biggest  challenge  facing  the  Albanian  economy  is  recovering  its  activity, 
ensuring stable economic growth and employment. On the other hand, all the economies of 
Central and Southeast Europe are also facing these challenges. The main objective remains 
enhancing  competitiveness:  in  other  words,  creating  and  boosting  production  capacities  to 
produce  high-quality  goods  and  services  at  lower  costs  compared  to  our  competitors. 
Currently,  both  our  economy  and  the  economies  in  the  region  are  too  small  to  generate 
sufficient domestic demand that would promote employment, and, for them, to cope with the 
competition from the Asian economies is costly. At the same time, our economies are small 
against the economies of Central Europe; they suffer from low productivity, implying that, in 
the current conditions, the production quality and quantity for unit of labour is lower than in 
our  direct  partners,  both  at  regional  and  global  levels.  Higher  production  and  employment 
rates are the only alternatives that lead to creating values that would guarantee convergence 
with  advanced  European  economies.  In  Central  European  economies,  this  phenomenon 
happened  at  the  end  of  1990s  thanks  to  capital  investments  from  European  and  global 
markets. Factors that supported these capital flows weakened at the outbreak of the global 
financial  crisis  and  withdrew  totally  after  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  At  present,  the  global 
markets  have  withdrawn  from  Eastern  Europe  economies  and  from  other  developing 
countries. In the absence of free capital from abroad, structural reforms in the labour, capital, 
and land markets and pension system remain the only possibilities to attract foreign capital 
and investments to support growth and employment. These reforms have high financial costs 
and their benefits materialise in the medium and long run. 
In  the  meantime,  actual  economic  policies  are  oriented  towards  maintaining  the  fragile 
macroeconomic  and  financial  equilibriums  and  are  obliged  to  focus  on  overcoming  the 
difficulties of the moment caused by the crisis that has stricken not only our region, but also 
our  European  trading  partners.  The  priorities  of  the  moment  do  not  sustain,  or  better  say, 
render  it  more  difficult  to  undertake  and  immediately  implement  structural  reforms  in  the 
economy,  at  least  for  those  that  require  financial  resources  and  support.  Nonetheless, 
definite  solutions  for  short-term  problems  will  come  in  the  framework  and  context  of 
economic  benefits  and  convergence.  Consequently,  choices  related  to  defining  economic 
priorities,  education,  employment,  existing  vacuum  in  human  and  financial  capital,  fiscal 
policies, structural and legal reforms should be guided by the vision and objectives for the 
next 20 years. 
While  long-term  solutions  and  short-term  problems  in  the  economy  interact  with  and 
condition each other, it is indispensible to adopt domestic and external anchors, which would 
support economic and development policies. Assessing the existing situation at 360 degrees, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in a global context, taking into account the decision-making time and approach, I deem that 
the country needs and deserves to enter as a partner into a new and flexible agreement with 
the International Monetary Fund. 
From the overall perspective, the Albanian economy enjoys economic and financial stability. 
Our economy continues to produce positive growth rates; it has a stable financial system, low 
but contained inflation, relatively stable exchange rate and low interest rates to finance the 
public  debt.  Moreover,  macroeconomic  policies  have  been  in  line  with  the  scope  and 
recommendations  of  IMF  programmes.  Signing  under  these  conditions  enables  a  dignified 
agreement  and  minimises  the  costs  that  accompany  the  implementation  of  reforms  at 
present by Albanian authorities. At the same time, from the point of view of foreign investors 
in general and those in the banking sector in particular, this development would contribute to 
reducing risk premiums for the country. The experience of other countries has shown that the 
intervention of the IMF has helped sovereign ratings return to their previous positions. The 
spread has narrowed immediately, hence reducing the nervousness and hesitation of agents 
to invest in these markets. 
In the national and international arena it seems that the highest risk is related to ensuring the 
monetary assets to meet immediate needs arising from acknowledging government liabilities 
to  businesses,  and  medium-term  needs  to  cope  with  liabilities  or  enable  reinvestment  of 
liabilities  arising  as  a  consequence  of  extraordinary  fiscal  stimuli  applied  in  2009.  An 
agreement  with  the  IMF  would  address  the  scepticism  of  the  domestic  and  international 
markets  about  the  size  of  the  public  debt,  especially  under  the  conditions  of  a  sizeable 
absence of foreign reserve funds in relation to crediting the economies in our region. 
According  to  reliable  analyses  of  the  market  itself  and  of  important  international  financial 
institutions, a number of risks exist, not only for developing economies, but also for the so-
called  advanced  economies.  Our  main  trading  and  financial  partners  are  focused  on  their 
problems of the real economy and financial system. Their adjustment policies have negative 
side  effects  on  the  Albanian  economy,  which  appear  in  low  demand  for  our  products, 
downward remittances and limitation of financing with direct investment and other forms of 
capital  while,  despite  the  partial  adjustment  noticed  recently,  the  current  account  to  GDP 
ratio  continues  to  be  of  concern.  The  dependency  of  the  Albanian  economy  on  countries 
experiencing difficulties such as Greece and Italy, requires measures to face a potential non-
financing of the balance of payment. 
Moreover,  European  monetary  authorities  and  regulators  of  the  banking  and  financial 
markets  state  that  there  is  a  political  decision  that  each  European  economy  experiencing 
lack  of  financing  must  find  funds  in  cooperation  with  the  IMF.  The  new  agreement  would 
ensure  low  cost  and  safe  foreign  reserve  funds  directly  from  IMF  accounts.  This  would 
increase Albania’s rating in relation to its capacities to pay back the foreign debt, and would 
provide for better access in the international financial market with low financing costs. 
The agreement is positive news for foreign investors and potential partners as well, not only 
from  the  point  of  view  of  ensuring  financial  assets  but  also  as  a  guarantee  to  implement 
prudent  policies  and  adopt  a  reliable  fiscal  rule,  which  enables  the  consolidation  of  public 
finances in the medium run and, at the same time, keeps the trajectory of the public debt in 
check. 
The IMF may not solve the challenges for long-term developments of the Albanian economy. 
Problems related to competitiveness, employment and demographic developments, capacity 
utilisation,  and  repositioning  of  our  economy  in  the  region  and  global  economies,  require 
structural  reforms  in  the  realms  of  education,  employment,  expansion  and  deepening  of 
financial  and  capital  markets,  alignment  and  unification  of  legislation  and  coordination  of 
structural reforms at regional and European level. Overcoming these challenges, however, 
will  be  easier  under  the  calming  effects  that  an  agreement  with  the  IMF  offers.  This 
agreement should and could be characterised by sufficient flexibility, which would guarantee 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  necessary  space  to  stimulate  on-going  structural  reforms  and  sustainable  economic 
growth in the long run, unaffected by short-term problems. 
Concluding, I am confident that the news for an agreement will be received positively by the 
domestic  and  foreign  financial  markets,  and  will  also  be  interpreted  as  a  guarantee  that 
Albania  enjoys  a  sound  economic  and  financial  environment,  with  many  opportunities  for 
investment and profit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
