Andreas Dombret: Issues at the IMF-World Bank Annual Meeting 2013 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Atlantic-Brücke, Washington DC, 9 October 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Hodges  family  for  opening  their  house  to  us  and  for  inviting  me 
today.  Washington  is  busy  with  the  annual  meetings  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  But 
there is even more going on. The G20 are also meeting, as are the Financial Stability Board, 
the  Governors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  the  Institute  of  International 
Finance. 
For a couple of days Washington has become the Mecca of the financial world. Thus, it is 
good that this delegation from the Atlantik-Brücke has also come to Washington to be part of 
it all and to gather information. 
I  would  like  to  give  you  a  very  brief  overview  of  what  economic  issues  will  be  under 
discussion. Three topics will be at the center of interest: first, the global economic outlook; 
second,  current  and  future  challenges  for  economic  policy;  and  third,  institutional  matters, 
such  as  the  global  reform  of  financial  regulation.  Let  us  take  a  closer  look  at  these  three 
topics. 
The global economy 
2. 
The global economy has improved, but growth is still moderate. In its latest World Economic 
Outlook, the IMF projects global growth to reach 2.9% in 2013 and 3.6% in 2014. In doing 
that, the IMF revised earlier estimates downwards. 
The  underlying  geographical  pattern  of  this  outlook  is  a  bit scattered. Growth  in  advanced 
economies  is  recovering,  while  estimates  for  emerging  economies  have  been  revised 
downwards. In the euro area, growth has picked up, but will remain weak. On the positive 
side, reforms in the crisis countries are progressing and initial results are becoming visible. 
The  German  economy  has  overcome  its  cyclical  weakness  and  has  returned  to  normal 
capacity utilization. 
Challenges for economic policy 
3. 
What are the challenges for economic policy? Looking to the future, there are three major 
challenges we have to face. 
The  first  of  these  is  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies.  With 
improved economic conditions, it becomes more probable that interest rates will rise again. 
Nevertheless,  exiting  from  such  a  prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  will  be  difficult.  It 
might cause volatility on financial markets and limiting this volatility will be decisive. 
Emerging  markets,  in  particular,  will  have  to  prepare  themselves  for  potential  outflows  of 
capital. Some of them will have to undertake structural reforms and consolidate their public 
finances. 
This  brings  us  to  the  second  challenge:  developments  in  public  finances.  This  topic  is 
relevant  for  the  US  –  just  think  of  the  government  shutdown  and  the  risk  of  eventually 
reaching  the  debt ceiling  –,  it  is  relevant for  Japan  and  it  is  certainly  relevant  for the  euro 
area. Ultimately, high government debt impedes economic growth and endangers financial 
stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The third challenge is the dampened outlook for emerging market economies. This will shift 
the global pattern of growth toward advanced economies and will require emerging markets 
to adjust. 
Regulatory reform 
4. 
Now,  we  have  talked  about  the  global  economic  outlook  and  we  have  talked  about 
challenges for economic policy. This leaves us with the third topic that will be relevant for this 
year’s annual meeting: institutional reform. 
Let us take a closer look at the reform of financial regulation. Here, we have already made 
good  progress.  We  have,  for  instance,  agreed  upon  new  capital  requirements  for  banks. 
These will make banks more resilient against shocks, thereby enhancing financial stability. 
But we have not reached the end of the reform process. Two topics are currently of interest. 
The first is the issue of shadow banking. Shadow banking refers to financial institutions that 
operate outside the perimeter of traditional banking regulation. We might also use the term 
“non-bank  banks”.  Money  market  funds  or  hedge  funds  are  typical  examples.  As  these 
entities might be a source of systemic risk we have to deal with them in terms of regulation. 
This  issue  has  already  been  discussed  at  the  G20  summit  in  St.  Petersburg  in  August. 
Progress has been made and shadow banking will remain high on the reform agenda. 
The same is true of the “too big to fail” problem. This refers to banks which are so big that 
their  failure  could  bring  down  the  entire  financial  system.  Just  think  about  what  happened 
when  Lehman  Brothers  failed  in  September  2008.  What  we  need  are  restructuring 
mechanisms  that  will  allow  such  banks  to  fail  without  disrupting  the  whole  system.  At  the 
conceptual level, we have already made good progress. Now, we have to implement the new 
measures. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, many issues will be discussed at this year’s annual meeting of the 
IMF and the World Bank. I have highlighted a few of them but left out others. 
In the context of the IMF, there will certainly be debates on quotas and governance. At the 
same time, there will probably be discussion about issues such as public debt management 
or finance for growth. It will be interesting to see what comes out of all these discussions and 
to what extent it will shape the future of the global economy. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
