Mario Draghi: Keynote address at the Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Führungstreffen Wirtschaft 2013 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Führungstreffen Wirtschaft “Strategies for more growth” organised by Süddeutsche Zeitung, 
Berlin, 21 November 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The euro area has been through a difficult period of correcting the imbalances of the past. 
The  necessary  adjustment  has  inevitably  put  our  economies  under  strain,  and  it  has  also 
caused unemployment that is still unacceptably high, especially among the young.  
Yet I see signs today that the euro area is slowly advancing on the road to recovery. The 
latest  data  suggest  that,  little  by  little,  economic  growth  is  again  taking  hold  –  although  it 
remains weak, uneven and fragile, while the risks surrounding the economic outlook continue 
to be on the downside. 
This  gives  policy-makers  in  the  euro  area  an  opportunity  to  alter  their  focus  –  to  be  less 
absorbed in short-term crisis management, and more focused on building an economy with 
more stability, more growth and more jobs. 
Today  I  would  like  to  discuss  what  we  can  do  individually  and  collectively  to  achieve  that 
goal. 
My  key  point  is  that  the  return  of  economic  growth  is  not  a  signal  that  reform  efforts  are 
behind  us.  On  the  contrary,  to  secure  the  recovery  and  create  jobs,  determined  action  is 
more important than ever. 
All  actors  in  the  euro  area  have  a  part  to  play.  A  sustainable  recovery  first  and  foremost 
requires  price  stability,  which  we  at  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  will  continue  to 
provide.  It  requires  more  competitive  economies,  for  which  governments  must  create  the 
right  conditions.  And  it  requires  dynamic  and  inclusive  business  models,  which  social 
partners and business leaders can deliver. 
We  all  benefit  from  a  prosperous  and  dynamic  euro  area  economy,  so  we  all  have  a 
responsibility to make it a success – national governments, social partners, businesses and 
European actors.  
Monetary policy 
Let me first describe what the ECB is doing to maintain price stability in the euro area. I will 
start with a quick review of the key principles underlying our monetary policy strategy. 
As  you  know,  the  Treaty  establishes  price  stability  as  the  ECB’s  primary  mandate.  This 
mandate has guided our monetary policy since monetary union began. And it will continue 
guiding our monetary policy in the future. 
To  put  our  mandate  into  practice,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  established  a 
transparent, ambitious and verifiable objective – namely, to keep average inflation in the euro 
area below but close to 2% over the medium term. 
The  rationale  behind  this  objective  was  explained  at  the  time  we  clarified  our  strategy  in 
2003, notably in remarks by our then chief economist Otmar Issing. It ensures that inflation 
remains low enough to avoid distorting the decisions of firms and households in the economy 
– while preserving a sufficient buffer away from zero.  
We need this buffer away from zero to provide a safety margin against deflationary risks at 
the euro area level. It also prevents countries experiencing inflation rates well below the euro 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
area  average  as  part  of  their  adjustment  processes  from  being  forced  to  operate  in 
deflationary territory for protracted period. 
These considerations are the backdrop against which we decided to cut our main policy rates 
two weeks ago. 
The rationale for action 
The context of this decision was a gradual but sustained downward drift in inflation that we 
had  observed  over  several  months.  Inflation  projections  by  ECB  staff,  as  well  as  by  other 
major forecasting institutions, had been revised  down repeatedly over the last year – from 
already low levels. 
And the process of gradual disinflation did not just affect individual, volatile components of 
inflation  such as  energy.  Instead,  it  reflected  a broad-based reduction  in  all  major  inflation 
components since last summer. 
The disinflationary trend was further confirmed by the latest yearly inflation figures published 
by Eurostat. These were revised down by almost half a percentage point to 0.7% in October.  
Overall, we have been witnessing a disinflation “in slow motion” for several months now. And 
combined with still weak economic and monetary dynamics, the latest data suggest that we 
may experience a prolonged period of low inflation going forward. 
So why did we act? 
It was not because we see deflation risks materialising in the euro area. With the recovery 
taking hold, we still expect inflation to return very gradually to levels below but close to 2%. 
This  view  is  also  supported  by  inflation  expectations,  which  over  a  longer-term  horizon 
remain firmly anchored at levels close to 2%. 
Rather,  we  acted  to  restore  an  appropriate  safety  margin  from  zero  as  prescribed  by  our 
price stability objective. 
By rebuilding the safety margin, our accommodative stance also has an important side effect: 
it facilitates the continuing process of internal rebalancing in the euro area.  
Countries with past competitiveness deficits should accept low inflation rates relative to the 
euro  area  average.  And  monetary  policy  cannot  and  should  not  discourage  the  ambitious 
reform efforts that are necessary to achieve such rebalancing.  
But if average inflation is allowed to drift too low at the euro area level, it is much harder for 
those countries to undershoot the average. And in the process, adjustment runs into major 
headwinds as demand suffers and real debt burdens rise.  
Addressing the concerns 
I am of course aware that our rate cut has raised some concerns. 
One concern is the effect of this decision on different countries in the euro area. 
However, it is important to understand that setting monetary policy for a union of 17 member 
states is not the same as for a single country. 
What  is  the  same  is  the  objective  –  price  stability.  But  what  is  different  is  the  institutional 
setting,  the  decision-making  procedures  and  the  instruments  for  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy. And crucially, in monetary union price stability is defined for the euro area 
as a whole.  
This  is  the  mandate  that  was  given  to  us  by  the  euro  area  member  states  and,  since  the 
launch of the euro, we have delivered it continuously and in full. Euro area price stability is 
confirmed and anchored into the future.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Another  concern  is  the  implication  of  low  interest  rates  for  savers.  This  concern  is 
understandable. But the effect of monetary policy on the returns on savings cannot be seen 
in isolation. 
First, we need to take account of the state of the economy. 
Interest rates are low because the economy is weak. Accommodative monetary policy is a 
response to this, designed to restore sustainable growth in an environment of price stability. 
If we were to raise rates in this situation, it would only depress the economy further.  
And this would in turn affect savings. 
Why?  Because  people  would  lose  their  jobs  or  have  their  wages  cut  in  a  prolonged  and 
entrenched recession, thus reducing the amount they can save. Or because they would see 
returns on assets fall, thus reducing their investment income. When the economy contracts, 
incomes fall, and savings necessarily fall in tandem.  
Moreover,  the  interest  rate  that  matters  most  to  long-term  savers  is  not  the  main  ECB 
refinancing rate, but the rate on safe long-term investments – in Germany, that is long-term 
Bunds. 
The ECB’s decisions influence these long-term rates but there are also other factors at play. 
For example, on the day of our rate cut of 25 basis points, interest rates on 10-year Bunds 
fell by less than 7 basis points. Since then those rates have risen by about 2 basis points. 
The current low level of interest rates on long-term Bunds is largely explained by investors 
that have sought safe assets in the context of sovereign debt tensions in the euro area.  
A third concern about low interest rates is that they undermine incentives for reform in the 
euro area. 
It is true that monetary policy decisions can have side effects – I mentioned a positive side 
effect  earlier.  Yet  we  act  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  in  line  with  our  mandate,  not  for 
individual countries. 
If  there  is  concern  about  reform  incentives,  we  need  to  ask  whether  the  framework  of 
economic  governance  is  being  sufficiently  enforced,  and  if  not,  what  could  be  done  to 
strengthen it. After all, ensuring sound fiscal and economic policies is ultimately the task of 
political authorities, not monetary authorities. 
Economic policy 
In the same vein, we know that monetary policy alone cannot create a sustainable recovery. 
Restarting growth ultimately depends on governments, business leaders and social partners 
working  together.  Governments  need  to  create  the  conditions  that  allow  entrepreneurs  to 
generate growth. 
There is no short cut to growth through debt. Growth ultimately has to come from increasing 
the  productive  capacity  of  the  economy  –  that  is,  through  raising  competitiveness  and 
productivity. 
This country presents a good example of how to build solid foundations for growth.  
Germany  has  competitive  and  innovative  firms  that  are  embedded  in  global  value  chains, 
notably  the  Mittelstand.  The  country  has  enacted  labour  market  reforms  that  have  helped 
maintain  price  competitiveness,  and  that  limit  the  impact  of  economic  downturns  on  the 
young.  And  it  has  done  this  while  working  in  cooperation  with  social  partners,  who 
understand that business models have to adapt to a globalised economy.  
In short, Germany has oriented itself in a direction that in my view would benefit all euro area 
countries:  being  forward-looking,  open  to  the  world  and  focused  on  competitiveness  and 
productivity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Abraham  Lincoln  famously  said  that  “you  cannot  make  the  weak  stronger  by  making  the 
strong weaker”. Similarly, the answer to the problems of the euro area is not to weaken its 
stronger economies. Rather, it is to strengthen its weaker economies. 
And in fact, this is what we are seeing in the euro area today.  
Most countries that lost competitiveness are regaining it. They are converging towards the 
most competitive countries, not vice versa. They have learned the fundamental lesson – for 
which Germany is the model – that in a monetary union, wages have to reflect productivity to 
maintain price competitiveness.  
For example, the countries under full EU-IMF programmes have seen their unit labour costs 
fall by more than 15 percentage points since 2009, relative to the euro area average. Current 
accounts are in balance or surplus in all the countries under strain, meaning that they are no 
longer  accumulating  external  debt  and  “living  beyond  their  means”  –  and  larger  countries 
would be well advised to follow. 
And  even  though  declines  in  import  demand  play  an  important  role,  the  rebalancing  in 
countries under strain is also coming from growth in exports and increasing market shares. In 
Spain, for example, export volumes are up by more than 20% since 2009.  
For this reason, I do not agree with those who say that Europe is in a “lost decade”. Euro 
area countries are using the second decade of the euro to undo the mistakes of the first – 
and in doing so, laying the foundations for sustainable growth in the decades to come. 
The challenge ahead 
The task of restoring sustainable growth is still far from complete. Regaining competitiveness 
is only one part of the challenge. Another essential component is to reverse the damage to 
the economy caused by the crisis. It has reduced the euro area’s output level and perhaps 
also its growth rate.  
To  turn  that  around  requires  higher  investment  in  human  and  physical  capital  –  and  in  all 
euro area countries. In Germany, for example, investment is still around 1 percentage point 
of GDP lower than it was in 2007, and in that year it already had the lowest investment ratio 
in the euro area. 
Both the public and private sectors have a role to play here. Generating higher investment is 
ultimately the job of the private sector. But public authorities have to create the conditions 
that facilitate and encourage this process.  
I  see  three  conditions  as  crucial:  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment;  growth-enhancing 
structural reforms; and a healthy banking sector.  
First,  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  provides  the  certainty  that  is  so  important  for 
investment.  
That entails medium-term price stability, which the ECB is providing. And it entails medium-
term  economic  stability,  which  governments  have  to  ensure  through  sustainable  fiscal  and 
economic policies and adhering to the euro area rules. 
Second,  structural  reforms  are  vital  to  raise  growth  potential  and  make  new  investment 
attractive  –  especially  in  the  current  environment  where  firms  may  have  become  less 
optimistic as a result of the crisis.  
Of  particular  importance  are  reforms  that  increase  competition,  which  in  turn  drives 
innovation,  efficiency  and  productivity  growth.  Such  reforms  include  opening  up  protected 
sectors and removing barriers for new firms to enter the market. 
Third,  we  need  a  healthy  banking  sector  to  ensure  that  capital  can  be  allocated  where 
productive investment is needed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bank lending in the euro area is currently very  weak, having fallen for 16 straight months. 
This in part reflects the state of the economy; in part it reflects balance sheet constraints in 
the banking sector.  
But  as  the  economy  picks  up  next  year,  we  need  to  ensure  that  those  balance  sheet 
constraints  do  not  hinder  the  recovery.  This  is  why  the  rigorous  and  comprehensive 
assessment of banks’ balance sheets currently being undertaken by the ECB is so important. 
Prompt corrective actions by banks themselves are welcome. 
Taken  together,  these  three  conditions  will  provide  firms  with  the  certainty,  optimism  and 
financing they need to restart investing – and hence to get the euro area back to a higher 
growth trajectory. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
I  have  today  described  the  actions  being  taken  by  all  actors  in  the  euro  area  to  ensure 
stability  and  raise  growth.  A  great  deal  of  progress  has  been  made,  but  a  great  deal  still 
remains to be done. For the sake of those who remain unemployed, we have to persevere. 
Now is not the time to relax reform efforts. Nor is it the time to become fractious. 
We all benefit from an environment of inflation at below but close to 2% in the euro area. We 
all benefit from measures to raise productivity and improve competitiveness. It is never the 
case that sound economic policies are good for some in the euro area but not for others. 
I trust that this audience understands our shared responsibility for the euro area. After all, we 
are the euro area – its citizens, its firms and its institutions. It is only by acting together that 
we  can  put  the  crisis  behind  us,  and  move  forward  towards  a  brighter,  more  prosperous 
future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
