Mark Carney: Global economic outlook, financial reform and UK 
monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Davos  CBI  British  Business  Leaders  Lunch,  Davos, 
24 January 2014. 
 When  a  banker  invites  a  regulator  to  a  meeting  on  a  mountainside,  the  regulator  gets 
suspicious.  At  5000  feet,  “cliff  effect”  takes  on  a  whole  new  meaning.  That’s  one  of  the 
reasons why I am pleased to have so many distinguished witnesses here today. 
While Douglas Flint may have had terminal velocity in mind for me, I am more interested in 
discussing the prospects of the global and British economies achieving escape velocity. 
In  physics,  escape  velocity  refers  to  the  speed  necessary  to  escape  from  a  planet’s 
gravitational  pull.  The  economic  analogue  is  the  momentum  necessary  for  an  economy  to 
escape from the many headwinds following a financial crisis. A few quarters of above-trend 
growth driven by household spending represent a good start, but they aren’t sufficient. It will 
take  sustained  growth,  more  balanced  demand  and  a  recovery  in  the  supply  side  for 
advanced economies to break free into a more normal universe. Today, I would like to speak 
to the contribution of central banks to make this happen. 
Global economic outlook 
1. 
Over the past year, the global economy has picked up and tail risks have decreased. After 
rising to an expected 3.5 percent this year, global growth could finally re-attain its pre-crisis 
trend of 4 percent in 2015. 
Three quarters of this acceleration is expected to be driven by advanced economies, with the 
US and the UK leading the pack. And this isn’t the best case scenario. Even in the euro area, 
risks have become two-sided, albeit around a modest growth rate of about 1%. 
None of this is to suggest that current levels of economic activity are acceptable or that the 
world  economy  is  no  longer  under  strain.  After  the  Great  Moderation  and  the  Great 
Recession,  there  are  several  reasons  why  it  will  be  years  before  any  superlatives  are 
attached to this recovery. 
First, for all the talk of austerity and deleveraging, the aggregate debt burdens of advanced 
economies have actually increased; with their total non-financial sector debt rising by 25% 
relative to GDP since 2007. Balance sheet repair in the public and private sectors will exert a 
persistent drag on major economies for some time. 
Second, the need to rebalance demand from deficit to surplus countries endures. Given the 
adjustment pressures on the former, without progress on rebalancing, robust and sustainable 
global growth will remain an aspiration. 
Third, confidence, while improved, remains subdued. Recognising that the end isn’t nigh is 
far from marking the normalisation of business and consumer sentiment. Given past shocks 
and  modest  prospects,  business  investment  in  particular  remains  hesitant  across  the 
advanced  world.  On  balance,  corporations  remain  more  focused  on  reducing  operating 
expenditures than increasing capital expenditures. 
This  focus  is  helping  to  contain  inflationary  pressures  in  the  near  term.  Indeed,  across 
advanced economies, wage growth remains weak and labour markets soft. 
Reflecting  the  combination  of  improving,  but  still  subdued,  demand  and  considerable,  if 
uncertain,  slack,  monetary  policy  remains  exceptionally  stimulative.  Recall  that  the  recent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
decision of the Federal Reserve to begin tapering asset purchases meant only slowing the 
rate of additional stimulus. And that the 7% unemployment rate in the UK is merely the point 
at which the MPC begins to even think about adjusting policy. 
The  key  question  for  central  banks  is  the  expected  evolution  of  the  supply  side  of  their 
economies.  This  is  unusually  uncertain  at  present.  We  know  that  our  economies  are 
operating well below their, admittedly unsustainable, pre-crisis trends, but we don’t know how 
much capacity was destroyed following the crisis. 
We know that depressed business investment is limiting productivity growth in the short term, 
but we don’t know to what extent and whether such shortfalls can be caught up. 
From a longer perspective, we know that total factor productivity growth has slowed over the 
past decade, but given the incredible flourishing of innovation, we don’t know whether this is 
due to lags, measurement errors or more fundamental factors. Statistical trend measures of 
labour  productivity  growth  suggest  it  has  slowed  in  the  United  States, the  euro  area  (both 
core and periphery), the UK and even Korea. 
By this point, buffeted by gloom and uncertainty, you may be considering joining the bankers 
in pushing me off the mountainside, so let me begin to outline how  we can address these 
challenges. 
We can start by recalling that the global economy has been in similar circumstances before. 
Everyone knows that the 1930s marked the depressing aftermath of a great financial crisis. 
Less  well-appreciated  was  that  it  also  marked  a  period  of  intense  innovation  that  laid  the 
groundwork for post-war growth, particularly in the United States. Alexander Field in his book 
“A Great Leap Forward” contends that the 1930s were the most technologically progressive 
decade  of  the  20th  century.  He  notes  the  development  of  chemical-based  materials  like 
Teflon, Nylon and synthetic rubber; the development of the Television, and the expansion of 
the public road network that paved the way for advances in distribution and transportation. 
In the 1930s, the collapse of demand meant mass unemployment and slow adoption of new 
technologies.  It  took  a  recovery  in  aggregate  demand  after  the  Great  Depression,  partly 
spurred by mobilisation for the Second World War, for many innovations to be applied and 
new markets to develop. 
Demand  was  persistently  weak  in  the  1930s  because  policy  mistakes  were  legion.  A 
protectionist  backlash  closed  global  markets  and  ended  global  finance.  Policies  favouring 
liquidation led to widespread bank failures. Monetary policy was tightened dramatically. 
This time, thus far, is different. Protectionism is being resisted, banks recapitalised, and the 
global financial system rebuilt. In parallel, monetary policy is highly accommodative. 
As  the  global  economy  gains  momentum,  staying  the  course  on  these  policies  will  be 
decisive  to  achieving  escape  velocity.  The  United  Kingdom  is  at  the  centre  of  these 
decisions. Let me expand. 
Financial reform 
2. 
In recent years, protectionism has been the dog that didn’t bark. Although gently mocked, the 
G20 pledge to resist protectionism has been largely respected. In contrast, some major trade 
deals  have  been  signed  (such  as  between  Canada  and  Europe),  and  other  even  more 
significant ones are in train. The UK can help spur on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership discussions on wide ranging free trade between the EU and the US. 
In tandem with keeping the global trading system working is the re-founding of an integrated, 
open global financial system. 
As the leading global financial centre, the UK will be central to completing the job of financial 
reform. The UK financial system is both a global good – it supports an open global system – 
and a national asset. To realise its potential, we need our system to be safe, fair and to act 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
with  integrity.  Without  those  foundations,  the  innovation  for  which  finance  in  the  UK  is 
renowned will be meaningless. 
A  safe  system  means  resilient  banks  and  markets  that  together  can  absorb  rather  than 
amplify shocks. 
Much has been achieved in recent years to repair the core of the banking system. Minimum 
capital  requirements  for  the  world’s  largest  banks  have  been  increased  seven-fold.  These 
banks are on course to meet these new requirements five years before the deadline, having 
raised  more  than  half  a  trillion  dollars  of  new  equity.  In  the  UK  alone  they  have  raised 
£140bn. To ensure that this is sufficient, the Bank of England will begin annual concurrent 
stress tests of major institutions this year. The Bank is also working with international peers 
to tackle worryingly large differences in bank risk models through tighter supervision, more 
standardised approaches and better disclosure. 
To make markets safer, funding and derivatives markets are being overhauled. Recognising 
that this will transform the use and importance of collateral, the Bank is reforming our market 
operations. We are also working to develop market-based sources of finance so that the real 
economy  can  be  less  reliant  on  banks.  To  make  the  system  fairer,  the  days  when  banks 
privatised gains but socialised losses must end. 
The  Bank  is  at  the  forefront  of  international  efforts  to  agree  common  standards  to  create 
classes  of  debt  holders  that  can  be  bailed  in  to  recapitalise  failing  institutions.  By 
complementing  this  so-called  gone  concern  loss  absorbing  capacity  with  cross  border 
agreements, plans on resolution, and new derivative contracts with automatic stays, we can 
create  the  situation  where  the  incentives  of  shareholders,  management,  bondholders,  and 
citizens are aligned. Firms that take excessive  risks will bear the full consequences of the 
market; consumers, businesses and taxpayers who rely on critical banking services will not. 
It is not the Bank of England’s role to champion the City. By making it safer and fairer we can 
put in place the conditions for it to thrive. But whether or not it thrives will rest on the efforts of 
individuals and organisations to re-establish the system’s reputation for integrity. 
While regulators will fix the mechanics of benchmarks in markets ranging from LIBOR to FX, 
only  private  individuals  and  institutions  can  reform  the  behaviour  that  has  made  such 
changes necessary. Changes to the structure of compensation will better align the incentives 
of  bank  staff  and their  shareholders,  but  not  every  risk can  be  anticipated.  Even  if  such  a 
package could be devised it would not internalise the impact of individual actions on systemic 
risks, including on trust in the banking system. 
For the system to operate with integrity, penalties for misconduct cannot be seen as a cost of 
doing  business.  Rather,  banks  must  recognise  that  only  exemplary  behaviour  can  confer 
social licence to global financial capitalism. 
More fundamentally, integrity cannot be legislated, and it certainly cannot be bought. Only a 
perspective  which  takes  into  account  the  wider  implications  of  actions  can  guide  proper 
behaviour.  And  while  regulators  can  promote  competition,  end  the  subsidy  enjoyed  by 
institutions  that  are  too  big  to  fail,  and  determine  the  appropriate  split  of  remuneration 
between  fixed  and  variable  elements  to  limit  risks  to  financial  stability,  only  society,  not 
regulators,  can  determine  whether  the  absolute  and  relative  levels  of  compensation  are 
acceptable. 
UK monetary policy 
3. 
Measures to make the system safer, fairer and to operate with more integrity are re-founding 
a  more  resilient,  open  global  financial  system.  This  sets  the  stage  for  monetary  policy  to 
support a supply side recovery. 
Ben Bernanke once said to Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, “You [were] right, we [the 
Fed] did it [caused the great depression]. But thanks to you, we won’t do it again.” Thanks in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
part to Chairman Bernanke’s leadership, central banks have pursued the opposite strategy to 
the  1930s  to  great  effect.  While  the  human  cost  since  2008  has  been  considerable,  it  is 
dwarfed by the experience of the Great Depression. Central banks haven’t done it again, but 
that  doesn’t  mean  they  should  be  satisfied.  There  remains  still  considerable,  if  uncertain, 
slack in their economies. 
I say uncertain because obvious measures of slack, such as unemployment, are much lower 
than we would have expected given the scale of the fall in demand. Supply side performance 
in advanced economies has been surprisingly poor. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  growth  in  potential  supply  was  largely  predictable  (technically  a 
stationary trend). As a consequence, central bankers responded to movements in demand 
around that trend. The issue now is the extent to which the fall in demand has itself eroded 
potential supply and whether that could be reversed as economies recover. In the US, the 
question  is  whether  labour force  participation  rates  will  pick  up. In  the UK,  the question  is 
whether labour productivity will reverse any of its poor performance. 
These  questions  mean  it  makes  sense  for  policy  to  test  the  extent  to  which  supply 
performance is “endogenous” to demand.1  
This is one of the main advantages of the forward guidance employed by both the Bank of 
England and the Federal Reserve. 
Last  August  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  made  an  easy  call:  we  wouldn’t  even 
begin to think about raising interest rates until the unemployment rate fell to 7%. Given the 
weakness of the UK recovery and the flexibility of the labour market, we could expect that 
considerable slack would ensure that the MPC was not taking undue risks with inflation as 
policy encouraged faster output and employment growth. 
To be clear, the Bank continues to be mindful of the risks posed by sustained exceptionally 
loose monetary policy. In some advanced economies like the UK, these risks relate mainly to 
housing markets. In emerging market economies, they centre on the volatility of capital flows. 
Across  the  financial  sector,  a  low  for  long  environment  risks  complacency,  excessive  risk 
taking and undisciplined underwriting. In all cases, authorities can and should look to macro-
prudential policy tools to manage these risks so that monetary policy can remain focussed on 
its objective of establishing the conditions for a sustained recovery  while maintaining price 
stability. Given the powers and remit of the Financial Policy Committee, the Bank of England 
is exceptionally well-positioned to coordinate macroprudential and monetary policies. 
Since  August,  inflation  has  fallen  back  to  target  (for  the  first  time  in  5  years)  and 
unemployment  has  fallen  rapidly  towards  7%,  so  what  have  we  learned  on  the  journey 
towards our threshold? 
With the wisdom of hindsight, there have been three main drivers of the recovery thus far: a 
marked reduction in extreme uncertainty, the repair of the core of the financial system and 
significant deleveraging by households. These have driven a recovery in consumer spending 
and housing investment, which together have accounted for almost all the GDP growth in the 
year to Q3. As my colleague Ian McCafferty outlined earlier this week, there are also early 
signs of a recovery in business investment. 
The less good news is that the recovery has not – as measured at least – been accompanied 
by meaningful productivity growth. 
Given the continued openness of the economy and the credibility of macro policy, it is hard to 
think  of  any  reason  why  there  should  have  been  a  persistent  deterioration  the  UK’s 
                                                
1  My MPC colleague Ben Broadbent discussed these issues extensively in September 2013 in a speech at the 
London Business School, “Conditional guidance as a response to supply uncertainty”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
productivity performance. In fact there are several reasons to expect productivity growth to 
pick up as the recovery proceeds. 
For  example,  until  recently,  the  fragility  of  the  banking  system  limited  the  reallocation  of 
capital  and  labour  from  less  to  more  productive  activities.  Indeed,  whereas  half  of  all 
productivity growth at the economy-wide level in the years prior to 2008 occurred through this 
channel, reallocation appears to have made no contribution to productivity growth in recent 
years. With the progress made in fixing the banking system, this negative should become a 
positive. 
Second, it is possible that with the sharp fall in real wages during the recession employees 
effectively  priced  themselves  into  low-productivity  work  at  a  time  of  weak  demand.  To  the 
extent that this allows skills to be retained and reduces costs of replacing particularly skilled 
employees as the recovery takes hold, the recovery could generate greater productivity as it 
proceeds. 
Third,  traditional  pro-cyclicalities  in  productivity  growth  such  as  learning-by-doing  and 
economies of scale should begin to operate. 
Finally, accelerating business investment, evident in surveys and increasingly necessitated 
by the recovery itself, should increase output per hour. 
Nevertheless,  it  appears  that  the  recovery  will  need  to  be  sustained  for  a  period  before 
productivity gains can resume in earnest. The latest data show that more than a quarter of a 
million jobs were created in a three-month period – the biggest increase since records began 
in  1971.  As  a  result,  unemployment  seems  to  be  falling  at  a  pace  that  will  reach  our  7% 
threshold materially earlier than we had expected. 
Crucially,  unemployment  remains  above  the  level  that  is  likely  to  be  consistent  with 
maintaining inflation at the target in the medium term. It is not just that nearly three quarters 
of a million more people are out of work than before the crisis; another three quarters of a 
million more people are involuntarily working part time. 
The effect of this slack in the labour market is evident in wage inflation, which is at around 
1% so that, even with weak productivity, unit labour cost growth remains below 2%. 
The fact that underemployment is exerting downward pressure on costs also reflects better 
than expected performance on the supply side of the labour market. In the jargon, the extent 
to which high unemployment has caused hysteresis seems to have been less than in past 
recessions. 
It  now  seems  likely  that  the  rate  of  unemployment  consistent  with  stable  inflation  in  the 
medium  term  is  somewhat  lower  than  the  MPC  assessed  back  in  August.2  In  part  that  is 
because rates of transition into jobs, even for those who have been unemployed for more 
than  a  year,  have  been  sustained  at  high  rates,  minimising  the  extent  of  skill  atrophy.  In 
addition, other measures of slack in the labour market, such as involuntary part-time working 
remain high. 
                                                
2 
“Monetary  policy,  trade-offs  and  forward  guidance”  Bank  of  England  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  August 
2013,  p  34.  “Since  the  medium-term  equilibrium  unemployment  rate  depends  on  the  composition  of 
unemployment,  it  will  change  over  time…That  medium-term  equilibrium  unemployment  rate  is  a  different 
concept from the long-run equilibrium unemployment rate: the latter is the rate to which unemployment will 
trend towards in the long run once all of the short and medium-term effects have dissipated. That long-run 
equilibrium rate will reflect the institutional features of the labour market, such as the degree of labour market 
flexibility, and the extent to which potential employees are aligned with vacancies in terms of skills, location 
and  occupation.  Over  time,  the  medium-term  equilibrium  unemployment  rate  should  converge  towards  the 
long-run  rate.  Current  estimates  of  the  long-run  equilibrium  rate  are  significantly  below  estimates  of  the 
medium-term equilibrium rate.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
This suggests that, even though unemployment is falling faster than expected, the recovery 
has  some  way  to  run  before  it  would  be  appropriate  to  consider  moving  away  from  the 
emergency setting of monetary policy. It is widely recognised that our 7% threshold is not a 
trigger for raising Bank Rate. Last August, the MPC said that when the 7% unemployment 
threshold was reached, there should be no assumption of an immediate, automatic change 
to  its  policy  stance.  It  would  assess  the  prevailing  economic  conditions,  including  wider 
measures  of  slack  and  inflationary  pressures,  before  deciding  the  appropriate  stance  for 
monetary policy. 
That the attainment of the 7% threshold will not be associated with any immediate need to 
raise Bank Rate is reinforced by recent developments suggesting that UK inflation pressures 
are more contained. In particular, inflation has fallen from 5% in 2011 back to the target for 
the first time since 2009. Global inflation is subdued, with both euro area and US consumer 
price inflation now less than 1%; oil prices have fallen by 4% relative to a year ago; other 
commodity prices have fallen by more than 10%, and sterling has appreciated by almost 9% 
since last summer. All of these developments will hold back imported inflation pressures that 
have to a great extent explained the above-target inflation over the past five years. 
The Bank’s assessment of how to evolve guidance to changing circumstances will begin in 
our  February  Inflation  Report.  The  MPC  will  consider  a  range  of  options  to  update  our 
guidance, recognising both what we have learned about the behaviour of aggregate supply in 
the economy as well as the more benign inflation outlook. 
The  MPC  has  noted  that  when  the  time  eventually  comes  to  begin  to  move  away  from 
emergency settings of policy, any such move would be gradual. The degree of stimulus will 
remain exceptional for some time. That should help reassure British business that the path of 
interest rates will be consistent with a sustained recovery – that is, with escape velocity. 
This recognises that many of the headwinds holding back the economy will remain for some 
time yet. Public and private balance sheets continue to be repaired. World demand remains 
weak and the appreciation of sterling will hold back the expansion of net exports. And there 
remain strains in the financial system despite good progress on post-crisis repair. 
These persistent headwinds mean that, even in the medium term, the level of interest rates 
necessary  to  sustain  low  unemployment  and  price  stability  will  be  somewhat  lower  than 
before the crisis. In the jargon, the equilibrium real interest rate, which has been negative for 
much of the period since the crisis, will eventually turn positive again, but it is likely to remain 
well below historical norms. 
Escape velocity won’t come cheap. 
The  Bank  of  England  is  helping  to  build  the  foundations  for  Britain’s  future  success:  the 
conditions for recovery while maintaining price stability; a financial system that is safe and 
does  not  impose  losses  on  the  taxpayer.  On  those  foundations,  Britain’s  businesses  can 
build again, through investment and innovation, the country’s future prosperity. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
