Kerstin af Jochnick: Why does the Riksbank care about household 
indebtedness? 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 
Centre for Business and Policy Studies, Stockholm, 31 January 2014. 
 Household indebtedness and the Swedish housing market have been discussed at length in 
many contexts over the last year. Some say that the high level of indebtedness is a threat to 
economic  stability,  while  others  say  that  such  concerns  are  unwarranted.  One  can  look  at 
household indebtedness and assess the risk from different perspectives, and perhaps this is 
why  there  are  such  differing  views  as  to  whether  or  not  it  is  a  risk.  From  a  consumer 
protection point of view, it is relevant to assess how high indebtedness can affect individuals. 
The risk also needs to be assessed from a macro perspective, which is relevant for us at the 
Riksbank, given our monetary policy perspective. However, today I intend to talk about why 
we  at  the  Riksbank  are  concerned  over  household  indebtedness  from  a  systemic-risk 
perspective,  and  how  household  indebtedness  can  affect  financial  stability.1  It  is  namely 
necessary  to  make  sure  that  investors,  credit  agencies  and  others  have  confidence  in  the 
Swedish housing and mortgage markets for our financial system to function smoothly. 
It is easy to become short-sighted when assessing risk in the economy. I would therefore like 
to  take  a  look  in  the  rear  mirror,  at  the  period  when  we  had  a  regulated  credit  market. 
Examining the background and reasons why households borrow more today than before is 
important in my view, as it enables us to understand how household indebtedness is linked 
to financial stability. 
One  can  say  that  the  period  with  a  regulated  market  was  one  extreme,  which  was  then 
replaced  by  another  extreme,  namely  a  free  market  with  in  principle  unlimited  access  to 
global capital. 
The  credit market  was  strictly  regulated  until  1985  and  there  was  relatively  little  degree of 
freedom  for  the  institutions  offering  mortgages.  Deregulation  was  in  many  respects 
necessary and desirable. However, the development we have seen since 1985 has created 
vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  against  which  we  must  be  vigilant.  The  funding  of 
housing purchases has in principle moved entirely into the banking system, while the banks 
are to an increasing degree funding these mortgages short-term on the financial markets.2 
Swedish  banks’  market 
to  around  SEK  3,500  billion,  of  which 
SEK 2,100 billion,  or  60  per  cent,  is  in  foreign  currencies.  This  means  that  the  banking 
system is now more sensitive to shocks than during the period with regulation. A necessary 
condition  for  the  banks  to  be  able  to  finance  Swedish  housing  is  that  market  participants, 
investors  and  credit  rating  agencies  have  fundamental  confidence  in  Sweden,  in  Swedish 
banks and in the Swedish housing market. If this confidence were to fail because investors 
considered the risks linked to household indebtedness had increased, the banks could find it 
difficult  to  obtain  funding,  or  their  funding  would  cost  more.  I  would  say  that  market 
confidence is essential for the stability of the financial system.  
funding  amounts 
                                                
1  The  Riksbank  usually  discusses  household  indebtedness  from  a  financial  stability  perspective  in  its  twice-
yearly Financial Stability Report. See, for instance, Financial Stability Report 2013:2. Sveriges Riksbank. 
2  Previously, mortgages were often financed through housing bonds, which had maturities of around 30 years. 
Today,  covered  bonds  are  used  instead,  where  newly  issued  covered  bonds  had  an  average  maturity  of 
around 4 years in the autumn of 2013. At that time, the average maturity of the outstanding covered bonds 
was approximately 3 years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We saw in the most recent financial crisis that high indebtedness in the household sector can 
create problems, with some countries suffering a severe fall in house prices. When the value 
of houses declines, households begin to save more. When savings increase, consumption 
decreases  and  thus  demand  in  the  economy  falls.  Ultimately,  this  can  lead  to  lower 
production  and  higher  unemployment. We  do  not  want  to  see  this  kind  of  development  in 
Sweden. 
It is also important to remember that there is interplay between developments in the financial 
markets and developments in the real economy. If we were to experience a fall in housing 
prices during a recession and thus similar problems to those experienced by other countries, 
it is likely that we would suffer both a decline in demand in the economy and that the banks 
would experience greater difficulty and greater cost in obtaining market funding. This in turn 
risks aggravating the recession further, which would result in a further rise in unemployment. 
It is therefore important to avoid incorporating potential vulnerabilities into the economy, such 
as large debts. 
The growth of the mortgage market has laid the foundation of the current financial 
system in Sweden 
The banks’ dependence on market funding thus means that household indebtedness could 
potentially  influence  financial  stability.  The  Swedish  banks  are  also  a  little  unusual  in  this 
context, as more than half of their total funding is made up of market funding, and a large 
part of this is in foreign currencies. Deposits from savers thus account for a relatively small 
percentage,  compared  with  many  other  countries.  Why  is  this?  How  have  we  in  Sweden 
acquired a financial system that is so dependent on market funding and thereby vulnerable to 
a fall in confidence? If we are to understand this, we need to look back a couple of decades. 
A strongly regulated and subsidised mortgage market 
Some of you may remember how the Swedish financial system was governed by credit and 
foreign  currency  regulations  for  a  long  period  of  time,  up  until  the  mid-1980s.  These 
regulations  determined,  for  instance,  who  was  allowed  to  borrow  and  on  what  terms.  For 
instance, borrowing and lending foreign currency was not allowed.  
These regulations allowed the state to control credit in society. The regulations were used to 
boost  construction  in  the  1950s  and  60s,  for  instance.  Then,  as  now,  there  was  a  large 
migration  to  the  cities,  and  a  severe  shortage  of  housing.  One  means  of  increasing 
construction  was  to  push  down  the  cost  of  building  housing.  Households  and  construction 
companies  had  the  possibility  to  receive  both  interest  subsidies  and  interest  guarantees  if 
they built housing in accordance with specific requirements regarding design and size. This 
led to a large demand for loans. 
The regulations not only governed the terms for households’ loans, but also the terms for the 
mortgage institutions’ funding of the loans. Mortgage institutions were usually independent of 
the banks and funded themselves by issuing mortgage bonds. The maturity for these bonds 
was normally 30 years, but it could sometimes extend to 40 years, that is, much longer than 
today. Demand for these bonds was governed by the state through so-called liquidity ratios, 
which regulated how much the banks were forced to invest in mortgage bonds in relation to 
their  deposits.  Insurance  companies  were  also  obliged  to  invest  in  mortgage  bonds.  One 
could say that the state created a form of artificial demand for mortgage bonds. The bond 
yield was set by the Riksbank. It was thus probably lower than it would have been on a free 
market. 
Steps towards market funding 
Right from the start, mortgages were thus funded by bonds since the mortgage institutions 
were not allowed to receive deposits from the general public. The banks, on the other hand, 
were  funded  by  deposits  and  short-term  bonds,  but  were  not  allowed  to  issue  long-term 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
mortgages. However, the mortgages were indirectly funded by the general public’s savings in 
that the banks were forced to invest in housing bonds. 
In the 1960s, the general pension fund (AP fund) was established, which meant that the state 
gained further  control  over  savings  in  the  economy  and  over  the  conditions for the  banks’ 
funding. When pension allocations began to be deposited with the AP fund, it quickly grew to 
become the largest investor in mortgage bonds, among others. 
Developments  accelerated  when  the  credit  and  currency  markets  were  deregulated  in  the 
mid-1980s at the same time as technological developments were beginning in the financial 
markets.  New  participants  entered  the  markets  and  began  to  offer  new  financial  products, 
such as saving in unit trusts. The Swedish banks were not slow in following the trend and 
began to offer their customers their own unit trusts. Saving in unit trusts involved gains for 
both the banks and households. The banks gained a new source of income and households 
were given the opportunity to actively invest their savings and spread risk. 
State  initiatives  have  since  continued  to  push  household  saving  towards  the  securities 
market. “Allemansfonder” (national public saving funds), investment savings accounts, unit-
linked insurances and individual pension savings are all examples of savings forms that are 
under certain circumstances taxed at a lower rate than savings in traditional bank accounts. 
These beneficial tax regulations have given households an incentive to increase their saving 
in securities. 
As  households  have  saved  to  a  greater  degree  in  securities,  the  conditions  for  the  banks’ 
funding have also changed. There is indeed a global trend for households to invest in unit 
trusts and other securities, but in Sweden saving in mutual funds is rather more extensive 
than in many other countries.3,  4 Although household saving still finances the banks, it now 
done  increasingly  indirectly  through  the  securities  market,  when  pension  funds  and  other 
financial agents, both Swedish and international, invest in the banks’ bonds. This has meant 
that the number of intermediaries and links between different financial agents has increased. 
In other words, the system has become more complex. 
A more integrated financial system 
Mortgage  institutions  were  for  a  long  time  independent  of  the  banks,  although  there  were 
indirect links in that the banks invested in the mortgage institutions’ bonds. When the credit 
market was deregulated and liquidity ratios were revoked, these investments were to some 
extent replaced by direct loans to mortgage institutions. Over the years, the links between 
mortgage  institutions  and  the  banks  have  continued  to  strengthen.  At the  beginning  of the 
1990s,  a  number  of  amendments  were  made  to  the  regulations,  enabling  the  banks  to 
acquire mortgage institutions. This laid the foundation for the major banking groups we have 
now. 
Initially, the mortgage institutions continued to fund their operations with housing bonds, and 
from  2007  these  were  gradually  replaced  by  what  are  known  as  covered  bonds.  Covered 
bonds  have  mortgages  as  collateral  for  their  funding  and  according  to  the  regulations 
governing  the  handling  of  these  bonds,  mortgages  with  an  excessively  high  loan-to-value 
ratio may not be used as collateral. As the covered bonds are regarded as more secure by 
the market, the banks had the incentive to change over to this form of funding. Moreover, 
                                                
3  See,  for  instance,  Chistelis,  Georgarakos  and  Haliassos  (2013),  Differences  in  portfolios  across  countries: 
economic  environment  versus  households  characteristics.  The  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,  March 
2013, 95 (1), pp. 220–236. 
4  Another explanation for the banks’ extensive market funding is that the Swedish occupational pension system 
means that Swedish households themselves do not save with the banks, which means that the banks must 
find funding in the markets. The pension funds in their turn invest substantially abroad, which means that the 
banks must partly fund themselves abroad.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
many  banks  in  Europe  had  already  introduced  similar  covered  bonds.  However,  mortgage 
institutions  were  not  allowed  to  fund  the  entire  stock  of  mortgages  with  these  bonds.  To 
cover  the  remaining  amount,  the  mortgage  institutions  instead  began  to  borrow  from  their 
parent banks, which in turn to a great extent obtained funding on the financial markets. This 
meant that the link between the mortgage institutions, the banks and the financial markets 
were further reinforced, and this also increased the complexity of the funding of housing. 
During the 2000s, the banks’ market funding in foreign currencies also increased. Part of this 
borrowing is used to finance mortgages in Swedish krona and the foreign currency therefore 
needs to be converted into krona on the FX market. I do not intend to go into this in depth; 
merely  to  observe  that  this  has  further  increased  the  complexity  of  the  Swedish  financial 
system in that the number of intermediaries has increased. At the same time, the banks have 
become dependent on the FX market functioning smoothly. 
Households’ high indebtedness could jeopardise the banks’ funding opportunities 
Swedish household debt has been rising in line with the increase in housing prices since the 
mid-1990s. The fact that households today are so heavily indebted means, for instance, that 
they  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  their  personal  finances  and  to  disruptions  in  the  housing 
market, for instance. If housing prices were to fall, this could affect the banks’ possibilities to 
fund Swedish mortgages. Let me try to explain why. 
Funding using covered bonds is closely linked to the housing market 
Around one half of the Swedish banks’ market funding comes from covered bonds. When the 
banks  issue  these  bonds,  they  earmark  collateral  that  is  only  for  the  market  participants 
investing in bonds. The investors often require a particular extra buffer of collateral, and so 
the  banks  often  earmark  more  collateral  than  is  required  by  the  regulations.  It  is  primarily 
mortgages that are earmarked, and funding with covered bonds is therefore closely linked to 
developments on the Swedish housing market. 
If housing prices were to fall, for instance, housing declines in value while mortgages remain 
constant.  Consequently,  the  loan-to-value  ratio  of  the  mortgage  increases.  As  mortgages 
with an excessive loan-to-value ratio cannot be used as collateral, falling housing prices can 
thus mean that some of the collateral must be removed or replaced. As the banks have often 
allocated  an  extra  buffer  of  collateral,  there  is  scope  to  remove  mortgages  that  no  longer 
meet the requirements, without having to replace them with other collateral.  
However, if the banks do not replace the collateral that has been removed, it may limit their 
possibilities to issue further bonds based on this collateral. The reason for this is that both 
investors and credit rating agencies often require a buffer of additional collateral. The banks 
can top up the collateral by earmarking other types of collateral, such as government bonds, 
by  selling  parts  of  their  liquidity  buffers  or  by  issuing  short-term  securities  and  then 
earmarking the liquid funds they receive. However, the opportunity to top up the collateral in 
this way presupposes that the financial markets are functioning normally and that investors 
have confidence in the Swedish banks. 
Heavily falling housing prices can disrupt market functioning 
Covered bonds are subject to special legislation that ensures that these securities are very 
safe. Although this regulation has worked well so far, one cannot rule out the possibility that 
heavily falling housing prices could disrupt the functioning of the market and thus affect the 
banks.  One  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  investors  might  reduce  their  holdings  or 
perhaps  no  longer  wish  to  own  Swedish  mortgages through  covered  bonds  when  housing 
prices are falling heavily. Although the risk of direct loan losses on the banks’ mortgages is 
initially  small,  investors  who  perceive  the  uncertainty  to  be  great  and  who  have  poor 
knowledge  of  the  credit  risk  might  wish  to  sell  their  holdings.  If  a  general  expectation  of 
increased  sales  pressure  also  builds  up,  a  large  number  of  more  well-informed  investors 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
might choose to sell their holdings of Swedish covered bonds to avoid large falls in value. 
This type of herd behaviour could create very negative price fluctuations on the bond market 
and perhaps even disrupt the functioning of the market.  
The  stress  tests  carried  out  by  both  the  Riksbank  and  other  analysts  indicate  that  the 
Swedish  banks  would  be  able  to  cope  with  a  large  fall  in  housing  prices  without  the 
earmarked collateral declining significantly. But regardless of this, we can be sure that the 
uncertainty regarding the covered bonds would increase if housing prices were falling and it 
is  always  international  confidence  in  the  Swedish  housing  market  that  is  important  here. 
However, it is difficult to predict at what loan-to-value ratio the Swedish covered bonds would 
begin  to  be  perceived  as  less  safe  by  the  market.  Perceptions  of  what  is  acceptable  may 
suddenly change. 
The fact that around one third of all Swedish covered bonds are owned by foreign investors 
is both an opportunity and a risk. The opportunity to spread funding has been positive, at the 
same time as we have previously seen that foreign investors tend to be the first to sell their 
holdings in times of unease, and that this can start a sales spiral. We saw this type of selling 
behaviour  in  2007,  for  instance,  when  unease  on  the  financial  markets  increased  and  the 
Swedish  banks’  exposure  to  the  Baltic  countries  made  investors  want  to  sell  the  Swedish 
banks’  covered  bonds,  which  were  perceived  as  high  risk.5  Investors  then  sought  safer 
assets,  such  as  government  securities.  During  the  second  half  of  2007,  foreign  investors 
reduced  their  holdings  of  Swedish  covered  bonds  by  as  much  as  a  quarter,  from 
SEK 450 billion  to  SEK  330  billion.6  It  was  primarily  investors  with  a  short-term  investment 
strategy who withdrew, which meant that bond yields rose.  
With the exception of the acute global financial crisis, however, the market for covered bonds 
has functioned well. Foreign investors’ interest in Swedish covered bonds is currently high, 
which  is  evident  in  the  low  yield  levels.  But  the  more  the  banks  become  dependent  on  a 
particular source of funding, the more vulnerable they become if this market were to suffer 
problems. 
High indebtedness makes households more sensitive 
I have now talked at length about how the banks have been able to fund the large volume of 
mortgages and what stability risks this funding model entails. But in this context one must 
also  take  into  account  the  reason for  the  increase  in  demand  for  mortgages  and  how  this 
affects households. 
There are several factors that can explain why this demand has increased. Higher incomes, 
low interest rates and rising housing prices are usually mentioned in this context. But credit 
terms  have  also  changed,  which  has  also  affected  how  much  a  household  can  afford  to 
borrow. The banks can now determine the terms and purposes of their loans themselves. At 
the  beginning  of  the  2000s,  many  of  the  banks  gradually  abolished  the  requirement  that 
households  should  amortise  their  loans.  For  the  banks  this  was  a  means  of  taking  larger 
market shares, and for the households it was a means of borrowing more. The banks also 
accepted lower down payments than before. In some cases, a household could take on a 
loan that corresponded to the full value of the housing. As a result, the loan-to-value ratio of 
mortgages today is higher than before and more loans are interest-only loans. Households 
have  also  become  more  sensitive  to  changes,  partly  because  they  have  larger  debts  than 
before, and partly because they have taken the loans at variable interest rates. This means 
                                                
5  See  M,  Sandström,  D,  Forsman,  J,  Stenkula  von  Rosen  and  J,  Fager  Wettergren  (2013),  The  market  for 
Swedish covered bonds and links to financial stability, Economic Review, 2013:2. Sveriges Riksbank. 
6  See L, Marklund (2014), Consequences of an increased loan-to-value ratio for the funding of mortgages with 
covered bonds, The analysis group’s memorandums on household indebtedness, No. 7, Sveriges Riksbank. 
www.riksbank.se. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
that higher interest rates could have an effect on the household’s finances. A further reason 
for concern is that households’ expectations of future mortgage rates are much lower than 
the  Riksbank’s.  This  could  mean  that  households  do  not  have  sufficient  scope  in  their 
budgets for higher interest rates. 
A study based on data from the end of the 1990s and up to 2012 shows that households 
have acted rationally and that it has been financially beneficial for them not to amortise their 
loans.7 It has been more profitable to instead invest their savings in financial assets, such as 
equity funds and fixed-income funds. This is because the return on these types of fund was 
high  during  this  period,  at  the  same  time  as  mortgage  rates  were  low  and  housing  prices 
rose,  with  the  exception  of  shorter  periods  of  time.  But  although  it  has  been  a  rational 
decision  not  to  amortise  the  loans,  I  also  believe  that  these  conditions  have  laid  the 
foundations for a new type of behaviour among households. It has quite simply become more 
common  not  to  amortise.  I  am  worried  that  households  do  not realise  that  the factors that 
previously  justified  a  high  level  of  indebtedness may  change  and  that  what  was  a  rational 
behaviour before, may not be so in the coming period. Mortgage rates and the return on the 
equity market and mortgage market are not constant over time; they change. One conclusion 
of the results of this study is that it is important to create the right incentives via, for instance, 
the tax system. 
The current situation has advantages and disadvantages 
I  have  now  painted  a  picture  of  how  we  arrived  at  our  current  situation,  with  a  global  and 
complex financial system and high level of household indebtedness. 
There is no doubt that the financial system we have now has created considerable welfare 
gains.  Households  have  been  able  to  invest  their  savings  in  mutual  funds  instead  of 
traditional savings accounts and have in this way been able to spread the risk in their saving 
and  thus  gain  a  higher  return.  For  the  banks,  the  greater  degree  of  market  funding  has 
similarly entailed greater opportunity to spread risk between different funding sources. The 
possibility to obtain funding on the international capital markets has also meant that access 
to capital has increased and that the banks have thus been able to fund Swedish mortgages 
more easily and more cheaply. This in turn has meant that a larger number of households 
have been able to borrow and probably also at  a lower interest rate than would otherwise 
have been the case. 
However,  the  condition  for  these  welfare  gains  is  that  there  has  been  considerable 
confidence  in  the  Swedish  state,  Swedish  banks  and  the  Swedish  housing  and  mortgage 
markets.  Today  a  large  percentage  of  the  market  agents  investing  in  Swedish  bonds  are 
outside of Sweden. This means that the Swedish financial system is also dependent on how 
other countries assess the Swedish mortgage and housing markets. It is important that these 
markets  function  well  so  that  we  can  continue  to  enjoy  a  high  level  of  confidence  on  the 
financial markets. We therefore have a major responsibility to ensure that the vulnerabilities 
are  limited  and  that  confidence  remains  strong.  This  is  particularly  important  given  the 
weaknesses that have emerged as a result of the structure of the financial system. The good 
access  to  capital  and  the  large  increase  in  mortgages  has  also  meant  that  the  Swedish 
banking  system  has  grown,  and  become  one  of  the  largest  banking  systems  in  Europe. 
Moreover,  the  Swedish  banking  system  consists  of  a  few  large  banks  that  are  closely 
interlinked. This means that problems at one bank can easily spread to other banks. All this 
means that the costs to society could be substantial if we were to suffer a financial crisis. 
                                                
7  See  T,  Jansson  (2014),  Households’  amortisation  decisions,  The  analysis  group’s  memorandums  on 
household indebtedness, No. 4, Sveriges Riksbank. www.riksbank.se.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
How do we attain a better balance? 
As I said at the start, developments in the real economy and developments on the financial 
markets are interlinked and problems with financial stability thus risk having a negative effect 
on  growth  in  the  real  economy.  Problems  on  the  housing  and  mortgage  markets  thus risk 
intensifying an economic slowdown by means of the financial markets and resulting in rising 
unemployment.  As  such  a  situation  would  affect  demand  in  the  economy,  and  thereby 
monetary  policy,  we  cannot  close  our  eyes  to  the  risks  linked  to  high  household 
indebtedness.  This  is  the  case  even  though  the  Riksbank  has  limited  opportunities  to  do 
anything about the underlying factors that are pushing up household debt. 
Many  people  believe  that  macroprudential  policy,  which  is  now  becoming  established  in 
Sweden, will resolve the problems of high household indebtedness all on its own. I do not 
think it is that simple. I believe that macroprudential policy is at present only able to alleviate 
the problems by increasing the banks’ resilience to these risks and hopefully also dampening 
the indebtedness to some extent. 
What do we need to do to obtain a better balance in the long run and to attain a development 
that is sustainable in the long run? I believe that we need input from several areas. 
In  recent  years,  a  number  of  measures  have  been  taken  to  dampen  household 
indebtedness.  For 
instance,  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority) has introduced a mortgage ceiling that limits how much a household can borrow in 
relation to the value of the property. Moreover, Finansinspektionen is working on introducing 
an  “amortisation  culture”,  that  is,  an  environment  that  encourages  more  households  to 
amortise  their  loans.  The  Swedish  Bankers  Association  also  recommends  that  borrowers 
should  amortise  their  loans.  Finansinspektionen  has  also  raised  the  risk  weights  on 
mortgages,  which  means  that  the  banks  have  to  hold  more  capital  when  they  issue 
mortgages. 
We  could  perhaps  also  consider  whether  it  is  possible  to  create  financial  incentives  for 
households  to  reduce  their  indebtedness,  for  instance,  via  the  tax  system.  However,  such 
solutions are beyond the mandate of the Riksbank. Regardless of what one decides to do, I 
believe  it  is  very  important  to  make  households  aware  of  the  risks  a  high  level  of 
indebtedness may entail for their own finances. As I said earlier, there is a risk that many 
households  are  taking  it  for  granted  that  the  economic  conditions  that  have  prevailed  in 
recent years will continue to apply. 
But  it  is  not  only  households’  increased  propensity  to  take  on  debt  that  has  caused  our 
current situation. If we look back, we can see that the rise in household indebtedness has 
gone  hand  in  hand  with  housing  prices.  One  important  explanation  for  the  rising  housing 
prices is that the supply of new housing has been inadequate. Compared with many other 
countries,  construction  of  new  housing  in  Sweden  has  been  very  low.  There  are  several 
factors that are usually highlighted as explanations for this structural problem: high costs for 
land and construction, the current legislation on planning, construction and the environment 
that  makes  strict  demands  regarding  the  type  of  housing  that  can  be  built,  and  rent 
regulations. I do not intend to go into this in depth now, but would like to note that structural 
measures are required in the housing market, which will contribute to an increase in housing 
and  reduce  the  lock-in  effect.  However,  such  measures  are  beyond  the  mandate  of  the 
Riksbank. 
We  should  perhaps  also  reflect  on  the  banks’  funding  of  mortgages,  to  create  a  better 
balance in funding sources and thus better stability. The banks’ issues of covered bonds to 
fund  housing  have  been  successful  and  led  to  good  access  to  funding  and  lower  funding 
costs, and ultimately to lower mortgage rates. But one should also be aware that as covered 
bonds have become so common, we have also built vulnerabilities into the banking system: 
the dependence on the market for covered bonds functioning properly and the risk that the 
banks’  balance  sheets  are  too  highly  mortgaged  limits  the  scope  to  take  action  in  a  crisis 
situation. An excessive share of encumbered assets risks putting the banks’ other investors 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
at a disadvantage, which can mean they become more volatile in times of financial stress. A 
study carried out a few years ago found that all of the four major Swedish banks were among 
the  ten  banks  in  Europe  with  the  highest  percentage  of  encumbered  assets.8  After  the 
financial crisis, we can also see that Swedish banks are mortgaging more of their assets than 
before. 
The  matching  between  lending  and  funding  may  also  comprise  a  risk,  both  with  regard  to 
maturity  and  currency.  In  Sweden,  the  matching  between  maturities  is  relatively  poor.9  I 
therefore  take  a  positive  view  of  the  plans  to  introduce  new  rules  to  improve  matching 
between maturities for lending and funding. We should be able to create more stability with 
longer maturities for the banks’ funding. 
I said at the start that I would keep to the stability and systemic-risk perspective, and have 
therefore not discussed the level of household indebtedness or the relationship to household 
assets. This would require a speech that was twice as long! My message is that household 
indebtedness is at a high level and that we have constructed a housing funding model that 
has  made  us  sensitive  to  shocks.  We  need  to  have  firmly  established  confidence  in  the 
Swedish housing market and the marker for covered bonds from both Swedish and foreign 
financiers, to ensure that our model functions properly. 
I  am  well  aware  that  the  risks  linked  to  household  indebtedness  and  the  housing  market 
entail  very  complex  questions.  I  also  know  that  rapid  and  drastic  changes  risk  leading  to 
severe and dramatic adjustments of debts and housing prices. Naturally, we  wish to avoid 
this. But at the same time, I think it is important to begin to take action. In the long run, it is no 
sustainable for debts to continue increasing at the same pace as today. 
So why does the Riksbank care about household indebtedness? The Riksbank is concerned 
about  household  indebtedness  partly  because  international  confidence  in  the  Swedish 
housing and mortgage markets are necessary conditions for our financial system to function 
smoothly.  Financial  developments  in turn  are  linked to  developments  in  the real  economy. 
The indebtedness of Swedish households can thus affect the Riksbank’s conditions to carry 
out its statutory tasks, price stability and financial stability. It is therefore important that the 
Riksbank  continues  to  follow  developments,  analyses  and  highlights  risks  linked  to 
household indebtedness.  
                                                
8  See Barclays 2012. (Over-promising? Encumbrance at European Banks, Barclays Capital Equity Research.  
9  See Financial Stability Report 2013:2, Sveriges Riksbank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
