Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Enhancing resilience to sustain inclusive 
growth 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Year-end  Philippine  Economic  Briefing,  Manila, 
18 March 2014. 
 Reflection of resilience 
Quite often the picture that we associate with the word “resilience” is that of the bamboo tree 
that sways to the violent winds and yet is not broken. It rustles. But doesn’t snap In medicine, 
we think of resilience as the body’s ability to recover quickly from illness In psychology, we 
conjure a state of being able to “bounce back”.  
Such  pictures  do  characterize  the  Philippine  economy,  especially  when  we  consider  the 
events  of  last  year.  We  were  buffeted  from  both  the  global  and  domestic  fronts.  But  the 
economy remained resilient. 
Globally,  the  Fed’s  pronouncements  and  actions  with  respect  to  its  withdrawal  of 
accommodative  monetary  policy  (or  the  Fed  tapering)  brought  heightened  volatility  to  our 
financial markets. The resulting market uncertainty and portfolio rebalancing got reflected in 
a reversal of the strong capital inflows of previous periods. This led to depreciation pressures 
on  the  exchange  rate  decline  in  our  stock  market  and  widening  of  spreads  on  our  debt 
papers. 
While  all  of  these  were  happening  in  the  financial  markets,  the  country  was  hit  by  natural 
disasters,  which  threatened  to  weaken  our  growth  prospects  and  unsettle  inflation 
expectations. 
Against this backdrop, the resilience of the economy was evident. The economy continued to 
grow  by  7.2  percent  in  2013.  This  performance  beat  market  expectations  and  the 
Government’s  target  of  6–7  percent  for  the  year.  Inflation  was  at  the  low  end  of  the 
Government’s  target  range  of  3–5  percent.  Meanwhile,  our  banks  remained  a  source  of 
strength as the system’s balance sheets stayed solid. Our external accounts continued to be 
robust,  buoyed  by  strong  structural flows  such as  remittances  and receipts from  BPO  and 
tourism.  Our  GIR  remained  more  than  adequate  by  most  yardsticks.  And,  prudent  fiscal 
management provided the policy space for re-building and stepped-up government spending 
on infrastructure that is expected to form the base for sustained economic growth. 
Risks to the resilience story 
Can  we  expect  this  strong  performance  to  continue?  What  are  the  risks  to  this  resilience 
story? Let me quickly run through some threats to resilience. 
On  the  global  front.  First,  we  see  continued  uneasiness  among  global  investors  from 
uncertainty  in  the  next  steps  of  the  Fed.  This  may  cause  capital  outflows  and  with  that, 
greater financial market volatility. Second, many analysts also predict the slower growth in 
Asia to continue. This could have an impact on intra-Asian trade, which had compensated for 
weakness in trade with advanced economies in the recent periods. Third, the risk that recent 
political turmoil, including in Ukraine, may escalate. This could affect international commodity 
prices, global financial markets, and undermine global growth prospects. 
Closer to home. we need to be watchful, among others, of our own disaster risk management 
efforts  that  could  affect  sustainability  of  our  growth  performance;  and  potential  upward 
adjustments in domestic utility rates that could affect inflation expectations; as well as any 
risks to financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Responses to sustain resilience 
Given these risks, how can we sustain resilience? On the part of the BSP, we will continue 
policies that strengthen our macrofundamentals. 
First, we will closely track monetary conditions to ensure that our stance of monetary policy is 
appropriate.  Based  on  our  assessments,  inflation  remains  manageable.  Our  forecast  runs 
show that, over our policy horizon, average annual inflation will settle within the government’s 
target range. Therefore, there continues to be room to keep rates steady. although the room 
for  keeping  stance  of  policy  has  narrowed,  given  the  aforementioned  global  and  domestic 
risks. 
Second,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  Our 
assessment  shows  that  the  peso  will  remain  fundamentally  supported  by  robust  economic 
growth and the BOP surplus. Given the moods and swings of the financial markets, we will 
continue our flexible exchange rate policy, but at the same time, keep a strategic presence in 
the foreign exchange market to limit excessive exchange rate volatilities. 
Third, we  will remain  watchful of potential sources of vulnerability to our banks. Risks that 
can directly affect individual banks, and those that co-mingle and can affect the system as a 
whole  will  be  given  attention.  In  other  words,  we  will  sharpen  the  financial  stability 
perspective of our bank surveillance. We will also align our regulations with the international 
reform agenda. Banks will be supervised so they stay sound and therefore able to sustain 
effective and efficient intermediation of funds to the productive sectors of the economy. 
In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  build  resilience  that  would 
lead to stable prices, a relatively competitive exchange rate, and a sound banking system. 
The ASEAN Banking Integration Framework could also help us achieve improved resilience. 
We believe the Philippines stands to benefit from this regional integration effort. Apart from 
seeing a much larger investor base, greater integration could also open up opportunities to 
mobilize  resources  toward  a  diverse  array  of  productive  investments.  Greater  competition 
also promises to help us capitalize on technology and innovation, while pushing our financial 
institutions to enhance their efficiency. 
But resilience is not enough 
But resilience of itself is not enough. What would be ideal is that, while our economy is able 
to  withstand  harsh  conditions,  we  should  also  be  able  to  move  forward  and  achieve  our 
objectives of sustained broad-based economic growth in a stable macro environment. This is 
the second part of today’s theme. Enhancing Resilience to Sustain Inclusive Growth. 
“Inclusive Growth” has become such a buzz word – everyone (even the IMF) now talks about 
it. I am afraid, if we just keep on speaking about it, without much action, there is a risk that 
the buzz will simply drone. We need to make sure that our exhibited resilience, which has 
given  us  this  strong  macroeconomic  base  from  which  to  leap,  translates  to  a  palpable 
improvement in the welfare of more, if not all, Filipinos. 
A larger economic pie for more 
Resilience helps to enlarge the economic pie. But, it would be more desirable if the larger pie 
is shared by more. Ladies and gentlemen, we all need to do more if we would like economic 
growth to cast a wider net and cascade through the broader society.  
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  believe  our  efforts  to  intensify  financial  inclusion  would  help 
ensure that more of the stakeholders are able to enjoy the now larger pie. These initiatives 
are in the form of crafting regulations to improve access to financial services, expanding our 
economic  financial  and  learning  programs,  and  strengthening  our  financial  consumer 
protection efforts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We are fully aware, however, that BSP and the government cannot do this alone. We need 
the strong partnership of the private sector. 
We  hope  that  this  briefing  will  provide  a  venue  for  meaningful  information  sharing  and 
dialogue  between  the  public  and  the  private  sectors  on  the  competitive  challenges  and 
opportunities posed by our current operating environment. 
But  more  than  this,  we  hope  that  this  briefing  would  be  a  venue  for  us  to  confirm  our 
readiness to meet these challenges and move forward, with the good of the greater majority 
in mind. We trust that today’s proceedings will  encourage all to work together towards the 
shared goal of inclusive growth – the only growth that truly matters and the only growth that 
transforms. 
Thank you and a pleasant day to all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
