  Peter Praet: The financial cycle and real convergence in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Annual  Hyman  P.  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  US  and  World  Economies, 
Washington DC, 10 April 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen1 
Thank you for inviting me to address this conference. The latest data confirm that the euro 
area  on  aggregate  is  proceeding  slowly  along  the  path  of  economic  recovery.  Yet,  a  key 
issue that faces policymakers today, and that will continue to face them for several years to 
come,  is  how  to  deal  with  persistent  divergence  between  national  economies.  Some  euro 
area  countries  are  experiencing  steady  growth,  while  in  others  growth  remains  anaemic. 
Some have unemployment rates under 5%, while in others unemployment exceeds 25%. 
In the euro area, which is a monetary union but not a formal political union, there are risks if 
such  divergences  remain  unaddressed.  Without  fiscal  equalisation  mechanisms,  real 
economic convergence is important to gradually reduce cross-country income gaps, and this 
in turn ensures the economic and social cohesion of the single currency. This issue of real 
convergence is what I would like to focus on in my remarks today – in particular, why the first 
decade  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  failed  to  produce  real  convergence,  and 
how the euro area can produce a sustainable convergence process going forward. 
My main argument is as follows. Economic theory tells us that the introduction of the euro 
should  have  led  to  real  convergence  as  capital  flowed  towards  so-called  “catching-up” 
economies where the marginal product of capital was higher. Yet, while capital growth was 
indeed  higher  in  catching-up  economies,  it  did  not  lead  to  underlying  productivity 
convergence.  In  my  view  this  was  because  two  structural  and  institutional  conditions  were 
missing. 
First, there was an incomplete single market in goods and services, and a general lack of 
competitive processes in the non-tradable/services sector, which allowed some firms in so-
called  catching-up  economies  to  extract  excessive  rents  and  distort  capital  allocation. 
Second, there was an incomplete single market in capital, and lack of common approach to 
supervision  and  resolution  of  banks,  which  allowed  the  financial  cycle  to  take  hold  too 
strongly in these countries in the upswing, and limited the potential for risk-sharing between 
jurisdictions  in  the  downswing.  This  “Minsky”  cycle  in  turn  masked  the  underlying  lack  of 
productivity convergence in the pre-crisis period. 
The  reform  process  in  the  euro  area  today  is  essentially  a  process  of  filling  these  two 
lacunae:  improving  the  functioning  of  national  economies  through  structural  reforms;  and 
creating a well supervised, integrated financial market through Banking Union. This should 
provide the conditions for efficient resource allocation and hence sustainable convergence in 
the future. 
The illusion of convergence before the crisis 
In its simplest form, economic convergence can be understood as the process of narrowing 
income gaps  between  lower  and  higher  income  countries,  achieved  through faster  relative 
growth in the catching-up economies. According to the standard neoclassical growth model, 
convergence  should  be  driven  by  capital  flows  towards  the  lower  income  countries,  which 
                                                
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  Jonathan  Yiangou,  Neale  Kennedy  and  Grigor  Stoevsky  for  their  contributions  to  this 
speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  have low capital-to-output ratios and hence a higher marginal return on capital. An increase 
in labour productivity in the catching-up economies would also accelerate convergence, as 
capital  deepening  would  empower  production  in  those  economies  and  organisational 
processes would gradually reach the standards of efficiency set by more mature regions. 
When EMU was launched, the conditions for economic convergence to proceed according to 
this model seemed to be present. Nominal interest rates between higher and lower income 
countries converged rapidly. Capital flowed towards lower productivity economies where the 
marginal  product  of capital  was  higher,  supported  by  the  elimination  of exchange  rate  risk 
within  the  euro  area.  For  example,  from  1999  to  2008  exposures  from  banks  in  higher-
income economies towards those in the catching-up economies (Spain, Ireland, Greece and 
Portugal)  increased  more  than  fivefold.  Facilitated  by  these  flows,  capital  accumulation 
accelerated  in  these  countries:  from  1999  to  2007  average  growth  in  capital  services  in 
catching-up economies ranged from around 5% to almost 9%, compared with a range of 2% 
to 3.5% in more productive economies. 
On  the  surface,  these  developments  appeared  to  be  contributing  to  convergence:  GDP 
growth in catching-up economies was generally faster than in higher income economies. Yet, 
with hindsight we know that there was no underlying convergence in labour productivity. In 
particular, strong capital accumulation in catching-up economies did not translate into faster 
total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  growth.  TFP  actually  diverged  between  higher  and  lower 
income countries in this period. In fact, there was a positive correlation between the  initial 
level of GDP per capita and average TFP growth rates: the highest TFP growth rates were 
found  in  Germany,  Austria,  Netherlands  and  Finland.  A  special  case  here  is  Italy,  where 
initial GDP per capita was high but TFP converged downwards the catching-up economies. 
This seems to be because falling real interest rates eased fiscal constraints and reduced the 
incentive of governments to focus on structural policies. 
In  other  words,  the  apparent  economic  convergence  in  the  pre-crisis  period  was  largely 
illusory.  There  was  a  cyclical  convergence  in  GDP  levels,  but  it  was  not  structurally 
anchored.  This  poses  two  questions  that  can  help  inform  policy  choices  in  the  euro  area 
today: first, why did capital flows not lead to productivity convergence? And second, why did 
more observers not see through the illusion of convergence prior to the crisis? 
Why did real convergence not happen? 
Starting with the question of why TFP in particular did not converge, an important explanation 
seems to be that – contrary to the assumptions of the neo-classical growth model – foreign 
capital  flowing  into  catching-up  economies  was  allocated  to  sectors  where  the  marginal 
product  of  capital  was  low  and  falling.  This  implied  that  capital  accumulation  was  not 
associated  with  technological  change  and  hence  TFP  growth.  Indeed,  in  the  catching-up 
economies capital flowed disproportionately into the non-tradable/services sector, which was 
in general experiencing significant productivity losses.2 Specifically, capital accumulation was 
highest in the construction and real estate sectors, closely followed by retail, transport and 
leisure. There seem to be two explanations why this happened. 
First, in some sectors the falling marginal product of capital was counterbalanced by rising 
profit  margins,  meaning  that  total  compensation  from  investing  in  these  sectors  remained 
high.3 This was principally the result of an incomplete single market and a lack of competition 
– for example, in network industries such as utilities and telecommunications – which allowed 
                                                
2   See  European  Commission,  2014,  “The  drivers  of  total  factor  productivity  in  catching-up  economies”,  in 
Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, Vol. 13, Issue 1, April 2014. 
3   See European Commission, 2013, “Catching-up processes in the euro area”, in Quarterly Report on the Euro 
Area, Vol. 12, Issue 1, March 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in  other  sectors.  For  example,  research  has  shown 
incumbent firms to charge excessive rents and distorted price signals. The capturing of rents 
by  firms  in  these  sectors  may  have  affected  productivity  growth  not  only  by  channelling 
resources  away  from  more  productive  uses,  but  also  by  creating  a  drag  on  incentives  to 
become  more  efficient 
that 
anticompetitive  regulations  in  upstream  sectors  such  as  utilities  can  curb  TFP  growth  in 
downstream sectors.4 
Second, specific financial factors also contributed to capital misallocation. In certain sectors 
in catching-up economies both the marginal product of capital and profitability were relatively 
low  –  for  example,  construction  and  retail  –  yet  capital  formation  remained  elevated.  The 
explanation for this apparent contradiction seems to have been very loose credit conditions. 
This  meant  that,  despite  low  gross  remuneration  for  enterprises  in  these  sectors,  net 
remuneration was kept high by low real borrowing costs. In Ireland, for example, from 2003 
to  2008 the  average  real  borrowing  costs for  households  (mortgages)  was  1.1%,  while  for 
non-financial  corporations  it  was  2.1%.  In  both  cases  this  averaged  2.8  percentage  points 
below the nominal cost. As a consequence, and facilitated by insufficiently intrusive banking 
supervision,  credit  volumes  also  increased  steeply,  with  loans  to  households  growing  on 
average  by  23%  per  year  in  the  four  years  before  the  crisis,  and  by  almost  28%  for  non-
financial corporations. The fact that this credit growth was associated with labour-intensive 
sectors  such  as  construction,  and  hence  diverted  labour  towards  these  sectors,  itself 
contributed to the weak performance of productivity. 
Another  financial  factor  that  may  have  influenced  capital  allocation  was  the  type  of  cross-
border capital flows, which reflected an incomplete single market in capital. According to the 
ECB’s financial integration indicators, by 2008 there was almost complete integration of euro 
area  interbank  markets,  but  retail  banking  remained  largely  fragmented  and  cross-border 
equity markets were hardly developed at all.5 This meant that the cross-border capital flows 
into  catching-up  countries  were  mainly  debt-based  and  intermediated  through  local, 
relationship-based  banks.  Generally  speaking,  such  a  financing  mode  –  compared  with 
equity portfolio investment or direct cross-border lending from foreign banks – tends to favour 
incumbent  and  local  firms,  and  can  make  bank  lending  decisions  less  sensitive  to  price 
signals.6 This may have also supported capital misallocation. 
In short, capital flows did not lead to real convergence because the catching-up economies 
lacked  the  appropriate  structural  and  institutional  frameworks  to  allocate  those  flows 
efficiently.  In  the  context  of  an  incomplete  single  market  in  goods  and  services  and  weak 
competitive conditions, profit signals became disconnected from underlying productivity and 
diverted capital from more productive uses. And with an incomplete single market in capital 
and uneven banking supervision, credit growth became excessive and over-concentrated in 
low productivity sectors. 
Why did more observers not recognise it? 
While  weak  TFP  growth  was  the  subject  of  academic  debate  before  the  crisis,  this  was 
generally seen as a euro area problem, in particular vis-à-vis the United States.7 The general 
mood among observers was that the catching-up economies were progressing relatively well, 
                                                
4   Bourlès et al (2010), “Do product market reforms in upstream sectors curb productivity growth? Panel data 
evidence for OECD countries”, NBER Working Paper 16520, November 2010. 
5   See Financial Integration in Europe, European Central Bank, April 2008. 
6   For  a  detailed  exposition  of  this  argument  see  Rajan,  R.  and  L.  Zingales  (2002),  “Banks  and  markets:  the 
changing character of European finance”, in V. Gaspar (ed.), The Transformation of the European Financial 
System, October 2002. 
7   See for example Havik et al (2008), “The EU-US total factor productivity gap: An industry perspective”, DG 
ECFIN Economic Papers 339, September 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  or  at  least  not  markedly  worse  than  others.  For  example,  the  European  Commission’s 
EMU@10  Report  stated  that  “three  of  the  four  cohesion  countries  (Spain,  Ireland  and 
Greece) have shown a satisfactory development overall, while only the fourth (Portugal) has 
disappointed.”8 This leads me to my second question: if this convergence was in fact cyclical 
rather than structural, why was it not identified earlier? 
My tentative answer would be that observers’ assessments were influenced by the financial 
cycle, a theme that has echoed in Hyman Minsky’s work.9 In retrospect, it seems now that 
the  early  years  of  the  euro  were  the  peak  of  a  much  longer  financial  upswing.  This  led 
observers  to  overestimate  the  sustainability  of  consumption  and  investment,  and  to 
underestimate the risks of rising private debt levels – and this was true on both sides of the 
Atlantic. One explanation for this is that, as the upward phase of the financial cycle can be 
very prolonged – according to estimates by BIS scholars, the typical duration of the financial 
cycle  is  around  16  years10  –  perceptions  of  risk  and  value  adjusted  upwards.  Historical 
relationships  between  asset  prices,  debt  ratios  and  underlying  productivity  levels  were 
deemed  no  longer  to  hold.  Hence,  developments  that merely  reflected the  longer financial 
cycle were falsely believed to be structural. 
Another  explanation  is  that  observers  overestimated  future  productive  capacity  due  to  the 
effect of the financial cycle on real-time potential growth estimates.11 This in turn could have 
led  firms’  and  households  to  bring  forward  future  consumption  and  investment  into  the 
present, based on an overestimation of their lifetime income. One way such misperceptions 
can arise is if a prolonged credit-driven economic expansion weakens supply constraints and 
raises  estimates  of  potential  output,  making  growth  appear  more  structural  in  nature.  In 
Spain, for  example,  the boom  in  the  construction  sector  raised  both  domestic  participation 
rates  and  immigration  levels.  The  European  Commission’s  latest  estimates  of  potential 
growth rates are in the range of 3.2% and 4% for the period 2000–2007, driven mainly by the 
increasing  labour  contribution  (adding  around  2  percentage  points  on  average  per  year). 
Since 2008, however, the labour contribution has been the largest drag on potential growth, 
for example, subtracting more than 2 percentage points from the 2013 estimate. 
A final explanation is that observers mistook the significance of inflation differentials within 
the  euro  area.  Excess  domestic  demand  combined  with  low  productivity  growth  should  be 
reflected in rising prices, and domestic measures of price and wage inflation in the catching-
up  economies  were  indeed  running  considerably  higher  than  the  euro  area  average  on  a 
cumulative basis. Average annual inflation differentials in the 2002 to 2008 period were in the 
range  of  0.5  to  1.5  percentage  points.  However,  these  developments  were  not  considered 
especially alarming by some observers as they were interpreted as reinforcing the theory of 
Balassa-Samuelson  equalisation.  Some  also  saw  inflation  differentials  as  being  more 
reflective of low inflation in Germany as it went through a phase of wage adjustment. Overall, 
this may have led to less concern about the lack of real convergence in productivity levels 
than was warranted. 
                                                
8   European  Commission,  “EMU@10:  Successes  and  challenges  after  ten  years  of  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union”, European Economy 2, 2008. 
9   See for example Minsky, H (1982), “Can ‘it’ happen again?”, Essays on Instability and Finance. 
10   Drehmann et al (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don’t lose sight of the medium term!”, BIS Working 
Papers No 380, June 2012. 
11   For a detailed explanation see Borio et al (2013), “Rethinking potential output: Embedding information about 
the financial cycle”, BIS Working Papers No 404, February 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Achieving sustainable convergence 
It was only when the financial cycle turned that the unsustainability of economic convergence 
became apparent. The majority of countries with relatively strong GDP growth rates prior to 
the crisis also experienced a relatively strong downward adjustment, in some cases undoing 
much of the welfare gains that were achieved since the launch of the euro. Some might see 
this as evidence that the assumptions of the neoclassical growth model need to be qualified 
– that absent credit-driven growth, there is no reason to believe that euro area economies 
should converge towards similar levels of productivity, or even rates of productivity growth.12 
Indeed,  endogenous  growth  models  allow  for  persistent  divergences  as  some  forms  of 
capital exhibit non-diminishing returns. 
Yet, I think it is too early to draw such a conclusion. The neo-classical assumptions have not 
yet  been  properly  tested,  simply  because  capital  did  not  flow  where  the  marginal  return 
would  have  been  highest.  What  the  euro  area  needs,  in  my  view,  is  to  “re-run”  the 
convergence  process,  but  with  the  appropriate  conditions  in  place  to  ensure  efficient 
allocation of resources, and the right framework to make convergence sustainable. Let me 
explain in more detail what that might entail. 
To  begin  with,  catching-up  economies  have  to  address  the  immediate  after-effects  of  the 
previous misallocation of capital. The pre-crisis inflows into the non-tradable/services sector 
were  associated  with  real  exchange  rate  appreciation,  rising  unit  labour  costs  (ULC)  and 
increasing  dependence  on  external  financing.  When  the  financial  cycle  turned,  however, 
capital  flows  quickly  reversed.  This  reflected  the  incomplete  nature  of  financial  integration 
prior  to  the  crisis  –  based  largely  based  on  short-term  debt  –  and  in  turn  unwound  the 
channels for potential risk sharing within the euro area. A study on risk sharing published in 
2008 had found that “monetary union has facilitated risk sharing, although the level of risk 
sharing is still much below the level found among U.S. states”.13 However, a study using a 
similar  methodology  in  2013  found  that  risk  sharing  through  capital  markets  had  virtually 
collapsed during the crisis.14 
With  external  financing  drying  up,  the  catching-up  economies  faced  the  risk  of  a  “sudden 
stop”. They therefore had to pursue both fiscal and structural policies aimed at achieving an 
internal devaluation so as to restore external balance. And they have been rather successful: 
since 2009 Greece has almost entirely reversed the ULC growth it experienced in the pre-
crisis  period,  while  good  progress  has  also  been  made  in  Spain,  Ireland  and  to  a  lesser 
extent  Portugal.  All 
the  catching-up  economies  have  also  experienced  remarkable 
improvements  in  their  current  accounts15,  ranging  from  an  almost  11  percentage  points  of 
GDP correction in Spain to a 16 percentage points of GDP improvement in Greece. 
However, while internal devaluation may improve the sustainability of the external position, it 
does not in itself produce sustainable convergence. Indeed, there is a risk that, if unit labour 
costs (ULC) adjust mainly due to falling wages and the current account closes, policymakers 
may lack incentives to address the underlying productivity problem. This may in turn imply 
that similar imbalances reappear in the future: the experience of exchange rate devaluations 
in the 1990s suggests that adjusting only through relative costs, without lifting productivity, 
                                                
12   The  most  widely  used  concepts  in  applied  work  are  those  of  β-convergence  (faster  productivity  growth, 
exhibited by countries with lower productivity levels) and σ-convergence (decreasing cross-country dispersion 
in productivity levels). 
13   Demyanyk, Y. et al (2008), “Risk sharing and portfolio allocation in EMU”, DG ECFIN Economic Papers 334, 
July 2008. 
14   Kalemli-Ozcan, S. et al (2013), “Debt crises and risk sharing: the role of markets versus sovereigns”, CEPR 
Discussion Paper no. 9541, July 2013. 
15   Including capital transfers (e.g. EU funds). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  may not be sustainable. Hence, I see reforms that boost productivity as a cornerstone of a 
sustainable convergence process – but which reforms? 
The importance of reallocation 
Raising  TFP  is  chiefly  a  function  of  innovation,  technology  adoption  and  reallocation. 
Innovation creates new technologies that improve the efficiency of the production process, 
adoption  helps  those  technologies  to  become  more  widespread,  and  reallocation  helps 
capital and labour concentrate in firms where they can be employed most efficiently. 
Public policy can and should contribute to innovation and technological spillovers by raising 
the  quality  of  human  capital  and  helping  incubate  research  and  development,  as  well 
creating  a  business  environment  that  favours  entrepreneurship.  However,  the  benefits  in 
terms  of  productivity  tend  to  be  felt  over  a  longer  time  horizon.  There  may  also  be  a  lag 
between technology adoption and TFP growth, as optimising the use of new technologies – 
in particular information and communication technology – tends to require parallel investment 
in intangible capital such as management systems and organisational processes.16 Hence, in 
the  short-  to  medium-term,  perhaps  the  most  effective  role  that  public  policy  can  play  in 
boosting  TFP  is  to  strengthen  the  conditions  for  reallocation  to  sectors  that  are  already 
productive. This is particularly the case in the catching-up economies because, as we saw, 
weak TFP growth there was in part driven by misallocation of capital inflows. 
Recent  firm-level  analysis  from  the  Eurosystem’s  Competitiveness  Network  provides  two 
insights  that  suggest  this  could  be  a  promising  strategy.  The  first  is  that  the  distribution 
between the most and least productive firms in individual euro area countries is very large 
and  skewed.  Far  from  being  normally  distributed  –  with  many  firms  centred  around  the 
average performance level – there are a few highly productive firms and many which have 
low  productivity.  The  second  insight,  which  applies  in  particular  to  Spain,  is  that  the  ULC 
developments of firms at the bottom and the top of the productivity distribution are dissimilar. 
While ULC went up sharply before the crisis for unproductive firms, highly productive firms 
did not experience significant ULC growth.17 
This  implies,  first,  that  there  is  substantial  potential  to  boost  productivity  by  reallocating 
resources  both  across  sectors  and  within  sectors  towards  the  most  productive  firms;  and 
second, that reallocation is not dependent on further ULC adjustment among those firms, as 
the  most  productive  firms  did  not  experience  a  significant  competitiveness  loss.  In  other 
words,  productivity  gains  can  be  realised  in  the  short-  to  medium-term  independent  of 
necessary longer term processes such as improving innovation or adopting new technology 
– or indeed, completing internal devaluation. Achieving these gains in the euro area today 
requires reforms that address both price signals and credit allocation that hinder the pace of 
reallocation. 
In terms of price signals, I have discussed how before the crisis excessive rents in sheltered 
sectors  distorted  profit  signals  and  encouraged  capital  misallocation.  Hence,  ensuring  that 
capital now flows towards higher TFP firms must involve deepening the single market and 
strengthening competitive forces in the non-tradable/services sector. Greater competition will 
also  support  TFP  growth  through  various  static  and  dynamic  channels:  a  recent  empirical 
                                                
16   For an explanation of this phenomenon in the US context see Bernanke, B (2005), “Productivity”, remarks at 
the C. Peter McColough Roundtable Series on International Economics, January 2005. 
17   Di Mauro, F. (2014), “Firm-level data: Who said that they are too difficult to use for policy?”, VoxEU 11 March 
2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  study of the impact of competition policy on TFP in twelve OECD countries found a positive 
and signiﬁcant effect.18 
So  far,  catching-up  economies  have  made  notable  reforms  of  framework  conditions  that 
increase  competition,  for  example  by  strengthening  competition  authorities,  reducing 
administrative burdens on companies, softening authorisation requirements and ensuring a 
fair public procurement process. However, progress in reducing excessive rents in sheltered 
goods and services markets has been less impressive, especially in network industries such 
as  energy,  telecommunications  and  transport.  This  is  partly  due  to  the  micro-  or  sector-
specific  dimension  of  the  reform  needs,  which  imply  confronting  vested  interests  inside  a 
certain sector. Reforms in these sectors are key, not only because they support reallocation, 
but  also  because  they  immediately  increase  the  competitiveness  of  the  tradable  sector  by 
reducing often onerous input costs. This could in turn strengthen incentives to raise TFP as 
the gains would no longer have to be shared with suppliers of intermediate inputs. 
Reallocation  of  capital  needs  of  course  to  be  accompanied  by  reallocation  of  labour,  and 
here price signals are also important. For example, there is some evidence that slower ULC 
adjustment  in  the  non-tradable/services  sectors  in  catching-up  economies  is  discouraging 
labour from moving to the tradable sector, as wages remain higher in the former. Addressing 
this  distortion  across  sectors  is  the  rationale for  labour market reforms  that  strengthen the 
link between wage formation and economic conditions. Reforms in this area are now well-
advanced. 
However,  we  must  also  acknowledge  that  there  may  be  skill  mismatches  that  prevent 
reallocation  –  especially  for  workers  previously  employed  in  low  skill  sectors  such  as 
construction  –  and  these  are  more  challenging  to  address.  At  the  end  of  2012,  18%  of 
workers in the euro area with low education levels were unemployed, compared with only 6% 
of  highly  educated  workers. This  puts  a  strong onus  on  active  labour  market  policies  and, 
over the longer term, raising educational attainment. 
Fixing the financial sector 
Improving price signals in these ways is necessary for reallocation to take place in catching-
up economies – but it is not sufficient. For example, in several such countries profit margins 
in  the  tradable  sector  have  increased  relative  to  non-tradables  in  recent  years,  yet  these 
signals  have  not  triggered  meaningfully  higher  investment.  Research  by  the  European 
Commission  suggests  that  financing  constraints  are  an  important  factor  limiting  capital 
reallocation  in  this  direction.19  Moreover,  there  is  some  evidence  that  weak  bank  balance 
sheets have retarded the process of “churn” between firms that drives resource reallocation. 
One study found that, in the early phase of the crisis, banks that were lowly capitalised were 
more  likely  to  maintain  credit  to  less  creditworthy  borrowers  –  so-called  “ever-greening.20 
This  type  of  behaviour  inhibits  firm  exits  and  reduces  the  availability  of  credit  for  new 
entrants. 
Addressing these financing constraints has both a short- and a longer-term dimension. The 
short-term  part  concerns  dealing  with  the  legacy  of  the  previous  financial  cycle  –  that  is, 
repairing  bank  balance  sheets  and  reintegrating  the  euro  area’s  financial  markets.  This  is 
necessary so that capital can once more flow “downhill” from higher income to lower income 
                                                
18   Buccirossi et al (2013), “Competition policy and productivity growth: an empirical assessment”, in The Review 
of Economics and Statistics, October 2013, 95(4). 
19   European Commission, Product Market Review 2013: Financing the Real Economy, European Economy 8, 
2013. 
20   Albertazzi,  U.  and  Marchetti, D.  J.  (2010),  “Credit  crunch,  flight  to  quality  and  evergreening:  an  analysis  of 
bank-firm relationships after Lehman”, Working paper, Banca d’Italia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  countries,  and  so  that  banks  in  those  countries  are  sufficiently  capitalised  to  be  able  to 
allocate credit efficiently. The main policy initiative that will support this is the Banking Union 
project  and,  as  part  of  that,  the  ECB’s  Comprehensive  Assessment.  Its  aim  is  to  dispel 
doubts about asset quality and levels of capital and provisions, and in doing so to accelerate 
the  process  of  deleveraging  and  restructuring  in  the  banking  sector  that  is  the  inevitable 
consequence of a major financial crisis. 
Over the longer-term, however, it is important that policy-makers also reflect on the quality of 
financial integration in the euro area – that is, the incentive structures in the financial sector 
that can lead to inefficient credit allocation, and the channels for sharing risk when financial 
crises  do  arise.  Indeed,  one  criticism  we  could  perhaps  make  of  Optimal  Currency  Area 
theory is that is does not take account of the financial instability that may arise when capital 
reallocates across regions, both in terms of inflows and outflows. Banking Union goes some 
way towards redressing this, which is why it is essential for the longer term stability of the 
euro area. 
In  terms  of  improving  incentives,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  should  in 
principle  be  better  placed  to  prevent  credit  misallocation  as  supervision  will  be  decoupled 
from  national  economic  conditions.  The  shift  towards  bail-in  ability  under  the  new  EU 
resolution framework should also, over time, increase the quality of scrutiny over allocation 
decisions  by  shareholders  and  creditors.  And  by  removing  supervisory  barriers  to  retail 
banking integration, the SSM should provide the pre-conditions for greater foreign entry into 
national  banking  markets,  which  research  suggests  could  improve  capital  allocation  by 
increasing the distance between the main shareholders and management of a bank and the 
vested interests in the country where the bank operates.21 
These same factors also provide stronger channels for risk-sharing within the euro area. A 
more  integrated  retail  banking  market  would  imply  that  losses  from  local  banking  crises 
would be shared across multiple jurisdictions, thus acting as a shock absorber as we see, for 
example, in the United States. If such losses were still to erode a bank’s capital, the new EU 
resolution framework will ensure, first, that the costs of bank failure fall mainly on the private 
sector  rather  sovereigns,  and  second,  that  they  are  spread  evenly  across  the  euro  area 
banking sector rather than concentrated in the affected countries. The relevant innovations 
here  are  the  minimum  requirements  for  bail-in  before  sovereign  interventions,  and  the 
creation of the Single Resolution Fund for all banks that participate in the SSM. 
That said, in my view achieving high quality financial integration must also involve deepening 
capital markets in Europe, both to improve the possibilities for market-based debt and equity 
financing,  and  to  provide  further  channels  for  private  risk-sharing.  This  obviously  goes 
beyond  Banking  Union  and  will  not  be  straight-forward,  as  it  concerns  multiple  aspects  of 
national law. But there are practical ways in which progress could be made. To give just one 
example, a Securities Law Directive has not been proposed to date, although it was already 
recommended  in  the  second  report  by  the  Giovannini  Group  more  than  ten  years  ago  (in 
2003).22 
Managing the financial cycle 
Facilitating the process of resource reallocation should allow TFP convergence to resume in 
catching-up  economies,  while  the  structural  reforms  being  undertaken  in  these  economies 
should help ensure that efficient resource allocation lasts. However, there is still one question 
from  the  pre-crisis  period  that  I  have  not  addressed:  how  can  we  ensure  that  the 
                                                
21   Giannetti,  M.,  and  S.  Ongena,  2009.  “Financial  Integration  and  Firm  Performance:  Evidence  from  Foreign 
Bank Entry in Emerging Markets.” Review of Finance 13, 181–223. 
22   The Giovannini Group, Second Report on EU Clearing and Settlement Arrangements, April 2003. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  convergence process is not again disrupted by the financial cycle? One would hope that a 
better supervised and more diversified financial system will have a smoothing effect on the 
financial cycle. Yet, some academics argue that such is the force of the financial cycle that it 
is unavoidable that monetary policy will also have to play a central role in “leaning against the 
wind”. In the euro area, however, the situation is not quite so clear cut. 
The ECB’s two-pillar strategy does make financial imbalances an important element of our 
policy assessment, even when inflation is low. Specifically, the monetary pillar captures the 
connection  between  excess  credit  and  liquidity  creation  and  potential  risks  to  future  price 
developments,  including  disruptive  asset  price  booms.  And  our  medium-term  orientation 
grants  us  a  sufficiently  long  policy  horizon  to  account  for  the  financial  imbalances  in  our 
strategy.  In  this  way,  it  implicitly  incorporates  elements  of  a  “leaning  against  the  wind” 
approach. 
To quote the ECB Monthly Bulletin from April 2005: “[our] approach amounts to a cautious 
policy of ‘leaning against the wind’ of an incipient bubble. The central bank would adopt a 
somewhat  tighter  policy  stance  in  the  face  of  an  inflating  asset  market  than  it  would 
otherwise  allow  if  confronted  with  a  similar  macroeconomic  outlook  under  more  normal 
market  conditions. It  would  thus  possibly  tolerate  a  certain  deviation from  its  price  stability 
objective  in  the  shorter  term  in  exchange  for  enhanced  prospects  of  preserving  price  and 
economic stability in the future.”23, 24 
Yet, were evidence of financial imbalances to reappear, we would have to reflect carefully on 
whether standard monetary policy would be the right tool to use in response. This is for two 
reasons. First, there is some uncertainty as to what interest rate path would be required to 
prick an emerging credit bubble. Some studies find that in a leverage-driven boom profits are 
very sensitive to even small interest rate changes, implying monetary policy could provide a 
powerful  offset.25  However,  other  evidence  suggests  that  quite  large  interest  rates 
movements  would  be  needed  to  offset  the  financial  cycle,  which  would  in  turn  create 
collateral damage for the economy and price stability.26 
Second, there is still heterogeneity between the financial cycles of individual countries within 
the euro area. While it is true that aggregate euro area money and credit growth before the 
crisis  was  high,  that  growth  was  concentrated  in  specific  regions.  In  the  catching-up 
economies, growth in credit in the pre-crisis period was 10 percentage points higher than in 
more productive countries. In such circumstances, it may well be the case that hiking rates at 
the  aggregate  level  would  be  too  strong  a  response  for  regions  that  are  not  subject  to 
financial exuberance. 
The conclusion I draw from this is that standard monetary policy might be the right response 
when the financial cycle is rising across sectors and countries. In these circumstances, even 
                                                
23   See ECB Monthly Bulletin article on “Asset price bubbles and monetary policy”, April 2005. 
24   It should be noted that at the time this article was written, the idea of using monetary policy to prick asset price 
bubbles  was  alien  to  much  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  central  banking.  Indeed,  in  2006  former  Federal 
Reserve  Governor  Don  Kohn  argued  that  only  if  the  likelihood  and  risks  of  bubbles  could  be  accurately 
identified would early intervention by central banks be superior to cleaning up after the bust, adding that “for 
my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles” 
(see Kohn, D. (2006), “Monetary policy and asset prices”, speech at the European Central Bank Colloquium 
held  in  honour  of  Otmar  Issing,  16  March  2006).  However,  that  view  has  now  largely  changed  across  the 
central  banking  community.  In  particular,  the  importance  of  financial  stability  for  price  stability  is  now  self-
evident after the crisis, and most central bankers agree that for certain types of financial imbalances monetary 
policy may be the only tool that is sufficiently broad-based and powerful. 
25   See for example Adrian, T. and H.-S. Shin (2010), “The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the 
Financial Crisis of 2007–09”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports no. 439, March 2010. 
26   See for example Bean, C. et al (2011) “Monetary Policy after the Fall”, in Macroeconomic Challenges: The 
Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  if there was collateral damage, it could be justified for a period of time to offset the danger of 
a much larger risk to price, financial and economic stability in the future. When imbalances 
are regional or sectoral in nature, however, interest rate policy would seem too blunt a tool. 
We need more surgical instruments, namely an effective macro-prudential policy framework. 
For  example,  tools  such  as  loan-to-value  ratios  or  debt-to-income  ratios  could  be  used  to 
limit credit misallocation to non-productive sectors, without at the same time harming sectors 
where capital needs to flow. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Real  economic  convergence  supports  the  cohesion  and  smooth  functioning  of  monetary 
union. What I have tried to illustrate today, however, is that there are no shortcuts to achieve 
it  –  and  least  of  all  by  riding  the  upswing  of  the  financial  cycle.  As  Hyman  Minsky 
demonstrated, what goes up must sadly come down. 
One  way  to  begin  a  more  sustainable  convergence  process,  in  the  near  term,  is  through 
reallocating  resources  where  they  are  most  productive.  But  the  challenge  for  euro  area 
countries does not stop there. Raising productivity is a complex process that reaches across 
the economy and into many different policy domains, be they education, judicial systems or 
administrative  capacity.  Yet  we  have  ageing  populations  across  the  euro  area,  so  if  we 
desire  to  GDP  per  capita  in  a  sustainable  manner,  we  have  no  choice  but  to  face  this 
challenge head on. 
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
