  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Providing affordable banking services 
in Uganda 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
official opening of Orient Bank Limited, Acacia Mall Branch, Kampala, 3 April 2014. 
 The Shareholders of Orient Bank Limited; 
Members of the Board of Directors; 
Senior Management and Staff; 
Invited Guests in your respective capacities; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is an honour and pleasure for me to join you today at the official opening of Orient Bank’s 
Acacia Mall Branch. Let me begin by congratulating the Shareholders, Directors and Senior 
Management of Orient Bank for the commendable job they have done in implementing their 
branch expansion programme, thereby bringing banking services nearer to the people. 
During the past twenty years of operation in Uganda, Orient Bank has expanded its service 
delivery channels and outlets. The branch being opened today here at the Acacia Mall brings 
the total number to twenty. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this occasion not only marks success for Orient Bank in increasing 
its presence in the banking industry, but also lends support to the Bank of Uganda’s financial 
inclusion agenda, which aims to extend access to affordable financial services more widely 
among the population. Extending access to financial services will only be possible on a large 
scale  if  banks  can  overcome  the  cost  barriers  which  are  a  major  obstacle  to  the  wider 
provision  of  financial  services.  Therefore,  I  would  like  take  this  opportunity  to  reiterate  my 
view that banks in Uganda must prioritise improving efficiency. Operating costs as a share of 
total assets are too high. It will only be possible to provide more affordable financial services 
to Ugandans when operating costs are brought down. One of the ways in which costs can be 
lowered is through the introduction of new technologies for delivering financial services, such 
as information technology. 
Orient Bank has been at the forefront of introducing innovative technologies and products to 
the Ugandan banking market. It was the pioneer of the Point of Sale technology in Uganda 
with  its  benefits  of  promoting  a  cashless  economy.  In  addition,  the  bank  remains  the  sole 
issuer  of  American  Express  cards  in  Uganda.  I  also  understand  that  the  bank  will  soon 
launch the “CHIP and PIN” Visa cards, an innovation that will enhance the security features 
of  the  bank’s  existing  Visa  card  product.  It  is  however,  important  to  note  that  increased 
innovation  comes  with  increased  risks.  I  therefore  urge  Orient  Bank  to  design  robust  risk 
management processes and internal controls to mitigate the risks inherent in technological 
advancement. 
Turning to today’s event, the new Acacia Mall is in a very strategic location, as illustrated by 
the  number  of  banks  that  have  established  outlets  at  this  Mall.  The  “Sapphire  Banking 
Lounge”  at  this  branch  is  designed  to  offer  Orient  Bank’s  customers  a  first  class  banking 
experience. I also have no doubt that Orient Bank’s existing menu of products will appeal to 
the  customers  of  this  branch  and  that  the  bank  will  continue  to  focus  on  providing  quality 
services for its customers. 
The Bank of Uganda, as Uganda’s monetary and regulatory authority, remains committed to 
ensuring price stability and a sound financial system. We shall continue to conduct vigorous 
financial sector regulation and supervision to ensure that all banks are well capitalised and 
that they have robust risk management frameworks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  With  these  remarks,  I  once  again  commend  the  Shareholders,  the  Board  of  Directors  and 
Senior  Management  of  Orient  Bank  for  extending  their  branch  network  to  bring  banking 
services nearer to the people. 
It  is  now  my  honour  and  pleasure  to  declare  Orient  Bank’s  Branch  Acacia  Mall  Kampala 
officially open. 
Thank you for listening. 
Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile (Prof.) 
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
