Mark Carney: One mission. One bank. Promoting the good of the people 
of the United Kingdom 
Text  of  the  30th  Mais  Lecture  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and 
Chairman of the Financial Stability Board, at Cass Business School, City University, London, 
18 March 2014.  
 It  is  a  great  honour  to  be  invited  to  give  the  30th  Mais  Lecture.  This  lecture  series  has 
charted the evolution of UK macroeconomic policy through the eyes of leading policymakers, 
including my four predecessors as Governor. 
The  Mais  Lectures  span  a  period  during  which  the  focus  of  macroeconomic  management 
was firmly on monetary policy. They helped establish a broad consensus for the primacy of 
price stability as well as the institutional framework necessary to deliver it. 
This  focus  initially  made  sense  since  one  of  the  greatest  challenges  for  macroeconomic 
policy in the late 1970s and 1980s was the fight against inflation.1 That fight culminated in the 
adoption of an inflation target, which helped secure 15 years of price stability and sustained 
economic growth. 
However, with time, a healthy focus became a dangerous distraction. 
The financial crisis that exploded the Great Moderation was a powerful reminder that price 
stability  is  not  sufficient  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability.  Words  which  had  alluded  to 
such risks were not followed by actions that might have prevented them being realised. 
Lessons have since been learned. In the wake of the crisis, the Bank of England would be 
promised enormous new powers and responsibilities. In the past year those promises have 
become  realities  with  the  statutory  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  and  the  Prudential 
Regulation Authority (PRA) formally joining the Bank. 
The question now is how we use our powers to fulfil our responsibilities. 
In response, the Bank of England is today launching a transformative strategic plan to fulfil its 
broader  mission. We  have  a  new  leadership  team. We  are  setting  out  fifteen  initiatives  to 
reshape the institution. Behind that plan is a vision for the Bank that I want to set out this 
evening. It is: 
A Bank with many and varied responsibilities, but a single timeless mission; 
An institution that works as One Bank to exploit the synergies and complementarities across 
our policy functions; 
A Bank that draws on its long history of intellectual leadership and international engagement 
to shape an open, resilient global system; 
And a Bank that builds on the immense successes of the past quarter century in combining 
clear objectives, good governance and constructive transparency. 
A single timeless mission 
Let me begin by asking a simple question: what is the Bank of England for? 
The Bank’s founding charter of 1694 explains that its original purpose was to “promote the 
publick  Good  and  Benefit  of  our  People…”.  What  that  meant  in  practice  at  the  time  was 
                                                
1 
“The fight against inflation” was the title of Geoffrey Howe’s 1981 lecture.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
pithily summarised by the diarist John Evelyn, who recorded the event 320 years ago in the 
following terms: “A publick bank... set up by Act of Parliament… for money to carry on the 
war”. The war in question was against France, and in return for the monies raised the Bank 
received  both  income  and  banking  privileges:  it  was  soon  the  only  bank  allowed  to  be 
constituted as a joint stock company, and had an effective monopoly of the note issue in the 
London area.2 
Its size – partly resulting from its unique joint stock status – meant that, by the first half of the 
19th  Century,  the  Bank  had  become  the  dominant  part  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  Its 
notes had become an accepted means of settlement between banks, and as the provider of 
those  notes  the  Bank  acted  as  banker  to  other  banks.  Commercial  banks  held  Bank  of 
England  notes  in  place  of  gold,  relying  on  the  Bank  of  England’s  credibility  for  ultimate 
convertibility. 
Despite the Bank’s founding aim of public service, criticism persisted until after the middle of 
the 19th Century that it was acting in its own rather than the public interest by protecting its 
gold  reserves  at  times  of  financial  stress,  to  the  detriment  of  its  customers.  That  criticism 
faded as the Bank gradually assumed the role of lender of last resort, adopting Bagehot’s 
principle that it should lend freely against good collateral at penalty rates in times of crisis.3 
By the end of the 19th Century the Bank of England had informal responsibility for a broad 
range  of  policy  areas.  It  remained  the  fiscal  agent  for  the  government.  It  maintained 
monetary  stability  through  the  operation  of  the  Gold  Standard.  And  it  promoted  financial 
stability through its role as the effective lender of last resort, and more generally – through 
the judicious exercise of the Governor’s eyebrows – as the institution which managed and 
resolved financial crises.4 
While the Bank’s responsibilities varied over the following century they remained broad and 
largely  informal  until  1997.  The  transformative  changes  that  year  gave  birth  to  a  modern 
Bank with a narrower focus on price stability grounded in clear statutory objectives, and with 
the  operational  independence  to  pursue  them.  Independence  was  the  solution  to  the  time 
inconsistency problem, which causes policymakers who promise low inflation – but then go 
for  faster  growth  –  to  get  neither.  Removing  political  considerations  from  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy made possible a credible commitment to low inflation. Strong accountability 
mechanisms and transparency were put in place to legitimise that independence. 
Those changes reflected the belief that price stability was the best contribution a central bank 
could  make  to  macroeconomic  stability  and  by  extension  to  the  broader  public  good.  This 
represented a deconstruction of the old model of central banking.5 
In my view, while there were enormous innovations of enduring value during this period, the 
reductionist  vision  of  a  central  bank’s  role  that  was  adopted  around  the  world  was  fatally 
flawed. 
                                                
2  Other banks were restricted to partnerships of up to 6 members. 
3  During the 1866 and 1878 crises the Bank lent freely to the system but allowed the insolvent Overend Gurney 
and  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  to  fail.  And  in  1890  it  used  a  “lifeboat”  approach  to  rescue  Barings  which  was 
perceived to be solvent. Note however that there is no definitive evidence that an explicit set of Lender of Last 
Report (LOLR) principles was accepted by the top of the Bank and its directors. The emergence of the Bank’s 
LOLR role in this period is discussed in Collins (1988), Capie (2002) and Dornbusch and Frenkel (1984). 
In the late 19th Century the banking system was relatively unregulated (and partly self-regulated) – the Bank 
did not have an explicit supervisory infrastructure or system of prudential control until 1979. Nevertheless the 
scope of the Bank’s responsibilities was arguably as broad then as it is now, albeit that the mix was different.  
4 
5  See Padoa-Schioppa (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  particular,  it  failed  to  recognise  that  financial  stability  is  as  important  an  objective  of 
macroeconomic policy as price stability, and it downplayed the interrelationships between the 
two. 
And it failed to recognise that central banks have a vital role to play in maintaining financial 
stability because of the deep underlying connection between it and monetary stability. Both 
are fundamentally about maintaining the public trust and confidence in money and financial 
intermediation  that  are  essential  for  them  to  oil  the  wheels  of  commerce.  That  trust  and 
confidence can be undermined through a loss of certainty about the future value of money, a 
loss  of  confidence  in  financial  intermediaries,  or  ultimately  a  loss  of  faith  in  the  financial 
system. 
Central banks have a primordial responsibility to act as guarantors of trust and confidence in 
money because of their status as monopoly issuers of currency. This naturally gives them 
control over the quantity of money and interest rates – monetary policy. It also means that a 
core  part  of  financial  stability  policy  –  acting  as  lender  of  last  resort  to  private  financial 
institutions at times of financial stress – falls naturally to central banks. 
Other instruments of financial stability policy seek to prevent the build-up of vulnerabilities in 
the  first  place.  Microprudential  supervision  aims  to  maintain  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
individual  financial  institutions  by  ensuring  they  are  adequately  capitalised  and  have 
sufficiently  resilient  funding  and  liquidity.  Macroprudential  policy  seeks  to  safeguard  the 
stability and resilience of the financial system as a whole both by using prudential policy for 
macroeconomic  ends  –  for  example  in  managing  the  financial  cycle  –  and  by  addressing 
risks related to structural features of financial institutions and markets. In the latter regard, 
the priorities range from ending too big to fail to improving the resilience of financial market 
infrastructure. 
The  Bank  of  England  has  now  been  tasked  by  Parliament  with  operating  these  prudential 
tools. Our broad range of responsibilities now include: supervision and regulation of financial 
market  infrastructures;  acting  as  lender  and  market  maker  of  last  resort;  the  design  and 
operation of macroprudential tools; recommendations on core elements of financial reform; 
and the resolution of failing financial institutions. 
A return to a broad role is welcome. 
The best answer to the question of what the Bank of England is for is given by the original 
1694 founding charter: promoting the good of the people of the United Kingdom. 
That mission is timeless. The understanding of what we should do to achieve it has evolved. 
In  1694  promoting  the  good  of  the  people  meant  financing  a  war  with  France.  During  the 
Great  Moderation,  it  meant  price  stability.  Today,  reflecting  the  lessons  of  the  ensuing 
financial crisis, it means maintaining both monetary and financial stability. 
We don’t intend to fail. 
Going back 320 years to refresh our purpose is part of building on the best of our history, but 
we are not seeking to reconstruct the central bank of the past. Instead through our strategic 
plan we are building the 21st Century central bank. 
Here’s how. 
One Bank: complementarities, synergies and economies of scope 
The broad range of responsibilities we have been given creates the potential to exploit the 
complementarities and synergies between them. 
It  is  our  duty  to  do  so  because  the  effectiveness  of  each  function  influences  that  of  the 
others. In other words, we have to maximise our impact by working together. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
That imperative is the core of our new strategic plan which stresses that our contribution to 
the public good will be greatest if we work as One Bank. 
Complementarities might be operational, arising when putting two functions together is more 
efficient  by  allowing  faster  decision  making  in  a  crisis,  improving  the  coherence  of 
communication, or taking advantage of the common skills, information or analyses required 
to operate the policies.6 
Or they might be economic, arising when there are strong interactions in the way the policies 
have their effect, or when one policy affects another. It then makes more sense to have them 
operated by one institution so that shared analysis and information leads to consistency of 
decision making and so that trade-offs between objectives can be managed effectively, and 
in a timely manner, to achieve better outcomes. 
There  are  strong  complementarities  between  all  four  of  the  core  functions  of  the  Bank: 
monetary  policy,  markets,  macroprudential  policy  and  microprudential  regulation.7  Each 
affects overall monetary and financial conditions and therefore has the capacity to affect the 
achievement of both monetary and financial stability. They in turn help maintain confidence in 
the currency, which we also support by issuing high-quality banknotes that people can use 
with confidence. More generally we are conscious that everything we do affects the trust and 
confidence in the Bank and by extension the financial system. 
Monetary and macroprudential policy 
The  interaction  between  macroprudential  and  monetary  policy  is  central  to  the  Bank’s 
success in achieving its dual objectives of monetary and financial stability. 
The case for discharging these responsibilities in a coordinated way is very strong. 
I am delighted that Ben Broadbent has today been appointed as the next Deputy Governor 
for Monetary Policy. In that role, he will be central to co-ordinating these functions and his 
experience in academia, financial markets, and as an external Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC) member, makes him extremely well qualified to do so. 
The  transmission  channels  of  monetary  and  prudential  policy  overlap,  particularly  in  their 
impact  on  banks’  balance  sheets  and  credit  supply  and  demand  –  and  hence  the  wider 
economy.8 Monetary policy affects the resilience of the financial system, and macroprudential 
policy tools that affect leverage influence credit growth and the wider economy. 
In  turn,  financial  stability  is  a  pre-requisite  for  monetary  stability  –  for  example  systemic 
banking crises are likely to be deflationary. In reducing the frequency and severity of financial 
crises,  macroprudential  policy  therefore  helps  to  preserve  the  role  of  money  as  a  store  of 
value.9 
While price and financial stability are clearly connected, achieving both can be difficult. As we 
saw so clearly in the run-up to the financial crisis, the credit and business cycles operate on 
different  time  horizons,  with  the  former  as  much  as  twice  as  long  and  twice  as  big.10  In 
                                                
6  Decision-making  should  be  quicker  with  fewer  agencies  involved,  and  when  trade-offs  can  be  internalised 
rather than being subject to negotiation. 
7  Blinder (2010) argues that, because of economies of scope, the Federal Reserve should be both the systemic 
risk regulator and should supervise because preserving financial stability is closely aligned with the objectives 
of monetary policy and is likely to require lender of last resort powers.  
8  Monetary policy affects banks’ balance sheets for example by changing the return on their assets; through its 
impact  on  the  economic  cycle  and  the  amount  of  bad  loans;  through  its  impact  on  credit  demand;  and  by 
affecting the value of their collateral and hence funding conditions. 
9  Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2013). 
10  See Aikman et al (2014), Drehman et al (2012).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
pursuing  price  stability,  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  the  gradual  build-up  of  financial 
vulnerabilities through its effect on the degree of risk-taking in the economy.11 For example 
the  period  of  low  and  predictable  interest  rates  before  the  financial  crisis  helped  drive  a 
“search for yield” and leverage cycle, even with inflation subdued. 
It doesn’t take a genius to see that similar risks exist today. 
That tension between monetary and financial stability is best managed in a coordinated way 
in a single institution. The use of macroprudential tools can decrease the need for monetary 
policy to be diverted from managing the business cycle towards managing the credit cycle. 
This  enhances  the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target.  That  in  turn  may  reduce  the  need  for 
sharp  or  persistent  moves  in  interest  rates,  which  themselves  might  threaten  financial 
stability. 
Similarly, macroprudential policy can more effectively focus on its primary goal of systemic 
stability by recognising that, while it affects the economic cycle, it is not suited to managing it. 
Instead its effects on the economic cycle should – like fiscal policy – be taken into account in 
setting  monetary  policy,  which  is  the  primary  and  most  effective  tool  of  demand 
management. 
Taken together with the synergies from sharing information and analysis, these are strong 
arguments for operating monetary policy and prudential policy in the same institution. In the 
short  time  the  Bank  has  been  responsible  for  both,  we  have  already  seen  the  benefits  of 
operating them in a coordinated way. 
For example, our forward guidance framework for monetary policy reflects a clear division of 
responsibilities. Although monetary policy has an important role to play in mitigating financial 
stability risks, it does so only as a last line of defence. 
This  is  important  because  vulnerabilities  can  emerge  from  a  long  period  of  unusually  low 
interest rates, as complacency sets in about the future path of policy and asset prices. There 
have been signs of such behaviour across the housing markets in advanced economies. In 
anticipation of similar risks arising in the UK the Bank’s MPC and FPC have met jointly to 
review them. The FPC has identified a graduated range of macroprudential tools available to 
it for a coherent, proportionate response to these risks, and has taken initial, prudent steps. 
As the housing market evolves and macroprudential policy responds the FPC and MPC will 
continue  to  work  together  to  understand  the  collective  impact  of  measures  on  residual 
vulnerabilities and macroeconomic outcomes. 
That  co-ordination,  the  shared  monitoring  of  risks,  and  clarity  over  the  FPC’s  tools  allows 
monetary policy to keep Bank Rate as low as necessary for as long as appropriate in order to 
support the recovery and maintain price stability. For example expectations of the future path 
of interest rates – and hence longer-term borrowing costs – have not risen as the housing 
market has begun to recover quickly. 
Macroprudential and microprudential policy 
There is also a natural complementarity between macro and microprudential policy because, 
in  essence,  macroprudential  policy  uses  prudential  policy  tools  for  macroeconomic  ends, 
specifically the mitigation of risks that could in time undermine price and financial stability.12 
So the two will often operate through the same channels – albeit towards different objectives. 
                                                
11  See Adrian and Shin (2010), Jimenez et al. (forthcoming). 
12  For  example,  the  Basel  III  framework  for  capital  regulation  combines  microprudential  and  macroprudential 
elements.  Tougher  minimum  requirements  and  institution-specific  add-ons  will  be  the  responsibility  of 
microprudential  supervision.  The  system-wide  counter-cyclical  buffer  will  be 
responsibility  of 
macroprudential policy.  
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Those  objectives  are  themselves  generally  mutually  reinforcing.  While  ensuring  the  safety 
and soundness of individual institutions is not sufficient for systemic stability, it surely helps.13 
Meanwhile macroprudential policy seeks to reduce systemic risks and in doing so is likely to 
improve the resilience of individual firms.14 
At times there may be a conflict. This is most likely to arise at a turning point in the cycle 
when  macroprudential  policy  –  perhaps  in  pursuit  of  its  secondary  objective  to  support 
growth  and  employment  –  may  mandate  a  loosening  of  capital  requirements  in  order  to 
support credit supply and broader economic conditions. A microprudential supervisor at the 
same  time  may  understandably  be  more  concerned  to  maintain  large  capital  buffers.  The 
question best answered in a single institution is which dominates – risks from a paradox of 
thrift or those from weakened institutions? 
The obvious overlaps in tools and objectives mean that combining the two arms of prudential 
policy  in  one  organisation  makes  sense.  That  will  also  help  to  share  knowledge  and 
expertise, and to help avoid conflicting messages to firms. And, to the extent conflicts occur, 
they  are  likely  to  best  be  resolved  within  a  single  institution  through  shared  analysis  and 
mutual understanding of reaction functions.15 
Our strategy will be to conduct supervision as an integrated part of the central bank and not 
as a standalone supervisory agency that happens to be attached to a central bank. 
The benefits that close cooperation can bring were demonstrated in 2013 as the PRA and 
the FPC worked closely together to bring clarity both to banks’ existing capital positions, and 
the standards expected of them. The FPC mandated the exercise with a view to establishing 
a system-wide, transparent standard of resilience that would boost confidence and allow the 
banking  system  to  contribute  to  economic  recovery.  The  PRA  –  under  Andrew  Bailey’s 
leadership – delivered the recommendation for each of the major institutions. The resulting 
increase  in  capital  ensured  the  core  of  the  financial  system  was  on  a  sound  footing  and 
made an important contribution to securing economic recovery. 
There were clearly lessons to learn from that exercise, most notably the importance of clarity 
of early communication by the Bank to financial institutions about the standards to which they 
would be held. Those lessons are being applied now in the first of the Bank’s annual stress-
testing  exercises,  which  will  bring  together  the  microprudential  standards  for  banks  with  a 
macroprudential assessment of the risks to which they must be resilient. 
As  with  monetary  policy,  expectations  matter  and  the  system  will  be  more  resilient  if  the 
Bank’s moves can be anticipated. 
Market operations and prudential policy 
The synergies I have identified so far explain why it makes sense for monetary policy and 
prudential policies to be operated by a single institution, but there are also complementarities 
between prudential policy and the way a central bank uses its balance sheet and controls the 
supply of high-powered money. 
                                                
13 
In  a  concentrated  banking  system  such  as  the  UK’s  the  resilience  of  a  subset  of  large  institutions  has  a 
disproportionate effect on the resilience of the system. One might think that microprudential regulation is then 
enough to guarantee systemic stability. But that is not so when there are systemic externalities or financial 
accelerator effects. The latter operate through feedbacks in the macroeconomy, and would depend (among 
other  things)  in  the  short  run  on  the  response  of  monetary  policy.  A  macroprudential  authority  –  with  a 
macroeconomic  viewpoint  –  therefore  complements  microprudential  supervision  even  in  a  concentrated 
banking system. 
14  See Bank of England (2009) for a discussion. 
15  Blinder  (2010)  makes  this  argument  in  the  context  of  potential  conflicts  between  safety  and  soundness 
considerations and monetary policy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The design and operation of our liquidity facilities have important synergies with prudential 
policy.  The  terms  on  which  we  supply  liquidity  in  times  of  stress  affects  the  level  of  self-
insurance banks choose. If we are too strict, banks have to over-insure at significant cost by 
holding an excess of low-yielding liquid assets rather than loans, and markets will freeze too 
quickly in crises. But overly permissive terms create a moral hazard risk in the form of banks 
running excessive liquidity mismatches in normal times.16 Prudential supervisors can mitigate 
the moral hazard risk by imposing minimum liquidity requirements. But there is no point in 
setting  those  requirements  at  a  very  high  level  when  the  central  bank  is  prepared  to  lend 
freely against good collateral to solvent institutions. 
So  it  is  important  to  coordinate  liquidity  requirements  and  banks’  reliance  on  liquidity 
insurance  from  the  Bank  of  England.  Striking  an  efficient  balance  is  most  likely  when 
responsibility for prudential policy also lies with the central bank.17 And it explains why we are 
announcing management changes today to enhance that coordination, with Paul Fisher – the 
Bank’s Executive Director for Markets – moving to become Deputy Head of the PRA. 
The Bank exploited those synergies in August 2013 when, recognising the greater availability 
of liquidity insurance provided through our facilities, and banks’ improved capitalisation, we 
reduced the required level of banks’ liquid asset holdings to help support lending to the real 
economy. 
And in October last year we overhauled our facilities, offering money and collateral for longer 
terms  against  a  wider  range  of  assets,  at  lower  cost.  We  could  do  so  because,  as  both 
supervisor  and  provider  of  liquidity  insurance,  we  can  manage  any  resulting  moral  hazard 
risk.18 More importantly these changes recognise and support the evolution of markets and 
the  growing  importance  of  collateral  that  in  turn stems from financial  reform. We  have  the 
opportunity through the design of our facilities to help support more diverse forms of finance 
and more resilient markets – to the benefit of financial stability. 
There  is  another  important  operational  complementarity.  The  Bank  can  use  supervisory 
information and insight to make quicker, better informed judgements about whether to lend to 
banks at times of crisis.19 
It is clear that there is a strong case for central banks to have a broad role. Monetary and 
financial  stability  are  core  objectives  of  macroeconomic  policy,  and  central  banks  are 
uniquely  well  positioned 
their  achievement.  There  are  significant 
complementarities  between  the  broad  range  of  the  Bank’s  policy  responsibilities,  and  that 
has  already  translated  into  significant  mutually  reinforcing  support  to  the  UK  economic 
recovery. 
Our strategic plan cements our commitment to work as One Bank to exploit those synergies. 
It  breaks  down  barriers  between  areas  within  the  Bank  through  a  reorganisation  that  puts 
greater  emphasis  on  joint  working  and moves  key  senior  staff  between  areas;  it  aids  staff 
movement between areas by promoting a unified culture; it sweeps away a proliferation of 
internal committees that held up decision-making; and it gives responsibility to the new Chief 
Economist and Governors both for a coordinated research agenda spanning all aspects of 
central banking and focusing in particular on the intersections between policy areas, and for 
ensuring the Bank makes better use of the data we have across the organisation in tackling 
all of the policy challenges we face. 
to  contribute 
to 
                                                
16  See Farhi and Tirole (2012).  
17  See Rochet and Vives (2004). 
18  See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/money/publications/liquidityinsurance.pdf. 
19  See Ferguson (1999). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
International engagement to shape an open global system 
In  an  era  of  renewed  globalisation  securing  monetary  and  financial  stability  requires  more 
than  a  purely  domestic  focus.  To  realise  globalisation’s  promise  and  deliver  strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth,  policymakers  must  re-build  an  open,  integrated  and 
resilient global financial system. As the leading global financial centre, the UK will be central 
to this task. There are two elements that are particularly important. 
First,  the  Bank  of  England’s  actions  will  help  shape  the  functioning  of  core  markets.  The 
combination of the eventual exit from Quantitative Easing and new liquidity regulations will 
shape  demand  for  central  bank  reserves.  A  host  of  financial  reforms,  such  as  those  to 
derivative  markets,  will  fundamentally  change  the  role  of  collateral,  to  which  the  Bank  of 
England’s facilities must respond. And most fundamentally, given the serious issues raised 
by the Libor and foreign exchange scandals, changes must be made to both the hard and 
soft infrastructure of core markets to ensure they are fair, effective and efficient. 
These are massive issues which require focus, discipline and innovation. Those are some of 
the reasons why we have created a new Deputy Governor role for Markets and Banking and 
why my colleagues and I are thrilled that Minouche Shafik has accepted this extraordinarily 
important 
international,  managerial  and  economic 
experience from a career that has spanned academia, the public service and the IMF. She 
will help lead the Bank’s efforts to reshape core markets and the Bank’s relationship to them. 
Second, through its intellectual leadership and international relationships, the Bank can help 
complete  the  G20’s  ambitious  programme  of  financial  reform  including  building  resilient 
financial institutions, ending too big to fail, making derivative markets safer and transforming 
shadow banking to market based finance. Sir Jon Cunliffe, one of the original architects of 
the  Financial  Stability  Board,  is  leading  this  effort.  The  job  is  too  big  for  one  person  and 
requires a well-resourced and focused international strategy that draws on all areas of the 
Bank.  That  is  why  we  are  pooling  our  prudential  policy  teams  in  a  single  directorate  and 
bringing together our international teams to increase insight and impact. 
By acting as One Bank we can increase our international impact and ensure that the UK’s 
financial sector can be both a global good and a national asset. 
task.  Minouche  brings 
immense 
Building on the success of the past 25 years 
On the face of it the recent enlargement in the Bank’s responsibilities represents a return to 
the broader role of the Bank of the past. If there are some similarities in roles, how we will 
discharge  them  will  be  fundamentally  different.  The  age  of  informal  responsibilities,  nods, 
winks, secrecy and instinct is long past.20 
In no small part due to the Mais Lectures of my predecessors, particularly Mervyn King, we 
have  today  a  regime  for  monetary  policy  that  is  both  democratically  legitimate  and  highly 
effective. It rests on clear ultimate objectives delegated by Parliament, on sound governance 
arrangements to support independence, and on transparency of policymaking. 
We  are  extending  this  sound  framework  with  our  strategic  plan.  We  will  reinforce  these 
foundations in monetary policy. And we will broaden them to financial stability. 
The case for the independent operation of monetary policy is firmly established around the 
time-inconsistency of governments with horizons dictated by the electoral cycle. That time-
inconsistency  argument  applies  even  more  strongly 
to  both  microprudential  and 
macroprudential policy given the large potential size and long duration of credit cycles. The 
                                                
20  That  approach  is  perhaps  best  captured  by  Montagu  Norman’s  remark  in  1930  when  pressed  by  the 
Macmillan  Committee to explain  the  Bank’s actions:  “Reasons,  Mr  Chairman?  I don’t  have  reasons,  I have 
instincts”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
avoidance of potentially unpopular measures to boost the resilience of the financial system 
today  can  have  disastrous  consequences  many  years  later.  Moreover,  being  tough  and 
avoiding crises has no obvious reward. It is hard to be given credit for a counterfactual. 
The Bank’s independence must be supported by good governance arrangements. Now that 
Parliament has developed them, we must make them work. The model used for monetary 
policy of decisions being made by a committee made up of both Bank of England executives 
and independent experts has been expanded to financial stability with the creation of both a 
Financial Policy Committee and a Board of Prudential Regulation. As I have argued, those 
policy  committees  will  be  more  effective  if  they  have  access  to  the  broadest  range  of  the 
Bank’s  analysis  and  information  and  are  as  well  informed  as  possible  about  each  other’s 
reaction function. 
The now very wide range of the Bank’s responsibilities also creates a need to strengthen the 
oversight arrangements for the Bank as a whole. For delivery of our statutory objectives, the 
Bank  is  accountable  to  the  public,  through  Parliament’s  Treasury  Committee.  That 
accountability is being reinforced. 
Parliament has created an Oversight Committee of 8 non-executives who are in the Bank but 
not  of  the  Bank.  The  Government  has  today  announced  the  appointment  of  Anthony 
Habgood to lead the Bank’s Court of Directors and the Oversight Committee. I welcome the 
appointment  of  someone  of  his  depth  and  breadth  of  corporate  experience.  Independent 
oversight  by  the  committee  he  will  chair  can  strengthen  the  Bank’s  legitimacy  and 
effectiveness. 
The  Oversight  Committee  has  access  to  internal  papers,  is  able  to  observe  meetings  of 
policy  committees,  and  is  responsible  for  reviewing  all  aspects  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Executive  of  the  Bank,  including  the  delivery  of  policy,  the  design  of  and  adherence  to 
rigorous processes and procedures, and the monitoring of our transparency and openness. 
Modelled on the Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF, we will create a unit to support 
this, with a director reporting to the Chairman of the Oversight Committee. 
It  is  not  just  our  governance  but  also  our  commitment  to  transparency  and  openness  that 
must be further enhanced. 
Transparency and openness are central not just to our legitimacy to perform these new tasks 
on behalf of the citizens of the United Kingdom. They are also central to our effectiveness in 
performing  them.  Just  as  Governor  King  described  in  his  Mais  Lecture  9  years  ago, 
openness about what policy is seeking to achieve can make it more effective.21 
In monetary policy, that helps to anchor inflation expectations and to support countercyclical 
movements in the policy setting. To that end, we have introduced forward guidance to reduce 
uncertainty  about  the  way  monetary  policy  will  be  set  as  the  recovery  gains  pace.  Our 
Inflation  Report  has  evolved  in  the  past  year  to  contain  more  information  about  the  key 
judgements underlying our forecasts and to widen the set of economic indicators for which 
we publish forecasts to include the labour market, components of GDP, the world economy 
and household incomes and saving. 
It  will  evolve  further,  including  using  our  new  organisational  structure  to  draw  stronger 
distinctions  between  staff  and  MPC  forecasts.  We  will  also  review  the  case  for  releasing 
transcripts of our policy meetings after some years, and report publicly to the Oversight and 
Treasury Select Committees on the outcome of that review. 
Through our strategic plan, we will also increase the transparency of our work on financial 
stability. We will publish the results of regular bank stress tests. As with monetary policy, we 
also intend to publish more of the research and analysis underlying our policy choices. Over 
                                                
21  See King (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
time,  the  financial  sector  will  be  better  placed  to  anticipate  our  responses  and  as  with 
monetary  policy,  increased  transparency  will  make  us  not  just  accountable,  but  also  more 
effective. 
Conclusion 
The  first  Mais  Lectures  launched  the  fight  against  inflation.  With  time  and  increased 
confidence policymakers would win that war only to lose the peace. 
As  a  consequence,  George  Osborne’s  2010  lecture  heralded  the  return  of  prudential 
supervision and the introduction of macroprudential policy to the Bank of England. Today’s 
challenge  is  to  create  a  macroeconomic  environment  that  provides  the  basis  for  strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth, the economist’s equivalent of a land fit for heroes. 
This evening I have sketched how the Bank of England intends to makes its contribution. I 
am in no doubt that those who come after me will add to our collective knowledge of how 
best to coordinate the Bank’s vast array of policy levers to achieve our fundamental mission. 
An open and confident Bank will welcome such advice and criticism. 
Why?  Because  the  need  for  broad  macroeconomic  management  is  not  just  an  intellectual 
curiosity, but rather a reality that will persist for years to come. 
As the MPC has signalled, a low for long interest rate environment will likely be with us for 
some time. The MPC’s new guidance that any adjustments in rates, when they come, will be 
limited  and gradual  helps  provide  confidence to households  and  businesses  that the  MPC 
won’t  take  risks  with  the  recovery.  This  in  turn  helps  make  the  attainment  of  the  inflation 
target more likely. 
At the same time, policymakers across the Bank’s statutory committees are fully aware that 
an  environment  of  relatively  low  and  predictable  interest  rates  could  encourage  excessive 
risk taking in financial markets and by households.22 This puts a tremendous burden on both 
microprudential supervision and macroprudential management. 
Moreover,  the  nature  of  a  rapidly  evolving  global  economy  reinforces  these  pressures. 
Sustained 
intense  capital  flow  volatility  and  powerful 
disinflationary  forces  driven  by  the  integration  of  the  other  half  of  humanity  into  the  global 
economy will buffet our economy and financial sector for years to come. 
The Bank can help turn those challenges into opportunities. Through the coordinated use of 
the Bank’s tools, risks to monetary and financial stability can be mitigated. Through changes 
to  the  hard  and  soft  infrastructure  of  markets  fair,  open  and  competitive  markets  can  be 
re-built.  Through  ideas  and  engagement,  the  global  financial  system  can  be  reformed  to 
secure an open, resilient system in which all countries have confidence and in which British 
businesses can thrive. 
To achieve this we are building a central bank for the 21st Century that combines the finest 
aspects of our history and traditions with the best of the modern and new. 
That is how we will contribute to the good of the people. The Mais Lectures of decades to 
come  –  along  with  the  stability  of  our  economic  and  financial  system  –  will  testify  as  to 
whether we have succeeded. 
 
 
imbalances  across  countries, 
                                                 
22  Carney (2009).  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
References 
Brunnermeier, M and Y. Sannikov, (2013), “The I-theory of Money”, mimeo. 
Adrian,  T.  and  H.  Shin,  (2010),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary  Economics”,  in 
Friedman,  Benjamin  M  and  Michael  Woodford  (eds),  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics. 
New York: Elsevier. 
Aikman, D., A. Haldane and B. Nelson (2014 forthcoming), “Curbing the credit cycle”, The 
Economic Journal. 
Bank of England (2009), “The role of macroprudential policy: a discussion paper”, Bank of 
England. 
Blinder,  A.,  (2010),  “How  Central  Should  the  Central  Bank  Be?”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Literature, 48(1): 123–133. 
Capie, F., (2002) “The emergence of the Bank of England as a mature central bank”, in D. Winch 
and P. O’Brien, eds., The political economy of British historical experience, 1688–1914, Oxford 
University Press. 
Carney, M., (2009), “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic 
Activity”,  Remarks  at 
the  Jackson  Hole  Symposium,  Wyoming.  Available  at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2009/08/some-considerations-using-monetary-policy/. 
Collins, M., (1988), “Money and banking in the UK: A History”, Croom Helm. 
Dornbusch,  R.,  and  J.  Frenkel,  (1984),  “The  Bank  of  England  in  the  Crisis  of  1847”,  in 
M. Bordo  and  A.  Schwarz,  A  Retrospective  on  the  Classical  Gold  Standard,  1821–1931, 
University of Chicago Press. 
Drehmann,  M.,  C.  Borio  and  K.  Tsatsaronis  (2012),  “Characterising  the  financial  cycle: 
don’t lose sight of the medium term!”, BIS Working Papers No 380. 
Farhi, E and J. Tirole, (2012), “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and Systemic 
Bailouts”, American Economic Review, 102(1). 
Ferguson,  R.,  (1999),  “Alternative  approaches  to  financial  supervision  and  regulation”, 
Journal of Financial Services Research, 16 (2/3), 297–303. 
Jimenez, G, S. Ongena, J-L. Peydro, and J. Saurina, (forthcoming), “Hazardous times for 
monetary policy: what do twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary 
policy on credit risk-taking?”, Econometrica. 
King, M., (2005) “Monetary Policy: Practice Ahead of Theory”, Mais Lecture, Cass Business 
School, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/ 
historicpubs/speeches/2005/speech245.pdf. 
Padoa-Schioppa,  T.,  (2011),  “Global  macroprudential  regulation”,  in  Macro-Prudential 
Regulatory  Policies:  The  New  Road  to  Financial  Stability,  by  S.  Claessens,  D.  Evanoff, 
G. Kaufman, eds., World Scientific. 
Rochet, J-C and X. Vives, (2004), “Coordination failures and the lender of last resort: was 
Bagehot right after all?”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(6), December. 
London.  Available 
at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
