  Charles L Evans: Monetary goals and strategy 
Speech by Mr Charles L Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, at the 
Annual  Hyman  P  Minsky  Conference  on  the  State  of  the  US  and  World  Economies, 
Washington, DC, 9 April 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can also be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago’s website. 
Introduction 
Thank you Dimitri. Before proceeding with my comments today, I need to remind you that the 
views I express are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) or within the Federal Reserve System. 
 
 The U.S. Congress created the Federal Reserve System 100 years ago, largely as a way to 
provide an elastic currency that could mitigate the banking panics and other disruptions that 
impaired economic activity and contributed to deflations in the late 1800s and early 1900s. 
That  mission  has  evolved  into  what  is  now  known  as  our  dual  mandate  –  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  directive  to  help  foster  conditions that  achieve  both  stable  prices  and maximum 
employment.  Over  the  Fed’s  100  year  history,  three  major  historical  episodes  continue  to 
provide  lessons  for  today  (chart  1).  First,  in  the  1930s,  the  U.S.  economy  experienced  a 
severe  credit  contraction  and  deflation  during  the  Great  Depression.  Milton  Friedman  and 
Anna  Schwartz  argued  persuasively  that  inept  monetary  policy  failed  to  combat  these 
destructive deflationary forces.1 Second, in the 1970s, U.S. monetary policy tried to do too 
much  to  stimulate growth  and  reduce  unemployment  when  unrecognized  structural factors 
                                                
1   Friedman and Schwartz (1963). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  stood  in  the  way.  Overly  accommodative  policy  led  to  soaring  rates  of  inflation.  Third,  the 
Treasury Accord of 1951 reminds us that an essential feature of good monetary policy is an 
independent central bank – one that is autonomous enough to make tough policy decisions. 
But,  democratically  elected  authorities  don’t  just  grant  autonomy  to  unelected  central 
bankers,  nor  should  they.  The  price  of  autonomy  is  accountability.  In  order  to  maintain 
autonomy, we need to say what we are trying to accomplish and then honestly evaluate our 
progress in a way that the public and their representatives can judge clearly. 
 
  The FOMC has recently made great strides in this direction by explicitly expositing a strategy 
that reflects the three key lessons of its history. The Committee’s “Statement of longer-run 
goals  and  monetary  policy  strategy”2  was  first  made  in  January  2012  and  has  been 
reaffirmed  each  year  since  (chart  2).  In  it,  the  Committee  indicates  that  price  stability  is 
understood to mean 2 percent inflation in the long run as measured by the annual change in 
the  price  index  for  total  personal  consumption  expenditures  (what  we  refer  to  as  the  PCE 
price  index.)  The  1930s’  deflation  and  the  1970s’  double-digit  inflation  clearly  indicate  that 
the nation is well-served by the Fed having a long-run inflation objective and making sure it 
achieves that objective within a reasonable period of time. 
The employment mandate is more nuanced. Because maximum employment is determined 
by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure of the labor market, we can’t have a simple, 
time-invariant  goal.  We  do,  however,  project  where  we  think  the  longer-run  normal,  or 
“natural  rate,”  of  unemployment  is  currently.  Today,  our  estimates  for  this  rate  generally 
range  between  5.2  percent  and  5.6  percent.  Such  assessments  can  vary  over  time. 
However, the most important determinants of the natural rate change only slowly, so today’s 
assessment is an important input into policy. Being explicit about it contributes greatly to our 
accountability. 
Accountability is key. Much as corporations require corporate scorecards and earnings calls 
to explain quarterly performance, the Fed needs to regularly communicate its policy strategy 
and evaluate how it’s doing. And, when we are missing our policy goals, the public needs to 
know what we are doing about it. We need to decide on the appropriate actions to achieve 
our objectives and communicate them to the public. To that end, in our longer-run strategy 
statement  we’ve  said  that  when  the  economy  deviates  from  price  stability  or  maximum 
                                                
2  Federal Open Market Committee (2014c). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  employment,  we’ll  take  a  balanced  policy  approach  that  achieves  both  goals  within  a 
reasonable period of time. 
A clear articulation of the FOMC’s goals and an explanation of how it views its policy misses 
and plans to correct them help the public better anticipate the Fed’s policy actions. In turn, 
the  public’s  improved  understanding  of  FOMC  policy  actions  increases  their  efficacy  by 
reducing uncertainty over future financial conditions and how those actions might evolve with 
changes  in  the  economic  environment.  So,  what  we  clearly  need  is  a  scorecard  that 
communicates our accountability in a straightforward manner. 
Keeping score when there are two goals 
  I  like  to  illustrate  our  balanced  approach  to  achieving  our  dual-mandate  goals  with  what  I 
refer to as a bull’s-eye scorecard (chart 3). The bull’s-eye in the center illustrates where we 
would  like  to  be. In this  case, the goals  are  2 percent  inflation  over  the  medium  term  and 
unemployment  at  its  natural  rate,  taken  here  to  be  5–1/4  percent,  which  is  my  long-run 
projection. The scorecard shows an equal weighting of policy misses around our inflation and 
unemployment  objectives;  that  is,  each  circular  ring  is  a  collection  of  unemployment  and 
inflation rates that should be equally uncomfortable for FOMC participants.3 For example, it 
tells  us  how  the  9  percent  unemployment  rate  we  faced  back  in  September  2011  can  be 
depicted  in  “inflation-loss  equivalent  units”  by  showing  the  inflation  rate  that  gives  an 
equivalent loss when unemployment is at its sustainable rate. The answer is 5–1/2 percent 
inflation! The greater the distance the circle is from the center of the target, the greater are 
                                                
3  Putting  equal  weight  on  (squared)  inflation  and  unemployment  deviations  is  reasonably  standard.  Given 
Okun’s law, this is equivalent to a formulation that weights inflation deviations four times more heavily than 
output deviations. In his seminal 1979 analysis, John Taylor noted that any heavier weight on inflation would 
reflect “extremely uneven concerns about inflation.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  our policy misses. And the greater our policy misses, the greater are the social gains from 
aggressive monetary and other public policy actions to correct them. 
The  bull’s-eye  scorecard  approach  has  three  benefits.  First,  it  provides  accountability  by 
clearly  describing  success  and  failure  to  achieve  our  mandated  goals.  Second,  it  renders 
operational the concept of the FOMC’s intent to take a balanced approach in achieving our 
goals.  Third,  the  bull’s-eye  guides  the  public’s  judgment  of  the  FOMC’s  likely  response  to 
current economic conditions. While we have made considerable progress toward our goals 
since 2011, we still have some ways to go to reach the bull’s-eye. 
Missing on the full employment mandate  
That’s  certainly  clear  in  the  case  of  our  employment  mandate.  While  we’ve  made  much 
progress  since  the  onset  of  the  Great  Recession  when  unemployment  reached  a  high  of 
10 percent,  6.7  percent  is  still  well  above  the  5–1/4  percent  rate  I  think  is  the  longer-run 
normal. Indeed, 6.7 percent is higher than the 6.3 percent peak unemployment rate in the 
previous recession. 
Moreover, we have to ask ourselves if this gap is a good measure of the current degree of 
slack in the labor market. For example, some of the decline in the unemployment rate over 
the past four years reflects people dropping out of the labor force instead of finding jobs. Of 
course,  certain  demographic  factors  such  as  the  increasing  number  of  baby  boomers 
reaching retirement age mean we should have expected to see a substantial drop in labor 
force participation for reasons unrelated to cyclical job prospects and the health of the labor 
market. But, when you take a detailed look, it appears that the labor force participation rate 
has recently declined more than can be accounted for by demographic trends and other such 
structural factors alone. In addition, the end of extended unemployment insurance benefits 
and other factors likely have decreased the natural rate of unemployment that is our target. 
So, the decline in the unemployment rate likely overstates to some degree the reduction of 
slack in the labor market over the past year. 
This discussion illustrates how difficult it is to judge where the labor market stands relative to 
our  full  employment  mandate.  A  while  back,  this  wasn’t  such  a  critical  issue:  When  the 
unemployment  rate  stood  at  9  or  10  percent,  it  obviously  far  exceeded  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment. Now, as the unemployment rate falls closer to its natural rate, disentangling 
structural from cyclical changes becomes more important. Thus, at this juncture, it is prudent 
to  consider  a  wide  range  of  indicators  of  labor  market  activity  to  better  gauge  the  overall 
health  of  the  labor  market.  In  the  press  conference  following  the  March  FOMC  meeting, 
Chair Janet Yellen indicated that, in addition to focusing on the official unemployment rate, 
the Committee considers a wide range of data in assessing labor market conditions.4 These 
include quit rates, layoffs and a variety of wage measures, as well as broader measures of 
unemployment  that  include  discouraged  workers  and  those  who  would  like  to  work  more 
hours.5 Generally, the evidence points to a still weak labor market. We still have some ways 
to go to reach our employment mandate. 
Below target on 2 percent inflation goal, too 
Let’s now turn to our price stability mandate. No one can doubt that we are undershooting 
our 2 percent target. Total PCE prices rose just 0.9 percent over the past 12 months; that is a 
substantial  and  serious  miss.  And,  as  the  bull’s-eye  chart  shows,  this  undershooting  has 
persisted  for  several  years.  Compounding  these  difficulties,  below-target  inflation  is  a 
                                                
4  Federal Open Market Committee (2014b). 
5  For  example,  the  broadest  measure  of  the  unemployment  rate,  U-6,  includes  those  workers  who  are 
marginally attached and those working part-time for economic reasons. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  worldwide  phenomenon  and  it  is  difficult  to  be  confident  that  all  policymakers  around  the 
world have fully taken its challenge onboard. Persistent below-target inflation is very costly, 
especially when it is accompanied by debt overhang, substantial resource slack, and weak 
growth. 
In the United States, the challenge of below-target inflation continues to be underappreciated 
in public commentary. Mistakenly, many greatly exaggerate the risks of overly high inflation. 
Before turning to inflation risks, let me mention one reason for some confusion. That is, some 
commentaries  minimize  the  current  below-target  inflation  experience  by  citing  the  slightly 
higher  increases  of  the  Consumer  Price  Index,  or  CPI.  The  CPI  is  the  best-known  single 
measure  of  inflation,  and  its  underlying  trend  currently  is  running  at  a  bit  above  
1–1/2 percent.  Many  commentators  compare  the  CPI  against  our  2  percent  inflation 
objective.  Unfortunately,  this  is  an  apples  and  oranges  comparison:  The  CPI  tends  to  run 
about  a  quarter  to  a  half  of  a  percentage  point  higher  on  average  than  the  PCE  index 
because of its different market-basket composition and statistical construction. Accordingly, it 
is  much  more  accurate  to  describe  the  Fed’s  inflation  objective  in  terms  of  the  CPI  to  be 
roughly 2–1/2 percent. So, against this 2–1/2 percent benchmark, CPI inflation also is quite 
low relative to target. In any event, the PCE price index is the preferred inflation measure on 
a  number  of  theoretical  grounds  and  the  one  chosen  by  the  FOMC  as  its  policy  target; 
therefore, we should judge the Committee’s ultimate inflation performance using that index 
relative to its 2 percent goal. 
So, what is the inflation outlook in the current environment? Despite current low rates, I still 
often  hear  people  say  that  higher  inflation  is  just  around  the  corner.  I  confess  that  I  am 
somewhat  exasperated by  these  repeated  warnings given  our  current  environment  of  very 
low inflation. Many times, the strongest concerns are expressed by folks who said the same 
thing back in 2009 and then in 2010 and, well, you get the picture. OK, five years later we still 
need to carefully assess this very serious question. Let me offer five reasons why I still see 
the economic environment as pointing to below-target inflation for several years. 
First,  many  commentators  see  rising  commodity  prices  as  a  harbinger  of  rising  inflation 
pressures.  Certainly,  back  in  2008  and  2010  there  were  instances  when  energy  and 
commodity  prices  rose  to  high  levels.  This  put  pressure  on  inflation  and  also  reduced 
aggregate  demand.  There  is  a  lot  of  evidence  that  these  types  of  relative  price  increases 
result  in  only  transitory  increases  in  consumer  price  levels.6  At  the  moment,  even  these 
transitory  upward  pressures  are  absent,  and  the  current  weak  state  of  global  demand 
contributes  to  downward  pressures.  Until  something  unexpected,  and  frankly  positive, 
happens  with  the  world  economy,  commodity  prices  seem  like  an  even  more  unlikely 
propellant for strongly rising inflation than they usually would be. 
Second,  some  say  a  classic  warning  sign  of  inflation  is  the  enormous  size  of  the  Fed’s 
balance  sheet  and  the  greater  than  $2.5  trillion  of  excess  reserves  sitting  on  commercial 
banks’ books. Surely, they say, enormous increases in the monetary base are likely to be 
accompanied  by  substantial  price  level  increases.  The  problem  with  this  story  is  that  the 
banks  have  not  been  lending  these  reserves  nearly  enough  to  generate  big  increases  in 
broad monetary aggregates. And even if they did, as an indicator of inflation, the monetary 
aggregates  lost  their  predictive  content  many  decades  ago.  The  evidence,  again,  is  that 
inflation remains low. But what if? What if lending picks up? Well, that would be really terrific. 
Dramatically higher bank lending would surely be associated with higher loan demand and a 
generally stronger economy. Strong growth and diminishing resource slack would be part of 
this  story,  and  a  rising  rate  environment  would  be  a  natural  force  diminishing  the  rising 
inflation pressures. In the meantime, monitoring the entire state of the economy along with 
                                                
6  Evans and Fisher (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  inflationary  pressures  would  be  rising 
inflation  seems  like  a  sensible  and  appropriate  safeguard  against  this  currently  low 
probability scenario. 
Third,  another  potential  source  of 
inflation 
expectations.  Here,  I  mean  a  breakout  of  inflation  expectations  separate  from  any 
fundamentals  that  might  accompany  the  previously  discussed  cases  of  rising  commodity 
prices  and  stronger  bank  lending.  One  could  think  of  this  as  the  spontaneous  combustion 
theory of inflation. The story goes like this: Households and businesses simply wake up one 
day  and  expect  higher  inflation  is  coming  without  any  further  improvement  in  economic 
fundamentals.  Without  appealing  to  esoteric  economic  theories  of  sunspots,  these 
expectations don’t seem sustainable in the current environment. Higher inflation expectations 
would  presumably  get  priced  into  higher  bond-market  yields  and  higher  financing  rates 
generally. Until inflation actually rises – remember, this story has expectations rising first – ex 
post real interest rates would be higher and that would presumably result in a higher debt 
burden  for  borrowers.  This  would  reduce  aggregate  demand.  Lower  demand  and  lower 
growth  would  further  reduce  cost  pressures,  strongly  suggesting  that  higher  inflation 
expectations would not be ratified by inflation experience, and thus, would not be sustained. 
Frankly, this story just seems very unlikely. 
Fourth, another more direct measure of potentially rising costs and hence inflation might be 
stronger wage growth. The economic story here is a bit involved. Most economic research 
indicates that rising wages are not a leading indicator of rising inflation, so wages are rarely 
an  early  warning  signal  for  future  inflation.  However,  higher  inflation  would  lead  to  higher 
nominal wage growth. And the double-digit inflation experience of the 1970s suggests that 
inappropriately accommodative monetary policy can amplify rising cost pressures, creating a 
wage–price spiral. Clearly, unsustainably strong nominal wage increases would very likely be 
symptomatic of rising inflation pressures. In terms of the current situation, there is good news 
and bad news. The good news is that currently, wage increases are low and not symptomatic 
of  high  inflation.  The  bad  news  is  that,  currently,  low  wage  increases  are  symptomatic  of 
weak income growth and low aggregate demand. Stronger wage growth would likely result in 
more  customers  walking  through  the  doors  of  business  establishments  and  leading  to 
stronger  sales,  more  hiring  and  capacity  expansion.  During  a  normal  and  steady-growth 
business  expansion,  nominal  wages  would  typically  grow  at  the  rate  of  productivity 
expansion  plus  compensation for  inflation.  If  normal  productivity  growth  is  1.5  percent  and 
inflation is at our 2 percent target, this would suggest a steady labor compensation increase 
of  3–1/2  percent  is  sustainable  without  building  inflation  pressures.  At  today’s  2  to  2–1/4 
percent  compensation  growth  rates  and  labor’s  historically  low  share  of  national  income, 
there is substantial room for stronger wage growth without inflation pressures building. 
Fifth,  do  we  really  know  that  the  public’s  expectations  are  for  low  inflation?  Judging  by 
today’s Treasury yield curve, inflation expectations remain below our target. If anyone was 
expecting  inflation  to  accelerate  in  the  future,  surely  individual  and  institutional  investors 
would  demand  to  be  compensated  for  growing  inflation  risk.  However,  our  Chicago  Fed 
affine term-structure model implies that the three-year-ahead average inflation expectations 
priced into the Treasury yield curve currently are below 2 percent and remain so for quite a 
number  of  years  to  come.  Given  today’s  unacceptably  low  inflation  environment  and  the 
wealth  of  inflation  indicators  that  point  to  continued  below-target  inflation,  I  think  we  need 
continued  strongly  accommodative  monetary  policy  to  get  inflation  back  up  to  2  percent 
within a reasonable time frame. After all, notice that the red and green regions of the bull’s-
eye  chart  show  modest  inflation  above  2  percent  is  much  more  acceptable  than  even 
6 percent unemployment. The FOMC should be  anxious to get to that bull’s-eye region as 
quickly as feasible given the long slow path to date. 
The Fed’s reaction function 
I’ve spoken so far about how we are missing on our policy objectives. Obviously, the aim of 
policy  is  to  eliminate  those  misses.  How  do  we  hit  the  bull’s-eye?  What  do  we  do 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  operationally in terms of policy tools? In normal times, the FOMC moves it’s traditional policy 
tool,  the  federal  funds  rate,  in  order  to  influence  aggregate  demand  and  with  it  economic 
growth and inflation and disinflationary pressures. 
  Many  economists  have  studied  the  relationship  between  actual  Fed  actions  and  sensible, 
explicit policy rules that might capture the Fed’s policy reaction function (chart 4). Historically, 
Fed policy moves have  been reasonably  well described by simple policy rules, particularly 
the  1999  version  of  the  so-called  Taylor  rule,7  that  relate  the  federal  funds  rate  to  the 
differences  of  output  (a  proxy  for  employment)  and  inflation  from  their  target  levels  and  a 
constant term that is meant to capture the equilibrium real interest rate and the Fed’s inflation 
target.  However,  this  rule  does  not  always  describe  policy  well.  For  example,  given 
judgmental,  but  reasonable,  choices  for  the  Fed’s  inflation  objective  before  it  adopted  a 
2 percent objective, the Taylor rule misses during the 1990s are big. Actually, in some cases 
they were bigger than those associated with the well-known and loud complaints lodged by 
John Taylor against the Fed for its 2003–06 deviations from the rule.8  
Why  do  these  misses  occur?  Well,  the  economy  and  the  policies  that  optimally  close 
deviations from our goals are more complicated than what can be captured by any simple 
rule. Taylor clearly recognized this in his 1993 article in which he stated: “While the analysis 
of these issues can be aided by quantitative methods, it is difficult to formulate them into a 
precise algebraic formula. Moreover, there will be episodes where monetary policy will need 
to  be  adjusted  to  deal  with  special  factors.  For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  provided 
additional reserves to the banking system after the stock-market break of October 19, 1987, 
                                                
7  Taylor (1999). 
8  See, for example, Taylor (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  and  helped  to  prevent  a  contraction  of  liquidity  and  to  restore  confidence.  The  Fed  would 
need more than a simple policy rule as a guide in such cases.”9  
In  fact,  during  the  most  extraordinary  times,  such  as  the  2008  financial  crisis  and  its 
aftermath, the Taylor rule completely breaks down. Its prescription would have been to set 
policy  rates  at  something  like  –5  percent  in  2009.  Such  rates  are  just  not  feasible  for  the 
simple reason that nominal interest rates cannot go below zero; that is, rates cannot breach 
what  we  refer  to  as  the  zero  lower  bound,  or  ZLB.  Moreover,  there  is  no  emergency 
handbook that comes with the rule that says what to do in this event. An apparently unstated 
branch of the Taylor 1993 rule includes setting the federal funds rate to zero during these 
circumstances and then simply wait and presumably smile confidently in public while holding 
to zero rates. As a rigid policy prescription, we are thus left with inaction. And inaction looks 
like  policy  abdication  because  we  are  left  doing  nothing  to  try  to  make  timely  progress  in 
reducing policy misses. This rule cannot be the be-all and end-all for monetary policy; for a 
policy rule that some say should be enshrined in the Federal Reserve Act explicitly to govern 
the implementation of U.S. monetary policy, its prescriptions under the recent circumstances 
we’ve faced are an absolute failure. 
Furthermore, given that the Taylor rule has failed so badly and done so for so long, how can 
we be confident that its prescriptions will still be a good policy to follow once the rule says 
that the fed funds rate should rise above zero again? Indeed, that’s what many versions of 
the Taylor rule say today – that it’s time now to begin to increase the fed funds rate. How can 
we  know  if  the  policy  prescriptions  are  from  a  reborn  and  healthy  policy  tool  or  perhaps 
instead from one still suffering from a zombie-like hangover in terms of its prescriptions? 
It’s  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  Taylor  rule’s  theoretical  underpinnings  are  loose, 
especially compared with the seminal 1979 John Taylor article10 on optimal monetary policy 
in a rational expectations model with sticky prices. Indeed, the Taylor rule parameters are not 
necessarily  stable.  In  particular,  consider the  intercept term. The  usual specification  of  the 
rule  assumes  that  this  intercept  term  is  a  constant  2  percent  equilibrium  level  of  the  real 
interest rate. However, it is well known that equilibrium real rates of interest are not constant, 
and  modern  macroeconomic  models  of  optimal  monetary  policy  all  take  this  into  account. 
Assuming that the equilibrium real interest rate is constant is just as egregious an error as 
failing  to  account  for  the  time-varying  nature  of  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment.  We  all 
know  that  mis-specifying  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  can  lead  to  seriously 
inappropriate  monetary  policy  outcomes  like  double-digit  inflation  in  the  1970s.  It  certainly 
seems  that  the  fallout  from  the  financial  crisis  and  persistent  headwinds  holding  back 
economic activity are consistent with the equilibrium real interest rate being lower than usual 
today. Indeed, if you put any  weight whatsoever on the secular stagnation hypothesis that 
Larry  Summers  and  Paul  Krugman  have  described,11  an  appropriate  analysis  would 
recognize  lower  expected  real  rates  of  interest.  In  any  event,  the  FOMC’s  latest  policy 
statement in March recognizes this possibility of lower real rates, as the Committee stated it 
currently anticipates that “even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent 
levels,  economic  conditions  may, for  some time,  warrant keeping the target fed funds  rate 
below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.”12  
                                                
9  Taylor (1993), p. 197. 
10  Taylor (1979). 
11  See Summers (2013) and Krugman (2013). 
12  Federal Open Market Committee (2014a). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
During Ben Bernanke’s eight years as Fed Chair, the FOMC worked hard to make the Fed’s 
policy  intentions clear; and I am confident that the FOMC under Chair  Yellen  will continue 
along  this  same  path.  When  the  federal  funds  rate  got  stuck  at  zero  and  goal-oriented 
monetary  policy  said  to  do  more,  we  did  more!  We  implemented  the  following:  the  first 
quantitative easing program, or QE1, in March 2009;13 QE2 in fall 2010; the initial forward 
guidance on the federal funds rate in August 2011; Operation Twist in fall 2011; the open-
ended QE3 in fall 2012; and the enhanced threshold forward guidance in December 2012. All 
of  these  were  ways  to  go  beyond  the  policy  inaction  that  was  the  prescription  of  simple 
constrained policy rules, and do something to meet our policy mandates. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  ask  again,  what  is  the  accountability  test?  Much  has  been  done; 
however, looking at the bull’s-eye scorecard, I would argue, if anything, the FOMC has been 
less  aggressive  than  the  policy  loss  function  calls  for.  And  to  me,  in  the  current 
circumstances,  accountability  and  optimal  policy  mean  we  should  be  maintaining  a  large 
degree of accommodation for some time. Policies that would instead place us on a slow glide 
path toward our targets undermine the credibility of our claim that we will do our job and meet 
mandated  policy  goals  in  a  timely  fashion.  Timid  policies  would  also  increase  the  risk  of 
progress being stymied along the way by adverse shocks that might hit before policy gaps 
are  closed. The  surest and  quickest  way  to  reach  our  objectives  is  to  be  aggressive. This 
means, too, that we must be willing to overshoot our targets in a manageable fashion. Such 
risks are optimal if the outcome of our policy actions implies smaller average deviations from 
our  targets  over  the  medium  term.  We  should  be  willing  to  undertake  such  policies  and 
clearly communicate our willingness to do so. 
References 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2013, “What are the Federal Reserve’s 
large-scale asset purchases?,”(external) Current FAQs, December 19. 
Federal Open Market Committee, 2014a, press release(external), March 19. 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  2014b,  Transcript(external-pdf)  of  Janet  Yellen  press 
conference, March 19. 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  2014c,  “Statement  on  longer-run  goals  and  monetary 
policy strategy,”(external-pdf) as amended January 28. 
Evans,  Charles  L.,  and  Jonas  D.  M.  Fisher,  2011,  “What  are  the  implications  of  rising 
commodity  prices  for  inflation  and  monetary  policy?,”(pdf)  Chicago  Fed  Letter,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago, No. 286, May. 
Friedman,  Milton,  and  Anna  J.  Schwartz,  1963,  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States, 
1867–1960, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Krugman,  Paul, 
Summers,”(external) New York Times, opinion pages, November 16. 
Summers,  Lawrence,  2013,  speech(external),  Fourteenth  Annual  Research  Conference  in 
Honor of Stanley Fischer, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, November 8. 
Taylor, John B., 2013, “A review of recent monetary policy,” testimony(external-pdf) before 
the U.S. House Committee on Financial Services, March 5. 
stagnation, 
coalmines, 
“Secular 
bubbles 
2013, 
Larry 
and 
                                                
13  For more about the quantitative easing programs (also referred to as large-scale asset purchases) and the 
rationale behind them, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Taylor,  John  B.,  1999,  “A  historical  analysis  of  monetary  policy  rules,”  (external-pdf) 
Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319–341. 
Taylor,  John  B.,  1993,  “Discretion  versus  policy  rules  in  practice,”(external)  Carnegie-
Rochester Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39, Vol. 1, December, pp. 195–214. 
Taylor,  John  B.,  1979,  “Estimation  and  control  of  a  macroeconomic  model  with  rational 
expectations,”(external) Econometrica, Vol. 47, No. 5, September, pp. 1267–1286. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
