  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Setting a milestone with the Quezon City Credit 
Surety Fund 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Quezon  City  Credit  Surety  Fund  lunch,  Manila,  18  August 
2014. 
 the  members  of 
Good morning everyone!  
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and our partner institutions – the DBP, Land 
Bank and IGLF – we thank Quezon City under the distinguished leadership of Mayor Herbert 
Bautista,  Vice  Mayor  Ma.  Josefina  Belmonte-Alimurung,  and 
the 
Sangguniang Panlungsod for launching its own Credit Surety Fund or CSF. 
The Quezon City CSF is the first at the National Capital Region. This is therefore a significant 
milestone  in  our  program  to  promote  CSFs  across  the  country. This  tells  us  that  the  local 
government  in  Quezon  City  continues  to  find  ways  to  support  the  further  growth  and 
development of local micro, small and medium enterprises – or what we call MSMEs.  
We  know  that  through  its  Sikap  Buhay  Entrepreneurship  and  Cooperative  Office,  the  city 
government  is  pro-active  in  promoting  access  to  credit,  particularly  for  microfinance.  This 
time,  by  setting  up  its  own  CSF,  Quezon  City  is  scaling  up  to  help  more  members  of 
cooperatives gain access to bank credit. 
With the CSF, coop members with good credit standing can avail of bank credit even if they 
still lack collateral and sufficient credit history. 
On the part of the banks, CSF is a welcome program, as it provides opportunities to comply 
with the mandatory 8pct credit allocation required under the law – RA 6977, as amended, 
also known as The Act to Promote, Develop and Assist SMEs – under a more manageable 
risk framework. 
As  a  whole  therefore,  the  CSF  is  a  win-win  program  for  coop  members,  banks  and  our 
national goal to have a more inclusive financial system that will support inclusive growth.  
Indeed, we have seen the initial benefits from our partnerships under the CSF. As of May this 
year, roughly P1.1 billion in loans have been granted by 30 CSFs to nearly 10,000 MSMEs. 
With Quezon City, we now have 31 CSFs: 14 in Luzon, 7 in the Visayas and 10 in Mindanao. 
We look forward to seeing the benefits of CSF in Quezon City, our country’s biggest city in 
terms of population.  
The importance of MSMEs to our country and our people cannot be overemphasized: they 
account  for  35.7%  of  our  economy  as  measured  by  GDP,  constitute  99.6%  of  registered 
firms  and  employ  62%  of  our  workforce.  In  other  words,  additional  support  granted  to 
MSMEs will have strong multiplier effects.  
We are happy to learn therefore that Quezon City-based coops in cooperation with the Office 
of the Mayor initiated discussions with the Bangko Sentral for the creation of its own CSF. 
Thus today, we have 12 cooperatives who have initially contributed P3.95 million to the CSF 
while the Quezon City government will give a counterpart contribution of P5 million. 
Additional contributions will also come from DBP, LandBank and the IGLF. Let us therefore 
thank Land Bank as represented by its President Gilda Pico; the Development Bank of the 
Philippines  represented  by  Chairman  Jose  Nuñez,  Jr.;  and  the  Industrial  Guarantee  and 
Loan Fund represented by its Chief Executive Officer BenelLagua. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  On  our  part,  you  can  count  on  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  continued  support  to  make  this 
collaboration  sustainable.  We  will  continue  to  advocate  and  introduce  more  innovations, 
promote capacity building, and provide liquidity support through our rediscounting facility. 
Finally,  I  can  share  that  the  Bangko  Sentral  is  in  final  stages  of  discussions  on  new 
partnerships with other LGUs and cooperatives to set up additional CSFs in the country.  
Indeed, the spirit of cooperation of Bayanihan is alive and well in our country. If we sustain 
this momentum, we can truly achieve sustained, balanced and inclusive growth. 
Muli, maraming salamat. Mabuhay ang MSMEs! Mabuhay ang Quezon City! Mabuhay ang 
ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
