Tiff Macklem: Flexible inflation targeting and “good” and “bad” 
disinflation 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to 
the John  Molson School of Business, Concordia University,  Montreal, Quebec, 7 February 
2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. I want to particularly thank Professor Switzer for inviting me to speak here at 
the John Molson School of Business. 
I  grew  up  in  Montréal  and  this  occasion  is  a  sort  of  a  closing  of  a  circle  for  me.  My  first 
speech as Senior Deputy Governor was here in Montréal and this will be my last. In a few 
months, I will be joining another outstanding business school – the Joseph L. Rotman School 
of Management. So speaking to business students here in Montréal is a nice bridge from my 
past to my future. 
I want to use this opportunity to discuss a topic that is at the heart of the Bank of Canada’s 
mission: inflation control. 
I was part of the team in the early 1990s that designed and implemented the Bank’s inflation-
targeting framework. We developed the framework against a backdrop of high and variable 
inflation.  Those  of  you  who  are  old  enough  will  recall  the  crippling  effects  of  double-digit 
inflation and mortgage rates that rose above 20 per cent in the 1980s. 
Fortunately, inflation targeting worked – indeed, better than many imagined. We’ve now had 
more  than  two  decades  of  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation,  and  Canadians  have 
confidence in the value of their money. Low, stable and predictable inflation has supported 
solid economic growth and a well-functioning and more stable labour market. And it provided 
both a beacon and an anchor as we navigated the global financial crisis. 
Inflation targeting has served Canadians well in tranquil and turbulent times. 
But this is not the end of monetary history. Globally, the financial crisis shook central banking 
to its core and took it back to its roots as a lender of last resort and an important player in 
maintaining  financial  stability.1  The  fallout  of  the  crisis  has  been  a  painfully  slow  global 
recovery that has reduced job prospects for a generation of new workers in many advanced 
economies, and turned the tables on inflation control. 
Inflation targeting was conceived as a monetary policy framework to get inflation down and 
hold it there. But, today, the challenge is to get inflation up. Most advanced economies are 
experiencing declining inflation or disinflation. Over the past two years, inflation in advanced 
economies  has fallen  by  1.5  percentage  points on  average  and  is  below  target  in most of 
these economies, Canada included (Chart 1). 
I want to focus my talk today on what this disinflation means for our inflation-control policy. I’ll 
begin with a brief review of how our inflation-targeting regime works, and then discuss the 
post-crisis inflation experience, the factors contributing to disinflation and the implications for 
monetary policy. 
                                                
1   See T. Macklem, “Raising the House of Reform” (speech to the Rotman Institute for International Business, 
Toronto, ON, 7 February 2012); M. Carney, “A Monetary Policy Framework for All Seasons” (speech to the 
U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York, 24 February 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
To  give  you  a  hint  of  where  I  am  going,  not  all  disinflations  are  created  equal.  Some  are 
“good”  disinflations  caused  by  increased  competition  and  higher  productivity  growth,  while 
others are “bad” disinflations stemming from weak demand for goods and workers that puts 
downward  pressure  on  prices  and  wages.  In  theory,  monetary  policy  should  respond 
differently  to  good  and  bad  disinflation.  In  practice,  this  is  complicated  by  uncertainties 
surrounding our measurements and projections. Our work at the Bank of Canada is both to 
sharpen the analysis as much as we can and, at the same time, to take account of the risks 
and uncertainties as we determine the appropriate course for monetary policy to achieve our 
inflation target. 
Let me expand. 
Inflation Targeting 101 
The Bank’s mandate is to mitigate “…fluctuations in the general level of production, trade, 
prices and employment, so far as may be possible within the scope of monetary action, and 
generally  to  promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  Canada.”2  High  and  volatile 
inflation  in  the  1970s  and  1980s  taught  us  that  the  best  way  for  us  to  achieve  these 
objectives is to keep inflation low, stable and predictable. 
When we adopted our inflation-targeting monetary policy in 1991, we were virtually alone. No 
other G-7 country was doing this. New Zealand, the first country to adopt inflation targeting, 
had done so only nine months before us. And there was very little in the academic literature 
on inflation targeting. 
Since 1995, the target has been to achieve an annual total rate of inflation of 2 per cent – the 
midpoint of our control range of 1 to 3 per cent – as measured by the consumer price index 
(CPI).  The  target  is  reviewed  jointly  with  the  federal  government  approximately  every  five 
years, and was last renewed in 2011.3  
To achieve that target, an essential component of our monetary policy framework is a flexible 
exchange rate. The floating exchange rate is part of the monetary transmission mechanism. 
It  allows  the  Bank  to  pursue  its  own  “made-in-Canada”  monetary  policy  that  is  directed  at 
achieving 2 per cent inflation in Canada and stabilizing our economy. The flexible exchange 
rate also serves as a kind of shock absorber for the Canadian economy, helping it absorb 
and adjust to shifts in the global economy.4  
In  light  of  the  recent  depreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  it  bears  stressing  that  the  Bank 
does not have a target for the exchange rate – it has an inflation target. The exchange rate is 
determined in markets, and we neither promote any specific value for the Canadian dollar, 
nor thwart its movements. 
Our inflation-targeting policy has three important features. 
It is symmetric. The Bank is equally concerned about inflation rising above or falling below 
the  2  per  cent  target.  High  and  variable  inflation  erodes  purchasing  power,  creates 
uncertainty,  distorts  investment  decisions,  and  causes  arbitrary  redistributions  of  wealth 
between savers and borrowers. But sustained negative inflation – or deflation – is even more 
pernicious. The 2 per cent target provides a buffer that gives monetary policy greater scope 
to  avoid  the  risk  that  disinflation  could  deteriorate  into  outright  deflation.  In  a  deflation, 
inflation  expectations  become  unanchored  on  the  downside,  and  people  begin  delaying 
                                                
2   Preamble to the Bank of Canada Act, R.S.C., 1985 c. B-2. 
3   Bank of Canada, “Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information – November 2011.” 
4   T. Macklem, P. Osakwe, H. Pioro and L. Schembri, “The Economic Consequences of Alternative Exchange 
Rate  and  Monetary  Policy  Regimes  in  Canada,”  paper  delivered  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  conference, 
“Revisiting the Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” November 2000.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
purchases because they expect the things they buy will be less expensive in the future. This 
depresses demand. And as prices and wages fall, the real burden of mortgages and other 
nominal debt commitments increases, further depressing demand. 
Today, with inflation at about 1 per cent, prices are rising, not falling. And we expect inflation 
to increase gradually to the 2 per cent target. But with inflation persistently below target, we 
are more concerned about downside risks to inflation than upside ones. 
It is forward looking. Monetary policy actions take time – about two years – to work their 
way through the economy and to have their full effect on inflation. For this reason, monetary 
policy  must  always  be  forward  looking,  with  the  Bank  setting  the  policy  rate  based  on  its 
judgment as to how inflation is likely to evolve. Making that assessment requires a careful 
examination of the economic evidence pertaining to the balance of supply and demand in the 
economy and other factors affecting inflation. 
To help us see through temporary fluctuations in inflation, the Bank uses core inflation, which 
strips  out  the  volatile  components  of  the  CPI,  as  an  operational  guide  for  setting  policy  in 
pursuit of the target for total CPI inflation.5 In our baseline forecast, demand is expected to 
strengthen, gradually absorbing excess capacity in the economy. As this slack is taken up, 
core and total inflation are expected to increase to target over the next two years or so. 
It is flexible. In assessing whether the stance of monetary policy is appropriate to achieve 
the  inflation  target,  the  Bank  must  make  a  judgment  regarding  the  horizon  for  returning 
inflation to target. Flexible inflation targeting provides the scope to consider financial stability 
risks and to manage the volatility that monetary policy actions may induce in the economy 
and  financial  markets.  In  the  current  context,  an  important  element  in  our  monetary  policy 
decisions – which has been highlighted in our recent policy announcements – is the need to 
weigh the risks of exacerbating elevated household imbalances against the downside risks to 
inflation when inflation is already below target. 
The  Bank’s  record  of  inflation  control  over  more  than  20  years  is  impressive.  Since1991, 
inflation  in  Canada  has  averaged  2  per  cent,  as  measured  by  total  CPI,  and  its  standard 
deviation  has  fallen  by  roughly  two-thirds  compared  with  the  1970s  and  1980s  (Chart  2). 
Moreover, the persistence of inflation, as measured by the serial correlation in inflation, fell 
from 0.8 between 1975 and 1990 to only 0.1 since 1995. Nowadays, fluctuations around the 
target  are  typically  short-lived,  so  the  best  forecast  for  inflation  is  2  per  cent  –  the  target. 
What could be simpler? 
Low  inflation  is  also  a  means  to  an  end  –  better  economic  performance.  Low,  stable  and 
predictable inflation has been associated with more stable economic growth in Canada and 
lower  and  less-variable  unemployment  (Table  1).  The  average  rate  of  unemployment  has 
fallen, and fluctuations in unemployment, as measured by its standard deviation, have been 
reduced by more than one-third.6  
Not  surprisingly,  other  countries  have  followed  Canada’s  lead.  Since  1991,  more  than  25 
other advanced or emerging-market economies have become inflation targeters.7  
                                                
5   Our  main  measure  of  core  inflation  is  CPIX,  which  strips  out  from  total  inflation  eight  of  the  most  volatile 
components  of  the  consumer  price  index  as  well  as  the  impact  of  indirect  tax  changes  on  the  remaining 
components. 
6   For  more  on  the  improved  functioning  of  labour  markets  with  low  and  stable  inflation,  see  T.  Macklem,  “A 
Measure of Work” (speech to the Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce, Winnipeg, MB, 4 October 2012). 
7   G.  Paulin,  “Credibility  with  Flexibility:  The  Evolution  of  Inflation-Targeting  Regimes,  1990–2006,”  Bank  of 
Canada  Review  (Summer  2006):  5–18;  S.  Jahan,  “Inflation  Targeting:  Holding  the  Line,”  International 
Monetary Fund, Finance and Development, March 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The recent behaviour of inflation in Canada 
With that context, let’s look at the recent behaviour of inflation in Canada. 
Following the global financial crisis, total inflation in Canada fell sharply, to a low of –0.9 per 
cent in July 2009, largely as a result of a drop in the world price of oil, which plummeted from 
US$140 per barrel in the summer of 2008 to US$35 later that year. With the resumption of 
growth  in  most  advanced  economies,  global  oil  prices  rebounded  in  2010  to  US$90  per 
barrel, and total inflation rose to more than 3 per cent in 2011 (Chart 3). 
By comparison, core inflation remained relatively stable around 2 per cent during this period. 
However, since 2012, both core and total inflation have drifted lower and have been below 
2 per cent for the past 20 months. 
Other  measures  of  core  inflation  have  also  declined.  Indeed,  the  disinflation  since  2012  is 
evident in all of our measures of inflation (Chart 4). And, if we look at individual components 
of the CPI basket, it is apparent that the weakness is widespread, with the prices of about 
three-quarters of the consumer basket now increasing at a pace of less than 2 per cent over 
the past year (Chart 5). 
What explains disinflation in Canada? 
Global disinflation 
A  number  of  studies  have  indicated  that  there  is  a  global  dimension  to  inflation,  which  is 
currently low and falling across a wide range of advanced economies.8 A convenient way to 
look  at  this  is  by  using  factor  analysis,  a  statistical  method  that  summarizes  the  common 
variability among the inflation rates of different countries. When we look at the evolution of 
global inflation, as measured by this common factor, we see a decline in global inflation since 
2012 (Chart 6).9  
Global total inflation is strongly correlated with global energy and food price inflation – the 
corresponding correlation coefficients are 0.5 and 0.6, respectively. This suggests that much 
of  the  recent  decline  in  global  total  inflation  can  be  explained  by  the  recent  fall  in  world 
energy and food prices (Chart 7). However, longer-term trends are more likely a reflection of 
movements in global core inflation. 
The  recent  decline  in  global  core  inflation  is  more  difficult  to  understand  (Chart  8).  It  may 
reflect  the  large  and  persistent  amount  of  economic  slack  in  many  advanced  countries 
(Chart 9).10 However, it is less apparent how economic slack can explain why disinflation is 
occurring now, since core inflation was relatively stable from 2009 to 2011, when the output 
gaps  in  most  countries  were  even  larger.  It  may  be  that  the  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  the 
output gap increases as the gap becomes more persistent, and this could be reinforced by 
changes in inflation expectations. 
                                                
8  
Inter  alia  M.  Ciccarelli  and  B.  Mojon,  “Global  Inflation,”  The  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics  92,  no.  3 
(2010): 524–35. 
9   For  international  comparability,  core  inflation  is  defined  here  as  consumer  price  inflation  minus  food  and 
energy. Still, there are differences across countries with regard to the components that enter the measurement 
of consumer prices. The charts show standardized inflation rates, whereby all inflation rates have a mean of 
zero and a standard deviation of one. 
10   Some  have  argued  that  increasing  trade  with  China  has  helped  to  keep  inflation  low.  While  this  has  been 
confirmed  empirically  (L.  Morel,  “The  Direct  Effect  of  China  on  Canadian  Consumer  Prices:  An  Empirical 
Assessment,” Bank of Canada Discussion Paper No. 2007–10; D. Côté and C. De Resende, “Globalization 
and Inflation: The Role of China,” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2008–35), the overall effect seems to 
be quantitatively small, and it has become even less important recently, since Chinese prices are no longer 
falling and China’s market share of imports to advanced economies is no longer rising. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Looking  at  the  relevance  for  Canada  of  global  inflation  developments,  it  is  evident  that 
Canada’s  total  inflation  rate  co-moves  substantially  with  the  common  factor  in  inflation 
among  advanced  economies,  underscoring  the  importance  of  energy  and  food  prices  for 
movements in total CPI inflation in Canada. In contrast, relatively little of the variance of core 
inflation in Canada appears to be related to movements in global core inflation (Chart 10). 
The decline in Canadian core inflation in 2012 has been stronger than what was observed at 
the global level, which is surprising, given that economic slack in Canada looks to be smaller 
than elsewhere. 
This  suggests  that  country-specific  factors  are  likely  to  be  more  important  in  driving  core 
inflation dynamics in Canada. 
where  πt  is  inflation  in  this  period,  Et(πt+1)  is  the expected  rate  of  inflation  next  period,  and  
Subdued domestic fundamentals 
The expectations-augmented Phillips curve provides a model for understanding the domestic 
forces at work on core inflation. In its simplest form, this model expresses core inflation as a 
function of inflation expectations and a measure of economic slack, 
πt=Et(πt+1)+b(yt-y¯t)+∊t 
yt  –  y¯t  is  the  gap  between  actual  output  yt  and  potential  output  y¯t.11  The  error  term ∊t 
captures  other  drivers  that  are  missing  from  the  equation,  for  example,  price  or  supply 
shocks triggered by factors such as unusual weather or shifts in competition. 
An important point to note is that the estimated coefficients on the determinants of inflation in 
this relationship tend to be very small, and the statistical relationship tends to be weak. While 
this is not surprising, given Canada’s record of stable inflation since the adoption of inflation 
targeting,  it  implies  that  fairly  large  variations  in  the  output  gap  are  needed  to  induce 
economically meaningful movements in core inflation. 
This stylized representation is, of course, a simplification of the true inflation process, but it is 
useful to help us assess the role of potential drivers that could be depressing inflation. 
Persistent economic slack 
Let’s  start  with  the  output  gap.  Slack  in  the  Canadian  economy  remains  significant 
(Chart 11).  Taking  into  account  the  full  range  of  indicators  of  capacity  pressures  and  the 
uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, we concluded in our most recent Monetary Policy 
Report that the amount of excess supply in the economy in the fourth quarter of 2013 was 
between ¾ and 1¾ per cent. 
Our  conventional  measure,  which  is  based  on  a  statistical  method  that  combines  several 
data  sources,  suggests  that  the  output  gap  was  close  to  the  lower  end  of  this  range.12 
However,  an  alternative  structural  approach  suggests  that  the  output  gap  was  closer  to 
1¾ per cent in the fourth quarter.13 This reflects material slack in total hours worked, as well 
as  a  level  of  labour  productivity  that  is  considerably  below  its  trend.  Other  labour  market 
indicators  also  point  to  a  greater  degree  of  slack  than  the  conventional  measure.  For 
                                                
11   Potential  output  is  the  level  of  output  that  can  be  sustained  in  an  economy  without  adding  to  inflationary 
pressures. Identifying the current level of potential output is necessary to estimate the output gap, which is a 
key measure of inflation pressures. 
12   The conventional measure is based on the extended multivariate filter method (see L. Butler, “The Bank of 
Canada’s  New  Quarterly  Projection  Model  Part  4.  A  Semi-Structural  Method  to  Estimate  Potential  Output: 
Combining Economic Theory with a Time-Series Filter,” Technical Report No. 77, Bank of Canada, 1996. 
13   For a description of the structural approach, see “Appendix A: Potential Output” on page 27 in the October 
2013 Monetary Policy Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
example,  the  proportion  of  involuntary  part-time  workers  and  the  average  duration  of 
unemployment are still elevated (Chart 12). 
Explaining  the  current  level  of  core  inflation  with  the  Phillips  curve  is  not  easy.  Simple 
econometric  estimates  of  the  coefficient  on  the  output  gap,  b,  would  suggest  a  value  of 
around 0.1. Conditional on our assessment of economic slack as 1¼ per cent (the midpoint 
of  the  range),  this  would  predict  core  inflation  of  1.9  per  cent.  This  is  well  above  actual 
inflation, which is running at about 1 per cent. 
Of  course,  the  true  coefficient  b  could  be  bigger  than  0.1.  As  you  might  expect,  we  have 
looked  at  this  at  the  Bank  of  Canada.  And  indeed,  we  find  that  controlling  for  factors  not 
captured in this simple equation could increase the coefficient to around 0.3.14 This produces 
a predicted value for core inflation of 1.6 per cent. This is better, but it still leaves a significant 
portion of the weakness in inflation unexplained. 
Given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  around  real-time  estimates  of  the  output  gap,  it  is 
possible  that  the  level  of  economic  slack  is  greater  than  currently  estimated.  Indeed,  the 
range  we  provide  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  is  designed  to  convey  this  uncertainty. 
However, even assuming a coefficient of 0.3 on the output gap, we would need to more than 
double our estimate of the degree of slack in order to predict an inflation rate of close to 1 per 
cent. This is not realistic. 
In addition to economic slack, other factors must be causing disinflation. 
Changing inflation expectations? 
What about inflation expectations? During the past year, survey forecasts of short-term total 
inflation have moved lower, in line with changes to actual inflation. The January Consensus 
Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is now 1.5 per cent for this year and 1.9 per cent for 
next  year  (Chart  13).  According  to  the  Bank’s  Business  Outlook  Survey,  inflation 
expectations  remain  steady,  with  almost  all  firms  expecting  CPI  inflation  to  be  within  the 
Bank’s  1  to  3  per  cent  inflation-control  range  over  the  next  two  years,  and  the  majority 
expecting inflation to remain in the bottom half of that range, consistent with the Bank’s base-
case projection. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to be 
consistent  with  the  2  per  cent  inflation-control  target,  providing  little  evidence  that  inflation 
expectations  are  becoming  unhinged  from  the  2  per  cent  target.  Of  course,  the  longer 
inflation  remains  below  target,  the  more  likely  inflation  expectations  are  to  decline.  This  is 
something to watch closely, but to this point, it is hard to explain the observed disinflation as 
the result of a shift in expectations. 
This leaves only the error term in the Philips curve to account for the unexplained weakness 
in  inflation.  What  could  this  negative  error  reflect?  A  wide  range  of  evidence  points  to 
increased competition in the domestic retail sector. 
Increased domestic retail competition 
The increase in retail competition is, in many ways, a welcome development. It means lower 
prices  and  more  selection  for  consumers.  And  if retail  margins  are  holding  up,  which  they 
appear  to  be,  it  also  suggests  that  retailers  are  more  productive,  which  increases  real 
incomes and living standards. 
Competitive  pressures  in  the  retail  sector  in  Canada  appear  to  have  intensified  on  three 
fronts: newer and bigger retailers, cross-border shopping and online purchasing. 
                                                
14   For  instance,  empirical  work  estimates  a  stronger  relationship  between  a  subset  of  core  inflation  and  the 
output gap. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Walmart  opened  its  discount  stores  in  Canada  in  1994  and,  in  2006,  began  transforming 
many of them into supercentres that offer food as well as general merchandise. By the end of 
2013, 61 per cent of the company’s outlets were supercentres. 
This  new  retailing  strategy,  as  well  as  Walmart’s  pricing,  has  increased  the  competitive 
pressures  on  traditional  retailers.  In  addition,  Target  and  a  number  of  other  American 
retailers have recently entered, or are planning to enter, the Canadian marketplace.15  
So  far,  despite  the  significant  pressure  on  prices,  retail  profit  margins  are  holding  up, 
reflecting improved productivity in the sector (Chart 14). The composition of the sector has 
changed  toward  more  profitable  retailers:  chain  stores  have  become  an  increasingly  large 
share  of  the  retail  sector,  and  their  profit margins  are  almost  three times  higher than  non-
chain outlets (Chart 15). Measured productivity in the retail sector has also been improving 
faster than productivity for the total economy (Chart 16). 
Retail competition may also have intensified as a result of the increase in duty exemptions 
announced in the federal government’s 2012 budget. Following the change, the number of 
travellers returning from the United States by car after an overnight stay (likely for shopping 
trips)  rose  significantly.16  While  the  volume  of  overnight  car  trips  displays  a  significant 
seasonal pattern (with peaks around the summer months), the average level increased from 
around 150,000 per month in the five years prior to the duty change to nearly 270,000 per 
month since then (Chart 17). I would not want to overplay the impact of this change – the 
share of nominal consumption by Canadians abroad is only about 4 per cent and the recent 
depreciation of the Canadian dollar will work in the other direction. Nonetheless, increased 
cross-border shopping may have been a reinforcing factor. 
Finally,  online  shopping  has  opened  a  new  front  on  the  competitive  landscape.  More 
consumers are using the Internet to purchase a wide range of goods and services. Although 
this remains a small component of consumption, online shopping is adding choice and new 
competition to the retail sector.17  
What does all this mean for prices? 
Subdued inflation has been reflected in the unusual softness in the prices for core food items 
and  core  non-durable  goods,  two  sectors  where  anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that 
competition has intensified. Food alone accounts for 17 per cent of the core CPI basket, and 
it exerted the largest drag on core inflation in 2013 (Chart 18). 
Core food inflation is very low by historical standards, and although much of this weakness 
reflects a decline in global food price inflation, the fall in recent quarters is outsized relative to 
the drop in global food price inflation (Chart 19). 
The agriculture component of the Bank’s commodity price index stabilized in late 2012 but 
core food inflation continued to decrease, consistent with the evidence of greater competition 
in grocery and general merchandise stores in Canada. 
Looking  forward,  ongoing  structural  change  in  this  sector  suggests  that  competitive 
pressures are likely to remain intense for some time. However, the recent depreciation of the 
Canadian dollar can be expected to offset at least some of the downward pressure on retail 
food prices. 
                                                
15   Other notable retail entrants include Marshalls, J. Crew and Nordstrom. 
16   The 2012 federal budget raised duty exemptions on goods purchased abroad. The exemption for a stay of 24 
to  48  hours  was  increased  from  $50  to  $200,  while  the  exemption  for  a  trip  longer  than  48  hours  was 
increased from $400 to $800, both effective 1 June 2012. 
17   In total, in 2012, Canadians placed nearly 164 million orders, valued at approximately $18.9 billion. This dollar 
amount of spending represents only about 1.9 per cent of nominal consumption in Canada (Canadian Internet 
Use Survey, Statistics Canada). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
For  non-durable  goods,  which  include  items  such  as  personal  care  products,  price  growth 
has eased significantly in recent quarters, with prices outright falling in the fourth quarter of 
2013 (Chart 20). In fact, the last time the rate of inflation for non-durable goods was lower 
than the current level was when Walmart entered the Canadian market in the mid-1990s. 
Overall, our expectation is that while increased competition will have a permanent effect on 
the level of prices, its impact on the rate of inflation will be transitory. Our best judgment is 
that more intense competition will subtract around 0.3 percentage points from core inflation in 
2014. It is difficult to predict how long increased competition will weigh on inflation, but in our 
base-case projection we assume that it will continue to drive prices lower for about another 
year. 
Implications for monetary policy 
As we just saw, subdued inflation appears to reflect a significant and persistent amount of 
excess  supply  in  the  economy  and  heightened  competition  in  the  retail  sector.  Our  best 
estimates of the impact of these two factors still leave some of the disinflation unexplained, 
but together they are not far off. With at least a partial diagnosis, it is time to consider the 
treatment. 
This is most easily demonstrated by comparing the effects of a fall in aggregate demand and 
an  increase  in  competition  in  a  very  simple,  stylized  model  of  the  economy.  The  model 
consists  of  the  Phillips  curve  previously  outlined,  equations  linking  aggregate  demand  to 
interest  rates  and  a  monetary  policy  rule  in  which  the  policy  interest  rate  responds  to 
divergences of actual inflation from the target and of actual output from potential output (a 
Taylor rule). 
An increase in competition in this model directly lowers inflation but barely affects the output 
gap (Chart 21). In contrast, a fall in aggregate demand results in an increase in slack in the 
economy  and,  through  the  Phillips  curve  relationship,  this  leads  to  lower  inflation.  In  both 
cases, inflation falls, but only in the latter is there slack in the economy. 
The  monetary  policy  implications  of  these  two  scenarios  are  significantly  different.  In  the 
case  of  an  increase  in  competition,  monetary  policy  largely  stays  the  course,  leaving  the 
policy interest rate essentially unchanged. For the fall in aggregate demand, both output and 
inflation decline, and the Taylor rule calls for a cut in interest rates to stimulate demand and 
bring inflation back to target. 
The  different  policy  responses  reflect  the  distinction  between  “good”  disinflation  and  “bad” 
disinflation. An increase in competition in a specific sector causes prices in that sector to fall 
relative to other prices. This is a relative price change, rather than a generalized change in 
prices.  It  reflects market  forces  at  work,  and  it  is  not  a  sign  of  weakness  in  the  economy. 
Consumers  benefit  from  lower  prices,  and  increased  competition  is  likely  to  mean  higher 
productivity in the sector – both good things. Hence, there is little need for monetary policy to 
try  to  counter  this  “good”  disinflation,  provided  that  inflation  expectations  remain  well 
anchored. 
A decline in aggregate demand, however, reduces employment and income at the same time 
as inflation declines for a broad range of goods and services. This is “bad” disinflation and 
something to be resisted by monetary policy. 
These stylized simulations arbitrarily assume that the persistence of inflation is the same in 
both scenarios. And with the same persistence, monetary policy reacts more to a shortfall in 
demand than an increase in competition. If the impact of increased competition on the rate of 
inflation is less persistent, as we expect, this conclusion is only reinforced. 
That’s the theory. What about the practical world of monetary policy? 
We need to do our best to determine why inflation is below target, but no matter how hard we 
try,  there  will  be  uncertainty  about  our  diagnosis.  Moreover,  the  economy  is  enormously 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
more complicated than the simple model I used for illustration. We don’t have a crystal ball to 
help us see the future. And monetary policy decisions are not prescribed by a simple rule. 
For all these reasons, monetary policy is not a mechanical exercise. It is better described as 
risk  management.18  There  are  many  sources  of  uncertainty  behind  our  assessment  of  the 
disinflationary forces at work in Canada, ranging from the role of global factors to the amount 
and  impact  of  excess  supply  in  our  economy,  the  importance  and  duration  of  competition 
effects, and, importantly, the behaviour of inflation expectations. These considerations are all 
embedded in our decisions. 
But  theory  combined  with  measurement  is  at  least  a  crude  guide.  And  as  we  observe 
disinflation  across  a  number  of  advanced  countries,  the  message  from  theory  is  that 
monetary policy should work to counter “bad” disinflation stemming from weak demand, but 
look through “good” disinflation from increased competition and improved productivity. 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up with the Bank’s outlook and a few concluding remarks. 
As we noted in the Monetary Policy Report that the Bank issued two weeks ago, inflation has 
moved  further  below  the  2  per  cent  target  in  recent  months.  At  the  same  time,  Canada’s 
economic  growth  strengthened  in  the  second  half  of  2013,  and  prospects  have  improved 
somewhat, with expectations of firmer growth in the United States. 
While as yet there are no signs of a rebalancing toward exports and business investment in 
Canada,  the  strengthening  of  the  global  economy  and  the  recent  depreciation  of  the 
Canadian  dollar  should  foster  a  broadening  of  the  composition  of  growth  in  Canada.  As 
excess  capacity  is  gradually  absorbed  and  the  effects  of  increased  competition  wane,  the 
Bank  expects  that  both  core  and  total  CPI  inflation  will  return  to  2  per  cent  in  about  two 
years. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar may also boost some import prices directly, 
although our experience is that the pass-through to core inflation is relatively small. 
While  the  fundamental  drivers  of  growth  and  future  inflation  appear  to  be  strengthening, 
inflation is expected to remain well below target for some time. Therefore, the downside risks 
to inflation have grown in importance. At the same time, the risks associated with elevated 
household  imbalances  have  not  changed  materially.  Weighing  these  considerations,  the 
Bank decided at its last fixed announcement date to maintain the target for the overnight rate 
at 1 per cent. The timing and direction of the next change to the policy rate will depend on 
how new information influences this balance of risks. 
As  I  noted  at  the  outset,  our  inflation-targeting  policy,  combined  with  a  floating  exchange 
rate, has served us well for more than 20 years. Inflation targeting was designed against a 
backdrop of high inflation, but its key features of symmetry and flexibility also give us room to 
manoeuvre  in  an  environment  of  disinflation.  We  are  doing  our  best  to  identify  the  main 
drivers of disinflation and are continuously assessing their impact on the economy and their 
persistence.  There  is,  of  course,  some  uncertainty  about  our  judgments,  particularly  as  to 
how  long  increased  competition  will  depress  inflation.  I  can  assure  you  that  the  Bank  of 
Canada will continue to monitor developments closely, whether I am there or not. 
Thank you. 
                                                
18   S. Poloz, “Monetary Policy as Risk Management” (speech to the Canadian Club of Montreal, Montréal, QC, 12 
December 2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19 
  20 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
