  Sabine Lautenschläger: Banking supervision – a challenge 
Speech Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung, Hamburg, 8 September 2014. 
 Summary 
The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  will  be  bolstered  when  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB)  assumes  its  banking  supervision  responsibilities  under  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM), believes Sabine Lautenschläger, member of the ECB’s Executive Board. 
Bringing together the supervision of individual banks, the macro-prudential supervision of the 
financial system and monetary policy under one roof will help to ensure that monetary policy 
can  focus  entirely  on  safeguarding  price  stability,  Lautenschläger  said  in  a  speech  at  the 
Annual Conference of the Verein für Socialpolitik in Hamburg. The interaction between the 
three policy areas of the central bank will reduce the risk of financial dominance, strengthen 
the transmission of monetary policy and improve the management of the financial system. 
“Both areas have a very strong interest in sound banks with viable business models that can 
provide  credit  to  the  real  economy”,  said  Lautenschläger.  Given  that  banks  have  already 
been  preparing  over  recent  months  for  the  requirements  that  will  apply  following  the 
imminent  launch  of  the  SSM  and  have  strengthened  their  capital  bases,  their  capacity  to 
provide credit to the economy has increased even before the official start of the SSM. This 
strengthens the transmission of monetary policy. 
For the central bank, which provides financing for commercial banks, it is very important – 
particularly  in  times  of  crisis  –  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  sound  banks  that  are 
solvent  but  suffering  from  liquidity  shortages  and  insolvent  banks  that  will  not  be  able  to 
survive in the long run. A strong European supervisor would be able to dispel some of the 
uncertainty  attached  to  solvency  assessments.  This  will  help  the  ECB  to  fulfil  its  tasks, 
because it will be able to provide liquidity support without fear of exceeding its mandate, said 
Lautenschläger.  However,  reliable  solvency  information  would  only  be  able  to  help  reduce 
financial dominance if there is a credible regime for resolving banks. This requires a common 
regulatory framework and a resolution fund with ample resources. In addition, stricter rules 
regarding the granting of emergency liquidity assistance to commercial banks by Eurosystem 
national central banks could reduce potential conflicts of interest. 
Particularly in times of economic growth, the ECB’s new tasks could permit an appropriate 
reaction to potential excesses in asset markets, for example. Using interest rates to counter 
such developments is not appropriate, warned Lautenschläger, because it could jeopardise 
the  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  It  is  thus  all  the  more  important  that  the  ECB’s 
Governing Council should have more tools at its disposal to counter imbalances. 
 My speech today is devoted to a relationship – to be precise, a triangular relationship. It’s 
about what makes a complex, yet successful relationship which does justice to the common 
and different goals and interests of the three parties. 
Starting  this  year,  a  triangular  relationship,  and  in  particular  the  workflows  and  decision-
making processes within it, is playing a specific role for the ECB, because in less than two 
months the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) officially begins its operations – and then 
three policy areas will come under the umbrella of the ECB. Monetary policy will remain, of 
course,  our  main  task.  The  ECB  will  additionally  take  on  responsibility  for  banking 
supervision  in  the  euro  area.  And  we  will  play  an  important  role  in  calibrating  and 
implementing macro-prudential supervision, even though national authorities will continue to 
be primarily responsible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Each  of  these  policy  areas  has  its  mandate,  goal  and  instruments.  The  task  of  monetary 
policy  is  to  ensure  price  stability.  In  this  respect,  interest  rate  policy  is  the  standard 
instrument (although there are now quite a number of measures that are non-standard). The 
supervisory  objectives  are  to  ensure  the  safety  and  stability  of  the  banking  system  as  a 
whole.  The  supervisory  authorities  have  had,  since  the  crisis,  a  veritable  arsenal  of 
instruments which mainly concern the risk-bearing capacity of individual banks. The objective 
of macro-prudential policy is the stability of the financial system as a whole. Even though the 
ECB has of course exerted influence on financial stability via its monetary policy, starting in 
November it will additionally use capital-based and liquidity-based instruments – in respect of 
the institutions it directly or indirectly supervises. 
Despite their differences, the three policy areas of monetary policy, banking supervision and 
financial stability plus macro-prudential supervision are closely linked. One could even argue 
they  are  in  a  triangular  relationship:  they  influence  comparable  variables  (such  as 
consumption  and  investment)  and  operate  via  the  same  transmission  channels  (such  as 
bank lending). Instruments which are used in one of the three policy areas inevitably affect 
the other two; that makes it essential to clearly specify the objectives of each activity and to 
clearly adjudicate on conflicting goals. 
As is often the case in complex relationships, we could spend the whole day studying each 
side of this relationship. Today I would like to specifically address the question of how the 
new  framework,  how  the  two  new  banking  supervision  and  macro-prudential  supervision 
tasks, will help the ECB to abide by its price stability mandate, as a kind of side effect. To 
come  straight  to  the  point,  I’ll  be  talking  about  financial  dominance,  monetary  policy 
transmission and the financial cycle. 
Reducing financial dominance 
The classic function of a central bank is to provide liquidity to solvent banks. And the ECB 
has  unquestionably  fulfilled  this  role  even  during  the  crisis.  Our  lending  to  banks  rose  by 
more  than  €800  billion  from  2008  to  the  height  of  the  crisis  in  2012.  If  the  ECB  had  not 
provided  liquidity,  there  would  have  been  bailouts,  abrupt  debt  reduction  and  thus  a 
deepening  of  the  recession  –  and  this  would  have  made  our  mandate  of  ensuring  price 
stability much more difficult. 
However, there is no doubt that this lending entails risks for the central bank. It could fall into 
the trap of financial dominance: the central bank could finance banks which are not suffering 
merely from a temporary liquidity crunch, but which are permanently incapable of surviving, 
which are insolvent. Financial dominance is accompanied by the risks of moral hazard and 
market distortion and – worst of all – by the risk of monetary financing. 
But how can a central bank become exposed to these risks? No doubt, it is a consequence 
of the information asymmetry between a non-supervisory central bank on the one hand and 
the  banks  and  national  supervisors  on  the  other.  Assessing  the  solvency  of  a  bank  often 
takes more than the equity ratio. Having comprehensive knowledge of the capital situation 
and the risk profile of the bank is a real benefit for such an assessment. This is particularly 
true  in  financial  crises,  in  the  course  of  which  an  assessment  of  the  solvency  and  risk-
bearing  capacity  of  a  bank  depends  on  many  quantitative  and  qualitative  parameters;  we 
should recall the often difficult valuation of assets that came under pressure in the crisis or 
those that were not marketable. 
For the ECB this aspect is more important than for many other central banks. Our monetary 
policy  works  via  the  bank  transmission  channel,  so  it  is  bank-based.  Thus,  for  our  open 
market  operations  almost  1,800  business  partners  are  currently  registered.  By  way  of 
comparison,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  only  21  primary  dealers.  72%  of  our  business  is 
conducted via direct (and, of course, secured) loans to banks, a type of lending unknown to 
the  Fed.  For  this  kind  of  monetary  policy,  information  on  the  financial  soundness  of  our 
monetary policy counterparties is vital. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  creation  of  the  SSM  represents  an  important  complement  to  monetary  policy.  A  well-
established  European  supervisory  body  that  is  capable  of  acting  can  recognise  emerging 
internal risks in banks and strengthen their resilience and risk-bearing capacity. In addition, in 
the event of a crisis the ECB will be able to resort to the sound judgement of the SSM. This is 
especially true for the emergency liquidity assistance, which the national central banks are 
responsible for granting. In this respect, the Governing Council, for its decision, will be able 
to  rely,  among  other  things,  on  the  SSM’s  expertise  to  judge  whether  it  wants  to  raise 
objections to the national emergency liquidity assistance.1 
Now I don’t want to sing the praises of synergy effects without pointing to some problems. 
First, financial dominance may arise not only if the ECB, due to lack of sufficient information, 
provides liquidity to non-viable banks. Financial dominance may also arise if the public gains 
the impression that our interest rate decisions are influenced by concerns about their effects 
on the institutions, in other words if we fall prey to a conflict of interests. Our credibility would 
then  be  at  stake.  That’s  why,  in  the  workflows  and  decision-making  processes,  we  attach 
great importance to the separation of monetary policy decisions and supervisory decisions. 
That’s  why  the  functional  separation  below  the  Governing  Council  level  will  be  strictly 
observed  and  monetary  policy  decision  documents  will  be  submitted  to  the  Governing 
Council without any inflow of supervisory analysis, and vice versa. 
Only  at  Governing  Council  level  will  the  draft  decisions  meet  one  and  the  same  decision-
making body. For example, if supervisory measures are taken in respect of certain banks the 
Supervisory Board will forward the draft of the final decision to the Governing Council under 
an  implicit  approval  process  –  the  process  ensures  that  the  members  of  the  Governing 
Council  do  not  change  the  decision,  but  can  only  turn  it  down.  This  principle  of  a  clear 
separation  between  our  different  roles  will  also  be  carefully  monitored  by  the  European 
Parliament. 
To  effectively  counter  any  possible  impression  of  fiscal  dominance,  systemically  important 
banks must be resolved without any risks to financial stability. 
Currently, a Europe-wide framework for bank resolution is being set up, a Single Resolution 
Mechanism with a resolution fund. We have thus taken a big step towards solving the too-
big-to-fail  problem.  The  resolution  mechanism  will  also  serve  to  protect  the  central  bank, 
because  it  makes  possible  a  Europe-wide,  orderly  winding-up  of  a  systemically  important 
institution, without the Governing Council having to worry about the side effects on financial 
stability of a short-term withdrawal of liquidity. 
Effective  supervision  and  the  orderly  resolution  of  banks  thus  also  support  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy mandate. It helps the central bank to carry out its task, that is, to provide 
liquidity assistance, without it having to worry about overstepping its mandate. 
Improving the monetary policy transmission 
The  Eurosystem  offers  liquidity  to  banks  to  maintain  financial  intermediation  in  the  money 
market  and  to  improve  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  For  this  transmission  to  work 
optimally, a stable financial sector is needed. For banks are the most important channel via 
which our monetary stimulus is passed on to businesses and households. And only healthy 
banks can perform their role as lenders. So monetary policy-makers and banking supervisors 
                                                
1   However, Article 14.4 of the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central 
Bank  (Statute  of  the  ESCB)  assigns  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  responsibility  for  restricting  ELA 
operations if it considers that these operations interfere with the objectives and tasks of the Eurosystem. Such 
decisions  are  taken  by  the  Governing  Council  with  a  majority  of  two-thirds  of  the  votes  cast.  For  further 
information, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/201402_elaprocedures.de.pdf? 
e716d1d560392b10142724f50c6bf66a. 
please 
see: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  are very interested in having sound banks with viable business models that can lend money 
to the real economy. 
But how does the Single Supervisory Mechanism support the monetary policy transmission? 
First, the comprehensive assessment, i.e. the health check of the banks, plays an essential 
role.  The  assessment  of  bank  balance  sheets  aims  to  uncover  bad  debts  and  to  place  all 
banks with a solid capital base under the supervision of the SSM. And this assessment can 
have a catalytic effect. 
Prior to the health check, most banks accelerated their deleveraging or built up their equity. 
The sum of bank balance sheets declined in 2013 alone by around 20 percentage points of 
GDP.  Since  July  2013,  the  nearly  130  banks  have  built  up  capital  amounting  to 
approximately €140 billion.2 As a result of the health check, one or the other institution will 
make further provisions or raise capital. A lengthy period of balance sheet restructuring will 
thus be significantly shortened. 
In  lending,  we  are  already  seeing  the  first  positive  signals.  The  decline  in  lending  to 
companies  and  households  has  stabilised.  And  our  latest  Bank  Lending  Survey  suggests 
that in the second quarter of 2014 lending standards eased for all categories of loans on a 
net basis. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism can make a further significant contribution in support of 
monetary  policy;  set  up  properly,  it  could,  at  best,  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy  during  the  next  credit  cycle.  At  this  point,  the  interaction  of  micro-prudential  and 
macro-prudential policy, the second side of the triangular relationship, comes into play. 
As  I  said  earlier,  many  banks  in  the  euro  area  had  to  deleverage  significantly  during  the 
crisis; they were not resilient enough. Some banks found it difficult to refinance because their 
equity ratios were too low. So they had to increase their capital ratio during the downturn, 
and this curbed new lending. 
This  cyclical  behaviour  cannot  perhaps  be  eliminated  with  instruments  from  micro-  and 
macro-prudential supervision, but it certainly can be attenuated. Supervision in Europe will 
take a preventive, risk-based approach. We will be pushing for more than compliance with 
the minimum capital and liquidity ratios under the supervisory regulation. We will above all 
check whether the business models of banks we directly supervise are sustainable, whether 
bank-internal  control  structures  and  governance  are  set  up  in  an  appropriate  way  and 
whether  the  institutions  could  survive  crises.  If  during  an  upturn  a  bank’s  resilience  is 
increased,  then  there’s  less  need  to  raise  capital  during  a  downturn  to  boost  market 
confidence. Under such circumstances, it should then be possible to use macro-prudential 
instruments that support lending, such as the releasing of countercyclical capital buffers. This 
would  help  monetary  policy  to  achieve  more  predictable  effects  throughout  the  economic 
cycle. 
But  the  interests  of the banking  supervisors  and  of those  responsible  for  macro-prudential 
supervision do not always have to be aligned. I can easily imagine situations in  which the 
supervisor  feels  there  is  more  capital  and  liquidity  than  necessary  or  that  the  increase  in 
margin  requirements  is  more  than  necessary,  while  from  a  systemic  perspective  cyclical 
behaviour is perceived to be crisis-intensifying. 
The  link  between  the  two  areas  of  responsibility  at  the  ECB  may  also  prove  to  be  helpful 
here,  by  internally  resolving  potential  conflicts.  The  advantage  of  having  the  Governing 
Council  as  a  decision-making  body  for  all  three  policy  areas  is  that  it  can  get  a 
                                                
2   These  figures  are  based solely  on  publicly  available data;  retained earnings  and  other  categories  were  not 
taken into account in the calculations. The actual figures should be correspondingly higher. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  comprehensive  picture  of  the  systemic  risks  and  thus  weigh  up  the  micro  and  macro 
considerations and can find a balance that should be beneficial to monetary policy. 
But this is not the only advantage for monetary policy. By combining the functions within the 
ECB  synergies  may  arise,  at  best,  in the  choice  of  instruments  to  curb  threats  to financial 
stability.  For  some  monetary  policy  instruments,  such  as  adjustments  to  haircuts  or  to  the 
minimum  requirements  for  collateral,  overlap  with  macro-prudential  measures  aimed  at 
liquidity and margin requirements. 
The interplay between micro- and macro-prudence can therefore support monetary policy not 
only  during  the  cycle.  It  can  also  ensure  that  monetary  policy  does  not  have  to  deal  with 
problems that may lie on the periphery of its mandate. 
At  the  same  time,  the  combination  of  functions  within  the  central  bank  also  brings  great 
advantages  for  micro-prudential  supervision.  For  monetary  policy  decisions,  extensive 
economic  analyses  are  made  to  which  the  supervisors  may  resort  in  order  to  obtain 
additional  information  about  the  environment  and  the  conditions  under  which  the  banks 
conduct  their  business.  The  ECB  has  extensive  knowledge  of  the  market  and  provides, 
among other things, real-time insights into the general refinancing situation of the banks. In 
short,  the  exchange  of  know-how  and  information  creates  synergies  and  leads  to  better 
informed supervisory decisions and outcomes. 
Steering the financial cycle 
So far I have talked about the interaction between the areas of responsibility in the downturn 
phase of the cycle. But what about the upturn? 
In  recent  years  there  has  been  much  discussion  about  the  extent  to  which  central  banks 
should  play  a  role  in  steering  the  financial  cycle  –  whether  they  should  “lean  against  the 
wind”. Before the crisis, many opinion leaders believed that, given the difficulty of identifying 
latent bubbles, it was the task of the central bank to make good the damage once the bubble 
had burst. 
As a result of the crisis, however, when a long financial boom had a major impact on price 
stability, many economists have changed their minds and are demanding that central banks 
should take into account risks to financial stability in their decisions. 
The  ECB  has  always  included  financial  stability  considerations  in  its  monetary  policy 
decisions. In our two-pillar strategy financial imbalances are an important element in deciding 
what  measures  are  necessary,  even  when  it  is  a  matter  of  inflation  that  is  too  low.  In 
particular, the monetary pillar captures the relationship between excessive credit and liquidity 
creation,  and  potential  risks  to  future  price  developments,  including  that  of  a  destabilising 
asset price boom. Our actions have a deliberate medium-term orientation. This gives us a 
sufficiently long horizon to take account of financial imbalances in our strategy. Elements of a 
“leaning-against-the-wind” approach are therefore implicitly included. 
However,  should  there  be  signs  of  financial  imbalances  emerging,  we  need  to  carefully 
consider  whether  the  use  of  standard  monetary  policy  instruments  is  appropriate  as  a 
response. There are two reasons for this. 
First, it could conflict with our mandate to preserve price stability. The BIS estimates that the 
financial  cycle  typically  lasts  around  16  years,  compared  with  eight  years for the  business 
cycle.  This  asynchrony  can  lead  to  periods  in  which  inflation  makes  a  rate  cut  necessary, 
while the financial data favour the opposite. If we take only the financial cycle into account, 
we may be forced, even with our medium-term orientation, to make compromises in terms of 
our  price  stability  objective.  According  to  our  hierarchy  of  goals,  which  gives  priority  to 
monetary policy, this would not be permissible. 
In  addition,  there  is  also  the  question  of  which  interest  rate  path  should  be  followed  to 
counter  excessive  credit  growth.  Some  studies  conclude  that  in  a  highly  leveraged  boom 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
even  small  changes  in  interest  rates  can  have  a  strong  impact.3  Other  studies  suggest, 
however,  that  rather  large  interest  rate  movements  would  be  required  to  counteract  the 
financial cycle, but these in turn would cause collateral damage to the economy and price 
stability.4 
Using monetary policy instruments to strengthen financial stability seems to be too crude an 
approach in view of the heterogeneity in the euro area. So, for example, lending in the period 
before 2008 was ten percentage points higher in some subsequent crisis countries than in 
the  non-crisis  countries.  A  rate  hike  by  the  ECB,  which  always  applies  to  the  entire  euro 
area,  would  have  had  too  great  an  impact  on  those  regions  that  were  not  affected  by 
excessive lending. 
But  if  monetary  policy  instruments  cannot  always  simultaneously  satisfy  financial  stability 
aspects, then there is only one conclusion: we must consistently apply the Tinbergen Rule; 
we need at least as many instruments as we have goals to achieve. A different goal requires 
an additional tool that is appropriate and proportionate. 
This is where the SSM comes into play – more specifically, the relationship between macro-
prudential policy and monetary policy, the third side of the triangle. In principle, it should be 
easier, by expanding the toolkit which is available to the ECB, with the SSM to establish a 
clear  separation  of  functions  between  the  two  policy  areas.  Monetary  policy  should 
concentrate on price stability, which is an important variable throughout the euro area. The 
focus of macro-prudential policy should be on financial stability. Particular emphasis could be 
put on specific regional or sectoral imbalances. 
However, there may be circumstances under which a clear separation is not so simple. This 
is the case when the financial cycle extends across sectors and countries and represents a 
threat  to  future  price  stability.  A  combination  of  monetary  and  macro-prudential  measures 
could then be the right answer. 
Particularly  for  the  macro-prudential  measures,  there  are  many  different  questions  and 
uncertainties  about  unintended  spillover  effects  of  regionally  limited  measures  on  other 
countries  or  the  entire  euro  area.  Under  such  conditions,  the  fact  that  the  ECB  is  also 
responsible  for  banking  supervision  will  benefit  monetary  policy.  Because  for  all  of  these 
issues, the decision-making is concentrated in the Governing Council. The Council’s role is 
to ensure an optimal policy mix. 
As for macro-prudential policy, the national authorities, as I have already said, still play an 
important  shaping  role.  They  have  extensive  knowledge  of  the  national  economic  and 
financial  systems.  The  governors  of  most  of  the  national  central  banks  are  involved  in 
national  macro-prudential  tasks.  This  will  make  the  exchange  of  views  and  voting  in  the 
Governing  Council 
in  respect  of  national  and  European  macro-prudential  policies 
considerably easier. 
Should opinions diverge – for example, in relation to the systemic consequences of a specific 
measure – the ECB is authorised under EU legislation to improve existing macro-prudential 
measures  which  have  been 
to  make 
recommendations for new measures. 
implemented  by  national  authorities  or 
Summary 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to summarise. 
                                                
3   See  Adrian,  T.  und  H.-Y.  Shin  (2010),  “The  Changing  Nature  of  Financial  Intermediation  and  the  Financial 
Crisis of 2007–09”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No 439, March 2010. 
4   See,  for  example,  Bean,  C.,  M.  Paustian,  A.  Penalver  and  T.  Taylor,  “Monetary  Policy  after  the  Fall”, 
28 August 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  My intention today has been to give you an understanding of the future tasks of the ECB, the 
future triangular relationship. The Single Supervisory Mechanism and the new role in macro-
prudential supervision will not, when properly set up, dilute the objective of the central bank, 
but  instead  may  contribute,  as  a  side  effect,  to  a  strengthening  of  our  monetary  policy 
mandate. And monetary policy can focus on its task of maintaining price stability. Banking 
supervision  will  ensure  that  banks  become  more  resilient;  macro-prudential  instruments 
should  have  a  dampening  effect  on  asset  price  bubbles  and  cyclical  behaviours.  The 
completion  of  the  banking  union  will  also  contribute  significantly  to  safeguarding  financial 
stability in the future. 
Nevertheless, we must not succumb to hubris – we must not succumb to the notion that all 
problems are solved thanks to the SSM. The health of individual banks depends not only on 
supervision, but also on the overall economy and the structure of the banking system; and 
the ECB’s influence on that is limited. And we should not forget that irrational exuberance, as 
can  be  found  ex  post  in  many  a  “bubble”,  is  simply  part  of  human  nature.  That’s  another 
lesson the crisis should teach us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
