Peter Praet: Reforms and growth in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Panel intervention “Fixing finance”, The Economist’s Lisbon Summit, Lisbon, 18 February 
2014. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in  Portugal  today,  where  we  are  now  seeing  signs  of  a 
stabilisation in the economy. Economic activity is recovering, the unemployment rate is falling 
– although from  very high levels –  and the current account is in surplus. While it will take 
years  for  the  scars  left  by  the  crisis  on  the  economy  and  society  to  fade,  confidence  has 
been steadily improving during the recent months. Real GDP has been growing at positive 
rates  since  the  second  quarter  of  2013  and  the  most  recent  information  from  industrial 
production, sales, and merchandise trade confirm that this trend is continuing. 
Other euro area countries that have been hit hard by the crisis are also now beginning down 
the recovery path, while financial markets have started a more benign pricing of sovereign 
and  private  credit  risk.  All  this  is  thanks  to  the  progress  that  has  been  made  in 
macroeconomic,  structural  and  financial  repair  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis. 
Especially  since  mid-2010,  the  start  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  decisive  action  has  been 
taken at national and European levels. 
In the first part of my remarks today, I would like to give an overview of the key measures 
that have been taken in response to the crisis. My focus will be on the role played by the 
ECB. Monetary policy has been critical to averting a more severe economic calamity. 
But the ECB has also made a wider contribution: we have contributed actively to the debate 
on  the  deepening  of  EMU  and  we  have  promoted  progress  toward  the  euro  area’s  new 
financial architecture, the Banking Union. 
This work of strengthening the euro area is not complete, however. And this is where I would 
like to focus the second part of my intervention. Specifically, I would like to ask: what further 
steps are needed to embark on a path of robust growth, both in stressed and non-stressed 
economies? 
We  know  that  achieving  high  sustainable  growth  will  be  indispensable  to  bring  the 
unemployment rate back to acceptable levels and to support debt sustainability. But for this 
to  happen,  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  will  need  to  persevere  in  its  efforts  to  reform  its 
economic fabric. The process of structural reform is demanding – and it therefore requires 
long-term commitment and strong ownership to be a success. 
The starting point: the debt crisis and the emergence of financial fragmentation 
Let me start by briefly reviewing the evolution of the crisis in the euro area. 
Very broadly speaking, the crisis has had two main phases. The first phase began with the 
bankruptcy  filing  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008.  Here  the  euro  area  shared  in  a 
global liquidity crunch that was largely imported from abroad. The second phase began in 
May 2010 with a sovereign crisis that was localised in the euro area, and that was partially 
exported  to  the  world  economy.  This  second  phase  was  arguably  the  more  pernicious  for 
monetary union. 
The  re-pricing  of  sovereign  risk  in  the  euro  area  spread  from  Greece  to  other  vulnerable 
economies, and from sovereign to private debt and vice versa. In the process, the liquidity 
crunch  morphed  into  a  systemic  crisis  for  the  banking  sectors  of  a  number  of  member 
countries,  and  for  the  integrity  of  monetary  union  as  a  whole.  The  traditional  exposure  of 
banks  in  vulnerable  countries  to  their  own  sovereign  issuers  became  a  quick  carrier  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial contagion as their sovereign bond holdings depreciated and eroded their capital in 
the eyes of creditors. 
This adverse sovereign-bank feedback loop interacted with existing vulnerabilities. Countries 
with  persistent  competitiveness  losses  and  associated  large  current  account  deficits  –  as 
was the case of Portugal – were particularly sensitive to a reversal in external financing. This 
was exacerbated by capital flight to core economies which started to deplete banks’ deposits 
in the most vulnerable countries. Concerns that systemic sovereign issuers may lose market 
access  fed  fears  that  they  may  be  forced  to  redeem  their  liabilities  in  a  currency  different 
from the euro, and thus de facto leave the euro area. “Redenomination fears” became a new 
source of market anxiety. There was a risk that such unwarranted concerns would become 
self-fulfilling and the spectre of destructive tail scenarios was looming. 
In this context, the process of financial integration, which had evolved at a rapid pace since 
the  inception  of  the  euro,  was  partially  reversed,  giving  way  to  fragmentation.  Interbank 
financial  fragmentation  per  se  was  not  a  new  phenomenon  in  the  post-Lehman  world. 
However, during the most severe stages of the sovereign crisis the fractures across the euro 
area  were  not  idiosyncratic  but  systemic  –  that  is,  they  ran  along  national  borders.  This 
reversal  of  the  integration  process  risked  undoing  one  of  the  key  benefits  of  the  common 
currency. 
Fragmentation  led  to  an  impairment  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  The 
monetary impulse that the ECB had swiftly introduced in response to the rising risks to price 
stability was no longer transmitted uniformly throughout the entire euro area. While the ECB 
had brought its official policy interest rates to historical lows, a number of countries were not 
in a position to take advantage of monetary accommodation. Banks in those countries were 
tightening  credit  conditions,  running  against  the  monetary  policy  intentions  of  the  central 
bank, with negative repercussions on access to finance, in particular for small and medium-
sized enterprises. This translated into a drag on the economic recovery. 
As  a  result,  the  singleness  of  monetary  policy  was  no  longer  ensured,  posing  significant 
challenges to the ECB’s policy conduct. 
Fixing the monetary transmission mechanism and the elimination of tail risks 
The  ECB  responded  forcefully  to  these  challenges  with  a  number  of  standard  and  non-
standard monetary policy measures. The main purpose of the non-standard measures was 
to  reduce  financial  fragmentation  and  restore  an  appropriate  functioning  of  its  monetary 
policy across the euro area. In particular, the measures were geared towards removing two 
sources of risk premia: bank funding risks and redenomination fears. 
Higher funding risks for banks had been a symptom of the crisis ever since liquidity strains 
had first emerged, almost overnight, in the summer of 2007. They had escalated to systemic 
proportions after the Lehman demise. 
Since the onset of the crisis, the ECB’s mainstay response to this problem has been twofold: 
a policy of unlimited provision of liquidity at fixed interest rates against eligible collateral in 
the weekly main refinancing and longer-term operations, and an extension of maturity of the 
liquidity operations from 3 months to up to 3 years. This dual approach to crisis management 
has been reinforced by two further initiatives. 
First, collateral rules have been adapted in various stages with a view to broadening the pool 
of assets that banks could mobilise for Eurosystem liquidity provision. This process – which 
has complemented the fixed-rate-full-allotment decision – has always balanced the need to 
be supportive to our counterparties with the goal of exercising an appropriate degree of risk 
control,  and  to  protect  our  balance  sheet.  Incidentally,  Portuguese  banks  have  greatly 
benefited from these measures. For instance, they were able to strengthen collateral buffers 
by mobilising additional credit claims for the purpose of obtaining Eurosystem liquidity – and 
more effectively than other banking systems in the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, the refinancing risk faced by euro area banks has been minimised by giving them 
reassurance that monetary policy will remain accommodative for an extended period of time. 
In the course of 2013, this reassurance has taken two forms: conditional forward guidance on 
the level and direction of our policy rates in the future, and a pledge to maintain the fixed-
rate-with-full-allotment policy for as long as needed and at least until mid-2015. 
These measures proved powerful in addressing the funding risk faced by our counterparties 
throughout the crisis, as evidenced, for example, by the significant decline in money market 
term premia. 
Addressing  redenomination  fear  premia,  however,  is  more  alien  to  central  banks,  and 
therefore required a new approach. The Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) initiative was 
the innovative instrument that we deployed to remove break-up fears from the market pricing 
of sovereign credit risk, and promote more regular financial conditions. The initiative proved 
an extremely effective instrument. It has not only reduced the fraction of sovereign spreads 
that  reflected  compensation  for  the  redenomination  fears,  but  also  contributed  more 
generally  to  the  improvement  in  funding  conditions  for  corporates,  banks  and  individuals 
across the euro area. 
In  sum,  non-standard  measures  by  the  ECB  have  helped  ease  liquidity  pressures  for  the 
euro area in general, and continue to play a pivotal role in alleviating funding constraints for 
Portuguese banks in particular. And we have seen consistent signs that banks in Portugal – 
again,  more  visibly  than  within  other  stressed  countries  –  are  starting  to  pass  the  easing 
stimulus onto their customers, that is, to firms and households. 
Fixing the euro area economic and financial system 
These monetary policy measures would have been less effective, had they not been flanked 
by a serious drive toward financial reform. The key element of this ambitious reform agenda 
has been the Banking Union. It is probably the most ambitious and encompassing reform of 
the EU architecture since the institution of the single currency. The successful completion of 
the Banking Union should help to address bank funding fragmentation in a more structural 
way and give concrete support to credit supply conditions throughout the euro area. 
Let me explain why. 
With the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) centred on the ECB, banks 
will be subject to a homogeneous set of rules and procedures. This will make the standards 
for  prudential  supervision  in  the  euro  area  more  comparable  and  evenly  applied.  As  a 
consequence, supervision should act as a source of integration rather than – as often was 
the case in the past – an additional cause of fragmentation. But some preliminary steps are 
needed before the SSM can operate in full. The first and most important precondition is full 
information about the balance sheets of the euro area banking sector. This is why much of 
2014 will be devoted to a comprehensive assessment of the conditions of our banking sector. 
The  Asset  Quality  Review  (AQR)  is  a  central  building  block  in  this  assessment  and  a 
precondition  to  restore  confidence  in  the  banking  system  of  the  euro  area.  Transparency 
about  banks’  balance  sheets  will  help  revive  private  investors’  interest  in  maintaining  and 
increasing exposures to euro area banks. Indeed, expectations of a serious comprehensive 
assessment  have  already  reinforced  the  positive  trend  in  the  financial  markets.  Looking 
forward, the strengthening of bank funding positions – both on the equity and on the debt 
side – that will result from the exercise will help support credit provision to productive sectors 
with clear benefits for economic growth in the euro area. 
The ECB is therefore also playing a role in the repair of the financial sector through its new 
supervisory  function.  However,  there  are  clear  limits  to  what  the  ECB  can  and  should  do. 
These limits are defined by the ECB mandate as enshrined in the Treaty. In that respect, the 
strict separation between monetary and supervisory functions is instrumental in safeguarding 
against potential conflicts of interest between these two functions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Moreover, finishing the repair process requires actions in other policy areas. At the European 
level,  the  most  pressing  is  to  complete  the  Banking  Union.  An  effective  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism is particularly important, as it will further reduce the sovereign-bank nexus and 
thus work towards the elimination of fragmentation across national borders. 
But  fixing  the  financial  system  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  economy  recovery.  Healthy 
banks can better intermediate between those who save and those who want to invest, and 
are  thereby  necessary  for  future  growth.  Yet,  proper  framework  conditions  need  to  be  in 
place so that the right incentives to invest exist. For example, it is important that firms can 
flexibly adjust to changing economic conditions, and that excessive rents in sheltered sectors 
do  not  distort  the  allocation  of  capital.  Creating  such  framework  conditions  is  largely  the 
responsibility of national policies. Let me therefore now turn to the national dimension of the 
reform process. 
Improving sustainability and growth 
At the time of the sovereign crisis, the most pressing preoccupation of national governments 
was  to  repair  public  finances  and  restore  the  trust  of  financial  markets.  Therefore,  fiscal 
consolidation  was  necessarily  their  first  priority,  and  the  national  reactions  in  this  domain 
were both forceful and effective. 
Let me remind you of some key facts. 
Between  2010  and  2013  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Cyprus  requested  financial 
assistance  from  the  EU  and  the  IMF.  These  programmes  involved  far-reaching  economic 
and  financial  policy  adjustments.  Other  countries  that  had  been  hit  by  a  confidence  crisis, 
such as Spain and Italy, chose to undertake similar corrections. Spain also requested ESM 
programme for its financial sector. 
As a result, structural fiscal balances (i.e. fiscal balances excluding the impact of the cycle 
and  one-off  costs)  improved  significantly  in  all  these  countries.  From  2010  to  2013  this 
improvement was equal to about 15 percentage points in Greece, 6.5 percentage points in 
Portugal,  6.0  percentage  points 
Ireland  and 
4.0 percentage points in Italy. Some of these adjustments are unparalleled in scale from a 
historical perspective. 
These fiscal corrections took place at a time when confidence had reached its lowest level, 
private sector saving ratios were sharply increasing, banks had to deleverage and access to 
finance by firms and households was impaired. The short-term costs in economic and social 
terms were therefore high. 
Yet,  those  costs  were  also  elevated  by  the  fact  that  most  of  the  stressed  countries  had 
entered  the  crisis  with  rigid  institutions  and  economic  structures.  As  a  consequence,  the 
necessary  adjustment  of  prices  and  costs  to  restore  competitiveness  was  slow,  which 
exacerbated the negative impact on activity. Nominal rigidities increased the real cost of the 
adjustment  and  the  burden  has  often  been  borne  by  the  more  vulnerable  members  of 
society. 
A  key  complement  to  fiscal  adjustment  has  therefore  been  structural  reform.  In  several 
countries  a  series  of  bold  structural  reforms  have  been  implemented.  In  Portugal  in 
particular, the reform agenda has been broad-based and far-reaching. It has included public 
administration,  health  and  pension  systems,  education,  judicial  systems,  competition 
frameworks,  industrial  relations,  labour  markets,  energy  markets,  network  industries, 
services sectors and regulated professions. 
in  Spain,  5.5  percentage  points 
in 
Some concrete examples of structural reforms 
The  overall  approach  to  structural  reforms  in  stressed  countries  has  been  to  proceed  in  a 
comprehensive  manner.  This 
reforms  are  mutually 
is  not  only  because  certain 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
complementary – for example, the competitiveness benefits of a labour market reform may 
not materialise without accompanying product market reforms, as wages adjust but prices do 
not  –  but  also  because  an  encompassing  approach  ensures  that  the  burden  of  reform  is 
spread more fairly across society. 
However,  implementation  obstacles  to  this  approach  have  been  significantly  higher  than 
initially expected. In general, it has been easier to change institutions and rules in the labour 
market  than  in  product  markets;  it  has  been  easier  to  change  rules  for  “outsiders”  than 
denting  the  vested  interests  of  established  “insiders”;  and  it  has  been  easier  to  increase 
taxes  rather  than  cutting  expenditure.  While  these  difficulties  are  in  many  cases  gradually 
being  overcome,  the  process  is  far  for  completed.  Still,  one  should  not  underestimate  the 
achievements so far. 
Let me give you a few examples: 
Looking at a well-established summary indicator of employment protection, the OECD index, 
Portugal,  Spain  and  Greece  have  recorded  notable  improvements  in  2013.  In  these  three 
countries  labour  market  institutions  are  currently  assessed  to  be  more  flexible  than  in 
Luxembourg,  Italy,  France,  Germany,  Belgium  and  the  Netherlands.  This  should  help 
achieve a balance of employment protection that gives both stability – encouraging workers 
to invest in firm-specific skills – and mobility – allowing for reallocation between productive 
and non-productive sectors.1 
These same countries have also introduced several measures to help connect wage levels 
more closely with actual productivity developments. The link between collective bargaining 
and  economic  conditions  has  been  strengthened  by  the  possibility  for  more  firm-level 
agreements.  In  Greece,  wage  floors  have  been  significantly  reduced  to  boost  youth 
employment  creation;  in  Portugal,  they  have  been  frozen  and  overtime  pay  considerably 
reduced. Wage indexation has become less prominent in Spain and in Cyprus it has been 
abolished. 
In all these countries the labour market reforms have started to have an impact on private 
sector wages. Private sector compensation per employee has fallen significantly in Greece 
since  2011,  correcting  what  was  an  unsustainable  increase  prior  to  crisis,  and  it  has  also 
started to adjust in Spain, Portugal and Cyprus in 2012–13. I fully recognise the difficulties 
this process creates, yet this has to be set against the need for wages to adjust to reduce 
unemployment  and  restore  external  competitiveness.  We  are  expecting  that  that  these 
positive effects will dominate going forward and help employment to begin recovering in the 
near future. 
In  parallel,  all  programme  countries  have  strengthened  their  active  labour  market  policies, 
including  by  fostering  traineeship  programmes  and  dual-apprenticeship  systems,  also  with 
the support of EU funds. This is important, as having an adequate social safety net and job 
search  and  retraining  programmes  can  reduce  unemployment  duration  and  so  lower  the 
long-term costs of an adjustment phase. There is also a fairness dimension: we should not 
forget  that  some  citizens  paid  high  entry  costs  to  enter  previously  closed  professions,  for 
example  by  purchasing  expensive  licences,  and  may  now  need  help  transitioning  to  new 
employment. 
Product market reforms have generally aimed at improving competition in network industries 
–  energy,  telecommunication,  transport  –  and  highly  regulated  professions,  as  well  as 
reducing  administrative  (licencing)  burdens  to  wholesale  and  retail  trade  and  provisions  of 
services.  Such  reforms  have  tended  to  face  greater  implementation  obstacles  than  labour 
market measures, partly owing to the micro or sector-specific dimension of the reform needs. 
                                                 
1   Blanchard,  O.,  F.  Jaumotte,  and  P.  Loungani  (2013),  “Labor  Market  Policies  and  IMF  Advice  in  Advanced 
Economies During the Great Recession”, IMF Research Department. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
This  has  required  policymakers  to  confront  more  concentrated  opposition  from  vested 
interests within the sector that is subject to reform. 
However,  among  programme  countries,  Portugal  has  some  impressive  achievements  to 
show  in  terms  improving  product  market  functioning  and  economic  framework  conditions. 
These have included the change of competition law and the regulatory framework, the reform 
of the judicial system, and the reform of regulated professions and of the housing market. 
Finally, programme targets for privatisation were achieved ahead of time. 
Structural reforms need a long-term commitment 
As I said at the start of my remarks, an improvement of the underlying prospects for these 
economies  has  moved  expectations.  Perceptions  about  the  sustainability  of  the  recovery 
path in Portugal, in particular, have been reflected in persistent improvements in confidence 
and  associated  reductions  in  risk  premia.  Over  time  the  economic  and  social  pay-offs  of 
reforms will be high, in terms of higher wealth and employment. High and sustainable GDP 
growth  will  in  turn  bring  about  improvements  in  fiscal  positions  and  sizeable  reductions  in 
debt-to-GDP  ratios  in  the  medium  to  long-run,  contributing  therefore  to  long-term  debt 
sustainability. 
However, to reap these benefits implies a long-term commitment. The reform process is a 
continuum. A reform that has just been legislated does nothing for the citizens of a country, if 
it is not followed-up with effective implementation. Making sure that reforms transfer from the 
statute  book  to  the  real  economy  requires  painstaking  monitoring,  as  well  as  a  prompt 
reaction  in  case  outcomes  deviate  from  expectations.  When  countries  exit  adjustment 
programmes,  such  an  orientation  will  help  prove  to  markets  that  reforms  have  been 
undertaken not only due to external pressure, but also out of a genuine recognition of their 
benefits.  This  is  the  best  way  to  ensure  sustainable  market  access  supported  by  a  robust 
growth outlook. 
Recent empirical estimates based on the distance-to-frontier approach show the gains that 
could  still  be  achieved.  In  Portugal,  closing  the  gap  from  best  practices  via  a  fast 
implementation of product, labour and welfare state reforms would lead to an increase in per-
capita GDP by 13.5% in 10 years.2 In these projections, not only the pace of implementation 
matters, but also the degree of ambitiousness. If reforms target only a partial closure of the 
gap vis-à-vis the best performers then of course the GDP gains will also be reduced. 
All  this  points  to  the  need  to  establish  a  clear  link  between  notional  reforms  and  actual 
outcomes  via  an  outcome-based  accountability  framework,  which  can  increase  or  make 
more effective the implementation process. 
The need for structural reforms in all euro area countries 
Despite difficulties, the impetus for reform has been strong in the stressed countries, while it 
has been much weaker in the rest of the euro area. This is the natural outcome of a crisis-
driven reform process. However, the crisis has clearly shown that a strategy of postponing 
reforms  is  self-defeating,  as  it  contributed  to  the  accumulation  of  imbalances  and 
vulnerabilities in good times and increased the cost of adjustment in bad times. 
It is therefore crucial that the reform process is strengthened in all euro area countries, also 
those not affected by the crisis. Research has shown that undertaking coordinated reforms in 
                                                 
2   See R. Bouis and R. Duval (2011), Raising Potential Growth after the Crisis: A quantitative Assessment of the 
Potential Gains from Various Structural reforms in the OECD Area and Beyond, OECD Economic Department 
Working Papers No. 835, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kgk9qj18s8n-en. Fast implementation 
refers to phasing-in over 5-years, while slow implementation refers to phasing-in over 10-years. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
all countries can boost GDP more than in a situation where each country acts alone.3 A more 
widespread  approach  to  reforms  in  all  euro  area  countries  can  therefore  contribute  to  a 
stronger recovery in the stressed countries and in the euro area as a whole, through positive 
supply and demand effects. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. 
The euro area has come a long way in addressing its problems. The progress that has been 
made is remarkable and covers a wide range of areas and actors. The ECB has been central 
in  stabilising  the  euro  area  economy,  smoothing  the  adjustment  process  of  the  stressed 
countries and restoring the proper functioning of the monetary transmission channel. At the 
supra-national level, EU governance has been strengthened and, in particular, the Banking 
Union is being established. And at national level, progress is ongoing towards restoring fiscal 
soundness and driving forward structural reforms. 
The  pay-off  from  these  reforms  is  becoming  increasingly  visible:  in  2013,  we  already  saw 
signs  of  a  turnaround  in  most  euro  area  countries.  In  Portugal,  real  GDP  has  started  its 
recovery  path,  fiscal  developments  have  been  positive  and  the  unemployment  rate  has 
started  to  fall.  And  consumer  and  business  confidence  has  been  on  an  upward  trend  for 
many months. A similar improvement in confidence has also occurred in other countries that 
had  been  affected  by  the  crisis.  Expectations  regarding  incomes  and  employment  are 
steadily being upgraded. This is a sign that households and firms are starting to internalise 
the benefits of the reforms implemented so far. 
Looking ahead, the task of all euro area policymakers is to ensure that the improvement in 
confidence  will  be  validated  by  actual  outcomes.  If  implementation  of  structural  reforms  is 
pursued  ambitiously  and  the  reform  momentum  upheld,  it  seems  likely  that  growth  will 
surprise on the upside in the coming years. 
                                                 
3   See Varga J., J. in’t Ved (2013), The growth impact of structural reforms, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, 
European Commission Vol. 12/4, page 17–27. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
