  Njuguna Ndung’u: A successful regional integration in the East African 
community – the role of central banks 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Bank of 
the Republic of Burundi’s Golden Jubilee Celebrations, Bujumbura, Burundi, 7 June 2014. 
 His Excellency Honourable Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic of Burundi; 
Honourable  Tabu  Abdallah  Manirakiza,  Minister  of  Finance,  Cooperation  &  Development, 
Republic of Burundi; 
Mr. John Ciza, Governor, Bank of the Republic of Burundi;  
Central Bank Governors and Deputy Governors Present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good morning. I take this opportunity to thank Mr. John Ciza, Governor of Bank of Burundi 
for  inviting  me  and  my  fellow  Governors  of  the  EAC  Central  Banks  to  the  Golden  Jubilee 
celebrations of the Bank of the Republic of Burundi. Indeed, I am honoured to join the Bank 
of  Burundi  and  to  speak  during  this  auspicious  celebration  of  the  50th  anniversary  of  the 
Bank of Burundi. Today, while you are reflecting on the achievements of the Bank for the last 
50 years, I am going to focus the way forward towards “A Successful Regional Integration in 
the East African Community: The Role of Central Banks”. 
I am happy to note that Central Banks in the region have adopted a coordinated approach to 
monetary  and  financial  policy  formulation  and  implementation. Given  that  the  structures  of 
our economies are similar, this coordination has continued to enhance the effectiveness of 
policy as well as the convergence required. 
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, before going into the main theme of this topic, allow 
me  to  briefly  highlight  some  of  the  key  milestones  the  EAC  Partner  States  have  made  in 
driving the integration agenda forward since commencement in July 2000. The EAC Partner 
States undertook to establish among themselves “a Customs Union, a Common Market, a 
Monetary Union and ultimately a Political Federation”. The Customs Union is already in place 
and  implementation  of  the  Common  Market  is  ongoing.  The  signing  of  the  Protocol 
establishing the East African Monetary Union by the Summit in November 2013 was a clear 
demonstration of the commitment of our EAC leaders in advancing the integration process. 
Your  Excellency,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  economic  integration  is  a  vital  ingredient  of  the 
development and growth of the EAC economies. Elimination of border restrictions between 
Partner States to allow  movement of people and goods will accord EAC economies larger 
markets; enhanced policy credibility across all spheres of economic management and better 
coordination  and  bargaining  position  in  international  institutions.  Increased  convertibility  of 
regional currencies and subsequently, creation of a single currency area will also minimize 
exchange  rate  uncertainty  and  eliminate  volatile  swings  in  the  exchange  rate,  reduce 
transaction costs and lower interest rates and inflation. 
In  addition,  creation  of  larger  markets  in  the  EAC  region  will  enable  members  to  leverage 
their relative comparative advantages into one unified block of economic activity capable of 
offering more goods and services on the international market than its competitors. 
Furthermore,  bridging  infrastructure  gaps  through  joint  regional  infrastructure  projects  that 
target key regional transport corridors will support trade and investment in the region. Finally, 
integration  will  allow  for  free  movement  of  goods  and  labour  skills  within  the  region  in 
response to market demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  However,  regional  integration  comes  with  some  challenges.  We  have  learnt  from  EU  the 
pitfalls of regional integration:  
Firstly, integration of economies could lead to loss of national sovereignty. To illustrate this, 
EAC  partner  states  may  have  to  give  up  some  of  their  sovereignty  to  supra-national 
institutions  to  be  created  such  as  the  East  African  Central  Bank  (EACB),  East  African 
Assembly, the Commission on Financial Services, among others. 
Secondly, Partner states may no longer be able to enact policies to meet their specific needs 
and interests if such policies are in conflict with regional initiatives. For instance, use of fiscal 
or monetary policy to pursue a specific country development agenda. 
Thirdly, it may be difficult for national governments to create and implement policies based 
on  their  own  particular  needs.  In  this  regard,  fiscal  rules  could  limit  a  country’s  ability  to 
increase public debt to finance critical infrastructure projects or social safety nets. But one of 
the demonstrated challenges is the problem associated with the sovereign debt crisis in the 
Euro Zone. Dissimilarities in current debt levels and structure also pose a threat. 
Finally,  the  distribution  of  benefits  and  costs  may  be  unequal  due  to  different  levels  of 
development, as EU has demonstrated. Therefore, the involvement of stakeholders is crucial 
for the success of regional integration initiatives.  
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, despite the challenges, experience has shown that 
the  benefits  from  regional  integration  outweigh  costs.  Regional  integration  can  promote 
peace,  economic  progress,  structural  change  and  growth  with  lasting  benefits for the  EAC 
region. Central Banks have a role to play to make these benefits a reality and improve the 
livelihoods  of  the  East  African  people.  Central  Banks  will  be  required  to  contribute  to  the 
development  and  prosperity  of  the  EAC  region  through:  achievement  and  maintenance  of 
macroeconomic  stability,  especially  price  and  financial  stability;  in  addition,  meeting  the 
pre-requisites  for  the  Monetary  Union  and  creation  of  key  institutions  responsible  for 
implementation  of  the  EAMU  roadmap;  establishment  of  an  efficient  payment  mechanism; 
and, through macro-prudential regulation of the financial system. 
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, the recent financial crisis has shown that although 
financial  integration  improves  access  to  financial  markets  and  the  opportunities  for  risk 
diversification, it may also increase the scope for financial contagion effect across countries. 
In  this  regard,  EAC  Central  Banks  must  ensure  that  financial  stability  arrangements  keep 
pace with the degree of financial integration; strengthen supervisory capacity and financial 
sector  resilience;  and,  ensure  adequacy  of  capital  and  liquidity  buffers.  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, financial stability requires a concerted effort by key stakeholders. It is therefore 
important for EAC Central Banks to strengthen synergies with other financial sector players. 
But also we have seen the benefits of innovations in the financial sector for inclusive growth 
and reducing cost of doing business.  
To conclude, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, I once again want to reiterate that the 
benefits  of  regional  integration  outweigh  the  challenges  and  that  EAC  countries  can 
overcome  the  challenges.  The  Central  Banks  in  the  region  have  a  role  to  play  in  the 
transformation of the EAC economies. Consequently, the EAC Central banks have put their 
best foot forward to support the integration Agenda during the 10 year transition window to 
the establishment of the EAC Central Bank. To accomplish this, the EAC Central Banks will 
harmonize  their  macroeconomic  frameworks  and  policies  and  enhance  internal  capacities 
within the region. 
THANK YOU, YOUR EXCELLENCY, 
THANK YOU, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
