Philip Lowe: Demographics, productivity and innovation 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The 
Sydney Institute, Sydney, 12 March 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  David  Jacobs,  Michelle  Bergmann  and  Daniel  De  Voss  for  excellent  assistance  in  the 
preparation of this talk. 
Thank you very much for the invitation to address The Sydney Institute. Over many years, 
the Institute has played an important role in the intellectual and public policy life of our city 
and our country. It is, therefore, a very real honour to be here. 
The title of my remarks is Demographics, Productivity and Innovation. What I would like to do 
this evening is to step back from the constant flow of high-frequency data on the Australian 
economy and explore a longer-term issue – namely the potential links between demographic 
developments, productivity growth and our society’s attitudes to risk and innovation. 
To try to make these issues a little more concrete, could I begin by asking you to think about 
two questions: 
 
How  has  our  society’s  attitude  to  risk  and  innovation  evolved  over  time  and  what 
implications are there for productivity growth? 
As  the  population  ages,  how  might  our  attitude  to  risk  and  innovation  continue  to 
change? 
 These  are  not  easy  questions  to  answer.  Understanding  how  people  think  about  risk  and 
what drives productivity growth are issues that the economics profession has struggled with 
for many years, with robust answers difficult to come by. As a result, some of what I have to 
say  this  evening  will  inevitably  be  speculative,  and  for  a  central  banker  that  is  a  slightly 
uncomfortable thing to do! 
Nevertheless,  these  questions  are  worth  thinking  and  talking  about.  Western  societies  are 
ageing  and  productivity  growth  in  many  advanced  economies  has  trended  lower  for  some 
time now. In addition, over recent years, businesses and households in many countries seem 
to have become more risk averse. The proximate cause of this has been the financial crisis, 
although  I  suspect  that  there  might  also  be  deeper  factors  at  work.  These  developments 
rightly  throw  the  spotlight  onto  the  issues  of  how  our  society  generates  and  funds  the 
innovations that are so important for continued improvement in our living standards. 
These issues might seem quite a long way from the short-term setting of the cash rate, which 
is the main task that keeps the Reserve Bank in the news. But understanding them is critical 
to  doing  our  job  well.  Demographic  trends  and  productivity  growth  are  central  to 
understanding how fast the economy can grow without inflation exceeding the medium-term 
inflation  target.  And  while  changes  in  demography  and  productivity  have  little  influence  on 
our month-to-month decisions about the cash rate, they do have an important bearing on the 
average  level  of  the  cash  rate  over  time.  In  effect,  they  set  the  contours  within  which  we 
make our monthly decisions. 
So this evening, I would first like to talk about recent demographic trends in Australia and 
compare those with what is happening in other advanced economies. I would then like to talk 
about  the  productivity  challenge  that  lies  ahead  and  the  importance  of  a  culture  that 
promotes  innovation.  And  finally,  I  would  like  to  link  the  demographic  trends  to  this 
productivity challenge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Demographic trends 
First, to demography, which, in my view, we do not talk about enough. Mostly, demographic 
developments  are  not  deemed  to  be  newsworthy.  And  in  the  financial  markets,  the 
impending release of demographic information is not met with the same excited anticipation 
that sometimes accompanies the release of the latest monthly statistics. Yet, demographic 
developments have profound effects on our economy and on our society. 
I would like to draw your attention to three specific developments in Australia. 
The first is that our population is growing pretty quickly, and has been for some time. Over 
the past five years, the population has increased by 9 per cent and it is projected to grow by 
another 9 per cent over the next five years. The rate of natural increase has tended to slow a 
little over recent decades, although this has been more than offset by a pick-up in the rate of 
immigration (Graph 1). The result has been the fastest rate of population increase in more 
than three decades. 
Graph 1 
  Most other developed economies find themselves in a very different position, with the rate of 
population  growth  in  the  OECD,  as  a  whole,  only  around  one-third  of  that  in  Australia 
(Graph 2).  Indeed,  our  population  has  been  rising  at  a  faster  rate  than  the  population  of 
almost any other country in the OECD. In a number of these countries, the population has 
actually  been  declining  over  the  past  few  years  and  the  rate  of  decline  is  expected  to 
accelerate.  Japan  is  perhaps  the  most  prominent  example  here,  with  the  population 
projected to fall by 10 per cent over the next 20 years, while the working-age population is 
projected to fall by an almost unprecedented 17 per cent over this same period.1 These are 
remarkable numbers. 
                                                 
1  See  National  Institute  of  Population  and  Social  Security  Research  (2012),  “Appendix:  Auxiliary  Projections 
2061  to  2110”  in  Population  Projections  for  Japan  (January  2012):  2011  to  2060,  January.  Available  at 
http://www.ipss.go.jp/site-ad/index_english/esuikei/gh2401e.asp. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 2 
  The  second  aspect  of  our  demography  that  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  is  the 
diversity  of  our  population.  According  to  the  latest  estimates,  28  per  cent  of  Australia’s 
current population was born overseas (Graph 3). This share has been steadily rising since 
the 1940s and is currently at its highest level since the late 19th century. This share is also 
very high by international standards; in most countries, immigrants account for less than 15 
per  cent  of  the  population,  and  in  quite  a  few  cases  the  figure  is  in  the  low  single  digits 
(Graph 4). Among the larger advanced economies, only Switzerland has a higher share of 
immigrants  in  the  population.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that,  on  average,  new  immigrants  to 
Australia  are  almost  10  years  younger  than  the  average  Australian.  Immigrants  are  also 
more likely to have a post-secondary school qualification than the average Australian. 
 
Graph 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
Graph 4 
  The  third  aspect  of  our  demography  is  the  ageing  of  the  population.  For  most  of  the  past 
40 years or so we have had somewhat of a demographic dividend. While the share of the 
population  that  is  over  65  has  been  steadily  rising,  this  has  been  more  than  offset  by  a 
decline  in  the  share  of  children  in  the  population  (Graph  5).  As  a  result,  the  share  of  the 
working-age population – defined here as those between 15 and 64 – has trended higher. 
However, this trend has now turned around and the share of the population in the 15–64 age 
group is in decline. 
Graph 5 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We are starting to see the effect of this demographic transition in the monthly employment 
data. For many years, the participation rate – that is, the share of the adult population in the 
labour force – had been steadily rising. In contrast, over recent years, the participation rate 
has declined and today it is around the same level it was in 2006. 
Part of this decline is cyclical, reflecting the current soft conditions in the labour market. But 
our analysis also suggests that around half of the decline since late 2010 is due to ageing, 
which is more structural in nature. The results of this analysis can be seen in Graph 6, which 
shows  the  actual  participation  rate  (the  orange  line)  along  with  our  estimates  of  how  the 
participation rate would have evolved had the age structure of the population been constant 
over  time  (the  blue  line).  Given  the  ageing  that  is  taking  place,  these  data  imply  that  the 
participation rates for the various age groups will need to continue to increase if the overall 
participation rate is to trend higher again. Whether or not this happens will have an important 
bearing on the future growth rates of our economy. 
Graph 6 
  Australia  is,  of  course,  not  unique  in  having  to  deal  with  the  challenge  of  an  ageing 
workforce. Indeed, the changes taking place in a number of other advanced economies are 
much starker than those that are taking place here (Graph 7). Our relatively high population 
growth,  which  includes  a  flow  of  relatively  young  immigrants,  means  that  a  number  of 
countries  in  Western  Europe  as  well  as  Japan  and  South  Korea  are  further  along  in  this 
journey than we are. From our perspective, this provides us with an opportunity to learn from 
their experiences. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 7 
  So in summary: our population is growing rapidly, it is increasingly diverse and it is getting 
older. I will return to these themes in a few moments. 
But before I do that, I would now like to turn to the issue of productivity. 
Productivity and innovation 
As I have spoken about before, Australia faces a major challenge here.2 Looking back over 
the past two decades or so, we have enjoyed faster growth in real per capita income than 
almost  any  other  advanced  economy.  In  the  1990s,  we  benefited  from  strong  productivity 
growth. Then in the 2000s, our collective living standards were boosted by a very large rise 
in commodity prices. And over much of this period our national income was further increased 
by the rise in the labour force participation rate that I mentioned a moment ago. 
Today things look a little different. Productivity growth over the past decade has been lower 
than it was in the 1990s, commodity prices are high but no longer rising, and the share of the 
population in employment has fallen recently. If these trends continue we face the prospect 
of considerably slower growth in our living standards than we have become accustomed to. 
The solution here is to lift our productivity growth. 
Again,  Australia  is  not  the  only  country  facing  this  challenge;  in  almost  all  developed 
economies, productivity growth has been slower over the period since the mid 2000s than it 
was over the preceding decade (Graph 8).3 There is much debate about why this is the case. 
One  line  of  thought  is  that  the  slowdown  is  largely  a  legacy  of  the  financial  crisis,  which, 
among  other  things,  caused  investment  spending  in  many  advanced  economies  to  fall  to 
very low levels. 
                                                 
2  See Lowe P (2013), “Productivity and Infrastructure”, Speech to the IARIW-UNSW Conference on Productivity 
Measurement, Drivers and Trends, Sydney, 26 November. 
3  This is true of both labour productivity and multifactor productivity growth. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 8 
  Another line of thought is that the slowdown is much more structural in nature. A prominent 
advocate of this view is Professor Robert Gordon from Northwestern University. He argues 
that the first three-quarters of the 20th century was a golden period in terms of productivity 
growth  for  the  advanced  economies.  During  that  period,  we  worked  out  how  to  take  full 
advantage of the transformational inventions of electricity and the internal combustion engine 
that occurred at the end of the 19th century.4 While there have been many breakthroughs 
over recent years, Gordon argues that they pale into insignificance compared with the huge 
advances made possible by these iconic inventions at the end of the 19th century. 
Another sombre assessment is offered by Nobel Laureate Edmund Phelps. He argues that 
the  problem  is  not  so  much  that  we  have  run  out  of  really  great  things  to  invent,  but  that 
western  societies  are  now  less  able  to  invent  them.  He  argues  that  cultural  changes, 
including  the  changed  role  of  government,  have  stifled  the  desire  and  incentives  for 
innovation.  As  a  result,  our  economies  have  become  less  dynamic  and  less  likely  to  find, 
develop and make use of the major technological breakthroughs that are the source of much 
productivity growth.5 
As is usual in economics though, there is a counterview and it is much more optimistic. This 
view is that the so-called techno-pessimists are fundamentally wrong and, rather than facing 
a  future  of  much  slower  technical  progress,  we  are  on  the  cusp  of  a  new  era  of  great 
progress  in  science.  A  prominent  advocate  of  this  view  is  Robert  Gordon’s  colleague  at 
Northwestern University, Joel Mokyr, who argues that the technological advances of recent 
times have given scientists a dazzling new range of tools and instruments. These advances 
have also greatly lowered the cost of accessing information. His argument is that, as a result, 
a new age of great scientific advancement is now possible.6 
                                                 
4  See Gordon RJ (2012), “Is US Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds”, 
NBER Working Paper No 18315, August. Available at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18315. 
5  See Phelps E (2013), Mass Flourishing: How Grassroots Innovation Created Jobs, Challenge, and Change, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton. 
6  See Mokyr J (2013), “Is Technological Progress a Thing of the Past?”, EU-Vox essay, 8 September. Available 
at http://www.voxeu.org/article/technological-progress-thing-past. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
I don’t profess to know which of these views is correct – only time will tell. What underlies 
these debates though is that the ability of a society to innovate, to take and manage risks 
and to respond quickly to the changing world helps determine the rate of productivity growth. 
Improvements  in  productivity  require  existing  resources  to  be  used  more  efficiently  or 
advances in technology – they do not occur from doing the same thing over and over again 
without change. 
So if we are to improve efficiency and advance technology then innovation is required and 
innovation requires someone to take a risk – the risk of trying a different process, the risk of 
changing workplace organisation and management practices, or the risk of spending scarce 
resources to explore a new idea. Sometimes the effort will not pay off, but just occasionally it 
will, and when it does, we find a better process, a more efficient organisational design or an 
idea that transforms how we do things. 
The point I want to emphasise here is that regardless of whether the techno-pessimists or 
the techno-optimists turn out to be correct, our attitudes to risk-taking, to innovation and to 
entrepreneurship have a significant influence on our future living standards. 
At this point, I would like to return to one of the questions I asked you to think about at the 
beginning: how has our society’s attitude to risk and innovation evolved over time and what 
are the implications for productivity growth? 
My own tentative answer is that there has been a subtle, but important, shift in the way we 
think about risk and innovation. In particular, our preferences appear to have shifted in such 
a way that we increasingly focus on risk mitigation and risk control. There are examples of 
this  in  a  whole  range  of  activities  in  our  society  –  from  the  nature  of  the  legislation  that 
parliaments pass, to the increase in compliance activities in the nation’s boardrooms, to the 
amount of money we are prepared to spend to limit the probability of blackouts and even to 
our attitudes about the design of children’s playgrounds. In each of these areas, our society 
has been prepared to limit options or to spend more of our scarce resources to reduce risk. 
I  want  to  make  clear  that  I  am  not  saying  that  this  is  necessarily  a  bad  thing.  Wealthy 
societies  like  our  own  have  considerable  capability  to  address  risks  in  a  way  that  poorer 
societies cannot. After all, that is one of the benefits of economic progress. And it may also 
be the case that wealthy societies inherently have less tolerance for certain types of risk than 
do less wealthy societies. So what we are seeing may well be optimal from the perspective of 
our collective welfare, even if it does not maximise measured economic growth. 
But,  at  least  in  my  opinion,  it  is  appropriate  occasionally  to  ask  whether  we  have  got  the 
balance right. Reducing risks is not always cost free – resources need to be devoted to the 
task and this means that these resources cannot be used for other tasks. And perhaps even 
more importantly, it might also be the case that a more risk-averse society is naturally less 
inclined to  support  and finance  innovation,  to  implement  new  processes  and  to  apply  new 
technologies. If this is indeed the case, it has implications for future productivity growth. 
Here, I want to circle back to the issue of demography, because some of the developments 
that  I  spoke  about  earlier  have  the  potential  to  shape  how  our  society  thinks  about  risk, 
innovation and change in the future. You might recall the second question I asked: how might 
society’s attitude to risk and innovation change as a result of ageing of the population? 
Again,  there  are  no  definitive  answers.  Older  workers  do  have  considerable  accumulated 
experience  that  can  boost  their  productivity.  However,  the  available  data  both  in  Australia 
and the United States suggest that individuals in their 30s and 40s have a higher probability 
of  becoming  an  entrepreneur  than  do  older  individuals.7  The  take-up  rate  for  new 
                                                 
7  See  Australian  Centre  for  Enterprise  Research  (2012),  “Global  Entrepreneurship  Monitor,  National 
Entrepreneurial Assessment for Australia – GEM Australia 2011 National Report”, Queensland University of 
Technology,  available  at  http://www.gemconsortium.org/docs/download/2414  and  Reynolds  P  and 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
technologies is also higher for younger workers. In addition, younger people tend to be less 
risk averse than older people in their financial decisions.8 All else constant, this higher risk 
aversion of older citizens means that as the population ages, access to capital for more risky 
firms, especially start-ups with little business history, is likely to be more restricted and more 
expensive. 
There are, of course, also factors working in the other direction. As the workforce ages, the 
incentive to find new labour-saving techniques is likely to increase. And the rising pressure 
on  public  finances  from  the  ageing  of  the  population  should  increase  the  incentive  for 
governments to find more efficient ways of delivering goods and services. 
So it is not yet possible to know what the net effect of ageing will be on our attitude to risk 
and  innovation.  But,  if  ageing  societies  do  become  inherently  more  risk  averse  and  less 
supportive  of  innovation  –  as  I  suspect  they  might  –  then  we  are  likely  to  face  a  greater 
challenge than we have to date in generating productivity growth. This means there is likely 
to be more of a premium on getting policies right in some key areas related to innovation. I 
would like to mention five of these, although they are by no means exclusive:9 
 
The way in which we finance innovation, including the access to start-up capital for 
new businesses. The Financial Sector Inquiry will no doubt look at this issue. 
The incentives for innovation that we establish through the tax system. 
The way we support human capital accumulation and research. 
Our business culture and the way we promote and support entrepreneurship. 
The way in which we promote competition in our markets, for it is often competition, 
or the threat of it, that is the driver of innovation. 
 These  are  all  challenging  areas  to  get  right  and  they  should  all  be  on  our  collective  radar 
screen if we are to maintain and strengthen the culture of innovation in an ageing society. 
I  would  also  like  to  briefly  return  to  the  two  other  demographic  factors  that  I  mentioned 
earlier, because I think there is a more positive story here. In particular, a reasonable case 
can be made that both of these demographic factors – that is fairly fast population growth 
and the increasing diversity of our population – can actually promote innovation. 
If the population is growing quickly, then the overall size of the market is getting bigger every 
year. This dynamism creates new opportunities and can increase the pay-off from taking a 
risk. And the increasing diversity of our population means that we have a constant influx of 
people coming to our shores, bringing with them new perspectives, new skills and new ideas. 
While high population growth and high levels of immigration can create challenges of their 
                                                                                                                                                      
P Davidsson  (2009),  “PSED  II  and  the  Comprehensive  Australian  Study  of  Entrepreneurial  Emergence 
(CAUSEE)”, in P Reynolds and R Curtin, New Firm Creation in the United States: Initial Explorations with the 
PSED II Data Set, Springer, pp 265–280. 
8  Data from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey indicate that individuals 
over the age of 65 are more likely to report that they are not willing to take financial risks, and less likely to 
report  that  they  are  willing  to  take  above-average  financial  risks,  when  compared  with  the  rest  of  the 
population (see Black S, L Rogers and A Soultanaeva (2012), “Households’ Appetite for Financial Risk”, RBA 
Bulletin, June, pp 37–42). 
9  See Banks G (2012), ‘Productivity Policies: The “To  Do” List’, Speech at the Economic and Social  Outlook 
Conference,  “Securing  the  Future”,  Melbourne,  1  November.  Available  at  http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/ 
assets/pdf_file/0009/120312/produtivity-policies.pdf;  Daley  J,  C  McGannon  and  L  Ginnivan  (2012),  “Game-
Institute,  Melbourne.  Available  at 
changers:  Economic  Reform  Priorities 
http://grattan.edu.au/static/files/assets/bc719f82/Game_Changers_Web.pdf;  and  Department  of 
Industry 
(2013),  Australian 
Industry,  Canberra.  Available  at 
http://www.innovation.gov.au/science/policy/AustralianInnovationSystemReport/AISR2013/wp-
content/uploads/2013/11/AIS-Innovation-Systems-Report-2013-v3.pdf. 
Innovation  System  Report,  Department  of 
for  Australia”,  Grattan 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
own, properly managed, they can also help create a more dynamic economy and a society 
with more opportunities for all. 
So there is a reason for optimism here. In a number of areas, Australia’s demographic trends 
are  more  favourable  than  in  most  other  western  countries.  We  have  a  strong  record  of 
adapting  to  change  and  allowing  the  marketplace  to  guide  our  adjustment.  Our  sound 
macroeconomic and financial frameworks also provide a basis for confidence. The challenge 
we face is to build on these advantages and to strengthen our collective ability to innovate 
and to adjust to the changing world. We will need to do this if we are to enjoy the type of 
growth in our living standards that we have become used to over the past 20 years or so. 
Thank you for your time this evening. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
