  Graeme Wheeler: The significance of dairy to the New Zealand economy 
Speech by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to DairyNZ, 
Hamilton, 7 May 2014. 
 When Charles Wilson, the CEO of General Motors, was being reviewed by the US Senate in 
1953 for  the  position  of Secretary  of  Defence  in  President  Eisenhower’s  Administration  he 
commented: 
“For years I thought what was good for our country was good for General Motors and vice-
versa”. 
At the time, General Motors accounted for around 2 percent of US GDP. 
Many  might  express  a  similar  sentiment  about  our  dairy  industry.  Dairy  farmers  have 
experienced  some  of  the  greatest  prosperity,  and  also  most  difficult  adjustments,  that  our 
economy  has  seen.  Prosperous  periods,  like  the  introduction  of  refrigerated  shipping,  the 
post WWII commodity boom, and the current flourishing trade with China. And difficult times, 
when the sector had to adjust to Britain’s accession into the EEC, the constant restructuring 
of co-operatives, the removal of subsidies in the mid-1980s, and periods of exchange rate 
pressure that were not necessarily accompanied by strong underlying commodity prices. 
Today, I would like to discuss the critical economic contribution that the sector makes to the 
New Zealand economy, and comment on three issues: 
• 
• 
• 
I will begin by talking about the sector’s export performance. 
Dairy  export  revenue  has  risen  dramatically  over  the  past  two  decades  (figure  1).  At 
$15.5 billion,  dairy  exports  make  up  almost  a  third  of  New  Zealand’s  annual  merchandise 
exports. 
Figure 1: NZ Dairy exports (annual, New Zealand dollar terms) 
the impact of commodity prices on New Zealand’s exchange rate; 
the importance of our dairy export trade with China; and 
the level of dairy farmer debt 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1 
  Growing export receipts have been driven by higher prices and increasing animal numbers. 
Over  the  past  eight  years,  dairy  prices  in  NZ  dollars  were,  on  average,  65  percent  higher 
than in the previous two decades and dairy cattle numbers increased by 30 percent. 
Productivity  growth  has  also  been  impressive.  During  those  eight  years,  improved  stock 
management  and  supplement  use  helped generate farm  productivity  growth  (measured  by 
production  per  hectare)  of  1.9  percent  per  annum.  Productivity  beyond  the  farm  gate  (as 
measured by the volume of exports per kilogram of milk solids produced) increased by a third 
as  dairy  processors  became  more  efficient,  reduced  wastage,  and  shifted  towards  more 
lucrative products (figure 2). 
Figure 2: Volume of exports per kilogram of milk produced 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, DCANZ, RBNZ estimates. 
 Strong growth in dairy receipts creates benefits for others, such as rural communities, rural 
service  providers,  machinery  retailers,  and  financial  institutions.  There  are  also  significant 
indirect effects on the broader economy through additional spending and upward pressure on 
the exchange rate. 
New Zealand’s exchange rate 
i) 
An important factor behind the rise in New Zealand’s exchange rate has been the strength of 
the  terms  of  trade  (which  measures  the  ratio  of  export  prices  to  import  prices,  both  in  NZ 
dollar  terms).  Our  terms  of  trade  are  at  their  highest  level  since  1973  and  are  20  percent 
above  the  average  level  of  the  1990s.  Dairy  prices  account for  just  under  half  of  the  ANZ 
commodity price index (though a smaller share of goods and services exports) so changes in 
global  dairy  prices  have  a  major  effect  on  the  terms  of  trade  and,  in  turn,  the  NZ  dollar 
exchange  rate.  Figure  3  shows  the  close  relationship  between  movements  in  the terms of 
trade and the exchange rate. 
Other factors also affect the value of our currency. An important structural factor affecting the 
long term level of the exchange rate has been the persistent gap between national savings 
and  investment.  Over  the  past  40  years  New  Zealand  has  demanded  more  capital  for 
investment  in  housing,  infrastructure,  and  other  assets  than  its  national  savings  could 
finance.  This  has  meant  an  ongoing  reliance  on  foreign  saving  via  inward  capital  flows, 
placing upward pressure on interest rates and the exchange rate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Our current high exchange rate also reflects the relative strength of New Zealand’s economic 
performance and the consequent upward pressure on our interest rates relative to those in 
other advanced economies. 
Figure 3: TWI and Terms of Trade 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ. 
 A  key  issue  is  whether  the  strong  increase  in  global  dairy  prices  represents  a  permanent 
shift,  or  whether  it  reflects  cyclical  elements.  We  believe  both  factors  are  present. 
Structurally, the demand for protein is rising rapidly in middle income countries as per capita 
incomes  and  urbanisation  increase.  China’s  50  percent  increase  in  dairy  imports  in  2013 
reflects  this  structural  change,  as  well  as  sluggish  growth  in  Chinese  milk  production  as 
small, inefficient producers leave the sector as part of the Government’s efforts to raise the 
quality of raw milk production. 
But  cyclical  or  temporary  factors  are  also  in  play.  These  include  the  2013  drought  in  New 
Zealand, severe climatic conditions in Asia, and an outbreak of foot and mouth disease in 
China. The strong supply response from the US, Europe and New Zealand, as a result of the 
high global dairy prices, is expected to exert downward pressure on international dairy prices 
over the next two to three years. 
The  high  exchange  rate  has  three  major  effects.  First,  it  reduces  income  gains  to  New 
Zealand commodity exporters, but even allowing for this, commodity export prices are well 
ahead of those received in the 2008 commodity price boom (figure 4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Figure 4: ANZ commodity price index 
  Source: ANZ banking group. 
Second, part of the benefit of increased dairy prices accrues indirectly to all New Zealand 
households, rather than specifically to dairy farmers. Appreciation in the New Zealand dollar 
lowers  import  prices,  and  significantly  boosts  the  real  disposable  incomes  of  many 
consumers. Third, currency appreciation adversely affects the tradable sector, and especially 
export and import-competing firms that are not exposed to the dairy industry or other sectors 
enjoying high international prices. 
The Reserve Bank considers that the exchange rate is overvalued and does not believe its 
current level is sustainable. Many analysts consider that the positive news on the economy 
and  the  forecast  tightening  in  interest  rates  is  fully  priced  in  and  believe  that  there  is 
considerable  downside  risk  for  the  currency.  Our  exchange  rate  could  be  expected  to 
weaken if one or more of the following occurs: the US economy continues to improve; global 
dairy prices continue to come off their recent highs; China’s growth slows; financial market 
volatility begins to rise; or if there is a global “risk off” event such as a correction in global 
equity prices. 
If, however, the exchange rate does remain strong, it is likely to be reflected in continued low 
or  negative  tradables  inflation.  In  such  circumstances,  the  high  exchange  rate,  along  with 
new economic data, will be a factor in our assessment of the extent and speed with which 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) needs to be raised. 
Further,  if  the  currency  remains  high  in  the  face  of  worsening  fundamentals,  such  as  a 
continued  weakening  in  export  prices,  it  would  become  more  opportune  for  the  Reserve 
Bank to intervene in the currency market to sell NZ dollars. 
New Zealand’s dairy export trade with China 
ii) 
China’s  economic  growth  over  the  past  35  years  is  unparalleled  in  modern  times.  China 
achieved average annual growth of 10 percent in the three decades to 2010, and although 
growth has slowed, the Government’s target is for annual growth of 7-and-a-half percent over 
the medium term. 
China’s  growth  has  been  driven  by  several  factors:  high  domestic  investment  and  savings 
ratios,  sizable  foreign  direct  investment,  the  impact  of  catch  up  technologies,  the  massive 
shift  of  labour  from  subsistence  agriculture  to  higher  productivity  roles  in  urban  industrial 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  production, and on-going market based reforms including, importantly, those associated with 
its membership of the World Trade Organisation since 2001. 
China is the world’s second largest economy, and the largest trading nation. It is the second 
largest trading partner for the United States and the European Community, and the largest 
trading partner for the 11 countries of ASEAN, as well as Australia and New Zealand. China 
takes 21 percent of our merchandise exports – up dramatically from 4 percent a decade ago 
(figure 5). 
Figure 5: Export market shares (average annual percentage for given year) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 China is our largest export market for every agricultural commodity except beef (where it is 
our second largest market behind the United States). It purchases a third of New Zealand’s 
dairy exports (figure 6). 
Figure 6: Share of primary exports to China (annual total) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
  Provided China’s economy continues to expand at around current rates, growing demand for 
protein-based  commodities  looks  assured.  China’s  current  rate  of  urbanisation,  which  is 
around  50  percent  and  well  below  the  more  industrialised  Asian  economies,  could  trend 
higher for another two or three decades (figure 7). Higher incomes, and greater access to 
refrigerated products, mean that urban dwellers’ per capita consumption of dairy products in 
China is about three times higher than that of rural dwellers. 
Figure 7: Urbanisation rates in industrialised Asian countries 
 Source: World Bank. 
An important issue is whether China can maintain a 7–8 percent growth rate over the long 
term.  Such  growth  rates  would  continue  to  make  China  an  outlier  compared  with  the 
development of other middle income economies. China has achieved outstanding economic 
growth for over 30 years, but it faces several difficult challenges in the years ahead. These 
include:  a  declining  labour  force  and  aging  population;  rebalancing  the  economy  towards 
stronger  consumption  and  higher  value  added  exports;  meeting  infrastructure  demands; 
addressing  income  inequalities  in  the  central  and  western  regions;  tackling  corruption  and 
environmental  issues;  implementing  the  ambitious  set  of  reforms  announced  in  the  third 
Plenum; and managing the very rapid build-up in local government and corporate debt over 
the past five years. 
So  while  the  long  term  future  dairy  trade  with  China  seems  assured,  there  are  risks  of 
temporary  disruption  along  the  way.  Two  particular  issues  are  firstly,  whether  we  have 
diversified our dairy export markets sufficiently, and secondly, could we find that our market 
leadership in respect of exports of whole milk powder is challenged? 
There are grounds for optimism on the diversification front. Fifty years ago, nearly 90 percent 
of our dairy exports went to the United Kingdom, today it’s 0.3 percent. Currently, Fonterra 
operates  in  more  than  100  countries,  several  emerging  market  economies  are  growing 
rapidly,  and  new  trading  opportunities  are  being  opened  up  through  international  trade 
agreements, and possibly through a trans-pacific partnership if negotiations are successful. 
India, rather than China, is forecast by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics  and  Sciences  to  be  the  major  new  market  opportunity  for  dairy  exports  in  the 
future. The Bureau projects global demand for dairy products to increase from USD7 billion 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
in 2007 to USD85 billion in 2050 (in 2007 USD)1. By 2050, India’s import demand for dairy 
products  is  projected  to  be  USD48  billion  –  more  than  three  times  China’s  USD15  billion, 
given the projected growth in China’s domestic production. World Bank projections suggest 
that China and India could be the world’s largest and third largest economies at that time. 
Figure 8: Projected global demand for dairy imports 
Source: ABARES. 
A  second  risk  is  that  a  strong  competitor  enters  the  Chinese  market  and  threatens  our 
market  share.  New  Zealand  supplied  over  70  percent  of  China’s  dairy  imports  in  2013 
(figure 9). 
Figure 9: Chinese imports of dairy products 
 Source: UN comtrade. 
                                                 
1  Linehan  v,  Thorpes,  Andrews  N,  Kim  Y,  Beaini  F,  March  2012  Food  demand  to  2050.  Opportunities  for 
Australian  agricultural  research  by  the  Australian  Bureau  of  Agricultural  and  Resource  Economics  and 
Sciences. Conference paper 12.4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  This high market share reflects the high quality of our product, in terms of nutritional value 
and safety, and the marketing skills in achieving major inroads into a market that others have 
found difficult. 
But other countries also produce clean milk and these producers have seen the high returns 
and  market  share  that  New  Zealand  enjoys  in  China.  Some,  like  the  US  producers,  are 
investing  in  whole  milk  powder  driers. While  New  Zealand  is  likely  to  continue  dominating 
global milk powder export production for many years, we should expect competitors to more 
aggressively target the Chinese market. This reinforces the need for further diversification in 
export products and markets, including positioning for the opportunities that are expected to 
open up in the Indian market. 
Dairy farmer indebtedness 
iii) 
Dairy  debt  almost  trebled  over  the  past  decade,  and  currently  stands  at  $32  billion.  It  is 
concentrated  among  a  small  proportion  of  highly  leveraged  farms  with  around  half  of  the 
dairy debt being held by only 10 percent of dairy farmers. Strong export earnings saw the 
sector’s debt to income ratio improve between 2010 and 2012, although for the decade as a 
whole this ratio tracked steadily upward (figure 10). 
Figure 10: Dairy debt (June years) 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ. 
 The elevated debt level means that some farmers are potentially highly exposed if there are 
substantial  declines  in  the  milk  price  pay-out,  or  if  land  prices  fall.  With  dairy  production 
techniques becoming more intensive and with a higher cost structure, the implied ‘breakeven’ 
pay-out for individual farm profitability has increased over time. A significant decline in the 
milk pay-out, for example, could place some highly indebted farmers under financial strain, 
particularly  with  the  market for farmland  being more  illiquid  in  times  of stress.  Higher  debt 
levels mean that farmers are also exposed to rising interest rates, especially with close to 70 
percent of dairy debt comprising floating rate mortgages. 
Many  dairy  farmers  however,  are  being  cautious  in  the  current  cycle  and  are  using  their 
higher net incomes to acquire additional property and undertake farm improvements without 
taking  on  new  debt  –  and  in  many  cases are repaying  debt.  Farm  building  consents have 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  been rising steadily and dairy conversions are increasing, while dairy farm prices remain well 
below 2008 levels and farm credit growth remains moderate (figure 11). 
Dairy farmers are therefore generally taking a cautious approach in the knowledge that the 
current high prices can turn around quickly. This is encouraging to see given the vulnerability 
of the sector and its already high debt load. 
Figure 11: Value of farm sales and credit growth 
Source : REINZ, RBNZ. 
 Conclusion 
I began with a quote from Charles Wilson about what’s good for General Motors. He could 
not  have  imagined  56  years  later  that  the  US  government  would  have  a  60  percent 
ownership  stake  in  the  company.  But  it  does  illustrate  how  even  the  most  dynamic 
enterprises can lose competitiveness and suffer major losses in market share. 
The  New  Zealand  dairy  industry  is  experiencing  prosperous  times,  continuing  the  strong 
growth in export earnings of the past eight years. Animal numbers and prices have increased 
and on and off farm productivity growth has been impressive. 
And the future looks bright. There seem to be important structural reasons behind the rise in 
dairy  prices  that  should  continue  into  the  medium  term.  But  cyclical  elements  were  also 
present and it would not be surprising to see a continuation of the correction in auction prices 
that we have seen in recent months. 
Looking ahead there are important challenges to manage. On the external front these include 
the oscillations in global dairy prices, the competition that dairy farmers will increasingly face 
from other international suppliers, and the need to continue diversifying our export markets 
and  position  ourselves  for  the  enormous  longer  term  opportunities  that  are  expected  to 
emerge in the Indian market. On the domestic front, dairy farmers should be conscious that 
high  dairy  prices  can  turn  around  quickly,  and  will  need  to  continue  managing  their  cash 
flows and borrowings in a prudent manner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
