Ravi Menon: Myanmar must open up at a measured pace 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at High-Level Seminar on Financial Sector Liberalisation, Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, 
10 January 2014. 
 His Excellency U Win Shein, Union Minister, Ministry for Finance and Revenue, 
His Excellency U Kyaw Kyaw Maung, Governor, Central Bank of Myanmar, 
distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
A defining moment 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  for  this  high-level  seminar  on  financial  liberalisation.  This 
collaborative event is a clear testimony to two things: 
• 
first, the commitment and resolve of the Myanmar government and central bank to 
modernise and develop the financial sector; and 
second, the warm relationship and close co-operation between the central banks of 
Myanmar and Singapore. 
 Myanmar  is  at  a  defining  moment.  There  is  a  distinct  sense  of  optimism,  as  the  country 
rejoins  the  global  economy.  A  strategic  location  at  the  intersection  of  China  and  India,  a 
generous  endowment  of  natural  resources,  and  a  large,  youthful  and  literate  population  
– Myanmar is poised to be the next economic frontier in Asia. 
Finance is a handmaiden to the economy. As Myanmar opens up its economy and seeks to 
achieve  sustained  growth,  it  is  important  to  liberalise  and  develop  its  financial  sector  in 
concert.  But  it  must  do  this  in  a  progressive  and  calibrated  manner,  step-by-step,  making 
sure the fundamentals and preconditions are in place. 
Let me elaborate on these two themes: why liberalise the financial sector, and why liberalise 
at a measured pace. In doing so, I will draw partly from Singapore’s experience. Singapore 
and Myanmar are two very different economies and it would be unwise to apply Singapore’s 
experience directly to Myanmar. 
But I think the overall lesson is relevant: It is critical to open up, but open up at a measured 
pace. 
Why financial liberalisation is important 
A well-developed financial sector can be a catalyst to spur and sustain economic growth. It 
will lead to more effective mobilisation of domestic savings, help to harness foreign savings, 
and improve the efficiency of investment allocation. And opening up the financial sector to 
foreign  participation  can  play  a  critical  role  in  catalysing  the  sector’s  growth  and 
development. 
A basic purpose of banking is the provision of credit for economic and social development. 
Large segments of the Myanmese economy and population do not have access to affordable 
funding.  Foreign  financial  institutions  can  complement  the  local  banks  in  effective  credit 
intermediation. It will deepen the financial sector, thereby helping to raise household savings 
and divert funds away from the shadow financial system. 
Foreign financial institutions can provide a channel for Myanmar to tap into foreign savings to 
drive its growth, even as the country ramps up the mobilisation of domestic savings. This is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
particularly  relevant  for  financing  infrastructure  development,  which  is  critical  to  drive 
Myanmar’s economic growth. 
• 
A  McKinsey  study  estimates  that  Myanmar  will  need  to  invest  US$320  billion  in 
infrastructure up to 2030 to achieve an annual growth of 8%. 
Foreign capital, intermediated through a well-developed banking industry and well-
functioning  capital  markets, 
this 
infrastructure need. 
is  a  necessary  complement 
to  meeting 
 And it is not only financing that foreign participation brings, but critical expertise in structuring 
projects and managing risks. 
Most  important,  foreign  financial  institutions  promote  competition  and  innovation,  providing 
the  impetus  for  local  institutions  to  upgrade  their  capabilities.  This  has  been  Singapore’s 
experience. 
• 
We had protected our local banks from foreign competition in retail banking for many 
years. 
In  1999,  MAS  embarked  on  a  programme  to  liberalise  access  to  Singapore’s 
domestic banking market. 
The  aim  was  to  strengthen  our  local  banks  through  competition  and  provide 
Singaporeans with quality banking services. 
  The strategy worked. 
• 
The  local  banks  built  up  strong  management  teams  and  made  significant 
infrastructural investments to expand their range of business activities and enhance 
operational effectiveness. 
They  are  now  stronger  and  more  dynamic,  with  much  improved  systems  of 
management, risk controls, technology, and expertise. 
Liberalisation provided the spur for our local banks to raise their game and compete 
with some of the world’s largest banks while maintaining high prudential standards. 
  Why liberalise at a measured pace 
This leads me to my second point. The pace and sequencing of financial liberalisation are 
critical: 
• 
The  pace  of  liberalisation  should  proceed  in  accordance  to  the  country’s  stage  of 
development. Progressive liberalisation at a steady pace is better than a ‘big bang’ 
approach. 
And  financial  reforms  must  be  sequenced  appropriately  in  order  to  ensure  the 
stability of the financial system. 
 sound regulation and supervision; 
a strong core of local banks; and 
a selective admission policy. 
Let me highlight three factors that must be in place for successful financial liberalisation: 
• 
• 
• 
First,  regulation  and  supervision.  Financial  crises  following  rapid  liberalisation  are  often 
caused  by  excessive  risk-taking  by  financial  institutions  against  a  backdrop  of  weak 
prudential regulation and supervision. The quality of prudential oversight, risk management, 
and corporate governance must keep pace as the financial sector grows. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Second, a core of strong local banks. Sound banking systems need strong anchor players 
who are well-regulated, rigorously supervised, and able to take the long-term view, so that 
their interests are closely aligned with that of the domestic economy. 
• 
This is why Singapore phased its liberalisation measures progressively, to give the 
local banks time to adjust so that they can compete effectively, while maintaining the 
stability of the financial system. 
It  may  be  necessary  to  facilitate  the  consolidation  of  a  fragmented  local  banking 
system to form a core group of strong local banks that are able to compete. 
In Singapore, liberalisation spurred the consolidation of Singapore banks from seven 
banking groups to three, a process which may otherwise have taken much longer. 
Foreign bank participation in the domestic banking system must therefore be strong 
enough to encourage the strengthening of the local banks but not so strong as to 
overwhelm them. 
It is a judicious balance that each country must find for itself. 
• 
Third,  selective  and  stringent  admission.  Singapore  has  always  had  a  very  open  policy 
towards foreign banks in wholesale and offshore banking activities. But when we selectively 
liberalised foreign bank access to retail banking, MAS considered three sets of factors: 
• 
First, the banks’ prudential strength, credit ratings, and quality of risk management. 
We only admitted strong, well-run banks. 
Second, we took into account the relationship we had with the home regulator, as 
we needed to be able to work with them on consolidated supervision of these banks 
and trust them to regulate the head office in a sound manner. 
Third,  we  evaluated  the  banks’  long-term  business  plans  and  how  they  could 
contribute to the Singapore economy. 
  Liberalisation is not an end in and of itself. It must ultimately lead to a stronger, safer, and 
more competitive financial system that serves the needs of the economy and country. 
The  lessons  from  the  development  history  of  many  economies  are  compelling:  financial 
liberalisation is integral to the development process but this liberalisation must be carefully 
sequenced  if  crises  are  to  be  avoided  and  the  benefits  of  liberalisation  maximised.  In 
general, domestic financial reform should precede full capital account liberalisation. 
Let  me  conclude.  Myanmar  has  embarked  on  a  momentous  journey  to  strengthen  and 
develop its financial sector. Liberalising the financial sector is not a question of whether but 
how. MAS, through its growing partnership with the Central Bank of Myanmar, is happy to 
contribute  to  this  effort  where  it  can.  We  have  been  deeply  engaged  in  many  training 
programmes  and  stand  ready  to  share  our  experiences  where  relevant.  Singapore  wants 
Myanmar to succeed and prosper, and realise its huge potential. 
I wish you fruitful discussions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
