William C Dudley: Economics at the Federal Reserve banks 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New  York, at the American  Economic Association 2014 Annual Meeting, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 4 January 2014. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  the  role  of 
economics and  economists  at  the  Reserve  Banks.  Economics  is  a critical  discipline  at  the 
New York Fed, just as it is at the Board of Governors and the other Reserve Banks.  
Nevertheless,  I  expect  that  my  perspective  will  differ  a  bit  from  that  of  Eric,  Charlie,  or 
Narayana.1 In part, this is because my background is different. Although I have a Ph.D. from 
Berkeley, unlike Charlie and Narayana, I never spent time in academia, and, unlike Eric, I 
spent  most  of  my  career  not  in  public  service, but  working  in  the  private  sector.  My  focus 
during my time in the private sector was also somewhat different than my colleagues, with an 
emphasis on those issues that affect financial markets. Don’t get me wrong, I am very happy 
I got a Ph.D. in economics, the training has been invaluable. It’s just that my career path is a 
bit unusual relative to other central bankers, so that must influence my perspective.  
Of course, another important point of differentiation is where I am now and the unique role 
that  the  New  York  Fed  performs  within  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  All  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Banks have their areas of specialization. In my opinion, the New York Fed has at 
least four that are worthy of mention today because these affect the work of the New York 
Fed’s economists.  
First, we are the operational arm of the Federal Reserve, responsible for the implementation 
of  monetary  policy.  This  means  we  have  a  unique  set  of  relationships  with  the  securities 
dealer  community  and  with  respect  to  monitoring  financial  markets.  It  also  means  that  we 
work  very  closely  with  the  Board  of  Governors  and  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC) in implementing monetary policy.  
Second, we have a unique endowment and responsibility by virtue of our location. New York 
City  is  a  global  financial  center,  and  finance  is  a  very  important  aspect  of  the  Second 
District’s  economy.  Most  of  the  largest  global  financial  institutions  have  a  major  presence 
here.  With  delegated  authority  from  the  Board  of  Governors,  we  are  responsible  for  the 
supervision of most of the major financial institutions headquartered in our district, as well as 
numerous foreign banking organizations that do business here. 
Third, we are the fiscal agent for the Treasury and conduct the Treasury debt auctions on 
their behalf. Additionally, we are responsible for Fedwire, which along with Clearing House 
Interbank  Payments  System  (CHIPS),  is  one  of  the  two  large-dollar,  real-time  payment 
systems in the U.S.  
Fourth, we have a unique set of international duties. We provide banking services to foreign 
central banks, including investment of reserves and administration of foreign exchange swap 
lines. We also have a seat at the table in Basel with respect to the activities of the Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS),  its  various  committees,  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB). 
As I noted earlier, economics is a critical discipline at the New York Fed. The New York Fed 
economists are not just theoreticians. Most have a strong empirical orientation and work very 
                                                 
1   Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston; Charles Plosser, President of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia;  and  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
closely  with  those  in  the  Bank  that  are  responsible  for  the  execution  of  policy  –  be  it  with 
respect  to  monetary  policy,  financial  stability,  supervision  or  payments  services.  What’s 
special to me about the Bank is how the economists and non-economists work together to 
develop practical policy solutions to real-world problems and then implement those policies 
effectively. 
The breadth of activities at the New York Fed means that our economists contribute to policy 
in  many  different  ways,  working  closely  with  other  areas  of  the  Bank  including  those  who 
execute on our supervision, monetary policy, and payments responsibilities. We have about 
60 Ph.D. economists in our Research Group. But we also have many more in other areas of 
the Bank, such as part of our open markets desk, in our supervision group, and in our risk 
functions. In fact, many of those with economics Ph.D.s elsewhere in the Bank started their 
careers at the Bank in the Research Group. They moved to other areas of the Bank as their 
interests  evolved  and  they  became  less  focused  on  research  and  more  focused  on  policy 
development. This movement of economists throughout the organization has helped build a 
deep  reservoir  of  human  capital  within  the  Bank  and  has  fostered  close  collaboration 
between Research and other areas of the Bank.  
Our model with respect to attracting economists into our Research Group is to hire people 
with strong research skills, with the highest academic credentials and who already have or 
are likely to develop a policy orientation related to the Bank’s work. We give our economists 
plenty of time and opportunity to conduct independent research, and expect them to publish 
their research in the major academic journals and to engage with the economics profession 
outside the Bank. As they progress in research capability, we require economists to apply the 
skills and techniques they use in research to policy issues. We expect that, as their academic 
careers develop, there will be a natural convergence between their research interests and 
the Bank’s policy agenda. This usually happens as a matter of course because the Bank has 
a rich agenda of policy issues to work on and the economists at the Bank often have unique 
access  to  data  and  information  that  would  not  be  available  elsewhere.  The  convergence 
works  in  both  directions:  research  informs  the  policy  work  and  policy  work  generates 
research questions. The end result is that our economists have the ability to be both highly 
respected  in  their  disciplines  from  a  research  perspective,  and  also  to  make  a  significant 
contribution  to  policy  development  and  implementation.  There  is  an  excellent  value 
proposition  both  for  the  Bank  and  the  economists  that  work  here,  as  indicated  by  the 
publication record of our economists and their contribution to policy initiatives.  
Let me give you some more concrete examples of what our economists have worked on or 
are currently working on. I will focus on three broad buckets: prudential policy and financial 
stability;  monetary  and  macroeconomic  policy;  and  microeconomic  and  regional  economic 
policy. 
Prudential policy and financial stability 
New  York  Fed  economists,  inside  and  outside  our  Research  Group,  provided  substantial 
assistance to the design and development of the numerous emergency lender of last resort 
facilities implemented during the financial crisis. This was done in conjunction with the Board 
of  Governors,  but  the  contributions  from  the  New  York  Fed  were  critical  because  of  our 
unique  vantage  point  with  respect  to  operational  implementation,  financial  markets,  and 
financial market infrastructures. 
In  a  different  vein,  New  York  Fed  economists  assisted  in  designing,  developing,  and 
implementing  supervisory  stress  testing,  including  the  annual  Comprehensive  and  Capital 
Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR)  supervisory  stress  tests.  The  New  York  Fed’s  economists 
perspectives and measurements on how downturns affect bank portfolio values was crucial 
to the design of these tests. A critical aspect of CCAR was the development of independent 
detailed models for the key bank business lines to act as an independent check on the risk 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
assessments  by  the  banks.  Of  course,  this  effort  also  drew  on  work  at  the  Board  of 
Governors and the rest of the Federal Reserve System. 
As  well,  our  economists  have  played  a  role  in  developing  international  and  domestic 
regulatory  policy  with  respect  to  bank  capital  and  liquidity  standards.  For  instance, 
measurement  of  capital  losses  over  time,  and  various  run-off  rates  of  different  types  of 
liabilities by our economists informed this work. Also, our economists’ work on broker-dealer 
liquidity informed the design of the liquidity coverage ratio.  
Finally,  our  economists  pay  special  attention  to  the  emerging  area  of  financial  stability 
monitoring. This takes place in a number of realms, including participation in the work of the 
Basel Committees, such as the Committee on Global Financial Stability (CGFS) of the BIS, 
that  I  currently  chair,  and  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS), 
which  I  once  chaired,  the  numerous  workgroups  and  committees  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Board, and ongoing contributions to the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). With 
respect to the FSOC, for example, New York and Chicago Fed economists have played a 
key role in editing the FSOC annual reports.  
A  few  other  examples  of  our  economists’  involvement  in  prudential  and  regulator  policy 
include: 
 
GSE  reform  and  housing  market  policy.  Our  economists,  working  with  staff  in  the 
Markets Group, have published two staff reports detailing a framework for replacing 
the GSEs and implementing an explicit government guarantee to protect against tail 
risks  in  residential  real  estate.  This  work  has  included  briefings  of  congressional 
staff and congressional testimony.  
Triparty  repo  reform.  Working  with  the  other  areas  of  the  Bank  and  Board  of 
Governors  staff,  economists  have  helped  to  design  and  implement  reforms  that 
make the triparty repo market more stable and less prone to “run” risk.  
Reference  rate  reform.  New  York  Fed  economists  and  members  of  the  Markets 
Group are deeply involved in the FSB’s efforts to reform the reference rate setting 
process for LIBOR and other reference rates.  
  Monetary policy and macroeconomic policy 
Economists  provide  invaluable  input  to  the  New  York  Fed  President,  who  serves  as  Vice-
Chairman of the FOMC, and to the Markets Group, which is responsible for the operational 
aspects of monetary policy implementation.  
This work has many aspects, including:  
 
Independent macroeconomic forecasts. This includes a New York Fed DSGE model 
and a suite of products to analyze labor market developments.2  
The  development  and  implementation  of  new  tools,  such as  the  large-scale  asset 
purchase  programs,  the  payment  of  interest  on  excess  reserves,  and  the 
development  and  testing  of  a  fixed  rate,  full  allotment  reverse  repurchase  facility. 
This is done in close concert with economists at the Board of Governors.  
Longer-term work to assess what monetary policy framework is most consistent with 
the goals of monetary policy and financial stability. New York Fed economists have 
made  many  contributions  to  the  theory  and  measurement  in  New  Keynesian 
models,  focusing  on  monetary  policy  at  the  zero  lower  bound,  and  incorporating 
financial frictions into more standard macro models.  
                                                   
2   Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Microeconomic and regional policy 
New York Fed economists also have important opportunities supporting microeconomic and 
regional  policy.  These  include  the  survey  of  consumer  expectations, which  will  launch  this 
month, and the consumer credit panel, which, using raw data supplied by Equifax, allows us 
to develop insights into consumer indebtedness at the micro-level. These panels give us and 
the  public  unique  insights  into  household  beliefs  and  behavior.  One  example  is  the  work 
highlighting the growing aggregate student loan debt balance and repayment burden. 
An  important  responsibility  for  each  of  the  Reserve  Banks  is  coverage  of  economic 
development in its region. A significant aspect of this work at the New York Fed involves our 
regional press briefings, business surveys, and white papers. One notable example has been 
the New York Fed economists’ work in developing a white paper that highlighted some key 
choices that Puerto Rican policymakers might make to eliminate structural constraints that 
have impinged on the Island’s economic performance.  
I’m very pleased by the contributions of our economists in the Bank, whether they sit in the 
Research  Group  or  elsewhere  in  the  Bank.  I  think  we  have  helped  to  contribute  to  the 
considerable  progress  made  on  a  number  of  fronts,  including  making  the  financial  system 
more resilient and robust and helping make monetary policy more effective, even at the zero 
lower bound. 
But there is much more work to do. In particular, I think we have just scratched the surface in 
understanding how developments in one area, such as capital and liquidity requirements for 
large,  complex  financial  institutions,  affect  other  areas,  such  as  effective  monetary  policy 
implementation. We still don’t have well developed macro-models that incorporate a realistic 
financial sector. We don’t understand fully how large-scale asset purchase programs work to 
ease financial market conditions – is it the effect of the purchases on the portfolios of private 
investors, or alternatively is the major channel one of signaling?  
There are many other riddles that remain to be solved. How does one design an effective 
reference  rate  that  is  informative,  verifiable  and  not  vulnerable  to  manipulation?  If  you 
manage to come up with one, how do you migrate the trillions of dollars of existing contracts 
to  the  new  standard?  The  U.S.  unemployment  rate  has  declined  more  sharply  than  one 
might expect given the economy’s growth rate over the past few years. Is this permanent or 
will it reverse if the economy continues to grow and the pressure on labor market resources 
increases  in  the  coming  years?  How  does  one  end  “too  big  to  fail”  for  large  global  firms 
operating across different jurisdictions? The list goes on and on. There is plenty to work on 
and think about. 
Finally, let me take up one other question that Stan has posed: Do I think you need to be an 
economist to be the President at the New York Fed? I don’t think so. If you look at the past 
five  Presidents  –  Volcker,  Corrigan,  McDonough,  Geithner,  and  myself,  some  have  been 
economists, some haven’t. Yet I think all my predecessors have been very effective.  
I  think  there  are  other  attributes  that  are  more  important  than  being  an  economist:  1)  An 
analytical  orientation;  2)  the  ability  to  synthesize  a  broad  range  of  material  so  as  to 
understand 
regulatory  and 
macroeconomic policy; 3) open-mindedness and pragmatism – the world is complicated and 
ever  changing;  and  4)  the  ability  to  lead  –  that  means  identifying  the  key  issues  and 
motivating people to do their best work in order to develop new insights and approaches.  
Having an economics background probably helps, especially on the analytics side, but, in my 
view, is by no means necessary and certainly not sufficient. One point on which I am certain 
is that regardless of the background of the President, having a very strong research group is 
essential. 
Thanks for your kind attention. 
 
interactions  of  markets, 
institutions,  and 
financial 
the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
