Grant Spencer: Comments on the Basel liquidity standards and central 
bank operations 
Remarks  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Financial  Stability  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  the  tenth  Asia-Pacific  High-Level  Meeting  on  Banking 
Supervision, Auckland, 27 February 2014. 
Introduction 
 While sourced in sub-prime credit losses, the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) was felt by most 
countries,  including  Asia  Pacific  countries,  as  a  massive  liquidity  shock.  This  was  felt  in 
banking systems as a loss of market liquidity (ability to sell assets) and as a loss of funding 
liquidity (ability to issue securities). 
The immediate policy response was for central banks to provide large doses of liquidity to the 
banks  and  for  governments  to  provide  guarantees  on  bank  debt  securities.  Most  of  these 
measures  were  subsequently  pulled  back  as  market  and  funding  liquidity  was  restored  in 
2009. 
The longer term policy response to the unprecedented liquidity shock of the GFC has been 
two-fold: central banks have strengthened and broadened their capability as system liquidity 
providers,  and  prudential  regulators  have  begun  to  strengthen  liquidity  requirements  for 
banks. Central banks have become better prepared to respond to systemic liquidity shocks in 
their various forms, and at the same time new prudential standards are requiring banks to be 
better prepared to withstand liquidity shocks on their own account. 
The topic I wish to discuss here is the extent to which the new Basel liquidity requirements 
may have implications for central banks’ policy operations, and vice versa. I will discuss the 
extent of alignment between the two policy arms as well as some potential implications of the 
Basel III standards for central banks’ policy operations. 
Basel III liquidity standards 
The maintenance of prudential liquidity standards is fully consistent with the central bank’s 
public policy function of system liquidity support. Banks left to their own devices may hold 
liquidity buffers that are less than socially optimal, due to: 
1. 
banks not allowing for systemic externalities that can result from liquidity shortages; 
and 
banks  potentially  relying  on  the  central  bank  to  offset  systemic  liquidity  shocks, 
thereby creating moral hazard effects. 
2. 
New  Basel  III  standards  will  start  to  be  introduced  from  January  20151  with  the  Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio  (LCR),  to  be  followed  in  January  2018  by  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio 
(NSFR).  These  standards  are  intended  to  strengthen  banks’  ability  to  independently 
withstand  liquidity  shocks,  by  holding  sufficient  liquid  assets  to  withstand  a  30-day  name 
                                                
1   The LCR will be phased in from 2015. For January 2015, banks will be required to have an LCR greater than 
60 per cent. The minimum requirement will increase by 10 percentage points each year until fully implemented 
by January 2019. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
crisis  (the  LCR)  and  to  reduce  the  inherent  maturity  mismatch  in  banks’  balance  sheets 
(NSFR)2 
In specifying the LCR, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has focussed 
on  the  need  for  banks  to  hold  high  quality  liquid  assets  (HQLAs)  that  will  remain  liquid  in 
private markets, even in a crisis situation. This essentially means that the bulk of LCR assets 
must  be  public  sector  securities  that  are  “traded  in  large,  deep  and  active  repo  or  cash 
markets.” The aim clearly is to base the standard on the best available liquid assets and to 
achieve cross-border consistency for internationally active banks. 
However, for many countries, this model does not fit. In Australia, South Africa and Norway, 
for example, government securities are relatively limited in supply, and they are often locked 
away  in  long-term  investment  portfolios,  thus  further  limiting  the  liquidity  of  secondary 
markets. 
The BCBS has considered situations where the market for HQLA might not be large enough 
to support LCR requirements and has developed alternative liquidity arrangements (ALAs). 
Permissible ALAs include: 
3. 
the  use  of  a  contractual  committed  liquidity  facility  (CLF)  provided  by  the  relevant 
central bank for a fee. So far, Australia and South Africa have adopted this option; 
the use of foreign currency HQLA to cover domestic liquidity needs, with haircuts to 
cater for currency risk. It appears Hong Kong and Singapore may adopt this option. 
the  additional  use  of  Level  2A  assets,  such  as  high  quality  corporate  debt  and 
covered  bonds,  i.e.  going  above  the  40  percent  cap  for  Level  2  assets,  but  with 
higher haircuts. 
4. 
5. 
The BCBS state that the use of ALAs is only available where a jurisdiction can demonstrate 
and  justify  that  an  issue  of  insufficiency  in  HQLA  genuinely  exists.  Additionally,  the 
jurisdiction  implementing  the  ALAs  faces  ongoing  obligations  relating  to  supervisory 
monitoring and reviews. 
New Zealand liquidity standards 
The  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  (RBNZ)  introduced  very  similar,  but  non-Basel 
conforming, liquidity requirements in August 2010. The high dependence of the New Zealand 
banks on short term wholesale funding (mostly from offshore) was shown in the GFC to be a 
significant vulnerability of the banking system and we were keen to reduce this risk as soon 
as possible. Our aim was to be in line with Basel thinking but we wanted to move promptly 
and did not wait for final decisions on the Basel standards. It was also evident early on that 
the Basel emphasis on HQLAs was going to be an issue in New Zealand where some two 
thirds of government securities are held offshore, contributing to a general lack of liquidity in 
debt markets. 
The RBNZ’s Liquidity mismatch ratio3 is very similar in concept to the LCR. We have a one-
week ratio which requires banks to hold sufficient primary liquid assets4 to meet net outflows 
under a one week name crisis. There is also a one month mismatch ratio requirement where 
primary  and  secondary  liquid  asset  holdings  must  be  sufficient  to  meet  potential  outflows 
under a 30-day crisis. There is a close alignment between the eligibility of assets to meet the 
RBNZ liquidity standards and the eligibility of those assets as collateral in RBNZ operations. 
                                                
2   The NSFR is designed to ensure that banks maintain a stable funding profile in relation to the characteristics 
of  their  on-  and  off-balance  sheet  activities.  In  particular,  the  NSFR  limits  over-reliance  on  short-term 
wholesale  funding,  encourages  better  assessment  of  funding  risk,  and  promotes  funding  stability.  BIS 
“Basel III: The Net Stable Funding Ratio” January 2014. 
3   See Appendix 2 for definitions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This acknowledges the role of central bank eligibility in underpinning private market liquidity 
as  well  as  the  central  bank’s  ultimate  role  as  lender  of  last  resort  to  the  banking  system. 
Restrictions are placed on holdings of the lower quality “secondary” liquid assets in order to 
ensure that banks hold a majority of primary rather than secondary liquid assets. 
More importantly, from an overall funding risk perspective, RBNZ introduced a Core Funding 
Ratio4 (CFR) similar to the proposed NSFR. The current minimum requirement of 75 percent 
was phased in over a three year period. The CFR requirement has promoted a significant 
improvement  in  the  stability  of  the  New  Zealand  banks’  funding  base,  with  short  term 
wholesale  funding  falling  from  35  percent  of  total  funding  in  2008  to  15  percent  in  2013. 
While  the  CFR  was  introduced  as  a  micro-prudential  requirement,  the  RBNZ  has  more 
recently nominated the CFR as a potential macro-prudential instrument. This means that the 
CFR could be adjusted through the financial cycle with a view to increasing funding resilience 
and  average  funding  costs  in  the  upturn,  and  taking  pressure  off  funding  costs  in  the 
downturn. I will come back to this a bit later in the context of the interaction between liquidity 
standards and monetary policy. 
Central bank liquidity facilities 
Cecchetti  and  Disyatat  (2009)5  differentiate  between  three  kinds  of  potential  liquidity 
shortage,  relating  to  central  bank  cash,  the  funding  of  institutions,  and  the  liquidity  of  key 
markets. In normal times, the central bank targets a supply of settlement cash consistent with 
maintaining short term market rates in line with the official policy rate. During the crisis, this 
approach was insufficient to restore stability. It was also necessary to introduce new funding 
facilities, and to broaden existing facilities in terms of the counterparties dealt with and the 
range of assets accepted as collateral. 
While  most  of  the  special  funding  facilities  have  been  curtailed  since  the  GFC,  some 
countries have found it necessary to maintain direct funding facilities, for example the BOE’s 
funding  for  lending  scheme.  Further,  it  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  many  of  the  special 
facilities  used  during  the  GFC  effectively  remain  on  standby,  i.e.  they  could  easily  be  re-
activated in a new crisis situation. 
Many  central  banks  have  also  retained  the  broader  scope  of  their  mainstream  liquidity 
facilities.  Examples  here  include  BOE,  BOJ,  RBA,  and  RBNZ.  These  more  permanent 
changes  reflect  lessons  learned  in  the  GFC  about  the  different  dimensions  of  financial 
system  liquidity.  Many  central  banks  appear  to  have  broadened  their  perspective  on  the 
“Lender  of  Last  Resort”  function  and  what  this  implies  for  central  bank  policies  in  normal 
times as well as during a crisis. 
One aspect of this broader approach is seen in central banks being more explicit about the 
key  markets  they  will  support6.  This  might  involve  a  prior  commitment  to  directly  support 
particular markets in a crisis, (eg. the FX market, the interbank market, the short term repo 
market). It might also involve an ongoing commitment to accept certain securities as eligible 
collateral. During the GFC, the market liquidity of debt securities became critically dependent 
on their collateral eligibility at the central bank. Central banks adjusted their credit standards 
                                                
4   See Appendix 2 for definition. 
5   Cecchetti,  Stephen  G.  and  Disyatat,  Piti,  Central  Bank  Tools  and  Liquidity  Shortages  (February  1,  2009). 
SSRN: 
Economic 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1678162 orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1678162. 
Policy  Review, 
Vol. 16,  No. 1, 
Available 
August 
2010. 
p. 29, 
at 
6   “Lessons  from  the  Use  of  Extraordinary  Central  Bank  Liquidity  Facilities”  Stéphane  Lavoie,  Alex  Sebastian 
and Virginie Traclet Bank of Canada Review, Spring 2011. 
“Central  Bank  Liquidity  Provision  and  Core  Funding  Markets”  Grahame  Johnson  and  Eric  Santor  paper 
presented at Reserve Bank of Australia 2013 Conference – Liquidity and Funding Markets. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
in  order  to  accommodate  the  broader  range  of  collateral  instruments,  albeit  with  larger 
haircuts  to  mitigate  the  risk.  By  maintaining  broader  ranges  of  eligible  collateral,  central 
banks are effectively continuing to support the liquidity of a range of debt markets. 
So in the post-GFC environment, central banks are generally now better prepared and more 
willing  to  support  financial  system  liquidity  in  its  various  forms,  through  existing  facilities, 
through dormant special funding facilities that can be reactivated as necessary, and through 
ongoing commitments to support liquidity in key financial markets, including by accepting a 
broader range of collateral instruments. 
Alignment of Basel standards and central bank liquidity policies 
The  first  point  I  would  make  here  is  that  an  increased  preparedness  by  central  banks  to 
support  system  liquidity  is  totally  consistent  with  a  more  rigorous  approach  to  prudential 
liquidity standards. Externalities associated with liquidity shocks were clearly evident in the 
GFC,  highlighting  the  need  for  banks  to  be  prepared  for  both  local  and  systemic  liquidity 
shocks. Further, more active central bank liquidity support may accentuate the moral hazard 
problem by reducing incentives on banks to self-insure against liquidity shocks. There is thus 
a  clear  case  for  stronger  prudential  liquidity  standards  to  ensure  banks  are  better  able  to 
withstand liquidity pressures, notwithstanding the role of the central bank as underwriter of 
system-wide liquidity. 
However, it is difficult to say that the new Basel III liquidity standards have been aligned with 
the developments in central bank liquidity policies. First, the Basel III initiative is attempting to 
promote  a  convergence  across  countries  towards  a  single  international  liquidity  standard, 
whereas central bank liquidity policies have if anything become more diverse since the crisis. 
Second, the Basel III standards have focussed on safe haven liquid assets that are expected 
to  retain  their  value  and  liquidity  in  a  crisis,  irrespective  of  central  bank  liquidity  policies. 
While this approach may work in the major developed economies, it does not recognise the 
crucial  role  that  central  bank  liquidity  policies  can  play  in  smaller  economies,  particularly 
where there is no deep government security market. 
Of  course,  during  the  consultation  process,  the  Basel  III  standards  have  been  modified  to 
accommodate  certain  local  conditions  through  the  alternative  liquidity  arrangement  (ALA) 
provisions. In particular, the Committed Liquidity Facility (CLF) variation has been designed 
to accommodate countries where there is a shortage of Government stock (such as Australia 
and South Africa). This is a positive move in that it recognises the essential role of the central 
bank  in  liquidity  provision  during  a  crisis.  However,  the  other  variations  under  ALA,  while 
allowing a wider range of LCR-eligible assets, do not link these to local central bank liquidity 
policies. For example, while there is an expectation that level 2A assets should be eligible 
central bank collateral instruments, there is no such expectation for level 2B assets. 
In  the  broader  scheme,  this  issue  comes  down  to  a  trade-off  between  international  cross-
border  consistency  and  regulatory  efficiency  on  a  country-by-country  basis.  For  the  home 
countries of internationally active banks, the former is clearly important to avoid regulatory 
arbitrage. But for countries hosting predominantly domestic banking businesses, the need for 
international consistency is probably less important than the local characteristics of domestic 
markets when it comes to designing efficient liquidity standards. 
Basel III impact on central bank operations 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  minimum  prudential  liquidity  standards,  including  the  Basel  III 
standards,  are  essentially  complementary  to  central  bank  liquidity  policies.  The  more 
prepared banks are to meet liquidity shocks, the less work will need to be done by central 
banks.  However,  there  may  be  implications  for  central  bank  liquidity  operations  in  two 
respects. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First,  with  banks  required  to  hold  their  best  quality  liquid  assets  to  meet  the  LCR 
requirement,  they  may  offer  lower  quality  liquid  assets  to  the  central  bank  in  its  regular 
market operations. This would result in central banks having to manage their credit risk more 
carefully, including paying closer attention to haircuts and securities pricing. This effect would 
likely  persist  in  a  crisis  even  though  supervisors  would  be  able  to  “release”  the  LCR 
requirement. Banks will tend to hoard high quality assets in a crisis, even though the LCR 
requirement may be reduced. A variation of this effect is for central banks, in the face of a 
high  quality  collateral  shortage,  to  move  away  from  sole  reliance  on  reverse  repos  for 
injecting system liquidity. An obvious alternative instrument for this purpose, and one which 
we use extensively in New Zealand, is FX swaps. 
Second, for countries adopting the CLF as an alternative to HQLA, there is a question about 
how  this  will  affect  central  bank  liquidity  operations  in  a  stress  situation.  Typically,  under 
existing arrangements, the central bank can closely control the quantum of system liquidity 
injections, given that standing (on-demand) facilities have a penalty margin attached. In the 
case  of  the  CLF  however,  banks  will  be  free  to  fully  access  funds  to  the  extent  of  the 
committed  credit  lines.  This  could  potentially  make  it  more  difficult  for  the  central  bank  to 
manage the quantity and price of short term funds in a crisis situation. 
Interaction between prudential liquidity standards and monetary policy 
Another  area  where  the  Basel  liquidity  standards  might  affect  central  bank  policies  is  the 
transmission of monetary policy. This interaction arises in the context of the NSFR or, in New 
Zealand, the Core Funding Ratio (CFR). These requirements are being introduced as micro-
prudential  measures,  intended  to  improve  banks’  resilience  to  liquidity  shocks  by  reducing 
the  maturity  mismatch  between  assets  and  liabilities.  The  main  impact  of  this  policy,  as 
observed with the CFR in New Zealand, will be for the banks to increase the average term of 
their  funding,  incurring  some  increase  in  average  funding  costs  as  a  result  of  the  term 
premium. 
My  point  here  is  that  if  the  stable  funding  requirement  is  treated  as  a“set  and  forget” 
prudential standard, it could have pro-cyclical characteristics7 that influence the transmission 
of monetary policy. The particular situation of concern is in a cyclical downturn when a fixed 
NSFR will require banks to continue to roll over term debt at a time when term premiums are 
increasing, rather than allowing the banks to moderate the cyclical impact on their funding 
costs by shortening the average term of their borrowing. This could cause a weakening of the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism in that bank cost of funds might not reduce to the 
same extent as usual following a monetary policy easing in a cyclical downturn. 
If  this  pro-cyclical  effect  is  significant  then  monetary  policy  adjustments  to  official  interest 
rates  may  need  to  be  more  vigorous,  potentially  in  both  the  upturn  and  the  downturn,  to 
achieve the same effect on bank cost of funds, and thereby bank lending rates. 
An obvious way to avoid this pro-cyclical effect of the NSFR would be to adjust the NSFR 
through the cycle, which would effectively make it a macro-prudential tool. This is indeed the 
approach that RBNZ is intending to take by including the Core Funding Ratio in its macro-
prudential“toolkit”8. However, no countercyclical adjustments have yet been made to the CFR. 
                                                
7   See  for  example  “The  macroeconomic  effects  of  a  stable  funding  requirement”,  A.  Munro,  C.  Bloor  and 
R. Craigie, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper 2012. 
8   The  MoU  between 
the  Minister  of  Finance  and 
the  Governor  of 
the  RBNZ 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial_stability/macro-prudential_policy/5266657.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 is  available  at 
5 
Conclusion 
The GFC has rightly led to: 1) A new emphasis on liquidity standards for banks; and 2) A 
more  comprehensive  approach  to  the  management  of  banking  system  liquidity  by  central 
banks. These two policy arms are complementary. 
However,  while  the  Basel  III  liquidity  regime  has  been  created  with  the  aim  of  achieving 
common liquidity standards for internationally active banks, the post-GFC evolution of central 
bank  liquidity  policies  has  been  diverse  and  very  local  in  character,  making  it  difficult  to 
achieve alignment between the two policy arms. Alignment has not been assisted in my view 
by the approach that has been taken to allowable variations in the Basel III standards. While 
the alternative CLF arrangement brings the central bank explicitly into the scope of the LCR 
for  countries  adopting  that  variant,  the  important  role  of  central  bank  policies  is  not 
recognised more broadly. 
Regarding the implications of the Basel III liquidity standards for central bank operations, the 
main impact is likely to be on the quality of assets that central banks may need to accept in 
reverse repo operations. Banks are more likely to hoard their higher quality liquid assets to 
meet LCR requirements, including in a crisis situation. This will reinforce the need for central 
banks  to  improve  their  credit  assessment  capabilities,  including  closer  attention  to  pricing 
and haircut requirements. 
A more substantive implication of the Basel III liquidity standards relates to the potential for 
the NSFR to have a pro-cyclical impact on banks’ cost of funds. Such effects could arise if 
banks  are  prevented  from  modifying  the  term  structure  of  their  debt  in  response  to  large 
changes  in  the  interest  rate  term  premium.  In  this  regard,  the  prudential  and  monetary 
authorities may find that the NSFR cannot be treated as a “set and forget” policy ratio. 
Appendix 1: Alternative liquidity approaches under the LCR 
The  following  describes  how  some  countries  are  implementing  Alternative  Liquidity 
Approaches under Basel III. 
Australia – the RBA and APRA have introduced a “Committed Liquidity Facility” (CLF) that 
provides an insurance overlay to otherwise “low quality” liquid assets, at a cost of 15 basis 
points per annum. The CLF will be sufficient in size to cover the shortfall between a bank’s 
holdings  of  HQLA  and  its  LCR  needs.  Qualifying  collateral  for  the  facility  will  comprise  all 
assets eligible for repurchase transactions with the RBA under normal market operations and 
other  assets  the  RBA  deems  appropriate  (including  self-securitisations).  Banks  will  be 
required to demonstrate that they have taken all reasonable steps towards meeting their LCR 
requirements  through  their  own  balance  sheet  management,  before  relying  on  the  CLF. 
APRA will be reviewing each ADI’s liquidity risk management framework and management 
practices as the basis for approving the CLF for LCR purposes. 
South Africa – The South African Reserve Bank has approved the provision of a CLF and 
the  utilisation  of  statutory  cash  reserves  as  part  of  HQLA for  liquidity  regulation  purposes. 
South Africa has a limited availability of Level 1 HQLA and virtually no Level 2 assets that 
satisfy the Basel III criteria. The CLF will be provided for an amount up to 40 per cent of any 
particular  bank’s  liquidity  requirements.  The  commitment  fee  is  scaled  so  that  the  fees 
charged increase as the reliance on the CLF  increases. There is also a drawdown rate of 
100 basis points and drawdowns will be for a period of 30 days. 
Norway  –  Norwegian  authorities  acknowledge  that  the  LCR  requirements  will  pose  a 
challenge to Norwegian banks due to lack of Government bonds, but also due to strict cash-
flow run-off assumptions imposed by the Basel III requirements. Net cash outflows in a crisis 
forms  the  denominator  of  the  LCR  equation.  Where  the  strict  rules  around  the  run-off  of 
cash-flows  do  not  align  with  the  characteristics  of  the  underlying  assets  and  liabilities,  the 
required  net  cash  outflow  assumptions  may  be  overstated  and  the  required  HQLA  will 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
consequently be higher. At this point Norwegian authorities have not stated their final policy 
position. 
Malaysia  –  also  have  issues  with  the  Basel  III  approach  to  the  proposed  cash  flow 
assumptions, particularly as they relate to institutional savings schemes. In Malaysia, these 
schemes are dominated by pension funds, which predominantly manage household savings. 
However,  the  LCR  cash  outflow  assumptions  for  investments  from  institutional  funds  are 
more  severe than for  investments for retail funds,  even  though  the  underlying  savings  are 
from households in both cases. As a result, HQLA requirements for banks are higher than 
might be expected. 
Hong Kong SAR – Given the limited supply of HQLA denominated in Hong Kong dollars, the 
HKMA  expects  Hong  Kong  to  be  a  jurisdiction  which  needs  to  adopt  alternative 
arrangements for LCR purposes. HKMA have stated that they are likely to use option 2 for 
alternative arrangements, which allows the use of Level 1 foreign currency HQLA to cover 
local currency liquidity needs. 
Appendix 2: Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
 Definition of HQLA 
There are two categories of assets that can be included in the stock of High Quality Liquid 
Assets.  “Level  1”  assets  can  be  included  without  limit,  while  “Level  2”  assets  can  only 
comprise up to 40% of the stock. Supervisors may also choose to include within Level 2 an 
additional  class  of  assets  (Level  2B  assets).  If  included,  they  will  be  within  the  40  percent 
limit on Level 2 assets and comprise no more than 15 percent of the total stock of HQLA. 
Level 1 assets are limited to: 
coins and banknotes; 
1. 
2. 
central bank reserves (including required reserves); 
marketable securities representing claims on or guaranteed by sovereigns, central 
3. 
banks,  PSEs,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  International  Monetary 
Fund,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  European  Community,  or  multilateral 
development  banks,  and  satisfying  certain  conditions  such  as  being  assigned  a  0 
percent risk-weight under the Basel II Standardised Approach and traded in large, 
deep and active repo or cash markets characterised by a low level of concentration; 
where the sovereign has a non-0 percent risk weight, sovereign or central bank debt 
securities  issued  in  domestic  currencies  by  the  sovereign  or  central  bank  in  the 
country in which the liquidity risk is being taken or in the bank’s home country; and 
where the sovereign has a non-0 percent risk weight, domestic sovereign or central 
bank debt securities issued in foreign currencies are eligible up to the amount of the 
bank’s  stressed  net  cash  outflows  in  that  specific foreign  currency  stemming from 
the bank’s operations in the jurisdiction where the bank’s liquidity risk is being taken. 
4. 
5. 
Level 2A assets are limited to the following: 
(a)  
Marketable securities representing claims on or guaranteed by sovereigns, central 
banks, PSEs or multilateral development banks that satisfying certain conditions such as 20 
percent  risk  weight  under  the  Basel  II  Standardised  Approach,  traded  in  large,  deep  and 
active repo or cash markets characterised by a low level of concentration; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
(b)  
Corporate (non-financial) debt securities (including commercial paper) and covered 
bonds that satisfy certain conditions around a satisfactory credit rating and traded in large, 
deep and active repo or cash markets characterised by a low level of concentration; 
Level 2B assets are limited to the following: 
1 
2. 
Residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS) that satisfy certain conditions. 
Corporate  (non-financial)  debt  securities  (including  commercial  paper)  that  satisfy 
certain conditions including a minimum credit rating 
Common (non-financial) equity shares that satisfy certain conditions such as being 
exchange  traded  and  centrally  cleared,  denominated  in  domestic  currency  and 
traded in deep markets. 
3. 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand mismatch ratio 
The Reserve Bank’s mismatch ratio is akin to the LCR, although it is not compliant with Basel 
III requirements. All New Zealand incorporated registered banks are subject to minimum one-
week and one-month mismatch ratios. The aim of the mismatch ratios is to reduce the risk 
that an individual bank is brought down by a short-term loss of confidence. 
One-week mismatch ratio 
One-month mismatch ratio 
  Primary liquid assets contain the following classes of assets: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
ESAS balances with the RBNZ 
NZD currency demand balances with other NZ banks 
Foreign currency notes and coins held by the bank, and foreign currency demand 
balances held with overseas banks, subject to a haircut; 
NZ government securities denominated in NZD 
Other securities with haircuts: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
High rated local authority securities 
High rated State owned Enterprise securities. 
High rated Kauris, 
High rated two-name and single-name RMBS 
4. 
5. 
Secondary liquid assets have larger haircuts and contain the following classes of assets: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Local and Foreign government guaranteed securities 
Lower rated local authority securities 
Lower rated corporate securities 
Asset back securities 
Registered bank securities 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand core funding ratio 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  mismatch  ratio  is  akin  to  the  NSFR.  The  basic  notion  underlying  the 
CFR is a comparison between an estimate of the funding of the bank that is stable and can 
be  assumed  to  stay  in  place  for  at  least  one  year  (‘core  funding’),  and  the  core  lending 
business of the bank that needs to be funded on a continuing basis. The CFR is currently 
applied to locally incorporated banks. A bank must maintain its one-year core funding ratio at 
not  less  than  the  minimum  specified  in  its  conditions  of  registration,  at  the  end  of  each 
business day. For most banks this is currently set at 75 percent. 
One-year core funding ratio = 
 Where the one year core funding dollar amount = 
• 
all funding with residual maturity longer than one year, including subordinated debt 
and related party funding 
plus  50  percent  of  any  tradable  debt  securities  issued  by  the  bank  with  original 
maturity  of  two  years  or  more  and  with  residual  maturity  at  the  reporting  date  of 
more than six months and not more than one year 
plus non-market funding that is withdrawable at sight or with residual maturity less 
than or equal to one year 
plus Tier 1 capital 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
