Charles I Plosser: Shocks, gaps, and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia,  at  the  KAEA-Maekyung  Forum,  Korea-America  Economic 
Association, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 4 January 2014. 
 The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
I want to thank Bang Jeon, president of the Korea-America Economic Association (KAEA), 
who is on the faculty here at Drexel University, and Yongsung Chang, vice president of the 
KAEA, who is on the faculty at the University of Rochester, for inviting me to speak to this 
forum. The KAEA has hosted a number of prominent speakers in recent years at its annual 
meetings, and so it is a pleasure and an honor to speak to you this evening. 
Much has happened in the field of macroeconomics and monetary policy in the past seven 
years since I left Rochester to join the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Today I want to 
highlight  some  key  features  of  the  recent  recession  and  the  recovery  and  to  discuss  how 
they have influenced my views on monetary policymaking. Before I begin, though, I would 
like to point out that my views are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or 
my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
The challenges presented by the recession and recovery have illustrated why policymakers 
must  have  a  framework  that  provides  a  basis  for  their  policy  judgments.  We  say  that  our 
policymaking is data dependent, but without a lens through which we view economic data, it 
is impossible to interpret those data in any sort of useful way, particularly as they pertain to 
policy.  However,  policymakers  also  must  approach  their  task  with  a  great  deal  of humility. 
The lens through which we look is often foggy and lacking focus. There is still much we do 
not understand about recent events, and I am mindful that further research is likely to bring 
more clarity to the narrative and to our ability to make more informed policy decisions going 
forward. After all, economists are still debating the events surrounding the Great Depression 
three-quarters  of  a  century  after  it ended.  Indeed,  I  would argue  that none  of  us have  the 
economic  theory  exactly  right.  That  is  why  I  believe  it  is  useful  and  important  that  policy 
discussions include a healthy debate with different perspectives clearly represented. There 
are many different interpretations of recent events, each with strengths and weakness and it 
is  unlikely  that  economists  will  converge  to  a  common  or  shared  understanding  of  these 
events anytime soon. Unfortunately, this is not just a characteristic of the current economic 
environment  –  it  is  the  typical  state  of  affairs  –  and  it  is  one  of  the  reasons  I  believe  it  is 
important for monetary policymakers to think in terms of policies that are likely to be robust 
across many models and perspectives. 
The traditional view of shocks and gaps 
I want to organize my comments today around “shocks” and “gaps.” I find this to be a simple 
but useful way to highlight some different perspectives and their implications. For example, 
economists have different views about the nature of the shocks that sent the economy into 
recession  and  about  the  dynamics  of  the  economy  in  response  to  those  shocks.  Those 
dynamics  are  summarized  by  the  economic  models  or  frameworks  economists  use  to 
interpret  incoming  data.  As  a  policymaker,  I  think  it  is  impossible  to  determine  the  right 
course  of  policy  without  an  assessment  of  the  nature  of  the  shocks  and  a  framework  or 
implicit model for the economy. 
One way to characterize some of the key differences in models is to view how the models 
assess departures from some concept of ideal or desirable outcomes. The concept could be 
a  steady  state,  some  notion  of  economic  potential,  or  the  economic  efficient  outcome. 
Departures of the economy from these ideal outcomes can be viewed as gaps. Of course, to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the extent that the ideal outcomes are model dependent, the gaps would also depend on the 
model one is using. 
According to one perspective, which I’ll call the traditional view, shocks hitting the economy 
are largely transitory and dissipate rather quickly over time. Negative shocks can then give 
rise to something called a negative output gap – a level of output that is lower than the level 
consistent  with  the  economy  operating  at  its  full  potential.  Such  a  gap  then  becomes  an 
object that policy seeks to close or eliminate. In some models, this negative output gap also 
acts to dampen inflation. 
Think  about  the  recent  recession.  Some  economists  and  policymakers  characterize  the 
shock that hit financial markets as a temporary, albeit large, aggregate demand shock. This 
shock  gave  rise  to  a  large  “output  gap,”  sometimes  referred  to  as  slack,  which,  in  turn,  is 
working to keep inflation low. According to this view, the large output gap and low inflation 
justify keeping interest rates near zero for a long time. The belief is that low rates will help to 
close the output gap by increasing the growth of demand and thus output, which will reduce 
slack and allow inflation to move back to target. In this perspective, there are headwinds that 
are  temporarily  restraining  economic  growth,  but  these  can  be  offset  with  aggressive 
monetary accommodation. 
An alternative view of shocks and gaps 
But  there  is  an  alternative  interpretation.  Let’s  look  at  a  rather  simple,  but  I  think  useful, 
figure.1 The figure shows the level of real GDP as well as various vintages of potential GDP 
estimated by the U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO). The CBO defines potential GDP 
as  a  “measure  of  the  economy’s  maximum  sustainable  output,  in  which  the  intensity  of 
resource  use  is  neither  adding  to  nor  subtracting  from  inflationary  pressure.”2  Such  a 
definition  obviously  has  embedded  in  it  some  implicit  assumptions  about  an  underlying 
economic model, but I will return to this point shortly. 
I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  two  noteworthy  features.  First,  during  the  recession, 
GDP  fell  sharply,  as  we  all  know.  But  since  the  end  of  the  recession  in  June  2009,  the 
economy has continued to grow at roughly the same pace as it grew before the recession. 
There has been little evidence of the rapid growth required to return the economy to the path 
of potential GDP as estimated by the CBO in 2007. While that may still happen, there has not 
been the V-shaped recovery to date anticipated by many. The shock that hit the economy 
appears to have had very persistent, if not permanent, effects. From a statistical perspective, 
the economy appears to have taken a permanent hit to the output level. 
The  second  noteworthy  feature  illustrated  in  the  figure  is  that  the  CBO  has  revised  its 
estimate of the path of potential GDP numerous times since the beginning of the recession. 
Specifically, almost every year since 2007, it has revised down potential GDP. I am showing 
only three vintages here as an example. If you look at the “gap,” or the difference between 
the actual level of GDP – measured as of February 2013 when the latest CBO estimate of 
potential was released – and estimated potential, it is about half the size that it would have 
been if the path of potential GDP had not been revised. The gap is closing not because GDP 
has  rebounded  toward  the  earlier  estimates  of  potential  –  but  because  potential  GDP  has 
fallen. And this has occurred in spite of aggressive policies – especially monetary policy – 
that were intended to boost economic growth rates. 
So, what  might one infer from these observations? I want to offer a perspective based on 
some  empirical  research  that  Charles  Nelson  and  I  published  in  the  Journal  of  Monetary 
                                                 
1  See figure below. 
2  Congressional Budget Office, “A Summary of Alternative Methods for Estimating Potential GDP,” Background 
Paper, March 2004, p. 1. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Economics over three decades ago.3 In that paper, we concluded that real output contained 
important stochastic trends. A stochastic trend is often characterized as a random walk. A 
particular feature of a random walk is that it doesn’t exhibit any mean reversion. It means that 
the stochastic shocks that drive such a series accumulate. Put another way, each shock is 
permanently  embodied  in  the  level  of  the  series  –  there  is  little  tendency  to  return  to  a 
previous  trend  line.  Such  shocks  are  the  antithesis  of  transitory,  or  what  some  refer  to  as 
cyclical, shocks that, by definition, dissipate over time. 
In  our  analysis,  Nelson  and  I  assumed  that  the  economy  was  buffeted  by  a  mixture  of 
permanent and transitory shocks. Such a framework is not unusual and is compatible with 
the  type  of  permanent  and  transitory  distinction  stressed  in  Milton  Friedman’s  permanent 
income hypothesis.4 More generally, in dynamic models, forward-looking agents’ responses 
to  permanent  shocks  can  be  quite  different  from  their  responses  to  transitory  shocks.  For 
example,  in  the  permanent  income  framework,  agents  adjust  consumption  much  more  in 
response  to  changes  in  permanent  income  than  to  temporary  changes  in  income.  Our 
statistical analysis found that a large portion of the fluctuations in real GDP were the result of 
shocks to the stochastic trend, that is, permanent shocks. Interestingly, the recent recession 
saw  a  marked  drop  in  consumption.  Some  of  this  decline  may  have  been  due  to  credit 
constraints that became binding on some consumers. But some of the decline likely reflected 
the fact that many consumers now perceived that their permanent income had fallen, so they 
reduced their level of consumption. 
Looking  at  the  figure,  we  see  that  the  behavior  of  the  GDP  suggests  that  in  the  recent 
recession, the U.S. economy sustained what appears to be a permanent or at least highly 
persistent  shock  to  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  that  has  lowered  the  level  of  GDP  – 
although not necessarily its growth rate. One could contemplate numerous hypotheses about 
the nature of such a shock. In 2009, I put forward the idea that the crisis and recession were 
caused by a shock that likely had either permanent or very long-lasting consequences for the 
economy. I suggested that the financial crisis may have precipitated a permanent or highly 
persistent  decline  in  the  output  of  financial  intermediation.  I  have  also  considered  the 
possibility that the collapse in house values could be viewed as a permanent loss of wealth 
affecting  household  balance  sheets.  Either  of  these  disturbances  would  require  significant 
real adjustments in the economy.5  
If  we  view  the  shock  we  experienced  as  largely  permanent  in  nature,  in  contrast  to  being 
largely  transitory,  then  it  alters  the  way  we  should  think  about  gaps  and  about  the  policy 
responses,  particularly  appropriate  monetary  policy.  If  you  accept  the  idea  that  money  is 
neutral in the long run, then efforts to use monetary policy to offset such permanent shocks 
and  to  close  what  appears  to  be  a  gap  will  likely  be  ineffective  and  perhaps  even 
counterproductive.  The  real  economy  must  ultimately  adjust  to  such  permanent  shocks. 
Monetary policy cannot offset the costs or the necessity of such real adjustments, and so it is 
unlikely to be an effective stabilization tool. 
Looking  at  the  figure  again,  we  see  the  repeated  downward  revision  in  the  estimate  of 
potential GDP suggests that the CBO is gradually recognizing that the fall in output was most 
likely a permanent or at least highly persistent shock to the supply side of the economy. In 
other words, the CBO’s measures of potential output now recognize that the shock that hit 
the  economy  damaged  the  productive  potential  of  the  economy  in  a  persistent  way,  as 
potential GDP is now lower as far out as 2020. Therefore, the output gap is no longer what 
                                                 
3  Charles R. Nelson and Charles I. Plosser, “Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic Time Series: Some 
Evidence and Implications,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 10 (1982), pp. 139–162. 
4  Milton Friedman, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton: Princeton University Press (1957). 
5  Charles  Plosser,  “A  Perspective  on  the  Outlook,  Output  Gaps,  and  Price  Stability,”  speech  presented  to 
Money Marketeers, New York, May 21, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
we thought it was – it has been revised down over time. One can wonder whether five years 
from now the CBO’s potential GDP estimates will gradually converge with the existing growth 
path of real GDP. At that point, the output gap will have been gradually revised away. 
The  constant  revision  of  estimates  of  potential  output  and  thus  of  the  output  gap  also 
underscore  one  of  the  difficulties  policymakers  have  in  trying  to  use  gaps  as  a  guide  to 
policymaking  in  real  time.  Indeed,  Athanasios  Orphanides  and  Simon  van  Norden  have 
argued  that  a  major  problem  that  gave  rise  to  the  great  inflation  of  the  1970s  was  the 
mismeasurement  of  the  perceived  output  gap.6  They  explained  how  the  Fed  consistently 
relied on estimated output gaps that were subsequently revised and ended up being much 
smaller than initially thought. They argue that policymakers’ reliance on estimated gaps led to 
overly expansionary monetary policy and the resulting high rates of inflation. 
There is a separate and perhaps more challenging issue. While a permanent shock to the 
level of GDP is disturbing enough, it would be even worse if the underlying growth rate of the 
economy  were  to  slow.  Economists  normally  think  that  the  longer-run  growth  rate  of  the 
economy  is  roughly  the  sum  of  the  growth  rate  of  the  labor  force  and  the  growth  rate  of 
productivity. Here again, monetary policy would not be an effective tool to address such real 
economic challenges as slower labor force or productivity growth. Appropriate policies would 
require focusing on increasing productivity and the quality of the labor force, not on traditional 
countercyclical monetary policy. 
Alternative concepts for the gap 
To this point, I’ve talked about the traditional view and an alternative view of the nature of the 
shock the economy experienced and how these views change the nature of the gap and the 
appropriate monetary policy response. But as I mentioned at the outset, there are different 
ways to approach the standard to which economic performance is measured. In particular, 
we need to remember that economic theory does not give us a unique way to define gaps. 
Different models can offer different conceptual approaches to the gap. 
For example, as I mentioned earlier, implicit in the CBO’s approach to constructing potential 
GDP  is  a  model  of  the  economy  and  the  concept  of  a  noninflationary  maximum  level  of 
output. One feature of the CBO’s construct of potential, and many others’, is that potential 
output  moves  very  slowly  and  very  smoothly.  This  means  that  potential  GDP  does  not  – 
indeed,  cannot  –  respond  much  to  current  shocks  to  the  economy  regardless  of  their 
magnitude or source, especially in real time. 
This  is  in  contrast  to  research  Nelson  and  I  conducted  that  revealed  that  a  significant 
proportion of the variability in GDP was due to permanent or very long-lasting shocks. While 
our  statistical  approach  was  not  based  on  an  economic  model,  there  is  good  reason  to 
believe that shocks that give rise to permanent changes in GDP should be viewed differently 
from those that give rise to purely transitory movements, especially in terms of their policy 
prescriptions.  Measures  that  arbitrarily,  or  by  assumption,  assign  the  bulk  of  fluctuation  in 
GDP to purely temporary factors may provide poor policy guidance when shocks are more 
permanent in nature. 
A different conceptual approach to defining a gap is implied by a class of economic models in 
wide  use  today  –  the  new  Keynesian  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium,  or  DSGE, 
models. DSGE  models explicitly posit that firms have some pricing power; that is, there is 
imperfect competition so that a firm can choose to sell more of its output by lowering its price 
or to sell less of its output by raising its price, and the firm will set its price at a markup over 
marginal cost to maximize its profits. DSGE models also assume that firms are able to only 
                                                 
6  Athanasios Orphanides and Simon van Norden, “The Reliability of Inflation Based on Output Gap Estimates in 
Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37 (2005), pp. 583–601. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
adjust  prices  infrequently.  This  form  of  sticky  prices,  together  with  imperfect  competition, 
allow monetary policy to have real effects in the short run, while remaining neutral for the real 
side  of  the  economy  in  the  long  run.  The  sticky  prices  generate  distortions  that  mean 
allocations and output can be inefficient in the face of shocks. In these models, the efficient 
level of output is the level of output that would prevail in the absence of the sticky prices and 
other market imperfections that allow deviations from perfect competition. 
In  this  framework,  the  relevant  output  gap  to  be  addressed  is  the  difference  between  the 
efficient level and that level generated by the distortion introduced by the sticky prices and 
market imperfections. The behavior of the efficient level of output is unlikely to be a smooth 
or a slowly evolving series like the CBO concept. In fact, it could be quite volatile and may 
bear  little  or  no  resemblance  to  the  traditional  concept  of  potential  used  by  the  CBO  and 
others. Efficient output would be altered by changes in technology that affect productivity or 
changes in agents’ preferences. The role of monetary policy in these models is to react to 
economic  conditions  in  a  way  that  minimizes  the  potential  for  distortions  arising  from  the 
price stickiness or other market imperfections. The general policy prescription is to minimize 
the gap between output and the efficient level of output. In the absence of unexpected events 
that lead firms to change their desired markups over marginal cost, or other real rigidities like 
real wage rigidities, this would be equivalent to stabilizing inflation.7  
A great deal of work is being done on this class of models. For example, many researchers 
are attempting to build richer models that have a more elaborate financial sector in light of 
the recent financial crisis, and they are incorporating frictions of various kinds. Regardless of 
how these models are enhanced, their concept of the gap will continue to be a deviation of 
output  from  the  efficient  level  that  would  prevail  in  the  absence  of  nominal  rigidities  and 
market imperfections. Therefore, the gap in these models will remain conceptually different 
from  a  gap  based  on  potential  output.  And  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  policy 
prescriptions based on these gaps will be the same. Indeed, the nature of the shock will be 
an important determinant in whether the efficient output level changes and whether monetary 
policy should react or not. 
Conclusion 
Policymakers  need  a  framework  with  which  to  evaluate  incoming  data  in  order  to  set 
appropriate monetary policy. But the recession and recovery have underscored that we must 
remain  humble  about  our  degree  of  understanding  of  the  economy  and  that  we  must 
entertain various perspectives in setting policy. As I’ve discussed, there are several different 
ways  to  interpret  the  economic  dynamics  we  have  seen  in  recent  years,  and  those 
perspectives  would  call  for  different  policy  responses.  Some  view  the  shocks  hitting  the 
economy as transitory and potential GDP as stable. Others view the shocks as being more 
permanent, affecting both actual and potential output. 
In addition, there are alternative concepts of the output gap itself, some of which focus on the 
efficient  level  of  output  instead  of  potential  output.  Each  of  these  perspectives  has  some 
merit  as  well  as  drawbacks,  and  it  will  be  some  time  (if  ever)  when  we  will  know  which 
perspective is the correct one in explaining our recent economic experience. 
This  state  of  affairs  has  led  me  to  be  skeptical  of  relying  on  gaps  in  general  as  well  as 
optimal  control  exercises  that  are  derived  from  specific  models.  Instead,  I  have  long 
advocated  that  we  should  think  in  terms  of  robust  policies  that  yield  good  economic 
                                                 
7  See  Jordi  Gali  and  Olivier  Blanchard,  “Real  Wage  Rigidities  and  the  New  Keynesian  Model,”  Journal  of 
Money,  Credit  and  Banking,  39  (2007),  pp.  35–65  and  Aubhik  Khan,  Robert  G.  King,  and  Alexander 
L. Wolman, “Optimal Monetary Policy,” Review of Economic Studies, 70 (2003), pp. 825–860. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
outcomes  across  a  variety  of  models  and  frameworks.8  In  my  view,  a  robust,  systematic 
approach  to  policy,  which  is  transparent  and  minimizes  the  degree  to  which  data 
mismeasurement and model uncertainty affect policy, is the most promising approach to the 
uncertainties facing policymakers in real time. 
 
                                                  
8  Charles Plosser, “Output Gaps and Robust Policy Rules,” speech presented to the 2010 European Banking 
and Financial Forum, Czech National Bank, Prague, the Czech Republic, March 23, 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
