  Sukhdave Singh: Global RMB – challenges and implications 
Keynote speech by Dr Sukhdave Singh, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the HSBC Forum: China Globalising: RMB Rising (Malaysia) – 
“Global RMB: Challenges and Implications”, Kuala Lumpur, 12 August 2014. 
 It is an honour and pleasure to be here with you this morning to talk about what is likely to be 
the most important development affecting the global monetary system since the introduction 
of  euro.  Should  the  RMB  become  a  global  currency,  it  will  transform  the  global  financial 
landscape. In fact, the RMB could potentially define this century, in the same manner that the 
US dollar dominated the previous century. 
In my remarks today, I would like to share some thoughts on the potential for the RMB to 
achieve the status of a global currency. Where it to do so, what will the potential impact be 
on the global monetary system? Finally, I will touch on the implications for Malaysia. 
The world is ready, is China ready? 
From  where  we  stand  today,  the  world  is  clearly  ready  for  a  global  RMB.  The  question  is 
whether China itself is ready. 
There  is  no  question  that  the  RMB  would  become  an  international  currency.  The  only 
question is how big of an international currency. Will the RMB’s role in the international trade 
and  finance  reflect  the status  of  China  as  the  second  largest,  and  soon  to  be  the  largest, 
economy in the world? 
To be an international currency does not take much. You just need to lower the barriers and 
allow  for  it  to  be  traded  outside  your  borders.  The  Malaysian  ringgit  was  an  international 
currency before we de-internationalised it during the Asian Financial Crisis. At its peak, the 
ringgit accounted for about 18% of Malaysia’s trade settlements, which was significant given 
the high trade orientation of the Malaysian economy. However, what we learnt from the crisis 
in  1997  was  that  for  our  small  open  economy,  the  internationalisation  of  the  ringgit  was 
inconsistent  with  maintaining  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability,  and  the  benefits  were 
not  commensurate  with  the  risks.  China  is  not  a  small  economy  but  like  Malaysia  it  is  a 
developing  economy.  Therefore,  it  is  not  immune  to  the  types  of  vulnerabilities  an 
international currency and the accompanying open capital account can create in its immature 
economy with its immature financial system. 
The rapid momentum of the current RMB internationalisation reflects China’s strong position 
in  global  trade.  However,  it  also  reflects  a  safe  phase  of  RMB  internationalisation.  It  is 
comparable to wading in shallow water, where you can see the bottom of the sea, anticipate 
what hazards may lie on the sea floor, and therefore are able to walk rapidly. The real difficult 
part  is  when  you  get  into  deeper  waters,  where  the  risks  are  less  visible,  the  waves  are 
higher, the resistance of the water stronger. Progress can then be expected to be slower and 
more cautious. 
As  the  currency  of  a  developing  economy,  the  road  to  internationalisation  of  the  RMB  will 
have many potholes, and it would be the skills and resilience of the policymakers in China 
that will determine whether the RMB manages to navigate these hazards and travels far on 
the  road  to  internationalisation.  After  all,  we  can  think  of  other  more  developed  countries, 
including another at one time second-largest economy, which upon reaching the threshold on 
which  China  stands  today,  decided  that  the  costs  that  come  with  having  their  currency 
playing  a  big  international  role  were  something  that  they  did  not  want  to  bear.  For  lack of 
official support, these currencies consequently never achieved their full global potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Would the reality be different for China? Only time will tell. It is the case that the RMB will sail 
more smoothly and speedily in international waters if its sails are filled by the strong winds of 
robust Chinese economic fundamentals. 
  Five key pre-conditions to being a global currency 
So  allow  me  to  look  at  some  of  the  key  fundamentals  that  I  believe  would  support  a 
sustainable progress of the RMB towards being a major global currency. 
Studying  the  history  of  global  currencies  such  as  the  British  pound  and  the  US  dollar 
provides  us  some  indication  of  the  possible  path  of  RMB  internationalisation.  Let  me  be 
clear, this does not mean that I am implying that the RMB must necessarily follow the path of 
other major global currencies. Nevertheless, such reflection does provide an opportunity for a 
realistic assessment of the prospects and challenges that lie ahead for the RMB. There are 
at least 5 key factors. Let me list them without going into the details. 
• 
Currencies  that  rise  to  dominance  are  often  of  countries  that  are  dominant  in 
global trade. 
Currencies  often  become  internationalised  because  the  country  is  a  key  global 
exporter of capital. 
Every successful currency had official support. 
Currencies  can  only  rise  to  international  prominence  when  backed  by  liberalised 
and developed markets. 
There needs to be confidence in the currency and the economy. 
• 
How does China fare against these signposts? I would say that it is three out of five. As far 
as trade dominance is concerned, China surpassed the US economy as the largest goods 
trading nation in 2013. 
The internationalisation of the currency, despite its cautious nature, is certainly getting a lot 
of official support – not just from Chinese policymakers but also from policymakers in other 
countries. 
As for confidence in the currency and the economy, there would not be so much enthusiasm 
for  RMB  internationalisation  were  such  confidence  missing.  The  fact  that  countries  are 
queuing  up  to  be  able  to  trade  RMB  within  their  borders,  or  to  gain  access  to  China’s 
domestic  financial  markets,  shows  a  strong  desire  on  the  part  of  these  countries  to 
participate  in  what  they  see  as  an  economy  with  a  potential  for  continued  strong  growth. 
There  is  a  deep  hunger  internationally  for  Chinese  consumers,  Chinese  exports,  Chinese 
assets and of course, the Chinese currency. While the USD was at one time supported by its 
gold  backing,  the  RMB  today  is  backed  by  China’s  huge  foreign  exchange  reserves. 
Confidence  in  the  currency  is  further  enhanced  by  expectations  of  conditions  in  China 
remaining supportive of a strong currency. 
The main precondition on which China does not do well is in the stage of development and 
readiness of its financial system and policy frameworks. 
These  challenges  are  not  insurmountable  but  they  are  big  enough  to  make  Chinese 
policymakers  adopt  a  gradual  and  sequenced  approach  to  RMB  internationalisation.  They 
are big enough that premature liberalisation could create significant risks to macroeconomic 
and  financial  stability.  The  challenge  for  Chinese  policymakers  is  to  develop  the  domestic 
financial system to a level where integration with the global financial system would not lead 
to  significant  vulnerabilities.  Therefore,  the  state  of  the  financial  system  will  be  a  key 
determinant  of  the  extent  to  which  policymakers  are  willing  to  liberalise  and  open  their 
system,  and  consequently,  will  also  be  a  key  determinant  of  the  extent  and  pace  of  RMB 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  internationalisation. The global status of the RMB is closely linked to the global status of the 
Chinese financial system. Ambitious reforms could expedite RMB internationalisation. 
On the issue of being a global exporter of capital, China is certainly that. However, a large 
part of these outflows have been official and they have not been in RMB. This in fact touches 
at the heart of what is known as the Triffin Dilemma. China has been sending USDs abroad 
because  that  is  what  it  has  been  receiving  through  its  current  account  surpluses  and  FDI 
inflows. Sometime in the future, China may develop a structural current account deficit, but I 
do  not  see  that  happening  in  the  foreseeable  future.  Opening  up  the  capital  account  and 
domestic financial system to non-resident investors could lead to even more foreign currency 
capital  inflows.  On  both  accounts,  China  will  not  only  continue  to  export  USD  capital  but 
could find itself confronted by persistent appreciating pressure on its exchange rate due to 
the high demand for RMB. 
Promoting RMB for trade settlement will only go so far in resolving this. If more of China’s 
trade is settled in RMB, less USD will flow in, and China would need to intervene less and 
would have less USD to send abroad. But the question remains, with more RMB flowing in 
through the current and capital account, how do you get more RMB out of China in the first 
place? 
There are in fact numerous possibilities for China to create a significant pool of RMB liquidity 
abroad  without  necessarily  running  a  current  account  deficit.  This  include  RMB  outflows 
through official aid, international loans by banks in China, foreign issuance of debt in Chinese 
markets,  direct  investment  abroad,  inter-company  loans,  repatriation  of  corporate  profits, 
resident spending abroad and so on. Some of these are already happening. Offshore RMB 
balances  in  Hong  Kong,  Chinese  Taipei  and  Singapore  for  example  rose  almost  40% 
between late 2013 and early 2014 to RMB1.4 trillion. 
These numbers are indeed encouraging, except for one thing. When the RMB is abroad, it 
gets homesick, terribly homesick. It yearns to return home to the land of its birth. When the 
legal avenues for it to do so are limited, it desperately seeks other ways to do so. And as the 
size of overseas RMB pool increases, the pressure of the homeward bound flows will also 
increase.  Will  the  Qualified  Investor  Schemes,  RMB  clearing  banks  and  the  eventual 
introduction of the China International Payment System alleviate this situation of the offshore 
RMB? Yes, it would, but not entirely. 
In  the  current  situation,  despite  the  sharp  increase  in  RMB  related  trade  and  investment 
transactions, the data I have seen suggests that the use of RMB remains rather lopsided and 
favours the flow of RMB into China rather than out of China. A significantly greater proportion 
of China’s exports were paid for in RMB, then its imports. Similarly, while 63% of the FDI into 
China was in RMB, only 16% of the direct investment out of China was in RMB. 
What all these lead us to is that a currency cannot be a true global currency on the basis of 
current  account  convertibility  alone.  It  needs  to be  convertible  also  on the  capital  account. 
However, a significant opening of the capital account is the deep water in China’s quest to 
globalise the RMB. It is like the RMB sailing out of the calm waters of the harbour into the 
choppy waters of the wide open seas. Having the support of the five fundamental factors I 
have discussed will ensure that the RMB is better prepared to navigate those choppy waters. 
To  ensure  sustainable  RMB  internationalisation  would  require  patience,  persistence  and 
careful thought – both on the part of Chinese policymakers as well as those outside China. 
How an internationalised RMB could change the global landscape 
Let  me  now  move  on  to  briefly  delve  on  the  implications  of  a  global  RMB  on  the  global 
monetary landscape. 
In today’s global monetary system, nobody can deny that there is a lack of choice when it 
comes to global currencies. This situation is rather precarious. We saw during the Financial 
Crisis in the Advanced Economies how financial markets globally seized up and the global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  monetary system came to the brink of collapse. A more multipolar monetary system should 
engender  greater  global  financial  stability.  If  global  liquidity  was  represented  by  more 
currencies,  then  the  likelihood  of  any  one  currency  being  a  determinant  of  global  liquidity 
would  be  significantly  reduced. The  observation  of  large  surpluses  of  a currency,  and that 
currency nevertheless appreciating, is an anomaly created by a global system where there 
are too few global currencies. By there not being enough choice, the whole world bears the 
pain when the domestic policies of the few major currency economies become extreme and 
inconsistent with the global role of their currencies. 
Monetary  policy  in  many  major  advanced  economies  is  being  conducted  as  if  theirs  are 
closed economies with closed financial systems. The implication in terms of how monetary 
policy is conducted is that it creates a false sense of confidence about the effectiveness of 
extreme  monetary  policy  with  respect  to  the  domestic  economy  and  a  failure  to  fully 
appreciate  the global  implications.  In  an  integrated  global  economy  and  financial  systems, 
the impact of policies leak out. Investors and savers earning lousy returns on their savings do 
not  simply  throw  up  their  hands  and  say  “since  I’m  earning  lousy  returns  I  might  as  well 
consume my savings or save less.” No, they start looking for other means to preserve the 
value of their savings, including venturing beyond their borders in search for better returns. 
The  outcome  is  a  monetary  policy  that  is  less  effective  than  what  is  envisioned  by  the 
policymakers in the major economies and a significant policy headache for countries that are 
on the receiving end of those capital inflows. 
The rise of the RMB will not entirely solve that, but hopefully, it will lead to a world where the 
global  monetary  system  is  less  distorted,  with  less  of  the  friction  that  we  see  now,  and  a 
greater sharing of the burden and benefits of serving as the world’s currency. 
Malaysia and the global RMB 
Finally, how would the globalisation of RMB affect Malaysia? 
For Malaysia, there is no downside to the RMB becoming an international currency. China is 
one  of  our  largest  trading  partners  and  anything  that  facilitates  the  growth  of  trade  and 
investment  flows  between  the  two  economies  is  good.  We  understand  some  of  the  policy 
challenges  China  faces  and  is  likely  to  face  as  it  internationalises  its  currency.  We 
understand  the  need  for  it  to  adopt  a  gradual  approach  and  providing  itself  the  space  to 
address any vulnerability that may emerge as a consequence of internationalizing the RMB. 
But,  we  also  know  that as  China  develops  its  financial  markets  and  its policy  frameworks, 
greater openness would by synergetic in promoting the further development of its financial 
system and its economy, and of course the international role of the RMB. 
Policymakers  in  Malaysia  are  fully  committed  to  strengthening  our  economic  and  financial 
ties with China. As far as using RMB for international trade and investment is concerned, we 
have  worked  to  put  the  necessary  infrastructure  in  place  and  continue  to  improve  on  it  to 
make it cheaper and more convenient. However, it is the private sector that must decide on 
the  economics  of  using  the  RMB  for  international  payments  and  receipts.  Institutions  like 
HSBC  can  play  a  very  helpful  role  in  educating  their  clients  and  the  broader  business 
community  in  Malaysia  on  the  possibilities  of  the  RMB,  as  well  as  providing  feedback  to 
policymakers  on  what  more  we  can  do  to  create  a  more  conducive  environment  to  allow 
RMB trade to grow. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  internationalisation  of  the  RMB  has  gained 
significant  momentum  over  the  last  year  or  so.  That  is  encouraging  and  it  appropriately 
reflects the growing role of China in the global economy. As I stated earlier, there is no doubt 
that  the  RMB  will  be  an  international  currency.  The  only  question  is  how  big  of  an 
international currency. To answer that question, it is worth reminding ourselves that China is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  internationalizing the RMB not because it believes that it is good for the world, but because it 
believes  that  it  is  good  for  China.  Therefore,  whether  the  RMB  internationalisation  will  be 
able to maintain its momentum, or even accelerate, will depend very much on what happens 
in China in the coming years. If the Chinese policymakers are successful in managing the 
political, economic and financial trade-offs entailed in moving to a global currency, than the 
21st century may indeed very well be the century of the global RMB. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
