  Charles Bean: The future of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the London School of Economics, London, 20 May 2014. 
 I  left  the  London  School  of  Economics  to  become  the  Bank  of  England’s  Chief  Economist 
and a member of its fledgling Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) almost 14 years ago. The 
Bank had not long been given the responsibility for determining interest rates but had at the 
same time relinquished the responsibility for banking supervision. As I approach the end of 
my  tenure,  the  Bank  looks  rather  different:  banking  supervision  has  returned;  and  a  new 
policy committee – the Financial Policy Committee – has been charged with preserving the 
stability of the financial system. 
As I look back, I think it is fair to say that it has been a pretty extraordinary – indeed unique – 
period to be involved in economic policy. My first seven years were years of plenty: growth 
was  steady;  unemployment  was  low;  and  inflation  never  strayed  far  from  target  (Chart  1). 
From time to time, the MPC nudged Bank Rate up or down a quarter point, and the economy 
obediently  stayed  on  course.  To  economists,  this  period  of  unusual  macroeconomic 
tranquillity is known as the Great Moderation. 
But  the  second  seven  years  were  years  of  famine,  as  the  Great  Moderation  turned  into  a 
Great  Tribulation:  the  worst  financial  crisis  for  a  century;  the  most  prolonged  downturn  on 
record;  and  inflation  rising  above  5%.  The  MPC  slashed  Bank  Rate  as  low  as  it  has  ever 
been in the Bank’s 320-year history. To bolster demand further, we then injected new money 
worth  around  a  quarter  of  annual  GDP  through  asset  purchases.  But  despite  the  dosage, 
output is only now approaching its previous peak. 
This evening, I will reflect on some of the innovations in monetary policy that took place as a 
result  of  the  crisis.  Then  I  will  look  at  some  of  the  broader  changes  in  the  framework  it 
prompted. 
Dealing with the crisis led central banks to innovate in several ways. In the first instance, this 
involved lending at longer tenors, against a wider range of collateral, and to a wider range of 
counterparties in order to keep financial markets functioning. For our part, as well as offering 
longer-term  funding  through  our  repo  operations,  we  also  introduced  the  Special  Liquidity 
Scheme (SLS) enabling banks to borrow liquid Treasury Bills against their illiquid mortgage-
backed  securities.  Later  we  introduced  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme  (FLS),  providing 
banks  with  cheaper  funding  and  a  financial  incentive  to  expand  lending.  Some  of  these 
facilities have since been made a permanent feature of our Sterling Monetary Framework. 
Others, such as the SLS and FLS, are by their nature temporary. 
More noteworthy from a monetary policy perspective, though, was the use of unconventional 
tools  to  inject  further  stimulus  when  policy  rates  approached  their  zero  lower  bound.  That 
took the form of explicit guidance to depress expectations of future interest rates; and large-
scale  asset  purchases  financed  by  the  issuance  of  reserves  –  colloquially  known  as 
quantitative easing. 
Let me start with forward guidance, which has particularly attracted academic interest.1 By 
holding  rates  “lower  for  longer”,  the  central  bank  can  implement  an  optimal,  yet  time-
                                                
1   See  e.g.  Paul  Krugman  (1998),  “It's  baaack:  Japan's  slump  and  the  return  of  the  liquidity  trap.”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, pp.137–205; Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and 
Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34.1, pp.139–235; Campbell, J. R., Evans, C. L., Fisher, 
J.  D.,  &  Justiniano,  A.  (2012),  “Macroeconomic  Effects  of  Federal  Reserve  Forward  Guidance.”  Brookings  Papers  on 
Economic Activity, pp.1–80.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  inconsistent, path for rates that boosts demand today, by lowering future nominal rates and 
by raising future inflation. It is time inconsistent because, when the future comes, it will no 
longer  seem  appropriate  to  go  through  with  the  promised  inflationary  episode.  Because 
policy  committees  cannot  tie  the  hands  of  their  successors,  I  do  not  believe  such  time-
inconsistent strategies can be credibly implemented other than over rather short horizons.  
Of course, all central banks provide guidance regarding the economic outlook and the factors 
determining  policy  so  as  to  influence  expectations.  Several  central  banks,  such  as  the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand and the Swedish Riksbank, go as far as providing forecasts of 
their own future policy decisions. Until last August, the MPC had shied away from providing 
such explicit guidance, lest it be misinterpreted as a promise independent of the state of the 
economy.  Instead  we  preferred  to  provide  an  implicit  steer  through  the  medium  of  the 
projections contained in our quarterly Inflation Report. 
Last  August,  however,  the  MPC  decided  that  more  explicit  guidance  about  our  reaction 
function could be helpful. Rather than aiming to provide more stimulus as in the academic 
literature, we were merely seeking to ensure that the recovery was not nipped in the bud by a 
premature  rise  in  market  interest  rates,  despite  there  still  being  a  significant  margin  of 
economic slack. 
We said then that we would not even countenance a rise in Bank Rate until unemployment 
had fallen  to  7%,  subject  to  overrides relating to  excessive  upward  movements  in  inflation 
expectations  and  to  the  risks  to  financial  stability,  the  latter  being  policed  by  the  Financial 
Policy Committee. We chose unemployment in part because its behaviour is directly linked to 
one  of  the  key  uncertainties  at  the  current  juncture,  namely  the  scope  for  a  recovery  in 
productivity. This has been unusually weak since the onset of the crisis for reasons we do 
not yet fully understand (Chart 2). If productivity rebounded, then unemployment would fall 
slowly. But in that case, there would also be more scope to maintain an expansionary policy 
before inflationary pressures began to rise. The opposite holds if productivity growth remains 
weak: unemployment falls more quickly, but we would then also need to begin raising Bank 
Rate earlier. 
Shorter-term market interest rates have moved higher since guidance was introduced, but no 
more so than is justified by a string of unexpectedly strong activity indicators. And there is 
persuasive survey evidence that businesses have both understood the message (Chart 3), 
and that it has made them more prepared to hire and invest (Chart 4). 
In  the  event,  though,  unemployment  fell  rather  faster  than  expected,  reaching  the  7% 
threshold in the data release for the three months to February. In anticipation of that, in our 
February  Inflation  Report,  we  provided  further  guidance,  not  only  on  the  conditions  that 
would lead the Committee to begin tightening, but also the likely trajectory thereafter. 
Regarding the first question, while unemployment provides a useful conditioning variable for 
not  tightening,  the  decision  of  when  to  tighten  needs  to  take  account  of  other  margins  of 
slack as well. These can arise in both the labour market – for instance, discouraged workers 
temporarily out of the labour force and those who are underemployed – and inside firms. 
The  amount  of  slack  in  an  economy  is  necessarily  a  fuzzy  concept,  as  potential  output 
cannot be observed and can be inferred only indirectly. Nevertheless, given the transmission 
lags,  monetary  policy  makers  cannot  avoid forming  a  judgement  about  the  level  of  activity 
consistent with inflation sustainably remaining at target, and thus of the margin of economic 
slack. 
Our  central  view  is  that  the  margin  of  slack  is  presently  around  1–1½%  of  GDP,  though  I 
should  stress  the  considerable  degree  of  uncertainty  around  that  estimate.  I  should  also 
stress that this is a short-run concept, relevant to inflationary pressures a year or so ahead, 
and does not incorporate any endogenous improvement in productivity that may materialise 
in the wake of faster growth over a rather longer horizon. We have said that we are aiming to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  close  this  gap  over  the  next  two  or  three  years,  while  keeping  inflation  at  around  our  2% 
target.  
We have also said that when Bank Rate does rise, it is likely to do so only gradually and to a 
level that is likely to remain materially below its pre-crisis average of 5% for some while. That 
reflects: the continuing headwinds from public and private de-leveraging and continued weak 
growth  in  the  euro  area;  continued  downward  pressure  on  global  interest  rates  from  high 
Chinese  net  savings;  and  the  undue  compression  of  risk  premia  during  the  run-up  to  the 
crisis. 
Let me now turn to asset purchases, our preferred tool for adding stimulus when Bank Rate 
reached its effective lower bound. Under this programme, the Bank acquired £375 billion of 
longer-term UK government debt – equivalent to around 25% of annual GDP – comprising 
£200  billion  purchased  between  March  2009  and  February  2010  and  another  £175  billion 
acquired between October 2011 and November 2012. By depressing the term premium on 
gilts, the purchases lowered the long-term safe rate of interest. Such purchases also led to 
lower spreads on risky assets as investors rebalanced their portfolios. In addition, the extra 
liquidity in the banking system may have helped boost credit supply. Finally, such purchases 
may also have reinforced market perceptions that policy would remain loose for an extended 
period – the so-called “signalling channel”. 
Analysis  by  Bank  staff  suggests  that  the  first  phase  of  our  asset  purchases  lowered  long 
rates  by  around  a  percentage  point;  other  studies  find  a  similar  impact  from  the  Federal 
Reserve’s asset purchases.2 The impact of the second round is harder to isolate because 
some of the effect was probably already priced into the market when the programme was re-
activated,  but there  are good reasons to  believe  the  impact  was  smaller  because  markets 
were  less  dysfunctional  than  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman’s.  There  is  also  considerable 
uncertainty about the impact on growth and inflation, but our present central assessment is 
that the programme had a peak impact on GDP of around 2½% and raised inflation by a little 
more than 1 percentage point. 
Since  the  evidence  suggests  that  asset  purchases  lower  longer-term  rates  and  stimulate 
demand, should they be a permanent part of the central bank’s armoury? Or should they be 
reserved for emergencies? 
I think there are a couple of reasons why they should be seen as just an emergency weapon 
for use when policy rates reach the effective lower bound. First, we have less of a handle on 
their  impact  than  we  do  changes  in  short-term  policy  rates  and,  as  I  just  indicated,  that 
impact may well be less when markets are functioning normally. Second, if the central bank 
routinely  deals  in  large  quantities  of  government  debt,  it  may  find  itself  more  open  to 
pressure from the fiscal authorities, while market participants are more likely to fear that the 
debt will be permanently monetised. 
That brings me naturally to the topic of unwinding our present large stock of asset purchases. 
We have committed to maintaining the stock, including reinvesting the cash flows associated 
with maturing gilts, at least until the first rise in Bank Rate. But at some stage thereafter, as 
part  of  the  transition  back  to  normality,  we  expect  to  start  running  down  the  portfolio  and 
withdrawing the associated bank reserves. 
In  principle,  we  could  do  this  just  by  letting  the  gilts  mature.  However,  as  Chart  5 
demonstrates, it would take a long time to run off organically in its entirety because of the 
relatively  long  average  maturity  of  the  gilts  held:  the  weighted  average  maturity  of  the 
portfolio  is  more  than  12  years.  So  more  active  sales  may  be  called  for  at  some  stage, 
                                                
2   For the United Kingdom, see: Michael Joyce, Matthew Tong and Robert Woods (2011), “The United Kingdom’s Quantitative 
Easing  Policy:  Design,  Operation  and  Impact”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,  51(3),  pp.200–212.  For  the  United 
States, see: Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache and Brian Sack (2011), “The Financial Market Effects of the 
Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases”, International Journal of Central Banking, 7(1), pp.3–43. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  though the MPC  would  be unlikely to initiate such a programme until Bank Rate was high 
enough that it could be cut to maintain demand if conditions deteriorated. Such a programme 
of sales could be expected to put upward pressure on yields, though by much less than the 
purchases pushed down on yields because markets would be functioning more normally. 
In addition, both heightened risk aversion and regulatory changes mean that banks will want 
to  hold  significantly  more  high-quality  liquid  assets  than  in  the  past;  Chart  6  shows  these 
holdings  had  shrunk  to  less  than  1%  of  bank  assets  pre-crisis.  That  means  an  additional 
source of demand for gilts and other highly liquid assets that can be easily sold or repo’d. 
That should also attenuate the upward pressure on yields from running down the portfolio. 
In  case  this  all  sounds  rather  sanguine,  I  should  say  that  I  do  not  expect  central  banks’ 
collective  management  of  the  exit  from  the  present  exceptionally  stimulatory  monetary 
stance will be easy. The bumpiness of the incoming data, allied to a state-contingent reaction 
function, means that market interest rates are bound to become more volatile along the exit 
path, however well central banks communicate their intentions.  
We  have  already  seen  the  sensitivity  of  markets  to  changes  in  the  expected  path  of  US 
monetary  policy  during  the  “taper  tantrum”  last  spring  and  its  attendant  consequences  for 
other countries – especially, but not exclusively, in the emerging economies. Movements in 
yield curves have been strongly correlated across countries, not only at the long end, which 
is not too surprising, but also at the short end of the curve, where domestic monetary policy 
considerations ought to dominate. 
Another reason the exit may be bumpy stems from the starting point. Implied volatilities in 
many  financial  markets  have  been  at  historically  low  levels  for  some  time  now  (Chart  7). 
Together  with  low  safe  interest  rates  in  the  advanced  economies,  that  has  underpinned  a 
renewed  search  for  yield  and  encouraged  carry  trades.  Taken  in  isolation,  this  is  eerily 
reminiscent of what happened in the run-up to the crisis. Episodes like the “taper tantrum”, 
which  produced  a  short-lived  bout  of  volatility  but  no  major  disruption  may  also  be 
contributing to a sense of complacency and an underestimation of market risk by investors. 
It is inevitable that at some stage market perceptions of uncertainty will revert to more normal 
levels. That is likely to be associated with falls in risky asset prices and could be prompted by 
developments in the Ukraine, the fault lines in the Chinese financial sector, monetary policy 
exit in the advanced economies, or something else. But it will surely come at some point. 
The bottom line is that we may yet encounter a few potholes on the way to the exit. But the 
good thing is that banks are better capitalised now than in the run-in to the crisis, leverage is 
lower, there is better visibility of counterparty exposures, and we are better placed to deal 
with  financial  institutions  that  get  into  trouble.  So  the  risk  of  major  financial  problems 
crystallising in the advanced economies should be much lower. Those emerging economies 
that have financed large external deficits through the accumulation of foreign currency debt 
may be more vulnerable, however. 
Let me turn now to the impact of the crisis on the monetary policy framework itself. Before 
the crisis, the conventional wisdom in central banks was that monetary and financial stability 
were largely complementary in nature. The maintenance of price stability would help foster 
stable  macroeconomic  conditions  more  generally  by  anchoring  expectations.  And  the 
consequent  reduction  in  macroeconomic  volatility  should  help  reduce  the  likelihood  of 
episodes of financial instability. All that was necessary was for banking supervisors to ensure 
that  individual  financial  institutions  followed  responsible  lending  policies  and  all  would  be 
well. 
Today, there is a tendency to claim that the crisis revealed a fatal flaw in focussing on price 
stability as the primary object of monetary policy, namely a failure to recognise that it could in 
some circumstances actually be detrimental to financial stability. While the years before the 
crisis were characterised by stability in the evolution of the market for goods and services, 
asset  markets  were  anything  but  stable.  In  particular,  there  was  a  massive  expansion  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  credit,  particularly  within  the  financial  system  in  many  of  the  advanced  economies, 
accompanied  by  upward  pressure  on  a  range  of  asset  prices,  including real  estate.  There 
was a boom in asset markets, even if there was no corresponding boom in the real economy. 
To some people, the relatively low level of interest rates necessary to maintain price stability 
was  instrumental  in  generating  this  boom  in  credit  and  asset  prices  by  encouraging  an 
aggressive search for yield. 
While  there  is  some  truth  in  this  charge,  I  think  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  that 
monetary  policy  was  the  sole,  or  even  the  prime,  cause  of  the  crisis.  Several  factors 
coincided to form a potent cocktail. There were other factors that depressed the yield on safe 
assets, including high savings rates in China and a more general demand for US Treasuries 
as  emerging  economies  accumulated  larger  stocks  of  foreign  reserves  in  the  wake  of  the 
Asia Crisis. Equally important, in my view, was the impact of the Great Moderation itself on 
risk-taking behaviour, as low volatility encouraged an underestimation of the likelihood and 
severity of adverse tail risks crystallising. Seen in this light, the Great Moderation sowed the 
seeds of its own destruction. 
On top of this, of course, there was a litany of microeconomic features that aggravated the 
crisis,  including:  the  development  of  complex  securities  that  were  impossible  to  value  in 
stressed  conditions  and  connected  financial  institutions  in  unexpected  ways;  disguised 
leverage  through  the  use  of  securitisation  vehicles,  whose  primary  aim  was  regulatory 
arbitrage; remuneration packages encouraging positions that generated decent returns most 
of the time but high losses in some states of the world; excessive reliance on credit-rating 
agencies; defective risk management; weak funding structures; and insufficient high-quality 
bank capital to absorb losses. 
That said, the experience of the past few years does appear to suggest that monetary policy 
ought to take greater account of financial stability concerns. Ahead of the crisis, Bill White 
and  colleagues  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  consistently  argued  that  when 
leverage was becoming excessive and/or asset prices misaligned, central bankers ought to 
“lean  against  the  wind”  by  keeping  interest  rates  higher  than  necessary  to  meet  the  price 
stability  objective  in  the  short  run.3  Just  as  central  banks  are  willing  to  accept  temporary 
deviations from their inflation targets to limit output volatility, so they should also be willing to 
accept temporary deviations to attenuate the credit cycle. Essentially it is worth accepting a 
little more volatility in output and inflation in the short run if one can thereby reduce the size 
or  frequency  of  asset-price  busts  and  credit  crunches.  Such  a  view  ran  counter  to  that 
espoused  by  many  central  bankers,  most  notably  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Alan 
Greenspan, who questioned the feasibility of addressing such financial imbalances with pre-
emptive monetary policy; in his view, monetary policy should instead focus on minimising the 
fallout from any subsequent correction – the so-called “cleaning” approach.4 
While the logic of leaning against the wind is sound in principle, the key question is whether a 
monetary  tightening  of  plausible  magnitude  is  likely  to  be  effective  in  attenuating  an 
established credit boom. Even if policy rates may appear with hindsight to have been held 
too  low  for too  long  in  the  years  preceding  the crisis,  particularly  in  the  United  States, the 
empirical evidence suggests that they would need to have been significantly higher to have 
had a meaningful impact on the rate of credit expansion.5 It is a brave central banker who 
would deliberately induce a recession in order to head off the mere risk of a future financial 
correction. 
                                                
3   For instance, William White (2006), “Is price stability enough?”, Bank for International Settlements Working Paper 205. 
4   Alan Greenspan (2002), “Opening Remarks” in Rethinking Stabilization Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas. 
5   Charles Bean, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor (2010), “Monetary Policy after the Fall” in Macroeconomic 
Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  That explains the interest in deploying additional policy instruments that are better suited to 
restraining  the  build-up  of  dangerous  financial  imbalances  and  contributing  to  the 
maintenance of financial stability – so-called macroprudential tools. With two targets – price 
and  financial  stability  –  one  really  wants  another  instrument,  or  set  of  instruments,  to 
complement monetary policy. In the new arrangements established following the crisis, the 
deployment of such instruments falls to the Bank’s Financial Policy Committee.  
There are several potential macroprudential tools to deal with such cyclical risks, but they are 
of broadly two types: those that increase the resilience of the system; and those that work 
pre-emptively against a build-up of leverage. In addition, measures may be targeted or more 
general in impact. 
To  give  some  examples,  first  consider  the  Basel  III  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer, 
implemented  in  the  European  Union  under  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive.  By  forcing 
banks  to  hold  extra  high-quality  loss-absorbing  capacity  during  a  credit  boom  that  can  be 
released  during  a  subsequent  downturn,  this  primarily  improves  resilience.  But  because  it 
raises the marginal cost of bank funds, the counter-cyclical capital buffer should also inhibit 
the  build-up  of  leverage  in  the  first  place.  There  are  several  reasons  why  debt  finance  is 
cheaper than equity finance, including the implicit subsidy from being Too Big To Fail, and 
the advantageous tax treatment of debt. Moreover, debt pays the same return in all states of 
the world except when default takes place, while the return on equity will vary; that makes 
debt  more  attractive  for  some  investors,  especially  during  financial  booms  when  the 
probability of default appears low. 
Raising  the  capital  requirements  on  particular  components  of  banks’  balance  sheets  by 
varying sectoral risk weights is different in that it alters the relative attractiveness of different 
sorts  of  lending.  Assuming  that  the  increase  in  capital  requirements  is  targeted  at  those 
sectors  where  the  risks are  most  material, then not  only  is  resilience  increased  but  it  also 
encourages  substitution  towards  safer  forms  of  lending  and  thus  has  a  pre-emptive 
character. 
Finally, there are tools that directly target borrowing, such as loan-to-income or loan-to-value 
caps, and restrictions on the share of banks’ portfolios that can be allocated to high loan-to-
income  or  loan-to-value  lending,  as  recently  introduced  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
Zealand. By acting directly on the riskiest segments of lending, such tools are more obviously 
pre-emptive in nature. 
Importantly, while monetary policy is well-suited to dealing with the problems that arise from 
sluggish  wage  and  price  adjustment,  a  good  macroprudential  tool  will  be  one  that  is  well 
targeted at dealing with a particular financial market failure, such as the underestimation of 
risk. 
To see, in a highly stylised way, how monetary and macroprudential tools can be combined, 
as well as the appropriate instrument assignment, consider first Chart 8. The left-hand panel 
is relatively conventional and portrays the market for goods and services. IS is an aggregate 
demand  schedule,  with  demand  a  decreasing  function  of  both  the  policy  rate,  R,  and  a 
macroprudential  instrument,  K.  PC  is  an  expectations-augmented  Phillips  curve,  in  which 
inflation expectations are assumed to be anchored at the inflation target.6 For any given set 
of shocks to aggregate demand and supply, the inflation target can be achieved by the set of 
pairs of R and K along the downward sloping schedule PS (for Price Stability) in the right-
hand diagram. An increase in demand resulting from, say, an increase in the propensity to 
invest, would shift this schedule out to the right. 
                                                
6  
In the literature, credit frictions and macroprudential policies can also affect potential output; see for instance Vasco Cúrdia 
and Michael Woodford (2010), “Credit spreads and monetary policy.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42(S1), pp3–35. 
For simplicity of exposition, I abstract from such effects here. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Turn  now  to  the  credit  market.  Conventional  macroeconomic  analyses  of  the  market  for 
loanable  funds  tend  to  focus  on  the  flow  of  funds  from  saving  households  to  businesses 
undertaking capital expenditures. But, as Chart 9 makes clear, such lending constitutes only 
a  small  fraction  of  the  assets  held  by  UK  banks.  The  vast  majority  of  loans  are  instead 
provided to finance the acquisition of existing assets, especially real estate.  
This should be borne in mind when contemplating the factors behind the demand and supply 
of  credit,  shown  in  the  left-hand  panel  of  Chart  10  as  CD  and  CS  respectively.  Demand 
decreases with the cost of borrowing, RB and supply increases with the return on bank debt 
(including deposits), RD, which for simplicity is taken to move in line with the policy rate R. In 
addition, there is a spread between RB and RD, reflecting expectations of default not only by 
end  borrowers  but  also  by  the  financial  intermediary.  In  credit  booms,  this  spread  is  often 
unsustainably  compressed,  while  during  credit  crunches 
it  widens  sharply.  Our 
macroprudential  instrument,  K,  is  assumed  either  to  reduce  the  demand  for  credit,  or  to 
increase the spread between RB and RD, or both. Either way it reduces the total quantity of 
credit, C. 
Now  unlike  macroeconomic  stability,  which  can  be  characterised  as  output  being  at  its 
sustainable  level  once  nominal  wages  and  prices  have  adjusted  and  inflation  is  at  target, 
there is no corresponding simple characterisation of financial stability. But for simplicity, let 
us  assume  that  the  authorities  have  in  mind  some  maximum  level  of  leverage  that  is 
consistent with the risks to future financial stability remaining acceptable. Then we have the 
downward-sloping frontier FS (for Financial Stability) in the right-hand panel that shows the 
minimum acceptable level of the policy rate for any given setting of the macroprudential tool. 
A  reduction  in  perceived  risk  leading  to  excessive  exuberance  on  the  part  of  investors  or 
borrowers would shift this frontier to the right. 
Putting these two policy relationships, PS and FS, together we get Chart 11. The respective 
slopes  of  these  two  schedules  depend  on  the  relative  impact  of  the  policy  rate  and  the 
macroprudential tool on aggregate demand and on the quantity of credit. A well-chosen and 
well-designed macroprudential tool is one that has a relatively large effect on the quantity of 
credit but only a modest impact on aggregate demand. That would generate a relatively flat 
FS schedule. Moreover, since changes in policy rates also affect aggregate demand through 
routes  other  than  the  credit  channel,  such  as  the  exchange  rate,  it  seems  reasonable  to 
assume that the PS schedule is relatively steep. That is the configuration of relative slopes 
shown  in  the  Chart.  Provided  the  two  schedules  do  not  coincide,  both  price  and  financial 
stability objectives can be achieved simultaneously.  
With this configuration, it is natural to assign the monetary instrument to the pursuit of price 
stability and the macroprudential instrument to the pursuit of financial stability. Moreover, with 
these slopes and this assignment, no active co-ordination in the setting of the instruments is 
strictly necessary: a process whereby each instrument is set independently, taking the other 
as  given  would  converge  on  the  equilibrium,  A.  That  said,  appropriate  co-ordination  and 
information exchange is desirable to achieve it efficiently and is facilitated in the real world by 
housing the MPC and the FPC in the same institution, with overlapping memberships, and 
the scope to meet jointly when required. 
Some sorts of shocks will involve a tightening in both instruments. For instance, consider a 
bout  of  “irrational  exuberance”  on  the  part  of  households,  businesses  and  investors.  The 
increased  optimism  is  associated  with  an  increase  in  the  demand  for  goods  and  services 
from households and businesses, together with increased demand for credit and a reduction 
in the credit spread. So both PS and FS shift out to the right, as in Chart 12. As drawn, both 
instruments are therefore tightened. 
In other cases, it will be appropriate for the instruments to move in opposite directions. For 
instance  a  beneficial  supply  shock  will  usually  generate  disinflationary  pressure  requiring 
lower interest rates, other things equal. So the price stability schedule shifts in. But it may 
well also encourage increased borrowing and a compression in spreads, leading the financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  stability frontier to shift out. In this example, monetary policy is loosened at the same time as 
macroprudential policy is tightened (Chart 13). Superficially this could look as if the monetary 
and macroprudential policymakers are at odds with each other, though such a rebalancing of 
the mix of policies is in fact entirely appropriate. 
There are, however, important qualifications to this somewhat Panglossian view of the ability 
to  maintain  both  price  stability  and  financial  stability  by  assigning  monetary  policy  to  the 
former  and  macroprudential  policy  to  the  latter.  Compared  to  the  impact  of  changes  in 
interest rates, we have relatively little experience of deploying macroprudential instruments. 
And  there  will  often  be  scope  for  those  affected  to  work  out  ways  to  circumvent  them, 
including  by  moving  activities  outside  the  regulatory  perimeter.  As  Federal  Reserve  Board 
Governor  Jeremy  Stein  has  noted,  monetary  policy  may  be  a  blunt  tool  for  addressing 
financial stability risks, but it does have the virtue that it “gets in all of the cracks”.7 So, there 
may well be times when monetary policy is the only game in town to guard against incipient 
financial stability risks. In that case, we are back in the world where monetary policy makers 
need to be prepared to consciously lean against the wind by deliberately undershooting their 
inflation target in the near term in order to reduce the likelihood of something nastier down 
the road. 
This thinking has now been embodied in the Chancellor’s remit for the MPC, which sets our 
objectives  each  year.  It  notes  that  “circumstances  may  arise  in  which  attempts  to  keep 
inflation at the inflation target could exacerbate the development of imbalances that the FPC 
may judge to represent a potential risk to financial stability. The FPC’s macroprudential tools 
are the first line of defence against such risks, but in these circumstances the MPC may wish 
to allow inflation to deviate from the target temporarily.” The remit also directs the MPC to 
have regard for the actions of the FPC and vice versa. 
I opened my remarks tonight by observing that my time at the Bank has neatly fallen into two 
halves. Seven years of unparalleled macroeconomic stability have been followed by seven 
years characterised by financial instability and a deep recession. It was a salutary lesson for 
those,  like  me,  who  thought  we  had  successfully  cracked  the  problem  of  steering  the 
economy,  and  highlighted  the  need  to  put  in  place  an  effective  prudential  framework  to 
complement monetary policy. Policy making today consequently looks a much more complex 
problem than it did fourteen years ago.  
In  Genesis,  following  his  interpretation  of  Pharaoh’s  Dream,  Joseph  is  made  the  most 
powerful  bureaucrat  in  Egypt,  in  which  position  he  ensures  that  enough  grain  is  hoarded 
during the seven years of plenty to provide sustenance during the seven years of famine that 
followed. That is a parable on the value of prudence that the central bankers of the future 
would do well not to forget. Thank you for your attention! 
                                                
7   Jeremy Stein (2013) “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses”, speech at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 7 February.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
