Jens Weidmann: Outlook for 2014 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Tagesspiegel 
event “DeutschlandAgora 2014”, Berlin, 16 January 2014. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Mr Döbler, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you very much for your invitation. 
I  am  delighted  that  so  many  of  you  have  accepted  the  Tagesspiegel’s  invitation.  Before  I 
begin, let me wish you all a happy and prosperous New Year. 
We are in Berlin. At the beginning of the year, the Governing Mayor announced what not to 
expect in 2014, namely the opening of the capital city’s new airport. Today I would like to talk 
about what we can expect – and what we must resolve to do – to overcome the crisis in the 
euro area on a lasting basis. 
In  my  speech  I  will  examine  the  measures  currently  being  taken  to  tackle  the  crisis  –  on 
which  opinions  are  divided  –  and  say  a  few  words  about  the  institutional  reforms  that  are 
needed in the single currency area. 
Blaise Pascal rightly said, 400 years ago, as he looked ahead to the New Year, that all the 
resolutions have already been made, and that all we have to do is keep them. So you will 
recognise  many  of  the  points  I  am  going  to  make  from  the  discussion  about  the 
establishment of monetary union. Having said that, a need for action does exist: but it took 
the crisis to show us how significant the need for action is. 
First, however, I would like to start by examining the economic prospects for the New Year. 
And they don’t look all that bad. 
Economic prospects 
2. 
The  German  economy  regained  momentum  last  year,  and  according  to  our  forecasts  this 
upturn will continue this year and next. 
This upward trend has again stemmed primarily from domestic factors. Germany’s domestic 
economy is therefore already significantly more dynamic than the modest rate of growth for 
2013 as a whole might suggest. 
Low  unemployment,  continued  growth  in  employment  and  favourable  financing  conditions 
are  supporting  private  consumption  and  driving  housing  construction.  But  German  foreign 
trade  is  picking  up  again,  too.  And  that  is  likely  to  continue  if  the  recovery  in  the  global 
economy and the euro area becomes more broad-based. 
The  Bundesbank’s  economists  expect  the  German  economy  to  expand  by  1.7%  this  year 
and 2.0% in 2015. Those are our forecasts based on our tried and tested economic models. 
But of course, these are expectations, not certainties. 
Making forecasts is a difficult business. In the mid-1800s it was predicted that the city of New 
York would be buried in horse manure by 1910 at the latest – but then came the automobile. 
And not everyone initially believed in the success of the motor car either. Kaiser Wilhelm II 
put his faith in the horse, playing down the automobile as “only a temporary phenomenon”. 
And even Gottlieb Daimler predicted that “global demand for motorvehicles will not exceed 
one million – if only because of the lack of available chauffeurs.” 
What I want to say is that forecasts – long-term forecasts in particular – should always be 
treated  with  caution.  But  short-term  forecasts,  too,  can  quickly  become  worthless  if 
unforeseen events occur – for forecasts are not prophecies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
If things turn out the way we expect them to, the German economy will grow considerably 
faster than the economy of most other euro-area countries. Nor are prospects brightening up 
for  Germany  alone.  Most  of  the  crisis  countries,  if  they  haven’t  yet  put  recession  behind 
them, can at least see the light at the end of the tunnel. 
Another  positive  factor  is  that  the  heterogeneity  in  the  euro  area  as  regards  economic 
growth, which was still very pronounced in 2011, has declined significantly over the last two 
years.  Going  by  the  European  Commission’s  2013  autumn forecast,  the  growth  disparities 
will continue to decrease substantially in the current year. 
Amongst other things, the fact that the differences in economic growth rates have narrowed 
further  of  late  is  proof  of  the  success  of  the  adjustment  measures  in  the  crisis  countries. 
However, the individual countries still differ in terms of their position in the economic cycle. 
This represents a challenge for the Eurosystem, our common central banking system. This is 
because the ECB Governing Council, to which I belong as President of the Bundesbank, can 
only make one common monetary policy – for the entire euro area. In the deployment of our 
instruments  we  cannot  make  allowances  for  the  economic  situation  of  individual  member 
countries.  We  knew  that  when  we  embarked  upon  monetary  union,  and  that’s  why,  for 
example, there can only be one policy rate for the entire euro area. 
One consequence of divergences in the economic situation is the diversity of inflation rates in 
the  euro-area  countries.  It  is  not  surprising  that  consumer  prices  in  Germany  are  rising 
somewhat  more  quickly  than  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Nevertheless,  according  to  our 
latest forecast, the German rate of inflation, too, will remain clearly below the 2% mark this 
and next year. 
The  outlook for  price  developments  in  the  euro area  as  a  whole,  which  play  a  key  part  in 
determining  actions  taken  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  will  only  gradually  move  in  that 
direction  again.  And  you  know  that  the  Governing  Council  defines  price  stability  as  an 
inflation rate of below, but close to, 2%. Eurosystem staff are expecting an inflation rate of 
1.1% this year and 1.4% in 2015. 
The risks  of  a  significantly  higher  rate  of  inflation  in  the  medium  term  are  therefore  low  at 
present.  That  applies  to  the  entire  euro  area  as  well  as  to  Germany.  I  am  in  complete 
agreement  with  my  colleague,  Mario  Draghi,  that  there  is  no  reason  for  irrational  fears  of 
inflation. That is not to say that combatting inflation will no longer be an issue in the future. I 
would recommend analysing things rationally and keeping an eye also on long-term dangers 
to price stability. 
But  at  the  same  time,  in  the  current  economic  situation  the  risk  that  the  euro  area  will 
experience  broad-based  deflation  is  also  limited.  This,  too,  is  a  spectre  which,  on  sober 
reflection, vanishes in thin air. 
This  is  connected,  not  least,  to  the  fact  that  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  solidly 
anchored at around 2%. Above all, however, we are on the threshold of a phase of economic 
recovery – which will gradually push inflation rates back up. 
The currently low inflation rates as an average for the euro area are the result, not least, of 
the  adjustment  measures  undertaken  by  the  crisis  countries.  These  measures  are 
unavoidable  in  order  to  make  the  economic  structures  more  competitive  and  promote 
sounder  public  finances  –  in  other  words,  for  these  countries  to  get  back  on  their  feet. 
Sustainable economic growth in the long term will not be possible with bloated construction 
or financial sectors. 
Advocates for an even more expansionary monetary and fiscal policy often cite the risk of a 
Japanese  scenario,  warning  that  the  euro  area  faces  a  similar  fate  as  the  Japanese 
economy,  which  has  suffered  from  the  effects  of  a  deflationary  trend  during  the  last  two 
decades. But the situations differ greatly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First, the  Japanese  yen  appreciated  sharply  at  the  beginning  of the  1990s,  with  the  result 
that  receding  import  prices  acted  as  a  brake  on  the  general  price  trend.  The  euro 
experienced no such strong appreciation during the crisis. 
Second, deflation requires that nominal wages fall, or at least expand at a slower pace than 
productivity, over a protracted period of time. In Japan, labour income per employee dropped 
considerably over many years, whereas no such board-based development is to be seen in 
the euro area. Only in Ireland and Greece has compensation per employee fallen markedly 
to sharply. 
Fear of a Japanese scenario is therefore misplaced. 
Moreover,  the  notion  of  Japan’s  “lost  decades”  needs  to  be  seen  in  perspective.  The 
weakness of growth in Japan is partly a natural consequence of the country’s demographic 
change, as the working-age population has been shrinking since the mid-1990s. And that, by 
the way, is an economic policy challenge that awaits Germany in the years to come. 
A  critical  view  therefore also  needs  to  be taken of  the  discussion kicked  off  by former  US 
Treasury Secretary Larry Summers and fuelled by Paul Krugman, about “secular stagnation”. 
Mr  Summers  recently  warned  that  the  US  faced  the  risk  of  weak  growth  similar  to  that  in 
Japan, and called for an even more expansionary demand policy. In so doing, however, he 
fails to see that the weak real growth in Japan is primarily a long-term structural problem that 
cannot be remedied in a sustainable manner by demand-oriented economic policy. 
The lesson to be learned from the example of Japan, however, is that the job of cleansing 
bank balance sheets of toxic assets should not be delayed. 
Those were my remarks about Japan. Let me come back to the euro area. 
A badly informed journal recently claimed that I was fighting against the policy of low interest 
rates.  What  it  is  true  to  say  is  that,  for  months,  I  have  been  repeatedly  stressing  that  an 
expansionary monetary policy is appropriate at the moment given foreseeable subdued price 
developments and moderate economic growth in the euro area. 
Against that backdrop, the Governing Council of the ECB recently confirmed its expectation 
that interest rates will remain at their present very low level for some time to come or in fact 
be going down even further. 
Criticism of low interest rate policy 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am not overlooking the fact that a critical view is being taken of the extremely low interest 
rates,  especially  in  Germany.  The  most  recent  cut  in  the  key  interest  rate  in  November 
caused considerable discontent in some quarters. Let me say something about this. 
I am very well able to understand the fact that German savers, as well as savers elsewhere, 
are  annoyed  when  their  savings  accounts  lose  value  in  real  terms  because  the  rates  of 
interest on low-risk investments are lower than the rate of inflation. That means the loss of a 
key incentive to accumulate savings. 
But please consider also that low interest rates are intended to give a boost to consumption 
and investment. That is the very reason why the central bank keeps them at a low level.  
Apart  from  that,  what  should  be  remembered  in  this  context  is  that,  for  many  people, 
including in Germany, low interest rates are not just a drawback. 
Homebuilders  are  benefiting  from  them  when  taking  out  a  loan.  Firms  are  enjoying 
favourable  financing  conditions,  which  is  ultimately  a  good  thing  for  employees,  too.  The 
government is paying less interest on its debt, which is bringing relief for taxpayers. Members 
of the general public are not just savers, they have other economic motives as well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Besides, it simply isn’t the task of the central bank to ensure a given minimum return on risk-
free financial investments. Rather, I agree with Jean-Claude Trichet, who recently said in an 
interview that it was not the ECB’s mandate to aim for an interest rate that pleases everyone; 
the mandate of the ECB is to maintain price stability. 
For me, that is the crucial point in this debate: members of the general public should be able 
to  rely  on  us  fulfilling  this  mandate  and  not  making  it  subordinate  to  other  objectives.  The 
Bundesbank stands by this unconditionally – no ifs, no buts. 
However,  we  must  not  turn  a  blind  eye  to  the  fact  that  extremely  low  interest  rates  also 
harbour risks to financial stability and the efficiency of economic structures. These, in turn, 
can  have  an  impact  on  price  developments  and  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  achieve  its 
primary objective of price stability. The crisis made this abundantly clear for us. 
An ultra-loose monetary policy is a course of treatment with risks and side effects. For that 
reason, it must not become a long-term therapy, especially as its positive effects decrease 
the longer the treatment continues, while the risks increase. 
There is a danger of economic agents ̶ such as households and, in particular, enterprises, 
but policymakers, too ̶ getting used to the ultra-loose monetary policy. Eventually, this might 
mean  that  a  necessary  structural  change  fails  to  take  place  or  that  enterprises  without  a 
sustainable business model are kept alive. 
But the low interest rate setting also has directly negative repercussions for banks, building 
and loan associations and insurance companies. 
In  the  case  of  banks,  declining  margins  mean  a  deterioration  in  profitability.  Banks  whose 
earnings derive mainly from the interest rate differential between deposits and loans are hit 
especially  hard  by  this,  and  that  means  not  least  savings  banks  and  credit  cooperatives. 
These institutions will find it an increasing problem in the long run to conduct risk provisioning 
for  economically  difficult  times.  And  insurers  as  well,  particularly  life  insurers,  will  have  an 
increasingly hard time generating guaranteed returns, the longer low interest rates persist. 
At the same time, there is a risk that low interest rates will prompt investors to embark on a 
“search  for  yield”.  An  increasing  risk  propensity  on  the  part  of  investors  might  lead  to 
hazardous excesses in individual financial market segments and, as it were, sow the seeds 
of the next financial crisis. 
The hype surrounding the “internet currency” Bitcoin also has to be seen in this context. I say 
“internet currency” in inverted commas, as Bitcoins do not nearly fulfil the essential criteria for 
a  currency  and  are  more  an  object  of  speculation,  the  risks  of  which  should  be  fully 
understood by investors. 
Over  the  long  term,  low  interest  rates  can  also  encourage  excessive  behaviour  in  the 
housing market. In actual fact, house prices in Germany have been showing a marked rise 
since 2010, especially in urban centres. However, it is not yet possible to speak of a broadly 
based bubble. At the moment, price increases are concentrated on urban property markets. 
Real estate prices in fashionable downtown areas are not an indication of what is happening 
in the rest of the country. Still, it is a development we have to keep an eye on. 
Claudio  Borio,  currently  Head  of  the  Monetary  and  Economic  Department  at  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) – in other words, the central banks’ bank – says of ultra-loose 
monetary  policy,  in  my  view  quite  correctly,  that  “The  longer  these  policies  and  measures 
last, the worse the cost-benefit outcome will be.” 
Monetary policymakers should therefore not only have an eye on the risks to price stability, 
which are indicated by the commonly used projection models, but also be aware of the fact 
that financial instability can also jeopardise price stability. 
The monetary pillar in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy attempts to identify longer-
term risks to price stability, although modelling the link between money or loans, on the one 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
hand,  and  the  inflation  rate,  on  the  other,  is  anything  but  easy,  especially  in  economically 
turbulent times. 
Monetary  policy,  however,  is  not  the  most  effective  instrument  for  responding  to  financial 
market crises. One major lesson of the crisis was that there were no instruments available to 
counter the looming, principally national financial market excesses in time. This gap is being 
closed by the macroprudential instruments. 
Ultimately, it is true to say that the causes of the crisis in the euro area cannot be eliminated 
with  the  resources  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  a  matter  for  politicians  to  overcome  the  crisis 
permanently  by  strengthening  the  forces  of  growth  and  freeing  monetary  policy  from  its 
difficult position. 
More than 90 years ago, Will Rogers said, “There have been three great inventions since the 
beginning of time: fire, the wheel, and central banking.” 
It  should  be  mentioned  that  Will  Rogers  was  a  humorist;  his  comment  was  probably  not 
meant as a compliment to central banks. I get the impression a little bit that some politicians 
think central banks hold the key to solving all pressing economic problems. 
Not so long ago, Raghuram Rajan, former Chief Economist at the IMF and current Governor 
of the Reserve Bank of India, claimed that central bankers nowadays enjoy the popularity of 
rock stars. 
Even though I think that is an exaggeration, it is reflection of the expectations that are now 
placed in central banks. I view this with a certain amount of concern, since the transfer of 
more  and  more  responsibility  can  jeopardise  central  banks’  independence.  However,  the 
experience of the 1970s and 1980s taught us that independence is a major prerequisite for 
central banks’ ability to fulfil their price stability mandate. 
The crisis in the euro area 
4. 
What  is  true  for  others  is  also  true  for  central  banks  –  exceptional  circumstances  justify 
exceptional measures. But with a little prudence, please. 
In  the  face  of  the  crisis,  the  Eurosystem  rolled  out  far-reaching  conventional  and 
unconventional measures to prevent an escalation of the crisis. Many of these measures had 
my support. 
But  it’s  certainly  no  secret  that  I  view  some  decisions  with  a  critical  eye.  In  my  opinion, 
purchasing bonds from crisis countries risks blurring the boundaries between monetary and 
fiscal policy. That might hinder the central bank’s long-term capacity to perform its mandate 
of  safeguarding  price  stability.  Blurring  policy  boundaries  in  this  manner  undermines  the 
fundamental  framework  of  monetary  union,  which  is  founded  on  individual  national 
responsibility and the principle of liability. 
It is undisputed in the ECB Governing Council that the Eurosystem’s crisis measures cannot 
replace  either  the  adjustment  measures  that  need  to  be  implemented  nationally  or  the 
essential reforms at the institutional level. 
The  peripheral  euro-area  countries  have  made  impressive  progress  in  adjusting  their 
economies  in  recent  years,  and  their  efforts  to  implement  structural  reforms  are  gradually 
bearing fruit. 
The peripheral countries have largely reduced their high current account deficits, and some 
are now running a surplus. Huge strides have been made in boosting price competitiveness, 
which  is  driving  exports  higher.  Apart  from  Italy,  the  peripheral  countries  have  seen  their 
national  unit  labour  costs  diminish  substantially.  Structural  budget  deficits  have  contracted 
sharply. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
All in all, it is safe to say that the adjustment process is in full swing, with some countries 
being further advanced than others. A leading group of countries is already within sight of the 
finishing line, while others still have quite a way to go. The crisis is not yet over for any of the 
peripheral countries. 
The high levels of unemployment across many countries undoubtedly paint a gloomy picture. 
But  the  jobless  figures  at  least  appear  to  be  levelling  off,  and  they  are  already  improving 
slightly in some countries. 
High levels of unemployment certainly owe something to the economic adjustment process. 
Yet the notion that the labour market would be better off without adjustment does not hold 
water.  The  reforms  form  the  basis  for  the  economic  turnaround  and  thus  for  an  upturn  in 
employment as well. 
Incidentally,  the  improvement  in  the  peripheral  countries’  current  account  positions  was 
mirrored by a drop in German surpluses with these countries. So it is misleading for Nobel 
Prize-winning  US  economist  Paul  Krugman  to  claim  that  “Germany  failed  to  make  any 
adjustment  at  all;  deficits  in  Spain,  Greece  and  elsewhere  shrank,  but  Germany’s  surplus 
didn’t.” 
Germany’s current account surplus of around 7% of GDP is still very high – that much is true. 
But  these  surpluses  are  now  being  generated  predominantly  outside  the  euro  area.  The 
current account surplus with other euro-area countries, meanwhile, is down by half compared 
to 2007. 
So Germany is very much playing a role in rectifying imbalances across the euro area. But 
spurring domestic demand in Germany – something which has been called for on numerous 
occasions, most recently by the US Treasury Secretary last week here in Berlin – would be 
of no great benefit, given the minimal impact it would have on the peripheral countries. That 
applies to credit-financed spending programmes and an expansionary wage policy in equal 
measure. 
Running a policy at the expense of fiscal credibility  would endanger Germany’s role as an 
anchor  of  stability  in  the  monetary  union,  and  would  thus  even  yield  a  counterproductive 
outcome. And as for higher wages, Bundesbank calculations indicate that raising wages by 
two percentage points above the level justified by improved labour productivity, for example, 
would indeed trigger an expansionary effect on demand to begin with. Over the longer term, 
however,  this  would  mostly  act  as  a  drag  on  German  enterprises’  competitiveness, 
particularly  benefiting  competitors  outside  the  euro  area  such  as  China  and  the  United 
States. At the end of the day, our European partners would probably be worse off. 
So it cannot be a matter of merely redistributing economic competitiveness throughout the 
euro area. It is the competitiveness of the euro area as a whole which needs to be stepped 
up. 
Reforming the operational framework of monetary union 
5. 
If the monetary union is to be placed on a sound long-term basis, the adjustment measures 
in the problem countries are a necessary condition but not a sufficient one. Only by restoring 
a harmonious balance in the institutional framework of monetary union will the euro area be 
able to put the crisis firmly behind it. 
In  its  current  configuration,  the  operational  framework  is  somewhat  skewed.  The  fiscal 
assistance  measures  have  put  elements  of  mutualised  liability  in  place,  but  the  attendant 
powers of intervention have not been granted to the community. 
What this means is that the relationship between liability and control has got out of kilter. And 
when that happens, there is a risk that prudent decision-making will go out of the window. 
This is a lesson which the financial crisis has taught us. As a case in point, banks could long 
rely on being bailed out with taxpayers’ money if they ran into difficulties. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
insolvency  regime  for  member  states  which  can  be 
If we are to maintain the balance between control and liability, we essentially need to opt for 
one  of  two  paths  towards  a  more  stable  monetary  union  framework.  Either  we  proceed 
towards  deeper  political  integration  –  a  fiscal  union,  say  –  or  we  develop  the  existing 
framework further and bolster the individual national responsibility of the individual member 
states as a constitutive feature of monetary union. 
However,  a fiscal  union must  not simply  mean  extending  mutualised  liability,  because  that 
would  merely  be  a transfer union.  A fiscal  union  that  is  worthy  of  the  name  would  instead 
require member states to transfer national sovereignty to the community level, say by giving 
the community the necessary right to intervene in the event of unsound public finances. 
Blending mutualised liability with decentralised decision-making powers on debt would be the 
wrong way forward. Policymakers might see this as an attractive “quick fix” for the crisis, but 
it  is  anything  but  a  sustainable  configuration  for  a  monetary  union.  In  fact,  it  provides  an 
additional incentive for member states to run up debt without providing any effective control 
instruments. So anyone can get into debt at someone else’s expense. 
As I just mentioned, only two options are sustainable. Returning to the founding principles of 
the Maastricht Treaty, or evolving into a fiscal union. 
The debate on choosing the right path towards a more stable monetary union – one which 
takes the people’s concerns seriously – is an important one. Nor is it a debate which fuels 
anti-European  sentiment,  but  one  which  lays  the  groundwork  for  popular  acceptance  and 
approval. Because I’m convinced that the people will ultimately only accept a union that is 
built on stability. 
At the end of the day, far-reaching political decisions will need to be taken, no matter which 
path we choose. For instance, a credible no bail-out regime would need to be backed by a 
codified 
implemented  without 
jeopardising the financial stability of the community as a whole. 
For example, three years ago, the Bundesbank proposed reforming the standardised terms 
and  conditions  for  sovereign  debt  with  the  aim  of  strengthening  investors’  individual 
responsibility, limiting the total liability for countries providing assistance and winning time for 
structural reforms. The Bundesbank suggested that a clause should be hard-wired into the 
terms  and  conditions  for  the  issuance  of  euro-area  government  bonds  that  would 
automatically  extend  the  maturity  of  a given  country's  bonds  by  three  years  if  that  country 
received loans from the ESM fund. 
Automatically extending bond maturities in this manner would buy time for crisis countries to 
resolve  their  problems  without  private  creditors  withdrawing  their  capital.  Thus,  it  would 
massively  reduce  the  funding  which  the  ESM  would  have  to  provide  –  and  which  the 
taxpayers  of  other  member  states  would  have  to  guarantee  –  to  the  level  of  net  new 
borrowing. It would buy time to gauge, with a higher degree of certainty, whether the country 
in  question  was  experiencing  solvency  or  liquidity  problems.  This  would  allow  a  better 
balance to be struck between liability and control.  
Now some might say that we have indeed strengthened centralised control mechanisms, and 
that  this  would  permit  at  least  a  degree  of mutualised  liability.  But  we  should  be  under  no 
illusions. It is true that “Brussels” has been given greater powers to police member states’ 
debt policies – by way of the reinforced Stability and Growth Pact, Fiscal Compact, European 
Semester etc – but when push comes to shove, member states still insist that they, and they 
alone, have the final say. 
Time will tell whether the new rules will have the desired binding effect. If anything, things 
have become more complex and less transparent, opening up scope for interpretation. The 
first cases in which the new rules have been applied suggest that this scope is being used 
rather generously. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
This  shows  that  the  willingness  to  cede  fiscal  policy  powers  to  Europe  on  the  part  of 
policymakers and the public at large in the member states simply isn’t strong enough to take 
the step towards greater integration and a bona fide fiscal union. All the more so, given that 
this would also necessitate far-reaching constitutional amendments in the member states. 
So  from  a  fiscal  policy  perspective,  it  looks  as  if  toughening  up  the  existing  Maastricht 
framework  is  the  more  realistic  way  forward.  In  the  long  run,  only  a  coherent  operational 
framework can reliably ensure that the monetary union is a union of stability. 
And  maintaining  a  stability  union  is  also  fundamentally  important  for  the  single  monetary 
policy. Otherwise, it might prove permanently ever more difficult for the Eurosystem to fulfil 
its mandate, particularly if it is increasingly being forced to act as the lender of last resort for 
governments. 
That’s  why  it’s  all  the  more  important  for  the  Eurosystem  to  eliminate  any  doubts  that  the 
central  bank’s  task  is  to  safeguard  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  sustainable  public 
finances are a prerequisite for price stability which the Eurosystem itself cannot bring about. 
This is where the onus is on governments and parliaments. 
On the European banking union 
6. 
Allow me to touch on one last point: the European banking union. 
The  crisis  has  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  vulnerability  of  the  financial  and  banking 
system  is  a key  weakness  of  the  euro  area. It must  be rendered  more  resilient  and  safer. 
This is where the banking union will make an important contribution. 
The banking union incorporates a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) as well as a single 
resolution mechanism. 
Banking supervision is to be based at the ECB and will be launched in the autumn of this 
year.  From  a  human  resources  perspective  alone,  this  project  is  a  Herculean  task.  Some 
1,000 new staff will have to be recruited over the course of the year. However, it is also a 
major  challenge  to  ensure  that  all  banks  in  the  euro  area  will,  in  future,  be  supervised 
according to the same high standards. 
Before the launch of the single supervisor, a comprehensive balance sheet assessment will 
be conducted for the 128 “significant” banks that will, in future, be supervised directly by the 
ECB. If this assessment reveals that recapitalisation is needed, this is to be remedied before 
the launch of the SSM, primarily using private funds. Or, if that is not possible and the bank 
has a sustainable business model, by the respective government. Ultimately, it is a question 
of who is responsible for past failings in banking supervision – and that was the individual 
member states. 
The second pillar of the banking union is the single resolution mechanism to deal with future 
bank  failures,  on  which  the  member  states  reached  a  basic  agreement  shortly  before 
Christmas.  For  European  banking  supervision  also  requires  European  banking  resolution; 
otherwise, control and liability would diverge.  
Where a bank fails, resolution costs must, as a general rule, in the future be borne first by 
shareholders and creditors. After that, a bank-financed resolution fund is to come into play, 
and only as a last resort are public funds to be used and the taxpayer made to pay. 
The fund is to be built up over a period of ten years and reach a volume of €55 billion. Before 
the 
financed  out  of  national 
“compartments”,  which  we  welcome  in  the  interests  of  a  balance  between  liability  and 
control. 
In  the  long  term,  Europeanisation  of  liability  with  a  centralised  supervisor  is  appropriate. 
However, as long as other factors with a key impact on the quality of bank balance sheets 
fully  capitalised,  bank  resolutions  would  be 
fund 
is 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
remain  under  national  control  –  for  instance  tax  legislation,  insolvency  rules  or  economic 
policy – it makes sense for some liability to stay at the national level. 
The  same  argument  can  also  be  applied  to  giving  precedence  to  the  use  of  national  tax 
funds for a transitional period. 
The  banking  union  makes  a  key  contribution  to  financial  stability  and  to  strengthening  the 
institutional  framework  of  the  monetary  union.  Another  essential  prerequisite  for  a  more 
stable monetary union is, however, stricter financial market regulation. 
More has been initiated in this area than is generally acknowledged. At the beginning of this 
year, the Basel III capital rules became effective in Europe, which will gradually improve the 
quantity  and  quality  of  banks’  capital.  Moreover,  rating  agencies  have  been  placed  under 
supervision,  inappropriate  compensation  systems  have  been  corrected,  computer-driven 
high-frequency  trading  subjected  to  stricter  regulation  and  trade  in  highly  speculative 
financial derivatives has been rendered more transparent and thus safer. 
In order to break the disastrous nexus of banks and governments, the regulatory treatment of 
government bonds will, however, also have to be changed. 
Currently,  banks  can  invest  unlimited  amounts  in  euro-area  government  bonds.  Under  the 
current  capital  rules,  a  zero  risk  weight  applies  to  these  assets,  which  means  that  these 
government  bonds  can  be  fully  funded  with  borrowed  money,  in  other  words,  they  do  not 
require any capital backing. This constitutes preferential treatment, and has been a factor in 
banks in several peripheral euro-area states, in particular, raising their exposure to domestic 
sovereign bonds during the crisis; they have thereby tied their fate to that of their national 
government. 
In  my  opinion,  credit  ceilings  and  risk-based  capital  backing  would  be  a  sensible  way  of 
breaking the nexus – that would basically mean applying similar rules to those for bank loans 
to private-sector debtors. Such rules would also promote bank lending to enterprises. 
Support for this proposal is growing, its logic is compelling, but implementation is probably 
not on the cards for 2014, and I fear that Berlin Brandenburg Airport may be up and running 
first.  In  the  longer  term,  however,  such  regulations  are,  in  my  opinion,  an  indispensable 
prerequisite for a stable monetary union and a healthy financial system. 
Conclusion 
7. 
Ladies and gentlemen  
Considerable progress has already been made towards resolving the crisis, but there is still a 
long way to go. The aim must be a more stable financial system and a more crisis-resistant 
monetary union. 
Important strategic decisions will again have to be taken in 2014, and it remains to be hoped 
that  far-sighted  agreements  will  be  reached.  Financial  market  regulation  remains  on  the 
agenda, as do further structural reforms in the peripheral countries. In Germany, politicians 
should be careful not to jeopardise the achievements of the reform policies. The good state 
of the German economy can be attributed, in good part, to the structural reforms of the past 
decade. 
Institutional  reform  of  the  monetary  union  must  continue  apace,  with  the  objective  of 
establishing  stable  long-term  foundations.  And  in  terms  of  monetary  policy  decisions,  the 
needle  of  the  compass  should  point  clearly  in  the  direction  of  long-term  price  stability;  the 
risks associated with the current policy must be taken into consideration; the central banks 
must not be overburdened. 
Every issue of the Tagesspiegel features the motto “rerum cognoscere causas” on the front 
page. Roughly translated that means to learn the causes of things or, a little less literally, to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
get to the bottom of things. I hope I have done some justice to this motto. However, we will 
have the opportunity of exploring these issues in greater detail in the discussion to follow. 
Thank you for listening. I look forward to the discussion. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
