Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s economic activity, prices, and monetary policy – 
relationships between the output gap, prices, and wages 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders in Okinawa (held in Naha), 29 May 2014. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good  morning,  everyone.  It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  visit  Okinawa 
Prefecture and meet with local representatives here. I am really looking forward to learning 
from you about this region through an exchange of views. I would also like to express my 
sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan's Naha Branch. 
Let me briefly provide an outline of my speech. First, I would like to talk about the Bank's 
baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices in Japan for the projection 
period from fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2016, in line with the April 2014 Outlook for Economic 
Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report).  Next,  I  would  like  to  shed  light  on  the 
concept of aggregate supply and demand balance (hereafter the “output gap”) and explain 
my view of how that is related to prices and wages. Afterward, I look forward to hearing your 
candid opinions about the contents of my speech as well as your thoughts about the situation 
facing the local economy. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
II. 
I will begin by describing the current condition of Japan’s economic activity and prices, the 
Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices (the baseline scenario) based on the Outlook 
Report, followed by the upside and downside risks to that baseline scenario. My views will be 
also touched upon. After that, I would like to explain the Bank’s communication policy, with 
some references to improvements made in the Outlook Report. 
Outlook for economic activity and upside and downside risks 
A. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, although the subsequent 
decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike has 
been observed. In the Outlook Report, the Bank revised downward its projected economic 
growth rate for fiscal 2013 – as compared with the projections made in October 2013 and 
January 2014 – owing mainly to sluggish export performance. However, a virtuous cycle of 
economic activity has been operating steadily since domestic demand has been firm.  
Weak  exports  reflect  a  shift  in  production  locations  abroad,  a  decline  in  Japanese  firms’ 
international competitiveness, and weak recovery in the global economy. In addition, there 
were temporary factors, such as deceleration in U.S. economic activity due to the adverse 
effects  of  the  unusually  severe  winter  weather  and  firms’  stance  of  placing  priority  on 
domestic  shipments  in  response  to  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike.  In  this  respect,  I  raised  doubts  about  the  Bank’s  overall  risk 
assessment  regarding  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  in  its 
October  2013  Outlook  Report.  The  Bank  concluded  that  upside  and  downside  risks  were 
“balanced,”  but  I  proposed  that  it  should  mention  that  attention  should  be  paid  to  the 
downside  risks,  mainly  because  there  was  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  the 
recovery in exports. I think that the cause of my concern has in fact materialized. 
Meanwhile,  domestic  demand  remains 
labor-intensive 
nonmanufacturing,  supported  by  public  investment,  housing  investment,  and  private 
consumption,  thereby  tightening  labor  market  conditions  and  also  effectively  wiping  out  a 
sense  of  excessiveness  in  production  capacity.  Taking  these  facts  into  account,  the  Bank 
led  mainly  by 
firm.  This 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
judges  that  the  economy  has  been  recovering  steadily  in  line  with  the  Bank’s  baseline 
scenario.  
According  to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  economic  activity, 
domestic  demand  is  likely  to  maintain  firmness.  Exports  are  expected  to  increase,  albeit 
moderately,  as  overseas  economies  particularly  advanced  economies  are  expected  to 
moderately  increase  their  growth  rates.  Thus,  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income, 
and spending is likely to be maintained (Chart 1). Meanwhile, the accommodative monetary 
environment  will  continue  to  support  economic  activity.  Moreover,  firms’  and  households’ 
medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  are  expected  to  rise  moderately  against  the 
backdrop of progress in the government’s growth strategy, as well as firms’ initiatives toward 
improving  productivity  and  their  tapping  of  potential  domestic  and  external  demand. 
Therefore, the economy is likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential as a trend 
throughout the projection period. 
My  outlook  for  economic  activity  is  more  or  less  in  line  with  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario. 
However, my projections of the real GDP growth rates are somewhat lower than the median 
of the Bank’s Policy Board members’ forecasts throughout the projection period. The rate of 
economic growth  is  expected to temporarily  turn  negative  in  April–June  2014  owing  to  the 
adverse impact of the consumption tax hike. But subsequently, the growth rate will likely rise 
at a very moderate pace, and will likely remain above its potential growth rate throughout the 
projection period. 
The  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  regarding  the 
economy  mentioned  in  the  Outlook  Report  include  the  following:  (1)  developments  in 
exports; (2) the effects of the consumption tax hikes; (3) firms’ and households’ medium- to 
long-term growth expectations; and (4) fiscal sustainability in the medium to long term. The 
Bank assesses that these risks are balanced as a whole. 
As for my own overall risk assessment related to the economy, the downside risks remain 
somewhat greater than the upside ones, although the degree of downside risks has lessened 
to some extent compared to October 2013 and January 2014. First, there is the risk that the 
rate of increase in exports will be more moderate than projected. There is a possibility that 
the  U.S.  economic  recovery  pace  will  be  slower  than  projected  as  a  result  of  sluggish 
performance in the housing sector and relatively slow recovery in the employment conditions 
for long-term unemployed workers and involuntary part-time workers. Tepid performance in 
emerging economies, disinflation in the euro area, and geopolitical problems should also be 
monitored  closely.  Second,  there  is  a  risk  of  domestic  private  consumption  becoming 
weaker. Since it is estimated that the rate of nominal wage increases will remain below the 
CPI-based  inflation  (including  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes)  throughout  the 
projection period, it is possible that real income may decrease and that consumer sentiment 
as well as households’ medium- to long-term expectations for growth and income may not 
improve.  
On this front, I disagreed four times in row with the Bank’s risk assessment, which appeared 
in the public statements released after the Monetary Policy Meetings (MPMs) held in January 
through  early  April  this  year.  This  disagreement  reflects  my  concerns  that  the  public 
statements referred only to developments in overseas economies as a risk factor, and did not 
mention the  pace  of  improvement  in the  employment  and  income  situation  in  Japan,  even 
though  it  was  pointed  out  in  the  October  2013  Outlook  Report.  However,  the  April  2014 
Outlook Report clearly stipulates the effects of the consumption tax hikes as a risk factor by 
almost reinserting the related description included in the October 2013 Outlook Report. The 
current report also refers to consumer sentiment as an additional new factor (as well as the 
employment  and  income  situation  and  developments  in  prices)  with  regard  to  the 
transmission  channel  of  how  the  consumption  tax  hikes  may  affect  private  consumption.  I 
take these points as indications that my concerns were confirmed and shared by the Policy 
Board.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Outlook for prices and upside and downside risks 
B. 
The current price developments show that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all 
items  less  fresh  food)  has  been  expanding,  and  recently  has  been  around  1¼  percent.1 
Major factors determining inflation rates are the output gap, medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations,  and  import  prices.  Developments  in  these  factors  reveal  that  the  output  gap 
has  been  improving  and  appears  to  have  reached  around  the  past  long-term  average  of 
about 0 percent. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear to have been rising on 
the whole. As for import prices, upward pressure – mainly from the rise in energy prices – 
has already begun to weaken somewhat. 
According to the Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for prices, the year-on-year rate 
of increase in the CPI (excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes) is likely to 
be around the current 1¼ percent for some time, follow a rising trend again from the second 
half of fiscal 2014, and “reach around 2 percent around the middle of the projection period.” 
Thereafter,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  gradually  shift  to  a  growth  path  that  sustains 
such inflation in a stable manner (Chart 2). Over the same period, as the adverse impact of 
the consumption tax hike wanes, the output gap will continue to improve thereby providing an 
upward pressure on prices, while medium- to long-term inflation expectations will remain on 
a moderate rising trend on the whole. The upward pressure arising mainly from the rise in 
imported  energy  prices  is  likely  to  wane  around  this  summer,  reflecting  developments  in 
international commodity prices and weakening lagged effects of the yen’s depreciation.  
Regarding my own outlook for prices for fiscal 2014, I project that the year-on-year rate of 
increase in the CPI may somewhat decelerate by this summer owing to the declining impact 
of  energy  prices  and  the  base  effect  from  fiscal  2013,  although  it  should  remain  at  above 
1 percent. The rate of inflation will then begin to rise again from October–December 2014. 
However, this will be a gradual move given that it will likely take some time for households’ 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations to show a steady rise – an indicator implies that 
they are currently remaining roughly constant (Chart 3). Thus, the rate of inflation will likely 
be more moderate than the Bank’s baseline scenario. 
My  outlook  for  the  period  during  and  beyond  fiscal  2015  is  that  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI will reach an average of approximately 1½ percent or a little higher in 
fiscal 2015, and the inflation rate of 2 percent is likely to be reached toward the end of the 
projection  period.  Thereafter,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  gradually  shift  to  a  growth 
path that sustains such inflation in a stable manner. Over the past year (when the projection 
period  was  from  fiscal  2013  through  fiscal  2015),  my  outlook  was  that  “the  rate  of  CPI 
inflation will rise closer to 2 percent toward the end of fiscal 2015” and thus I considered that 
it  was  barely  in  line  with  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  –  described  as  “reaching  around 
2 percent toward the latter half of the projection period” of fiscal 2013 through fiscal 2015. 
This is why I did not oppose the baseline scenario in the past. However, with the projection 
period extended to fiscal 2016, I considered that the description of the price outlook should 
clarify the timing when the Bank’s “price stability target of 2 percent” will be achieved, rather 
than  providing  an  expression  –  namely,  “around  2  percent”  –  that  contains  a  degree  of 
latitude.2 
                                                
1  Assuming  that  the  rise  in  the  tax  is  fully  passed  on  to  prices  of  all  taxable  items,  the  direct  impact  of  the 
consumption tax hike from 5 to 8 percent in April 2014 is estimated to raise the CPI (all items less fresh food) 
by  2  percentage  points  in  fiscal  2014,  because  some  items  will  not  be  affected.  The  impact  in  April  is 
estimated to be 1.7 percentage points; this is because the former tax rate of 5 percent was applied to some 
public electricity and water charges in that month.  
2  At the MPM held on April 30, 2014, I submitted a proposal against the expression of the baseline scenario of 
the  outlook  for  prices.  My  proposed  new  expression  was  that  “the  inflation  rate  of  2  percent  is  likely  to  be 
reached toward the end of the projection period as the Bank continues with QQE, aiming to achieve the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent,  as  long  as  it  is  necessary  for maintaining  that  target  in  a  stable  manner.”  This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  regarding  prices 
mentioned  in  the  Outlook  Report  cover  the  following:  (1)  developments  in  firms’  and 
households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations; (2) developments in the output gap; 
(3) the responsiveness of inflation to the output gap; and (4) developments in import prices. 
The risks to the price outlook are assessed as being largely balanced as a whole. 
My own overall assessment on risks to prices is that the risks remain tilted somewhat to the 
downside, although the degree of such downside risks has declined moderately compared 
with October 2013 and January 2014. The path toward achieving the 2 percent target seems 
broadly on track so far. However, there is uncertainty with regard to “the timing for achieving 
2  percent”  and  thereafter  “the  timing  to  gradually  shift  to  a  growth  path  that  sustains 
2 percent in a stable manner.” In particular, I suggest that clear judgment on the timing to 
achieve 2 percent in a stable manner can be made only after examining the effects of the 
second round of the consumption tax hike. 
My aforementioned outlook for economic activity and prices assumes that quantitative and 
qualitative monetary easing (QQE) will continue during and beyond 2015 under the current 
framework.  Under  this  current  framework,  the  Bank  will  continue  with  QQE,  aiming  to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent as long as it is necessary for maintaining this 
target in a stable manner. What is important is that the Bank is conducting monetary easing 
with the aim of achieving 2 percent inflation in a stable manner with sustainable economic 
growth,  rather  than  merely  achieving  2  percent  in  a  specific  year  and  failing  to  meet  the 
target in subsequent years. Under the Bank’s so-called flexible inflation targeting framework, 
I  maintain  the  view  that  it  will  likely  take  longer  than  “two  years”  to  achieve  the  2  percent 
inflation – in order to avoid imposing excessive  burdens on firms and households. Such a 
path seems desirable for Japan’s economy and is likely to lead smoothly to the next phase of 
maintaining 2 percent in a stable manner. I will  explain later my  views on the path toward 
achieving 2 percent with some background rationale. 
The Bank’s communication policy  
C. 
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to report that several changes were made in 
the  Outlook  Report  in  terms  of  improving  reader  friendliness.  The  latest  report  now  has  a 
“summary”  section.  This  section  provides  the  structure  of  the  report  as  well  as  a  brief 
explanation on the examination from “two perspectives” in the context of meeting the price 
stability target: the baseline scenario (first perspective); and upside and downside risks to the 
baseline scenario (second perspective). Regarding these two perspectives, I submitted two 
different proposals in April and October last year suggesting revisions to the text to make the 
report  easier  to  understand  for  the  public.  On  this,  I  am  glad  to  note  that  my  proposal  in 
October  was  incorporated  in  the  latest  report.  This  revision  also  reflected  my  repeated 
suggestion over the past years to insert a brief summary of the report. The Bank is now keen 
to  steadily  improve  its  communication,  albeit  at  a  rather  gradual  rate,  particularly  toward 
promoting the reader friendliness of its public documents. 
These improvements can be considered a good example of the Bank achieving its intention 
to  strengthen  its  external  communication:  this  was  incorporated  in  the  Bank’s  Strategic 
Priorities  for  Fiscal  2014–2018,  released  in  late  March  2014,  which  describes  the  basic 
principles of the Bank’s business operations and organization. One of its key features is that 
the  Bank  expressed  that  it  will  engage  in  Bank-wide  efforts  to  steadily  fulfill  its  mission  of 
                                                                                                                                                   
expression  seems  more  appropriate  not  only  because  it  reflects  my  own  outlook,  but  also  because  it  is  a 
better  description  of  the  Bank's  baseline  scenario.  Regarding  the  latter,  the  median  of  the  Policy  Board 
members’ forecasts of the inflation rate is 1.9 percent for fiscal 2015 and 2.1 percent for fiscal 2016; so the 
projected  year  of  achieving  “2  percent”  is  fiscal  2016.  Given  that  the  Bank  is  committed  to  achieving 
“2 percent,”  it  is  better  to  provide  a  clear  focus  on  the  timing  when  2  percent  will  be  reached,  rather  than 
providing an expression of “around 2 percent.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent; the document gave priority to strengthening 
external communication to ensure broad public confidence. This new move reflects my call to 
place  greater  emphasis  on  external  communication  –  stressed  ever  since  I  assumed  my 
position  as  a  Policy  Board  member.  Especially  in  light  of  achieving  the  2  percent  target, 
public  understanding  is  indispensable.  Concrete  actions  specified  in  the  report  include  the 
following: (1) making full use of information technology, for example through improvements to 
the  Bank’s  web  site,  and  enhancing  the  in-house  tours  of  its  Head  Office  and  branches; 
(2) strengthening  the  Bank’s  communication  with  various  people,  firms,  and  economic 
organizations;  (3)  publishing  the  findings  from  its  research  and  analysis  in  effective  ways; 
and (4) supporting the activities of the Central Council for Financial Services Information and 
associated committees to promote financial literacy among the public. Related departments 
of  the  Bank  have  already  prepared  detailed  plans  to  put  the  new  strategic  priorities  into 
practice. Accordingly, the Bank will continue to  do its best to implement the priority issues 
expressed in the Strategic Priorities.  
Output gap in Japan 
III. 
A  shortage  of  demand  for  goods  and  services  relative  to  supply  capacity  since  the  global 
financial crisis has been a major cause of the sustained mild deflation in Japan. This situation 
has recently improved as economic recovery has continued. Today, I would like to explain 
my view on the process of achieving the 2 percent target, with a focus on the “output gap” as 
a  key  word  for  understanding  the  background  of  the  sustained  mild  deflation  and  recent 
improvement. 
Concepts of the output gap and its performance  
A. 
The output gap is a term that refers to the difference between aggregate demand and supply 
capacity. Usually, actual GDP is used as a proxy for aggregate demand, and potential GDP 
as  a  proxy  for  supply  capacity.  The  Bank  estimates  potential  GDP  as the  production  level 
achieved under the current economic structure with an average utilization level of labor and 
capital  stock.  Generally,  whether  a  country’s  economic  condition  is  in  an  upturn  or  a 
downturn can be judged on the basis of the level of aggregate demand relative to the level of 
supply  capacity.  If  aggregate  demand  exceeds  supply  capacity  with  an  average  utilization 
level  of  labor  and  capital  stock,  excess  demand  prevails,  and  the  sign  of  the  output  gap 
becomes  positive.  The  converse  is  true  for  a  negative  sign  of  the  output  gap,  implying  a 
stagnant economic activity level. Meanwhile, a change toward this positive territory implies 
upward  pressure  on  prices,  and  a  change  toward  negative  territory  implies  downward 
pressure  on  prices.  In  Japan,  the  rate  of  real  GDP  growth  has  exceeded  that  of  potential 
growth since fiscal 2013, thereby contributing to a significant improvement in the output gap.  
Now,  let  us  take  a  look  at  some  indicators  related  to  the  output  gap.  Chart  4  exhibits 
(1) the estimates of the output gap by the Bank and (2) the composite indicator in the Bank’s 
quarterly  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan).  The  Bank’s 
estimate  reports  an  improvement  from  about  minus  1  percent  in  July–September  2013  to 
nearly 0 percent in October-December 2013, suggesting that the output gap is more or less 
balanced.3 Meanwhile, the Tankan composite indicator – the proxy for the output gap based 
on  the  extent  of  labor  and  capital  stock  utilized  –  is  built  as  the  weighted  average  of  the 
diffusion  indices  (DIs)  for  the  employment  conditions  and  production  capacity  from  the 
Bank’s  Tankan.  Positive  figures  of  the  composite  indicator  signify  that  firms  find  that  their 
employment and production capacity are on the whole excessive, and negative figures mean 
a shortage. Chart 4 shows that the indicator turned negative in 2013, pointing to a shortage 
                                                
3  According to the Cabinet Office, the output gap is estimated to be about minus 1.5 percent for July-September 
2013, about minus 1.6 percent for October-December 2013, and about minus 0.3 percent for January-March 
2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
in employment and production capacity. It should be noted that the composite indicator gives 
equal  weight  to  respondent  firms.  Given  that  the  Tankan  respondents  are  dominated  by 
small  firms,  which  face  a  shortage  in  employment  and  production  capacity,  the  Tankan 
composite indicator tends to reflect such a shortage more strongly than the Bank’s estimate 
of  the  output  gap.  Taking  these  factors  into  account,  it  is  fair  to  judge  the  output  gap  as 
currently being more or less balanced.  
Interpretation of output gap estimates 
B. 
There is a high degree of uncertainty with respect to estimates of the output gap. Care thus 
needs to be exercised in its interpretation – as evident in the fact that the output gap estimate 
by the Cabinet Office is in larger negative territory than that by the Bank for the same period. 
In this regard, I would like to point out four issues regarding the Bank’s estimation method of 
the output gap. 
First,  estimation  errors  arise  from  different  estimation  methodologies  and  different  data 
sources. Although actual GDP data are available from the “National Accounts” compiled by 
the Cabinet Office, there are no official data on potential GDP, and therefore institutions and 
researchers have to make their own estimates from various data on, for example, labor and 
capital  stock.  One  distinctive  feature  of  the  Bank’s  estimate  is  that  the  Bank  derives  its 
estimate of the potential growth rate by first determining the output gap and then applying the 
actual  GDP  growth  data  (Chart  5).4  Conversely,  the  Cabinet  Office  first  estimates  the 
potential  growth  rate  and  then  derives  the  output  gap  by  applying  the  actual  GDP  growth 
data. Both estimates point to an improvement in the output gap from a long-term perspective. 
Second,  different  estimates  on  the  rate  of  potential  economic  growth  may  lead  to 
differences in output gap estimates. The Bank estimates Japan’s potential growth rate to be 
around  0.5  percent,  while  the  Cabinet  Office  estimates  this  to  be  about  0.7  percent.  The 
difference may have suggested a greater improvement in the output gap in the case of the 
Bank’s  estimate.5  Moreover,  according  to  the  Bank’s  estimate,  the  decline  in  Japan’s 
potential growth appears to have occurred since around the time of the global financial crisis. 
This may be attributable to the manner that the demographic trend and a decrease of capital 
stock due to physical disposal and wear are reflected in the estimate. 
Third,  the  impact  of  tightening  labor  market  conditions  can  also  be  captured  using  the 
Bank’s output gap estimate. The output gap can be divided into labor input gap and capital 
input gap on the basis of resource utilization – just as with the Tankan composite indicator 
(Chart 6). If the labor input gap is positive, actual labor input exceeds average labor input, 
which indicates a labor shortage; if the labor input gap is negative, the converse is true. The 
labor  input  gap  had  already  turned  positive  by  October–December  2013.  This  reflects  a 
continuous decline in average labor input, which was caused by a decrease in the number of 
employed  people  and  labor  hours.  This  trend  has  been  augmented  since  2012  by  the 
retirement  of  the  baby  boomer  generation  reaching  65  years  old.  The  labor  shortage  was 
exacerbated  further  by  the  rapid  economic  recovery  since  2013  driven  by  labor–intensive 
nonmanufacturing.  This  observation  is  consistent  with  the  following:  (1)  the  Tankan’s 
employment  conditions  DI,  which  had  already  shifted  to  one  of  shortage;  (2)  the 
unemployment  rate  of  3.6  percent  in  February  2014,  which  approached  the  structural 
unemployment  rate  of  around  3.5  percent;  and  (3)  the  positive  growth  trends  in  wages 
(Charts 7 through 9). 
                                                
4  The Bank applies the Hodrick-Prescott filter method to smoothen the rate of the total factor productivity (TFP) 
growth. Thus, there is no one-to-one relationship between the estimated rate of potential growth (Chart 5) and 
that derived from the output gap and the actual GDP growth data. 
5  Although  different  methodologies  and  data  are  used,  both  the  Bank  and  Cabinet  Office  adopt  the  Cobb-
Douglas production function approach and estimate the rate of potential growth by dividing into labor, capital 
stock, and Solow residual (TFP). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fourth, the Bank’s estimate also reflects a rising shortage in production capacity mainly 
in  nonmanufacturing,  as  shown  in  a  rapid  improvement  in  its  capital  input  gap.  Chart  6 
indicates  that  the  capital  input gap  is  presently  in  the  vicinity  of  zero. The  gap  was  nearly 
closed by a rise in the capital utilization ratio; this was achieved by economic recovery while 
business  fixed  investment  has  remained  sluggish  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  In 
particular,  the  construction  sector  faces  a  shortage  in  production  equipment  and  facilities. 
Moreover,  a  deficiency  is  also  felt  in  information  and  communication  services,  reflecting 
growing  use  of  information  technology  by  the  services  sector,  and  in  the  distribution  and 
retail sectors. These movements are consistent with the Tankan’s production capacity DI for 
nonmanufacturing,  which  points  to  a  shortage  in  production  capacity  (Chart  10).  In 
manufacturing,  the  capital  utilization  ratio  also  improved  rapidly  when  firms  faced  a  front-
loaded  increase  in  domestic  demand  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  (Chart  11).  Some 
firms had to postpone exports in order to prioritize domestic demand. 
C. 
Will the balanced output gap lead to immediate economic growth constraints? 
Now that the output gap is almost balanced in Japan, the next issue is whether this condition 
will impose a constraint on economic growth by creating a shortage in labor and capital stock 
across nearly all sectors and firms. I would first like to touch on this issue from the short- and 
medium-term point of view. 
Because the balanced output gap simply means that aggregate demand is roughly equal to a 
long-term  average  supply  capacity,  this  would  not  immediately  lead  to  growth  constraints. 
However, if a firm encounters a rapid temporary increase in demand – as was the case with 
the front-loaded increase in domestic demand prior to the consumption tax hike in April 2014 
– it may find difficulty in immediately hiring sufficient numbers of workers through want ads or 
in quickly reassigning existing production capacity and employees to specific production lines 
and services. This may adversely affect other firms, for example, in being unable to provide 
parts  and  materials  or  having  insufficient  delivery  cars  and  drivers.  This  condition  actually 
occurred  among  some  firms  and  sectors  in  Japan  until  March  2014,  but  it  seems  to  have 
improved  somewhat  since  April.  The  output  gap  therefore  seems  to  have  improved  in 
January–March 2014 and the opposite in April–June. 
If  exports  begin  to  rise  at  a  moderate  pace,  there  will  be  room  for  manufacturing  to  raise 
production without causing a severe labor shortage, owing to higher labor productivity than 
nonmanufacturing. The manufacturing industry, which faced declining employment from the 
early 1990s, managed to expand production by improving labor productivity until the global 
financial crisis. In addition, business fixed investment in manufacturing has been increasing 
gradually,  and  if  the  rate  of  increase  exceeds  that  of  physical  disposal  and  depreciation 
costs, this will likely further raise capital stock and supply capacity (Chart 5). 
Moreover,  improvement  in  skills  and  proficiency  of  workers  will  also  contribute  to  an 
improvement  in  labor  productivity  and  accordingly,  if  a  mismatch  between  supply  and 
demand  of  labor  is  reduced,  this  may  open  the  possibility  of  lowering  the  structural 
unemployment rate. The rate was generally in the range of 2–3 percent in the 1980s; it rose 
to a peak of above 4 percent in the early 2000s before dropping moderately to the current 
level  of  around  3.5  percent  (Chart  8).  The  structural  unemployment  rate  appears  to  have 
risen on the backdrop of slow labor supply responses in adjusting to changes in the domestic 
demand structure driven by the progressive aging of the population and a steady decline in 
public investment. 
Over  the  Bank’s  projection  period,  the  potential  growth  rate  is  expected  to  rise  from  the 
current level of around 0.5 percent toward around 1 percent. This will occur mainly through 
an accumulation of capital stock, a moderate increase in the labor force participation ratio for 
women  and  the  elderly,  and  further  improvement  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP).  At  the 
same  time,  an  economic  growth  rate  exceeding  the  potential  growth  rate  will  expand  the 
output  gap  into  the  positive  territory,  mainly  in  fiscal  2014  and  fiscal  2015.  The  greater 
positive  output  gap  will  promote  business  fixed  investment  and  an  extension  of  working 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
hours by part-time workers, thereby helping to raise further the potential growth rate. It is also 
expected that greater efforts will be made by the government to update existing institutions 
and tax systems aimed at promoting full-time employment, settling the issues of children on 
waiting lists for nursery schools, and promoting economic growth strategies.  
To  summarize,  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate  has  declined  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global 
financial crisis, partly owing to the sluggish economic growth. Decline in the potential growth 
rate  is  commonly  observed  among  other  advanced  countries.  Going  forward,  Japan’s 
potential growth rate is expected to gradually rise toward about 1 percent, while the actual 
economic growth will exceed the potential growth rate. The output gap will be expected to 
improve from summer 2014 through fiscal 2015, and remain in the positive thereafter.  
Medium- to long-term challenges implied by the output gap 
D. 
I  will  now  touch  on  the  medium-  to  long-term  challenges  implied  by  developments  in  the 
output  gap.  The  pace  of  aging  will  accelerate  in  Japan,  and  the  labor  shortage  will  likely 
intensify despite an increase in the labor force participation ratio for women and the elderly 
as well as in the number of full-time workers. Given that the elderly tend to increase demand 
for  medical  and  nursery  care,  trips,  and  social  expenditure,  the  economic  structure  will 
probably  be  tilted  further  to  labor-intensive  nonmanufacturing.  This  suggests  that  labor-
saving initiatives  will be  needed in nonmanufacturing through the active use of information 
technology and robotics as well as promoting a business-friendly environment that supports 
competition,  efficiency,  and  corporate  governance.  At  the  same  time,  comprehensive 
measures to deal with the declining population will become important. 
Output gap, inflation expectations, and their relations to prices and wages 
IV. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  explain  my  views  regarding  two  important  key  words  in  achieving 
2 percent  price  stability  target  –  the  output  gap  and  inflation  expectations  –  and  how  they 
relate to price and wage developments. 
Relations between the output gap and prices: the Phillips curve 
A. 
An improvement in the output gap tends to exert upward pressure on prices. Such a positive 
relationship  between  the  rate  of  change  in  prices  and  the  output  gap  may  be  expressed 
using the Phillips curve. Chart 12 exhibits Phillips curves based on the CPI (for all items less 
fresh food) and on the CPI (for all items less food and energy) as variables for price changes 
on  the  vertical  axis.  Both  Phillips  curves  were  drawn  based  on  two  observation  periods: 
(1) from 1998 Q1 to 2012 Q3 (from the period with a decline in wages to the period prior to 
the sharp depreciation of the yen and stock price hike); and (2) from 2012 Q4 to 2014 Q1 
(from the period of the sharp depreciation of the yen and stock price hike to the present). 
The slope of the Phillips curve based on the CPI (for all items less fresh food) appears 
to  have  steepened  sharply  together  with  a  rise  in  the  intercept  since  October–December 
2012. Among these changes related to the curve, the steepening of the slope indicates that 
prices are more prone to rise than before in response to a similar degree of change in the 
output gap (I will explain about the intercept later). This occurs when firms find it easier to 
raise  their  sales  prices  or  pass  their  input  costs  on  to  their  sales  prices.  The  recent 
movement mainly reflects the sharp rise in imported prices as a result of a rapid and sharp 
depreciation of the yen, that has accompanied a corresponding rise in the prices of energy 
and other goods and services (Chart 13).  
In contrast, in the case of the Phillips curve based on the CPI (for all items less food and 
energy), a steepening of the slope is not clearly observed. This is attributable to the lesser 
impact  of  the  yen’s  depreciation:  it  is  because  this  CPI  omits  food  and  energy  prices  that 
account for about 30 percent of the weight of the CPI (for all items less fresh food). In this 
sense, further steepening of the slope is expected to occur for the Phillips curve based on 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the CPI (for all items less food and energy) in order to achieve the 2 percent target. However, 
it seems that this process will take some time. 
Changes in firms’ deflation-oriented price-setting behavior 
B. 
It  is  known  that  the  Phillips  curve  for  Japan  has  flattened  since  the  late  1990s.  One 
contributing  factor  for  this  has  been  the  decline  in  the  frequency  of  price  adjustments. 
Reflecting the sluggish economy, discount price setting by competitors, and the preference 
for lower prices by clients, firms were discouraged from raising their sales prices in the face 
of  concerns  over  a  possible  loss  of  market  share  –  even  though  a  rise  in  production  cost 
occurred. Currently, the situation signals the possibility that the price-setting environment of 
firms  may  be  improving.  As  economic  recovery  continues  and  the  inflation  rate  steadily 
increases at a moderate pace, the frequency of price adjustments increases, and thereby, 
the slope of the Phillips curve will likely steepen gradually. In this regard, the sharp increase 
in imported prices and the consumption tax hike appear to have provided opportunities for 
firms  to  raise  their  sales  prices  collectively.  Some  firms  have  begun  to  amend  their  past 
price-setting  behavior.  They  have  managed  to  continue  increasing  demand  –  even  with 
higher sales prices – by offering higher value-added or innovative goods and services.  
An  increase  in  the  number  of  such  firms  may  promote  further  steepening  of  the  Phillips 
curve.  However,  the  increase  is  likely  to  be  gradual  –  as  evidenced  by  the  presence  of 
divergent  behavior  among  firms,  some  of  which  are  still  setting  lower  sales  prices  in  stiff 
competition.  This  may  suggest  that  it  is  a  challenging  task  to  change  the  price-setting 
behavior of firms, as demand has been decreasing amid the declining population, and it will 
take place gradually through firms’ greater efforts to develop innovative business models and 
their greater growth expectations. 
Developments in services prices will play an important role in achieving the 2 percent price 
stability target. In the past, the frequency of price adjustments was highest among energy-
related  products  and food, followed  by  goods;  the  prices  of  services  were  rarely  adjusted. 
With  energy-related  products,  food,  and  goods,  the  sales  prices  need  to  be  adjusted 
frequently  in  response  to  changes  in  related  imported  commodities,  materials,  and  input 
costs. Conversely, the prices of general services – accounting for about 40 percent of the 
components of the CPI (all items less fresh food) – were barely changed: the year-on-year 
rate of change was in a narrow range of plus 0.8 percent to minus 0.6 percent throughout the 
2000s (Chart 13). Since October–December 2013, however, the prices of general services, 
such as those in the food services industry, have begun to rise due in part to the effects of 
the  depreciation  of  the  yen.  I  suggest  a  key  question  is  whether  the  rising  trend  will 
continue.6  
Relationship between prices and wages 
C. 
Naturally,  the  next  question  is  why  services  prices  have  hardly  been  adjusted.  In  general, 
services  are  labor  intensive,  and  so  wages  account  for  a  greater  weight  in  the  production 
cost. For this reason, sluggish wage developments seem to have contributed to reducing the 
need to adjust services prices, although this causal relationship may have occurred in two 
ways. 
Over  the  period  since  the  2000s,  changes  in  cash  earnings  have  remained  at  around 
0 percent, and there appears to be a positive correlation between changes in cash earnings 
and  changes  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  food  and  energy)  (Chart  14).  Nonetheless,  such  a 
                                                
6  House rent and imputed rent, which account for about 20 percent of the components of the CPI (all items less 
fresh  food),  are  also  important  determinants  of  the  price  developments  in  Japan.  These  rents  may  be 
underestimated  in  the  CPI  due  to  the  low  frequency  of  price  adjustment  and  to  the  absence  of  the  quality 
adjustment on the age of buildings and earthquake-resistant structure. Imputed rent is included in the CPI and 
PCE deflator in the United States, while it is excluded from the HICP in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
in 
the  “levels”  as  opposed 
to  year-on-year  changes  (Chart  16). 
positive  correlation  does  not  necessarily  hold  if  the  observation  is  made  on  the  industrial 
level  (Chart  15).  This  can  be  understood  more  intuitively  by  taking  a  look  at  their 
development 
In 
manufacturing, for example, the prices of goods (reflected in the CPI) have declined  while 
cash earnings of full-time workers have been more or less unchanged. This suggests that an 
increase  in  labor  productivity  has  partly  enabled  such  a  price  decline.  By  contrast,  in 
nonmanufacturing, services prices and cash earnings have both remained largely constant 
over the same period, as labor productivity was low.  
Meanwhile,  the  cash  earnings  of  part-time  workers  have  been  on  a  rising  trend  since  the 
mid-2000s,  for  both  manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing.  As  a  result,  the  differences  in 
hourly  cash  earnings  between  full-time  workers  and  part-time  workers  have  somewhat 
decreased,  leading  to  the  current  hourly  cash  earnings  of  part-time  workers  to  be  roughly 
above  40  percent  of  those  of  full-time  workers.  This  may  reflect  the  shortage  of  part-time 
workers  as  a  result  of  a  steady  shift  in  employment  from  full-time  workers  to  part-time 
workers. This trend is especially seen in nonmanufacturing. Part-time workers, whose wages 
are  relatively  low,  now  account  for  over  30  percent  in  nonmanufacturing,  whereas  in 
manufacturing they account for less than half. 
Regarding the overall outlook for Japan’s prices and wages, a positive correlation between 
them  is  likely  to  hold  –  mainly  driven  by  an  increase  in  both  wages  and  sales  prices 
especially  in  nonmanufacturing.  In  general,  the  responsiveness  of  sales  prices  to  wage 
changes  is  greater  for  part-time  workers  than  full-time  workers  in  the  services  industry 
(Chart 15). This is because the variable component of wages is greater for part-time workers, 
and  so  changes  in  their  hourly  wages  have  a  more  direct  impact  on  services  prices.  As 
Japan's  economy  gradually  shifts  to  nonmanufacturing,  wage  increases  are  expected  to 
exert upward pressure on prices. Nevertheless, the pace of wage increases is, on the whole, 
likely to be faster than that of price increases (excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax hike), as will be discussed later. 
Let us now look at the Phillips curve with a wage version, which indicates the relationship 
between  the  rate  of  change  in  cash  earnings  and  in  the  unemployment  rate.  Chart  17 
presents  the  Phillips  curve  using  the  same  observation  period  as  the  Phillips  curve  with 
inflation  version.  Steepening  of  the  slope  reflects  the  higher  responsiveness  of  wage 
changes  against  the  improvement  in  the  unemployment  rate.  Recent  movements  of  the 
curve, however, have not yet resulted in an apparent steepening of the slope. Going forward, 
the  steepening  of  the  slope  is  expected  to  occur  gradually  as  the  economy  continues  to 
recover and labor demand increases.  
Inflation expectations, prices, and wages 
D. 
Let me now talk about inflation expectations. The increase in inflation expectations will lead 
to  an  increase  in  current  prices  and  wages  if  such  an  increase  in  inflation  expectations  is 
incorporated  in  the  current  price  setting.  A  rise  in  inflation  expectations  is  reflected  as  an 
upward  shift  of  the  intercept  of  the  Phillips  curves  in  both  the  CPI  and  wage  versions 
(Charts 12 and 17). The upward shift of the intercept means that the rate of inflation is prone 
to rise even with the same level of the output gap in the former case, and that the rate of 
wage increase is prone to rise even with the same level of unemployment in the latter case. 
In this regard, the upward shift of the curve is observed in the Phillips curve for the CPI, but it 
is yet to be seen in that for wages. It is expected that the upward shift will occur further in the 
Phillips curve for the CPI (all items less food and energy) version, while the shift will begin to 
occur in the Phillips curve for the wage version.  
Medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  more  important  indicators  than  short-term 
expectations. This is because the former are more stable, while the latter are more prone to 
current prices, such as prices of energy and daily necessities, and thus tend to be volatile. 
Thus, let us look at medium- to long-term indicators: the inflation outlook (excluding the direct 
effects of the consumption tax hikes) over the next five years for households and that over 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  next  three  and  five  years  for  firms.  Chart  3  indicates  that  households’  inflation 
expectations  have  remained  at  around  2.0-2.5  percent  since  late  2011.  Meanwhile,  firms’ 
inflation expectations recorded 1.7 percent for both the next three and five years, according 
to  a  survey  conducted  in  March  2014  as  a  part  of  the  Tankan (Chart  18).7  Going forward, 
inflation expectations are likely to rise to around 2 percent, thereby raising the actual prices 
and wages. 
Timing of achieving the 2 percent price stability target  
E. 
As noted earlier, I expect that the inflation rate of 2 percent is likely to be reached toward the 
end of the projection period. Related to this outlook, I will now summarize my views.  
• 
First, medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear to have been rising on the 
whole. However, some indicators have recently leveled off; in particular, households’ 
long-term inflation expectations have continued to level off since late 2011. These 
inflation expectations are expected to rise gradually, as moderate inflation becomes 
settled in society and if the 2 percent price stability target is more widely recognized 
by the public.  
Next,  it  may  take  time  for  households  to  get  accustomed  to  the  environment  of 
continued moderate inflation. Real wages (deflated by the CPI, including the direct 
impact of the consumption tax hikes) are expected to continue to decline throughout 
the projection period; pension payrolls are also expected to be restrained vis-à-vis 
price  developments.  Under  these  circumstances,  households  may  continue  to 
regard  low  prices  as  an  important  determinant  in  their  expenditure  decisions  –  as 
confirmed  by  the  recent  households’  survey.  The  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term 
expectations for growth and income – together with an alleviation of future concerns 
over  fiscal  conditions  and  the  social  security  system  –  may  gradually  lead  to  a 
situation where mild inflation is more readily acceptable.  
Such an attitude among households is likely to affect firms’ price-setting behavior. 
Until recently, many firms have found it easier to raise their sales prices since the 
yen’s depreciation and the consumption tax hike provided an opportunity for them to 
increase  the  prices  of  most  of  their  products  and  services  simultaneously  and 
collectively.  Nonetheless,  price  rises  are  likely  to  occur  only  gradually  in  the  near 
future owing to discount price setting by some firms and preference for low prices by 
many  households.  This  observation  appears  to  be  consistent  with  the  Tankan’s 
results,  which  indicate  only  a  moderate  increase  in  firms’  own  sales  price  outlook 
(Chart 18).  
Wage  increases  stemming  from  a  labor  shortage  are  likely  to  generate  upward 
pressure  on  services  prices,  but  they  will  not  necessarily  raise  sales  prices  in  an 
equal  proportion.  For  firms,  it  may  take  some  time  for  a  stable  and  positive 
relationship to emerge between increases in wages and increases in sales prices. 
   Let me explain the last point in some detail. There are mainly three approaches that can be 
considered by firms in the face of permanent wage increases: (1) a response by raising labor 
productivity  without  generating  upward  pressures  on  sales  prices;  (2)  a  response  by 
squeezing profit margins without causing an increase in sales prices; and (3) a response by 
raising sales prices, which is possible in a situation where demand grows for their goods and 
                                                
7  Although interpretation of the survey results requires caution since the survey was conducted for the first time, 
the decomposition by firm size reveals that small firms reported higher inflation expectations than large firms. 
This could be attributable to the following: (1) small firms tend to be more affected by high material and input 
costs; and (2) a great number of large firms may feel that only a moderate increase in their sales prices is 
feasible. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
services. Case (3) will thus lead to a stable rise in sales prices, whereas the increase in sales 
prices will be limited in cases (1) and (2).  
In the transition period toward the new price and wage environment, there will be divergent 
responses among firms. Some firms will attempt to engage in higher value-added businesses 
and raise productivity, thereby expanding their market shares. Others may fail to adopt such 
strategies and have to restructure their businesses, merge with other firms, or close. Thus, 
the above three cases are likely to coexist for some time.  
With regard to the overall economic perspective, the rate of wage increases will be roughly 
equivalent to the sum of (1) the rate of the aggregate price increases and (2) the rate of labor 
productivity  growth.  It  is  expected  that  the  rate  of  productivity  growth  will  improve  toward 
around  1  percent  or  somewhat  higher  over  the  projection  period.  Accordingly,  the  rate  of 
wage increases will exceed the rate of price increases (excluding the temporary effects of the 
consumption tax hikes) by this magnitude. I consider that the 2 percent inflation is likely to be 
reached toward the end of the projection period at a moderate pace that does not impose 
excessive burdens on firms and households. I consider that such a gradual path is likely to 
lead  to  a  society  where  the  2  percent  inflation  is  maintained  in  a  stable  manner  and  is 
desirable for Japan’s economy.  
This brings me to the end of my speech.  
Thank you very much indeed for your kind attention. 
 
 12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13 
  14 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15 
  16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19 
 20 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
 22 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
 24 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
