  Thomas Jordan: Comments on Swiss monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the 106th Ordinary General Meeting of Shareholders of the Swiss National Bank, 
Berne, 25 April 2014. 
 Mr President of the Bank Council  
Dear Shareholders 
Dear Guests 
The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  has  a  mandate  to  ensure  price  stability,  while  taking  due 
account of the development of the economy. The monetary policy decisions needed to fulfil 
this mandate have a direct impact on the size and composition of our balance sheet. As a 
result of the current size of our balance sheet and the nature of our investments, it can be 
assumed  that  the  annual  results  will  continue  to  fluctuate  significantly  in  the  foreseeable 
future. 
Since summer 2007, the global economy has experienced a series of crises. At times, it was 
on the brink of the abyss, and the threat to the Swiss economy was correspondingly great. In 
order  to  fulfil  our  statutory  mandate,  we  have  been  obliged  to  resort  to  unconventional 
measures,  rather  than  operating  solely  with  the  familiar  monetary  instruments.  The  most 
exceptional  measure  was  certainly  the  introduction  and  enforcement  of  the  minimum 
exchange rate against the euro. However, the creation of the stabilisation fund to take over 
illiquid assets from UBS was also a special measure. In 2013, this episode was successfully 
concluded. By contrast, the minimum exchange rate remains the SNB’s key monetary policy 
instrument.  This  remains  true  even  though  we  have  not  had  to  enforce  the  minimum 
exchange rate with foreign currency purchases since autumn 2012. 
In  my  comments  today  I  will  explain  the  reasons  why  we  are  maintaining  the  minimum 
exchange  rate.  I  will  begin  with  a  brief  look  at  global  economic  developments.  Then  I  will 
present  our forecast for the global  economy  and  the  Swiss  economy.  Based  on  this, I  will 
follow  with  an  examination  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  As  you  know,  in  our  view, 
developments on the Swiss mortgage and real estate markets represent a risk for financial 
stability.  I  will  therefore  use  this  opportunity  to  follow  up  with  a  brief  presentation  of  our 
considerations on this topic. I will round up my remarks with two examples which illustrate 
the link between monetary policy decisions and our balance sheet. 
Global economic developments in 2013 
First, let me begin by reviewing the events of 2013. On the one hand, there was a certain 
feeling of renewed confidence last year. This can be mainly attributed to the ebbing of the 
European  financial  and  debt  crisis.  The  alleviation  of  the  crisis  is  likely  to  have  made  a 
significant contribution to Europe’s emergence from recession. Meanwhile, economic growth 
in  the  US  firmed  and  the  economy  in  Japan  picked  up  perceptibly.  On  the  other  hand, 
concerns about a number of emerging economies increased. One of the factors resulting in 
more difficult financing conditions for emerging economies with structural problems was the 
announcement by the US Federal Reserve that it intended to reduce its securities purchases. 
Overall, growth in the global economy in 2013 was weak and uneven, and remained marked 
by  uncertainty.  Will  this  situation  change  in  the  current  year?  Probably  only  to  a  limited 
extent.  According  to  our  assessment,  although  the  cycle  has  probably  bottomed  out,  the 
challenges remain formidable. I will now outline the international economic position in more 
detail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Global economic outlook for 2014 
In 2014, growth in the global economy  is likely to be stronger than in 2013. Nevertheless, 
regional differences will remain substantial. While relatively robust growth can be expected in 
the US, the signs are pointing to a modest and uneven recovery in the euro area. A slightly 
stronger  economic  momentum  than  in  2013  can  be  expected  in  the  major  emerging 
economies,  but  they  will  not  attain  former  growth  rates.  We  therefore  anticipate  that 
expansion  in  the  global  economy  will  be  no  more  than  moderate.  However,  the  recovery 
remains subject to significant downside risks. This is still largely due to the European debt 
crisis. 
You may be wondering whether the debt crisis is not already over. The extreme risks have 
indeed  been  eliminated.  Reform  programmes  introduced  in  some  euro  area  countries, 
progress achieved in creating a banking union and measures taken by the European Central 
Bank (ECB) have clearly brought about an alleviation of the crisis. But the crisis has not yet 
been overcome – which is hardly surprising, since structural reforms are also required if this 
is to be achieved. 
It is important to acknowledge the efforts that have already been made in this respect in the 
affected  countries,  and  as  an  onlooker  one  should  be  cautious  when  making 
recommendations.  Yet  there  is  broad  consensus  that  additional  structural  reforms  are 
needed and should be implemented consistently. Such reforms should increase the growth 
potential of the countries affected and allow them to significantly and sustainably reduce their 
high  level  of  unemployment  and  debt.  Additional  efforts  are  also  required  in  the  banking 
sector. Consequently, the bank review to be carried out by the ECB is extremely important. 
Only a healthy banking sector is capable of supplying the economy with sufficient credit. 
However, risks also exist outside the euro area. The global recovery could be held back by 
political  tension  in  several  regions  as  well  as  structural  weakness  in  major  emerging 
economies. 
A further source of potential turmoil is uncertainty about the future path of monetary policy in 
the major currency areas. In particular, the divergence in the monetary policy direction could 
increase.  Overall,  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  economies  is  likely  to  remain  very 
expansionary since production capacity is underutilised and inflation is low. But while in the 
US  the  Federal  Reserve  is  preparing  the  ground  for  a  gradual  normalisation  of  monetary 
policy, the ECB is considering whether it should undertake further monetary policy easing. By 
contrast,  interest  rate  increases  could  become  necessary  again  in  a  number  of  emerging 
economies, to prevent further depreciation of their currencies and counter high inflation. 
As you can see from this list of items, unfortunately the risks for economic growth have not 
diminished.  The  European  crisis  may  have  become  somewhat  less  virulent,  but  it  has  not 
been overcome. Moreover, additional uncertainties have emerged and the Swiss franc is still 
high. Overall,  the  environment  remains  extremely  challenging for  both  the  Swiss  economy 
and our monetary policy. 
Outlook for Switzerland in 2014 
I will now look at developments in Switzerland. In 2013, our economy did quite well, primarily 
as a result of stable domestic demand. This year we are expecting the economy to maintain 
a  similar  momentum,  driven  by  domestic  demand  as  well  as,  increasingly,  by  foreign 
demand.  Thus  the  global  economy  will  supply  positive  growth  impetus,  which  will  assist 
export industries, in particular. Accordingly, production capacity utilisation is expected to be 
higher and companies should see further improvement in their financial situation. Given this 
situation, 
the  months  ahead, 
unemployment is likely to decline slightly. 
However,  this  essentially  positive  scenario  is  associated  with  external  risks  which  I  have 
already  outlined.  Furthermore,  the  popular  federal  initiative  approved  in  February  to  curb 
to  regain  momentum.  During 
investment 
looks  set 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  immigration  represents  an  additional  element  of  uncertainty  as  far  as  the  economy  is 
concerned. We do not know yet how the initiative will be implemented and what effect it will 
have  on  our  relationship  to  the  EU.  Consequently,  the  economic  impact  of  the  popular 
decision cannot really be properly quantified at the moment, and this is why it has not been 
included in our forecast. For 2014, we continue to expect economic growth of around 2%. 
Inflation in Switzerland and the SNB’s monetary policy 
The  greater  economic  momentum  which  we  are  forecasting  will  gradually  lead  to  a  better 
utilisation of production capacity. The underutilisation which still prevails continues to restrain 
consumer  prices  in  Switzerland.  Declining  inflation  abroad  and  the  slightly  stronger  Swiss 
franc are having a similar impact by dampening imported inflation. Thus the SNB’s inflation 
forecast shows that there is no risk of inflation in the foreseeable future. In 2014, inflation in 
Switzerland is likely to amount to only 0%. 
In  addition,  the  international  environment  is  still  giving  rise  to  high  levels  of  uncertainty. 
Consequently, the danger that the Swiss franc, as a safe haven, might suddenly be subject 
to  further  upward  pressure  has  not  been  averted.  Short-term  interest  rates  are  practically 
zero. For this reason, the minimum exchange rate is the right tool to avoid an undesirable 
tightening of monetary conditions, since an appreciation of the Swiss franc would lead to a 
further  decline  in  import  prices  and  a  renewed  threat  of  deflation.  Given  this  situation,  the 
SNB is maintaining the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. We remain ready to 
enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  if  necessary,  by  purchasing  foreign  currency  in 
unlimited  quantities,  and  to  take  further  measures  as  required.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity of stressing, once again, that the minimum exchange rate does not represent a 
peg to the euro. The Swiss franc is able to move freely above CHF 1.20 per euro. As I said, it 
is high, and should weaken with time. 
For many years, interest rates have been at a low level due to the overall economic situation. 
However, the danger of a longer period of low interest rates is that imbalances can build up, 
and  we  can  indeed  observe  such  a  development  in  the  Swiss  mortgage  and  real  estate 
markets. Allow me therefore to give you our assessment of this situation. 
Mortgage and real estate markets and countercyclical capital buffer 
The  Swiss  residential  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets  have  been  growing  strongly  for 
some time, giving rise to imbalances. Some time ago, these reached a level, in the view of 
the  SNB,  that  poses  a  risk  to  the  stability  of  the  banking  system  and  hence  the  Swiss 
economy. 
Why does the SNB not simply increase interest rates in order to slow down the mortgage and 
real  estate  markets?  Although  an  increase  in  the  interest  rate  would  have  a  dampening 
effect, it would, at the same time, intensify upward pressure on the Swiss franc and, given 
the current situation, threaten price stability. Consequently, an interest rate increase is not an 
option. Given this situation, in 2013, the SNB made a proposal to the Federal Council, after 
consultation  with  the  Swiss  Financial  Market  Supervisory  Authority  (FINMA),  that  the 
sectorial  countercyclical  capital  buffer  (CCB)  be  activated  for  the  first  time,  at  1%  of  risk- 
weighted mortgage loans financing residential property located in Switzerland. The Federal 
Council acted on the proposal. Since last September, banks have therefore been required to 
provide more capital backing for residential mortgage loans in Switzerland. 
Certainly, momentum on the mortgage and real estate markets was dampened somewhat in 
2013. However, the measures introduced by the beginning of 2013, such as the activation of 
the CCB as well as those taken by the industry itself, were insufficient to prevent a further 
build-up  of  imbalances.  Therefore,  the  volume  of  mortgage  lending  was  still  rising  at  a 
substantially stronger pace than national income. As a result, in Switzerland as a whole, debt 
was increasing significantly faster than people’s capacity to offset this debt with income. This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  development is particularly critical because the correlation between mortgages and national 
income is very high, both in historical terms and compared with other countries. In addition, 
in  an  environment  of  persistently  low  interest  rates,  coupled  with  banks’  undiminished 
appetite for risk, the danger remained considerable that imbalances would build up further 
unless additional countermeasures were taken. 
In January 2014, therefore, acting on a proposal by the SNB, the Federal Council increased 
the  CCB  from  1%  to  2%  of  risk-weighted  positions  financing  residential  property  in 
Switzerland. The deadline for compliance is 30 June 2014. As part of its proposal, the SNB 
drew attention not only to the cyclical risks but also, once again, to the high risks in mortgage 
lending, especially in the area of affordability. 
Some three months have passed since the CCB was increased. Based on the data currently 
available for the first quarter of 2014, the all-clear still cannot be given, in our view. In the first 
quarter of 2014, momentum in real estate prices was similar to that in the previous year and 
therefore has not further diminished. However, for an idea of the overall picture we are still 
lacking important data. A definitive assessment of the latest developments would therefore 
be premature. 
So  we  will  continue  to  monitor  developments  on  the  mortgage  and  real  estate  markets 
closely. Any decisions on further measures must be made in the light of these observations. 
The  SNB  therefore  regularly  examines,  first,  whether  the  CCB  needs  to  be  adjusted. 
Depending on how the situation develops, this might need to be an upward or a downward 
adjustment. Second, the authorities are working on the specification of measures that would 
target risks in the area of affordability. 
Monetary policy and the SNB balance sheet: Flexibility as the key factor 
In the case of the CCB, the SNB plays an important role because it can make proposals for 
its activation, alteration or deactivation. However, this instrument does not have any impact 
on our balance sheet. By contrast, our monetary policy decisions as well as other measures 
aimed  at  stabilising  the  financial  system  are  reflected  in  the  composition  and  size  of  the 
balance sheet. Accordingly, it is of key importance for the effectiveness of our measures in 
the fields of monetary policy and financial stability that we have the option of making flexible 
use of our balance sheet. There are therefore no statutory limitations with respect to the size 
or composition of our balance sheet. 
This flexibility played a major role in ensuring that we remained capable of acting during the 
crisis, even in very difficult conditions. It enabled us to fulfil our mandate of ensuring price 
stability and also of making a contribution to financial stability as part of this mandate. 
Let  me  give  you  two  examples  of  the  way  in  which  we  make  flexible  use  of  our  balance 
sheet.  For  topical  reasons,  I  would  like  to  start  by  talking  about  the  creation  of  the 
stabilisation  fund.  The  stabilisation  fund,  as  we  called  it,  was  an  undertaking  which 
commenced in 2008 and was successfully concluded last year. 
What  was  involved?  You  will  recall  that  in  October  2008  a  Swiss  big  bank,  UBS,  was  in 
substantial difficulties. Financial stability  was threatened and intervention by the authorities 
was  absolutely  necessary.  Consequently,  the  Federal  Council,  the  Swiss  Federal  Banking 
Commission  (predecessor  of  FINMA)  and  the  SNB  decided  on  measures  to  stabilise  UBS 
and  thereby  strengthen  the  Swiss  financial  system.  The  core  element  in  the  package  of 
measures was the stabilisation fund, which took over illiquid assets from UBS totalling almost 
USD 40 billion. The SNB funded 90% by granting the stabilisation fund an interest-bearing 
loan. For its part, UBS provided the stabilisation fund with equity corresponding to 10% of the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
transferred  assets.1  Moreover,  to  strengthen  UBS’s  equity,  the  Swiss  Confederation 
subscribed to mandatory convertible notes in the amount of CHF 6 billion.2  
By  April  2009,  the  illiquid  assets  had  been  transferred  to  the  stabilisation  fund  from  UBS. 
Subsequently,  the  portfolio  was  managed  and  reduced.  The  main  goal  was  complete 
repayment  of  the  loan  to  the  SNB.  Sales  as  well  as  principal  repayments  and  interest 
payments did indeed result in a gradual repayment of the SNB loan. By mid-August 2013, 
the loan had been fully repaid. Finally, in November, UBS purchased the stabilisation fund by 
reimbursing the SNB its contractual share in the fund equity. At this point, the stabilisation 
fund assets were entirely liquid. 
The conclusion of this transaction was a major and exceptional achievement. To strengthen 
the financial system, the SNB had stated, in autumn 2008, that it was prepared to finance the 
takeover of assets up to a value of USD 60 billion by the stabilisation fund. For the success 
of  this  undertaking  it  was  important  that  we  could  handle  our  balance  sheet  flexibly.  This 
package of measures enabled both investors and savers to regain confidence in UBS. 
The  second  example  I  would  like  to  mention  here  is  the  introduction  of  the  minimum 
exchange  rate  in  September  2011.  This  rate  was  introduced  to  correct  a  massive 
overvaluation of the Swiss franc arising from adverse developments on the foreign exchange 
market, and thereby avert the threat of a deflationary trend. I have explained to you why this 
instrument is still needed and is being enforced by us without any restriction. A measure like 
the minimum exchange rate can only succeed if the central bank is totally credible, in other 
words,  if  people  believe  it  will  actually  defend  the  rate,  if  need  be.  Words  can  certainly 
achieve a great deal in the financial markets. But this only holds true if they are followed up 
with  deeds  when  necessary.  In  the  case  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  deeds  in 
question are unlimited foreign currency market interventions. In 2012, we were required to 
enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate  with  extensive  foreign  currency  purchases,  and  our 
balance sheet total increased significantly. If there were statutory restrictions on our balance 
sheet  we  would  be  unable  to  introduce  and  enforce  a  measure  of  this  kind.  The  financial 
markets would call into question both our resolve and our ability to see the measure through. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, I come to my concluding remarks. Even seven years after the onset 
of  the  financial  crisis,  the  environment  remains  very  challenging  for  our  economy  and  for 
Swiss monetary policy. With interest rates close to zero and a high Swiss franc, the minimum 
exchange rate is still the key monetary policy instrument for the SNB. 
Our monetary policy decisions have caused the SNB balance sheet to increase considerably. 
Due  to  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  and  the  uncertainty  on  the  capital  markets,  annual 
results are expected to be volatile in the foreseeable future. That is why we cannot provide 
you with any forecasts of the SNB’s future annual results. 
We  are  certainly  very  aware  that  the  lack  of  a  dividend  is  painful  for  many  shareholders. 
However, as you know, the SNB is obliged by constitution and statute to act in accordance 
with the interests of the country as a whole. Its primary goal is to ensure price stability, while 
taking  due  account  of  the  development  of  the  economy.  The  SNB  is  required  to  gear  its 
                                                
1  Overall,  illiquid  assets  totalling  USD  38.7  billion  were  taken  over.  The  funding  was  as  follows:  The  SNB 
granted a loan of USD 25.8 billion and UBS provided 10% or USD 3.9 billion in the form of the purchase price 
for the option to repurchase the stabilisation fund at a later date. The difference between the funds paid into 
the stabilisation fund and the total sum of transferred assets was made up of contingent liabilities which, at 
that point, did not require any financing. 
In  2009,  the  Confederation  sold  the  equities  arising  out  of  the  conversion  of  these  notes  to  institutional 
investors, thereby ceasing its involvement. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  monetary policy to this goal alone, and not to making profits. I would therefore like to thank 
you,  our  shareholders,  also  on  behalf  of  my  colleagues,  Jean-Pierre  Danthine  and  Fritz 
Zurbrügg,  for  your  loyal  support  of  and  understanding  for  the  activities  of  the  SNB.  The 
Governing Board thanks the SNB staff for their untiring service to our institution. Thank you 
all for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
