Per Callesen: A central banker’s perspective on European regulatory 
reform 
Speech by Mr Per Callesen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the International 
Capital  Market  Association’s  (ICMA)  and  Nordic  Capital  Markets  Forum’s  (NCMF)  Annual 
Conference  on  Regulatory  Reform  and  Nordic  Capital  Markets,  Copenhagen,  18  March 
2014. 
 Thank you for the invitation! 
For this topic of European Regulatory reform I have chosen to highlight, first a number of the 
most  prominent  financial  regulatory  issues  in  Denmark  over  the  past  year  that  are  also 
related  to  the  broader  European  agenda,  and  second,  the  implications  of  the  European 
Banking Union going forward. 
Capital and liquidity regulation 
At  the  heart  of  Basel  III  and  the  implementing  legislation  in  the  European  Union 
(CRR/CRDIV) has been stricter regulatory requirements of capital and liquidity. 
We  have  come  a  long  way  in  many  countries,  including  in  this  country,  to  ensure  better 
capitalisation of banks. Authorities have raised capital requirements by implementing the EU 
legislation, and in several instances going somewhat beyond this by taking advantage of the 
room for national discretion included in the directives. Perhaps even more importantly, bank 
themselves  have  taken  steps  to  become  substantially  better  capitalised,  often  going  well 
beyond the regulatory minimum requirement. 
In recent surveys, Danish banks stand out as top performers in a European context when it 
comes  to  early  compliance  with  fully  phased-in  stricter  minimum  rules  for  capital.  This  is 
wise. The largest Danish bank did very recently raise new additional tier 1 capital at a fairly 
low price, a price which was lower than recent, similar issuances by other EU banks. This 
confirms the old textbook lesson that solid capitalization is a cornerstone for lower funding 
costs. 
Had banks across our continent had similar levels of capitalisation before the financial crisis 
struck as our Danish banks do today, I am confident that the crisis would have been a rather 
different  one  and  also  the  international  debate  and  actions  for  reregulating  banking  would 
have been quite different. 
Should banks, well advised and at the broader international level, decide to move further in 
the direction of increasingly adding distance to the difference between actual capitalisation 
and regulatory requirement, interesting new aspects may come up. First, the financial system 
would be safer. Second, funding costs are likely to come down. Third, other regulatory and 
supervisory practices may possibly become less intrusive over time. 
Liquidity  regulation,  especially  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR),  which  measures  banks’ 
ability  to  withstand  short-term  severe  stress  in  funding  markets,  has  been  subject  to 
extensive  discussions  over  several  years.  The  LCR  will  become  binding  for  financial 
institutions across the EU from January 1, 2015. At the heart of the LCR is a requirement that 
banks should hold a buffer of high quality liquid assets (HQLA) to survive a 30-day period of 
market stress. The technical details are very complicated, but the basic idea is fairly simple 
and reasonable. 
What can become a problem, however, is the definition of what constitutes high quality liquid 
assets. If that definition is too centralised, too rigid and based on an implicit assumption that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
all assets under the same formal classification perform equally well in all markets – then we 
will have new financial problems. 
What we need is portfolios of liquid assets which are well diversified, and consist of assets 
with proven market liquidity and credit quality. We need liquidity standards which will facilitate 
a  self-sustaining  banking  sector  and  not  adding  further  to  its  reliance  on  central  bank 
facilities,  or  adding  further  to  the  interdependence  between  banks  and  the  sovereign.  We 
need assets with a broad and diversified investor base. 
In that respect it is surprising to see how strong the push has been towards a definition of 
liquidity which is heavily reliant on government bonds and central bank facilities, for example 
the Basel Committee proposal that at least 60 per cent of bank liquidity should include only 
such assets. If government bonds were defined as the only high quality liquid assets, the link 
between banks and sovereigns would be reinforced, especially in the absence of risk weights 
for such bonds and if there are no diversification requirements. 
As central bankers, we are obviously in favour of prudent fiscal policies and a low level of 
public debt. But the combination of the current low Danish public debt and liquidity regulation 
insisting on government bonds constituting a dominant large share of banks’ liquidity buffers 
would hurt liquidity in the Danish government bond market. The answer should obviously not 
be to increase public debt. 
The solution is not difficult. Denmark has one of the largest and most liquid covered bond 
markets  with  a  stable  institutional  framework  and  a  very  strong  track-record  of  market 
liquidity  and  credit  quality,  including  throughout  the  entire financial  crisis.  This  track-record 
has  been  confirmed  in  a  recent  comprehensive  study  by  the  European  Banking  Authority 
(EBA).  Danish  covered  bonds  are  currently  used  as  the  main  instrument  of  bank  liquidity 
management and there is no reason why they should not continue to serve this role. They 
are  not  so-called  inside  money  (claims  on  other  financial  institutions)  but  claims  on  non-
financial companies and, mainly, private households. 
We are confident that the European Commission will take these issues into account when 
deciding upon liquidity definitions within the next few months. 
The European Commission has recently forwarded another proposal, namely on the potential 
structural  separation  of  large  banks.  As  you  may  know,  that  proposal  is  seeking  a 
“mandatory ring-fence”, that is a separation of bank lending facilities from proprietary trading 
and certain other trading activities. Separation may be useful in some countries, whereas in 
other  countries,  such  as  Denmark,  there  is  not  much  of  a  convincing  case  for  such 
separation.  Problems  in  our  banking  sector  came  from  traditional  lending  activities,  not 
proprietary trading. The broader debate over the merits of structural separation will continue. 
My  point  at  this  stage  is  only  that  due  notice  should  be  taken  of  the  potential  dilemma 
between on the one hand asking banks to hold larger amounts of highly liquid assets, and on 
the other insisting that such assets should be managed in separate corporate structures. 
Maturity extension for mortgage covered bonds 
As regards the Danish mortgage bonds, you may have noticed a public debate over the past 
few months, as well as a law passed last week, on the introduction of mandatory extension of 
mortgage credit bonds under certain conditions. 
The  underlying  issue  is  the  following.  Over  the  last  decade,  Danish  mortgages  became 
increasingly reliant on long-term loans with a maturity up to 30 years, financed by the issuing 
of  short  term  bonds,  down  to  a  maturity  of  12  months.  Borrowing  costs  are  consistently 
passed  through  directly  to  borrowers  –  so  called  “match-funding”.  And  demand  for  these 
bonds  have  been  consistently  very  robust  and  high  –  for  example,  market  rates  of  the 
12 month bonds have on average been below 30 basis-points during the past year. But the 
system has been short of a comprehensive answer on what would happen in the extremely 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
unlikely, but also rather scary, event of a failure of the now frequent auctions of new short-
maturity mortgage bonds. 
The solution has been to introduce a mandatory extension of mortgage bonds with shorter 
maturities than the underlying loan in case an auction would fail, or if the interest rate has 
increased by more than 5 percentage points in the year preceding the previous refinancing. 
In  such  a  case,  the  bonds  will  be  extended  for  a  year  with  an  interest  rate  equal  to  the 
interest rate at the latest refinancing plus an add-on of 5 percentage points. A comparable 
extension could happen in case a mortgage institution would become insolvent. To get the 
proportions of the debate right, it is key to remember that no Danish mortgage institution has 
failed  for more than  200  years,  and  instances  of  a  5  percentage  point  increase  in  interest 
rates over a 12 month period have only been observed at very few instances during the last 
150 years. But the substantive issue of refinancing risk has been taken care of. 
One discussion has been whether the 5 percent trigger was needed or whether one should 
just refer more generally to the very unlikely event of a failed auction. The point is however 
that  identifying  a  failed  auction  in  practice  is  not  very  easy.  A  discretionary  decision  by 
authorities would probably be needed. The interest rate trigger is then a practical criterion, 
also allowing investors to price any such risk. 
Another discussion has been if, and to what extent, the new law would add to the cost of the 
bonds. Will there be an additional risk premium for investors? As a first approximation, the 
answer  is  yes,  namely  the  risk  of  having  a  maturity  extension  at  a  rate  of  an  additional 
5 percentage  points  in  cases  where  the  market  rate  increases  by,  say,  6  or  7  points.  Our 
estimate is that the effect is less than 10 basis-points at the point of issuance, and probably 
smaller.  Note  however,  that the  new  law  provides  a  high  degree  of  certainty for  investors. 
This is a material change compared to the previous situation, where investors in the case of 
extreme  events  were  bound  to  have  open  ended  speculation  on  the  possible  actions  of 
public authorities. This new certainty runs counter to a higher risk premium stemming from 
the new law. 
A third discussion has been on whether a possible self-reinforcing negative market valuation 
effect could come into play in cases where markets rates would be approaching the five per 
cent  trigger  point,  say  by  increasing  by  4  percentage  points.  One  answer  is  that  such  an 
effect would be rather limited, since the maturity of the extended bonds is so short. Another 
answer is that an increase in interest rates of 5 percentage points is so extreme that many 
other reactions would be triggered, rendering the final outcome extremely hard to estimate. 
For example, much larger uncertainty in markets could actually reallocate demand for bonds 
from the longer maturities to the shorter ones. Another possible effect would be a flight of 
borrowers out of the shorter maturities, in particular if they can thus repurchase the bonds at 
a market discount, implying that not only demand, but also supply of the short maturity bonds 
will be reduced, and possibly sharply so. 
At  some  stage  the  public  discussion  of  these  issues  ran  out  of  proportion  with  the  limited 
magnitude  of  these  effects.  Now,  increasingly,  investors  and  observers  understand  and 
acknowledge  that  the  new  law  is  a  credit-positive  event  –  complementing  the  existing 
safeguards and track-record of the mortgage system. 
Banking Union 
Finally,  to  the  issue  of  Banking  Union.  Preparation  by  the  ECB  for  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism is  well advanced. Regarding the Single Resolution  Mechanism (SRM) and the 
setup of a sector-financed joint resolution fund, the window for reaching a final compromise 
between the co-legislators, the Council and the European Parliament, is closing fast due to 
the coming EP elections. Still, it should be in the interest of all parties to reach a compromise 
solution. I believe and hope that it will be done. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The Banking Union is a major change in the European financial regulatory framework. And 
the impact will be felt widely in EU countries, whether they participate in the union or choose 
not to. Danmarks Nationalbank finds that it would be to the advantage of Denmark to join. 
Yes,  the  trigger  event  for  leaders  deciding  to  launch  negotiations  on  a  banking  union 
construction was the sovereign debt crisis in a number of euro area countries combined with 
the weak banks and the interaction between banks and the sovereign. 
But the broader reasons for banking union were around even before the financial crisis. Key 
are the need for a level playing field in the single market for financial services, the need for a 
comprehensive  framework  for  crisis-management  of  cross-border  banks,  and  the  need  for 
better and more harmonized supervision. 
One may argue, and I do, that banking union is more of a single market issue than a single 
currency issue, while acknowledging that it is both. We need more competition in financial 
services and therefore more activities across borders. The reversal of cross-border financing 
activities since the financial crisis is not helpful. 
Supervision  by  the  ECB  can  better  ensure  a  level  playing  field  in  terms  of  supervisory 
practices. It can enhance the quality and credibility of supervision by adding external eyes to 
work  done  by  national  supervisors  –  excellent  as  it  may  often  be. The practice  set  by  the 
ECB is in any case likely to establish an EU wide benchmark for supervisory standards. 
A level playing field needs a strong single resolution mechanism which can effectively apply 
and  implement  bail-in.  Note  that  the  requirement  of  an  8  per  cent  bail-in  before  using 
resolution funds and public credit lines is very strong. 8 per cent of all assets often compares 
to 25–30 per cent of risk-weighted assets. The resolution mechanism will also  work as an 
insurance  scheme  in  case  of  even  graver  systemic  events.  This  is  helpful,  provided  it  is 
based on sound principles. 
The ECB is currently performing an Asset Quality Review of the largest banks of the euro 
area, and is preparing an ensuing stress test. The Danish supervisor will perform a similar 
review of the largest Danish credit institutions. 
Obviously, any legacy problems unearthed by the AQR and stress tests have to be dealt with 
before any joint insurance element of banking union will come into play. The ECB has strong 
incentives to safeguard the success of the AQR and be a strong and hands-on supervisor. 
Legacy issues are not a particular dividing line between countries in or out of the euro zone, 
but something being a matter for all possible participants in the banking union. 
There are still issues and details to be decided and dealt with, but we should work towards 
the  success  of  the  banking  union,  and  as  mentioned,  we  believe  that  Denmark  should 
continue to engage strongly with a view to participating when appropriate. 
Thank you for your attention. I am happy to take any questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
