Mario Draghi: Bank restructuring and the economic recovery 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  presentation 
ceremony  of  the  Schumpeter  Award,  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Austria,  Vienna, 
13 March 2014. 
 Summary 
On accepting the Schumpeter Award in Vienna, ECB President Mario Draghi said 2014 and 
2015  were  set  to  be  a  period  of  recovery  after  two  years  of  stabilisation  and  a  return  of 
confidence in the euro area. But the recovery “remains conditional on our pursuing the very 
policies  that  have  brought  about  the  return  of  confidence,”  including  growth-friendly  fiscal 
consolidation, structural reforms and a committed monetary policy. 
In his speech, Mr Draghi drew a parallel between the policies applied in the euro area with 
the  ideas  of  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter,  who  spoke  of  “creative  destruction”  driving 
innovation and productivity growth. By cleaning up and repairing banks’ balance sheets, the 
ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment  helps  create  the  necessary  conditions  for  resources 
again to flow to the productive economy. “By encouraging creative destruction in the banking 
sector, we can facilitate creative destruction in the wider economy and support the recovery.” 
Deleveraging in the financial system was necessary, since too much debt has been built up 
in the run up to the crisis, but the question is what form this deleveraging should take, and at 
what speed it should be allowed, or encouraged, to take place. What we want to achieve, Mr 
Draghi said, is a “good” form of bank deleveraging, where equity is built up, where deposits 
rise and where balance sheet reduction takes the form of swift asset clean-up, rather than a 
slow scaling back of the loan book while rolling over bad loans. 
The ECB’s monetary policy is helping this process. As the recovery proceeds and inflation 
gradually  increases  towards  levels  closer  to  2%,  the  ECB’s  forward  guidance,  firmly 
reiterated by the Governing Council in its last meeting, creates a de facto loosening of policy 
stance, and real interest rates are set to fall over the projection horizon. At the same time, 
the real interest rate spread between the euro area and the rest of the world will probably fall, 
thus  putting  downward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate,  everything  else  being  equal.  The 
strengthening of the effective euro exchange over the past one and a half years has certainly 
had a significant impact on our low rate of inflation, and, given current levels of inflation, is 
therefore becoming increasingly relevant in our assessment of price stability.  
The risk of deflation, which would make deleveraging harder, is quite limited. But the longer 
inflation remains low, the higher the probability of such risks emerging. That is why the ECB 
has been preparing additional non-standard monetary policy measures to guard against such 
a contingency and why it stands ready to take further decisive action if needed, Mr Draghi 
said. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me start by expressing how grateful I am, but also how humbled I feel, to speak before 
you today as the recipient of the Schumpeter Preis. 
It would be tempting to see the honour that you are bestowing upon me today as a reward for 
a job well done. I prefer, however, to regard it as encouragement and inspiration to continue 
to pursue our task with the determination and single-mindedness that we have shown over 
the past few years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
After five years of crisis and uncertainty, 2012 and 2013 have been years of stabilisation for 
the euro area. They have seen a return of confidence in the prospects of our union. 
2014 and 2015 will be a period of recovery. But that recovery remains conditional. It remains 
conditional  on  our  pursuing  the  very  policies  that  have  brought  about  the  return  of 
confidence:  growth-friendly  fiscal  consolidation;  structural  reforms  aimed  at  enhancing 
investment and productivity; a committed monetary policy guarding against all threats to the 
integrity of our money – in particular, the risk of both too high and, currently more relevant, 
too low inflation. 
But the recovery is also conditional on another set of policies, to which it is appropriate that I 
devote my remarks tonight, because those policies draw significantly on the teachings and 
ideas  of  Joseph  Schumpeter.  I  refer  here  to  the  actions  being  undertaken  to  “reboot”  the 
financial  system,  in  particular  the  so-called  comprehensive  assessment,  the  current  health 
check of the euro area banking system, which precedes the start of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) in November this year. 
The rationale for what we are doing actually connects two of Schumpeter’s most important 
and  better  known  insights.  First,  it  acknowledges  the  importance  of  a  well-functioning 
financial sector for the efficient allocation of capital and credit. And second, it contributes to 
the Schumpeterian notion of “creative destruction” which drives innovation and productivity 
growth. 
In short, by “cleaning up” and repairing bank balance sheets, we are creating the conditions 
necessary for resources to flow once more to the firms that use them most productively. And 
in  this  sense,  by  encouraging  creative  destruction  in  the  banking  sector,  we  can  facilitate 
creative destruction in the wider economy and support the recovery. 
Deleveraging and the real economy 
Let me begin by outlining the challenge facing policy-makers in repairing the banking sector. 
Looking back, there is no doubt that the business models and liability structure of euro area 
banks had to evolve. Before the crisis, numerous banks funded their activities with too much 
debt  and  not  enough  equity;  and  that  debt  involved  wholesale  financing  that  was  too  high 
relative to deposits. 
This model was only able to develop because of the perception of an implicit state guarantee 
for  bank  debt  –  a  perception  that  is  perhaps  the  most  pervasive  component  of  the  link 
between sovereign and bank risks. The deterioration of sovereign credit, on one side, and 
the clarification of the rules regarding bail-in of bank debt, on the other, have both contributed 
to putting an end to a funding model that was neither desirable nor sustainable. As a result, 
the  euro  area  banking  system  has  begun  a  secular  process  of  restructuring  and 
deleveraging. 
From  a  policy  perspective,  the  question  presented  to  us  is  not  whether  we  can  avoid  this 
deleveraging. It is universally accepted that too much debt had been built up in the run up to 
the crisis, by governments, non-financial firms, households and banks, and that we now have 
to work through the effect of the subsequent debt overhang. 
The correct question, in my  view,  is what form this deleveraging should take, and at what 
speed it should be allowed, or encouraged, to take place. 
Clearly, we do not want any excessively rapid deleveraging that involves disorderly fire sales 
of  assets.  This  is  why  two  years  ago,  in  the  context  of  a  bank  funding  squeeze,  the  ECB 
implemented longer-term refinancing operations. Borrowing from Schumpeter’s terminology, 
it would have been “destructive destruction”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
At  the  same  time,  we  do  not  want  any  excessively  prolonged  deleveraging,  where  banks 
reduce  their  loan  book  by  curtailing  new  lending,  while  hoping  that  the  underperforming 
assets they hold recover in value. 
Put bluntly, this would create “zombie” banks that do not lend, and the longer this persists, 
the longer credit conditions will interfere with the process of creative destruction described by 
Schumpeter.  The  “churn”  process  between  firms  entering  and  exiting  the  market  that  is  a 
crucial driver of productivity would be disrupted. 
There is some evidence that such credit misallocation is already occurring in the euro area, 
and it is creating an undesirable, even if only temporary, distortion to the detriment of small 
firms. Unlike large firms, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) cannot easily replace 
bank funding with capital market financing. Banks perform a key role in reducing information 
asymmetries with respect to the creditworthiness of smaller borrowers. 
If small, innovative firms cannot access finance, it has an important impact on employment 
and investment. Studies from the United States show that the bulk of net new job creation 
comes from young firms. At the same time, young firms have been shown to be much more 
sensitive to changes in investment opportunities than older firms, meaning that fewer start-
ups would probably lead to lower trend productivity growth. 
Achieving a “good deleveraging”: the comprehensive assessment 
What  we  want  to  achieve  is  a  “good”  form  of  bank  deleveraging,  where  equity  is  built  up, 
either through retained earnings or through outright issuance, where deposits rise and where 
balance sheet reduction takes the form of an asset carve-out, rather than of credit attrition. 
Our comprehensive assessment of bank balance sheets is, in my view, creating the setting 
and incentives for achieving this. The assessment will shed light on bank assets, ensure that 
problematic  assets  are  fully  recognised  and  prompt  timely  corrective  action  in  the  form  of 
bank restructuring and capital replenishment. 
Frontloading  banking  sector  repairs  in  this  way  should  in  turn  facilitate  the  Schumpeterian 
process of creative destruction in the economy at large – and not only by helping credit flow 
to younger firms, but also by facilitating debt resolution for older ones. 
Firms that no longer have a viable business model should go into insolvency. But there also 
appear  to  be  corporates  in  the  euro  area  that  cannot  invest  in  new  growth  opportunities 
because  of  an  excessive  level  of  debt.  Well-capitalised  banks  are  better  able  to  end  or 
restructure loans to firms with bad credit standing. This in turn ought to facilitate the process 
of selection of the firms that deserve to survive because they can thrive. 
Of  course,  credit  conditions  are  not  the  only  obstacle  to  innovation,  and  it  is  important  to 
emphasise  the  role  of  structural  and  tax  reforms  in  creating  a  business  climate  that  is 
conducive to investment and job creation. Cleaning-up banks is not a sufficient condition for 
a return to sustained growth – but it is a necessary condition. 
There  is  a  second  incentive  for  frontloading  bank  restructuring  and  balance  sheet 
adjustment,  which  has  to  do  more  directly  with  monetary  policy.  Banks  that  need  to 
recapitalise  typically  do  not  pass  the  low  level  of  our  policy  rates  through  to  their  lending 
rates. This has shown up for some time in the dispersion of bank lending rates across the 
euro area, and in the muted reaction, especially in the stressed countries, of lending rates to 
our successive steps of monetary easing.  
As bank balance sheet deleveraging progresses, one should expect to see – and we are in 
fact  starting  to  witness  –  an  improved  transmission  of  our  currently  loose  monetary  policy 
stance, in particular as deposit rates converge to lower levels. And we expect the effect of 
this improved transmission to become gradually more visible throughout the current year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The role of monetary policy 
In this context, last Thursday the Governing Council firmly reiterated its forward guidance to 
keep key ECB interest rates at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. The 
intention to maintain an accommodative policy stance for as long as necessary is based on 
an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term. This accommodative 
stance supports the deleveraging process through various balance sheet channels. 
But our forward guidance also has a further effect. As the on-going recovery proceeds in line 
with  our  projections,  the  significant  slack  in  the  economy  will  begin  to  be  absorbed,  and 
inflation will gradually increase towards levels closer to 2%. Our forward guidance therefore 
creates a de facto loosening of policy stance, as real interest rates are set to fall over the 
projection  horizon.  This  is  recognised,  for  example,  in  lower  forward  real  interest  rates 
embedded in the term structure of nominal interest rates and inflation swaps. 
How does this help? While the process of repairing the banking sector should improve the 
credit  supply,  falling  real  interest  rates  should  support  demand  for  credit  by  encouraging 
higher business investment, thus fostering a virtuous circle of higher spending, growth and 
inflation. At the same time, the real interest rate spread between the euro area and the rest 
of  the  world  will  probably  fall,  thus  putting  downward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate, 
everything else being equal. The strengthening of the effective euro exchange over the past 
one and a half years has certainly had a significant impact on our low rate of inflation and, 
given  current  levels  of  inflation,  is  therefore  becoming  increasingly  relevant  in  our 
assessment of price stability. 
At present, risks of deflation, which would of course make the deleveraging process harder, 
are quite limited. In fact, inflation excluding energy and food started to increase slightly from 
0.7% in December to 0.8% in January and to 1.0% in February. And medium to long-term 
inflation  expectations  remain  anchored  to  our  objective  of  an  inflation  rate  of  close  to,  but 
below  2%.  But  the  longer  inflation  remains  low,  the  higher  the  probability  of  such  risks 
emerging. That is why the ECB has been preparing additional non-standard monetary policy 
measures  to  guard  against  such  a  contingency  and  why  it  stands  ready  to  take  further 
decisive action if needed. Any material risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored 
will be countered with additional monetary policy measures.  
In other words, the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and its strong symmetric 
commitment  to  price  stability  will  help  the  deleveraging  process.  At  the  same  time,  the 
healing of the banking sector will accelerate the transmission of our policy stance and firm its 
grip on the economy. Together, they will support the on-going recovery. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I can summarise what I said tonight in a few words: the comprehensive assessment of bank 
balance sheets, which we initiated last year, is a bank-level supervisory exercise ahead of 
the start of the operations of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. But it also has significant 
macroeconomic  consequences  and,  as  such,  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  strategy  for  the 
recovery of the euro area. 
In  fact,  just  the  prospect  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  has  already  caused  banks  to 
raise new capital and to shed non-core or non-profitable exposures. This is very welcome: 
corrective action does not need to wait until the end of our comprehensive assessment. It is 
to everybody’s benefit that it takes place pre-emptively. 
In this way, I believe that we are already starting to witness some of the positive effects of 
frontloading bank balance sheet adjustment. I expect that we will see those effects gradually 
strengthen over the year, including in the form of a better transmission of our monetary policy 
impulse. In turn, I expect the necessary process of creative destruction to gain pace. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I think we can now say of the euro area economy what Galileo said of the earth: eppur si 
muove – and yet, it moves! 
The  job  is  by  no  means  complete.  But  as  evidence  accumulates  that  we  are  on  the  right 
track, I am hopeful that, eventually, we will have deserved the prize that you have generously 
awarded to me tonight. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
