Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Report,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  16  July 
2014. 
 Good  morning.  Carolyn  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  July 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
Before we take your questions, let me take a minute to share our thinking around how our 
quarterly analysis of growth and inflation feeds into our monetary policy decisions. 
I’ll  begin  by  reminding  you  that  monetary  policy  must  be  forward  looking.  That’s  because 
policy actions take time – around 6–8 quarters – to work their way through the economy and 
have their full effect on inflation. 
Let’s  look  back  to  last fall,  when  measured  inflation  was  very  low  –  total  inflation  was  just 
0.7 per  cent  last  October,  and  core  inflation  was  1.2  per  cent.  Inflation  had  been  running 
below target for some time and the economy was carrying a lot of excess capacity, which 
raised the risk that inflation could fall even further. 
At  the  time,  even  though  we  presented  a  projection  in  which  the  forecast  risks  around 
inflation  were  roughly  balanced,  we  gave  greater  weight  to  the  downside  risks  than  the 
upside ones. Because inflation had been persistently below target, a negative shock would 
have mattered more than a positive shock, as inflation would have been driven even farther 
away  from  target.  In  short,  we  attached  greater  weight  to  the  downside  risks  because 
inflation’s starting point was already relatively far from home, and had been for some time. 
This  situation  persisted  during  the  winter  months,  but  during  the  spring,  inflation  began  to 
move  up.  Six  weeks  ago,  when  we  last  set  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate,  the  inflation 
numbers we  were  working with  were April’s. They showed total CPI  inflation at 2 per cent 
and core at 1.4 per cent. Although we had expected inflation to move up due to various one-
off factors, including the effects of last year’s decline in the dollar, the increases arrived a bit 
faster than we had presented in the April MPR. 
At our announcement date six weeks ago, we did not have a new projection in which to work 
out all the details and balance the forecast risks. The economy still had a significant degree 
of  excess  capacity,  which  acts  to  pull  inflation  down  over  time.  Further,  relative  to  our 
projection in the April MPR, we were monitoring growing downside risks on global economic 
activity.  We  believed  that  as  we  worked  toward  our  next  projection,  published  in  today’s 
MPR, we would probably be downgrading the economic outlook. That would mean a longer 
period of economic slack in Canada, and would translate into a downside risk to inflation later 
in the forecast horizon. 
Accordingly,  six  weeks  ago,  even  though  measured  inflation  had  already  ticked  up,  and 
looked  likely  to  tick  up  even  more,  we  indicated  that  the  downside  risks  to  our  inflation 
outlook remained as important as before. In effect, the risks associated with the starting point 
for inflation had diminished, but the downside risks to the underlying fundamental drivers of 
inflation were growing. 
Today, our Report notes that total CPI inflation has moved to 2.3 per cent, and core inflation 
to 1.7 per cent. 
This  pickup  in  measured  inflation  is  attributable  to  the  temporary  effects  of  higher  energy 
prices, exchange rate pass-through and other sector-specific shocks. It is not coming from 
any change in domestic economic fundamentals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Today’s  MPR  presents  a  new  economic  projection  in  which  there  are  both  upside  and 
downside  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook.  We  believe  these  risks  are  roughly  balanced.  The 
downside  risks  to  inflation  associated  with  a  below-target  starting  point  have  clearly 
diminished.  The  projection  now  includes  a  lower  track  for  global  economic  activity,  and  a 
slower  return  of  our  economy  to  its  full  potential.  Our  serial  disappointment  with  global 
economic  performance  for  the  past  several  years  of  course  means  that  we  remain 
preoccupied with downside risks to economic activity and the fundamental drivers of inflation. 
As  the  temporary  effects  pushing  inflation  up  begin  to  dissipate  during  2015,  unless  the 
economy’s slack is absorbed over a reasonable timeframe, inflation will drift back down well 
below  target.  This  will  require  above-potential  economic  growth  fuelled  by  rising  exports, 
followed by investment in new capacity. 
We  believe  that  the  ingredients  are  present  for  an  eventual  return  to  balanced  and 
sustainable growth, with inflation on target, in 2016. We are anticipating that global demand 
will strengthen and, with the lower Canadian dollar, indeed, will lead to a pickup in Canadian 
exports and business investment. 
We  expect  real  GDP  growth  to  average  around  2  1/4  per  cent  during  2014  –  2016.  The 
economy  is  expected  to  reach  full  capacity  around  mid-2016,  a  little  later  than  we  said  in 
April. 
Meanwhile,  household  imbalances  continue  to  evolve  constructively  and  recent  data  are 
broadly consistent with a soft landing in Canada’s housing market. 
For the inflation target to be achieved on a sustained basis in 2016, the economy must reach 
and  remain  at  full  capacity.  Closing  the  output  gap  over  this  time  frame  is  reliant  on 
continued stimulative monetary policy and hinges critically on stronger exports and business 
investment. 
Weighing these considerations within the Bank’s risk-management framework, the monetary 
policy stance remains appropriate and the target for the overnight rate remains at 1 per cent. 
The Bank is neutral with respect to the timing and direction of the next change to the policy 
rate, which  will depend  on how new information influences the outlook and assessment of 
risks. 
And now, with that, Carolyn and I would be pleased to answer your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
