Stefan Ingves: The international regulatory agenda – necessary but not 
enough 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Affärs Världen Bank and Finans Outlook, Berns, 
Stockholm,19 March 2014. 
 Regulations and regulatory frameworks for banks have been the subject of much discussion 
in recent years. As several of the regulatory frameworks drawn up after the crisis are now 
being introduced at the national level these discussions have also perhaps waxed rather than 
waned recently. New and amended frameworks are also the theme here today. The Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision is, as many of you know, an international committee that 
produces  global  standards  and  regulations  for  banks.  This  summer,  I  will  have  been 
chairman  of  the  Committee  for  three  years.  Perhaps  the  most  important  task  facing  the 
Committee  when  I  took  up  the  post  of  chairman  was  to  finalise  the  Basel  III  regulatory 
framework, that is that part of the international reform agenda that followed in the wake of the 
financial crisis and that most closely relates to banks. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  tell  you  about  the  work  of  the  Basel  Committee.  Nowadays,  most 
regulatory frameworks are designed and drawn up internationally and my idea is to try to give 
you an insight into the international regulatory work. I would also like to present my view of 
what the international regulations entail for the Swedish financial system. 
There are above all three specific points I want to make. 
The  first  is  that  the  regulatory  frameworks  that  are  now  being  finalised  and  that  will  be 
introduced in Sweden and globally will benefit everyone. Once they are introduced they will 
increase  the  safety  margins  in  the  global  financial  system.  This  will  strengthen  financial 
stability in Sweden and abroad. 
My  second  point  is  that  many  of  the  international  reforms,  and  particularly  Basel  III,  are 
aimed at reducing just those risks and problems that Swedish authorities have identified in 
Sweden and in Swedish banks. They will thus directly contribute to increasing resilience in 
the Swedish banking system. 
The  third  point  I  would  like  to  emphasise  is  that  the  Basel  regulations  are  minimum 
requirements.  They  will  not  be  able  to  manage  all  of  the  risks  irrespective  of  the  country 
concerned.  In  my  opinion,  there  are  specific  circumstances  in  Sweden,  special  structural 
vulnerabilities, that more than justify continuing to set stricter requirements for the Swedish 
banks. 
New regulations will strengthen the banks and reduce the risk of crises 
The origins of Basel III lie in the latest financial crisis, which revealed several weaknesses in 
the global financial system. Above all, it became clear that the banks had too little capital in 
relation  to  their  risks  and  that  the  liquidity  risk  at  the  banks  was  too  high.  Moreover,  the 
collapse of the investment bank Lehman Brothers demonstrated how difficult it is to manage 
very  large  institutions  that  experiences  problems  and  to  avoid  the  problems  spreading  to 
other banks and having negative repercussions on the financial markets. 
The intention is that Basel III should capture the risks in the banking system better than the 
previous  regulatory  frameworks  and  thereby  reduce  the  likelihood  of  new  financial  crises. 
Basel III is thus a reaction to the fact that previous regulations were inadequate. The Basel III 
regulatory framework was published for the first time in its entirety in December 2010. Since 
then, the Basel Committee has worked to finalise the regulations. Beginning in 2013, Basel 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
III  will  gradually  replace  earlier  Basel  regulatory  frameworks.  In  Sweden,  Basel  III  will  be 
incorporated through EU legislation. 
More capital and larger liquidity buffers will increase resilience 
Put  simply,  Basel  III  is  founded  on  four  measures  that  act  as  instruments  for  assessing 
various risks in the banks. On the basis of these measures, the framework then stipulates 
certain minimum requirements, for example how much capital a bank must hold. 
The first measure is the risk-based capital measure, which is what we normally refer to when 
we speak about capital requirements. The risk-based capital measure was already a part of 
previous regulatory frameworks, but in Basel III it has been made much stricter. In addition to 
this  there  are  three  new  measures:  a  complementary  capital  measure,  the  leverage  ratio, 
and  two  liquidity  measures. The  latter  are  a  measure  of  short-term  liquidity  –  the  Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio (LCR) – and a structural measure of liquidity risk, the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio (NSFR). 
Today, I intend to focus on the leverage ratio and the NSFR. The reason for this is that the 
Basel Committee has made considerable progress on these measures this year. However, 
before  I  do  this  I  would  like  to  briefly  describe  the  risk-based  capital  requirement  and  the 
LCR,  as  when  I  speak  about  Sweden  and  Swedish  conditions  later  I  will  cover  all  of  the 
measures in Basel III. 
Let’s begin with the risk-based capital measure, which measures a bank’s capital in relation 
to its risk-weighted assets. This is the part of Basel III that was finalised first and it is already 
being  applied  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  The  idea  is  that  a  bank  should  have  sufficient 
capital  to  cover  unexpected  losses.  Compared with  previous  Basel  regulatory  frameworks, 
Basel III entails higher requirements for how much common equity tier 1 capital the banks 
must have and stricter and more uniform regulations on what may be counted as Common 
Equity Tier 1 capital that is capital of the highest quality. Basel III also introduces two kinds of 
capital buffer as a further element of the risk-based capital requirement that could be said to 
lie “on top of” the minimum requirements. The buffers are intended to provide safety margins 
before the banks begin to use their minimum capital holdings. In the case of systemically-
important  banks  there  is  also  an  extra  capital  requirement  over  and  above  the  minimum 
requirements. How large this supplement is depends on how systemically important the bank 
is.  For  global  systemically-important  banks  the  extra  requirement  will  begin  to  apply  from 
next year. 
For the  last  12 months there  has  also  been  an agreement  in the  Basel Committee  on  the 
short-term liquidity measure, the LCR. In brief, the LCR means that the banks must have a 
large  enough  buffer  of  high  liquid  assets  to  be  able  to  cover  their  cash  outflows  during  a 
30-day long stressed scenario. The aim is to strengthen the banks’ resilience to short-term 
liquidity  stress.  The  LCR  will  come  into  force  no  later  than  1  January  2015,  but  some 
countries are already applying it. In Sweden, a stricter version of the LCR has been applied 
since 2013. 
Leverage ratio complements the risk-based capital requirement 
As I mentioned earlier, the Basel Committee has made a lot of progress on the leverage ratio 
this year. In January the Committee agreed on a common method for calculating the ratio. 
The leverage ratio can be described as measure of how much of a bank’s assets the bank 
funds using its own capital. Like the risk-based capital measure, the leverage ratio aims to 
increase  the  ability  of  the  banks  to  cover  losses.  However,  unlike  the  risk-based  capital 
measure,  the  leverage  ratio  does  not  take  differences  in  risk  between  a  bank’s  different 
assets into account. 
The Basel Committee has been criticised by those who claim that introducing the leverage 
ratio creates a regulation that favours risk taking, as the measure deals with the banks in the 
same  way  irrespective  of  the  risks  they  take.  However,  the  leverage  ratio  is  intended  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
complement the risk-based capital measure and to act as extra protection to ensure that the 
level  of  capital  at the  banks  does  not fall  too  low.  It  can, for  example,  limit  how  much  the 
capital can fall in relation to the bank’s total assets if the models the banks use to calculate 
risk weights fail to capture risk to a sufficient extent and the risk weights therefore become 
too low. 
As  yet,  the  Basel  Committee’s  agreement  on  the  leverage  ratio  does  not  specify  any 
quantitative requirements. However, from the beginning of next year, large banks all over the 
world  will  need  to  publish  their  leverage  ratios.  The  idea  is  that  the  Basel  Committee  will 
monitor  developments  when  the  banks  begin  to  report  their  leverage  ratios  with  a  view  to 
migrating  to  a  minimum  requirement  from  2018.  However,  in  most  cases  the  risk-based 
capital requirement will continue to be the binding capital requirement, and not the leverage 
ratio.  However,  the  opposite  may  of  course  apply  in  some  cases.  This  is  also  reasonable 
because, when all is said and done, a requirement that can never be considered binding is 
not particularly meaningful. 
In  my  opinion,  the  leverage  ratio  is  a  welcome  complement  to  the  risk-based  capital 
measure. The Basel Committee’s agreement means that we now have a common method for 
calculating the leverage ratio, which we did not have before. This is good. The agreement on 
the leverage ratio is therefore a major step forward. 
The regulations for the structural liquidity measure, the NSFR, complete Basel III 
The fourth measure in Basel III is thus the structural liquidity measure, the NSFR. The aim of 
the  NSFR  is  to  ensure  that  the  banks  fund  their  operations  with  sufficient  long-term  and 
stable funding  so  as  to reduce the risk  of  being  hit  by funding  and  liquidity  problems. The 
NSFR thus constitutes an important complement to the short-term LCR measure that aims to 
protect the banks when, in some sense, liquidity stress is already a fact. 
The  NSFR  is  the  component  of  the  Basel  III  framework  that  has  not  yet  been  finalised. 
Finalising the regulations for the NSFR is one of the Committee’s most important priorities for 
2014. This will in principle mark the completion of the work with the entire Basel III regulatory 
framework. As part of this work, the Committee recently published a revised proposal for the 
NSFR  for  stakeholders  outside  the  Committee  to  comment  on.  In  connection  with  this  the 
Committee reiterated that it intends to introduce the NSFR as a quantitative requirement from 
1 January 2018. 
The changes made to the NSFR compared with the original proposal primarily aim to ensure 
that the measure better captures the funding structures that proved to be weak during the 
crisis. For example, the requirements have been tightened for operations that are typically 
associated  with  investment  banks.  Another  change  is  that  also  funding  with  a  maturity  of 
between six and 12 months may to a certain extent be included as part of a bank’s stable 
funding. However, the aim of the NSFR is still to ensure more stable funding at the banks. 
Other new regulations will also increase the safety margins 
In addition to the work with Basel III, the Basel Committee is devoting a lot of resources to 
completing  the  review  of  a  number  of  other  regulatory frameworks. These frameworks  are 
not usually seen as a part of Basel III, but this work also began as a result of the financial 
crisis. For various reasons, these frameworks will perhaps have less direct impact in Sweden 
than Basel III. But they are important from the global point of view and will indirectly benefit 
Sweden by increasing the safety margins in the global financial system. 
For  example,  one  element  of  this  work  concerns  an  updated  framework  for  the  capital 
requirements of the banks’ trading books. A similar review is also underway for the capital 
adequacy framework for securitised loans and other assets. Many major international banks 
have large trading books and considerable exposures to securitised assets. It is important to 
introduce regulations for risks related to activities of this type so that they can be limited. In a 
globalised world this is also important to Sweden. In addition, the Basel Committee is also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
working with a regulatory framework to limit large exposures and a number of frameworks 
relating  to  the derivatives  market.  All  of  these  are  included  in  the  reform  package  that the 
Basel Committee hopes to be able to finalise this year. 
New focus: application of the regulatory frameworks and the calculation of risk 
weights 
By now it is probably obvious to most of you that the Basel Committee and other standard 
setters  have  had  a  lot  to  do:  the  list  of  regulations  is  long.  However,  important  as  it  is  to 
design effective regulatory frameworks, it is just as important to ensure that they introduced 
in a consistent way around the globe. Only then will they be effective and credible. During my 
chairmanship, I have therefore considered it to be an important task for the Basel Committee 
to extend its efforts to monitor how various frameworks are implemented. 
Today,  the  Basel  Committee  conducts  this  work  at  several  levels.  For  example,  the 
Committee  is  currently  assessing  how  the  capital  adequacy  regulations  in  Basel  III  have 
been incorporated into national regulatory frameworks. Six assessments have been carried 
out so far and three are in progress, including the assessment of the EU. This assessment 
will eventually be extended to also cover other parts of the Basel III framework. However, it is 
already  clear  that  this  is  an  effective  way  to  ensure  that  the  frameworks  agreed  on  are 
actually put into place and to ensure that the regulations are used as intended. 
The  Basel  Committee  is  also  reviewing  how  the  banks  calculate  their  risk  weights.  Put 
simply,  the  risk  weights  determine  how  much  capital  the  banks  need  to  hold  for  a  certain 
asset, for example a loan or a security. So far, the Committee’s work has resulted in three 
studies that have compared how international banks calculate their risk weights for different 
portfolios. The latest study examined, among other things, the banks’ risk weights for lending 
to  companies,  while  the  earlier  studies  focused  on  risk  weights  for  the  banks’  trading 
operations.  However,  all  three  studies  have  revealed  that  the  risk  weights  the  banks 
calculate  themselves  using  their  own  models  vary  to  a  relatively  great  extent  without  this 
always being justified by differences in the risk associated with the assets. This means that it 
is not possible to effectively compare the banks’ risk weights. There is a risk that this could 
have a negative impact on confidence in the risk-based capital regulations. 
The banks’ risk weights must be credible 
I would like to focus on risk weights for a moment as we are currently discussing these here 
in Sweden too, although the discussion here differs somewhat from the discussion abroad, 
for  example  in  that  it  primarily  concerns  mortgages.  I  have  long  been  clear  that  the  risk 
weights  for  mortgages  that  the  banks  calculate  using  their  own  models  are  often  too  low. 
However, the causes of both the Swedish and the international problems can be traced to 
the same source. Internationally too, it has been concluded that the banks’ own models are 
inadequate for ensuring that risk weights always reflect the risks in a good and reliable way. 
Discussions are therefore underway as to whether the regulatory frameworks, as well as the 
oversight and approval of the banks’ internal models, must be reviewed so that the models 
cannot become tools for an unwarranted lowering of the capital requirements. 
In my opinion, finding ways of ensuring that the risk-weight calculations are credible and that 
the risk weights of different banks can be compared is one of the most important tasks of the 
Basel Committee going forward. A number of measures are being considered and discussed; 
we will gradually begin to see the fruits of this work. This relates, for example, to reviewing 
the banks’ choice of models for calculating risk weights and the degree of freedom for the 
banks to make their own assumptions in the models, as well as setting stricter requirements 
to  ensure  that  the  data  used  as  input  in  the  models  is  of  sufficiently  high  quality.  Another 
approach  involves  discussing  and  developing  proposals  for  regulatory  floors  of  different 
kinds, for example risk-weight floors like the one we have for mortgages in Sweden today or 
floors  that  cover  the  total  capital  requirement  that  is  also  in  place  today.  Finally,  it  is  a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
question of tightening up supervision and improving transparency concerning risk weights. It 
is probable that the assessment of the banks risk weights will be broadened and eventually 
become a permanent part of the undertakings of the Basel Committee. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  leverage  ratio,  there  are  those  that  claim  that  these  measures  will 
reduce the banks’ incentives to effectively manage their own risks. However, in my opinion it 
is question of avoiding a regulatory framework that gives the banks incentives to use their 
own models with the aim of reducing their risk weights and their capital requirements more 
than can be justified by the risks in their operations. It is important to find solutions to this 
problem as it will otherwise be difficult to restore the credibility of the frameworks and thus of 
the banks. 
Basel III is also relevant to the Swedish banking system 
Once Basel III is in place around the globe, the safety margins in the global financial system 
will be greater than previously. This will benefit everyone, even Sweden, partly by reducing 
the risk of global crises and partly by reducing the risk of crises spreading to Sweden and 
other countries through the links that exist on the financial markets. 
At the same time, the problems and risks that the international regulatory initiatives aim to 
deal with correspond to those that Swedish authorities have identified in Sweden. The Basel 
III framework will therefore also have a direct positive impact on financial stability in Sweden. 
Let me give you a few concrete examples: 
• 
Stricter risk-based capital requirements will increase the ability of the Swedish banks 
to cover unexpected losses, in both their Swedish and foreign operations, thereby 
increasing the banks’ resilience. 
The  leverage  ratio  will  provide  a  complementary  picture  to  the  risk-based  capital 
requirement and means that authorities and investors will be better able to assess a 
bank’s capital situation. Having a quantitative requirement for the leverage ratio sets 
a  limit  for  a  how  low  the  Swedish  banks’  capital  can  fall  in  relation  to  their  total 
assets, irrespective of how risky their operations are considered to be. A leverage 
ratio  requirement  of,  let  us  say,  3  per  cent  corresponds  to  a  risk  weight  for 
mortgages of approximately 22 per cent for a major Swedish bank with a 12 per cent 
CET 1 capital requirement.1 
Another example is the NSFR. The Riksbank has long pointed out that the Swedish 
banks should reduce their funding risks by extending the maturity of their funding so 
that it corresponds more closely to the maturity of the banks’ assets. The aim of the 
NSFR is to get the banks to do just this. 
Finally, we have the so-called countercyclical buffer, which is one of the new buffers 
introduced through the capital adequacy regulations in Basel III. This is intended to 
ensure that the banks build up extra shock absorbers in times when credit growth is 
particularly  high  so  that  they  really  take  into  account  the  risks  that  such  an 
expansion entails for the financial system as a whole. This may also help to slow 
down  an  excessive  growth  in  credit.  Once  this  framework  is  in  place  it  is  in  my 
opinion reasonable, given the course developments have taken in Sweden, that the 
countercyclical buffer is implemented and activated at a high level. 
                                                   
1  Having 12 per cent CET 1 capital here entails, according to the regulations, a primary capital requirement of at 
least 13.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets. As 13.5 per cent of 22 per cent equals 3 per cent, the leverage 
ratio requirement, put simply, corresponds to a risk weight of 22 per cent for mortgages. The calculation is 
based on a leverage ratio defined with primary capital in the numerator. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
But the structure of the Swedish banking system calls for greater safety margins 
Although the new regulatory framework will strengthen resilience in several ways there are 
structural  vulnerabilities  in  the  Swedish  banking system  that  mean  that  the  safety  margins 
provided  by  the  Basel  III  framework  are  not  enough  in  all  respects.  As  every  country’s 
financial system and banking system are unique and have their own special characteristics 
and  vulnerabilities,  the  basis  of  the  Basel frameworks  is  that  the  regulations  are  minimum 
requirements.  Countries  that  believe  it  is  necessary  to  set  stricter  requirements  can  and 
should do so. 
In my opinion, the size and high degree of concentration of the Swedish banking sector, as 
well  as  the  banks’  extensive  dependence  on  both  foreign  and  domestic  market  funding, 
create vulnerabilities that justify complementing the internationally-agreed frameworks. The 
high  and  growing  indebtedness  of  the  Swedish  households  poses  further  risks  to  the 
financial  system.  All-in-all,  this  justifies  Sweden  taking  action  sooner  and  having  stricter 
regulations in certain respects. 
On  the  basis  of  several  of  these  factors,  the  Riksbank  has  recommended,  together  with 
Finansinspektionen  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  that  from  1  January  next  year  the  major 
Swedish banks should have CET 1 capital ratios of at least 12 per cent. This is significantly 
higher  than  the  requirement  in  the  Basel  III  framework.  Several  other  countries  with  large 
banking  systems  have  for  similar  reasons  introduced  or  are  discussing  higher  capital 
requirements for their banks. Two closely-related examples are Switzerland and the United 
Kingdom. 
Another area where we need stricter requirements for Swedish banks is the area of short-
term liquidity risk. At present, the largest Swedish institutions are required to have a liquidity 
coverage  ratio  of  at  least  100  per  cent.  The  LCR  requirement  applies  in  total  for  all 
currencies  together  and  for  operations  in  euros  and  US  dollars  separately.  However, 
separate quantitative requirements for individual currencies are not included as a quantitative 
minimum requirement in the Basel III framework. In my view, however, it is very important 
that the banks maintain a high level of resilience to liquidity stress by holding liquidity buffers 
in  the  currencies  in  which  they  have  their  largest  cash  flows.  An  LCR  requirement  per 
currency ensures that this is the case in euros and US dollars. 
It is also reasonable that the banks report their LCRs in Swedish kronor to provide a more 
complete picture of their liquidity risks. The Riksbank therefore recommends the major banks 
to publish their LCRs in Swedish kronor.2 Unfortunately, only one bank, Swedbank, meets 
this  recommendation  today.  There  are  good  reasons  for  introducing  some  form  of 
quantitative requirement for LCRs in Swedish kronor. The banks have low liquidity buffers in 
Swedish kronor at present, which means that they would have to rely on foreign markets and 
swap  markets  if  they  were  to  need  liquidity  in  Swedish  kronor.  The  Riksbank  is  of  course 
always able to lend Swedish kronor, but in my view it is not reasonable that the banks can 
take liquidity risks on the assumption that the Riksbank will always be at hand if things do not 
go according to plan. The Riksbank should, potentially, be the lender of last resort, not the 
lender  of  first  resort.  Liquidity  regulations  in  Swedish  kronor  would  also  give  the  banks 
incentives  to  extend  the  maturity  of  their  funding.  This  is  because,  all  else  being  equal,  a 
bank that extends the maturity of its funding will reduce its short-term cash outflows and will 
thus have a higher LCR. 
We can also view risk-weight floors for mortgages as a complement to the existing regulatory 
frameworks. The leverage ratio deals to some extent with the problem that the risk weights 
perhaps do not always reflect the actual risk in the banks’ portfolios, but it does not do so 
precisely enough. International measures may eventually be proposed, but until then and as 
                                                
2  Financial Stability Report, November 2013. Sveriges Riksbank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
long as household indebtedness constitutes a significant risk we need a sufficiently high risk-
weight floor for Swedish mortgages. At present, we have a risk-weight floor of 15 per cent in 
Sweden. As long as household indebtedness increases, there are good reasons for raising 
this floor to at least 25 per cent. 
Finally,  in  the  case  of  the  leverage  ratio  and  the  NSFR  it  is  too  early  to  say  whether  the 
minimum  requirements  in  Basel  III  are  enough  for  Sweden  or  not.  As  yet,  the  Basel 
Committee  has  not  decided  on  a  quantitative  requirement  for  the  leverage  ratio  and  it  is 
therefore not possible to determine today how a Swedish requirement should relate to the 
international  requirement.  With  regard  to  the  NSFR,  the  Riksbank  has  recommended  the 
major Swedish banks to extend the maturity of their funding in order to be able to reach the 
NSFR once it is in place. The revised proposal for the NSFR means that the reference point 
for this recommendation has moved somewhat. However, irrespective of the technical design 
of the NSFR, the large Swedish banks need to extend the maturity of their funding. What the 
appropriate levels for the Swedish banks’ leverage ratios and NSFRs are, and thus whether 
the  Riksbank  needs  to  work  for  the  introduction  of  higher  levels  than  those  that  will  apply 
internationally,  are  questions  that  we  will  need  to  consider  carefully  and  return  to  in  the 
period ahead. 
The Basel regulations provide a good foundation, but more may be needed 
I hope that I have now succeeded in giving you a better insight into the work of the Basel 
Committee and my view of its importance to Sweden. 
The Committee has recently taken important steps towards finalising Basel III and hopefully 
a complete regulatory framework will be available at the end of 2014. I also hope that the 
work that has begun on a number of other important frameworks in the wake of the financial 
crisis will be finalised this year. This will entail a change in the focus of the Committee’s work. 
Going  forward,  the  Committee  will  place  more  emphasis  on  monitoring  and  assessing  the 
application of the frameworks to ensure that the regulations are effective. 
The international regulatory work is extensive and will affect us directly when the regulations 
are  introduced  here  in  Sweden.  Having  a  global  regulatory  framework  that  increases  the 
safety margins in the global financial system will benefit everyone and is therefore important. 
It  is  also  important  to  remember  that  the  international  discussion  on  regulations  and 
regulatory frameworks has a lot in common with the discussion underway here in Sweden. In 
the  main,  the  measures  proposed  in  Basel  III  aim  to  reduce  risks  that  also  exist  in  our 
Swedish  banks  and  that  we  have  been  pointing  out  for  a  long  time.  The  international 
regulatory work therefore serves Swedish interests – in other words, it is not a question of 
introducing  regulations  that  have  mainly  been  drawn  up  to  manage  problems  that  only 
concern other countries. Moreover, discussions are underway in international forums that are 
similar to those underway here in Sweden on many other policy issues, but perhaps not as 
much progress has been made abroad as in Sweden on considering what measures can be 
introduced. One example of this is the discussion of floors for risk weights. 
Finally:  as  things  look  today  there  are,  in  my  opinion,  specific  circumstances  in  Sweden, 
especially structural vulnerabilities, that justify continuing to complement the internationally-
agreed requirements with stricter requirements in certain areas. One of the greatest risks I 
see as far as Sweden is concerned is the mortgage market. The measures needed to come 
to terms with this have not been in focus here today, but this is certainly an issue I will return 
to. Today, I have instead talked about international regulations and about Sweden’s need to 
go further in some respects. Those I have mentioned today are higher capital requirements, 
LCRs per currency, risk-weight floors for mortgages and the countercyclical capital buffer. In 
the case of the leverage ratio and the NSFR, we need to examine more closely whether the 
Riksbank  should  work for  stricter  requirements in  Sweden  than  the  upcoming  international 
minimum requirements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
