Ewald Nowotny: European Monetary Union – past, present and future, in 
honor of Alexandre Lamfalussy 
Speech by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, 
at the Lamfalussy Lectures Conference, Budapest, 31 January 2014. 
 I am very glad to be here in Budapest again as a guest of the Hungarian central bank, with 
which  the  Austrian  central  bank  ‒  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  –  has  very  close 
relations, not the least because both our central banks are in the same IMF constituency as 
our friends from Turkey, the Czech Republic and a few other countries. 
I  am  a  humble  central  banker  and  not  a  diplomat,  so I may  be frank  and  remind  you  that 
close  relationships  are  not  necessarily  always  easy  relationships.  In  fact,  our  two  central 
banks recently faced some difficult issues, revolving especially around some foreign-owned 
banks. But I also want to underline that both our central banks have always been committed 
to finding workable and fair solutions, and I am quite optimistic that at the end of the day, we 
– and our governments – will find such solutions. We all know very  well that in matters of 
external and of internal affairs there may be situations of disagreement, but history teaches 
us that we should never go so far as to see each other as enemies. 
The Hungarian central bank and especially my friend, Governor György Matolcsy, are to be 
commended  for  the  brilliant  idea  of  establishing  the  Lamfalussy  prize  and  the  Lamfalussy 
lecture: I gladly accepted this prize in honour of Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy, who perfectly 
exemplifies the model of the great liberal, open minded Hungarian that journalist and author 
Paul Lendvai impressively described in his brilliant book “The Hungarians”. I recently gave 
my wife this book in recognition of her Hungarian roots. Baron Lamfalussy can also serve as 
a symbol of – and as a role model – for the personal and intellectual ties between Central 
Europe  and Western  Europe  and  therefore  also for the  relationship  between  the  “Ins”  and 
“Outs”  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Thus  it  is  no coincidence  that in  two  weeks,  the 
Belgian central bank will also hold a special conference in honor of Alexandre Lamfalussy, a 
conference, by the way, where Lamfalussy will personally attend the presentation of a book 
on his life coauthored by his son. 
Alexandre Lamfalussy lives in truly interesting times and has played an active part in these 
times  in  three  capacities:  As  an  eminent  scholar  in  monetary  economics,  as  a  leading 
commercial  banker  and  as  a  highly  influential  monetary  policymaker  And  from  my  own 
experience I can assure you that being a commercial banker and a policymaker are – and 
should be – two very different experiences. 
Alexandre  Lamfalussy  was  born  85  years  ago  –  in  1929  –  in  Kapuvár,  Hungary.  In  1949, 
when the Iron Curtain isolated Hungary and many other Central European countries from the 
rest  of  Europe,  he  managed  to  emigrate  to  Belgium,  where  he  studied  economics  at  the 
Catholic University of Louvain; he obtained his PhD from the University of Oxford. 
It is quite fascinating to see that Lamfalussy developed his strong pro-European conviction 
already during these formative years, no doubt also because he personally experienced the 
barriers  which  divided  Europe.  And  he  found  friends  who  shared  his  conviction  and  his 
values. 
Let me give you a small, but interesting example of Lamfalussy’s convictions: He became a 
member of “La Relève”, which was both a political club and a weekly magazine close to the 
left wing of the Belgian Christian Democrat Party. It is noteworthy that the keynote speaker at 
the 30th anniversary of La Relève in 1975 was Jacques Delors (Maes, 2011, p.17). When I 
was Vice President of the European Investment Bank (EIB) in Luxembourg, I had the good 
fortune to gain an understanding of this set of ideas from my good friend Philippe Maystadt, 
the President of the EIB and the former Belgian Minister of Finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Alexandre  Lamfalussy  then  worked  for  the  commercial  bank  Banque  de  Bruxelles  for 
20 years,  where  he  became  a  member  of  the  Executive  Board.  Already  during  this  time, 
Lamfalussy was active in a number of committees investigating the integration of European 
capital markets. 
In 1976, Alexandre Lamfalussy underwent a major career change and went to the Bank for 
International Settlements, the BIS, in Basel, first gaining great respect as Chief Economist 
and from 1985 serving as the General Manager of the BIS. During this time, he became one 
of the leading figures in the preparatory work for European financial integration. Lamfalussy 
was a member of the Delors Committee, which played a central role in the preparation of the 
Maastricht Treaty and EMU. Thus he was the obvious choice to become the first president of 
the European Monetary Institute (EMI), which had the task of organizing the preparations for 
the introduction of EMU and the single monetary policy and which then evolved into the ECB. 
I will return to the glorious past of EMU later, but first allow me to finish my short summary of 
Alexandre  Lamfalussy’s  spectacular  career  by  drawing  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  he 
played  a  decisive  role  in  European  economic  policy  in  later  years  as  well:  In  2000, 
Lamfalussy  was  appointed  chairman  of  a  committee  called  the  “Group  of  Wise  Men”,  a 
politically  incorrect  title,  of  course.  This  group  laid  the  groundwork  for  the  regulation  of 
European  financial  markets  and  developed  what  became  known  as  the  Lamfalussy 
procedure on the regulation of European securities markets. 
As my lecture is entitled “European Monetary Union: Past, Present and Future”, let me return 
to  the  past  briefly,  namely  to  the  foundation  laid  by  the  EMI  under  the  presidency  of 
Alexandre Lamfalussy. 
Following  the  political  agreement  on  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  the  EMI  took  up  its  duties  in 
1994. Alexandre Lamfalussy, then general manager of the BIS, was chosen to head this new 
institution. As David  Marsh remarked in his outstanding account of the history of the euro, 
“Sharp  of  mind  and  way  of  manner,  Lamfalussy  was  the  most  polished  of  monetary 
technocrats, commanding English, French and German with a cut-glass precision” (Marsh, 
2009,  p.  193).  (Not  untypically  for  an  Englishman,  David  Marsh  forgot  Lamfalussy’s 
knowledge of Hungarian). Lamfalussy started work in Frankfurt with a skeleton staff of 12 – 
today, the staff of the ECB numbers around 1,600, and the ECB is about to hire 1,000 more 
staff members to handle the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
The  basic  problems  at  this  early  stage  of  EMU  were  structural  aspects  that  are  still  of 
relevance today and, as I will show later, will remain so for the future. 
The first  aspect  concerns  the relationship  between  political  and  monetary  unification,  or  at 
least the coordination of both aspects. Especially in the German speaking countries, there 
were two opposing schools of thought at the time: 
One view, rather grandiosely called the “coronation theory”, saw a monetary union as the last 
step, the “coronation”, of a political union. This reflects the experience of the unification of 
Germany in the 19th century and is based on the conviction that there has to be a common 
political system to guarantee a strict monetary policy. 
The alternative view is the “locomotive theory”, which reflects the experience of the Robert 
Schumann-Jean  Monnet  approach  after  World  War  II.  In  this  view,  economic  cooperation 
projects  starting  with  the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community  in  1952  created  an 
evolutionary process toward an “ever closer union”. It is obvious that a political union using 
the  coronation  theory  as  a  starting  point  is  only  realistic  for  a  small,  rather  homogenous 
group of European states. After various rounds of EU enlargement this concept of a small, 
homogenous  Europe  was  no  longer  realistic;  moreover,  it  was  no  longer  in  Germany’s 
interest.  So  Alexandre  Lamfalussy  reports  in  an  interview  with  David  Marsh  how  much  he 
agreed with Helmut Kohl on a fast-track approach to monetary union. (Marsh, 2009, p. 191). 
The  Maastricht Treaty  provided  clear  rules  for  EMU  membership.  But  already  at  this  time, 
there  were  controversies  about  “creative  accounting”  and  statistical  manipulation  in  some 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
countries.  In  retrospect,  it  may  be  said  however,  that  the  ambition  of  entering  EMU  in 
combination  with  the  Maastricht  rules  exerted  a  strong  stabilizing  influence  in  all  future 
member states, so that – in accordance with benevolent political agenda setting – EMU could 
start as scheduled in 1999. 
The question of the division of labor between the ECB and the national central banks had yet 
to be resolved, another topic which has remained relevant to this day. One important issue 
was  whether  the  conduct  of  money  market  operations  should  be  decentralized,  as 
Jean-Claude  Trichet,  then  governor  of  the  Banque  de  France,  advocated,  or  whether  it 
should  be  centralized,  as  Alexandre  Lamfalussy  and  Hans  Tietmeyer,  president  of  the 
Bundesbank argued. The ECB view prevailed, which proved to be extremely beneficial in the 
financial  markets  turmoil  of  2007  and  2008:  fast  and  strong  liquidity  provision  by  the  ECB 
was vital for stabilizing the European economy. 
To come full circle, we now move on to the present-day situation and to the challenges of 
EMU.  The  present  situation  is  still  dominated  by  the  direct  and  indirect  effects  of  the 
worldwide  crisis  that  started  in  2007  to  2008.  In  the  years  before  the  crisis,  central  banks 
lived in the glory – and as we now know the illusion – of the concept of “Great Moderation”. 
The  basic  message  was  that  a  constellation  of  independent  central  banks  following  a 
strategy  of  tight  inflation  targeting  is  both  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition  to  ensure  a 
benign  combination  of  low  inflation  and  high  real  economic  growth.  This  combination  had 
indeed been achieved in the first years of the new century. But as we now know, this positive 
outcome  was  the  result  of  very  specific  circumstances,  especially  strong  first-round 
globalization effects. 
Thus,  central  banks  were  not  well  prepared  for  the  upcoming  financial  and  economic 
tsunami. This also holds true for the ECB, which in the summer of 2008 still raised interest 
rates.  But  when  the  tsunami  arrived,  central  banks,  including  the  ECB,  reacted  fast  and 
forcefully and thus prevented a world-wide crisis of the dimensions of the Great Depression 
of the 1930s. 
Looking at these developments from a European perspective, it is fair to say that without the 
ECB, the impact on Europe of the world-wide crisis and especially of the de facto breakdown 
of money markets for a time would have been  much stronger and indeed catastrophic not 
only for the member states of EMU, but for all of Europe. 
No national central bank, not even the central bank of a large country, would have been able 
to provide banks in liberalized capital markets with as much crucially needed liquidity as fast 
as the ECB. And only the big central banks like the ECB, the Fed, the Bank of Japan and the 
Swiss National Bank were able to form the strong network of swap agreements that proved 
of  utmost  importance  for  the  banking  industry  and  that  now  is  one  of  the  most  important 
permanent institutional innovations. All these innovations, by the way, benefited not only the 
banks – and thus the economies – of the euro area, but in an indirect way also the countries 
in which euro area banks are active, such as Hungary (Nowotny, 2010). 
It is only this year that the euro area is expected to move out of recession to a constellation 
of  positive,  albeit  still  very  weak,  growth,  and  we  still  see  substantial  differences  in  the 
economic  performance  of  various  EMU  member  countries  –  and  also  of  neighboring 
countries. 
The main efforts both in Europe and across the world are now moving from crisis fighting to 
long-term crisis prevention. Two main approaches are being implemented: The first approach 
is to adjust the structures of the banking industry by implementing the Basel III process and 
the European banking union project. Christian Noyer, who plays a key role in both areas, will 
talk about this. 
The  second  approach  is  to  adjust  public  finances.  As  I  have  shown  before,  the  founding 
fathers  of  EMU  were  already  fully  aware  of  the  risks  of  having  a  single  monetary  policy 
without a centralized European fiscal policy counterpart. This awareness gave birth to the EU 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  parallel  to  EMU.  As  the  crisis  showed,  the  provisions  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact were not strong enough to prevent a destabilizing accumulation of 
public  or  private  debt  in  a  number  of  countries before  the  crisis,  so  that  the  needed fiscal 
impulses were limited during the crisis. 
At the EU level, we therefore see a whole set of new institutional arrangements to provide for 
long-term  fiscal  sustainability.  There  is  a  far-reaching  consensus  about  the  intentions  of 
these  arrangements:  Public  deficits  and  debt  levels  need  to  be  limited  and  adequately 
supervised. This is all the more relevant for member countries of the euro area that do not 
have  access  to  central  bank  financing  and  that  are  exposed  to  free  capital  movements. 
There  are,  however,  divergent  views  about  how  fast  to  achieve  the  reduction  of  currently 
high,  mainly  crisis  induced,  levels  of  public  debt. Whereas  European  institutions,  including 
the  ECB,  advocate  strict  and  tight  timeframes,  IMF  and  U.S.  economists  tend  to  prefer  a 
more  flexible  approach.  This  discussion  is  not  new  and  will  remain  a  central  issue  of  the 
political and economic debate in the near future – and it is a discussion where easy answers 
indeed tend to be misleading. The difficult political process of regaining fiscal sustainability 
must of course be strengthened and controlled without damaging the still very fragile process 
of economic recovery. 
It  is  true  that  future  economic  growth  will  depend  on  a  number  of  supply-side  structural 
reforms of the labor and products markets. But in the present situation of still low capacity 
utilization in many fields of the economy, of low investment and especially of alarming rates 
of  unemployment  in  many  countries,  it  seems  to  be  obvious  that  the  demand-side  of  the 
economy is also of relevance – and that additional demand cannot be expected to come from 
ever-increasing current account surpluses of the EU. 
In this context, it is quite interesting to see that Alexandre Lamfalussy already at a very early 
stage referred to the problem that a lack of fiscal coordination could lead to substantial policy 
inefficiencies with regard to macroeconomic disequilibria – and could overburden a European 
single monetary policy in the long run: “The combination of a small Community budget with 
large,  independently  determined  national  budgets  leads  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  the 
absence  of  fiscal  coordination,  the  global  fiscal  policy  of  EMU  would  be  the  accidental 
outcome of decisions taken by Member States … As a result, the only global macroeconomic 
tool  available  within  EMU  would  be  the  common  monetary  policy  implemented  by  the 
European Central Bank” (Lamfalussy, 1989). 
What  about  the  future  perspectives  of  the  EMU?  This,  of  course,  is  a  huge  field  full  of 
uncertainties, so let me concentrate on a single issue: future institutional perspectives. 
We  see  a  wide  set  of  proposals  to  strengthen  the  political  foundations  of  EMU.  Basically, 
these  proposals  go  into  the  direction  of  creating  a  “European  economic  government”,  a 
“fiscal union” with, as Jean-Claude Trichet emphasized, a European finance minister. All this 
would involve substantial transfers of national sovereignty and thus Treaty changes. We are 
all aware of the immense political problems involved in achieving such changes. This holds 
especially true if we look at the EU as a whole, where there is a strong ongoing discussion 
about leaving the EU in one major country, the U.K. 
So  any  such  institutional  discussions  have  to  concentrate  on  the  Eurogroup  countries, 
strengthening  the  already  existing  perspective  of  a  two-  or  three-speed  Europe.  I  am  fully 
aware that this is a very sensitive issue not only for Europe in general, but especially also for 
the  newer  EU  Member  States.  In  the  very  long  run,  a  Europe  of  different  speeds  may 
converge again, but at least for the medium term, I consider a closer cooperation of the EU 
members  able  and  willing  to  engage  in  more  advanced  levels  of  political  and  economic 
integration the only way to achieve the desired future political foundations for EMU. In fact, 
the present EU Treaty (Article 136 TFEU) may already allow for far-reaching changes of this 
type without the need to change the Treaty (Piris, 2012). 
So  basically,  we  have  not  advanced  very  far  since  the  discussion  we  had  before  starting 
EMU that I described in the first part of my presentation. This historical perspective should 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
make us wary of frequent warnings that there cannot be a lasting monetary union without a 
closer political union. Now as then, a stronger political foundation would be preferable. But 
now as then, this stronger political foundation is extremely difficult to achieve. And now as 
then,  an  admittedly  imperfect  monetary  union  is  still  preferable  to  a  situation  without  a 
monetary union and without a strong European Central Bank, that has proved to be one of 
the most important and efficient European institutions. 
So  in  concluding  my  presentation,  let  me  return  again  to  Alexandre  Lamfalussy  and  his 
principle-based,  but  pragmatic  approach  to  economic  and  political  affairs.  In  2003, 
Lamfalussy  gave  a  speech  in  Budapest  on  the  unfortunately  also  now  extremely  relevant 
topic  “Correcting  Europe’s  dismal  growth  performance  should  be  the  EU’s  prime  policy 
objective”.  In  this  speech,  he  warned  against  relying  on  the  U.S.A.  as  “consumer  of  last 
resort” and made a number of proposals for “domestically propelled growth in Europe”. And 
he ended his speech with some very characteristic remarks. The proposals, and now I quote: 
“will bring sizable benefits to most of us, but not without throwing up new challenges. You 
may say that this remark is just the usual manifestation of a central banker’s innate caution. 
Well, it may be. But that does not mean that I am necessarily wrong”. 
I see this as a way of thinking with which every central banker can – and should – agree. 
References: 
Lamfalussy,  A.  1989.  Macro-coordination  of  fiscal  policies  in  an  economic  and  monetary 
union in Europe, Collection of Papers. Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary 
Union. Luxembourg, 1989. January. 91–126. 
Lamfalussy, A. 2003. Introductory remarks: Correcting Europe’s dismal growth performance 
should be the EU’s prime policy objective. World Science Forum. Budapest. 
Landvai, P. 1999. Die Ungarn. 4. Auflage C. Bertelsmann (also in English edition). 
Maes,  I.  2009.  The  young  Lamfalussy:  An  empirical  and  policy-oriented  growth  theorist. 
Working Paper Research No. 163. National Bank of Belgium. 
Maes,  I.  2011.  The  evolution  of  Alexander  Lamfalussy’s  thought  on  the  international  and 
European monetary system. Working Paper Research No. 217, National Bank of Belgium. 
Marsh, D. 2009. The Euro – The Battle for the New Global Currency. Yale U.P. 
Nowotny, E. 2010. The euro’s contribution to economic stability in CESEE. In: E. Nowotny, P. 
Mooslechner,  D.  Ritzberger-Grünwald  (eds.).  The  Euro  and  Economic  Stability.  Edward 
Elgar. 
Piris, J.-C. 2012. The Future of Europe – Towards a Two Speed EU? Cambridge U.P 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
