  Lawrence Schembri: Dual vision for the Canadian payments system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Lawrence  Schembri,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Canadian Payments Association, Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, 27 June 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you.  It  is  a  privilege  and  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  today  at  this  important 
conference. 
As  many  of  you  know,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  a  strong  interest  in  the  evolution  of  our 
payments system that goes well beyond our role as purveyor of the simplest form of payment 
–  cash.  This  interest  stems  not  only  from  our  oversight  responsibility  for  systemically 
important payment systems under the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act, but also from 
the important role these systems play in the transmission of monetary policy. Indeed, working 
with you and other stakeholders to improve payments falls squarely within our mandate to 
promote the economic and financial welfare of Canada. 
Today,  I  want  to  share  with  you  a  dual  vision  for  Canada’s  payments  system  and  its 
oversight. While I won’t claim that all of the elements of this vision are original, I hope that by 
articulating  it,  we  can  begin  a  much-needed  dialogue  on  how  to  improve  our  payments 
system and move it into the 21st century. 
Canada’s payments system is undergoing rapid and fundamental change. The bulk of it is 
driven  by  the  combined  forces  of  technological  innovation  and  the  desire  of  consumers  to 
realize the benefits, most notably the convenience, of new technologies. 
But is all of this rapid change going in the right direction? Is it sufficiently coordinated? Is it 
safe? Is it sound? Are users’ interests well protected? 
These  are  important  questions.  And  addressing  them  represents  the  important  challenges 
we all face. 
We  must  respond  –  in  a  coherent  and  far-sighted  manner.  Payment  systems  matter  to 
Canadians.  Every  year,  we  make  approximately  24  billion  payments,  worth  more  than 
$44 trillion.  These  payments  not  only  affect  our  daily  lives,  but  they  also  have  a  profound 
impact on the effectiveness of our financial system in promoting economic activity, both here 
in Canada and externally. 
To  coordinate  our  response  and  ensure  that  we  are  progressing  in  the  right  direction,  we 
need  a  dual  vision  for  Canada’s  payments  system  and  its  oversight,  one  that  promotes 
efficiency-enhancing  innovation  while  managing  the  risks  associated  with  the  adoption  of 
new technologies. 
My address today will contain three important elements: 
First, a vision for our payments system – one that meets the evolving needs of consumers 
and businesses and thereby supports productivity growth and improving living standards. 
Second,  a  vision  for  the  oversight  of  the  payments  system  –  one  that  helps  to  ensure  its 
safety and soundness, its efficiency and its security. 
And  third,  a  coordinated  approach  for  achieving  this  dual  vision  –  one  that  calls  on  the 
payments industry and regulatory agencies to work together to attain this collective goal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A vision for the payments system 
In considering a vision for the payments system, let’s take a holistic perspective.1 The often-
used distinction between retail payment systems, which involve many end-users and smaller 
transactions,  and  wholesale  or  interbank  payment  systems,  may  not  be  appropriate  when 
considering a vision for the future. Instead, a more comprehensive view reflects a future in 
which technological change will allow retail and wholesale systems to offer similar services 
and thereby compete more directly for a share of the same payments pie. 
My vision for the payments system draws from work that has already been done in Canada 
and in other jurisdictions to map out a desirable path for the future evolution of payments. 
We  are  not  alone  in  wanting  to  move  toward  an  innovative,  safe  and  secure  payments 
system that evolves to meet the needs of consumers and businesses. This vision maintains 
the  best  characteristics  of  our  legacy  system,  while  allowing  for  the  advantages  that 
innovations promise. 
Such a payments system has six essential attributes:2  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
I  will  consider  the  first four  attributes  now  and  leave  the  last  two  for  the  discussion  of  the 
vision for oversight.3  
Comparing  Canada’s  existing  payments  system  to  this  vision,  it  is  clear  there  are  many 
gaps.4  In  particular,  in  this  era  of  instant  communication,  Canadians  expect  to  be  able  to 
send and receive payments faster, at any time, and at low cost, without having to know the 
recipients’ banking information. 
Some progress has been made, however. 
The  wider  use  of  digital  payments  technology  has  increased  speed,  lowered  costs  and 
broadened  access  to  the  payments  market.  For  example,  between  2008  and  2011,  the 
number of credit and debit card payments rose by 23 per cent and 17 per cent respectively.5 
high speed – end-to-end processing in near real time; 
low cost – efficient and convenient; 
open access and ubiquitous usage; 
improved cross-border functionality; 
safe, sound and reliable; and 
secure – to protect the private information of users. 
                                                
1  An  example  of  an  all-encompassing  definition  of  a  payments  system  is:  a  set  of  “arrangements  that  allow 
consumers,  businesses  and  other  organizations  to  transfer value  from one  party  to  another.  It  includes  the 
institutions, instruments and services that facilitate the transfer of value between parties in a transaction.” See 
Task  Force  for  the  Payments  System  Review,  Going  Digital:  Transitioning  to  Digital  Payments,  Chapter 1 
(n.d.): 8.  
2  These  attributes  are  discussed  in:  Task  Force  for  the  Payments  System  Review,  “The  Way  We  Pay: 
Transforming the Canadian Payments System” (July 2011); Canadian Payments Association, “CPA Payments 
Strategy: Vision 2020” (February 2010); The Federal Reserve Banks, “Payment System Improvement – Public 
Consultation  Paper”  (September  2013);  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  “Strategic  Review  of  Innovation  in  the 
Payments System: Conclusions” (June 2012). 
3  The  use  of  global  payment  message  standards  will  help  to  ensure  the  necessary  information  content  to 
facilitate achievement of the first four attributes. 
4  See,  for  example,  Task  Force  for  the  Payments  System  Review,  “The  Way  We  Pay:  Transforming  the 
Canadian Payments System” (July 2011). 
5  Canadian Payments Association, “Examining Canadian Payment Methods and Trends” (October 2012). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Electronic  funds  transfers  continue  to  replace  cheques  for  bill  payments  and  payroll 
transactions.6  
Although there are fewer users, electronic person-to-person and e-wallet transactions have 
grown at the impressive rate of about 40 per cent annually over the same period.7 And then 
there are the new kids on the block – digital currencies – which, while more limited in market 
penetration,  have  the  potential  to  be game-changers  by  achieving  low-cost, faster,  end-to-
end payments. 
These  innovations  meet  the  important  attributes  of  speed,  convenience,  lower  costs  and 
efficiency,  but fall  short when  it  comes  to  ubiquity.  New  payment  systems  will  only  realize 
their full potential when they attain the universal participation that legacy systems enjoy. 
Despite many advances, the expression “the cheque is in the mail” is still a reality for many 
Canadian businesses. The recent Task Force for the Payments System Review highlighted 
that our businesses are still among the most cheque-reliant of the major economies.8 What is 
needed is an electronic invoice and payment system to facilitate the end-to-end automated 
processing of business-to-business payments.9  
We also need to improve significantly cross-border payments. An analysis by the Canadian 
Payments  Association  (CPA)  revealed  that  international  payment  needs  are  not  currently 
being  met.10  Compared  with  domestic  payments,  cross-border  payments  involve  higher 
transaction costs and longer processing times associated with converting from one national 
payment system to another. 
To  achieve  these  four  important  characteristics,  our  core  national  payment  clearing  and 
settlement  systems  should  be  upgraded.  The  Automated  Clearing  Settlement  System 
(ACSS)  was  implemented  in  the  early  1980s,  and  is  showing  its  age.  Access  is  limited, 
settlement occurs the next day and end-to-end processing of payments is slow. The Large 
Value  Transfer  System  (LVTS)  was  implemented  in  1999.  It,  too,  could  benefit  from 
technological  enhancements  to  clear  and  settle  both  retail  and  wholesale  payments  more 
efficiently. 
A vision for oversight 
To  complement  this  vision  for  the  payments  system,  we  also  need  a  new,  more 
comprehensive  vision  for  its  oversight.  The  arrival  of  new  players  in  the  retail  payments 
market  calls  for  a  fundamental  overhaul  of  the  Canadian  oversight  framework.  As  new 
systems compete with existing core systems, important public policy issues emerge. 
The goal is to create a level playing field for all systems, taking into account that some pose 
more  risk  than  others.  We  achieve  this  through  a  holistic  oversight  approach  that 
encompasses three broad types of payment systems: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
systemically important systems; 
prominent payment systems; and 
other national retail payment systems. 
                                                
6  Changes to back-office processes have also led to quicker access to funds. 
7  Canadian Payments Association, “Examining Canadian Payment Methods and Trends” (October 2012). 
8  Task Force for the Payments System Review, Going Digital: Transitioning to Digital Payments, (n.d.): 18. 
9  The processing of digital images of cheques is an improvement, but is not the best solution, given available 
technology. 
10  Canadian Payments Association, “CPA Payments Strategy Vision 2020” (February 2010): 8. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  safety and soundness; 
efficiency; and 
meeting users’ needs and protecting their interests.12  
Such  an  approach  will  reinforce  the  efforts  of  the  payments  industry  to  achieve  three 
important public policy objectives:11  
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Like vital public utilities such as power and water, core national payment systems must be 
both safe and sound to ensure continuous operations. They must be designed and operated 
to ensure that risk is effectively managed, using international standards,13 and providing open 
risk-based  access  and  ubiquitous  coverage.  Core  systems  need  to  be  efficient  to  remain 
competitive  by  keeping  costs  low.  These  key  attributes  will  help  to  ensure  that  the  critical 
mass of participation required to realize economies of scale and maximize social benefits will 
be achieved. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  is  working  with  the  Department  of  Finance  to  develop  a  new 
comprehensive framework for the oversight of payment systems that articulates this vision. It 
needs to be flexible, forward looking, and risk-based to meet public policy objectives, even as 
payment systems evolve and new trends emerge. 
The challenge is to find the balance between ensuring safety and promoting efficiency. The 
oversight  framework  must  instill  confidence  in  the  payments  system  and  foster  innovation 
and  competition  to  meet  user  needs,  support  economic  growth  and  promote  financial 
stability.  New  players  that  are  not  currently  subject  to  the  same  comprehensive  regulatory 
oversight as traditional incumbents must be brought into the framework. 
In this vision, the Bank of Canada may play a larger role by overseeing prominent payment 
systems, in addition to those that are systemically important.14 Through this expanded role, 
within the new oversight framework, we would be able to help maintain a safe and efficient 
payment  infrastructure,  even  as  the  market  responds  to  emerging  trends  and  end-user 
needs. 
What  would  this  potential  change  in  the  Bank’s  role  mean  for  the  CPA?  Initial  analysis 
indicates that the CPA’s ACSS exhibits characteristics of a prominent payment system and 
therefore could be subject to Bank of Canada oversight.15  
The vision for the other national retail payment systems is that they, too, would be subject to 
oversight  that  is  proportional  to  risks.  While  newer  retail  systems  are  not  systemically 
important  or  prominent, end-user  protection  is  of  particular  importance. For  instance,  most 
collect information about users, which has commercial value. Safeguards should be in place 
to protect this information. 
                                                
11  See  the  Canadian  Payments  Act  (S.C.  1996,  c.  6,  Sch.),  available  at  laws.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/p-
4.4/index.html.  
12  Users’ interests can be defined broadly to include service level expectations, convenience, ease of use, price, 
safety, transparency of terms of use, privacy and effective redress mechanisms. 
13  International  standards  for  the  oversight  of  systemically  important  payments  systems  are  defined  by  the 
CPSS-IOSCO  “Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures”  (Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, April 2012).  
14  Prominent payment systems do not pose systemic risk but a disruption or failure could cause, on a national 
scale, significant disruption to the ability of consumers and businesses to make payments or a general loss of 
confidence in the overall payments system. 
15  The  Bank  of  Canada  could  apply  standards  to  prominent  payments  systems,  based  on  the  CPSS-IOSCO 
“Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures”  (CPSS-IOSCO,  April  2012).  These  standards  would  be 
adjusted so  that  they  reflect  the  different  nature  and  magnitude  of  the  risks  posed  by  prominent  payments 
systems.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Achieving the dual vision: private-public collaboration 
Now that I have sketched out the dual vision for the payments system in Canada and for its 
oversight, the next question is: How do we achieve it? 
A simple one-word answer would be: Together! 
In this context, “together” can have two meanings, but to be successful in moving toward this 
dual vision, both are important. 
Consumers, the payments industry and regulatory agencies all have an important stake in a 
well-functioning state-of-the-art payments system. All should be consulted. Finding the right 
solutions  and  the  right  balance  will  require  collaboration from  all  those who  have  a  role  in 
reaching our vision. I trust you agree that forums such as this conference, FinPay,16 and the 
CPA’s Stakeholder Advisory Council should be leveraged for this purpose. 
In addition, public sector proposals for changing the regulatory and oversight landscape will 
go  through  a  public  consultation  process  that  will  allow  constructive  input  from  all 
stakeholders. 
Conferring  together  is  important.  So,  too,  is  acting  together.  If  the  payments  industry  can 
adopt  the  same  standards  at  approximately  the  same  time,  we  can  maximize  the  benefits 
accruing  from  the  positive  network  effects  associated  with  widely  used  standardized 
transactions. 
Achieving  this  will  require  three  additional  “c”  words  beyond  consultation:  namely, 
coordination, collaboration and co-operation. 
Clearly, the CPA and the public agencies are well placed to help coordinate and encourage 
collaboration and co-operation by industry. 
The CPA and its members can take the lead by embracing new technology to upgrade core 
clearing and settlement services to enhance efficiency and safety. 
The CPA has taken bold – and welcome – steps in this direction by promoting the adoption 
of  the  ISO  20022  standards  and  launching  the  Next  Generation  Clearing  and  Settlement 
System project. 
Using  a  common  standard  forms  the  foundation  for  any  well-designed  payment  system. 
Standards such as ISO 20022 facilitate straight-through processing, enhanced business-to-
business  payments, 
faster  funds  transfers  for  end-users,  both 
domestically and across borders.17 
Adopting  a  common  standard  will  also  reduce  the  barriers  that  prevent  new  players  from 
using core systems for clearing and settlement. 
To be truly successful and to benefit all Canadians, co-operation on the implementation of 
standards  is  essential.  Giving  consumers  and  businesses  what  they  need  and  what  they 
want is no easy task, but it is an inescapable one. Those who do not innovate  will be  left 
behind in today’s globally competitive world. 
interoperability,  and 
                                                
16  FinPay  is  the  Finance  Canada  Payments  Consultative  Committee,  a  forum  of  public  and  private  sector 
representatives  that  advises  Finance  Canada  on  developments  related  to  public  policy  aspects  of  the 
Canadian payments system. 
17  Consideration  could  also  be  given  to  the  recommendation  from  the  Task  Force  for  the  Payments  System 
Review that a centralized digital ID initiative should be further explored as a catalyst to spur innovations such 
as mobile payments and to leverage e-commerce and the full capabilities of the digital economy. See Task 
Force for the Payments System Review, “The Way We Pay: Transforming the Canadian Payments System” 
(July 2011): 16. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. 
Looking  ahead,  we  all  want  to  embrace  technological  change  to  improve  the  payments 
system in Canada and promote the economic and financial welfare of Canadians. For this 
purpose, we need a complementary dual vision to guide the changes in both the payments 
system and its oversight. Innovation is driving a rapid evolution – one that requires planning 
as pointed out more than 10 years ago by my former colleague, James Dingle. He wrote a 
short book about the history of the CPA titled, Planning an Evolution.18 If we were to write a 
similar book covering the next 20 challenging, but promising, years in the life of the CPA, we 
might want to modify the title somewhat to Planning a Revolution. 
When it comes to monetary policy, the Bank is committed to achieving our 2 per cent inflation 
target  –  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  keeping  the  Canadian 
economy  on  a  sustainable  growth  path.  In  recent  months,  we  have  said  that  economic 
growth  needs  to  become  more  balanced  and  broadly  based,  with  more  growth  coming 
through exports and related business investment. 
Let me connect this with the vision for the payments system that I’ve described today: One of 
the ways we can promote trade-driven growth is to work with our trading partners to reduce 
substantially  the  costs  of  cross-border  payments.  And,  of  course,  a  well-functioning 
payments system is a crucial element of an efficient financial system, which is, in turn, a key 
ingredient of sustained economic growth. 
As  industry  and  the  public  sector  work  together  to  improve  our  payments  system,  we  will 
count on the CPA to continue to play a key role. At this pivotal point in time, we have a once-
in-a-generation  opportunity  to  shape  the  future  of  Canada’s  payments  system.  And  we 
should act on it. 
We  look  forward  to  continued  dialogue  and  collaboration  as  our  shared  vision  becomes 
reality. 
Thank you very much. 
                                                
18  J.F. Dingle, Planning an Evolution: The Story of the Canadian Payments Association, 1980–2002 (Ottawa: A 
joint publication of the Bank of Canada and the Canadian Payments Association, 2003). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
