  Andrew Haldane: Halfway up the stairs 
Article  by  Mr  Andrew  G  Haldane,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England,  published  in 
Central Banking Journal, 5 August 2014. 
 “Halfway up the stairs 
Isn’t up, 
And it isn’t down. 
It isn’t in the nursery, 
It isn’t in the town.” 
AA Milne, Halfway Down (1924) 
It  is  the  25th  anniversary  of  Central  Banking.  So  it  is  a  good  time  to  be  asking  some  big 
questions  of  central  banking.  How  have  central  banks  evolved  over  the  last  quarter  of  a 
century? How has the crisis affected that evolution? And what lies in prospect for them over 
the next 25 years? 
AA Milne’s 1924 poem, Halfway Down, is a fitting description of the position central banks 
find  themselves  in  today.  During  the  past  25  years  or  more,  central  banks’  mandates  and 
instruments have moved upwards in steps. They have ascended the stairs.  
But where this leaves central banks today is not entirely comfortable. Halfway up the stairs is 
neither up nor down, neither nursery nor town. That begs a natural question about “where 
next” for central banks over the next quarter-century. 
Ascending the stairs 
History will show the 20th century to have been an unprecedented boom period for central 
banking. At the start of that century, central banks were relatively few in number. For those 
that did exist, their responsibilities were heavily constrained. Often, their role was to act as no 
more than an operational agent for the government of the day, managing money, debt and 
foreign exchange markets. They were agents, not principals. 
Through the course of the 20th century, central banks’ influence began to grow. So too did 
their  numbers.  For  some,  this  evolution  began  with  being  granted  monopoly  rights  over 
issuing  legal  tender  –  fiat  money.  This  gave  central  banks  special  status  relative  to 
commercial  banks.  It  underscored  their  stability  role  as  liquidity  provider  to  the  banking 
system: stabilising short-term money markets in normal times, acting as lender of last resort 
in abnormal ones. 
It also secured, by fiat, a demand for central bank liabilities. This meant central bank money 
became the natural settlement medium, and central banks the natural clearing house, when 
discharging obligations among banks. As the marginal supplier of liquidity, this gave central 
banks  the  ability  to  set  the  marginal  price  of  liquidity  –  the  short-term  interest rate. In  that 
way, monetary policy was born and an important central bank step had been taken. 
The  early  phases  of  monetary  control  by  central  banks  were  often  inauspicious,  highly 
constrained, or both. Monetary regimes during the latter part of the 19th century and the first 
part of the 20th were long on rules and short on discretion. The Gold Standard, and later the 
Bretton Woods regime, tethered monetary policy to a commodity or dollar anchor, with little 
scope for monetary discretion. And where monetary discretion did operate, it was not always 
a  success.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  discretionary  monetary  actions  during  the  Great 
Depression were a salutary lesson. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  But the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s brought a further sea-change. 
Tight  international  rules  gave  way  to  national  discretion.  With  the  accompanying  rise  of 
“monetarism”, these monetary frameworks were often based around targets for the money 
supply. In most cases, the role of central banks was still to act as operational agent. But the 
technical nature of these regimes gave central banks a say in their design. A second step 
had been taken. 
The “great inflation” of the 1970s, together with repeated failures to hit money supply targets, 
began  to  change  that  picture  further  during  the  1980s.  Monetary  discretion  was  found  to 
have come with costs. In particular, it had given birth to what economists subsequently called 
the  “time-consistency  problem”.  This  problem  arose  from  the  temptation  to  over-supply 
money  or  over-relax  regulations  today,  often  to  finance  wars  or  to  win  elections,  at  the 
expense of inflation tomorrow. This problem was thus endemic among elected officials. 
The birth of independence 
As arm’s-length technocrats, without the need to finance wars or win elections, central banks 
were  seen  as  a  bulwark  against  these  time-consistency  concerns.  Thus  was  born  central 
bank  independence.  If  decision-making  power  over  monetary  policy  were  delegated  to 
central  banks,  not  as  operational  agents  but  as  principals,  the  time-consistency  problem 
could  be  curbed  at  source. With  this  argument,  central  bank  independence  spread  rapidly 
and  globally  during  the  1980s  and  1990s.  And  with  it,  central  banks  had  taken  another 
significant step. 
At the same time as monetary policy discretion was being granted, constraints were being 
placed  around  it.  These  were  a  necessary  part  of  democratic  accountability.  These 
constraints included government-set success criteria – for example, inflation targets. In the 
jargon,  many  monetary  policy  regimes  became  characterised  by  instrument-independence 
but 
target-dependence.  They  combined  rules  with  discretion  –  hence  “constrained 
discretion”. 
Yet as significant was the accompanying shift in central bank transparency. This was seen 
as a necessary concomitant of delegated power. A century ago, the prevailing central bank 
ethos  allegedly  came  from  the  then-Bank  of  England  (BoE)  governor,  Montagu  Norman: 
“never  apologise,  never  explain”.  Then,  secrecy  and  mystique  were  believed  to  be  key 
weapons  in  central  banks’  armoury.  Media  appearances  were  rare.  Central  bank  actions 
were confined to the back pages of newspapers, if at all. At the BoE, the aim was to keep the 
Bank out of the press and the press out of the Bank. 
With  independence  granted,  all  that  changed.  Politicians  and  the  public  demanded 
explanations  –  and  sometimes  apologies  –  for  policy  choices.  Policy  meetings  were  pre-
announced  and  minuted.  And  regular  publications,  such  as  inflation  reports  and  financial 
stability reports, set out the analyses underpinning these decisions. Media appearances and 
newspaper articles began to appear. Central banks moved from the back to the front pages 
of  newspapers.  Journalists  were  no  longer  locked  out,  but  instead  ushered  in  for  press 
conferences. Another step up the stairs had been taken. 
End of the “Great Moderation” 
This brave new world looked set to continue indefinitely during the early years of this century. 
Inflation  was  low  and  output  stable,  the  so-called  “great  moderation”.  The  Holy  Grail  of 
growth without risk seemed to have been discovered. Yet moderation was sowing the seeds 
of  its  own  destruction,  dulling  the  risk  senses  of  central  banks,  regulators  and  market 
participants. In this vacuum, financial risk-taking rose to Himalayan heights. 
The global financial crisis of 2008 brought that decisively to an end. The financial system and 
economy  tumbled  from  their  Himalayan  peaks.  Great  moderation  gave  way  to  “great 
recession”,  the  sharpest  and  longest-lasting  since  the  1930s.  Central  banks  quickly 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  acknowledged their pre-crisis blind spot – ballooning debt among both banks and non-banks. 
And, not for the first time in their history, they reinvented themselves. 
On  the  monetary  policy  front,  extraordinary  times  resulted  in  extraordinary  monetary 
measures. Interest rates globally were lowered to levels previously never seen, accompanied 
in  some  major  advanced  countries  by  purchases  of  government  securities  –  so-called 
quantitative  easing  (QE).  In  some  countries,  central  banks  in  addition  purchased  private 
sector assets, such as mortgage-backed securities and corporate bonds – so-called “credit 
easing”.  Others,  including  the  Federal  Reserve  and  Bank  of  England,  issued  forward 
guidance to help clarify their future policy intentions and thereby shape the yield curve. 
This  was  terra  incognita  for  central  banks.  The  focus  of  monetary  policy,  at  least  in  the 
25 years prior to the crisis, had been on controlling the short-term safe rate of interest. Crisis-
induced monetary interventions widened that focus significantly. By pursuing QE and forward 
guidance, central banks began to exercise influence beyond overnight rates of interest. And 
for those central banks that engaged in credit easing, this influence extended further, from 
safe to risky rates of return across a broad spectrum of assets. These were giant steps. 
A second aspect of the reinvention was macro-prudential regulation. Inflation-targeting was 
necessary but, by itself, insufficient to curb the financial cycle. The response of governments 
has been to grant central banks new powers, focused on the needs of the financial system 
as  a  whole  and  towards  the  needs  of the  nonfinancial  economy,  as  much  as  the financial 
sector. That is what the “macro” in macro-prudential meant. 
Macro-prudential policy is gaining ground every bit as quickly as central bank independence 
did  in  the  1990s.  It  has  quite  radical  implications.  Pre-crisis  credit  cycles  were  allowed  to 
operate largely unconstrained. Macro-prudential policy overturns that orthodoxy, with policy 
instead leaning against the credit cycle to moderate its fluctuations, both during the upswing 
and the downswing. It, too, is a big step forward. 
A  third  aspect  of  the  reinvention  is  in  the  operations  of  central  banks.  During  the  crisis, 
central banks flexed their balance sheets as never before. New facilities were introduced that 
extended liquidity for longer durations against expanded sets of collateral (public and private) 
to  new  counterparties  (bank  and  non-bank).  This  took  last-resort  lending  to  a  new  level. 
Some central banks went one step further, becoming effective market-makers of last resort in 
some assets to secure market liquidity. These were new and bold steps. 
A fourth dimension was transparency. With monetary, regulatory and operational policies all 
working  in  overdrive,  central  banks  have  had  plenty  of  explaining  to  do.  During  the  crisis, 
their actions have shaped the behaviour of pretty much every financial market and institution 
on the planet. So central banks’ words resonate as never previously. Rarely a day passes 
without a forensic media and market dissection of some central bank comment. These, too, 
are significant steps to have climbed. 
Where does this leave central banks today? We are not in Kansas any more. On monetary 
policy, we have gone from setting short safe rates to shaping rates of return on longer-term 
and  wider  classes  of  assets.  On  regulation,  central  banks  have  gone  from  spectator  to 
player,  with  some  granted  micro-prudential  as  well  as  macro-prudential  regulatory 
responsibilities.  On  operational  matters,  central  banks  have  gone  from  market-watcher  to 
market-shaper  and  market-maker  across  a  broad  class  of  assets  and  counterparties.  On 
transparency, we have gone from blushing introvert to blooming extrovert. In short, central 
banks are essentially unrecognisable from a quarter of a century ago. 
Up or down? 
The key question, then, is where next? Will the next 25 years see as large a metamorphosis, 
from sleepy caterpillar to winged butterfly, as the last? It is impossible to know for sure. But it 
is interesting to attempt a bit of futurology and sketch some hypothetical evolutionary central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  bank paths. For the sake of illustration, let me consider two – one descending the stairs from 
whence central banks came, another ascending them to a whole new level. 
One  possible  future  path  is  that  central  banks  simply  retrace  their  steps,  going  back  to 
basics. Extra-ordinary times – from great moderation to great recession – necessitated extra-
ordinary measures. But extra-ordinary should not become the new ordinary. What might the 
new ordinary look like? 
For monetary policy, it would probably mean a return to plain-vanilla inflation-targeting using 
conventional short-term interest rate tools – the one instrument, one target world. Direct use 
of central banks’ balance sheets, to affect quantitative or credit easing, would return to being 
an emergency room measure, for use only when the zero lower-bound on interest rates bit 
tightly.  Active  monetary  policy  would  mean  small,  infrequent touches  on  the  tiller,  perhaps 
accompanied by small, infrequent explanations. Former BoE governor Mervyn King aspired 
to make monetary policy “boring”. In this scenario, his wish would be granted. 
Regulation  would  follow  a  similar  path.  While  not  returning  to  their  pre-crisis  norms, 
regulatory  rules  would  move  to  a  more  settled  pattern.  The  very  definition  of  a  resilient 
financial  system  is  one  that  does  not  require  active  intervention.  With  greater  amounts  of 
capital  and  liquidity  in  the financial  system,  this may  be  more  realistic. There  may  be  less 
need  to  fine-tune  the  regulatory  engine  and  correspondingly  less  need  for  the  tug-of-war 
between regulator and regulated that has characterised the past few years. A robust banking 
system ought also to be less prone to credit booms and busts, thereby reducing the need for 
discretionary macro-prudential actions to lean actively against the wind. Regulation would be 
handed back to the risk managers. 
In this world, the operational activities of central banks could also return to a more even keel. 
Wider  collateral,  longer  tenors  and  new  counterparties  were  necessary  ingredients  during 
crisis. But a return to more conventional operations – short-term lending against government 
collateral to banking counterparties – may be sufficient to oil the wheels in normalised market 
conditions, as it was for hundreds of years prior to the crisis. Market-making, at least beyond 
short-term money markets, would be a last resort. 
As for central bank transparency, with monetary, regulatory and operational policy no longer 
hyperactive,  it  is  conceivable  central  banks  could  retreat from  centre  stage.  Central  banks 
could migrate to the back pages of newspapers. Like good children, they would be relatively 
rarely seen and infrequently heard. Central bank-watchers would find something better to do 
with their lives than hang on to every gubernatorial semi-colon. 
For a central banker, this sounds like the good life – a low-intervention, low-visibility world. In 
some  respects,  it  would  be  back  to  the  future.  The  issue  is  whether  this  world,  however 
desirable, is realistic. There are some reasons for doubt. 
Financial system reinvention 
One of the likely consequences of the crisis, and the resulting regulatory response, is that the 
financial system will reinvent itself. Financial activity will migrate outside the banking system. 
And with that move, risk may itself change shape and form. What previously had been credit 
and maturity mismatch risk on the balance sheet of the banking system may metastasize into 
market  and  illiquidity  risk  on  the  balance  sheets  of  non-banks.  This  could  have  important 
implications for the stability of the financial system and the broader economy. 
With  more  activity  outside  the  banking  system,  and  with  the  banking  system  itself  better 
protected, the financial system and economy may become less prone to the low-frequency, 
high-cost  banking  crises  seen  in  the  past.  But  that  is  not  the  end  of  the  story.  Risk,  like 
energy, tends to be conserved not dissipated, to change its composition but not its quantum. 
So it is possible the financial system may exhibit a new strain of systemic risk – a greater 
number  of  higher-frequency,  higher-amplitude  cyclical  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  and 
financial  activity,  now  originating  on  the  balance  sheets  of  mutual  funds,  insurance 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  companies and pension funds. These cyclical fluctuations could in turn be transmitted to, and 
mirrored, in greater cyclical instabilities in the wider economy. 
In this world, it would be very difficult for monetary, regulatory and operational policy to beat 
an orderly retreat. It is likely that regulatory policy  would need to be in a constant state of 
alert  for  risks  emerging  in  the  financial  shadows,  which  could  trip  up  regulators  and  the 
financial  system.  In  other  words,  regulatory  fine-tuning  could  become  the  rule,  not  the 
exception.  
In this world, macro-prudential policy to lean against the financial cycle could become more, 
not less, important over time. With more risk residing on non-bank balance sheets that are 
marked-to-market,  it  is  possible  that  cycles  in  financial  assets  would  be  amplified,  not 
dampened, relative to the old world. Their transmission to the wider economy may also be 
more  potent  and  frequent.  The  demands  on  macro-prudential  policy,  to  stabilise  these 
financial fluctuations and hence the macro-economy, could thereby grow. 
In this world, central banks’ operational policies would be likely to remain expansive. Non-
bank  counterparties  would  grow  in  importance,  not  shrink.  So  too,  potentially,  would  more 
exotic forms of collateral taken in central banks’ operations. Market-making, in a wider class 
of financial  instruments,  could  become  a  more standard  part  of the  central  bank toolkit,  to 
mitigate the effects of temporary market illiquidity droughts in the non-bank sector. 
In this world, central banks’ words and actions would be unlikely to diminish in importance. 
Their role in shaping the fortunes of financial markets and financial firms more likely would 
rise. Central banks’ every word would remain forensically scrutinised. And there would be an 
accompanying  demand  for  ever-greater  amounts  of  central  bank  transparency.  Central 
banks would rarely be far from the front pages. 
Which path? 
Which  central  bank  path  is  the  most  likely  over  the  next  25  years?  Your  guess  is  almost 
certainly as good as mine. AA Milne ends his 1924 poem: 
“And all sorts of funny thoughts 
Run around my head, 
It isn’t really anywhere 
It’s somewhere else instead!” 
A quarter of a century on, I am confident central banks will be “somewhere else instead”. I 
am  much  less  confident  precisely  where,  whether  upstairs  or  down.  Central  banking  may 
need to await the 50th anniversary of Central Banking to find out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
