  Yves Mersch: Tackling unemployment in Europe – increasing mobility, 
enhancing flexibility, optimising education 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 26 September 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
First  of  all:  congratulations  to  all  doctoral  students,  whose  graduation  we  are  celebrating 
today! 
I  am  confident  that  you  have  a  bright  future  ahead  of  you,  as  you  stand  well  prepared  to 
enter  the  labour  market  and  to  find  jobs  that match  your  skills  –  be  it  in  academia,  in  the 
private or public sectors, here in Luxembourg or elsewhere. 
Holding the relevant qualification is a precondition for receiving a suitable job offer. However, 
it might not always be enough to secure a job. In several European countries, prospects are 
rather dismal, especially for young people. 
I am aware that unemployment may not be the most obvious challenge to talk to you about 
on such a celebratory occasion. It is, however, a major concern for the euro area. And I am 
convinced that well-educated people like you can really make a difference. 
High unemployment in the euro area – merely a temporary phenomenon? 
Temporary rises in unemployment rates are typical of cyclical downswings. 
Such  cyclical  increases  in  unemployment  are  distressing  for  those  affected  and  can  have 
dire consequences, but they tend to reflect a transitory downturn in labour demand and do 
not necessarily have a strong structural component. 
Firms that are uncertain about the strength of the recovery are unlikely to invest or to rehire 
workers.  At  low  interest  rate  levels  and  high  labour  market  rigidities,  firms  tend  to  favour 
capital intensive investments over hiring. 
Yet,  developments  during  the  second  recessionary  episode  in  Europe  differ  from  those 
observed at the beginning of the crisis. During the Great Recession, unemployment rose, as 
there  was  a  shortage  of  vacancies.  However,  during  the  second  recessionary  dip, 
unemployment  increased,  although  aggregate  vacancy  rates  remained  close  to  long-term 
averages. 
In  addition,  the  second  recessionary  period  led  not  only  to  extensive,  but  also  to  very 
persistent job  losses  in some  euro  area  economies. The  proportion  of people  in  long-term 
unemployment rose substantially. This is particularly  worrisome, as it reduces the chances 
that they will be rehired: if workers are unemployed for a long period of time, their skills might 
simply  erode.  Long  spells  of  unemployment  may 
into  structural 
unemployment. 
Indeed, the mere fact that firms are willing to hire, but people willing to work are unable to 
find  a  job  is  already  indicative  of  structural  factors  playing  a  role.  Estimates  suggest  that 
structural unemployment in the euro area, which was already high prior to the crisis, rose by 
about  17%  from  2008  to  2013.1  Structural  unemployment  is  not  only  distressing  for  those 
thus  easily 
turn 
                                                
1  The European Commission, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  use  different  estimation  methods,  resulting  on  average  in  structural 
unemployment being estimated at 8.8% in 2008 and 10.3% in 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  therefore, 
from  rises 
in  spells  of 
to  avoid  hysteresis  effects 
affected,  but  can  have  a  substantial  impact  on  potential  output  in  the  longer  term.  It  is 
essential, 
long-term 
unemployment. 
Particularly in countries that were hard hit, a large part of the decline in employment can be 
attributed  to  certain  sectors.  For  instance,  in  Estonia,  Ireland  and  Spain,  the  previously 
oversized  construction  sectors  had  to  downsize  substantially.  The  Spanish  construction 
sector alone has accounted for around half of all job losses in the country since the start of 
the  crisis.  Moreover,  such  a  collapse  in  the  construction  sector  has  an  enormous  impact 
further down the production chain. So, the number of people affected – for instance those 
providing building materials or real estate services – is estimated to be much greater than the 
1.8 million who lost jobs in the construction sector. 
The  resulting  mismatch  between  the  skills  offered  by  unemployed  workers  and  those  that 
employers require explains why vacancies are not filled, despite people being willing to work. 
In fact, skills mismatch has increased noticeably in the euro area and seems to be becoming 
more entrenched.2 
Potential solutions to increase high qualified employment 
If  labour  market  developments  are  so  heterogeneous  across  countries,  why  don’t  the 
unemployed simply move to places where the demand for labour is higher? 
Indeed, labour mobility is a powerful tool for tackling high localised unemployment levels and 
alleviating emerging bottlenecks in faster-growing euro area economies. That is why labour 
mobility is a core element of a successful currency union. It leads to a better match between 
workers’  skills  and  employers’  demands. In  economic  jargon,  it  aids factor re-allocation  by 
moving labour to where it is needed, which in turn contributes to overall growth in a monetary 
union and acts as an effective adjustment mechanism. 
So, how does Europe fare in terms of labour mobility? The free movement of workers is a 
fundamental right enshrined in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. But how 
much use do citizens make of this right in practice? 
Since  the  enlargement  of  the  European  Union  (EU)  in  2004,  labour  market  mobility  has 
certainly risen, albeit from very low levels.3 [The number of EU workers residing in another 
EU country rose from 4.7 million in 2005 to 8 million in 2013, representing an increase from 
2.1% to 3.3% of the total labour force.] The crisis boosted intra-EU mobility. Some studies 
suggest that the migration response to the crisis might have been even stronger in the EU 
than  in  the  United  States.4  This  is  quite  remarkable  given  that  the  United  States  is  often 
taken as a benchmark for mobility. 
Moreover, it has sizeable macroeconomic effects: estimates suggest that post-enlargement 
mobility flows over the period 2004–09 increased the GDP of the EU15 by around 1%. The 
impact on the GDP of major destination countries for migration, such as Ireland, Spain, Italy 
and the United Kingdom was even higher. 
Increased  labour  mobility  is  certainly  good  news  –  both  for  originating  and  destination 
countries. Another piece of potentially good news is that the level of education that migrants 
                                                
2  Ad hoc task force of the European System of Central Banks, “Comparisons and contrasts of the impact of the 
crisis on euro area labour markets”, Occasional Paper Series, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, forthcoming. 
3  OECD  Economic  Surveys:  European  Union  2014,  http://www.oecd.org/eco/surveys/economic-survey-
european-union.htm. 
4  Jauer,  J.,  Liebig,  T.,  Martin,  J.  and  Puhani,  P.,  “Migration  as  an  adjustment  mechanism  in  the  crisis?  A 
comparison  of  Europe  and  the  United  States”,  OECD  Social,  Employment  and  Migration  Working  Papers, 
No 155, http://www.oecd.org/eu/Adjustment-mechanism.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  bring to their destination countries has improved. With highly-skilled people willing to move 
for  work,  skills  shortages  in  destination  countries  could  be  compensated  for  by  workers 
emigrating from other countries. At least, this is how it should work ideally. What is worrying, 
however, is that many intra-EU migrant workers are employed below their skills level. The 
resulting  underutilisation  of  human  capital  shows  that  reforms  are  needed  to  improve  the 
efficiency of cross-border mobility in order to fully reap the benefits of workers’ migration. 
One  issue  is  that  recognition  of  qualifications  remains  uneven  across  EU  Member  States. 
According to a recent survey5, current procedures that tend to be cumbersome could easily 
be  replaced  by  more  automatic  ones:  more  than  90%  of  requests  submitted  result  in  the 
qualifications being recognised. 
But even if their qualifications have been recognised, migrants might simply not be able to 
take up a position matching their level of education owing to lack of language skills. More 
training in this area would certainly be welcome. 
Beyond  efforts  at  Member  State  level,  the  reformed  European  Social  Fund  could  be 
instrumental  in  this  respect.  Among  other  things,  its  objectives  include  investment  “in 
education, skills and lifelong learning”, as well as measures for “promoting employment and 
supporting labour mobility”. It is up to the European Commission and the Member States to 
make the most out of the opportunity for mobility through operational programmes, such as 
language courses or exchange programmes. 
Another barrier to workers moving from one country to another is that they are uncertain as 
to what will happen if they cannot find employment immediately. Unemployment benefits are 
transferable only to a limited extent. EU law has been adjusted accordingly and now needs to 
be implemented rigorously. The same applies for the transferability of pension rights. 
To  summarise,  adjustment  through  mobility  is  not  merely  a  theoretical  concept,  but  a 
European  reality.  However,  there  is  scope  for  both  more  inter-regional  and  more  inter-
country labour mobility. 
Mobility is not the sole answer, though. After all, employment will rise once firms are willing to 
hire.  And they  will  do  so  if  conditions  are favourable. While  policy-makers  cannot  interfere 
with employers’ decisions, they can certainly provide the right setting and eliminate barriers 
to  more  efficient  labour  markets.  Euro  area  countries  simply  need  to  achieve  the  labour 
market flexibility that is compatible with membership of a monetary union. 
Traditionally,  policy-makers  have  focused  on  passive  labour  market  policies,  such  as 
unemployment  benefits  that  are  de-linked  from  incentives  to  find  a  job.  In  my  view,  such 
policies should be complemented by more active policies, such as job-search assistance and 
targeted productivity-enhancing training measures to foster employability. 
To  ensure  sustainable  economic  development,  reforms  are  necessary  and  beneficial  for 
countries  that  are  currently  facing  high  unemployment  rates.  Countries  with  more  rapidly 
ageing  populations  also  need  to  prepare,  as  they  might  soon  face  bottlenecks  in  labour 
supply. Some of these countries are already confronted with skills shortages. Just to give you 
an  example  of  the  implications:  according  to  an  OECD  survey,  potential  GDP  growth  in 
Germany could decline to below 1% soon after 2020 as a result of an ageing population and 
skills shortages.6 
Once I met a boy who said that his professional ambition was to become a pensioner like his 
grandfather.  When  I  explained  that  this  was  related  to  age,  he  said  that  alternatively  he 
                                                
5  OECD  Economic  Surveys:  European  Union  2014,  http://www.oecd.org/eco/surveys/economic-survey-
european-union.htm. 
6  OECD Economic Surveys: Germany 2014, http://www.oecd.org/eco/Germany-Overview-2014.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  would accept to be an unemployment beneficiary like his father. Sadly, today he is in and out 
of prison. 
You see how wrong mind sets on fundamental values like work lead to social disruption. The 
same  applies  to  the  belief  that  you  must  only  make  an  effort  once  and  then  live  off  your 
diploma for the rest of your life. Technological and demographic changes affect skill renewal 
and knowledge transmission. 
More frequent skill upgrades in life cycles and better social usage of the swelling so-called 
non-productive age cohorts are challenges to intergenerational knowledge transmission. 
The fraction of the elderly in the population will increase tremendously, while the fraction of 
those  who  produce  resources  is  going  to  decline.  This  overall  loss  in  productivity  will  also 
affect capital, rates of return on capital will go down at a moment when pension funds are 
already stretched. This is known under the catch phrase “asset market meltdown”. Even in 
Luxembourg, the annual growth rate of GDP per capita, or better per employee, has strongly 
decreased. 
The question is, can you mitigate the effects of ageing societies by a rise in human capital? 
Research  at  Goethe  University  has  shown  that  “the  projected  fall  in  the  rate  of  return  on 
capital of 0.8 p.p. would be just 0.5 p.p. in the case of adjustments in human capital through 
better education.” 
Life-long learning, therefore also includes making better social use of the old. A University in 
an  environment  of  finite  financial  resources  has  to  address  the  challenge  of  including 
vocational training in its strategic spanning, in order to reap organisational and logistic gains 
in efficiency. A better use of facilities, resources and synergies increase financial efficiency 
and extend the sense of ownership of the University in the population at large. Of course, we 
must not forget the priority task of a University and the principle that quantity cannot replace 
quality. 
Striving for excellence must remain the guiding principle, especially in a country where the 
risks of complacency rise by the day. 
Conclusion 
On that note, I shall draw to a close. 
Unemployment  in  the  euro  area  remains  at  unacceptably  high  levels.  In  order  to  tackle  it 
effectively,  we  need  to  embark  on  a  triad  of  measures:  increased  mobility,  enhanced 
flexibility and optimal education. 
And  this  is  why,  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks  today,  I  said  that  well-educated,  highly-
skilled people like you can make a difference. 
So, let me conclude by wishing all of you a very successful 2014/2015 academic year! Thank 
you  to  the  departing  President  Rolf  Tarrach,  and  all  the  best  to  the  incoming  President 
Rainer Klump. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
