  Sarah Dahlgren: More resilient, better managed, less complex – 
strengthening FMUs and linkages in the system 
Remarks  by  Ms  Sarah  Dahlgren,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution 
Supervision Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Securities Industry and 
Financial Markets Association Conference, Boca Raton, Florida, 29 April 2014. 
 Good  morning  and  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  your  Annual  Operations  Conference.  This 
event brings together an important cross-section of market participants – and looking at the 
attendance, I think there is good representation of nearly every important part of the financial 
system in the audience. Today, I am going to talk about the progress that the industry has 
made to address weaknesses identified through the financial crisis and to build resilience to 
future  shocks.  I  will  also  offer  some  observations  on  areas  of  remaining  challenges, 
particularly  as  we  focus  on  the  interconnections  between  and  among  various  market 
participants. As always, my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of 
the Federal Reserve System. 
It’s  hard  to  believe  that  it’s  been  over  five  years  since  the  onset  of  the  worst  part  of  the 
financial crisis – and I’m not sure whether it feels longer or shorter than that! But one thing 
I’m certain of is that a lot has changed in those five years, including fundamental changes in 
rules  and  regulations,  as  well  as  substantive  changes  in  how  firms  and  the  system  are 
structured and operate. All of these changes have been designed to achieve a stronger, and 
more stable, financial system. I think it’s fair to say that the financial crisis made it very clear 
to  all  of  us  that  stability  was  about  more  than  just  banks.  It  is  also  about  the  safety  and 
soundness of a variety of interconnected – and oftentimes large – financial firms, regardless 
of  charter  or  organizational  type.  Post-crisis,  we  have  a  much  keener  appreciation  of  how 
financial stability is dependent on both strong financial institutions and on the soundness of 
the  connections  and  linkages  between  and  across  firms,  whether  those  connections  are 
other firms, financial utilities, or even the phone company. 
Recognizing  these  connections,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  expanded  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
authority for supervision. We now supervise a broader range of financial institutions than we 
did  pre-crisis,  like  insurance  companies,  savings  and  loan  holding  companies  and  some 
market utilities. In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss both the progress made and 
the remaining challenges for the firms we supervise in the context of three key overarching 
principles of our supervisory framework: 
• 
First, resiliency. Financial institutions must be resilient to shocks. Significant efforts 
have been undertaken internationally and domestically to reduce the likelihood that 
a large, global bank ever reaches the point where it is at risk of failure. Resiliency is 
also critical for financial market utilities. Those organizations must have failsafes in 
place to ensure the smooth functioning of the critical operations they provide. 
Second,  management.  Financial  institutions  must  be  well-managed.  Governance 
structures  need  to  be  in  place  to  establish  the  appropriate  decision-making 
processes, behaviors and incentives within these organizations. 
And,  third,  complexity.  Financial  institutions  must  become  less  complex.  This 
objective speaks to the need to reduce the level of interconnectedness among large 
financial firms and to ensure that there are credible mechanisms for resolving even 
the largest firms without causing systemic disruption across the financial system. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Resiliency 
Much  has  been  said  about  the  U.S.  and  international  set  of  regulatory  reforms  aimed  at 
making global banking organizations more resilient – particularly in the areas of capital and 
liquidity. The importance of robust capital requirements for financial stability and the serious 
shortcomings of the pre-crisis regulatory capital regime have been well documented. A lot of 
work has been done on the capital front through a range of both domestic and international 
efforts. These efforts have addressed – in most cases – both the quantitative and qualitative 
elements of capital, and have also addressed the important management processes around 
capital. 
The Basel standards – and resulting U.S. regulation – address both the quantity and quality 
of capital and raise the bar on both elements for large firms. As well, the new capital rules will 
also require a capital buffer that increases with a firm’s size, complexity, interconnectedness 
and global footprint. Implementation of these new standards should significantly increase the 
safety and soundness of the financial system. And, to date, many of the largest firms have 
considerably improved their capital levels and capital planning processes. 
Simply  addressing  the  quantity  of  capital  and  the  quality  of  the  planning  processes  isn’t 
enough,  though.  And  without  elaborating  too  much  on  something  I’m  sure  you  are  quite 
familiar with, the reasons include: 
• 
Capital  ratios  and  numerical  targets  are  snapshots  in  time  –  and  often  a  lagging 
indicator of financial condition. 
These  snapshots  don’t  incorporate  the  future  –  they  don’t  anticipate  what  might 
happen in different economic times or in different market conditions. 
Capital ratios don’t incorporate the impact on a firm’s ability to generate revenues 
during stress periods – and thus don’t indicate a firm’s ability to rebuild capital as 
necessary. 
So, clearly, stronger capital standards need to be combined with a better ability to 
anticipate the future – to incorporate a more forward-looking element into assessing 
the financial strength of a firm. 
   Thus, supervisory and risk management tools need to expand to include stress testing – and 
from this came the supervisory stress test and resulting Federal Reserve Capital Rule and 
the requirements in Dodd-Frank for stress testing. 
I think it’s fair to say that the new capital rules will and should change how firms think about 
risk within their organizations. Whether it’s the increases in risk weights of certain types of 
exposures,  or  the  overall  imposition  of  leverage  constraints,  the  new  capital  rules  are 
designed  to  build  a  more  resilient  financial  system  that  is  better  prepared  to  handle  and 
weather the next crisis. 
The  capital  requirements  for  large  banks  are  supplemented  by  a  liquidity  framework. 
Thinking back to the financial crisis it’s fairly clear from the experiences of most firms during 
that  period  of  time  that  liquidity  was  essential  in  survival.  Those  firms  that  didn’t  have 
sufficient liquidity suffered greatly. Here, too, the Basel Committee has played an important 
role  in  developing  and  implementing  an  internationally-agreed-to-framework  for  enhancing 
liquidity across large international firms. The new framework currently includes a short-term 
requirement – the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and discussions are underway to include a 
longer-term requirement – the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). 
While  capital  and  liquidity  rules  for  large  financial  institutions  are  in  the  process  of  being 
implemented – and significant progress has already been made in bolstering levels of both 
capital and liquidity in banking organizations – there are still areas within the financial system 
where additional focus on building resilience continues to evolve. In particular, enhanced risk 
management  standards  for  financial  market  utilities  have  been  adopted  by  international 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  standard setters and, in the U.S., the agencies have recently proposed new rules to adopt 
these standards for U.S. firms. 
Among these new standards are expectations that financial market utilities, including those 
that  act  as  central  counterparties  (CCPs),  be  more  resilient  to  shocks  –  with  a  particular 
focus on enhancing liquidity and liquidity risk management. While CCPs reduce aggregate 
risk, they also concentrate the remaining risk. That is, CCPs create potential single points of 
failure in global derivatives markets. Thus, CCPs need adequate capacity to absorb potential 
losses  from  the  default  of  one  or  more  of  its  members,  and  they  need  to  have  access  to 
liquidity so that they can always fully settle their obligations. 
The  new  risk  management  standards  include  requirements  that  CCPs  have  pre-funded 
default  arrangements,  that  CCPs  measure  and  collect  initial  and  variation  margin  even  in 
extreme stress scenarios, and that CCPs be able to  withstand, again in a plausible stress 
scenario, the failure of a member having the largest exposure to the CCP. In some cases, 
this last element is enhanced to require the ability to withstand the failure of the two largest 
members. 
As these standards are fairly new for the global population of financial market utilities and in 
many jurisdictions the standards have yet to be issued in new rules and regulations, progress 
across the industry in meeting these standards is mixed. 
• 
In  some  cases,  liquidity  risk  management  frameworks  are  underdeveloped,  with 
needed additional focus on measurement and monitoring to make the frameworks 
more robust. 
Additional work is also needed on the concept of liquidity buffers, with some firms 
continuing to rely too much on uncommitted sources of liquidity. 
And  stress  testing  and  scenario  planning  remain  areas  of  continued  focus,  with 
challenges in designing scenarios that are sufficiently extreme. 
  Beyond liquidity, additional work is needed in the area of capital planning. While this is not an 
area that financial market utilities have spent considerable time and resources on in the past, 
it is an area we will continue to focus on in our reviews and expect continued development 
and improvement over the coming year. 
As the industry continues to build resilience to future shocks, by enhancing the management 
of  and  the  amount  of  capital  and  liquidity,  as  two  important  elements  of  resilience,  the 
financial  system  will  continue  to  grow  stronger.  It’s  essential,  though,  that  all  parts  of  the 
financial  system  –  banks,  non-bank  financial  firms,  market  utilities  –  achieve  enhanced 
resilience. Simply having one part of the system robust to future shocks, with other parts – 
connected and linked within the system – less robust, leaves the system vulnerable to future 
shocks and instability. 
Management 
I’d  like  to  turn  now  to  the  second  element  of  our  supervisory  framework:  management.  In 
addition  to  our  focus  on  resiliency  as  an  essential  element  in  strengthening  the  financial 
system, we see enhanced risk management and corporate governance as a complement to 
resiliency and necessary to achieve stronger firms and a stronger system. As I know you are 
well  aware,  there  has  been  renewed  attention  on  the  importance  of  effective  corporate 
governance  across  the  industry.  The  debate  includes  examining  the  merits  of  familiar 
structures  and  practices  of  corporate  governance  and  increasingly  has  focused  on  the 
corporate cultures of financial institutions. 
In this regard, I’d offer that the themes we see across the industry are fairly common. That is, 
both  recognition  of  the  issues  and  progress  in  addressing  outstanding  challenges  are 
resident in all types of institutions, whether banks, non-banks or market utilities. To start, I’ll 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  touch on two elements in particular: risk culture and roles and responsibilities of boards of 
directors. 
In  November  of  last  year,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  released  a  framework  for 
assessing  risk  culture  at  financial  firms.  The  FSB’s  consultative  document  is  set  out  as 
guidance for supervisory interaction with firms on risk culture. It effectively outlines the basic 
elements – the “must haves” or conditions necessary – for a firm to have a strong culture. It 
provides  guidance  for  supervisors  (and,  in  turn,  for  firms)  in  identifying  practices  and 
behaviors  that  can  be  indicators  of  a  firm’s  risk  culture.  And,  for  each  area,  the  paper 
provides a set of indicators that can be used to assess where the firm is on the spectrum. 
To highlight those areas: 
• 
• 
• 
Not surprisingly, “tone from the top” is the first indicator. 
Accountability – that is, ownership of risk, effective escalation, and consequences. 
Effective challenge – including transparency and open dialogue across and between 
the board and senior management and senior management and staff. 
And,  finally,  incentives  –  both  compensation  and  talent  development/promotion 
processes. 
 Supervision  in  this  area  involves  an  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  a  financial 
institution’s  governance,  including  the  extent  to  which  the  board  and  senior  management 
demonstrate  effective  behaviors  that  contribute  to  good  governance.  This  includes 
consideration of the behavioral dynamics of the board and senior management, such as how 
the  “tone  at  the  top”  and  the  cultural  values  of  a  bank  are  communicated  and  put  into 
practice,  how  information  flows  to  and  from  the  board  and  senior  management,  and  how 
potentially serious problems are identified and addressed throughout the organization. 
I think the FSB’s document sets out a good set of reference points for supervisors – and for 
firms  –  to  explore  in  evaluating  risk  culture.  As  has  been  noted  by  others  –  and  is 
emphasized in the FSB’s guidance – assessing culture is not a single point in time event. It 
should be a regular and ongoing exercise that management teams, boards of directors and 
supervisors  conduct,  taking  the  range  of  feedback  from  interactions  and  work  conducted 
inside  the  firm,  interactions  and  reactions  from  the  firm’s  senior  management  team,  and 
interactions and dialogue with the board of directors. 
Alongside risk culture, much work has been done on the roles and responsibilities of boards 
of directors. The G30 has issued two reports in the last two years. The first report, issued in 
2012,  set  out  fresh  ways  to  describe  and  develop  more  effective  governance  at  financial 
institutions. The second report, issued late in 2013, deals specifically with the interactions of 
boards  of  directors  and  supervisors.  Both  reports  place  less  emphasis  on  the  form  of 
corporate governance – the traditional structures of boards and the like – and focus more on 
the actual behaviors of the various players involved, be it the chairman, the lead director, the 
chief risk officer, auditors or senior management. 
The  2013  report  proposes  a  new  kind  of  relationship,  one  that  involves  far  more  direct 
contact  and  ongoing  dialogue  between  directors  and  supervisors  about  the  key  issues 
confronting firms and the financial system, such as assessing financial institution strategies, 
business models, risk vulnerabilities, governance effectiveness and corporate culture. 
The Federal Reserve has growing experience in this area. Nearly three years ago, the New 
York  Fed  initiated  a  program  of  “enhanced  engagement”  with  directors  and  senior 
management at the major firms we supervise, very much along the lines now described in 
the G30 report. We provided additional training for our senior supervisory officers concerning 
corporate  governance  and  relationship-building  with  boards,  key  directors  and  senior 
managers. We also gave direction on how to focus their interactions on the most important 
supervisory matters, particularly with respect to the firm’s risk profile and risk management 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  practices. We also reached out to board chairmen and chief executive officers to enlist their 
cooperation and support. 
This  has  required  everyone  involved  to  step  up  to  the  plate  in  a  new  way.  For  our  senior 
supervisors, it has meant taking a higher-level and more encompassing view of the potential 
problems  that  a  firm  might  encounter  and,  when  necessary,  delivering  clearer  and  more 
timely supervisory messages and guidance to the firm. For directors and senior managers, it 
has meant a shift toward greater openness and increased candor with supervisors about the 
condition  of  the  firm,  its  business  strategies  and  risks,  and  the  issues  that  they  are  most 
concerned about. It has also required devoting more time and attention to their relationship 
with supervisors. 
After  three  years,  I  can  report  steady  progress  from  both  sides  at  reaching  the  “new 
paradigm” discussed in the G30 Report – but there’s still more to do. As I said a moment 
ago, much of the focus of the recent G30 reports has been on behaviors and firm cultures. It 
is right that these topics should be on the top of all our agendas. Five years after the crisis, 
headlines  about  bad  actors  and  corrosive  corporate  environments  continue  to  be  all  too 
common. 
So, my first observation about progress is just that – the topics of culture and behavior are 
“top of mind” for many senior management teams and boards of directors. It’s an important 
step to acknowledge that we have an issue. My second observation is that this is a difficult 
topic, one that generates very heated discussions, but one that is necessary as the industry 
tries to tackle the complex issue of what can be done to restore public faith in the financial 
industry. This begins with questions like: 
• 
• 
• 
What is the source of the problem? 
Are the problems we are experiencing unique to financial services? 
What  incentives  and  disincentives  –  compensation,  fines,  prosecutions  and  other 
measures – need to be altered for behaviors to really change? 
This is a topic that we will surely revisit a number of times over the coming months as both 
the industry and the supervisory community begin to answer some of the tougher questions. 
Complexity 
Let me now turn to the third element of the supervisory framework: reducing complexity. In 
large measure, this translates into sound recovery and resolution planning. The development 
and implementation of a credible resolution mechanism for large, global banks is a must. By 
credible,  I  mean  that  if  a  failure  of  one  of  these  financial  institutions  arises,  then  home 
authorities  will  proceed  with  the  resolution  plan,  rather  than  intervene  to  prevent  a  failure. 
Although  the  specifics  of  the  resolution  mechanisms  will  necessarily  vary  to  some  extent 
across  jurisdictions,  the  goal  is  common:  to  be  able  to  resolve  any  large,  global  firm 
regardless  of  its  home jurisdiction  without  taxpayer  funds  and  in  a  way  that minimizes  the 
knock-on effect to financial markets and other financial institutions. 
In  the  area  of  recovery  and  resolution,  I’d  again  offer  that  some  good  progress  has  been 
made  by  many  of  the  banking  organizations,  although  the  remaining  challenges  are  quite 
daunting. And, for the most part, this area is a new one for the other parts of the financial 
system, such as financial market utilities (FMUs), so the thinking is still evolving. 
Firms  have  made  good  progress  in  better  understanding  the  complexity  of  their  own 
operations, 
the  overall  management  of  organizational/legal 
structures, identifying all legal entities (and this was huge for some firms), and beginning the 
difficult  task  of  identifying  additional  impediments  to  resolving  a  large  internationally  active 
firm.  In  some  cases,  firms  have  already  begun  the  daunting  task  of  simplifying  their 
organizational and legal entity structures – with an eye to being less complicated and easier 
to understand – and resolve – should the need arise. 
including  strengthening 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Although there has been progress, there is still quite a bit of work to do. Earlier this year, the 
Federal  Reserve  issued  guidance  for  the  largest  firms  that  outlined  five  “capabilities”  that 
should be at the top of the list of “to dos”: 
• 
Collateral  management:  firms  should  have  effective  processes  for  managing, 
identifying and valuing collateral it receives; 
Effective  management  information  systems  (MIS)  around  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement  activities: 
firms  should  have  a  comprehensive  understanding  of 
obligations  and  exposures  associated  with  payment,  clearing  and  settlement 
activities; 
Stronger analytics around funding: firms should have the ability to analyze funding 
sources, uses and risks of each material entity and critical operation, including under 
stress; 
MIS by legal entity: firms should have demonstrated MIS capabilities for producing 
key data on a legal entity basis; and, 
Arrangements  for  shared  or  outsourced  services:  firms  should  have  robust 
arrangements in place for the continued provision of shared or outsourced services 
needed to maintain critical operations. 
     While  there  are  many  other  areas  that  supervisors/regulators  and  legislators  need  to 
continue to work on to make cross-border resolution a reality, these five areas are ones that 
we have highlighted for near-term focus by firms. 
Another  important  element  to  preventing  the  failure  of  a  firm  is  ensuring  that  firms  can 
respond  to  any  weakness  by  having  recovery  plans  that  are  implemented  well  before 
resolution becomes necessary. Such recovery plans should: 
• 
Identify actionable options that the firm can take in response to financial weakness 
that  will  restore  the  confidence  of  the  firm’s  counterparties  in  the  firm  without  the 
need for extraordinary official sector support; 
Incorporate  processes  that  analyze  the  root  causes  of  their  problems  and  identify 
longer-term  strategies  that  will  need  to  be  employed  as  other  recovery  options  to 
restore capital and liquidity are being executed; and, 
Be regularly tested and updated to ensure they remain reasonable. 
• 
For some types of firms – like financial market utilities, recovery planning is actually an even 
more important issue. Because FMUs provide critical services to the industry, experiencing a 
major  disruption  that  could  lead  to  resolution  –  or  dissolution  –  is  unacceptable.  It  is 
important, then, that a CCP be structured in a way, and develop and have tools available, to 
enable it to recover from losses and continue operations under extreme scenarios. Simply 
put, the debate on ‘less complex’ for financial market utilities is much more about recovery 
than it is about resolution. Steadfast resiliency may include casting a more critical eye on the 
resources needed for a single CCP to withstand a plausible, severe shock. 
Conclusion 
While there is still work that needs to be done to make financial institutions more resilient, 
better managed and less complex, we have also made a great deal of progress. I’d like to 
close  my  remarks  by  highlighting  some  of  the  practical  steps  we  are  taking  on  the 
supervisory side to continue that progress. 
• 
First,  through  collaboration  and  communication  with  other  supervisors,  both 
domestic  and  foreign,  we  are  continuing  to  work  across  global  firms  to  address 
issues  together  and  break  down  barriers  to  sharing  information  and  coordinating 
better among supervisors. I’d say this is still a work in progress. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Second, we need to continue to communicate our relevant supervisory findings in a 
timely manner and our communication needs to be candid and direct. Still too often I 
find that we don’t say what we mean the first time – and this leads to confusion and, 
at times, bad outcomes. 
Lastly,  we  need  to  be  more  proactive  in  establishing  an  open  dialogue  with  the 
directors of the financial institutions we supervise. We look to the directors to flag for 
us the key risks that keep them up at night. And, it is our obligation to explain the 
intuition behind our supervisory concerns and the rationale for needed change. 
Thank you for your attention today. I would be happy to answer a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
