Stephen S Poloz: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 22 January 
2014. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  January 
Monetary  Policy  Report,  which  the  Bank  published  this  morning.  Before  we  take  your 
questions, allow me to note the highlights of the Report. 
• 
lead 
the  way,  helped  by  diminishing 
Inflation  in  Canada  has  moved  further  below  the  2  per  cent  target.  This  is  due 
largely to significant excess supply in the economy and heightened competition in 
the retail sector. The path for inflation is now expected to be lower than previously 
anticipated for most of the projection period. 
The Bank expects inflation to return to the 2 per cent target in two years or so, as 
the effects of retail competition dissipate and excess capacity is absorbed. 
The global economy is expected to strengthen over the next two years, rising from 
2.9 per cent growth in 2013 to 3.4 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015. 
The  United  States  will 
fiscal  drag, 
accommodative  monetary  policy  and  stronger  household  balance  sheets.  The 
improving U.S. outlook is affecting global bond, equity, and currency markets. 
Growth in other regions is evolving largely as projected in October. 
Global trade growth plunged after 2011, but is poised to recover as global demand 
strengthens. 
In Canada, economic growth improved in the second half of 2013. However, there 
have been few signs of the anticipated rebalancing towards exports and business 
investment. 
While  we  are  doing  more  work  to  understand  the  wedge  between  the  level  of 
Canadian exports and that of foreign demand, this remains difficult to explain. We 
are  therefore  taking  a  conservative  approach  to  our  forecasts  for  exports,  and 
assuming the wedge will remain. 
That  said,  the  U.S.  recovery  is  becoming  more  broad-based,  including  higher 
investment spending by companies, and that, as well as the recent depreciation of 
the  Canadian  dollar,  should  help  to  boost  exports.  This,  in  turn,  should  lead  to 
stronger business confidence and investment here in Canada. 
Meanwhile, recent data have been consistent with the Bank’s expectation of a soft 
landing in the housing market and a stabilization of household indebtedness relative 
to income. 
Real GDP growth is projected to pick up from 1.8 per cent in 2013 to 2.5 per cent in 
both 2014 and 2015. This implies that the economy will return gradually to capacity 
over the next two years or so. 
Our recent analysis has given us an improved, yet still incomplete, understanding of 
the inflation picture. We now believe the effect of heightened retail competition will 
subtract about 0.3 percentage points from core inflation in 2014. This effect will be 
more persistent than initially thought. 
This finding, though, does not explain all of the weakness in inflation. And so, we are 
exploring whether the output gap has a greater impact on inflation than previously 
           BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   believed,  especially  when  the  gap  is  persistent.  This  interpretation  seems  to  be 
relevant for other countries, as well as Canada. 
While increased competition will have a permanent effect on the level of prices, it 
will have a transitory effect on the rate of inflation. As such, we believe policy should 
look through it. 
Although  the  fundamental  drivers  of  growth  and  future  inflation  appear  to  be 
strengthening, inflation is expected to remain well below target for some time, and 
therefore  the  downside  risks  to  inflation  have  grown  in  importance.  At  the  same 
time,  risks  associated  with  elevated  household  imbalances  have  not  materially 
changed. 
Weighing these considerations, the Bank judges that the balance of risks remains 
within  the  zone  articulated  in  October,  and  therefore  has  decided  to  maintain  the 
target  for  the  overnight  rate  at  1  per  cent.  The  timing  and  direction  of  the  next 
change  to  the  policy  rate  will  depend  on  how  new  information  influences  this 
balance of risks. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
