Jwala Rambarran: Trinidad and Tobago strengthens information 
exchange 
Address by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Trinidad and Tobago Securities 
&  Exchange  Commission  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  Port  of  Spain, 
6 January 2014. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Economists  typically  have  a  penchant  for  numbers  so  I’ll  start  with  a  few:  TODAY  is  the 
6th of the 1st month of 2014 and the 12th and last day of Christmas 2013. So I hope the next 
360 days of 2014 are productive and fulfilling for you, your families and our country. 
Today  is  also  a  historic  day.  Effective  supervision  of  our  financial  system  requires  us  as 
regulators to  see  both  the forest  and  the trees. We  need  to  improve  our  understanding of 
individual  financial  institutions  (the  trees)  and  their  intricate  connections  to  the  forest  eco-
system of financial markets and the macro-economy. Today’s signing of this Memorandum of 
Understanding  (MOU)  between  the  SEC  and  the  Central  Bank  is  about  advancing  this 
process  of  better  managing  systemic  risk.  This  is  not  about  ego  or  territory;  it’s  about 
ensuring  the  protection  of  every  citizen  who  trusts  their  bank,  securities  firm,  or  financial 
institution with their money. This is why we are here and why this piece of paper matters. 
As regulators, we need to remember who are at the heart of the financial system. We need to 
remember  it  is  real  human  hearts:  a  teacher  with  a  loan,  a  market  vendor  with  a  savings 
account  in  a  bank,  a  bus  driver  with  an  insurance  policy,  or  a  doubles  vendor  with  an 
investment in a mutual fund. Our duty to these market participants, who all rely on us, means 
that  we  must  find  common  ground  as  fellow  regulators,  we  must  collaborate  more 
systematically,  and  we  must  craft  together  a  regulatory  network  that  offers  protection, 
consistency, and stability. I think this should answer the question, why this MOU is important. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  the  Central  Bank  and  SEC  do  have 
frequent contact with each other as regulators. The Chairman of the SEC and I often consult 
each other on matters of mutual regulatory concern. The Central Bank has a representative 
on  the  Board  of  Commissioners  of  the  SEC.  Our  Financial  Institutions  Supervision 
Department speaks regularly to the SEC’s enforcement personnel. From a legal perspective, 
however, when the paths of the Central Bank and the SEC intersect in the conduct of our 
duties, as it often does, we are duty bound by law to stay firmly within the confines of our 
own regulatory backyards. 
This  MOU  establishes  a  mutual  cooperation  framework  which  will  allow  us  to  prudently 
venture beyond our own individual regulatory backyards, without creating any legally binding 
obligations. The anchor is the exchange of information between Central Bank and SEC. The 
MOU will allow us to share relevant information on corporate structure, administration, quality 
of organization and systems and any other information that may be relevant to the adequate 
supervision  of financial  entities  of  the  securities  industries. Through this  MOU,  the  Central 
Bank and the SEC can determine whether senior personnel and other individuals who may 
impact the strategic direction of a financial institution are indeed fit and proper persons. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, now that you are getting a sense of the bigger picture behind this 
agreement, you can see that collaboration among financial regulators is not an option. It is 
absolutely  necessary  if  we  are  to  be  effective  in  regulating  and  overseeing  our  financial 
system. Exchange of information should not just be relevant in times of crisis, but to prevent 
a crisis from happening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Some of you may already be asking about this collaboration in relation to the third financial 
regulator in Trinidad and Tobago, the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). I am pleased to inform 
you that Central Bank will soon be signing a similar MOU on regulatory collaboration with the 
FIU. I understand that the SEC is advancing negotiations on a similar MOU with the FIU. The 
message,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is  that  the  country’s  three  financial  regulators  are  co-
operating  and  sharing  information.  This  demonstrates  our  commitment  to  strengthening 
regulatory oversight which should result in a stronger and safer financial system. 
Such  collaboration  among  the  country’s  three  financial  regulators  is  also  a  further  step  in 
supporting our efforts to combat money laundering and terrorism financing. According to a 
2007  Joint  Report  by  the  United  Nations  Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime  and  the World  Bank 
several factors heighten the Caribbean region’s vulnerability to crime and violence. The Joint 
Report  notes  that  the  Caribbean  is  wedged  between  the  world’s  source  of  cocaine  to  the 
south and its primary consumer markets to the north. This makes the region the transit point 
for  a  torrent  of  narcotics  whose  street  value  far  exceeds  the  value  of  the  entire  formal 
economies  of  the  Caribbean.  Caught  in  this  cross  fire  of  the  international  drug  trafficking 
network,  financial  regulators  have  an  important  stake  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  efforts  to 
make  it  even  more  difficult  for  organized  criminal  groups  to  move  money  through  our 
financial system. 
Some  of  you  may  be  aware  that,  in  January  2015,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  will  be  the  first 
Caribbean  jurisdiction to  undergo  the  Fourth  Round  Mutual  Evaluation  utilizing  the revised 
Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) Forty Recommendations. In this regard, Trinidad and 
Tobago  is  inter  alia  required  to  demonstrate  cooperation  and  coordination  among  all 
stakeholders at the national level. 
While  the  signing  of  this  MOU  and  other  forthcoming  agreements  will  definitely  help  us  to 
bridge  gaps  that  previously  impeded  our  AML/CFT  efforts,  the  Fourth  Round  is  rigorous, 
time-consuming  and  will  call  for  considerable  resources,  both  technical  and  financial.  The 
Central Bank is concerned that the National AML/CFT Committee, which plays a crucial role 
in enabling national stakeholders to work with each other to combat money laundering and 
terrorism  financing,  has  not  met  since  July  2013.  We  are  of  the  view  that  this  Committee 
needs  to  expeditiously  recommence  its  activities,  given  the  extremely  short  timeframes  in 
which Trinidad and Tobago has to remedy its Third Round deficiencies as well as prepare for 
the Fourth Round. 
As financial regulators, we have a shared responsibility when it comes to the effectiveness of 
the regime in place to protect our country and its citizens from organized financial crime. The 
law enforcement authorities also have a responsibility to adapt their efforts and capacities. 
In closing, Ladies and Gentlemen, the challenges facing financial policymakers are daunting 
but  we  must  maintain  the  momentum for  undertaking  courageous  and  bold  reforms  of  our 
financial  system.  This  is  a  journey  we  must  make  collectively,  and  the  signing  of  today’s 
MOU  is  an  excellent  opportunity  to  make  further  progress.  Both  the  SEC  and  the  Central 
Bank are demonstrating that we are incorporating international best practices into our own 
regulatory and supervisory regimes. 
The Central Bank certainly looks forward to increasing collaboration with the SEC and with 
the FIU in the year ahead. 
I end as I began, with a number: we have only 360 days to prepare for the Fourth Round 
Mutual Evaluation scheduled for 2015. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
