  Christian Noyer: Macroprudential policies – implementation and 
interactions 
Introduction  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  before  the  Bank  of  France’s 
Financial Stability Review Panel (Panel RSF), New York, 14 April 2014. 
 Dear Governors, 
Dear colleagues, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  very  proud,  today,  to  launch  the  2014  issue  of  the  Banque  de  France’s  Financial 
Stability Review on “Macroprudential policies: implementation and interactions”. 
Since  2002,  our  Review  has  brought  together  contributions  from  prominent  academics, 
practitioners  and  policy-makers  from  all  over  the  world  on  topical  issues.  This  year, 
macroprudential policy has been one of the focuses of policy-thinking and policy-making and 
it is likely to be so for some time to come. I am sure that this issue of the Banque de France’s 
FSR will provide food for thought and action. 
I  warmly  thank  all  the  experts  who  have  contributed  to  this  Review  for  their  papers  of 
exceptional  quality  and  depth.  I  do  not  have  time  to  mention  all  of  them  and  only  some 
authors are here with me today. 
These contributions are very diverse in their assessment and experiences of macroprudential 
policies. Policy recommendations and proposals are sometimes difficult to reconcile but this 
is what we want to achieve in our FSR. Naturally, we don’t necessarily share all the views 
expressed in all the articles, but we do believe in the exchange of ideas. 
As an introduction to this FSR, we are extremely thankful to the roundtable participants that 
have accepted my invitation: 
• 
A  long-standing  member  of  the  Federal  Reserve  board:  Governor  Tarullo,  thank 
you. It’s a privilege to welcome you today given your active participation and role in 
setting international financial regulation; 
A Governor of one of the most advanced central bank in the area of macroprudential 
policy in Asia: Tae Soo Kang, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Korea, in charge of 
Financial Stability. 
A  very  active  ambassador  for  macroprudential  policy:  José  Viñals,  Financial 
counselor and Director of the Monetary and Capital Markets Department of the IMF. 
A distinguished expert on the financial sector worldwide and its regulation: Douglas 
Elliott from the Brookings Institution. 
   Thank you all for being with us today. 
As  you  know,  for  each  issue  of  our  FSR,  we  always  try  to  pick  topics  that  are  both 
analytically  complex  and  relevant  to  current  policy-making.  This  is  clearly  the  case  with 
macroprudential policies. 
Indeed,  macroprudential  policy  is  a  critical  dimension  of  the  public  policy  response  to  the 
crises we have experienced since 2008 and has figured prominently in the lessons we have 
drawn from them. Let me mention three of these lessons. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     First, the oversight of individual components of the financial system is not enough to 
preserve  financial  stability.  Having  robust  financial  institutions  is  a  prerequisite  for 
ensuring financial stability but it is not in itself sufficient. 
Second, maintaining price stability does not guarantee financial stability. In the euro 
area,  the  inflation  mandate  has  always  been  fulfilled,  but  has  not  prevented  the 
emergence  of  crises  in  the  region.  These  crises  have  forced  central  banks  to 
broaden  their  mandates  to  include  financial  stability  in  order  to  ensure  the 
functioning of the monetary policy transmission channel as well as to guarantee the 
smooth financing of the economy. Stable inflation and financial stability are therefore 
two  objectives  that  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  respectively  seek  to 
achieve. 
Third,  the  Lehman  episode  and  the  euro  area  crisis  have  confirmed  that  financial 
crises do not stop at borders. Consequently, financial system regulation must be the 
fruit of international cooperation. 
These lessons, in the post-crisis world, are at the heart of policy-makers’ actions. Financial 
crises  have  led  us  to  renew  our  approach  to  financial  system  regulation,  and  notably  to 
supplement it with a macroprudential perspective. But what is a macroprudential policy? How 
can we define clear objectives? What are the policy instruments? How can we organise it? 
What imbalances need to be redressed? These are only some of the numerous issues that 
contributors address in this Review. 
In particular, the broad scope of policy action is a major challenge. We especially need to 
anticipate  all  possible  conflicts  with  other  economic  policies,  such  as  microprudential, 
monetary or fiscal policy. 
I will now identify at least two prerequisites to ensure that macroprudential policy is effective: 
First, 
if  conflicts  arise  between  microprudential  and  macroprudential  policies, 
macroprudential policy should prevail. 
We must be particularly vigilant about this point in order to ensure the overall macro-welfare 
of the economy and guarantee the smooth financing of the economy. For example, imposing 
stringent requirements on financial institutions during an economic downturn may not be an 
appropriate policy response. Although it would reinforce the individual robustness of financial 
institutions, it may further subdue economic activity by causing a credit crunch for example. 
We would then enter into a negative feedback loop where the social and economic costs of 
regulation have systemic repercussions. 
There is thus a need under such circumstances for a clear prioritisation of macroprudential 
policy over microprudential policy in order to minimise the economic and social costs of the 
adopted measures and to guarantee the smooth financing of the economy, throughout the 
economic cycle. 
My second point is that this need for prioritisation must be addressed in a wider and clear 
governance  framework  of  the  interplay  between  macroprudential  policies  and  other  public 
policies. An optimal macroprudential policy framework must resolve such interaction issues 
by ensuring complementarity with monetary policy and consultation with fiscal policy. 
(i) 
First, macroprudential policy  is complementary to monetary policy in so  far as the 
two  policies  may  reinforce  or  take  over  from  each  other,  when  one  of  them  is 
constrained.  For  example,  when  monetary  policy  is  at  the  zero  lower  bound, 
macroprudential policy can help to give the economy an additional policy impulse. 
Macroprudential  policy  can  also  prevent  the  build-up  of  asset  bubbles  in  specific 
sectors in a context of low interest rates. This complementarity should not however 
jeopardise the independence of central bank monetary policy decision-making. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 (ii) 
 Second, the optimal framework must promote consultation with fiscal authorities in 
order  to  ensure  the full  effectiveness  of macroprudential  policy  measures  that  are 
often  designed  as  Pigouvian  Taxes  generating  resource  transfers.  This  requires 
cooperation  and 
in 
macroprudential policy decisions. Such as many countries have already adopted, a 
collegiate macroprudential authority, with a clear division of responsibility between 
central banks, the ministry of finance, market authorities, and banking supervisors, 
can ensure this cooperation. 
information-sharing  among 
the  authorities 
involved 
I  will  not  dwell  further  on  these  topical  issues,  which  am  sure  will  give  rise  to  fascinating 
discussions. It is my hope that we can collectively contribute to enlighten this policy debate. 
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  our  panellists.  I  suggest  that  we  start  with  Governor  Daniel 
Tarullo, who will give us the vision of the United States on macroprudential issues. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
