  G Padmanabhan: Governance in the corporate sector – certain 
perspectives 
Valedictory  address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  at  the  15th  National  Conference  of  Practising  Company  Secretaries  (PCS)  on  the 
theme  “Practising  Company  Secretaries:  The  Facilitator  for  Corporate  Growth”,  Mumbai, 
27-28 June 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Shri P R Ravimohan and Shri H S Mohanty gratefully acknowledged. 
1. Mr. Sridharan, President, Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI), Mr. Khare Vice-
President, Mr. Sahoo, ladies and gentlemen. Good afternoon. It is my pleasure and privilege 
to  address  this  gathering  today  at  the  conclusion  of  the  15th  National  Conference  of 
Practicing Company Secretaries (PCS) held under the aegis of ICSI. When my good friend 
Mr.  Sahoo  asked me  to  address  this  august gathering, I  accepted  with alacrity  since  I  am 
aware  that the ICSI  has  been  dedicating  itself  to  developing  and  regulating  the  profession 
with  its  vision  of  being  a  global  leader  in  promoting  good  corporate  governance  and  a 
mission  to  develop  high  caliber  professionals  to  facilitate  good  corporate  governance.  I 
respect  that.  ICSI  is  also  nurturing  professionals  that  are  actively  engaged  in  issues  to 
enhance governance in the corporate sector as well as in the securities markets, the two vital 
growth engines of the economy. I applaud that. Companies or corporations have been the 
principal  way  of  organising  large  scale  commercial  or  industrial  endeavour  right  down  the 
history  but  it  assumed  a  formal  structure  in  the  early  nineteenth  century  as  the  industrial 
revolution  gathered  pace1.  The  story  of  growth  and  development  since  then  in  the  free-
market  economies  is  not  very  different  from  that  of  the  evolution  of  corporations.  The 
narrative is not very different in India. The corporate sector has registered a quantum change 
in terms of size, number and complexity over the years and is slated for further acceleration 
in the process in the times to come. Therefore, today, the importance of a strong and vibrant 
corporate sector in the economic growth process cannot be overemphasised. 
2.  The  profession  of  a  company  secretary  is  probably  as  old  as  companies  themselves. 
Though  it  has  greatly  evolved  over  the  time,  the  nucleus  continues  to  be  “compliance”.  A 
company functions in the milieu of a maze of regulatory obligations. The job of a company 
secretary  -  whether  as  an  employee  or  a  practitioner  -  is  to  ensure  that  the  company 
functions within the ambit of the legal and regulatory framework. As Lord Cadbury observes 
in  his  now  eponymous  report,  “The  chairman  and  the  board  will  look  to  the  company 
secretary for guidance on what their responsibilities are under the rules and regulations to 
which  they  are  subject  to  and  on  how  those  responsibilities  should  be  discharged.”  To 
complete  the  perspective,  let  me  also  quote  the  then  Central  Minister  Shiv  Shankar,  who 
stated,  while  introducing  the  Company  Secretaries  Bill,  1980,  “The  Government  attaches 
special  importance to the  development  of  professional  management,  so that the  corporate 
sector  can  evolve  and  function  in  tune  with  changing  needs  of  time,  and  the  social 
responsibilities that this important segment of the economy has to shoulder. The profession 
of Company Secretaries has an important part to play in the introduction of professionalism 
in the area of corporate management.” 
3. During the past two decades, the importance of good corporate governance has come to 
the fore. The concern has been reinforced, particularly as it relates to the financial sector, in 
the backdrop of the global financial crisis. Suffice it to say here that it essentially comprises 
acting in a manner as to enjoy sustained trust of all the stakeholders which can broadly be 
                                                
1  
It may be of some interest to note that the so called Bubble Act, 1720 had banned formation of all companies 
in UK without a Royal Charter till it was repealed in the wake of progress of industrial revolution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  grouped into four categories: the owners, the lenders, the customers and the regulators. The 
literature on corporate governance is voluminous and I too have spoken about it elsewhere. 
It is not my intention to go into the principles and practice of sound corporate governance 
here today. After jogging my mind about the issues that I should flag to an audience like this, 
I  concluded  that,  given  my  background,  it  might  be  worthwhile  to  talk  about  the  tension 
between the companies and regulators, and then about some of the changes brought about 
by the new Companies Act and my perception about a few important areas. Let me start with 
the tension between the companies and the regulators, why it is important to resolve this and 
establish  synergy  in  the  interest  of  corporate  and  economic  growth  and  how  it  can  be 
achieved. 
4. One of the themes often discussed these days is the ease of doing business. According to 
global ranking of 189 countries published by the World Bank in June 2013, India figures at 
rank 134 in the overall ease of doing business, at 179 in the attribute “starting a business”, at 
186 in “contract enforcement” and 124 in “resolving efficiency”. Not an insignificant part of the 
blame for this  predicament  usually  is  laid  at  the  door  of  the  complexity  and  opacity  of  the 
regulatory  framework.  Without  admitting  the  truth  of  the  accusation  or  culpability  as  a 
regulator,  I  have  no  hesitation  in  stating  that  both  the  regulatory  framework  and  its 
administration require improvement. At the same time, let me argue that this improvement is 
not possible at the initiative of the authors and administrators of regulations alone; it requires 
active contributions from those for whom the regulations are framed. This is where you have 
an important role to play. 
5. What is the foundation of regulations? In a free market economy, regulations are basically 
aimed  or  should  be  aimed  at  addressing  various  reasons  for  market  failure:  existence  of 
monopoly power, externalities, information asymmetry etc. Put another way, in a kind of “bar 
stool” manner, regulations are aimed at addressing the divergence between individual and 
social incentives. There are many parables that illustrate this point; let me do this with the so 
called  “tragedy  of  commons”.  Suppose  residents  of  a  village  use  a  parcel  of  land  –  called 
common  in  UK  –  to  graze  their  animals.  If  one  villager  grazes  an  additional  animal,  it  is 
beneficial  for  her  but  detrimental  for  villagers  as  a  group.  If  several  villagers  do  this,  the 
common will be depleted and ultimately destroyed. Societies down the ages have resolved 
this problem in myriad ways – mostly through standards of normative behaviour rather than 
regimes of regulations and their enforcement. In a modern economy that is large, complex 
and  organically  interrelated,  such  problems  require  elaborate  and  explicit  rules  and 
regulations and their administration and enforcement. 
6. Regulations thus are supposed to modify behaviour of those covered by the regulation and 
ensure that they behave in a socially desirable way. But whether the regulations will have to 
be in the nature of a nudge or a shove depends upon how the regulated entities respond to. 
When  the  regulations  are  simple  and  the  regulated  entities  comply  with  the  regulations  in 
letter  and  spirit  so  that  the  objective  of  the  regulator  is  achieved,  it  is  not  necessary  for 
regulations  to  be  complex  and  detailed,  which  makes  both  administration  and  compliance 
difficult.  In  addition,  several  socially  and  economically  useful  activities  may  also  not  be 
undertaken in the face of such elaborate regulatory regimen. 
7.  Let  me  give  an  example  from  my  own  professional  field.  As  you  are  aware,  we  have 
restrictions  on  capital  account  transactions.  This  is  motivated  by  the  objective  of 
macroeconomic  stability.  In  the  preference  hierarchy  of  capital  inflows,  equity  inflows 
dominate  debt  inflows  and  as  such  we  have  a  stricter  regulatory  regime  for  debt  in 
comparison with equity. In 2007-08, when the global market conditions were benign and the 
Indian economy was going at a rapid pace, there were large debt inflows resulting in Rupee 
appreciation. Reserve Bank’s efforts to contain the Rupee volatility in turn resulted in large 
Rupee  liquidity  which  had  to  be  sterilised  at  considerable  fiscal  cost  lest  inflationary 
pressures  became  unmanageable. 
framework 
discouraged borrowing by Indian companies. I don’t need to amplify that this measure was in 
the greater interest of the economy including that of the companies. It would have been the 
the  circumstances, 
the  regulatory 
In 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  end  of  a  nice  story  if  the  companies  had  moderated  their  foreign  currency  borrowings  in 
response to these regulations. 
8. But how did the companies respond? Let me elaborate three different ways in which they 
tried to circumnavigate the regulation with the caveat that there may be others. 
a. 
Some  companies  issued  convertible  debentures,  which,  till  2007,  was  a  permitted 
instrument  for  equity  investment.  But  such  debentures  were  structured  in  such  a 
way  that  they  were  predominantly  debt  rather  than  equity.  As  an  example,  in  a 
convertible debenture of 100 Rupees, only 10 Rupees were convertible to equity on 
maturity. 
Some others adopted a slightly more sophisticated approach. They issued equities 
with  a  put  option  at  a  specified  strike  price  in  favour  of  the  investor  thus 
camouflaging  the  debt  nature  of  the  instrument.  To  illustrate,  suppose  an  equity 
instrument valued at 10 Rupees is issued with a put option after five years with a 
strike price of 20. At the appropriate time, the investor exercises the option and sells 
back these shares at Rupees 20 to the issuer, thereby getting a fixed return of close 
to 15 per cent. The economic essence of the whole transaction is that the company 
has borrowed the funds at a cost of 15 per cent. 
Yet  others  adopted  an  innovative  approach.  A  company  issues  a  share  valued  at 
10 Rupees  at  a  premium  of  Rupees  25,000  and  enters  into  a  shareholders’ 
agreement promising a guaranteed dividend of 8 per cent on the face value of the 
share as well as the share premium. The structure needs no elaboration.  
b. 
c. 
9.  What  does  the  regulator  do  when  such  incidents  unfold?  They  respond  by  making 
regulations more elaborate and provide for clauses that can prevent the aforesaid evasions. 
The regulatory framework evolves in a process of a game continuously played between the 
regulator and the regulated entities. What is necessary in the larger interest of the economy 
is that these games result in improving the common good. 
10. I now come to the second part of my address, the new Companies Act. I consider the 
enactment of the new Companies Act 2013 (CA 2013) as an important development. As we 
all  know,  the  new  law  introduces  changes  and  updates  to  various  aspects  relating  to 
companies  and  their  operations,  including  accounting,  auditing,  corporate  governance, 
related  party  transactions,  loans  and  investments,  mergers,  reconstruction  and  raising  of 
capital.  The  updates  necessitate  changes  and  enhancements  in  the  role  of  practicing 
company secretaries going forward. I understand that these issues, in particular with regard 
to the conduct of secretarial audit, have been deliberated upon in various sessions held over 
the  last  day  and  a  half.  On  my  part,  permit  me  to  talk  about  certain  provisions  relating  to 
three  aspects  of  the  CA  2013  viz.  the  Board,  the  audit  function  and  corporate  social 
responsibility;  all  areas  that  impact  corporate  governance  by  default,  the  growth  and 
development of an entity and the economy by consequence. 
The board of directors 
11.  Recognising  that  the  Board  of  Directors  is  the  ultimate  source  of  governance  in  a 
company,  the  new  CA  2013  addresses  the  issues  relating  to  its  composition  of  the  and 
functioning  comprehensively  in  order  to  enhance  its  efficacy.  The  Act  specifies  that  each 
company  should  have  at  least  one  “resident”  director  who  has  stayed  in  India  for  a  total 
period of not less than 182 days  in the previous calendar year. Large companies will also 
need to have at least one woman director on the Board and listed companies should have at 
least one third of the Board as independent directors. Independent directors can hold office 
for  not  more  than  two  consecutive  terms  of  five  years  each.  The  number  of  Board 
memberships a director can hold in public and private companies is also limit bound. Board 
meeting can be called only after a seven day notice and the fiduciary duties of directors are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  clearly  defined  in  the  Act.  The  code  of  conduct  for  independent  directors  has  been 
appropriately articulated. 
12. The Act also makes it mandatory for all listed companies and certain other companies to 
put in place an Audit Committee and a Nomination and Remuneration Committee. The type 
of directors that can be members of the Committees are specified with thee scale weighing in 
favour  of  independent  directors.  The  responsibility  of  chairing  these  Committees  can  be 
assigned to persons competent and qualified to discharge the responsibility. 
13.  The  above  provisions  will  ensure  diversity  and  integrity  in  the  composition  of  the 
Board/Committees and facilitate the company in benefiting from available talent pools. These 
improvements  in  turn  will  ensure  effective  Board  oversight,  inculcate  operational  discipline 
and instill financial discipline, leading to overall improvements in the corporate sector. 
Audit function 
14.  Paraphrasing  Wendell  Phillips,  we  can  say  that  effective  audit  is  the  price  of  good 
governance. In the area of audit, the CA 2013 provides for various checks and balances to 
ensure  that  the  audit  function  in  the  corporate  world  maintains  impeccable  quality.  The 
appointment of individual auditors and audit firms cannot exceed five consecutive years or 
two  terms  of  five  consecutive  years,  respectively.  The  appointment  will  be  subject  to 
ratification at every Annual General Meeting (AGM) and similarly, their removal prior to a five 
year term will also be subject to a resolution at the AGM and government approval, where 
required.  There  are  stiff  penalties  and  provisions  for  prosecution  by  the  National  Financial 
Reporting Authority for fraudulent actions on the part of the audit firms. The act also prohibits 
auditors  from  providing  non-audit  services  such  as  book-keeping,  internal  audit,  actuarial 
services, investment advisory services, etc. to the company where they are auditor to ensure 
their independence. These measures will not only ensure quality in audits but will also bring 
more transparency and accountability for the auditors as well as the company. 
15.  This  brings  me  to  an  important  provision  in  the  Act,  relating  to  the  introduction  of 
“Secretarial  Audit”  as  a  new  class  of  audit,  in  addition  to  the  existing  mandated  statutory 
audit, internal audit and cost audit. Secretarial audit will be mandatory for listed companies 
and certain other specified companies viz. those public companies that have paid up capital 
of  Rs  50  crore  or  more  or  a  turnover  of  Rs.  250  crore  or  more.  In  the  CA  1956,  the 
requirement  was  only  to file  a  compliance  certificate given  by  a  PCS  with  the  Registrar of 
Companies  with  the  requisite  fees  and  attach  a  copy  with  the  Board’s  report.  This  will  no 
longer be the case. The objective of the proposed secretarial audit under CA 2013 will be to 
improve  the  compliance  culture  in  the  corporate  sector  in  letter  and  spirit,  and  ensure 
transparency  and  timely  communication  of  compliance/non-compliance  status  to  the 
management  of  the  company,  regulators  and  external  stakeholders.  This  will  ultimately 
protect  the  interest  of  customers,  employees,  directors,  stakeholders  and  avoid  any 
unwarranted action from the law enforcing /other agencies. The report of the secretarial audit 
will  need  to  be  annexed  with  the  Board  report.  The  Board  of  Directors  in  their  report  to 
shareholders will need to explain any qualification/remark made by the company secretary in 
practice in the secretarial audit. 
16. The secretarial audit is intended to be a detailed and meaningful exercise conducted by a 
professional to verify compliance with provisions of various laws applicable to a company. It 
is  you,  practicing  company  secretaries  who  will  have  the  responsibility  to  conduct  these 
audits  for  which  you  will  have  similar  powers  and  rights  as  statutory  auditors.  In  fact, 
practicing  company  secretaries  will  form  part  of the  Key  Management  Personnel  (KMP)  of 
certain  class  of  companies  whose  appointment,  remuneration  and  removal  can  only  be 
effected  through  Board  resolutions.  Given  the  significance  of  the  position  and  the  work 
involved  in  the  audits,  it  will  be  important  to  ensure  that  practicing  company  secretaries 
inculcate  the required  expertise  and knowledge  to  conduct these  audits  diligently  and  with 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  integrity.  This  will  benefit  the  company  management,  government  authorities,  regulators, 
investors as well as other stakeholders with positive effects spreading to the economy. 
Corporate social responsibility 
17. “The price of greatness is responsibility”, Winston Churchill often used to say. There is no 
reason why it should be any different for companies as well. A new initiative that has been 
put in place under the CA 2013 relates to corporate social responsibility (CSR) of companies. 
Under  the  Act,  every  company  with  net  worth  of  Rs  500  crore  or  more,  or  turnover  of 
Rs 1,000 crore or more or a net profit of Rs 5 crore or more during any financial year will 
need  to  set  up  a  CSR  Committee,  which  will,  inter  alia,  recommend  to  the  Board  an 
appropriate  CSR  policy,  indicate  the  CSR  activities  that  the  company  will  undertake  and 
recommend  the  amount  of  expenditure  to  be  incurred  on  the  activities.  Boards  of  CSR 
companies will need to ensure that at least 2% of the average net profits made during the 
three immediately preceding financial years are utilised for CSR activities, giving preference 
to local area and areas around where it operates. In case of non-fulfilment of CSR spending, 
the  reasons  will  need  to  be  indicated  in  the  report  of  the  Board  in  a  “comply  or  explain” 
approach. The CSR policy and its contents will also need to be disclosed in the Board report 
and the company’s website. 
18.  Thus far,  there  had been  no  specific mandate for  CSR for  companies,  though  several 
companies did voluntarily undertake CSR initiatives. With the new Act, CSR activities will be 
a responsibility of all specified companies. While there may be issues in implementing CSR 
initiatives in companies that have not yet ventured in this area and also for companies with 
large amounts becoming eligible for CSR spends, over time this measure will not only help in 
the  economic  and  social  progress  of  the  under  privileged  sections  of  the  society  but  also 
facilitate gains for companies in terms of their reputation and image. 
The profession 
19. I have talked about some key provisions of the CA 2013 that are likely to have a positive 
bearing on the governance and compliance culture in the corporate world. However, simply 
enshrining the provisions in the Act will not ensure that governance standards are enhanced. 
The key in my view lies in their appropriate implementation, which will need to be ensured. 
Towards this end, the Act has significantly enhanced the role of company secretaries. As a 
professional  class,  PCS  will  in  the  year  ahead,  need  to  emerge  as  an  extremely  reliable 
source of assessing existing or potential compliance risks in the corporate sector; a source 
whose  integrity  will  be  relied  upon  by  various  regulators  and  agencies,  and  indeed  the 
corporate  sector  itself.  So,  what  needs  to  be  done?  Where  does  the  profession  see  itself 
going forward and how does it get there? 
20.  To  answer  the  questions,  let  me  go  back  to  some  issues  relating  to  the  roles  and 
responsibilities of PCSs. The conduct of the annual secretarial audit that PCSs will have to 
perform  going  forward  will  entail  i)  reporting  to  the  Board  about  the  compliance  with  the 
provisions, rules and laws applicable to the company, and ii) ensuring compliance with the 
secretarial  standards,  as  issued  by  ICSI.  These  two  functions  will  cast  an  overwhelming 
responsibility on PCSs that will require them to incur knowledge and experience of various 
laws,  regulations  and  practices  on  the  one  side  and  display  commitment  and  integrity  in 
performance on the other. 
21.  To  illustrate  the  enormity  and  depth  of  the  task  entrusted  to  PCSs,  the  scope  of  the 
secretarial audit will include assessing a company’s compliance with all applicable provisions 
of the CA 2013, SEBI Act 1992, RBI Act 1934, Securities Contracts Act 1956, Depositories 
Act  1996,  FEMA  1999,  Competition  Act  2002,  listing  agreement  and  any  other  law 
specifically applicable. Compliance with various secretarial standards issued by the ICSI to 
aid  companies  in  discharging  their  corporate  responsibilities  will  also  need  to  specifically 
assess as these standards, several of which are non-financial, have been provided statutory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  recognition  in  CA  2013  as  against  their  earlier  recommendatory  nature.  Further,  the 
secretarial  standards  cover  the  entire  range  of  company  operations  including  conduct  of 
meetings, dividends, shares, maintenance of records, inter-corporate interactions, contracts, 
appointment of auditors, etc. which PCSs will need to assess. 
22. I understand that the ICSI will be embarking upon a nationwide capacity building exercise 
amongst the existing professionals and members to meet the expectations and requirements 
of the enhanced position of PCS under the new Act. In addition, to bring up a niche cadre of 
high  quality  professionals  in  the  coming  years,  the  Institute  also  plans  to  initiate  a  long 
duration  integrated  programme  for  company  secretaries.  These  initiatives  are  timely  and 
warranted, and if I may say so necessary for developing world class professionals who will 
facilitate corporate sector growth through their knowledge, expertise, guidance, analysis and 
insights.  These formal  capacity  building  initiatives  will,  however,  need  to  be  supplemented 
with  self-motivated  learning  as  well  as  regular  interactions  with  companies,  regulators, 
government  agencies  and  other  stakeholders 
issues, 
compliance requirements and disclosure rationales. Practicing company secretaries will soon 
move  to  the  centre  of  the  corporate  world.  It  is  imperative  that  they  are  geared  for  this 
enhanced role. 
to  understand  organisational 
Conclusion 
23. Let me conclude by summarising the issues that I have touched upon today. I raised the 
issue that what is often good for an individual may not always be good for the society which 
explains the difference in perception between the regulator and the regulated. Thereafter, in 
the context of the new Companies Act 2013 and some of its important provisions in relation 
to  corporate governance, I talked  about  i)  the  changes  that  will need to be effected in the 
Boards of companies, particularly listed companies as also certain other companies and the 
beneficial effect these are likely to have on corporate sector’s operations and growth; ii) the 
improvements proposed in the audit function, in particular the introduction of secretarial audit 
and  its  importance  in  creating  compliance  awareness  for  management  and  external 
stakeholders;  iii)  the  new  provisions  relating  to  social  responsibility  of  the  corporate  world 
and  its  role  in  facilitating  (sustainable)  growth  in  the  economy  and  lastly,  iv)  how  the 
profession of company secretaries needs to evolve going forward to meet the challenge of a 
more  pivotal  role  in  the  corporate  sector.  In  my  perspective,  the  Companies  Act  2013 
proposes  significant  improvements  in  the  corporate  sector  operations  and  casts  huge 
responsibility on company secretaries; it is for you professionals to live up to the enhanced 
expectations  and  responsibilities  that  will  now  be  coming  your  way  and  ensure  that  the 
proposed  improvements  come  to  fruition.  My  best  wishes  to  the  Institute  in  its  continued 
endeavours to bring about a more vibrant, ethical and responsible corporate India. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
