Benoît Cœuré: Exchange of views on the ECB’s role in the troika 
Remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB,  before  the 
Economic and Monetary Affairs committee, Brussels, 13 February 2014. 
 Madam Chair, 
Honourable Members, 
Let me first of all thank you for your invitation to this exchange of views. 
The  adjustment  programmes  implemented  in  recent  years  in  several  euro  area  Member 
States were an unprecedented answer to an unprecedented crisis. This crisis has affected 
the lives of millions of EU citizens – hence it is only natural that you, as their directly elected 
representatives,  assess  what  has  happened.  This  crisis  has  revealed  major  shortcomings, 
mainly  in  domestic  economic  policies,  but  also  in  the  architecture  of  EMU  –  thus  the 
European  Parliament  as  an  institution  with  a  truly  European  perspective  is  an  appropriate 
forum to discuss what can be learnt from this experience. 
It is against this background that I am grateful for the opportunity today to explain the role of 
the  ECB  in  the  troika,  to  discuss  our  assessment  of  the  adjustment  process  in  the 
programme countries and to draw with you some key lessons from the last four years. 
The ECB’s role in the troika 
Let  me  start  by  recalling  the  circumstances  under  which  the  troika  was  set  up.  When  a 
sovereign  debt  crisis  erupted  in  spring  2010  in  the  aftermath  of  an  unprecedented  global 
financial crisis, the euro area was caught unprepared. 
The Maastricht architecture had failed to prevent the build-up of excessive imbalances and 
unsustainable  fiscal  positions  by  a  number  of  countries.  Europe  was  then  ill-equipped  to 
handle  a  crisis  of  such  magnitude  stemming  from  these  developments.  There  was  no 
framework for dealing with Member States losing market access. There was no governance 
foreseen for such cases. There was no instrument to provide funding. 
Under these difficult circumstances, the Member States decided to grant financial assistance 
subject  to  appropriate  conditionality  as  part  of  an  adjustment  programme.  The  Eurogroup 
sought to avail itself of the best available expertise to support it in designing and reviewing 
these programmes. The IMF and the European Commission in liaison with the ECB with their 
complementary experience in crisis management, country surveillance and financial stability 
were asked to take on this difficult task – this is what we know today as the troika. 
The particular expertise and euro area focus of the ECB, in other words, the views we have 
on the systemic consequences of the decisions under discussion, were compelling reasons 
for requesting our participation. Moreover, we made it clear that the ECB would retain its full 
independence, as mandated by the Treaty. 
By accepting the Eurogroup’s request, we accepted a clearly defined advisory role: the troika 
institutions provide the necessary input for the Eurogroup to take its decisions. In liaison with 
the other institutions, we analyse the situation on the ground, assess policy options in close 
cooperation  with  the  respective  Member  State  and  later  support  the  review  of  their 
implementation. 
Today,  this  set-up  is  codified  in  the  ESM  Treaty  and  in  the  two-pack,  which  was  jointly 
adopted by this house and by the Council. In its Pringle judgement, the European Court of 
Justice established the EU ground rules for the Commission’s and the ECB’s participation in 
the troika, holding that the tasks assigned to the ECB under the ESM Treaty are fully in line 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
with  the  EU  Treaties.  Hence,  the  ECB’s  participation  in  the  troika  is  based  on  solid  legal 
grounds. 
The design of the adjustment programmes 
Turning  to  the  design  of  the  adjustment  programmes,  let  me  emphasise  that,  despite  the 
substantial  differences  across  the  programme  countries,  the  troika  had  to  overcome  four 
challenges common to them all: 
• 
First,  unsound  national policies,  which  the  Maastricht framework failed to  prevent, 
led to an extremely difficult economic situation at the start of each programme. In 
fact, the ECB had warned publicly – and even in this house – about the unsound 
fiscal positions and loss of competitiveness of many of these economies. 
Second,  there  was  immense  time  pressure,  while  the  information  available  was 
often incomplete and sometimes even misleading. 
Third,  economic  considerations,  notably  debt  sustainability  concerns,  and  political 
circumstances put constraints on the amount of funding provided by European and 
international partners. 
And  fourth,  there  was  little  experience  with  large  adjustments  in  a  short  timespan 
within a monetary union context. A high risk of contagion across euro area Member 
States made the task more challenging and constrained the policy options. 
   The  troika  operated  under  these  constraints.  While  our  advice  was  tailor-made  to  the 
situation in each of the Member States, it followed one overarching objective: to create the 
conditions for sustainable long-term growth, high levels of employment and hence help the 
Member State to regain market access. This meant that three main policy areas needed to 
be  addressed:  first,  consolidating  public  finances;  second,  repairing  and  restructuring  the 
financial  sectors  to  put  them  on  a  healthier  footing;  third,  regaining  competitiveness  by 
pursuing structural reforms. 
When giving advice as part of the troika, we always attached importance to ensuring social 
fairness.  This  meant,  in  particular,  an  equitable  sharing  of  the  adjustment  burden  across 
society and overcoming powerful vested interests. 
I am acutely aware of the social hardship in the programme countries. Many citizens have 
suffered  and  are  still  suffering  from  policy  mistakes  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  and  the 
subsequently unavoidable adjustment process. These are real people losing their jobs. Real 
people getting their wages or pensions cut. This concerns all of us. 
But  we  should  not  jump  to  the  wrong  conclusions  and  blame  the  fire  brigade  for  the  fire 
damage. Let us always keep in mind what would have been the alternative. 
A  disorderly  default  would  have  resulted  in  a  meltdown  of  the  financial  sector  and  in  a 
collapse of the real economy. Social hardship would have hit the citizens of the programme 
countries much harder. And let us also not forget that in one case there was an extensive 
debate on the potential exit from the euro area. 
Instead,  what  have  we  experienced  these  last  four  years?  Tremendous  efforts  have  been 
made  to  repair  financial  sectors,  improve  the  functioning  of  the  economy  and  consolidate 
public finances. That Ireland has just exited from its programme and regained market access 
is a demonstration of this hard-won achievements. In all the programme countries we have 
seen major progress, especially as regards fiscal adjustment and the stabilisation of banking 
systems. Cost and price competitiveness are being regained step by step; structural reforms 
are showing first results. Market access has improved. 
Nevertheless,  unemployment  remains  unacceptably  high  and  the  recovery  is  fragile. 
Therefore,  governments  should  not  undo  the  progress  made.  Instead,  they  should  keep 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
going down this difficult path. Incidentally, this applies not only to the programme countries, 
but to all euro area Member States. 
Lessons to be learned 
I would like to draw three conclusions from what I just explained. First, the programmes were 
the  necessary  answer  to  some  Member  States  finding  themselves  on  the  brink  of  default. 
Second, the troika was the best available instrument in the given circumstances. And third, 
with  hindsight  and  taking  into  account  the  difficult  situation  as  well  as  the  imperfect 
information available at the time, the troika has provided sound advice. 
Where  does  this  leave  us?  I  believe  the  experience  of  the  last  four  years  offers  some 
important lessons. 
The  best  insurance  against  having  to  endure  swift  and  painful  adjustment  in  the  face  of 
imminent danger is to conduct sound fiscal and structural policies. This means building up 
buffers and efficient structures in good times so that a Member State never ends up in such a 
situation  again.  This  is,  first  and  foremost,  the  responsibility  of  the  Member  States 
themselves.  It  also  means  that  the  Excessive  Deficit  and  the  Excessive  Imbalances 
Procedures must be enforced thoroughly. 
More generally, we saw that the lack of an adequate governance framework at the European 
level considerably narrowed the policy options available once the crisis hit. Only when a new 
institutional set-up was built up, step-by-step, did more and more options become available 
again. This leads us to an important lesson: to collectively retain sovereignty, Member States 
need to share sovereignty. We have come a long way since 2010 in this regard, in particular 
with the step-by-step establishment of a banking union, but we are not there yet. I am sure 
that your institution will continue to play an essential role in this process, as it repeatedly has 
in recent years. 
The troika in its current form will not be there forever. I am convinced that in the long term, 
Europe’s  crisis  management  framework  should  be  brought  under  the  single  umbrella  of 
Community  law.  But  there  is  no  short  term  alternative  and  as  long  as  it  is  sought,  we  will 
continue to contribute our candid advice, learning from experience. 
I thank you for your attention and I am now looking forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
