  Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the Senate Standing 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce 
Speech by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Senate Standing 
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 30 April 2014. 
 Thank you for the opportunity for Tiff and me to be here today to share with you highlights 
from the Bank of Canada’s recent economic outlook. 
The Bank aims to communicate openly and effectively so that Canadians know how we are 
achieving our mandate to promote the economic and financial welfare of this country. One of 
the  best  ways  we  do  this  is  by  appearing  before  this  committee  and  answering  your 
questions. 
I  will  discuss  the  Bank’s  outlook  for  inflation,  then  move  on  to  our  outlook  for  global  and 
Canadian economic growth; I will touch on some recent Bank research and finish with trends 
that we are observing. 
Inflation 
Inflation in Canada remains low. We expect core inflation to stay well below our 2 per cent 
target this year, returning to target over the next two years. 
Total  CPI  inflation,  however,  will  move  closer  to  the  target  in  the  coming  quarters,  due  to 
temporary factors. 
Allow me to explain. 
We  expect  economic  slack  and  heightened  retail  competition  to  keep  core  inflation  below 
target until early 2016, while higher consumer energy prices and a lower Canadian dollar will 
contribute to total CPI inflation moving up. 
Total CPI inflation will remain fairly close to target throughout our projection period, even as 
upward pressure from energy prices dissipates, because the impact of retail competition will 
gradually fade and excess capacity will be absorbed. 
When this happens, core inflation will gradually make its way up to 2 per cent and catch up 
with total CPI inflation from below. 
Economic outlook 
Moving  to  our  economic  outlook,  global  growth  should  gather  steam  in  the  coming  three 
years as the headwinds that have dampened growth dissipate. 
Overall, we see global economic growth picking up to 3.3 per cent in 2014, moving to 3.7 per 
cent in 2015 and 2016. In Canada, real GDP growth is expected to average about 2 ½ per 
cent in 2014 and 2015 before easing to around 2 per cent. 
These numbers are essentially in line with the Bank’s January outlook, but they don’t reflect 
the  actual  quality  of  the  outlook,  which  has  changed  in  meaningful  ways,  especially  for 
emerging-market economies and Europe. 
Growth  in  Europe  is  modest,  but  inflation  remains  too  low,  and  hopeful  signs  of  recovery 
might be stalled by the Russia-Ukraine situation. 
China  and  other  emerging  economies  are  showing  solid  growth,  although  there  are  some 
growing concerns about financial vulnerabilities  – specifically, increased market volatility in 
response to political uncertainty. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The economic recovery  in the United States, however, is proceeding as expected, despite 
recent softer results largely due to unusual weather. In fact, private demand could turn out to 
be stronger than we had thought. 
The issues Canada’s economy faces are not unfamiliar to you. Competitiveness challenges 
continue to weigh down our export sector’s ability to benefit from stronger growth abroad. 
Given the importance of the export sector to an open economy such as ours, and given the 
growing wedge between Canada’s exports and foreign demand, the Bank has deepened its 
analysis of the export sector, specifically, non-energy exports. 
Non-energy exports 
By  breaking  down  the  non-energy  export  sector  into  a  large  number  of  subsectors, 
interesting facts and trends emerge. 
To start, we are discovering that there are subsectors, such as machinery and equipment, 
building materials, commercial services, and aircraft and aircraft parts, that are in line with 
fundamentals, or even doing better than their respective U.S. benchmarks. 
This  suggests  that,  as  the  U.S.  recovery  gathers  momentum  and  becomes  more  broadly 
based, many of our exports will benefit. 
The lower Canadian dollar will also contribute to the recovery of these subsectors. 
Other  subsectors,  including  auto  and  truck  makers,  food  and  beverage  suppliers,  and 
chemicals,  will  also  be  helped  by  a  lower  dollar,  but  to  a  lesser  extent,  since  they  are 
experiencing greater competitiveness challenges. Their recovery will be slower. 
The  big  picture  tells  us  to  expect  a  gradual  convergence  between  the  growth  rate  of 
Canada’s exports and that of the U.S. economy. But this more granular research indicates 
that the wedge between exports and foreign demand will endure. 
And make no mistake. This wedge is real and it is big. The good news is that we now know 
more precisely just where it is – with about half of our non-energy exports. The bad news is 
that  these  subsectors  are  doing  worse  individually  than  we  thought  before.  This  deeper 
understanding of our export sector is valuable, but it does not make us any less concerned 
about the challenges ahead. 
Looking forward, we continue to believe that rising global demand for Canadian goods and 
services, along with the assumed high level of oil prices, will stimulate business investment in 
Canada and help shift the economy to a more sustainable growth track. 
Trends 
We continue to expect a soft landing for the housing market and Canada’s household debt-
to-income  ratio  to  stabilize.  Nevertheless,  the  imbalances  in  the  housing  sector  remain 
elevated and would pose a significant risk should economic conditions deteriorate. 
We are observing, anecdotally at least, an increased awareness of this risk. Consumers are 
showing responsibility; for example, homebuyers who opt to buy less house than they qualify 
for  so  they  don’t  find  themselves  overextended  if  interest  rates  rise.  Banks,  as  well,  are 
underwriting loans more carefully, ensuring that people can service their debts if rates go up. 
So, while the risk could be significant, we are comfortable that it is not outsized. 
To sum up, the Bank continues to see a gradual strengthening in the fundamental drivers of 
growth  and  inflation  in  Canada.  But  this  view  depends  largely  on  the  projected  upturn  in 
exports and investment. 
There  is  a growing  consensus  that  when  we  do  get  home,  interest  rates  will  still  be  lower 
than we were accustomed to in the past – both because of our shifting demographics and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  because, after such a long period at such unusually low levels, interest rates won’t need to 
move as much to have the same impact on the economy. 
With underlying inflation expected to remain below target for some time, the downside risks 
to inflation are important, as are the risks associated with household imbalances. 
The Bank judges that the balance of these risks remains within the zone for which the current 
stance  of  monetary  policy  is  appropriate  and,  as  you  know,  we  decided  on  16  April  to 
maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. 
The  timing  and  direction  of  the  next  change  to  the  policy  rate  will  depend  on  how  new 
information influences the balance of risks. 
Conclusion 
Before Tiff and I respond to your questions, I would like to take just a moment to say a few 
words about the man sitting next to me. 
Tiff’s contributions at the Bank started long ago as a new recruit with a fresh master’s degree 
in hand. His contributions throughout his career have been significant. At the Bank, we will 
miss him for his intellect and management skills. But we will also miss a great friend to many, 
myself included. 
We can rest assured that Tiff’s contributions to the financial welfare of Canada will continue 
as the Dean of the Rotman School of Business, where he will be busy ensuring that the next 
generation  of  economists  and  business  leaders  are  prepared  to  take  Canada  into  a 
prosperous future. 
Tiff did such a great job as Senior Deputy Governor that, to find his replacement, we have 
had to split the position and look for two people to fill his shoes. 
I am pleased to report that we will be in safe hands. And, I look forward to introducing you to 
Carolyn Wilkins, the incoming Senior Deputy Governor, who will oversee the Bank’s strategic 
planning  and  operations  and  will  share  responsibility  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  I 
also look forward to working with our new Chief Operating Officer, Filipe Dinis, who will be 
responsible for managing all of the Bank’s administrative functions. 
And with that, Tiff and I are happy to take your questions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
