  
 
Ardian Fullani: Albania’s cooperation and coordination with the Republic 
of Italy 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, on the occasion of the First 
Edition of the Italian Week in Albania, Tirana, 5 May 2014. 
 Honourable President of the Senate, 
Honourable Prime Minister, 
Your Excellencies Ministers and Ambassadors, 
It is a special pleasure for me to address this important activity on Albania’s cooperation and 
coordination  with  the  Republic  of  Italy,  our  main  economic  partner.  Years  ago,  two  Italian 
missions,  dubbed  “Arcobaleno”  and  “Pelikan”,  provided  food  and  order  for  Albania. 
Nowadays,  Albania  is  about  to  being  granted  EU  candidate  country  status.  In  this  long 
journey,  amid  achievements  and  challenges,  Italy’s  support  has  always  been  there  for  us, 
and for that, we are most sincerely grateful. Albania and Italy are natural partners. 
Besides  and  beyond  the  geographic  proximity,  all  the  dimensions  of  economic  and  social 
development, such as the level of technological, financial and human capital development, 
demographic  and  labour  market  characteristics, exploitation  and  processing rate  of  natural 
resources, and strategic development plans render our two countries natural partners. 
This  close  partnership  and  cooperation  between  our  countries  has  its  roots  in  antiquity. 
Despite  the  mutual  benefit  from  economic  and  financial  exchange  on  a  voluntary  basis, 
technology and capital have flowed mainly in one direction, from Italy to Albania. Technology 
and financial capital inflows have fostered trade exchange, exploitation of natural resources, 
and  promotion  of  processing  industry,  consequently  the  country’s  economic  development. 
Given  the  factors  and  stage  of  economic  development,  this  cooperation  is  expected  to 
continue in the period ahead, with Italy remaining one of the main partners for the Albanian 
economy, in spite of dynamics in the composition of our trading partners. 
At  a  glance,  Italian  direct  investments  in  Albania  have  doubled  from  the  pre-crisis  level. 
However, the share of Italy in total foreign direct investments has averaged only 14% during 
2007–2012,  showing  that  financial  and  capital  integration  is  not  commensurate  with  trade 
integration between the two countries. 
Trade exchanges between Italy and Albania have expanded from 35% in 2007 to 37.5% in 
the last two years, hence strengthening the position of Italy as our main trading partner. 
Demand  from  the  Italian  economy  continues  to  play  a  key  role  in  Albanian  exports  and 
industry expansion, but it remains limited to certain branches. It is a fact that the presence of 
the  Italian  economy  is  not  homogeneous  across  all  the  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  high 
share  of  trade  and  investments  in  such  sectors  as  textiles  and  clothing,  metals  and 
construction,  machinery  and  equipment,  is  not  reflected  in  a  comparable  share  with 
investments  in  energy,  tourism,  agribusiness,  information  technology  or  financial  sector. 
Trade interests, penetration of capital and new technology in vital and lucrative sectors of the 
Albanian economy need both a higher presence and stronger and more direct support from 
the Italian financial sector. 
Bilateral  trade  exchanges  will  continue  to  be  determined  by  differences  in  productivity  and 
the degree of exploitation of natural resources. These differences should be tackled until they 
are eliminated altogether, especially in some important sectors such as agriculture, tourism, 
financial services, and exploitation of natural resources. This would pave the way for further 
development of trade and investments, leading eventually to trade relations being no longer 
driven by differences but by similarities in development stage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Obstacles  have  the  same  nature  and  characteristics  that  I  have  often  mentioned  in 
discussions  on  the  economic  growth  model.  They  have  been  and  remain  one  of  the  main 
reasons  for  the  banking  system  and  capital  market’s  lack  of  attention  with  regard  to 
expanding  foreign  investments  or  further  integrating  trade  and  financial  activities  with  our 
partners.  The  recent  policies  pursued  by  Albanian  authorities,  also  supported  by  the 
arrangement with the IMF and WB, pay special attention to these sectors and reforms. This 
approach would significantly boost the potential for cooperation. Development of agriculture, 
agribusiness  and  processing  of  Mediterranean  products,  development  of  tourism  and  their 
successful  combination  in  the  agri-tourism  sector  have  turned  Italy  into  a  world  leader  in 
these sectors. 
The  same  holds  true  for  the  financial,  energy  and  technology  sectors.  In  these  fields, 
cooperation could be stronger, and trade and financial relations between the two countries 
more frequent. 
Lastly,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  regional  dimension.  Albania  provides  the  Italian 
businesses access not only to the Albanian economic space, but also to the entire Western 
Balkan  region.  From  this  perspective,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  on  the  fact  that 
investing in Albania is a prerogative for using the advantages that South East Europe offers. 
Therefore,  adapting  regional  development  philosophy  for  infrastructure,  labour  market, 
human  capital  development,  technology  advancement,  economies  of  scale,  and  above  all, 
coordination  of  structural  reforms  and  development  policies  in  the  region,  are  a  great 
opportunity for Albania and Italy. 
Optimising  trade  with  financial  relations,  advancing  the  structural  reforms,  setting  strategic 
priorities, formalising and introducing important and strategic sectors to the market (based on 
ownership and use of land and other important natural resources of the Albanian economy), 
and utilisation of opportunities and potential offered under regional cooperation, would rapidly 
increase  the  possibilities  for  doing  business  and  investing,  yielding  direct  benefits  for  both 
countries. 
Dear guests, 
In the post-crisis period, our two countries underwent a process of deep structural reforms to 
revitalise the economy and establish solid foundations for sustainable growth. Considering it 
as a historic moment, I think that better coordination of economic and financial policies would 
be of mutual benefit, especially with regard to Albania’s fast convergence. 
I would like to assure you that the Bank of Albania remains deeply committed to providing a 
stable  macroeconomic  and  financial  environment,  and  guaranteeing  a  financially  safe 
environment  with  low  inflation  rates.  The  Albanian  banking  system  is  willing  to  support 
initiatives that contribute to development. 
Finally, I would like to thank Banca d’Italia for its assistance in renovating the central corpus 
of the Bank of Albania and the former Dajti Hotel, two landmark buildings standing out in the 
city of Tirana. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
