  Øystein Olsen: A decade of forward guidance in Norway 
Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at a 
seminar, held at Columbia University, New York City, 8 April 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Norges Bank’s website. 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  Columbia  University.  Economists  in  Norges  Bank  have  been 
greatly inspired by researchers from this institution, and we have had the pleasure of hosting 
scholars  from  Columbia  at  a  number  of  conferences  in  Norges  Bank.  Some  of  our 
economists have also been here as visiting scholars. It is therefore a particular pleasure for 
me to be here today. 
“Forward guidance” as an element of monetary policy has attracted attention in the aftermath 
of the international financial crisis. With key policy rates in some countries constrained at a 
lower bound, statements about central banks’ future actions have been used to affect interest 
rate expectations. 
Norges Bank has published explicit numerical interest rate forecasts as a regular part of our 
monetary policy communication for ten years. The interest rate forecast is our preferred way 
of  guiding  economic  agents’  interest  rate  expectations.  As  such,  our  version  of  forward 
guidance has been reasonably successful. 
The topic of my talk is our framework for forward guidance and the experience gained over a 
decade of practising our approach. Although circumstances differ, our experience may also 
be of value to others. 
Forward guidance in general 
Up until the 1990s, the code of conduct among central bankers was one of secrecy. Today, 
however, central banks strive to be transparent. This development reflects a general trend 
towards greater transparency in modern societies. For some central banks, including Norges 
Bank, a change from fixed exchange rates to an inflation targeting regime also highlighted 
the importance of greater transparency. 
Transparency is necessary for accountability. With accountability the central bank can build 
credibility and trust, both by showing that the objectives are actually attained in the longer 
run, and by explaining deviations from targets. Forward guidance, understood as information 
about  future  policy  intentions,  may  be  viewed  as  a  natural  extension  of  this  accountability 
framework. 
Economic  agents  are  forward-looking,  and  hence  the  future  stance  of  monetary  policy 
matters to them. As Michael Woodford has stated, “For not only do expectations about policy 
matter, but, at least under current conditions, very little else matters.”1 
In  macroeconomic  theory,  the  importance  of  expectations  has  been  appreciated  since  the 
rational expectations revolution of the 1970s. In the early 1990s, theorists started to model 
monetary policy as setting the interest rate.2 Central bankers have since had a theoretical 
                                                
1  Woodford, M. (2005): “Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness,” NBER Working Paper 11898. 
2  See Taylor, J. (1993): “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on 
Public Policy 39, and Henderson, D. and W. McKibbin (1993): “A comparison of some basic monetary policy 
regimes  for  open  economies:  Implications  of  different  degrees  of  instrument  adjustment  and  wage 
persistence,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  framework  with  both  forward-looking  agents  and  monetary  policy  specified  in  terms  of  the 
key  interest  rate.  Under  this  framework,  monetary  policy  becomes  more  powerful  if  the 
agents  understand  the  reaction  pattern  of  the  central  bank.  When  a  disturbance  hits  the 
economy, the policy response required to stabilise the economy is smaller if the central bank 
can affect the whole term structure than if monetary policy only works through the short-term 
interest rate.3 However, the importance of forward guidance depends on the degree to which 
expectations are forward-looking. 
In principle, economic agents may be able to calculate how the central bank will respond to 
changing  conditions  if  they  know  both  the  model  of  the  economy  and  the  objectives  and 
reaction pattern of the central bank. Expected future interest rates may then align well with 
the central bank’s own interest rate intentions, and there will be no need for the central bank 
to communicate its policy intentions. 
In practice, a model description of the economy is just that – a model, which always will be a 
simplification.  The  central  bank’s  reaction  pattern  may  also  be  adjusted  over  time. 
Judgement is applied when responding to shocks, and a specific reaction function will only 
provide a simplified representation of the central bank reaction pattern. Regular information 
about  policy  intentions  is  therefore  necessary  for  the  public  to  learn  and  revise  their 
expectations. This is also the rationale for forward guidance. 
In  theory,  forward  guidance  may  also  work  as  a  commitment  device  and  help  the  central 
bank stabilise the economy in a more efficient way.4 The merits of this are debated, and it 
may  be  most  relevant  in  a  situation  where  the  interest  rate  has  reached  a  lower  bound. 
Forward guidance about how the central bank plans to reach its targets may nevertheless 
help  establish  confidence  among  agents  that  the  objectives  will  actually  be  achieved. 
Forward  guidance  may  thereby  indirectly  make  an  inflation  target  more  credible,  and  thus 
contribute to anchoring inflation expectations. 
For  forward  guidance  to  work  as  intended,  there  are  some  preconditions.  First,  economic 
agents  must  indeed  understand  the  announced  reaction  pattern.  A  second,  and  related 
issue,  is  that  the  conditionality  of  the  guidance  must  be  understood.  A  commonly  raised 
concern is that the public might perceive the guidance as unconditional promises rather than 
conditional statements. Yet another requirement is that the guidance must affect the agents’ 
expectations.  I  will  address  these  issues  in  more  detail  when  I  discuss  our  experience  of 
forward guidance in Norway. 
Many  central  banks  started  to  provide  some  kind  of  forward  guidance  in  the  late  1990s. 
There  is  now  a  consensus  view  among  central  bankers  that  providing  information  about 
policy  intentions  enhances  the  effects  of  monetary  policy.  However,  no  consensus  has 
emerged on how to provide it. We may distinguish between three main categories of forward 
guidance: 
The traditional form of forward guidance has been to give qualitative statements about future 
intentions. For instance, some central banks have indicated the anticipated direction of the 
next change in the policy rate. In 1999, Norges Bank started to make statements such as 
“the probability that the next change in interest rates will be an increase is greater than the 
probability of a reduction”. Another example is the Federal Reserve, which has used “code” 
words such as “bias towards” or “balance of risks”, indicating the same. 
                                                
3  According  to  Geraats  (2006):  “Transparency  of  Monetary  Policy:  Theory  and  Practice,”  CESifo  Economic 
Studies 52 (1), central banks seem to have embraced transparency for its perceived economic benefits, rather 
than accountability requirements. 
4  To illustrate, we may consider an inflation-targeting central bank facing inflation below the target. In order to 
reach the inflation target in this situation, promising to allow inflation to overshoot the target later might help 
increase inflation today. Commitment in this sense would in practice involve some form of price-level targeting, 
rather than inflation targeting. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A second approach to forward guidance has been adopted by some central banks when key 
policy  rates  have  been  at  a  zero  lower  bound.  With  a  constrained  room  for  maneuver  in 
monetary policy, central banks have found it useful to communicate specific conditions likely 
to be fulfilled before a change in the stance of monetary policy should be considered. In the 
aftermath of the international financial crisis, conditional statements both related to the likely 
time it would take before a tightening should be considered and statements about thresholds 
for some variables have been used. Both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have 
for instance been linking future policy actions to specific unemployment thresholds. 
Publishing the central bank’s own interest rate forecast as a regular part of monetary policy 
communication is a third type of forward guidance. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand was 
the first  central  bank  to  pursue  this  approach  in  1997, followed  by  Norges  Bank  in  2005.5 
This  type  of  forward  guidance  is  also  conditional,  and  it  is  typically  accompanied  by  a 
consistent forecast for output and inflation. As the interest rate forecasts are revised, market 
participants  learn  over  time  how  the  central  bank  normally  responds  to  different  types  of 
shocks.  When  the  central  bank  explains  how  it  plans  to  achieve  its  target,  it  may  also 
improve confidence and credibility. 
Forward guidance in Norway 
Before I present our version of forward guidance, let me give you a brief background on the 
Norwegian economy and our monetary policy framework. 
[Chart: The Norwegian economy] 
Norway  is  a  small,  open,  natural  resource-rich  economy.  About  a  quarter  of  our  GDP  is 
related to oil and natural gas extraction. A large part of the petroleum production is exported 
and  the  bulk  of  the  revenues  saved  in  a  sovereign  wealth  fund.6  A  strong  fiscal  position, 
along  with  a  well  anchored  inflation  targeting  regime,  allowed  us  to  use  both  fiscal  and 
monetary  policy  actively  during  the  recent  international  financial  crisis.  The  unemployment 
rate has stayed around and below four percent during recent years, and the inflation rate has 
been low and stable. 
This picture seems rosy, but there are concerns: property prices have risen sharply over the 
last 20 years and households are heavily indebted. 
Norges Bank was given a formal inflation target for its monetary policy in March 2001. The 
operational  target  of  monetary  policy  is  annual  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to 
2.5 percent  over  time.  Monetary  policy  shall  also  contribute  to  stabilising  output  and 
employment. In this respect, the inflation targeting regime is flexible. 
Norges Bank’s Executive Board comprises seven members, including the Governor, Deputy 
Governor and five external members. The Board decides collectively on the key policy rate, 
normally six times a year.7 Our Monetary Policy Report with financial stability assessment is 
published  on  a  quarterly  basis.  Analyses  and  discussions  on  interest  rate  decisions  are 
reflected in the Report. Together with press conferences after our monetary policy meetings, 
the Report is the main channel for our communication of monetary policy. Since 2013, the 
Report also includes an evaluation of financial stability conditions, which is also used as a 
background for Norges Bank’s recommendation on a countercyclical capital buffer for banks. 
                                                
5 
In addition to New Zealand and Norway, the central banks in Sweden, the Czech Republic and Israel currently 
publish interest rate forecasts. In addition, the Federal Reserve publishes the individual interest rate forecasts 
of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
6  Norway’s  sovereign  wealth  fund  (the  “Government  Pension  Fund  Global”)  is  managed  by  Norges  Bank 
Investment Management (NBIM) and is invested in international capital markets. 
7  For  details  on  our  institutional  framework,  see  Qvigstad,  J.  with  I.  Fridriksson  and  N.  Langbraaten  (2013): 
“Monetary policy committees and communication,” Norges Bank Staff Memo 2/2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  [Chart:Timeline: The first years of Norges Bank forward guidance] 
In  2004,  we  started  to  publish  our  first  quantitative  guidance  in  the  form  of  a  “strategy 
interval”  for  the  key  policy  rate  four  months  ahead.  In  November  the  following  year,  we 
published  for the first  time  our  own  interest  rate  forecast for  the  next  three  years.  Prior  to 
that, we had established and published criteria for an appropriate interest rate path.8  
Up until November 2005, the analyses and forecasts in our reports had been based on either 
a constant interest rate path or an interest rate path as implied by the forward market. At this 
point  however,  our  conclusion  was  that  it  would  be  easier  to  interpret,  evaluate  and 
communicate our view of the economy when it was based on a path for the interest rate that 
we considered to be appropriate. In addition, it made our communication better aligned with 
our analytical framework and with theory. 
[Chart: Our interest rate forecast is conditional] 
Our  forecast  for  the  key  policy  rate9  is  presented  in  a  panel  together  with  forecasts  for 
inflation  and  the  output  gap.  The  chart  shows  the  forecasts  in  the  most  recent  Monetary 
Policy Report, published just two weeks ago. There is substantial uncertainty associated with 
the projections, as illustrated by empirically based fan charts. The fan chart for the policy rate 
also illustrates the conditionality of the forecast: Although we control the key interest rate, the 
forecast  for  the  interest  rate  is  conditional  on  the  outcomes  for  other  variables,  which  are 
uncertain. 
[Chart: The system for monetary policy analysis and forecasting] 
When  we  decided  to  publish  our  own  interest  rate  forecast,  more  transparency  and 
documentation  were  required  regarding  our  models.  Our  core  policy  model,  NEMO 
(Norwegian Economy MOdel), is used as a starting point to derive our interest rate forecast. 
Over  time,  we  have  also  established  an  apparatus  for  nowcasting10  in  order  to  steadily 
improve  our  assessment  of  initial  conditions.  In  addition  we  collect  information  about  the 
current economic situation from our regional network of business contacts. A set of models 
are used for cross checks and the assessment of exogenous assumptions. 
Our  core  policy  model  NEMO  is  a  New  Keynesian  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium 
(DSGE) model for a small open economy. The model has many features that are similar to 
corresponding  models  in  other  central  banks.  Recently  we  have  extended  the  model  to 
include financial frictions and also an explicit banking sector and a housing market. 
As soon as we abandoned an exogenous assumption of future key policy rates, we had to 
take a stand on how to formulate monetary policy within our core model. Analytically, deriving 
the monetary policy reaction pattern with a loss function is a useful and practical approach. 
We have developed an improved apparatus for solution algorithms for DSGE models in order 
to be able to solve for the endogenous interest rate path in different ways and under different 
assumptions. 
The interest rate path that we derive from the model analysis serves as a benchmark for the 
policy discussions of the Executive Board. The analytical loss function that we use in NEMO 
to solve for this path reflects our criteria for an appropriate interest rate path. 
The first criterion is that the interest rate should be set with a view to stabilising inflation at 
target or bringing it back to target after a deviation has occurred. The second criterion is that 
                                                
8  For details, see Qvigstad, J. (2005): “When does an interest rate path “look good”? Criteria for an appropriate 
future interest rate path – A practician’s approach,” Norges Bank Staff Memo 6/2005. 
9  The key policy rate is the interest rate on banks’ overnight deposits in Norges Bank. 
10  Norges  Bank  has  developed  a  system,  SAM  (System  for  Averaging  Models),  for  averaging  short-term 
forecasts for inflation and mainland GDP provided by different models. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  our inflation targeting regime should be flexible. Hence, the interest rate path should provide 
a  reasonable  balance  between  the  path  for  inflation  and  the  path  for  overall  capacity 
utilisation in the economy. 
We  have  learned  that  stabilising  inflation  involves  important  trade-offs  in  a  small  open 
economy. Let me elaborate a bit on this point: Shortly after we adopted inflation targeting in 
2002–2003, efforts to dampen inflationary pressures resulted in a strong krone appreciation, 
with strong impacts on the economy. Later, in the mid-2000s, when inflation was low while at 
the  same  time  growth  was  strong,  low  interest  rates  at  home  and  abroad  contributed  to 
amplifying the cyclical upturn in Norway. 
In the light of our experience, it is fair to say that our inflation targeting regime has become 
more flexible over time. 
The third criterion is that the interest rate path should reflect a robust monetary policy. By this 
we mean that the interest rate should be set so that monetary policy mitigates the risk of a 
build-up of financial imbalances. Moreover, acceptable developments in inflation and output 
should  be  likely  under  alternative  assumptions  about  the  functioning  of  the  economy. 
Implementing  these  concerns  analytically  is  not  straightforward,  however.  We  are  working 
intensively to refine our approach to these concerns in our analytical framework. 
[Chart: Criteria for an appropriate interest rate path] 
This  chart  illustrates  how  the  forecasts  for  the  key  policy  rate,  output  and  inflation  evolve 
when the various criteria are taken into account. The illustration is from our third Monetary 
Policy Report in 2012. If monetary policy at that time had given weight only to the low level of 
inflation,  the  key  policy  rate  should  have  been  lowered  sharply  and  kept  close  to  zero  for 
some time, as indicated by the red dotted line in the upper left panel. Inflation would then 
have been predicted to pick up relatively fast, partly owing to a weaker exchange rate. 
Taking into account our second criterion for an appropriate interest rate path, the key policy 
rate would have been somewhat higher in the short term, as indicated by the blue dotted line. 
Inflation would have been predicted to take somewhat longer to rise towards the target, but 
developments in output and employment would have been more stable. 
Finally, taking into account considerations of robustness (criterion 3), we reached the interest 
rate forecast indicated by the black dotted line. 
[Chart: Decomposition of change in the interest rate path] 
Our communication of interest rate decisions is aided by a decomposition of changes in the 
interest rate path. This is a model-based illustration of how the change in the interest rate 
forecast from one report to the next can be decomposed into contributions from exogenous 
disturbances. The intention is to communicate the driving forces behind any changes in the 
interest rate path. 
The chart illustrates the different forces behind the change in the interest rate path from the 
last report in 2012 to the last report in 2013.11 The key policy rate was kept at a lower level 
through 2013 than projected at the end of 2012. At the same time, the forecasts for 2014 and 
2015  were  revised  downwards.  The  primary  reason  for  the  revision  was  weaker-than-
expected  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Capacity  utilisation  and  cost  growth 
were both lower than projected. At the same time, there were prospects that growth ahead 
would  be  lower  than  previously  assumed.  Moreover,  growth  among  Norway’s  trading 
partners  and  interest  rates  abroad  were  lower  than  projected,  and  banks’  lending  spreads 
were higher than expected. Conversely, a substantial depreciation of the krone through the 
                                                
11  This  setup  is  from  Norges  Bank  Annual  Report  2013.  In  each  monetary  policy  report,  we  present  a 
decomposition of the contribution from different factors to the change in the interest rate path in relation to the 
previous report. The most recent report shows the change in the interest rate path through 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  year, which was viewed mainly as due to an increase in the risk premium, kept the interest 
rate forecast from falling further. A decline in premiums in the money market also pulled in 
the same direction. 
Experiences 
So  far  I  have  discussed  the  motivation  for  forward  guidance  and  how  we  implement  it  in 
Norges Bank. Let me now share some of our experiences with you. 
As a starting point, let me again address the preconditions for forward guidance to enhance 
the effect of monetary policy that I mentioned previously. I will try to illuminate two questions: 
1) Is our reaction pattern and the conditionality of our interest rate forecast understood? and 
2) Do we affect the expectations of economic agents? 
[Chart: Decomposition of change in the interest rate path: Forecasts] 
Prior  to  the  announcement  of  a  new  interest  rate  forecast,  many  of  the  market  analysts 
publish their own forecast of our interest rate path. These forecasts are usually accompanied 
by a discussion of the factors pushing the expected revision of our path in either direction. 
Some analysts even publish their own assessment of our decomposition of the interest rate 
change,  quantifying  the  estimated  effects  from  different  factors.  The  charts  show  the 
forecasts of the change in our interest rate path provided by three different macroanalysts 
prior to the publication of the October 2011 Monetary Policy Report. Our published change in 
the path and its decomposition are shown in the lower panel to the right. 
As shown in the chart, the forecasts are quite accurate, which is a typical pattern. We take 
this  as  an  indication  that  market  participants  in  general  understand  our reaction  pattern. It 
also  indicates  that  the  agents  correctly  perceive  our  interest  rate  path  as  a  conditional 
forecast, and not as an unconditional promise. 
[Chart: Changes in money market rates after monetary policy announcements] 
The  next  chart  shows  the  changes  in  money  market  rates  on  the  day  of  a  new  monetary 
policy announcement. It indicates that market movements around monetary policy meetings 
have been marginally smaller since we introduced our own interest rate forecasts in October 
2005. Announcing the whole interest rate path has not resulted in more pronounced market 
reactions  than  before.  Instead,  the  graph  could  be  taken  to  mean  that  we  have  become 
somewhat more predictable overall. But other factors may also have contributed to smaller 
market  movements:  reduced  volatility  may  also  be  related  to  the  very  low  level  of  interest 
rates during recent years. 
[Chart: December 2013: Small market reactions after policy announcement] 
As I noted earlier, in a world of perfect and symmetric information, where the reaction pattern 
of  the  central  bank  is  known  to  all,  there  would  be  no  need  for  forward  guidance.  Agents 
would  not  pay  any  attention  to  our  forecasts,  as  these  would  already  be  internalised  in 
expectations and reflected in asset prices. But it is also the case in the real world that the 
better we are at communicating our reaction pattern, the less attention our forward guidance 
will  receive.  For  this  reason,  it  will  be  hard  to  identify  the  contribution  of  publishing  the 
interest rate forecast. 
This  chart  shows  a  typical  example  of  an  announcement  where  our  new  path  had  been 
anticipated. The market interest rate path prior to our meeting in December last year (blue 
dashed  line)  was  already  well  aligned  with  the new  interest  rate  path to  be  published  (the 
purple solid line).12 On this occasion, our new interest rate forecast just confirmed what the 
                                                
12  Norges Bank’s forecasts of market rates are calculated as a forecast of the key policy rate plus an estimated 
3-month interbank risk premium. Both are given as quarterly averages. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  market  had  already  learned  and  expected  from  our  reaction  pattern.  In  such  a  case,  the 
market interest rate path works as an automatic stabiliser: If the market expects the outlook 
for the economy to change, and it – correctly – anticipates the central bank’s reaction to it, 
the  appropriate  tightening  or  loosening  will  be  reflected  in  market  rates  even  before  any 
action is taken. 
The example illustrates an important point: By being transparent and by regularly and over 
time providing information about the revisions of the forecasts, economic agents are kept up 
to date with the central bank’s reaction pattern. 
Since  the  world  changes,  our  interest  rate  forecast  may  at  times  come  as  somewhat  of  a 
surprise.  And  in  situations  where  we  observe  that market  participants  are  not  well  enough 
informed about our reaction pattern, we do not hesitate to surprise the market. 
The  huge  shock  to  the  international  –  and  hence  the  Norwegian  –  economy  during  the 
financial crisis in 2008  may serve as an example. In this case, we  were able to guide the 
market and affect expectations when we presented a new interest rate forecast. 
[Chart: December 2008: Market rates shifted down markedly after policy announcement] 
As  shown  by  the  black  line  in  this  chart,  we  cut  the  key  policy  rate  substantially  at  the 
monetary policy meeting in December 2008. The dashed blue line, which shows the market 
path  the  day  before  we  announced  the  rate  cut,  indicates  that  a  significant  cut  was 
anticipated by the market. However, in addition to cutting the policy rate, we also published a 
new interest rate forecast, shown by the solid purple line, which was considerably lower than 
our previous forecast, shown by the dashed purple line. The market had not fully anticipated 
this,  and  forward  rates  shifted  down  markedly  after  the  meeting,  as  indicated  by  the  solid 
blue line. The interpretation could be that we provided news to the market about the strength 
of the action deemed necessary by Norges Bank as a response to the financial crisis. On this 
special  occasion,  when  uncertainty  was  larger  than  usual,  we  believe  that  publishing  the 
interest rate forecast was particularly helpful in making monetary policy more effective. This 
example suggests that we can indeed guide the market and affect expectations. 
[Chart: Interest rate expectations one year ahead] 
Further evidence supporting our ability to affect expectations comes from household survey 
data.  In  this  chart,  the  purple  line  shows  a  diffusion  index  of  households’  bank  rate 
expectations one year ahead.13 The index correlates well with our forecast for the change in 
the  key  policy  rate  over  the  coming  year,  derived  from  each  vintage  of  our  interest  rate 
forecast. The chart is consistent with households being well informed about the interest rate 
changes predicted by Norges Bank. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me summarise: 
Norges Bank has provided forward guidance through publishing conditional forecasts for the 
key policy rate for almost a decade. Our overall experience is positive. We have indications 
that our reaction pattern is well understood, that agents understand the conditionality of our 
forecast and that they do pay attention to our predictions of future rates. 
Over time, however, we should be measured on whether we meet our overriding objective, 
price stability. A credible interest rate forecast shedding light on the reaction pattern of the 
central  bank  provides  a  clear  commitment  to  price  stability  and  contributes  to  anchoring 
expectations. 
                                                
13  When the index is above 50, the share of households that expect bank rates a year ahead to be higher than 
today is larger than the share that expect it to be lower. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  How forward guidance is best provided will depend on economic and institutional factors. A 
decade of forward guidance in Norway indicates, however, that regularly publishing our own 
interest rate forecasts is a robust strategy. 
However, there are unsolved  issues. After the international financial crisis, robustness and 
the interaction between monetary policy and financial stability have become more pressing 
concerns for monetary policymakers. 
This issue is on our research agenda. We have initiated a three-year research project, where 
we  will  seek  to  review  different  aspects  of  our  inflation  targeting  framework,  including  the 
question of how to take financial stability into account. Moreover, for a small open economy, 
large terms of trade shocks may represent a particular challenge, also for monetary policy. 
In our search for answers and our efforts to steadily improve our implementation of flexible 
inflation  targeting,  we  look  to  academia.  Therefore,  let  me  again  emphasise  how  much  I 
appreciate the opportunity to be here today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
       10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
       12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
