  Jon Cunliffe: The Bank of England’s Monetary and Financial Policy 
Committees – guiding the economy towards a sustainable and safe 
recovery 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at the International Festival for Business conference, Liverpool, 3 July 2014. 
 When  my  friends  and  relations  discovered  I  was  going  to  join  the  Bank  of  England  I  was 
inundated with the same request. From politicians and senior Whitehall mandarins to family 
and young children, after wishing me congratulations and good luck, the first question was: 
“can I please come and see the Bank’s gold?” 
I of course promised excursions to see the Bank’s gold to all and sundry. On arrival at the 
Bank, however, I was made aware of the sober reality. The Bank only owns two bars of gold. 
And they are in the Bank Museum for all to see. 
Of  course,  the  Bank  looks  after  a  great  deal  of  other  people’s  gold  –  over  5000  tonnes 
including the UK Government’s reserves and some of the reserves of other countries. Visits 
to the vaults in which it lies – as I also found out on arrival – are politely but very heavily 
discouraged.  But  apart  from  the  two  bars  in  the  museum,  the  Bank  of  England  itself  no 
longer owns any gold. 
I am pretty sure that most of those who wanted to see the Bank’s gold would not really be 
surprised by that. Gold plays virtually no part in our or other modern economies. But I do not 
think it was an accident that so many associated gold with the Bank. Gold remains for many 
a powerful symbol of stability. And stability is what the Bank of England is for. 
There have been major changes to the Bank over the last year or so. With the passing of the 
Financial  Services  Act  in  April  last  year,  Parliament  gave  us  very  significant  new 
responsibilities and wide ranging powers. More than ever now, stability remains at the heart 
of what we do. As we set it out in our new objective, the Bank’s core purpose is: 
 
“to promote the good of the people of the United Kingdom by maintaining monetary 
and financial stability”. 
I  want  to  focus  today  on  the  financial  stability  part  of  that  purpose:  what  are  we  trying  to 
achieve and how do we go about it? And how does it fit in with the other main part of that 
core purpose, maintaining monetary stability – or to put it simply, controlling inflation? 
A little bit of history might help to provide some context. 
The  Bank’s  current  arrangements  for  the  setting  of  monetary  policy  date  back  to  1997.  At 
that time, I was involved, at the Treasury, with the implementation of the reforms that gave 
the  Bank  of  England  operational  independence  on  monetary  policy.  Our  thinking  in  those 
days was very much dominated by the need for simplicity and clarity – “one instrument for 
one target”. 
The instrument was monetary policy; the target was price stability. So the Bank was given a 
statutory objective of maintaining price stability by hitting an inflation target. It was given new 
machinery,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC),  with  the  power  to  set  interest  rates  to 
achieve the target. 
Over  the  MPC’s  first  ten  years,  the  UK  economy  enjoyed  a  remarkable  period  of 
macroeconomic  stability.  There  was  only  one  month  –  March  2007  –  where  inflation  was 
more  than  1  percentage  point  away  from  the  Bank’s  target.  The  annual  rate  of  economic 
growth ran on average at around 3%, with fluctuations little more than 1.5pp either side of 
that. There was not a single quarter where economic activity contracted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  But though the macroeconomic environment was stable, huge risks were building up in the 
financial system. There was an explosion in risk taking in the global financial system, much 
of  which  had  an  impact  on  the  UK  because  of  our  internationally  active  banks  and  our 
position as international financial centre. Over the ten years to 2007, the balance sheet of the 
UK banking sector nearly doubled relative to the size of the economy. By the time the crisis 
broke,  the  balance  sheet  of  the  UK  resident  banking  sector  approached  6.5  times  annual 
GDP. 
But though much of the risk came from abroad, there was also a substantial rise in domestic 
lending and domestic debt. House prices increased faster than people’s incomes – from five 
times earnings in 2000 to over eight times earnings by 2007. As most people borrow to buy 
houses,  this  drove  up  outstanding  household  mortgage  debt  from  50%  of  GDP  to  around 
85%.  Household  debt  as  a  whole  went  from  around  110%  of  household  income  to  over 
165%.  Commercial  property  prices  doubled  and  lending  to  support  commercial  property 
investment trebled. 
Should  the  Bank  have  tried  to  rein  this  in?  The  MPC’s  objectives  made  no  mention  of 
financial stability. Much of the international thinking at the time was that central banks should 
not try to use monetary policy tools like interest rates to address asset bubbles and financial 
stability  risks.  Rather  they  should  deal  with  the  consequences  of  such  risks  if  they 
crystallised. Or, in the jargon of the day, not to “pop bubbles”, but to “mop up” the mess if and 
when they burst. 
Responsibility for financial stability at the time was shared jointly the Bank, HM Treasury and 
the Financial Services Authority, the latter body responsible at the time for regulating banks 
and  building  societies.  True,  the  Bank  as  whole  did  have  an  objective  to  contribute  to  the 
maintenance of the stability of the financial system as a whole. But it had no formal powers 
with which to do this. The FSA had powers but its focus was on individual institutions rather 
than vulnerabilities building across the system as a whole. It is fair to say that the task of 
addressing risks to financial stability fell between the cracks. 
The rapid expansion of debt and accumulation of risks in the financial sector ended, as we all 
know, in a damaging and painful crash – for the financial sector and for the economy as a 
whole. There is a substantial body of international evidence that recessions are deeper and 
more painful when they follow a sharp run-up of debt and a banking bust. The UK recession 
in 2008–9 was a case in point. 
The costs of mopping up afterwards are still very clear today. Despite interest rates being 
effectively at zero for over five years now, the economy is only just now back to its pre-crisis 
level. There are still over half a million more people unemployed in the UK than before the 
crisis. The amount of net public sector debt has pretty much doubled relative to GDP. On 
current plans, the OBR expect it will take a further five years until the public sector deficit is 
eliminated. 
I think, knowing what we now know, we would be more prepared to use monetary policy to 
address  financial  stability  risks.  Indeed  the  MPC’s  latest  remit  letter  from  the  Chancellor 
notes the MPC might wish to allow inflation to deviate from the target temporarily to avoid the 
development of imbalances that pose a potential risk to financial stability. 
But it is not without cost. Monetary policy, may, as Jeremy Stein said when he was at the 
Federal Reserve, be effective in tempering financial stability risks because when we change 
interest rates it “gets in all the cracks”. But because it gets in all of the cracks across all of the 
economy, using interest rates to deal with financial stability risks can carry a high cost. It is a 
very blunt instrument that affects the economy as a whole. 
So although it is an effective line of defence, it should be seen as one of the last lines of 
defence. The question then becomes how do we ensure that it does not – because we lack 
other instruments – have to be used as a first line of defence? Here the financial crisis and 
recession has led to the development of what is now called “macroprudential policy”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In  essence,  macroprudential  policy  means  using  the  regulatory  “stance”,  the  underlying 
settings of the regulation of the financial sector, first to reduce the probability and impact of 
systemic crisis and then, by varying those settings, to counter emerging threats to financial 
stability. 
The Bank now has a sister committee to the Monetary Policy Committee, the Financial Policy 
Committee  (FPC),  with  extensive  powers  to  set  and  change  the  regulatory  stance  for  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole  in  order  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  Like  the  MPC,  it  has 
external members, drawn from outside the Bank’s executive team, a published record of its 
meetings  and  a  regular  Financial  Stability  Report  to  explain  how  it  is  using  its  powers  to 
achieve its statutory objectives. There is substantial cross-membership between these two 
Committees to ensure effective policy co-ordination. 
But  though  the  institutional  set  up  for  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  mirrors  that  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee,  the  nature  of  its  task  is  different.  The  Monetary  Policy 
Committee is, in the main, engaged with guiding the economy towards the best achievable 
path for output consistent with keeping inflation at target – or with bringing it back to target. In 
the jargon – which some of you in the logistics field, for example, may be familiar with – the 
problem is one of “optimal control” or “dynamic programming”. What setting for interest rates 
is consistent, looking forward, with the best central outlook for the economy? 
The  Financial  Policy  Committee’s  job  is  really  about  identifying  risks  and  preventing  them 
from crystallising. 
This is not just about the most likely and visible risks. What we learned in the financial crisis 
was  that  the  financial  system,  has  a  myriad  of  connections  and  actors  and  a  phenomenal 
ability to change and adapt. It needs to be thought of as a complex “ecosystem”. At times of 
stress, it can behave in very extreme ways – or break down altogether. 
In such a world, it is not enough to know that every individual part is managing its own risk. 
You have to know that when the parts come together and act upon each other, the system as 
a whole is resilient. One part of the system may well think it has a good plan for offloading 
some of its risk in a period of stress. But the impact of that on other parts of the system may 
turn a stress into a crisis. 
And,  given  the  cost  when  things  go  badly  wrong,  it  is  not  only  important  to  ensure  the 
financial system can manage the known, likely risks it faces – the ones you can see and the 
ones  that  you  think  may  well  materialize.  The  system  needs  to  be  resilient  to  the  risks  of 
events that are improbable but possible. And, life being what it is, it must also have resilience 
to risks that simply cannot be foreseen – the “unknown unknowns”. 
To  use  a  familiar  but  imperfect  metaphor,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  like  a  driver 
steering a car down a winding road. It can dimly see the road behind but can only forecast 
what  the  road  ahead  looks  like.  The  instruments  usually  give  unclear  or  contradictory 
readings.  For  all  that,  the  MPC  tries  to  keep  the  car  at  the  highest  speed  that  can  be 
achieved without risking having to jam on the brakes at the next bend or having to floor the 
accelerator to prevent stopping. 
But to push this further – and perhaps too far – for the Financial Policy Committee’s role in 
relation to the financial system we need a rather different metaphor. The FPC is more like the 
safety authority for a race track. Its job is to see that the safety standards for the track and for 
the cars are high enough. That there are sufficient buffers on the bends if one of the cars 
comes off the track. And that, if there is a crash, the wreckage can be got off the road and 
does not cause a multiple pile up. 
But the track authority’s job is not just about ensuring the track is safe. If, when the race is 
running it starts to pour with rain and conditions become riskier, the track authority brings the 
“safety  car”  onto  the  track  to  slow  the  other  cars  down.  Sometimes  a  race  has  to  be 
interrupted because it has become too risky. The FPC sometimes has to do the same. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   
The safest approach of course might be to shut the track altogether. But the economy needs 
a healthy, thriving financial sector. It needs credit so that it can grow. Savers need to be able 
to invest. So the FPC needs to consider the impact of its actions on the economy. Adding 
more safety features or slowing the speed down can have an impact on the economy that 
has to be factored in to decisions. Likewise, bringing the safety car in when the danger is 
passed will also have an impact. These can be difficult judgments to make. They need to be 
coordinated with the Monetary Policy Committee so that the latter can take them into account 
in steering demand in the economy as a whole. But the focus of the FPC is financial stability 
risk: ensuring the system is robust to stress and taking steps to make periods of stress less 
likely and less severe. That is its comparative advantage. 
I want to finish by setting out two recent examples of how the Committee approaches this 
task: first, the stress test of the major UK banks which is currently in train, and second, the 
action the FPC announced last week on the housing market. 
In April, the Bank of England launched a stress test of the 8 major UK lenders, as part of an 
EU  wide  exercise.  Stress  testing  is  one  of  the  tools  developed  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
financial crisis to test the resilience of the financial system. In essence, a stress test sets out 
a  so  called  “adverse  scenario”  in  which  the  economy  gets  into  trouble  and  financial  risks 
materialize. Together with the banks, we can then look to see how they would cope with a 
scenario like this. 
Of course, supervisors in the UK have regularly stress-tested individual banks. But this is the 
first time that we will test all the major lenders at the same time. The objective is to see not 
just how each individual bank copes, but also how, when you put together all their responses 
to the stress, the system performs as whole. 
And the scenario we have developed is deliberately not what we think is likely to happen. 
In the stress scenario the UK suffers a severe recession: a drop of 4% in GDP and a rise in 
unemployment  of  over  5  percentage  points.  Due  to  the  current  account  position,  interest 
rates have to increase. House prices drop by 35%. 
This stress is a severe one; a chain of events and challenges that is very unlikely. But it is 
one that could plausibly happen. Many of these things have happened in the UK before: in 
the last recession, GDP dropped by 7%, in the early 90s recession, the unemployment rate 
rose by almost 4 percentage points and interest rates had to rise to nearly 15%. 
To repeat, this is not a combination of events that we expect to happen or think likely. But we 
do  want  our  banks  to  be  resilient  to  this  level  of  stress,  to  such  an  unlikely  but  plausible 
scenario. We do want the financial system as a whole to be able to withstand such a shock 
without a breakdown in the essential functions on which the economy depends. And if we 
find that individual banks or the system as a whole are not resilient we will need to consider 
how stability should be reinforced. 
To go back to my earlier imperfect metaphor, we want to test whether the track and the cars 
can cope with an unlikely but plausible combination of adverse circumstances. 
And you will note that a major part of the adverse scenario is a rise in unemployment and a 
crash in house prices. We want particularly to test this because housing mortgage debt is 
around two-thirds of UK banks’ domestic lending. 
And  this  brings  me  onto  my  second  example.  Last  week,  the  Financial  Policy  Committee 
announced  two  important  measures  to  address  the  risk  that  continued  momentum  in  the 
housing market could pose to household indebtedness and thence to the economy and to 
financial stability. 
I  think  it  is  important  to  understand  why  the  FPC  is  concerned  about  the  housing  market: 
what we are and are not responsible for and what we can and cannot do. We cannot address 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  the imbalance between the supply and demand for houses in the UK. The Bank cannot build 
a single house. Nor should we take responsibility for house prices. It is the risks to financial 
stability and to the economy we must focus on. 
The main risk we see arising from the housing market is the risk that house prices continue 
to grow strongly and faster than earnings and – and this is an important “and” – this increase 
in prices leads to higher and more concentrated household indebtedness. In short, the risk 
that more people take on higher debt relative to their income as they have to stretch further 
to buy homes. 
In the UK, household debt as a whole is already equal to 135% of household earnings. It was 
around 110% in 2000 and was driven up to 165% in the years leading up the crisis. It fell 
back  sharply  after  the  crisis.  Not  surprisingly,  the  crisis  and  recession  made  households 
realize  that  their  housing  assets  were  worth  less  and  that  their  debt  made  them  more 
vulnerable  than  they  previously  expected.  So  they  increased  their  savings  and  paid  down 
their debt. 
And  the  more  indebted  they  were,  the  more  they  were  likely  to  cut  back  sharply  on  their 
consumption. There is good reason to believe that this cut-back in consumption in the face of 
high debt is one of the main reasons why recessions are more painful when they follow a 
period in which household debt goes up quickly. 
At around 135% UK household indebtedness is high. It is at 2004 levels. It is markedly higher 
than many European countries. It is on par with the US. True, there are a few countries with 
even higher levels. But starting from this elevated level, the risk that the FPC is concerned 
about is that with limited housing supply, the demand for housing in the UK continues to push 
prices  up;  that  lenders  are  ever  more  willing  to  finance  high  loan-to-income  mortgages  as 
house prices rise, and that as a result household indebtedness climbs sharply, making the 
economy and financial system more vulnerable. This risk is greater at a time of exceptionally 
low interest rates which may well mask the likely true cost of a mortgage over time. 
So  at  its  recent  meeting  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  agreed  two  measures.  First,  that 
when  lenders  are  assessing  applications  for  mortgages  they  test  whether  the  mortgage 
would be affordable if interest rates were to be 3% higher. And second, that no more than 
15%  of  a  lender’s  flow  of  new  mortgages  should  be  more  than  four-and-a-half  times  the 
borrower’s income. 
These measures do not bite now on the market as a whole. Most lenders are already testing 
whether borrowers could afford mortgages if interest rates were to rise by around 3%. The 
FPC’s first recommendation is intended to stop that from slipping. 
And  though  the  proportion  of  new  mortgages  worth  more  than  four  and  a  half  times  the 
borrower’s income has been increasing sharply, it is currently around 10%, below the 15% 
limit the FPC has set in its second recommendation. 
These  measures  should  be  thought  of  as  insurance.  The  MPC’s  central  forecast  of  the 
economy is for housing transactions to rise and for house prices to continue to grow faster 
than  incomes  in  the  near  term,  but  then  to  fall  back  to  grow  in  line  with  incomes.  If  that 
forecast  came  to  pass,  the  upward  pressure  on  household  debt  from  the  housing  market 
would  ease  and  the  flow  of  new  mortgages  worth  four-and-a-half  times  the  borrower’s 
income would likely remain under the 15% limit. 
But an outcome in which house prices grow more rapidly relative to income and do so for 
longer  is  also  quite  plausible.  It  has  certainly  happened  before  in  the  UK.  We  know  the 
pressure from demand for homes is great and that the supply of new homes is quite weak. 
If  such  an  outcome  came  to  pass,  the  proportion  of  mortgages  at  high  multiples  of  the 
borrower’s income could rise substantially. Debt would grow and become more concentrated. 
Financial stability and the economy would be more exposed to a shock and one which, if it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  crystallised,  could  derail  a  sustained  and  durable  expansion.  The  FPC’s  recommendation 
should be seen as insurance against that risk crystallising. 
Consistent  with  its  role  as  risk  manager,  the  FPC  has  acted  in  advance  to  identify  and  to 
protect against a very major risk to the financial system and the economy. 
To  return  to  where  I  started.  The  Bank  of  England  is  for  stability.  Monetary  and  financial 
stability. We do not achieve that, any more, by holding gold. We aim to address that through 
the actions of the MPC and the FPC. 
The first aims to balance supply and demand and so steer the economy to keep control of 
inflation. The second aims to preserve financial stability by ensuring the underlying financial 
system is resilient by identifying risks and taking action to prevent them crystallising. 
The stress test of the major UK banks towards the end of the year will assess the resilience 
of  the  system  to  a  major  crash.  The  steps  taken  last  week  are  insurance  against  the 
possibility  of  a  sustained  boom  in  the  housing  market  leading  a  substantial  increase  and 
concentration in household debt that could make a crash more likely and more severe. 
And finally, just in case despite this speech, I am deluged with requests to visit the Bank’s 
gold vaults, I am afraid there are very good security and safety reasons why we cannot offer 
this. But I can recommend that on your next trip to London you visit the outstanding Bank of 
England museum just off Threadneedle Street. It is free. And you will be able to try to pick up 
one of our two bars of gold. Most important of all, there is an excellent game that will allow 
you to try your hand at maintaining monetary and financial stability. Because stability is what 
the Bank of England is for. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
