Ardian Fullani: Promoting a public debate around the new economic 
growth model 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Meeting  with  Agro-
Business and Banking Sector Representatives, Lushnja, 13 March 2014. 
 Dear guests, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to discuss one of the most important sectors of 
the Albanian economy – agriculture. Moreover, the fact that this meeting takes place in one 
of the areas with extraordinary potential for the development of this sector – I am referring 
here not only to Lushnja, but the entire Fier district – is very significant. 
I do not think I am surprising anyone, particularly those engaged daily with entrepreneurship, 
when I state that the recent years’ global economic crisis had an easily recognisable impact 
on  the  Albanian  economy  as  well.  The  pace  of  economic  growth  has  slowed  markedly, 
particularly in the past two years. According to the latest forecasts, the Albanian economy is 
expected  to  pick up  slightly  in  the  next  few  years  due  to  improved  monetary  and financial 
conditions, and the fact that our trading neighbours are, similar to Albania, showing the first 
signs of recovery after several years. However, we expect growth to remain weak for a while 
yet compared to the pre-crisis period. 
Under these circumstances, the Bank of Albania has been promoting a public debate around 
the new economic growth model, even before this global financial crisis took hold. 
The central bank’s stance has been clear and transparent to the public. We have constantly 
stated  that  the  main  sources  of  economic  growth  in  the  two  decades  of  transition  are 
reducing markedly, and the Albanian economy needs to be re-oriented towards new sectors 
in the very near future. The Bank of Albania sees agriculture – and, in a broader sense, the 
entire agro-business – as one of the main sectors standing at the front of this re-orientation. 
My presence here today, and Bank of Albania’s presence, should serve as a confirmation of 
our  commitment  to  discussing  the  new  growth  model  and  the  primary  role  that  agriculture 
should play in it. 
 The  Albanian  economy  had  a  very  difficult  year  in  2013.  Domestic  demand,  and 
consequently economic growth, hit one of the lowest levels in history. The inflation rate hit 
the  lower  bound  of  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  tolerance  band,  while  budget  deficit  and 
public debt increased considerably. 
The economic performance was also accompanied by uncertainties surrounding the external 
economy  –  Albania’s  trading  partners  in  particular  –,  but  also  the  domestic  economy 
considering that 2013 was an election year. All the above contributed to the deceleration and 
a  more  cautious  behaviour  of  economic  agents.  Some  of  domestic  product  indicators  saw 
significant changes. Worth mentioning is the construction sector, one of the top contributors 
to economic growth during 2000–08, which has shrunk considerably in the past years. 
Fortunately,  the  Albanian  banking  system  remains  solid  and  well-capitalised.  Despite  the 
increasing  non-performing  loan  portfolio,  banks  have  sufficient  capital  to  address  this 
phenomenon. I would like to elaborate more on this latter point. 
The  performance  of  lending  has  become  the  focus  of  attention  for  policy-makers  and 
economic  agents.  The  slower  economic  growth  was  followed  by  sharp  deceleration  in 
lending. The reasons are quite understandable: on the one hand, businesses have reduced 
their demand for loans due to uncertainties relating to the sale of their own products; and on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the other hand, banks have been pursuing a more conservative approach to lending, being 
uncertain about the success of different business plans. 
Global theory and practice suggest that the investment and credit cycles progress in line with 
the  performance  of  aggregate  demand.  In  other  words,  we  will  see  a  stable  recovery  of 
lending only when economic growth recovers at a steady pace. 
However, as we have already stated, we believe that there is room within the Albanian reality 
for  a  better  performance  of  lending.  Channelling  savings  into  profitable  investments  and 
supporting businesses with lending are the reasons for the existence of the banking system. 
We  have  been  constantly  emphasizing  this  message,  and  we  have  taken  concrete  steps, 
which have lowered the banking system’s financing cost and provided incentives for lending 
through an adequate regulatory environment. 
The Bank of Albania expects the situation to improve in the next few months, following the 
macro  prudential  measures  we  have  taken  to  facilitate  lending,  and  banks’  cleaning  up  of 
balance sheets and credit restructuring. I did not intend to make a random overview of the 
situation, but to show the Albanian economic reality at this moment and present the future 
challenges.  It  is  easily  understandable  that  the  weak  economic  growth  calls  for  innovative 
solutions from other new sectors. 
There is room for banks to lend to profitable projects as they continue to collect deposits and 
maintain  sound  levels  of  financial  ratios.  It  is  now  the  responsibility  of  all  policy-makers  to 
help entrepreneurship, in order to get a clear view of the right investments for the future. We 
have stated in our reports that the new sources of growth should originate from competitive 
sectors in the domestic and, even further, in the external market, so that the trade balance 
keeps on showing the improvements of 2013. 
Export growth is important in the long run to offset the moments of weakness in domestic 
demand,  by  diversifying  the  sources  of  income.  Although  the  economy  benefits  from  the 
increase in the exports of mineral products, the latter are often exported without any sort of 
processing in the domestic market and, consequently, make little contribution to improving 
productivity and competitiveness of the Albanian economy. 
Bank  of  Albania’s  research  and  analyses  show  that  traded  goods’  sector  has  shown 
increasing productivity compared to the non-traded one. 
During  the  2000s,  the  Albanian  economy  was  most  focused  on  non-traded  sectors  like 
construction, and hotels and tourism, with a low share in the growth of productivity. Improving 
them and successfully facing competition in the international markets should lie at the core of 
Albania’s  new  economic  growth  model.  Bank  of  Albania’s  analyses  suggest  that  these 
structural  changes  will  contribute  to  recovering  the  economy  at  a  faster  pace  in  the  years 
ahead and restoring the previous growth rates. 
The agriculture sector meets the above criteria to lie at the core of this new model better than 
any other economic sector. On the other hand, we must recognise that despite Albania’s vast 
natural  resources,  we  have  not  managed  to  fully  utilise  these  potential  resources  for  the 
agriculture sector to face competition in the international markets. The Bank of Albania sees 
great  potential  in  agriculture,  which,  for  a  number  of  reasons,  could  not  materialise  in  the 
past years but can become more beneficial in the future. Unlike other sectors, whose future 
benefits may be limited, agriculture may represent an important source for a second period of 
dynamic economic growth. 
The  Albanian  economy  should  be  re-oriented  towards  those  sectors  whose  capacity  to 
compete  in  the  international  markets  is  the  best  signal  for  the  development  potential.  The 
Albanian  economy  being  a  net  importer  of  food  products  hints  at  a  low  level  of 
competitiveness  and  represents  one  of  the  major  future  challenges.  Lushnja  is  one  of  the 
main regions of the Albanian agriculture the recovery of our economy should start from – and 
holding this meeting here today is not mere coincidence. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Bank  of  Albania’s  analyses  have  been  paying  increasing  attention  to  developments  and 
related perspectives in this sector. As we speak, 47% of the Albanian population and around 
49%  of  the  labour  force  lives  in  rural  areas  and  engages  in  agriculture-related  activities. 
According  to  the  latest  data  for  2012,  around  24%  of  the  land  area  is  used  to  cultivate 
different agriculture cultures. However, despite the vast resources concentrated in agriculture 
and the important role it plays as the main source of income for a considerable part of the 
population, only 20% of gross added value comes from this sector. 
The  low  share  in  economy  in  proportion  to  the  considerable  number  of  the  population 
involved in agriculture indicates the low productivity in this sector. The latest data show that 
the exports of “food, beverages and tobacco” account for 6.2% of total exports. Livestock and 
agricultural  products  share  0.78%  and  2.3%  in  total  exports,  respectively,  whereas  agro-
industry shares 3%. 
Fier district represents a considerable part of production factors in agriculture. 
The latest data show that Fier shares 18% in total agricultural land, thus being classified as 
the district with the highest share in the country. 
In  2012,  more  than  56  thousand  farms  were  registered  in  Fier,  the  highest  number  on  a 
country-level.  This  number  accounts  for  16%  of  total  farms  in  the  country,  providing  the 
highest share of income from the sale of agricultural products, and about 20% of Albania’s 
total  income.  Related  to  livestock,  Fier,  and  mainly  Lushnja  district,  have  a  considerable 
share  in  livestock  products.  As  a  district,  Fier  produces  20%  of  total  livestock  production 
(milk), whereas Lushnja produces 9%. 
The above setting witnesses private efforts and entrepreneurship to develop this sector. In 
order  for  this  process  to  go  ahead  at  a  more  accelerated  pace,  the  policy-makers  should 
identify  the  advantages  and  problems  this  sector  encounters,  in  order  to  address  them 
quickly. 
In  2012,  the  Oxford  University  published  a  book  focused  on  economic  growth  in  South-
Eastern  European  region.  This  book  elaborates  on  a  number  of  structural  problems  and 
challenges  facing  the  Albanian  economy,  in  its  efforts  to  develop  further.  Agriculture  has 
significant share in this analysis. 
Some of these problems are acknowledged and frequently mentioned, such as the important 
infrastructure-related issues that include the road, watering, draining, storage and processing 
systems.  Problems  with  land  ownership  and  the  transformation  of  its  function  for  other 
activities  continue  to  remain  a  major  obstacle  for  the  country’s  normal  development,  and 
raise ongoing concerns relating to the price and use of this important factor of production, 
and further on, to the normal functioning of product markets and other land-related factors. 
Agriculture is affected by other structural problems that need a long-term solution. Average-
size  farms  continue  to  be  relatively  small,  thus  restricting  the  development  and  growth  of 
average  productivity,  or  differently  known  as  “the  economies  of  scale”.  There  are  many 
reasons  behind  this.  We  can  mention  the  inheritance  of  the  communist  system  and  the 
separation of land after its collapse. As it was stated above, the lack of a normal land market 
also due to ownership problems, naturally plays an important role in establishing larger farms 
and,  consequently,  more  competitive  ones.  These  problems  also  affect  the  agricultural 
sector-bank relationship and the lending activity at home. 
The  recent  data  show  that  lending  to  the  agricultural  sector  accounts  for  1.25%  of  total 
lending  to  businesses,  on  average.  It  is  a  considerably  low  figure,  which  should  raise  our 
concern, considering that this sector contributes by one/fifth to the gross domestic product. 
I  believe  that  there  are  two  reasons  driving  the  banking  system  to  be  reluctant  to  finance 
different  projects  in  this  sector.  First,  risk  classification  and  categorisation  for  credit  to 
agricultural  sector  is  a  commitment  different  from  the  other  activities.  The  lack  of 
formalisation,  even  for  matters  such  as  regular  maintenance  of  information  and  statistics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
about ownership, and financial statistics, damage the farmers’ credibility from the early steps 
of  lending.  I  find  that  there  is  room  for  prudential  intervention  by  public  institutions,  not  to 
condemn farmers, but to better prepare them and assist them in formalising their business. 
In light of this, the Bank of Albania has in the past years initiated a campaign to improve the 
financial education of the Albanian people. The recent results of our questionnaires indicate 
that  the  Albanian  urban  population  shows  increasing  and  a  more  complete  knowledge 
related  to  various  financial  problems  they  encounter.  But  the  results  on  rural  areas  reveal 
that the education level remains considerably lower. 
Second, the Albanian agricultural sector suffers from the lack of information and evaluation. 
As I noted above, one of the reasons why banks hesitate to increase their lending is the lack 
of  complete  information  on  farms  and  their  products.  Further,  the  quality  certification 
standards  for  Albanian  products  remain  low.  One  of  the  main  reasons  restricting  higher 
exports and, consequently, higher production, is the lack of certification in accordance with 
the highest standards for all the Albanian agricultural products. This type of certification does 
not  only  prove  the  elementary  food  security  required  by  the  European  markets,  but  also 
establishes a starting point for competition in the market. 
The  presence  of  these  standards  at  a  reliable  level  would  lead  to  the  improvement  of  all 
market mechanisms, by helping bank lending in proportion to the quality of products. In the 
framework of concerns facing the agricultural sector, the Bank of Albania has increased its 
interest in microcredit institutions. 
In  many  developing  countries,  these  institutions  have  led  to  an  increase  in  lending, 
particularly to the agricultural sector and the rural population in general, thus trying to work 
out  the  formalisation  and  evaluation  problems  I  stated  above.  I  find  that  the  successful 
experience  of  microcredit  institutions  in  other  countries  could  be  imported  to  Albania. 
Consequently, all policy-makers should get closer to these institutions and help them grow, 
as  the  microcredit  institutions  are  the  ones  that  have  great  potential  to  become  important 
lenders to the private agricultural enterprises, better than any other intervention by financial 
and public institutions. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  once  more  that  the  agricultural  sector  should  be  an  important 
source for Albania’s further development. But the solution to the problems facing this sector 
calls not only for greater attention, but above all, for a modern way of thinking and a more 
concrete  cooperation  between  all  related  stakeholders.  I,  therefore,  hope  that  today’s 
meeting  will  contribute  to  drawing  the  attention  towards  this  important  sector  and  push 
forward  the  required  structural  reforms,  which  would  also  encourage  the  cooperation 
between agriculture and the banking and financial sector. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
