  Manuel Sánchez: Deepening financial reform in China 
Remarks  by  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  China 
Financial Summit 2014, Beijing, 14 May 2014. 
 I  am  extremely  pleased  to  be  back  in  this  beautiful,  captivating  land  to  participate  in  the 
China  Financial  Summit  2014,  devoted  to  the  theme  of  financial  reform  and  economic 
growth.  I  would  like  to  thank  our  hosts  for  the  honor  of  accompanying  such  distinguished 
speakers and sharing some views with you on the implications of financial reform. 
China’s economic miracle 
For more than three decades, China has experienced a remarkable increase in income and 
living standards. Average annual GDP growth has been about 10 percent, and since 2010 
China has become the second-largest economy in the world. 
This  progress  has  had  a  global  impact.  Many  nations  have  benefited  from  China’s 
momentum,  through  the  effects  of  greater  international  trade  and  investment.  Also,  world 
economic growth has been enhanced, and per capita income disparities have substantially 
narrowed.1 
China’s outstanding economic performance has been the result of sweeping reforms starting 
in  the  late  1970s.  Transformations  have  included  property  rights  granted  to  farmers,  the 
opening  of  many  economic  sectors  to  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  the  ability  to  run  a 
private  business,  the  privatization  of  some  state-owned  enterprises,  the  liberalization  of 
goods prices, and the reduction of barriers to international trade. 
Tremendous  output  expansion  has  gone  hand  in  hand  with  urbanization,  as  well  as 
augmented  employment  and  investment.  But  most  notably,  it  has  been  backed  by 
consistently  growing  total  factor  productivity.  Efficiency  has  benefited  greatly  from  the 
adoption of technologies and know-how from leading advanced economies.2 
As occurs in any economic development process, China may be facing diminishing returns 
from already implemented liberalization policies. Unexploited opportunities are suggested by 
the  relatively  low  size  of  consumption  and  the  service  sector  in  China’s  economy  in 
comparison with many nations. 
Hence,  the  sustainability  of  high  growth  rates  and  further  widening  of  benefits  to  society 
would  seem  to  require  more  structural  changes.  In  particular,  inefficiencies  prevailing  in 
several markets may be too costly to allow for continued high rates of economic expansion. 
To take hold of these opportunities, the plan for reform announced by China’s government 
last November aims to make the economy more efficient and market oriented. The reform 
agenda  is  ambitious,  involving  a great  number  of  issues. The following  are  just  a few  that 
stand out: the protection of property rights, the deregulation of non-public enterprises, further 
liberalization  of  prices,  financial  reform,  a  revision  of  government’s  role  in  the  economy, 
urban and rural development, and additional areas opened to FDI. 
                                                
1  See Sala-i-Martin, X., (2006), “The world distribution of income: falling poverty and … convergence, period”, 
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXI (2). 
2  See  Kehoe,  T.J.  and  Ruhl,  K.J.  (2010),  “Why  have  economic  reforms  in  Mexico  not  generated  growth?”, 
Journal of Economic Literature, 48(4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The potential for success is high in light of China’s proven ability to implement necessary and 
difficult  reforms  in the  past. Given  China’s  importance to the global  economy,  the  world  is 
following this process with fixed attention. 
The implications of financial development 
The  incorporation  of  financial  reform  in  China’s  transformation  plan  is  highly  appropriate 
considering its potential benefits. China can take further advantage of common knowledge 
regarding  financial  development,  such  as  the  following  points,  which  can  be  gleaned  from 
years of world experience. 
First,  functioning  financial  markets  are  a  necessary  condition  for  a  prosperous  economy. 
Many  studies  based  on  cross-country,  individual-country,  and  industry  levels  confirm  that 
greater financial deepening tends to bring about higher rates of economic expansion.3 
Second,  the  market  is  a  cost-effective  mechanism  for  channeling  savings  to  financing. 
Market  functioning,  in  turn,  requires  competition,  with  the  free  entry  and  exit  of  for-profit 
players,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  the  failure  of  institutions  which  are  no  longer  viable, 
provided that the stability of the financial system is preserved. Markets also require flexible 
prices, which of course, include interest and exchange rates.4 
Third, productivity may be enhanced by opening an economy to foreign investment and the 
free  movement  of  capital.  It  is  better  for  financial  institutions  to  be  well-developed  and 
adequately regulated and supervised before the capital account is fully freed. 
Flexible  exchange  rates  and  currency  convertibility  allow  for  independent  monetary  policy. 
Furthermore, economies with flexible interest and exchange rates are able to accommodate 
external shocks more easily than those under rigid price regimes, where adjustment relies 
heavily on quantity changes, including higher unemployment. 
Fourth,  financial  markets  frequently  suffer  from  imperfections,  such  as  asymmetric 
information,  adverse  selection,  and  moral  hazard,  which  can  translate  into  negative 
externalities  to  the  rest  of  the  economy.  The  financial  system  is  based  on  trust  and  the 
management  of  risk.  When  risk  is  not  appropriately  priced,  contagion  may  arise  and  trust 
may be jeopardized. 
These limitations make adequate regulation and supervision absolutely necessary. While the 
rules of the game should provide the correct incentives to market participants, by reducing 
moral hazard for example, prudential policies should aim at preventing systemic crises. 
Fifth,  we  are  continually  learning  about  how  financial  systems  should  best  develop. 
Specifically, successful financial liberalization depends greatly on how well and in what order 
it is implemented. Neither can it be considered a panacea. History teaches us that financial 
crises have been recurrent, and that many of them have resulted from poor policies, a fact to 
which the recent global financial debacle bears witness. 
                                                
3  For a review of the literature on the relationship between growth and financial markets, see Levine, R. (2005), 
“Finance  and  growth:  Theory  and  evidence”,  in  Aghion,  P.  and  S.  Durlauf  (eds.),  Handbook  of  Economic 
Growth,  Volume  1,  Part  A.  Amsterdam,  North-Holland  Elsevier,  pp.  865–934;  and  Zhang,  J.,  et  al.  (2012), 
“Financial  development  and  economic  growth:  Recent  evidence  from  China”,  Journal  of  Comparative 
Economics, 40(3). 
4  The advantages and disadvantages of fixed vs. flexible exchange rates have fueled a long-standing debate. 
For a seminal reference on the benefits of flexible exchange rates, see Friedman, M. (1953), “The Case for 
Flexible  Exchange  Rates”,  in  Friedman  M.,  Essays  in  Positive  Economics.  Chicago,  University  of  Chicago 
Press, pp. 157–203. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  China’s financial challenges 
China has made significant progress in fostering its financial system. Key advances include 
bank restructuring, increased foreign participation in financial institutions, the listing of banks 
on  domestic  and  foreign  stock  markets,  the  development  of  debt,  stock,  and  derivatives 
markets, the liberalization of lending interest rates, the initial opening of the capital account, 
and a stronger regulatory and supervisory framework. 
These measures have allowed China’s financial system to become one of the largest in the 
world. This is reflected by indicators such as the ratio of financial assets relative to GDP, the 
number of financial intermediaries, the capitalization value of the stock markets, and the fact 
that some of the major banks in the world in terms of market value are Chinese.5 
This advancement is obviously  impressive, especially given the daunting complexity of the 
system. The next step is to increase quality and efficiency. Indeed, China’s financial system 
could  yield  greater  benefits  by  becoming  more  market  oriented,  in  the  spirit  of  the  reform 
plan. 
Well-known  avenues  for  transformation  would  include  further  interest  rate  liberalization, 
credit  allocation  according  to  business  criteria,  transparent  local  government  finances, 
competitive  capital  markets,  currency  convertibility,  flexible  exchange  rates,  and  additional 
opening of the capital account. These reforms can enhance long-term economic potential. 
In  the  short  term,  China  faces  significant  challenges  to  sustained  economic  momentum, 
given  the  presence  of  apparent  financial  imbalances,  which,  to  a  large  extent,  stem  from 
stimulus policies implemented in the aftermath of the global crisis. 
In  particular,  during  recent  years,  credit  has  been  growing  rapidly,  financing  significant 
investment projects. The unregulated shadow-banking sector has been taking on a growing 
role. With rapid credit growth since 2008, China’s total financing stock relative to GDP has 
risen about 70 percentage points, to reach approximately 200 percent in 2013.6 
Credit  and  debt  trends  may  need  to  slow,  and  some  deleveraging  and  cooling  in  certain 
sectors  of  the  economy  may  be  unavoidable,  as  for  example,  in  the  real-estate  market. 
Economic measures such as tightening financial conditions may facilitate the adjustment. 
Furthermore, non-traditional finance could pose a systemic threat to financial stability in part 
because banks remain closely linked to the shadow-banking sector. Prudential policies may 
be called for. 
China’s  authorities  are  conscious  of  these  and  other  short-  and  long-term  financial 
challenges,  as  shown  by  efforts  to  adjust  to  recent  economic  developments.  In  the  past, 
reforms  have  been gradual  and  ordered,  and  results  have  been  encouraging. This feature 
does not need to be changed. Smooth implementation and adequate sequencing of reforms 
will continue to be essential for China to gain further from financial modernization. 
The Mexican experience 
I would now like to comment on experiences from my own country, Mexico. The health of the 
Mexican financial system seems to be largely a result of policies inspired by the hardship and 
trauma caused by domestic financial crises. Specifically, the disarray that emerged in 1982 
                                                
5  For  an  overview  of  China’s  financial  system,  see  Elliott,  D.J.  and  K.  Yan  (2013),  “The  Chinese  Financial 
System:  An  Introduction  and  Overview”,  John  L.  Thornton  China  Center  at  Brookings  Monograph  Series, 
No. 6, July. 
6  Data refers to social financing stock as a percentage of GDP from the fourth quarter of 2008 to the first quarter 
of  2013.  See  IMF  (2013),  “People’s  Republic  of  China,  2013  Article  IV  Consultation”,  IMF  Country  Report 
No. 13/211, p. 10, July. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and in 1995 due to a perverse mix of fiscal, monetary, and bank policies, led the country to 
implement corrective measures to achieve sustainable financial growth. 
The  Mexican  financial  system  is  bank centric. Most  of  its  assets  are  owned  by  banks that 
compete  among  themselves  and  exhibit  strong  balance  sheets  by  international  standards. 
The  system  also  includes  other  intermediaries,  such  as  mutual  funds,  pension  funds, 
insurance companies and nonbank banks, as well as efficient bond and equity markets for 
government and private issuers.7 
Several sound policies have led to financial improvement in Mexico. First and foremost, we 
learned the hard way that no financial system functions properly within an unstable nominal 
framework characterized by high inflation and weak public finances. 
Mexico’s  central  bank  has  had  autonomy  for  20  years.  Monetary  policy  adheres  to  an 
inflation-targeting regime and uses an interest rate as its key policy instrument. The control of 
inflation at low levels for more than a decade has been backed by stable and well-managed 
public debt. 
The credibility of monetary and fiscal policies, in turn, helps explain the rapid formation of a 
complete  yield  curve  for  sovereign  bonds  in  local  currency  during  the  first  years  of  this 
century,  and  issuances  of  public  debt  in  international  markets  for  maturities  as  long  as 
100 years. 
Second, the modernization of bank regulation and supervision has been a continuous work in 
progress. We lifted restrictions on deposit terms, amounts, and interest rates, and eliminated 
both  mandatory  credit  allocation  and  deposit  reserve  requirements  in  the  late  1980s  and 
early 1990s. 
Unfortunately, this was done without first imposing more adequate bank regulations amid all 
these  changes,  along  with  appropriate  supervision.  Financial  liberalization  triggered  the 
beginning  of  excessive,  low-quality  credit  growth.  Also,  after  a  10-year  period  of  bank 
nationalization, the banks were reprivatized, further inflating the credit boom. 
Third, the need to recapitalize the banks after the ensuing credit bust in the mid-1990s led to 
the  abolition  of  restrictions  on  FDI  in  the  banking  sector.  At  the  same  time,  a  deposit 
insurance  corporation  was  founded  to  provide  deposit  insurance  to  savers  up  to  a  certain 
limit. 
Accounting,  disclosure,  corporate  governance,  capital,  currency  mismatch  regulations,  and 
provisioning requirements were further enhanced in the second half of the 1990s. Moreover, 
in  the  early  years  of  this  millennium,  the  legal  framework  for  protecting  creditor  property 
rights was strengthened and credit bureaus were formed. 
Banks’ business models have also become more suitable in the wake of the lessons learned 
by managers from crises and the transfer of technical skills from other countries. Prudential 
regulation has received a careful overhaul based on experience from the most recent global 
turmoil. 
Fourth,  the  public  defined-benefit  pension  system  was  replaced  by  a  privately  funded 
defined-contribution system, in which  workers hold individual retirement accounts operated 
by specialized private asset managers. This has had the double effect of nourishing deeper 
capital markets while making the pension system sustainable in the long run. 
Fifth, the lack of obstacles to free international capital movement, especially since the early 
1990s,  has  been  combined  since  1995  with  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  which  has 
served as a buffer in turbulent times. Indeed, the resilience of the Mexican financial system 
                                                
7  For the structure and recent development of the financial system and its intermediaries, see Banco de México 
(2013), Reporte sobre el Sistema Financiero, September.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  was  tested  by  the  recent  global  crisis.  Despite  real  and  financial  shocks  to  the  economy, 
financial  markets  operated  with  no  disruptions  and  with  sufficient  liquidity  during  the  most 
volatile period, while banks remained solvent. 
Furthermore, the international financial bonanza since 2010 resulted in substantial portfolio 
capital  inflows  directed  to  Mexico’s  equity  and  fixed-income  assets.  Especially  noteworthy 
have been increasing holdings of peso-denominated government bonds by non-residents, a 
trend that has only recently slowed. 
Given the possibility of future bouts of heightened global risk aversion, sudden stops or even 
reversals of capital flows cannot be ruled out. The authorities remain vigilant to the need for 
measures to make the Mexican financial system more resilient in such an event. 
In  the  long  run,  Mexico  faces  two  significant  and  interrelated  challenges  to  financial 
development:  greater  deepening  and  wider  inclusion.  Mexico  is  one  of  the  emerging 
economies with the lowest ratios of credit to the private sector relative to GDP, and with less 
favorable coverage of financial services geographically and across different income strata. 
The relatively compact Mexican financial system finds its roots in previous domestic crises 
and  a  history  of  high  and  volatile  inflation  and  financial  repression.  Fortunately,  the 
deepening  process  was  renewed  during  the  last  decade,  as  a  result  of  a  sounder  policy 
framework. 
To  further  facilitate  this  process,  the  authorities  have  allowed  new  forms  of  bank  delivery 
channels such as retail commission agents, and simplified the requirements for opening bank 
deposit and phone banking accounts. Finally, Mexico’s ongoing, multi-tiered financial reform 
includes measures to tackle some obstacles to competition and permit the more expedient 
repossession  of  loan  collateral.  Financial  expansion  will  necessarily  take  time  if  it  is  to  be 
sustainable.8 
Final remarks 
China’s decades-long reform program has been responsible for nothing short of an economic 
miracle,  which  has  improved  living  conditions  not  only  for  the  country  itself,  but  to  a  large 
degree the world over. 
Where China’s financial development is concerned, reforms with the potential to fuel growth 
for  many  years  have  recently  been  outlined.  The  importance  of  structural  reforms  that 
undergird a solid financial system cannot be understated for any country. In China’s case, 
the order in which measures are implemented is of key significance, as is facing short-term 
challenges, and devising a well-thought-out medium-term plan. 
Without a doubt, China is pursuing these objectives with innovative and timely solutions, as 
the nation has done for many years. This course of action should allow its citizens to look 
forward to greater standards of living, and future generations to enjoy more prosperous lives. 
                                                
8  For a review of Mexico’s financial deepening and ongoing financial reform, see Sánchez, M. (2014), “Mexico’s 
banking system: opportunities from reform”, presented at BNP Paribas Economic Forum, March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
