Jens Weidmann: All for one and one for all? The roles of 
microprudential, macroprudential, and monetary policy in safeguarding 
financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank symposium on financial stability and the role of central banks in Frankfurt, 27 
February 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
About  six  years  ago,  on  17  February  2008,  the  British  government  decided  to  nationalise 
Northern Rock. The bank run that preceded this decision was the first run on a British bank in 
over a century. 
As we know now, the worst was yet to come. The fall of Lehman Brothers seven months later 
sent shockwaves through the global economy, marking the onset of what is now known as 
the  Great  Recession.  Still  today,  many  economies  are  struggling  with  the  aftermath  of the 
crisis, not only economically, but also socially and politically. 
The  tectonic  shifts  in  financial  conditions  that  erupted  so  violently  took  place  beneath  a 
seemingly calm macroeconomic surface. Inflation was low and stable, and estimated output 
gaps were small. Thus, when taking stock of the lessons learned from the crisis, one lesson 
seems rather straightforward. Price stability is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition to 
guarantee economic stability. Hence, financial stability has to be in the mix as well. 
Another lesson the crisis taught us is that, in order to safeguard financial stability, it is not 
enough  if  financial  regulation  and  supervision  focus  on  the  soundness  of  individual 
institutions.  The  interlinkages  between  different  financial  actors  and  between  financial 
institutions and sovereigns have been a key factor in explaining the crisis. 
How,  then,  is  financial  stability  to  be  maintained?  What  went  wrong  in  the  run-up  to  the 
crisis?  Have  we  drawn  the  right  conclusions from  what  has  been  the  worst financial  crisis 
since  the  Second  World  War?  And  is  the  implementation  of  the  lessons  learned,  i.e.  the 
regulatory agenda, proving sufficient to make a similar crisis unlikely? 
These are the overarching questions of this Bundesbank Symposium. It’s a great honour for 
the Deutsche Bundesbank and a great pleasure for me to welcome you to our symposium, 
and  to  see  that  so  many  distinguished  representatives  from  academia,  central  banks,  the 
financial sector, politics, and unions, have accepted our invitation. I am fully aware that some 
of you – like myself – have come more or less directly from the G20 and BIS meetings held 
last weekend in Sydney, but I am sure that the lively debate ahead of us on that very relevant 
topic is the best way to overcome the jetlag. 
Karl Popper once said that “without a free exchange of ideas there can be not freedom of 
thought. To find out whether our ideas are sound, we need other people to try them out on.” 
This is what this event is all about. So, to kick off our exchange of ideas, let me try out some 
thoughts on you as to how financial stability might best be achieved. 
2. 
The roles of monetary and macroprudential policy in macroeconomic 
management 
If anybody or anything has actually emerged from the crisis a winner, it is probably the word 
“macroprudential”.  Microprudential  policies  such  as  banking regulation  and  supervision  are 
still  necessary  in  safeguarding  the  soundness  of  individual  institutions.  But  as  it  turns  out, 
they are not enough when it comes to safeguarding the financial system as a whole. For the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
toolkit  – 
financial  stability  risks  we  need  an  additional 
management  of  systemic 
macroprudential policies. And it seems to me that this assessment is by now widely shared. 
The  role  of  monetary  policy  in  this  context  is,  however,  still  being  debated.  While 
macroprudential policy frameworks are still under development, we need to take a stand on 
whether  and  how  monetary  policy  should  play  a  supporting  role  without  undermining  its 
pursuit of price stability. 
First, we have to acknowledge that in the world we live in, macroprudential policy can never 
be perfectly effective – for instance because safeguarding financial stability is complicated by 
having to achieve multiple targets all at the same time. 
While maintaining price stability translates into one single target variable, that is, the average 
inflation  rate  related  to  the  price  of  a  consumption  basket,  maintaining  financial  stability  is 
more complex. Risks to financial stability can emanate from different sources, such as price 
bubbles  in  specific  asset  markets,  but  also  reckless  risk-taking  by  a  single  but  systemic 
player, and so on. 
While the level and volatility in individual prices of goods and services is usually not of much 
concern to central bankers as long as the impact on the price index is small, the level of and 
volatility in particular asset prices could lead to instability of the financial sector. This is why 
preserving financial stability is a multi-dimensional problem. 
Additionally, financial and business cycles do interact and the monetary policy stance does 
affect  risk-taking  by  the  financial  sector.  Indeed,  some  current  research  supports  the  view 
that  monetary  policy  seems  to  have  contributed  to  the  high  risk  appetite  in  the  financial 
system and thus to the build-up of financial imbalances. 
The  philosophy  of  “mopping  up”  after  a  crisis  that  prevailed  in  the  years  before  the  Great 
Recession has come under attack because it led to the expectation of a dramatic loosening 
of monetary policy in the event of a financial crisis. Such an asymmetric policy, in turn, may 
itself generate an additional incentive to take on higher risks and thus contribute to financial 
and macroeconomic instability.1, 2 
Hence,  some  observers  argue  that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  are  so  closely 
intertwined that, in the case of both upturns and downturns, monetary policy has to play an 
active role in stabilising the financial system. Some even call for a dual mandate for central 
banks, with financial stability on a par with price stability.3  
But  in  my  view,  even  if  monetary  policy  instruments  were  an  efficient  tool  to  influence 
financial stability – a premise which I would still doubt – an important argument against the 
comprehensive involvement of monetary policy in financial stability lies in the risk of losing 
credibility with regard to the pursuit of price stability. 
The  credibility  of  monetary  policy  depends  both  on  the  clarity  of  its  objectives  and  on 
transparency  with  regard  to  its  limitations.  Adopting  financial  stability  as  an  additional 
monetary  policy  objective  on  a  par  with  price  stability  would  risk  raising  unrealistic 
expectations  about  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  instruments.  It  could  create 
trade-offs  which  would  undermine  the  primacy  of  the  price  stability  objective,  reflected  for 
instance in the form of an inflationary bias. 
                                                
1  Diamond, D W and R G Rajan (2012), Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate Policy, Journal of 
Political Economy 120(3), 552–591. 
2  Farhi, E and J Tirole (2012), Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and Systemic Bailouts, American 
Economic Review 102(1), 60–93. 
3  Tabellini, G (2011), EZ rescue: Déjà vu all over again, voxeu.org, 27 October 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Tasking the central bank with both financial as well as price stability might give rise to a time-
inconsistency problem. In such a setting, a central bank should find it optimal to deliver the 
social  optimal  level  of  inflation  ex  ante,  but  it  might  not  do  so  ex  post.4  The  time-
inconsistency problem may arise because macro-prudential policy is not perfectly effective in 
preventing financial imbalances and it is only a pre-emptive tool, while monetary policy can 
pre-empt as well as correct financial imbalances. This is because macroprudential policy can 
affect only flows of credit but not the outstanding stock of debt. By contrast, monetary policy 
can also reduce the real stock of debt by creating surprise inflation. 
Moreover,  studies  being  more  optimistic  with  regard  to  the  efficacy  of  macroprudential 
instruments suggest that relying on macroprudential policies for financial stability purposes 
yields  socially  more  desirable  results,  because  macroprudential  instruments  allow  for  a 
targeted policy response and thus minimise output and inflation volatility.5, 6 
To put it succinctly: when it comes to handling financial stability risks, monetary policy is a 
sledgehammer rather than a scalpel. So, the latter should be the preferred choice of tool, and 
getting it ready for use has to be a political top priority. 
I am therefore convinced that in order to enable monetary policy to fulfil its mandate and to 
ensure clear accountability, it’s important that price stability remains the primary objective of 
monetary  policy.  But  that  is  not  to  say  that  when  it  comes  to  monetary  policy  and  price 
stability there are no lessons to be learned. Or “re-learned”, as Claudio Borio has pointed out 
with  the  words,  “Understanding  in  economics  does  not  proceed  cumulatively.  …  So-called 
‘lessons’ are learnt, forgotten, re-learnt and forgotten again.” 
It  is  therefore  more  of  a  reminder  from  the  crisis  than  a  discovery  that  monetary  policy 
decisions  must  attach  greater  importance  to  financial  sector  developments,  as  risks  to 
financial stability may ultimately culminate in risks to price stability – a topic, I am sure, that 
will be discussed at greater length during our first session today. 
Indeed, recent research7 reaffirms how taking into account credit developments can enhance 
the stabilisation of the overall economy: output volatility can be dampened without increasing 
inflation variability. The Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy is in principle rooted in such 
an  approach,  as  real  economic  analyses  are  regularly  cross-checked  against  those  from 
monetary  analyses.  Nonetheless,  the  Eurosystem  has  stepped  up  its  efforts  to  continually 
enhance its monetary analysis, including early warning indicators for unsound developments 
in the financial markets.8  
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  what  I  call  a  “more  symmetric  monetary  policy” 
approach of the Eurosystem is not identical to a prototypical approach of “leaning against the 
wind”.  Roughly  speaking,  a  “leaning  against  the  wind”  strategy  can  be  seen  as  an 
unconditional  monetary  policy  response  to  asset  price  changes.  In  contrast,  a  “more 
symmetric monetary policy” advocates a conditional policy response. 
                                                
4  Ueda,  K  and  F  Valencia  (2014),  Central  bank  independence  and  macro-prudential  regulation,  Economics 
Letters, forthcoming. 
5  Bean, C, Paustian, M, Penalver, A and T Taylor (2010), Monetary Policy after the Fall, Jackson Hole 2010 
Symposium Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
6  Angeloni,  I  and  E  Faia  (2013),  Capital  Regulation  and  Monetary  Policy  with  Fragile  Banks,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 60 (3), pp. 311–324. 
7  Fahr, S, R Motto, M Rostagno, F Smets and O Tristani (2013), A monetary policy strategy in good and bad 
times: lessons from the recent past, Economic Policy, April, 243–288. 
8  Papademos, L and J Stark (eds) (2010), Enhancing monetary analysis, ECB, chap. 6. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
By this I mean that in the context of our monetary analysis, we identify longer-term risks to 
price stability based on money and credit developments.9 The critical condition is therefore 
whether asset price movements and credit developments give rise to monetary and financial 
imbalances, which are ultimately relevant for price stability. 
In this sense, our monetary analysis acts as a filter to extract the monetary policy relevant 
movements  in financial markets. This  prevents us from  being  myopic,  helps  us  to  conduct 
monetary  policy  more  symmetrically  across  the  financial  cycle  and  thereby  contributes  to 
overall financial stability – but always on the basis of our price stability objective. 
However, fundamental challenges remain with this approach. As Claudio Borio10 has pointed 
out,  the  financial  cycle  has  a  much  lower  frequency  than  the  traditional  business  cycle. 
“Since financial liberalisation, its typical length is of the order of 16 to 20 years; by contrast, 
as generally conceived  in academic and policy work, business-cycle frequencies are up to 
eight years.” So, while extending the monetary policy decision-making horizon is warranted 
in principle, we are restricted in practice by our limited ability to reliably forecast over longer 
horizons.  For  instance,  early  warning  indicators  might  perform  well  ex  post,  but  do  not 
necessarily exhibit the same performance ex ante. 
We certainly need to look into all of these issues in more detail – I am looking forward to our 
discussion on these topics today. When it comes to financial stability, monetary policy has a 
role  to  play  –  insofar  as  price  stability  is  at risk as  well.  But  macroprudential  policies,  with 
their more versatile and precise instruments, should provide the first line of defence against 
financial instability. In many cases, the interest rate will prove too crude an instrument with 
which, for instance, to prick asset bubbles. 
Micro- and macroprudential regulation 
3. 
But it is not only the macroeconomic toolbox that needs an overhaul. The crisis has laid bare 
structural shortcomings of the financial system. These structural flaws demand a structural – 
that is, a regulatory – answer. 
Market failures and regulatory blind spots have tilted the playing field, hampered competition, 
and over-stimulated the risk appetite of investors. As you all know, much effort has already 
been  taken  to  address  the  fault  lines  revealed  by  the  global  financial  crisis  and  to  move 
towards a more resilient global financial system. 
At its meeting in Sydney last weekend the G20 agreed, to focus its current work programme 
on 1) building resilient financial institutions, 2) ending “too big to fail”, 3) addressing shadow 
banking risks, and 4) making derivatives markets safer. To be more concrete, I would like to 
revert to one key characteristic of the financial market that also regulation failed adequately 
to take into account in the past: the interconnectedness of its players. 
One  of  the  main  characteristics  of  financial  institutions  is  that  the  failure  of  one  institution 
might  pull  others  down  with  it  and  cause  a  systemic  crisis  if  the  failing  institution  has, 
because  of  its  size,  a  significant  influence  on financial  markets  or  its  business  partners  or 
does business with a lot of partners. The term “too interconnected to fail” might therefore be 
even more appropriate for this well-known “too big to fail” problem. 
The  insolvency  of  Lehman  Brothers  that  I  mentioned  earlier  is  a  case  in  point. What  was 
lacking then was an insolvency framework that allowed the failure of this institution without 
                                                
9 
Issing, O (2003), Monetary and Financial Stability: Is there a Trade-off?, speech delivered at the conference 
on “Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle”, Bank for International Settlements, Basle. 
10  Borio,  C  (2012),  “The  financial  cycle  and  macroeconomics:  what  have  we  learnt?“,  BIS  Working  Papers, 
no 395, December. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
destabilising the entire financial system. More than five years after the Lehman insolvency, 
the “too big to fail” problem still poses a real threat. 
Work  has  been  under  way  to  transpose  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  “Key  attributes  of 
effective resolution regimes for financial institutions” into national law, but we are not there 
yet,  and  we  must  not  slacken  in  our  effort  –  for  instance  to  ensure  that  G-SIFIs  have 
sufficient resources available to absorb losses in resolution, or to develop resolution rules for 
financial institutions of other sectors as well, such as insurers. 
In Europe, one major bit of progress is undoubtedly the agreement on the Bank Recovery 
and Resolution Directive. The directive sets forth resolution instruments and the sequence of 
liability for failing banks. In future, shareholders and creditors will be first in line to bear the 
costs  of  bank failures  –  rightfully  so,  since  they  assumed  the  risks  and  benefited from the 
respective returns in the first place. 
Containing the challenge of interconnectedness implies the necessity, first, to increase the 
loss absorbing capacity of institutions, thus making them less likely to fail to begin with and, 
second, to limit counterparty exposure. In the end, both ways also lead to a better balance of 
liability  and  control,  which  is  crucial  for  the  correct  functioning  of  financial  markets  and, 
hence, for financial stability. 
The  new  Basel  III  international  capital  rules  increase  the  loss  absorbing  capacity  of  banks 
because they now have to hold more and better capital than before. But to some, the risk-
weighted approach of the Basel rules is fundamentally flawed. 
Critics  such  as  Martin  Hellwig,  who  will  elaborate  on  his  views  during  tomorrow’s  panel 
discussion on banking regulation, maintain that the Basel approach causes the rules to miss 
substantial risks. And he argues that banks are using the risk weightings to leverage their 
positions up to a hundred times the equity invested. 
Still, the reasoning behind risk weighting sounds plausible. If all assets had to be backed by 
the same level of capital, banks would have an incentive to opt for riskier investments, as this 
would raise their expected return on equity. This, of course, would do a disservice to financial 
stability. 
Mark  Carney  therefore has  argued for  a  pragmatic  approach: sometimes  you  need  both  a 
belt and suspenders if you are at risk of losing your pants. Hence, the risk-weighted Basel 
rules should be supplemented by an unweighted leverage ratio. 
In  my  opinion,  that  sounds  sensible.  To  economists,  parsimony  is  normally  key  when  it 
comes  both  to  economic  modelling  and  to  regulatory  proposals.  But  in  this  special  case, 
putting multiple safety measures in place might be justified, even necessary. What applies to 
power  stations  holds  for  the  financial  system  as  well.  When  the  potential  fallout  is  vast, 
redundancy, not parsimony, might be the better approach – a point, I am sure, we will have 
time to delve into further during tomorrow’s panel discussion on regulatory reforms. 
It is obvious, however, that stricter regulation for some institutions might shift business to less 
regulated players. Regulators need to take this aspect of interconnectedness into account, 
too.  The  so-called  shadow  banking  system  can  be  a  source  of  systemic  risk  because  of 
unregulated liquidity and maturity transformation, the build-up of leverage, and procyclicality. 
The FSB published policy recommendations to address specific risks emanating from certain 
activities or institutions. In order to identify new risks in due time, the FSB has established a 
regular monitoring exercise. These are steps in the right direction. 
For  the  international  recommendations  to  be  effective,  it  is  crucial  to  transpose  them 
consistently into national law – and to do so quickly, given that this issue has been on the 
agenda  for  quite  a  while.  In  Europe,  for  instance,  we  are  already  in  the  process  of 
implementing  international  recommendations  to  regulate  money  market  funds  and  to 
enhance the transparency of securities financing transactions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Finally,  there  is  yet  another  major  aspect  of  interconnectedness  that  regulators  have  not 
taken into account up to now: the link between banks’ balance sheets and public finances. 
The  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  if  a  systemically  relevant  bank  or  many  banks 
simultaneously run into financial difficulties, the stability of the financial system is put at risk 
as a result. Given the deficiencies of previous resolution regimes, governments often had no 
option but to step in and bail out banks to prevent the financial system from collapsing. 
In Europe, however, the Greek case in particular showed that the other way round can also 
be  of  relevance.  Difficulties  in  government  finances  might  cause  substantial  problems  for 
banks, in particular because many banks hold large portfolios of government bonds. 
From a financial stability viewpoint this vicious circle has to be broken. As I discussed earlier, 
resolution  regimes  for  banks  are  important  in  this  regard.  Having  credible  resolution 
frameworks in place with clear bail-in rules of shareholders and creditors would help to shield 
the government from having to rescue banks with taxpayers’ money. 
Another crucial measure to cut the sovereign-banking nexus refers to the regulatory capital 
requirement regime for banks. One of the key lessons of the crisis was that sovereign bonds 
cannot per se be considered risk-free. We should therefore put this regulatory fiction to rest. 
But sovereign bonds pose a threat to financial stability not only because of preferential risk-
weighting. The most important rule in risk management is diversification. Yet when it comes 
to  sovereign  bonds,  banks  all  too  often  seem  to  neglect  this  principle.  In  many  cases, 
European  banks  hold  bonds  from  one  sovereign  only  –  their  home  country.  Large  and 
undiversified  sovereign  exposure  is  what  makes  sovereign  default  a  potentially  systemic 
event. Hence, the large exposure regime which caps the investment in one single debtor has 
to be applied to sovereigns as well. 
Without addressing the regulatory treatment of sovereign exposures, I see no reliable way of 
breaking  the  sovereign-banking  nexus.  In  my  view,  such  regulations  are  an  indispensable 
prerequisite for a healthy financial system in the longer run. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now come to a close. 
The  challenges  I  have  just  described  make  one  thing  very  clear:  safeguarding  financial 
stability is truly a herculean task. It would therefore be an understandable reflex to summon 
all  policies  at  our  disposal  towards  that  end.  As  D’Artagnan,  Athos,  Porthos  and  Aramis 
would have said: “All for one, and one for all!” 
But while  indeed all the policies I have mentioned – microprudential, macroprudential, and 
monetary  policy  –  have  a  role  to  play  when  it  comes  to  securing  financial  stability,  some 
restraint seems to be in order, especially with regard to monetary policy. 
Monetary  policy  can  influence  financial  conditions.  Notably,  it  can,  to  a  certain  extent, 
influence the risk-taking behaviour of the financial sector. A more symmetric monetary policy 
that  looks  through  the  financial  cycle  therefore  seems  appropriate.  Monetary  policy  has  to 
counter financial imbalances inasmuch as they endanger price stability. 
But adopting financial stability as an additional monetary policy objective on a par with price 
stability  overstates  the  accuracy  and  the  effectiveness  with  which  monetary  policy  can 
contribute to financial stability. And ultimately it runs the risk of harming credibility with regard 
to the pursuit of price stability, as this depends on both monetary policy clarity regarding its 
objectives and transparency regarding its limitations. 
This implies, however, that we must continue in our efforts to fully develop macroprudential 
policy  as  soon  as  possible;  and  that  the  international  recommendations  on  financial 
regulation have to be transposed quickly and consistently into national law. 
I now look forward to an exciting symposium! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
