Mario Draghi: The path to recovery and the ECB’s role 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Symposium on 
Financial Stability and the Role of Central Banks, organised by the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 27 February 2014. 
 Summary 
The euro area has made considerable progress on its reform agenda, says ECB President 
Mario Draghi. Speaking at a conference organised by Germany’s Bundesbank in Frankfurt 
he  emphasises  that  euro  area  governments  have  improved  their  fiscal  positions  despite 
recessionary headwinds and stressed euro area countries have become more competitive. 
“In parallel, the architecture of EMU has been strengthened in ways that many would have 
considered  inconceivable  two  years  ago”,  says  Mr  Draghi.  The  move  towards  a  banking 
union is crucial not only for the functioning of the financial system, but also for the conduct of 
monetary policy.  
Since the beginning of the crisis the ECB’s Governing Council has taken decisive steps to 
engineer  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  is  commensurate  with  the  subdued  medium-term 
inflation  outlook.  But  standard  monetary  policy  in  the  form  of  rate  cuts was  not  enough  to 
ensure an appropriate monetary policy stance, because unwarranted fears of euro break-up 
impaired the monetary transmission, he says. Against this background the ECB announced 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT). Like all the ECB’s monetary policy measures, OMT 
served, says Mr Draghi, to ensure compliance with the bank’s price stability mandate. 
“And  it  builds  on  an  established  monetary  policy  doctrine  that  has  gained  prominence  not 
least through its successful adherence by the Bundesbank for several decades”, Mr Draghi 
says. “Namely that the central bank should be endowed with a clear price stability mandate 
and, within this mandate, should be allowed – in fact obliged – to use its instruments in full 
independence to deliver price stability.” 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you tonight. 
When I last spoke at an event organised by the Bundesbank, in March 2012, the euro area 
stood  at  a  crossroads.  One  direction  pointed 
to  continued  malaise,  with  various 
vulnerabilities  threatening  to  undo  the  benefits  of  economic,  financial  and  even  monetary 
integration.  The  other  direction  pointed  to  gradual  repair,  with  ambitious  reform  efforts 
removing the key obstacles to economic stability and growth. 
The  euro  area  has  chosen  the  latter  path.  And  today,  we  are  seeing  first  signs  that  this 
decision is paying off. At the same time, challenges remain and continued reform efforts are 
needed to ensure that the recovery proves sustainable. 
Against  this  background,  let  me  first  elaborate  on  what  I  think  are  the  key  milestones 
achieved  so far  and then  address  what  are  the key  challenges for  the ECB  in  the  coming 
months. 
What have we achieved so far? 
The  euro  area  reform  agenda  has  consisted  of  two  pillars.  One  is  to  restore  fiscal 
sustainability  and  economic  competitiveness  at  country  level.  The  other  is  to  fix  structural 
shortcomings in the euro area architecture that had allowed imbalances to build up in the first 
place. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On both counts, the euro area has made considerable progress. 
Despite  strong  recessionary  headwinds,  euro  area  governments  have  markedly  improved 
their fiscal positions. Average government deficit ratios fell by more than a quarter over the 
last  two  years  and,  excluding  interest  payments,  were  approaching  balance  at  the  end  of 
2013. 
Simultaneously, most of the stressed euro area countries have made remarkable progress in 
gaining competitiveness. Over the past five years, the cumulative unit labour cost differential 
vis-à-vis  the  euro  area  have  fallen  by  more  than  20  percentage  points  in  Ireland,  around 
15 percentage  points  in  Greece  and  Spain,  and  almost  10  percentage  points  in  Portugal. 
This  was  accompanied  by  substantial  improvements  in  the  export  dynamics  of  these 
countries. 
Overall, we see the euro area’s economic recovery gradually taking hold, albeit at a slow and 
uneven pace. 
In parallel, the architecture of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) has been strengthened 
in ways that many would have considered inconceivable two years ago. 
Perhaps most important for monetary policy, and certainly most topical for this conference, 
are the concrete and ambitious steps towards a banking union. 
By  establishing  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  European  policy-makers  have 
demonstrated  a  firm  commitment  to  a  stringent  and  uniform  application  of  common 
supervisory  standards.  As  a  crucial  counterpart,  policy-makers  are  in  the  process  of 
establishing  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  which  should  enable  quick  and  efficient 
resolution of ailing banks without permanent recourse to taxpayer funds. 
Together,  these  new  institutions  will  fundamentally  strengthen  transparency,  stability  and 
incentive-compatibility in the financial sector. 
In a primarily bank-based financial system like the euro area’s, these features are crucial, not 
only for the functioning of the financial system per se, but also for the conduct of monetary 
policy. 
This is because, with an impaired bank lending channel, monetary policy may lose its handle 
on the real economy and ultimately inflation. At the same time, given the persistent downside 
risks  to  price  stability,  monetary  accommodation  was  a  necessary  ingredient  in  the  crisis 
response. 
How has monetary policy contributed? 
Accordingly, since I last spoke at this venue, the ECB’s Governing Council has taken further 
decisive steps to engineer a monetary policy stance that is commensurate with the subdued 
medium-term inflation outlook. 
These  steps  included  a  sequence  of  further  rate  cuts,  accompanied  since  July  2013  by 
explicit  communication  that  we  expect  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to  remain  at  current  or 
lower levels for an extended period of time. 
But standard monetary policy in the form of rate cuts and the accompanying communication 
were not enough to ensure an appropriate monetary policy stance. 
In  fact,  given  unwarranted  fears  of  a  euro  area  break-up,  monetary  policy  transmission 
became severely impaired – to the extent that the financial market dislocations jeopardised 
our ability to deliver on our price stability mandate. 
It  was  against  this  background  that  we  announced  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
(OMTs). Like all our monetary policy measures, it has served to ensure compliance with our 
price stability mandate as provided for in the Treaty. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And  it  builds  on  an  established  monetary  policy  doctrine  that  has  gained  prominence  not 
least  because  it  has  been  successfully  pursued  by  the  Bundesbank  for  several  decades. 
Namely that the central bank should be endowed with a clear price stability mandate and, 
within  this  mandate,  should  be  allowed  –  in  fact  obliged  –  to  use  its  instruments  in  full 
independence to deliver price stability. 
Combining  a  clear  mandate  with  strong  independence  in  pursuing  that  mandate  is 
particularly important when conducting a single monetary policy  in EMU, which consists of 
18 countries with heterogeneous economic structures and institutional landscapes. 
On the one hand, it allows us to flexibly tailor our policy measures to the specific monetary 
policy  challenges  that  may  arise  in  this  multi-country  context  –  most  notably  to  tackle  the 
financial fragmentation that has hampered monetary policy transmission during the crisis. On 
the  other  hand,  it  establishes  a  stable  anchor  for  inflation  expectations  through  our  price 
stability objective. 
This approach of “constrained discretion” is what made the track record of the Bundesbank 
and  then  the  ECB  so  successful.  And  this  approach  is  further  validated  by  the  strong 
progress towards restoring the singleness of the euro area’s monetary policy observed since 
the announcement of the OMTs. 
Since summer 2012, Target balances have shrunk by about a third. Spreads on long-term 
sovereign bonds vis-à-vis Germany have fallen by around 350 to 450 basis points for Spain, 
Italy and Ireland, and by more than 600 basis points for Portugal. Spreads in corporate debt 
markets have fallen by more than 150 basis points for some important market segments, and 
thus have made it easier for firms to raise funds in the market. 
What challenges are yet to be tackled? 
Despite these achievements, several challenges remain. Let me focus on three challenges 
for the ECB. 
One  of  them  relates  to  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation.  Since  the  review  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy, which took place in 2003 under the auspices of Otmar Issing, the 
ECB has aimed at inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
To  be  sure,  current  HICP  inflation,  which  stood  at  0.8%  in  January,  can  clearly  not  be 
considered close to 2%. Is this a reason for concern? 
With the average euro area inflation rate standing at 0.8%, we are clearly not in deflation, 
which  is  defined  as  a  self-reinforcing  fall  in  prices  that  is  broad-based  across  items  and 
across countries. 
Moreover, inflation expectations for the euro area over the medium to long term continue to 
be firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. 
What we are experiencing now is a prolonged period of low inflation, which will be followed 
by a gradual upward movement towards inflation rates below, but close to, 2% later on. 
Of course, inflation remaining low for a prolonged period of time is a risk in itself. It implies 
that there is only a small safety margin away from zero. And it makes structural adjustment 
efforts more difficult. 
Hence, it is important to carefully assess the causes of low inflation. In recent times, energy 
price developments in particular put downward pressure on headline inflation, a phenomenon 
that  has  contributed  to  weaker  inflation  at  the  global  level.  Moreover,  low  inflation  partly 
reflects  internal  rebalancing  efforts  by  way  of  which  several  countries,  especially  those  in 
economic adjustment programmes, have aimed at improving their competitiveness. 
However, the low inflation outlook is also driven by continued weakness in demand. At this 
point in time, we do not have evidence of consumers postponing expenditure plans, which is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
something  one  would  observe  in  a  deflationary  environment.  But  any  setbacks  in  the 
absorption of economic slack may give rise to further negative developments. 
Against  this  background,  we  will  remain  alert  as  to  whether  any  indications  on  further 
downside risks to price stability emerge and we stand ready to act. 
A second challenge we will be facing in the coming months is to make the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  really  work.  As  I  initially  explained,  the  institutional  reforms  that  have  been 
adopted or are being adopted to establish a banking union constitute important progress. 
But to meet the ultimate objective of strengthening financial stability, implementation is key. 
And  implementation  is  well  under  way:  the  Supervisory  Board  has  held  its  first  three 
meetings;  a  Framework  Regulation  has  been  prepared  and  is  now  the  subject  of  a  public 
consultation;  and  work  is  progressing  on  the  supervisory  model  of  the  SSM  with  the 
Supervisory Manual. 
One  of  the  first  major  implementation  tests  is  the  comprehensive  assessment,  the  health 
check of the euro area banking system, which is currently being conducted as a prelude to 
the SSM becoming operational. 
Here, the ECB is making good progress in establishing the new structures and ensuring that 
the exercise will be fair, transparent and stringent. But many more steps still lie ahead of us. 
A  final  challenge  relates  to  the  macro-prudential  arm  of  the  SSM.  As  you  know,  the  SSM 
Regulation  gives  the  ECB  the  power  to  apply  stricter  macro-prudential  measures  than  the 
national  authorities  if  it  deems  them  necessary.  We  can  also  advise  on  the  calibration  of 
instruments. This goes some way towards insuring against an inaction bias at the national 
level, thus improving the prospects for a more stable euro area financial system. 
We  will  maintain  a  clear  separation  of  objectives  between  the  macro-prudential  policy 
framework  and  monetary  policy  and  a  clear  hierarchy,  with  price  stability  remaining  the 
ECB’s overall primary objective. 
But we are very much aware that both policies may interact. As mentioned before, financial 
instability may undermine monetary policy’s ability to maintain price stability, both directly by 
its  negative  impact  on  credit  provision,  growth  and  inflation  and  indirectly  by  impairing  the 
monetary  transmission  process.  Conversely,  a  protracted  low  interest  rate  environment 
necessary  to  maintain  overall  price  stability  may  create  incentives  to  search  for  yield  and 
lead to local bubbles in a heterogeneous monetary union. 
In  both  cases,  macro-prudential  policy  can  be  used  to  address  financial  stability  concerns 
and  facilitate  our  monetary  policy  conduct.  In  the  first  case,  where  the  financial  stability 
concerns are of a systemic nature affecting the whole euro area, those policies will have to 
be coordinated. In the second case, national macro-prudential authorities may take actions to 
reduce the risk of local financial imbalances. 
In such a case, macro-prudential measures may exert cross-country spillovers that matter for 
monetary policy. For example, raising capital requirements in one jurisdiction may dampen 
lending  in  the  whole  euro  area,  while  a  tightening  of  loan-to-value  ratios  may  simply  shift 
lending  between  respective  jurisdictions,  leaving  the  euro  area  aggregate  unchanged.  A 
monetary  authority  may  therefore  have  a  legitimate  interest  in  which  macro-prudential 
measure is used. 
Many of these questions are yet to be fully explored and we have to acknowledge that the 
macro-prudential  policy  framework  is  still  in  its  infancy. We  are  in  a  learning  process. The 
objectives, transmission mechanisms  and  effects  are  still  being  established,  and this  is  an 
area  where  the  ESRB’s  systemic  macro-prudential  oversight  is  playing  an  integral  role. 
Conferences such as today’s can provide crucial input here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Overall,  I  am  optimistic  that  macro-prudential  policies,  if  properly  coordinated  at  the 
European  level,  will  strengthen  our  defences  against  future  financial  instability  in  the  euro 
area, while also addressing some of the side effects that come from a single monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  With  the  three  challenges  of:  (i) ensuring  price  stability  in  the  face  of  a 
prolonged period of low inflation, (ii) setting up the SSM and rebooting the banking system to 
support  credit  and  growth,  and  (iii) establishing  an  effective  macro-prudential  policy 
framework to increase resilience in the face of future financial turbulence, the ECB will have 
its hands full in the coming year. We are committed to doing our job, but do not expect us to 
do the job of others. It is more important than ever that, in parallel, governments continue to 
pursue their structural reform agenda. 
The return of confidence in the euro area is evidence that the reform efforts will eventually 
pay off. This is visible from the return of market confidence. But, more importantly, it is visible 
from the return of political confidence – as expressed, for example, in Prime Minister Helle 
Thorning-Schmidt’s assessment that joining the euro would be in Denmark’s best interest. 
Ultimately, the common theme in all our efforts is to further the aims of the European Union. 
These  are  to  promote  peace,  its  values  and  the  well-being  of  its  peoples.  As  the  recent 
events in Ukraine demonstrate, these aims remain as attractive and compelling as ever. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
