Yannis Stournaras: Responses to the euro area crisis and challenges 
ahead 
Welcoming  address  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  EMS 
Managing  Director  Klaus  Regling  speech  “Overcoming  the  Euro  Crisis”,  Athens,  10  July 
2014. 
 The  euro  area  crisis  stems  from  the  fact  that  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  is  a 
complete monetary union but an incomplete economic and financial union. Indeed, the roots 
of the crisis are complex, resulting from an interaction between inadequate architecture and 
inadequate implementation of the structures that had been put in place. 
Five years after the start of the crisis, the outlook appears brighter. The euro area has moved 
out of recession, intra-euro area macroeconomic imbalances have been significantly reduced 
and the changes to the institutional framework underpinning EMU have been considerable 
leading to a stronger architecture. 
Response to the crisis (at national and EU level) 
In  order  to  address  the  underlying  economic  and  institutional  challenges  stemming  from 
crisis,  euro  area  countries  had  to  respond  with  a  comprehensive  strategy.  This  strategy 
included  both  measures  at  the  national  level  as  well  as  at  the  level  of  European  Union 
institutions. 
First,  Europe  responded  with  the  creation  of  the  necessary  financial  backstops.  The 
establishment of the EFSF and, later, the ESM allowed euro area members to grant loans at 
favourable  interest  rates  and  under  strict  conditionality  to  countries  that  had  lost  market 
access. 
Second, the Governing Council of the ECB was innovative in its conduct of monetary policy, 
putting in place both standard and non-standard policy measures. These measures helped 
increase  confidence  and  were  directed  at  restoring  the  smooth  operation  of  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism.  The  downward  adjustment  of  interest  rates,  the  provision  of 
sufficient liquidity and the Securities Market Programme all played their role. 
As  a  further  step,  the  ECB  announced  in  September  2012  the  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions  (OMT)  programme,  which  contributed  significantly  to  the  improvement  in 
financial market conditions in the euro area, the decline in sovereign spreads and the gradual 
reversal  of  financial  fragmentation.  The  latest  non-standard  measure,  the  targeted  longer-
term refinancing operations, is designed to support lending to the real economy. 
Third,  there  has  been  a  significant  correction  of  external  and  domestic  imbalances  in 
individual  euro  area  countries,  with  significant  progress  having  been  achieved  to  regain 
previous losses in competitiveness and cut back fiscal deficits. 
At  the  same  time,  structural  reforms  have  gathered  pace  and  programme  countries  in 
particular have undertaken substantial reforms in order to make the economies more flexible 
and market-oriented. 
Fourth,  significant  steps  have  been  taken  to  improve  economic  policy  coordination.  These 
measures included the strengthening of the Stability and Growth Pact, the establishment of 
the European Semester, stronger emphasis on macroeconomic imbalances and the Fiscal 
compact. 
Last but not least, crucial steps have been agreed to move towards the creation of a Banking 
Union.  The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  start  operating  in  November  2014  and 
agreement  on  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  has  been  reached.  These  measures  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
work  to  reinforce  the  European  banking  system,  reduce  the  negative  feedback  loops 
between  banks  and  sovereigns  and  overcome  fragmentation  in  EU  financial  markets, 
promoting growth. 
Results and challenges ahead 
The European strategy to deal with the crisis is delivering results, as interest rate differences 
between  core  and  periphery  countries  have  been  reduced,  programme  countries  have 
regained market access and the banking sector has been strengthened. 
However, many challenges remain. A key characteristic of the euro area economic recovery 
is the continuing decline in loans to the private sector. The recovery is so far “creditless” at 
both the euro area as a whole and, in many cases, in individual countries. Because the euro 
area  economy  is  bank-based,  bank  lending  is  especially  significant  for  companies  and,  in 
particular, for SMEs, which produce the bulk of goods and services and account for a large 
share of employment. Consequently, the on-going credit contraction raises the question: Can 
the recovery be sustained in the presence of negative loan growth? Personally, I doubt it. 
Looking ahead, there is a need to deal with limited potential growth in the euro area. To this 
end,  euro  area  members  are  increasingly  recognizing  the  need  for  joint  efforts  and 
coordinating  national  structural  policies  for  growth  and  jobs,  as  reflected  in  the  recent 
conclusions of the European Council. 
Today’s speaker 
Klaus Regling, as the first Managing Director of the European Stability Mechanism and Chief 
Executive Officer of the European Financial Stability Fund, has been at the centre of the euro 
area crisis. 
His career has spanned 35 years in senior positions mainly in the public sector. He worked at 
the  IMF  in  Washington  and  Jakarta;  he  spent  around  10  years  at  the  German  Ministry  of 
Finance,  working  on  preparations  for  monetary  union;  he  then  moved  to  the  European 
Commission where he was Director General for Economic and Financial Affairs from 2001 to 
2008. 
He is thus perfectly suited to address the issue of how we overcome the euro area crisis. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
