  Vítor Constâncio: Growth challenges for Asia and Europe 
Speech by  Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Asia 
Europe Economic Forum, Berlin, 15 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  year’s  Asia  Europe 
Economic Forum, in particular as relations between the two continents are getting stronger 
and more relevant. This is particularly important at the current juncture, as we are regaining 
growth after the global financial crisis. In my remarks, I would first like to explore the growing 
interrelations between Europe and Asia before then discussing growth challenges in the euro 
area.  I  would  like  to  end  with  some  reflections  regarding  global  challenges  which  are  of 
relevance for both Europe and Asia. 
Intensifying Asian-European relations 
Asian-European relations have become closer over recent decades. This is true both in 
an  economic  sense,  and  when  viewing  relations  between  the  two  continents  from  a  wider 
perspective. And despite the recent slowdown in globalisation since the financial crisis, links 
between Europe and Asia are likely to become even stronger, as additional Asian countries 
broaden their integration in the global economy. 
As  to  economic  relations,  we  have  seen  a  surge  in  two-way  trade  volumes  and 
investment flows, in particular because of China. In 2013, total EU trade with Asia reached 
EUR 1.25 trillion, almost double the value recorded a decade ago and representing over one-
third of total EU trade. At the same time, the EU accounted for over 28% of Asian trade last 
year, far ahead of any other trading partner, including the United States. Most of EU imports 
coming  from  Asia  arise  from  China  (16.6%  of  total  EU  imports),  but  Japan  (3.4%),  India 
(2.2%) and South Korea (2.1%) are also among its top ten import source countries. The EU 
is also a major investor in Asia. In 2011, 22% of EU outward investment went to Asia, while 
20%  originated  in  the  region.  Financial  links  are  also  multiplying  and  strengthening. 
According  to  the  BIS,  banking  exposures  of  a  sample  of  ten  major  reporting  euro  area 
countries vis-à-vis Asia rose from USD 144 billion in early 2005 to USD 340 billion at the end 
of last year, although this only represents about 3% of total exposures. 
These  economic  developments  have  driven,  and  have  themselves  been  boosted  by,  a 
growing number of agreements with a gradually increasing scope. The first comprehensive 
EU  Free  Trade  Agreement  (FTA)  with  an  Asian  partner  (South  Korea)  has  been  in  force 
since  2011,  rendering  70%  of  bilateral  trade  duty-free.  At  the  end  of  2012,  the  EU  and 
Singapore concluded a comprehensive FTA, the first EU agreement with an ASEAN country 
covering trade and services. Talks on investment are on-going. FTA negotiations with Japan 
began  in  April  2013,  while  talks  on  a  comprehensive  investment  agreement  with  China 
started in January this year. 
The  stronger  links  between  Asia  and  Europe  which  I  just  mentioned  have  deepened  the 
interdependency  of  the  two  areas.  The  IMF  estimates  that  a  –1%  growth  shock  in 
emerging  markets  would  have  a  negative  impact  on  euro  area  output  of  –0.3%.1  Internal 
estimates suggest that a shock of that size in China alone would bring down GDP in the euro 
                                                
1   World Economic Outlook, April 2013, Chapter 2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
area by 0.1–0.2%.2 However, these impacts could be larger if the shock was accompanied 
by confidence effects, a rise in global risk aversion and capital flow reversals 
Since the financial crisis, growth in emerging markets has come down considerably, 
currently standing at about 4% as compared with over 6% in the period 2000–07. China has 
experienced one of the largest drops in its growth rate, from over 10% before 2008 to 7.7% 
last  year.  External  factors  such  as  lower  demand  from  advanced  economies  and  tighter 
global  financial  conditions  can  probably  explain  a  good  part  of  this  growth  deceleration. 
However,  the  question  remains  whether  we  might  not  be  witnessing  a  more  structural 
change in Asia’s growth potential. I would like to focus briefly on some examples concerning 
emerging Asia’s two largest economies, China and India. 
In China, demographic developments and declining returns on very high investment in 
a  number  of  heavy  industries  are  likely  to  be  behind  some  of  the  recent  growth 
deceleration. In addition, high credit growth and increased leverage since 2008 has led to 
very high corporate debt, increasing risks in the financial system. It is clear that China’s new 
government is implementing a far-reaching programme of structural reforms, including in the 
financial  sector.  For  instance,  China  has  already  made  significant  progress  in  liberalising 
interest rates. Formally, only bank deposit rates are still controlled directly by authorities. But 
de  facto  liberalisation  has  progressed  even  further  as  non-bank  institutions  have  recently 
offered  consumers  alternatives,  for  instance  in  the  form  of  deposits  via  internet-based 
accounts.  Nonetheless,  the  challenge  to  allocate  capital  efficiently  and  to  improve  the 
performance of state-owned enterprises in a true competitive environment remains. Efforts 
by  the  authorities  to  give  a  greater  role  to  market  forces  and  competition,  including  from 
foreign firms, will ensure investment flows to productivity-enhancing projects. 
In  India,  concerns  persist  about  infrastructure  bottlenecks  linked  to  low  public 
investment,  which  could  hold  back  the  country’s  growth  potential.  High  and  volatile 
inflation  and  administrative  hurdles  further  increase  uncertainty  and  act  as  a  deterrent  to 
investment. Sizeable government deficits also help crowd out private investment. This adds 
to  the  challenges  that  India  faces  to  be  able  to  increase  its  potential  growth  sufficiently  to 
absorb  the  new  workers  that  are  entering  the  workforce  and  thus  reap  the  benefits  of  its 
favourable demographic developments. 
Hence, it would seem that the steadfast implementation of a programme of structural reforms 
is necessary to arrest the decline in potential growth. 
Similar challenges regarding potential growth also apply to the euro area. Let me now turn to 
these. Developments in the euro area also have clear implications and spillover effects on 
Asia. 
The euro area – overcoming growth challenges 
The euro area recovery is proceeding, though at a moderate pace, with GDP increasing 
for three consecutive quarters. GDP is projected to grow at 1.2% in 2014, according to our 
own projections and those of the European Commission and the IMF. There is an on-going 
economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  which  is  broad-based  as  it  is  now  happening  in  all 
member countries. These signs are encouraging, even though growth remains below rates 
observed  before  the  global  recession  and  unemployment  rates,  in  particular  for  young 
people, remain unduly high. 
What  I  would  like  to  do  now  is  to  elaborate  on  what  can  be  done  to  strengthen  the 
recovery in the euro area. I  would  like  to focus  on  three factors: the  rehabilitation  of  the 
                                                
2   These estimates are based on the NiGEM and a global VAR. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  euro  area’s  banking  system,  the  achievement  of  efficient  credit  allocation  and  sustainable 
debt levels, and the implementation of structural reforms to spur productivity growth. 
Starting with the rehabilitation of the euro area’s banking system, public capital injections 
and state guarantees were necessary during the crisis, and the ECB had to provide liquidity 
to banks in its capacity as lender of last resort. A number of banks were undercapitalised and 
had  fragile  funding  structures.  How  did  these  problems  come  about?  According  to  the 
standard growth theory, capital should flow towards countries and sectors with low capital-to-
output ratios and hence higher marginal returns on capital, which tend to be located in lower 
income  countries.  While  such  flows  towards  these  countries  were  observed  before  the 
financial crisis, they were allocated to sectors where the marginal product of capital was low 
partly due to very loose credit conditions and an incomplete single market in capital as retail 
banking  remained  largely  fragmented  and  cross-border  equity  markets  were  hardly 
developed at all.3 
An improvement of this situation is important as financial development is crucial for 
long-term economic growth, as we can see from the positive relationship between financial 
development  and  economic  growth  over  the  past  20  years.  This  is  because  financial 
deepening alleviates financing constraints at the firm level. However, there is evidence of a 
threshold at which the positive effect of more credit on growth starts petering out. We 
have indeed observed in the past a number of boom-bust cycles induced by financial market 
excesses which I would classify into three types: asset price booms, credit booms and real 
estate booms. The global financial crisis was preceded by all three which resulted in strong 
deleveraging  needs  of  the  private  sector.  As  a  result,  we  are  now  in  a  situation  of  a 
creditless  recovery  in  the  euro  area,  with  low  levels  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  and 
nevertheless positive, though low, GDP growth 
Currently,  some progress towards financial stabilisation is being achieved.  Banks  are 
reducing  their  liquidity  buffers,  repaying  our  LTROs  and  regaining  the  confidence  of  the 
markets.  Quantity-based  indicators  confirm  a  stabilisation  in  bond  markets  and  improved 
integration in equity markets. 
The  second  measure  which  could  help  to  overcome  the  sluggishness  of  the  euro  area 
recovery  is  to ensure efficient credit allocation.  Before  the  crisis,  capital  flows  were  not 
allocated  efficiently  because  catching-up  economies  lacked  appropriate  structural  and 
institutional frameworks. The risks related to private debt levels were underestimated. Recent 
analysis  by  the  Eurosystem’s  Competitiveness  Network  (CompNet)  provides  evidence  that 
the  distribution  between  the  most  and  the  least  productive  firms  in  individual  euro  area 
countries is very large and skewed: there are a few highly productive firms and many which 
have low productivity.4 As a result, resources should be reallocated both across sectors and 
within sectors towards the most productive firms. 
With  regard  to  both  of  the  elements  I  just  mentioned,  the  rehabilitation  of  the  euro  area’s 
banking  system  and  efficient  credit  allocation,  a  lot  of progress has been made through 
the creation of the banking union, with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM).  The  ECB’s  comprehensive  assessment  is  being 
conducted  before  the  SSM  takes  up  its  supervisory  tasks,  with  the  aim  of  completing  the 
repair  of  balance  sheets  of  banks  subject  to  the  SSM  and  of  improving  their  capital  and 
solvency  positions.  It  is  an  important  step  in  bringing  about  greater  transparency  of  the 
banks’  balance  sheets  and  consistency  of  supervisory  practices  in  Europe.  While  the  first 
pillar, the asset quality review (AQR) should enhance transparency of bank exposures, the 
second  pillar,  the  stress  test  which  is  being  performed  in  close  cooperation  with  the 
                                                
3   See Financial Integration in Europe, European Central Bank, April 2008. 
4   See  Di  Mauro,  F.  (2014),  “Firm-level  data:  Who  said  that  they  are  too  difficult  to  use  for  policy?”,  VoxEU 
11 March 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  European Banking Authority (EBA) has the aim of examining the resilience of banks’ balance 
sheets to stress scenarios. 
The main benefits I expect from the SSM are an improvement in the quality of supervision, a 
more  homogeneous  application  of  rules  and  standards,  the  improvement  of  incentives  for 
deeper  banking  integration  and  a  strengthening  of  the  application  of  macro-prudential 
policies. 
These achievements towards a banking union are particularly important in the euro area as 
about 75% of the real economy’s financing needs are still met by the banking sector. 
While this progress on the banking union is encouraging, further challenges lie ahead, 
or, as André Sapir put it recently, “The foundations of a banking union have been laid, but 
changes in the financial landscape are yet to come”.5 
The third factor that would help to sustain the recovery is the implementation of structural 
reforms  to  spur  productivity  growth.  Such  reforms  comprise,  for  example,  raising  the 
quality  of  human  capital,  fostering  research  and  development,  reducing  administrative 
burdens so as to create a business environment that favours entrepreneurship, deepening 
the single market and strengthening competitive forces in the non-tradables sector. Why do I, 
and also my colleagues at the ECB, stress the importance of this factor so much? If you look 
back  at  the  period  before  the  crisis,  the  aforementioned  flow  of  capital  to  catching-up 
economies did not lead to total factor productivity increases in these countries. This would 
have been an important condition for sustainable convergence between euro area countries. 
One of the reasons was an incomplete single market in goods and services. As mentioned 
earlier, capital flows in catching-up economies were allocated to sectors where the marginal 
product of capital was low and falling, also because this was counterbalanced by rising profit 
margins.6 Indeed, a lack of competition led to excessive rents and distorted price signals. As 
a result, capital was channelled away from more productive sectors, thereby leading to lower 
aggregate productivity. This is also indicated by the previously mentioned firm-level analysis 
conducted by the Eurosystem’s CompNet, which suggests that there is strong heterogeneity 
of firm labour productivity within and across countries.7 This period was also characterised by 
an  overestimation  of  the  sustainability  of  consumption  and  investment  growth,  of  future 
productive capacity and of potential growth in the long term. 
More  recently,  in  the  stressed  euro  area  countries,  a  lot  of  progress  has  already  been 
achieved,  with  relative  unit  labour  costs  below  what  they  were  in  2008  and  successful 
external  adjustments.  It  is  now  necessary  to  be  assured  that  this  progress  is  not  purely 
cyclically  driven  but  structural  and  therefore  sustainable.  The  reform  efforts  are  producing 
some visible effects; for instance, the current account of stressed countries in the euro area, 
which used to be in a significant deficit position, has now moved into surplus. Further effort is 
also needed to implement reforms which boost productivity through an increase in the quality 
of human capital and a fostering of research and development. 
Overall, these reforms should help to increase growth in the euro area,. This should also be 
achieved  by  fostering  investment  in  the  long  term,  boosting  the  quantity  of  investment, 
mobilising resources in the private sector and increasing the quality of infrastructure projects. 
Re-establishing confidence is of the utmost importance for a sustained recovery in the 
euro area. We observed a strong drop in domestic private investment following the onset of 
the global financial crisis. This was the result not only of the credit constraints I mentioned 
                                                
5   See the article “European banking union: Foundations laid but bricks still to fall in place”, FT 8 May 2014. 
6   See European Commission, 2013, “Catching-up processes in the euro area”, in Quarterly Report on the Euro 
Area, Vol. 12, Issue 1, March 2013. 
7   See  CompNet  Task  Force,  2014,  “Micro-based  evidence  of  EU  competitiveness:  the  CompNet  database”, 
ECB Working Paper Series No 1634, February 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  earlier,  but  also  of  a  steep  drop  in  confidence  in  the  euro  area  due  to  the  uncertainty 
surrounding  the  financial  crisis.  On  the  positive  side,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  recent 
indicators suggest a slow return of confidence which – hopefully – will also help investment 
to slowly get back to levels observed before the crisis. 
Before I turn to global challenges, I would also like to say a few  words  about low annual 
inflation  in  the  euro  area,  which  has  stood  at  rates  of  between  0.5%  and  0.9%  since 
October last year. We expect euro area inflation to remain low for a prolonged period. That 
said, we still see no distinct signs of deflation in the euro area for the time being. The 
main  reasons  are  the  following:  first,  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  well 
anchored,  according  to  measures  extracted  from  both  financial  instruments  and  surveys. 
Second,  the  lower  inflation  rates  in  the  euro  area  can  in  large  part  be  explained  by 
global  factors,  in  particular  with  regard  to  energy  and  food  prices.8  Third,  there  is  no 
evidence  so  far  that  economic  agents  are  postponing  expenditure  plans,  which  is 
sometimes  seen  as  an  indication  of  deflation.  Domestic  demand  is  strengthening,  as 
suggested  by  the  rise  in  consumer  confidence, which  in  April  reached  a  level  last  seen  in 
2007.9 And fourth, much of the decline in core euro area inflation comes from the countries 
that were or are still under a demanding adjustment programme. This suggests that part of 
this decline reflects a relative price adjustment needed to restore competitiveness, and as I 
mentioned earlier, this is to be welcomed. 
This does not mean at all that we are complacent about risks arising from a too protracted 
period of low inflation. We have therefore reaffirmed our forward guidance and stressed that 
we  are  determined  to  act  swiftly  if  required  and  do  not  rule  out  further  monetary  policy 
easing. 
Global challenges 
After covering some of the challenges relevant for Asia and for Europe, let me now turn to 
global challenges. 
Recent  turbulence  in  financial  markets  in  some  emerging  economies  fuelled  the  debate 
about spillover effects of monetary policy as the question arose as to whether they could 
be  driven  by  the  tapering-off  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  in  the  United 
States. Spillover effects in general are unavoidable consequences of globalisation and have 
been documented in recent research, for example at the ECB.10 Part of the afore-mentioned 
recent  turbulence  in  financial  markets  is  related  to  self-fulfilling  effects  in  emerging 
economies, owing to herd behaviour and the fact that asset prices are picking up and debt 
levels  are  also  rising  as  a  result  of  the  higher  equity  values  resulting  from  higher  equity 
prices. 
This raises the question as to whether the Federal Reserve, the ECB and other central banks 
in  advanced  economies  are  insufficiently  sensitive  to  the  impact  of  their  unconventional 
policies  on  emerging  market  economies,  or  whether  the  complaints  of  emerging  markets 
about these spillover effects are unjustified. This topic has been widely discussed; it was, for 
example,  one  of  the  core  themes  discussed  at  the  2013  Jackson  Hole  central  bank 
                                                
8   According to ECB staff estimates, developments in energy and food prices and the impact of indirect taxes 
explain around three-quarters of the overall decline in HICP inflation. 
9   Some  of  the  global  factors  that  have  dampened  inflation  (such  as  lower  commodity  prices)  contribute  to 
improve real disposable incomes and support spending. 
10   See, for example, Lo Duca, M.,  G. Nicoletti and A. Vidal Martinez, 2014, “Global corporate bond issuance: 
what role for US quantitative easing?”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1649, March 2014. The authors find 
evidence that bond issuance in emerging markets since 2009 would have been halved without quantitative 
easing in the United States. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  conference. We also recently had a very enriching panel discussion on this at the Hutchins 
Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings.11 
In this context, I would like to stress three points. First, we should not neglect the positive 
spillover  effects  from  accommodative  conventional  and  unconventional  monetary 
policies  in  advanced  economies  since  the  start  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  For 
example,  in  the  US,  estimates  suggest  that  the  purchases  of  long-term  Treasury  bonds 
reduced yields by up to –120 bp. Moreover, UMPs in the US supported GDP growth, even 
though  there  is  more  uncertainty  regarding  the  magnitude  of  the  effects.12  These  policies 
have prevented even more pronounced and protracted financial market dysfunctioning that 
would almost certainly have been transmitted to the rest of the world. In addition, they have 
supported the recovery in advanced economies, thereby stimulating demand for imports from 
the rest of the world. 
This notwithstanding, unconventional monetary policies have also led to instances of higher 
volatility  in  other  economies.  For  example,  there  is  evidence  that  some  elements  of 
unconventional monetary policy in advanced economies have accentuated the pro-cyclicality 
of capital flows, in particular to emerging market economies. 
The  timing  of  an  exit  from  unconventional  monetary  policies  has  been  called  into 
question.  Here  it  has  to  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  world  –  including  emerging  market 
economies  –  would  have  been  in  a  much  worse  position  if the  central banks  of  advanced 
economies had exited from unconventional measures at an earlier stage. Time was needed 
to  stabilise  the  whole  financial  system.  In  addition,  there  is  still  a  negative  output  gap  in 
advanced  economies,  with,  in  the  euro  area,  high  unemployment,  while  in  emerging 
economies  the  output  gap  is  much  smaller  and  they  are  close  to  full  employment.  This 
suggests  that  a  cooperative  solution  to  reduce  the  spillover  effects  of  an  exit  from 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  would  consist  in  advanced  economies  making 
progress  to  sustain  aggregate  demand  and  growth,  and  emerging  markets  accepting  an 
appreciation of their currencies – which they often refuse to do. 
However, unconventional monetary policies have not been the primary driving force for this 
increase  in  pro-cyclicality,  and  adverse  developments  did  not  arise  uniformly  across 
economies. And this brings me to my second point: it seems rather that country-specific 
factors such as weak institutions, external and domestic financial imbalances, limited 
exchange rate flexibility and fiscal imbalances were also factors behind the volatility.13 
For example, the sell-off in emerging market economies in January 2014 was concentrated 
in  economies  which  were  more  vulnerable;  healthier  economies  in  East  Asia  were  largely 
unaffected.  This  evidence  suggests  that  the  adoption  of  sound  domestic  policies  allows 
emerging  economies  to  minimise  adverse  spillovers,  and  at  the  same  time  benefit  from  a 
stronger  recovery  in  advanced  economies.  Spillover  effects  could  therefore  be  reduced  by 
improving  macroprudential  policies,  controlling  the  total  leverage  of the financial  system  in 
both advanced and emerging economies. 
The  third  point  I  would  like  to  make  in  the  context  of  spillover  effects  is  that  advanced 
economies are carefully communicating their monetary policy strategies, thereby doing 
their  part 
from 
unconventional  monetary  policies.  Unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  have  to  be 
to  minimise  any  possible  negative  spillover  effects 
the  exit 
from 
                                                
11   After a keynote speech by Raghuram Rajan, Governor of India’s central bank, a panel discussion took place 
with Charles Evans, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago; Alexandre Tombini, Governor of the 
Central  Bank  of  Brazil;  Eswar  Prasad,  the  New  Century  Chair  in  International  Trade  and  Economic  and  a 
senior fellow of the Brookings Global Economy and Development programme, and myself. 
12   See IMF, 2013, “Unconventional Monetary Policies – Recent Experiences and Prospects. 
13   See  IMF,  2013,  “Word  Economic  Outlook”,  and  Fratzscher,  M.,  M.  Lo  Duca  and  R.  Straub,  2013,  “On  the 
international spillovers of US quantitative easing”, ECB Working Paper Series No 1557, June 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ended at some point, given the possible negative side effects such as excessive risk-taking 
and complacency regarding structural reforms. With clear and credible communication on the 
parameters  of  exit  by  advanced  economy  central  banks  we  help  to  clarify  our  reaction 
function  and  vulnerable  economies  get  the  opportunity  to  adopt  the  policies  needed  to 
ensure that abrupt market corrections will not materialise in the future. This clear and careful 
communication  is  also  reflected  in  our  forward  guidance,  which  we  reiterated  at  our  last 
press conference one week ago. 
Notwithstanding  these  arguments,  cooperation  to  reduce  negative  spillover  effects  of 
monetary  policy  or  the  exit  from  unconventional  measures  is  important.  There  are 
already  several  forums  where  central  bankers  meet,  such  as  the  BIS  meetings.  On  such 
occasions, central banks explain their policies and the situation of their own countries. Such 
collaboration helps to understand the possible reaction function as well as possible spillover 
effects on other countries. 
In  addition,  the  network  of  standing  swap  arrangements  concluded  in  October  2013 
among  the  major  central  banks  reflects  their  long-standing  cooperation  and  the  systemic 
importance of their economies and financial systems. It enables emergency liquidity to flow 
to  major  financial  hubs  and,  through  these  hubs,  to  other  markets,  thereby  contributing  to 
global financial stability. 
Another measure which would reduce negative spillover effects would be to enhance global 
safety  nets,  mostly  via  the  IMF.  A  number  of  instruments  which  go  in  this  direction  have 
already  been  created for  countries  with  strong  domestic  policy  frameworks,  including  such 
instruments  as  the  IMF’s  Flexible  Credit  Line  (FCL)  and  Precautionary  and  Liquidity  Line 
(PLL).  Improving  global  safety  nets  helps  to  reduce  the  need  for  countries  to  accumulate 
reserves. 
Concluding remarks 
Relationships  between  Asia  and  the  euro  area  have  strengthened  over  recent  decades. 
While  this  is  a  positive  development,  it  has  also  increased  interdependencies,  including 
negative spillover effects, both from Asia to Europe and from Europe to Asia. 
Both  regions  have  domestic  challenges  to  cope  with,  regarding  in  particular  structural 
reforms to adjust the composition of growth in some Asian countries, and the rehabilitation of 
the banking system, the achievement of efficient credit allocation and sustainable debt levels, 
and  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  to  spur  productivity  growth  in  the  euro  area. 
Progress has been made in some areas, for example with the banking union in Europe, but 
much remains to be done. 
At  the  global  level,  the  spillover  effects  of  monetary  policy,  including  the  exit  from 
unconventional measures, continue to be in focus. While part of the volatility in the financial 
markets  of  emerging  market  economies  has  other  explanations,  it  is  important  to  ensure 
proper communication of and cooperation between central banks, a policy that has always 
been pursued by the ECB. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
