  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Managing the economy at a crossroads 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Thailand (FCCT), Bangkok, 3 July 2014. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to be here once again, to address the oldest press club in Southeast Asia. I 
congratulate  you  for  the  outstanding  works  in  Thailand  over  these  years.  Journalism  is 
indeed a special profession, one whose status is sometimes hailed as “the fourth pillar of the 
state” alongside the legislature, the executive and the judiciary. Such privilege comes with a 
somber  weight  of  commitment  to  accurate  reporting  and  balanced  viewpoints.  These 
qualities are needed more than ever today, as there is much public demand to understand 
the  implications  of  the  recent  political  development.  I  will  share  with  you  today  my  early 
assessment from a policymaker’s standpoint, regarding the latest economic outlook and key 
challenges to public policy lying ahead. 
Current economic assessments 
First, let me give you a brief summary of where we are. The buildup of political tension 
late  last  year  came  at  an  unfortunate  time  for  the  economy.  The  economic  activity  was 
already  hampered  by  weak  domestic  demand  amid  high  household  debt  and  a  lackluster 
global economy. As the political uncertainties persisted, the repercussion on consumer and 
business  confidence  grew,  denting  private  consumption  and  investment.  The  lack  of  a 
functioning  government  early  this  year  also  curtailed  public  finance  capability,  subjecting 
infrastructure investment to further delay and putting 2015 fiscal budget at risk. Tourism, a 
shining sector in 2013, was increasingly weighed by security concerns. A tepid recovery in 
exports  offers  only  a  partial  offset  to  softening  growth,  and  could  not  prevent  the  overall 
economy from contracting in the first quarter. 
It  is  under  this  backdrop  that  the  end  to  political  stalemate  in  May  provided  some 
cause  for  short-term  optimism.  The  first  relief  comes  from  a  resumption  of 
government  spending.  The  presence  of  a  fully  functioning  government  ensures  that  the 
budget  for  2015  fiscal  year  could  be  prepared  on  time,  eliminating  the  risk  of  a  Thai-style 
“fiscal  cliff”.  An  acceleration  of  public  disbursement  in  the  short-term  is  also  providing  a 
welcomed boost to the economy. Plan for public investment in infrastructure is now back on 
track, and there have been renewed efforts to maximize the efficiency of these projects. 
A  resumption  of  effective  fiscal  policy,  in  turn,  lends  support  to  domestic  demand 
recovery. Repayment of overdue debt to farmers, approvals of backlog projects by the BOI, 
and fresh loans to the SMEs provided quick relief in and of themselves, but the combined 
multiplier  effects  could  also  be  meaningful.  By  shoring  up  income  and  improving  overall 
sentiments,  these  measures  constitute  an  important  effort  to  revive  private  spending.  Fast 
indicators  already  suggest  that  private  consumption  and  investment  are  stabilizing,  and 
private  confidence  improving.  We  expect  the  recovery  of  domestic  demand  to  gain  more 
traction going forward, especially in the second half of this year. 
In  light  of  these  recent  events,  our  latest  growth  projection  for  this  year  has  been 
revised  upward  to  1.5  percent.  While  this  figure  may  be  much  lower  than  long-term 
potential  growth  of  around  4  to  5  percent,  it  is  chiefly  dragged  down  by  the  first-quarter 
contraction – bygones if you like. From this quarter onwards, we anticipate a clear pickup in 
growth  and  a  V-shaped  recovery.  Many  independent  forecasters  are  currently  holding  a 
similar view, and most have revised up their growth projections after the political turning point 
in May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
This  brighter  economic  outlook  is  not  without  risks,  however.  Exports  of  goods  in 
particular  have  underperformed  thus  far  this  year,  despite  their  insulation  from 
domestic political turmoil. A number of factors are at play, some temporary, others more 
secular. Weaker economic growth in regional trading partners, including China and ASEAN, 
has  been  one  cyclical  hindrance.  Global  trade  also  appears  to  be  lagging  global  growth, 
limiting  scope  for  emerging  economies  like  Thailand  to  leverage  on  advanced  economies’ 
recovery. More deep-rooted structural issues at home may also be responsible, as segments 
of the manufacturing sector are not integrated into the modern global supply chain. For these 
reasons, exports may play a less active role in its contribution to growth this year. 
On  the  financial  stability  front,  we  remain  cautious  but  optimistic.  Domestically,  the 
prolonged  period  of  economic  slowdown  has  subjected  indebted  households  and  smaller 
businesses  to  financial  strains.  Loan  quality  for  weaker  borrowers  has  deteriorated 
somewhat  as  a  result.  The  good  news  is  that  these  risks  have  been  confined  to  specific 
sectors, and the banking system remains strong and has weathered the slowdown very well, 
owing to their prudent risk management policies. Externally, we also cannot rule out further 
episodes of volatile capital flows owing to shifts in monetary policy abroad. Our economy has 
proven  resilient  to  such  shocks  in  the  recent  past,  thanks  to  strong  macroeconomic 
fundamentals and robust policy framework. We will closely monitor the adjustment process to 
ensure that risks to financial stability continue to be contained. 
To summarize, the economy seems to be at an inflection point. The outlook for growth 
has  improved  following  the  political  event  in  May.  But  a  new  set  of  challenges  has  also 
emerged. Now that political uncertainties have waned, what should be the priorities for public 
policy?  What  are  key  areas  of  needed  “economic  reform”,  and  what  should  such  agenda 
entail?  This  brings  me  to  the  second  topic  of  my  talk,  that  of  challenges  to  public  policy 
management during the current period of transition. 
Challenges to public policy management 
The agenda for economic reform under discussion today is wide-ranging and may at times 
seem confusing to the public. To organize one’s thoughts, it might be helpful to revisit 
the  basic  role  of  government  in  a  modern  economy.  At  its  most  basic  level,  the 
government exists to provide services that otherwise cannot be carried out by private market 
–  things  like  infrastructure,  law  enforcement,  or  national  defense.  Public  policy  may  also 
pursue social welfare objectives in accordance with its citizen’s wills, for example to promote 
income equality or access to health care and education. Finally, but no less important, public 
policy  must  provide  a  stable  environment  for  the  nation  to  prosper,  and  avoid  being  the 
cause of malaise itself. 
Based  on  these  basic  tenets,  the  present  challenges  for  Thai  policymakers  are 
twofold. Public policy must first aid the private sector in overcoming structural bottlenecks 
and  lift  the  economy’s  potential  growth  by  addressing  areas  where  market  has  failed. 
Secondly, the policymakers must restore and maintain macroeconomic policy credence, and 
lay a stronger foundation for the economy to grow on a sustained basis. Let me take each of 
these in turn. 
Structural policy to boost potential growth 
1. 
The Thai economy is growing at a pace well below what a typical country with the same level 
of  income  should  be  able  to  attain.  Failure  to  sustain  a  higher  pace  of  growth  over  an 
extended period, even when demand pressure has eased, suggests that part of the problem 
could be from the supply side. 
It is no secret that infrastructure in Thailand needs an overhaul. Indeed, very few would 
dispute  the  merits  of  large-scale  public  investment.  The  challenge  is  to  strike  a  balance 
between timely implementation and rigorous cost-benefit analyses, as well as efforts to make 
the  most  efficient  use  of  public  resources.  Focusing  on  those  projects  with  the  greatest 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  potential  for  “crowding-in”  private  investment  should  also  be  encouraged.  Multiplier  effects 
would  provide  additional  lift  to  potential  growth  at  no  public  cost,  and  would  be  the  very 
evidence that public policy has served its function of aiding the private sector. 
Current  supply  constraints  are  not  limited  to  physical  capital,  but  extend  to  human 
capital as well. In 20 years, Thailand will be among the first ASEAN countries to enter an 
aging-population  phase,  with  share  of  senior  citizens  rising  from  15  to  27  percent  of  total 
population.  Early  symptoms  have  already  been  felt  in  some  industries,  whose  capacity  to 
produce  and  invest  is  stifled  by  the  lack  of  qualified  labour.  Tight  labour  market  is  also 
indicative of labour shortage at the lower end of the skill spectrum. Market forces have failed 
to  resolve  these  issues.  Education  policy,  tax  incentives,  minimum  wage,  and  migration 
policy all have bearings on the labour market dynamics. The long-term growth implications of 
these policies should be incorporated into the policymakers’ considerations. 
Implementing a comprehensive set of economic policies to lift potential growth, while 
pursuing  other  public  policy  objectives,  is  not  an  easy  task.  It  requires  a  close 
coordination among various policy authorities. It also takes immense skills to introduce the 
right sequencing of policies at the right time. These prerequisites must also be backstopped 
by strong policy credibility, the second area of priority. 
Maintaining macroeconomic policy credibility 
2. 
In its quest to provide public services, the policymakers must avoid being the source 
of  harm.  International  experience  is  filled  with  cautionary  tales  of  how  a  lack  of  policy 
discipline could lead the economy awry. Over-bloated and inefficient government increases 
risks  of  unsustainable  public  finance,  and  can  sow  the  seeds  for  political  conflicts.  Lax 
monetary  discipline  is  associated  with  hyperinflation  and  financial  instability.  Maintaining 
macroeconomic policy credibility and discipline must be an integral part of economic reform 
in Thailand. 
Policy  credence  is  not  an  independent  choice,  but  is  shaped  by  the  overall 
institutional setup. Institutions are the set of rules and norms that governs the incentives of 
economic  agents  and  constrains  their  behaviours.  Political  developments,  strength  of  the 
legal system, property rights enforcement, quality of workforce, degree of corruption are but 
some aspects of the institutional environment. They all interact with the policymakers’ ability 
to pursue their objectives credibly. 
Institutions evolve via a mixture of history, will power and luck. A combination of factors 
at  critical  junctures  can  determine  the  path  of  institutional  change.  Thailand  must  seek  to 
make the most of the current windows of opportunities, to build on reform momentum, and 
promote a virtuous circle of institutional development. The ultimate goal is to have a political 
setup  that  is  in  accordance  with  international  standards,  with  a  stronger  institutional 
framework to promote a credible and effective public policy. 
legal  mandate 
Monetary policy 
Let  me  now  devote  the  last  few  minutes  of  my  talk  to  discuss  how  the  current  monetary 
policy fits into the overall public policy directions. 
Monetary  policy’s 
is  to  preserve  price  and  financial  stability. 
Throughout the last couple of years, the Monetary Policy Committee has maintained 
an  accommodative  policy  stance  to  support  the  economy.  Weighing  risks  to  financial 
stability  against  downside  risks  to  growth,  the  Committee  carefully  adjusted  the  degree  of 
policy accommodation to ensure sufficient support to domestic demand. The last policy rate 
cut took place in March this year, as lower risks to domestic financial stability and subdued 
price pressure opened room for monetary easing in light of higher risks to growth. 
In  our  latest  meeting  in  June,  the  Committee  voted  unanimously  to  maintain  policy 
rate at 2 percent. The Committee was encouraged by reduced political uncertainties and a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  resumption of functioning government. We also deemed recent fiscal actions and prevailing 
monetary  policy  accommodation  as  lending  adequate  support  to  recovery.  The  Committee 
will continue to monitor the situation, and ensure that the ongoing recovery gains traction, in 
the context of price and financial stability consistent with our mandate. 
The Committee has been able to maintain policy credibility and adhere to our mandate 
thanks to our operational independence. The institutional setup must continue to protect 
this  independence,  so  that  monetary  policy  can  remain  a  cornerstone  of  Thailand’s 
macroeconomic stability. The MPC is aware that our operational independence would mean 
little  in  the  absence  of  public  trust.  We  are  determined  to  continue  exercising  prudence, 
impartiality, and balanced judgements in deliberating monetary policy. That is ultimately the 
very source of our credibility. 
To close my remarks this evening, I hope the FCCT will continue to promote the professional 
interests  of  foreign  correspondents  working  in  Thailand,  and  initiate  lively  and  insightful 
discussion as it has done for the past sixty years. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
