Benoît Cœuré: Rethinking economics after the crisis 
Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  during  the  panel  discussion  at  the  Third  Conference  of  the  ECB  Macro-
prudential Research Network, Frankfurt am Main, 24 June 2014. 
 I wish to thank Jean-Édouard Colliard and Sebastian Schmidt for their contributions to these remarks. I am solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In the short run central banks need quick answers to specific questions, but whether they can 
be obtained depends largely on research progress made long before. To use a metaphor, 
central banks are sometimes asked to fix the system, but must prepare their toolbox years in 
advance. In these short remarks I will discuss why, in my view, economics sometimes failed 
to  give  us  the  necessary  tools  to  address  policy  challenges  during  the  recent  crisis,  and 
underline  some  paradigmatic  changes,  or  rather  extensions  to  what  already  exists,  which 
would be welcome in order to build a stronger link between economic policy and economic 
thinking.  In  the  end,  I  believe  we  can  overcome  the  different  perspectives  by  working 
together. 
Economic thinking and central banks: some frictions 
Policy-makers  and  academics  live  in  very  different  worlds  and  face  different  constraints. 
While  ideas  born  in  academia  were  instrumental  in  establishing  the  key  tenets  of  modern 
monetary  policy,  they  sometimes  proved  less  useful  in  dealing  with  some  challenges  we 
faced  during  the  crisis.  To  (mis-)quote  John  Maynard  Keynes,  it  is  then  more  difficult  for 
central bankers to distil “their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back”. 
Let me start these remarks by mentioning a few frictions that we should try to overcome for 
economic research to have even more impact on policy: 
Different temporalities 
Robert  Solow  famously  observed  in  1967  that  economists  are  “determined  little  thinkers”. 
They  progress  step  by  step  by  studying  the  smaller  problems,  and  gradually  get  closer  to 
answering  the  bigger  questions.  This  temporality  is  well  adapted  to  academia  because 
searching for the truth is a very long-run objective. Policy-makers however do not have the 
luxury of a long time horizon, and would get much help from more big thinking in academia. 
Unfortunately, these different temporalities have an impact on economic thinking. The typical 
methodology of economic theory is first to consider a frictionless benchmark, corresponding 
for instance to a long-run steady state equilibrium, and then enrich it with frictions. While this 
is  understandable  from  a  methodological  point  of  view,  this  approach  can  easily  imply  a 
neglect of the short and medium-term dynamics, drastic adjustments and complexities that 
are important for central banks. 
Another  unfortunate  outcome  is  that  the  typical  economics  curriculum  tends  to  emphasise 
the frictionless benchmark more than the realistic variants. Shifting the academic focus to a 
world with frictions would have a welcome impact on teaching, allowing central banks to hire 
from a pool of young economists better equipped with methods and tools to address policy 
challenges. 
Different objectives 
The  world  of  policy-makers  is  not  one  where  it  is  enough  to  reject  a  null  hypothesis,  but 
where  an  actual  decision  needs  to  be  taken,  often  on  the  basis  of  partial  information. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Economics is used as an input to form disciplined and educated judgements. While it is our 
task to make the best possible use of economic knowledge, deeper collaboration could be 
achieved if this constraint were internalised by academics. 
Academic research develops according its own internal logic and research questions, which 
may not always overlap with social priorities. The choice of questions addressed sometimes 
depends on their intellectual appeal more than on policy relevance. The publication “game” 
can even generate short-term herding and fads. 
The validation of an economic model is typically a backward-looking exercise: is the model 
able to replicate past observations? In the world of policy-makers, one has to think seriously 
about what happens if the data-generating process changes. Forecasting such changes is 
also important, as policy actions often have an impact with a lag. Issues like robustness, non-
linearities and parameter instability are key concerns for central banks and have only been 
taken seriously in academic research relatively recently. 
The recent crisis is of course the perfect example of a situation in which more robustness 
would  have  been  necessary.  In  crisis  conditions  many  standard  results  no  longer  apply, 
established  asset  pricing  relationships  break  down,  and  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy becomes problematic. Let me mention a few elements that in my view have 
become particularly important, and relate them to economic thinking. 
Answering new policy questions – some examples 
Insufficient data 
Crises  are  times  when  new  questions  are  being  asked,  and  when  policy-makers  have  to 
“open the hood of the car” and understand mechanisms that they would normally not look 
into, because they are assumed to be well functioning. This typically requires data that are 
more granular than those needed in normal times. While steering macro policies in normal 
times typically requires little more than monitoring aggregate prices and quantities, acting in 
a crisis requires drawing the map of a complex network of interdependencies, and making it 
available  for  simulation.  Without  such  data  being  prepared  in  advance,  policy-makers  are 
bound  to  rely  on  anecdotal  evidence  provided  by  those  very  actors  which  will  potentially 
benefit from their measures. The development of studies bases on Target2 data of intraday 
payments, which I see as a positive by-product of the MaRs network, is typical of this. 
Financial instability and the macroeconomy 
We  have  to  address  urgent  questions  in  the  still  rather  new  field  of  financial  stability  and 
macro-prudential  supervision.  Central  banks  have  to  rely  on  the  development  of  new 
conceptual  frameworks,  models  and  tools  that  allow  us  to  assess  the  effectiveness  and 
transmission  channels  of  alternative  policy  instruments  (such  as  loan-to-value  ratios,  bank 
capital requirements, leverage caps, liquidity ratios etc.) as well as their interactions with the 
broader economy. 
This requires, for instance, integrating widespread financial instability into aggregate models, 
accounting  for  the  fundamental  role  of  bank  defaults,  the  design  of  bankruptcy  rules,  fire 
sales and elevated discontinuities that are typical of financial (in)stability. Macro stress-tests, 
for instance, require integrating complex second-round effects of bank deleveraging after a 
shock. 
In  doing  so,  we  have  to  be  aware  of  potential  contagion  risks  across  EU  countries  and 
feedback effects that can amplify financial instability. 
Policy-making in real time also has to rely on a diversity of forecasting tools and successful 
early warning indicators that allow us to assess the current level of systemic instability. The 
MaRs team has worked hard on the development and evaluation of such tools as well as the 
utilisation of data sources that can be used for these tasks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  approach  goes  beyond  understanding  macro-prudential  policies  better.  Another 
important  example  is  analysing  the  impact  of  unconventional  monetary  policies.  In  this 
regard,  the  experience  of  central  banks  around  the  world  with  various  non-standard 
measures offers a unique opportunity to improve our understanding of the effectiveness of 
alternative tools. 
Structural changes? 
We  are  also  facing  important  questions  about  ongoing  changes  in  the  structural  features 
underlying  our  economies. To  start  with  a  topical  example,  we  are  witnessing  a  persistent 
decline  in  equilibrium  real  interest  rates.  Our  understanding  of  this  development  is  still 
limited. Of course, there is no shortage of opinions, and some commentators, starting with 
Lawrence  Summers,  have  even  proclaimed  the  emergence  of  a  “new  normal”  referring  to 
Alvin Hansen’s 1939 concept of “secular stagnation” with interest rates staying permanently 
at lower levels and economic activity remaining subdued. There are many such examples. 
For instance, our imperfect understanding of the current slope of the Phillips curve and the 
trends in productivity is one of the reasons why the ECB has been reluctant to complement 
its forward guidance with numerical triggers. 
I do not share this pessimism but I think it is of great importance to understand to what extent 
this  development  is  driven  by  long-term  forces,  such  as  demographic  changes  or  lower 
potential growth, and to what extent it is driven by medium-term forces, such as changes in 
risk aversion and the perceptions of macroeconomic risks in the wake of the recent crisis. 
Frictions and rationality 
Institutional  details  and  frictions,  both  on  the  side  of  market  participants  and  regulatory 
institutions, have an impact which is difficult to detect in normal periods. Interbank markets, 
for instance, used to be seen by academics as a somewhat dull topic before the crisis, so 
that little was known about their functioning. Both in Europe and in the United States, they 
have  been  at  the  centre  of  recent  policy  debates,  generating  a  welcome  crop  of  new 
research, to which MaRs has been contributing. 
The  dominant  “rational  expectations”  modelling  paradigm  in  economic  research  postulates 
strong  assumptions  about  human  decision-making,  implying,  for  instance,  that  economic 
agents are always able to assign sensible probabilities to alternative outcomes. Clearly, this 
characterisation  of  human  decision-making  stands  in  stark  contrast  to  our  own  recent 
experience. We need to understand how panics and bubbles can emerge from psychological 
biases. The Nobel prize co-awarded to Robert Shiller last year will certainly encourage more 
research in this direction. While much progress has been made on studying notions such as 
Knightian  uncertainty,  sentiment,  confidence  or  sunspots,  more  work  is  probably  needed 
before they can be part of our standard modelling toolbox. A challenge is of course to come 
up with tested and robust behavioural theories. 
Another  important  departure  from  rationality  that  is  of  key  practical  concern  is  how  simple 
behavioural rules adopted by market participants in normal times can lead to entirely different 
outcomes  or  even  to  market  meltdowns  in  crisis  periods.  Agent-based  models  are  a 
promising way to look at these problems, but they need to be developed in close cooperation 
with practitioners and policy-makers to take the proper behavioural rules as inputs. 
On  both  issues,  what  policy-makers  need  above  all  is  more  work  integrating  these 
approaches into richer frameworks where the impact of policy tools can be analysed. 
A lot of progress has of course already been made on many of these topics, in no small part 
due to the MaRs efforts. The crisis acted as a wake-up call and spurred a lot of interesting 
research along the lines I have briefly sketched. But a lot of work is still ahead. Even before 
the crisis many papers had discussed many of the mechanisms that played a role, but they 
did not form a consistent body of knowledge that could be used outside academia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let  me  conclude  with  some  thoughts  about  the  new  paradigms  we  would  like  to  see 
emerging. 
Making economics more relevant for policy. Towards new paradigms? 
From a policy perspective I think it is clear that we need more realistic frictions in our toolbox. 
Many  of  the  frictions  I  have  mentioned  have  been  studied  already,  but  a  key  requirement 
from a policy perspective is that they should not be studied independently, as is often done, 
but  integrated  into  a  general  framework.  We  need  to  be  able  to  think  about  behavioural 
issues, financial frictions and macroeconomics inside a common set-up. Central banks also 
need economists trained to think along all of these different dimensions and able to tackle 
the substantial degree of complexity posed by these problems, which should be part of the 
curriculum. 
In line with policy-makers’ concerns for robustness, it is essential that several paradigms and 
approaches can be developed in parallel. The recent economic crisis was also in large part a 
crisis  in  economic  thinking,  paralysing  policy  institutions  when  they  needed  to  act.  With  a 
more pluralistic approach, it is more likely that new conceptual tools can be found when the 
standard ones are not helpful. Of course a balance must be found between plurality, which 
brings  robustness,  and  proliferation,  i.e.  too  many  approaches,  which  would  prevent 
comparability. 
The very nature of a crisis invariably means that it is understudied before it unravels. It is not 
surprising that the period of the “great moderation” did not generate a lot of studies on crises. 
One  way  to  anticipate  potential  problems  and  important  topics  would  be  at  least  to 
understand crises of the past, working with economic historians. At a minimum, let us hope 
that a lot of economists will continue working on the latest crisis after it is over, instead of 
going back to “business as usual”. 
Because of the frictions I mentioned at the beginning, it may be necessary for central banks 
to  stimulate  research  on  topics  and  approaches  relevant  to  them.  The  MaRs  network  has 
been very successful at promoting some of the new approaches and tools that we need, in 
particular  by  building  an  aggregate  framework  incorporating  financial  instability.  We  would 
now find it desirable that this approach takes root in academic circles, and can permeate the 
development of a new paradigm, influencing research and teaching. In other words, we invite 
other researchers, both in academia and in policy institutions outside the ESCB, to follow up 
on the progress already made to establish closer links between current policy challenges and 
economic thinking. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
