  Vítor Constâncio: Banking Union and European integration 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the OeNB 
Economics Conference, Vienna, 12 May 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I thank the Oesterreichische NationalBank for inviting me to Vienna to make this address on 
the Banking Union and European Integration at the occasion of one more of its prestigious 
Economic Conferences. As Vice-President of the ECB, I have been involved in the Banking 
Union project from the start and it is with great pleasure that I now see it beginning to come 
into  place.  By  the  start  of  next  year,  we  will  have  an  operational  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM)  and  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM).  It  is  undoubtedly  the  more 
important and far reaching reform in the European Union since the creation of the euro. 
As many other European institutional innovations, the project was born in connection with the 
crisis management effort of trying to sever the bank-sovereign nexus that was contributing to 
financial  fragmentation.  The  idea  of  launching  the  SSM  emerged  during  the  June  2012 
European Council meeting. It was a consequence of the decision that the ESM could directly 
recapitalise weak banks, thus taking some fiscal pressure off sovereigns. But if the European 
level  were  to  assume  liability  for  European  banks,  it  also  logically  had  to  assume  control: 
hence the need for a European supervisor. It was only later that the concept of a fully-fledged 
Banking  Union  emerged,  which  would  contain  a  SRM  and  a  possible  Deposit  Guarantee 
Scheme, which has meanwhile been postponed. 
Rationale and objectives of Monetary Union 
The absence of European supervision and resolution had however already been identified by 
many  analysts  as  an  initial  design  flaw  of  monetary  union.  As  the  crisis  developed,  this 
became clear. The high degree of interconnectedness, in the euro area in particular, implies 
that the impact of supervision affects not only the domestic banking sector but also, as an 
externality, other countries. This has been captured by the so-called “financial trilemma”. The 
concept  of  the  trilemma  illustrates  the  impossibility  of  achieving  simultaneously  three 
objectives  in  an  environment  with  linked  financial  markets.  These  objectives  are  financial 
stability and financial integration while preserving supervision at national level.1 
The  reasoning  behind  this  is  the  following:  with  increasing  financial  integration,  pursuing 
national  financial  policies  will  generally  not  lead  to  financial  stability,  because  national 
policies seek to benefit national welfare, while not taking into account externalities of national 
supervisory practices in other countries.2 This leads to an under-provision of financial stability 
as a public good.3 A correction of this flaw addresses the first objective of Banking Union. 
A second objective for Banking Union4 stems from the evidence that keeping supervision at 
national level in both creditor and debtor countries contributed to the large imbalances that 
                                                
1   Schoenmaker, D. (2011): “The Financial Trilemma”, forthcoming in Economics Letters. 
2   Holthausen,  C.  and  T.  Ronde  (2004):  “Cooperation  in  international  banking  supervision”,  ECB  Working 
Paper 245. 
3   On financial stability as a public good, see for instance Beck et al (2010): Bailing out the Banks: Reconciling 
Stability and Competition An analysis of state-supported schemes for financial institutions. 
4   Banking union and the future of banking, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the IIEA 
Conference on “The Future of Banking in Europe”, Dublin, 2 December 2013; Towards the Banking Union, 
speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the 2nd FIN-FSA Conference on EU Regulation 
and  Supervision  “Banking  and  Supervision  under  Transformation”  organised  by  the  Financial  Supervisory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  developed  before  the  crisis.  Without  unified  supervision,  it  was  impossible  to  contain  the 
build-up of such imbalances in the pre-crisis period. National supervisors had to respect the 
single market rules and lacked the macro-prudential tools to offset the effects of large capital 
inflows.  As  I  have  often  underlined,  private  debt  intermediated  by  the  banks,  more  than 
public  indebtedness,  was  at  the  heart  of  developments  in  peripheral  countries.5  By 
introducing supervision at the European level, the Banking Union now offers a possibility to 
better  pre-empt  such  developments  in  the  future  –  and  therefore  to  better  protect  the  real 
economy and financial stability in the whole area. 
A  third  objective  of  the  Banking  Union  is  the  contribution  it  can  provide  to  financial 
integration,  by  separating  banks’  robustness  from  sovereigns  and  consequently  reduce 
markets’ fragmentation. 
The fourth objective is closely connected with the third one. Imperfect financial integration in 
a  currency  union  directly  complicates  the  task  of  the  central  bank.  It  becomes  harder  to 
achieve  a  smooth  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy  and  to  ensure  similar  levels  of 
interest rates across countries. Thus, the tendency towards less financial integration induced 
by both the financial crisis and institutional shortcomings has undesirable effects also for the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
A final objective of Banking Union is to increase the efficiency of the banking system which is 
the dominant source of finance for the European economy. This will be achieved in different 
ways.  First,  the  SSM  will  be  a  strong  and  independent  supervisor,  enforcing  supervision 
consistently across the participating Member States. With supervision at a European level, 
the focus of supervisory activities will be aligned with the activities of cross-border banks and 
the area-wide financial sector, thus less subject to domestic considerations. 
With  a  micro-prudential  task  and  an  extensive  set  of  powers,  the  SSM  should  be  able  to 
monitor risks faced and stemming from individual banks in the system and address them in a 
timely fashion. This is supported by the macro-prudential task conferred to the ECB entailing 
the  monitoring  and  addressing  of  risks  from  a  system-wide  perspective.  The  fact  that  the 
ECB  has  been  given  power  over  the  direct  application  of  macro-prudential  instruments  as 
well as a coordinating role among all member states, is an important innovation of the new 
Regulation  that  will  improve  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  the  SSM  will 
have a European focus and support the development and effective application of the single 
rulebook, the harmonisation of supervisory practices and procedures, creating a level playing 
field  and  reducing  compliance  costs.  The  SSM,  coupled  with  the  other  elements  of  the 
Banking Union should be conducive to ensuring the most efficient allocation and transfer of 
intra-group capital and liquidity. Therefore, it should contribute to the creation of truly pan-
European banks and enhance cross-border banking integration which will reduce transaction 
and compliance costs and bring efficiency gains. 
On the other hand, the new framework may lead down the road to a period of consolidation 
in  a  not  much  concentrated  European  banking  sector.  In  fact,  there  is  scope  for  further 
consolidation  without  reinforcing  the  so-called  “too-big-to-fail”  problem  and  for  reaping  the 
benefits  of  efficiency-driven  consolidation.  The  present  weak  profitability  in  the  banking 
sector and the existence of over-capacity in certain areas of the European market suggest 
that some efficiency gains could be achieved. 
                                                                                                                                                   
Authority, Helsinki, 12 February 2013; Towards a European Banking Union, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-
President of the ECB, Lecture held at the start of the academic year of the Duisenberg School of Finance, 
Amsterdam, 7 September 2012 (ECB website). 
5   See “The European Crisis and the role of the financial system”, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of 
the  ECB,  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  conference  on  “The  crisis  in  the  euro  area”  Athens,  23  May  2013  (ECB 
website). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Besides these fundamental goals, Banking Union also involves two practical aspects of more 
immediate  concern  that  I  will  now  address:  (i)  the  repairing  of  banks’  balance  sheets  to 
unclog  the  impaired  credit  channel  and  consolidate  the  on-going  mild  economic  recovery; 
(ii) the  reduction  of  the  bank-sovereign  loop  in  order  to  further  mitigate  the  remaining 
financial fragmentation6. I will complete my remarks by addressing the role of the SRM as the 
necessary complement to the SSM  in the Banking Union and finally, by dwelling upon the 
broader implications of Banking Union for European Integration. I will only briefly touch upon 
the SSM as my colleague Danièle Nouy will elaborate on SSM issues during her speech later 
today. 
Bank recapitalisation and the economic recovery 
In the past few years, one could hear many voices urging European policy makers to repair 
the balance sheets of banks so that these could again lend to the real economy and jump 
start GDP growth. There will be no growth without finance, the narrative goes. In this vein, 
the fact that the U.S. has returned to robust economic growth faster than Europe has been, 
to a large degree, attributed to policy-makers acting quickly to repair the balance sheets of 
U.S. banks. 
This narrative, while intuitively compelling, is missing two crucial points. The first is that euro 
area  bank  balance-sheet  repair  has  started for some  time  already.  As  I  recalled  recently7, 
since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  top  20  European  banks  have  increased 
capital, net of share buy-backs, by higher amounts than the corresponding top 20 American 
banks: USD 289 billion by EU banks against USD 179 billion by U.S. banks. And according 
to the FDIC, the leverage ratios of the biggest European banks, calculated according to the 
same accounting standards, are very close to their American peers8. Furthermore, since mid-
last year in particular, European banks have implemented write-offs and increased provisions 
and capital, partly anticipating the Comprehensive balance-sheet Assessment that the ECB 
is conducting this year. Our estimates based on public information indicate that SSM banks 
(comprising 128 institutions) have, from July 2013 to April 2014, strengthened their balance-
sheet  by  EUR  104  billion.  Measures  taken  include:  EUR  34  billion  through  issuance  of 
quoted shares (implemented and publicly announced), EUR 15 billion through the issuance 
of contingent capital hybrids or EUR 19 billion relating to additional provisioning. As a result, 
confidence in the euro area banking sector has improved and since the first quarter of last 
year, banks’ stock prices have risen at almost double the rate of the market average growth. 
But  even  if  we  were  to  agree  that  completing  the  strengthening  of  European  banks  is  a 
necessary condition to consolidate the recovery, it is far from being a sufficient condition for 
jump  starting  growth  in  Europe.  I  caution  that  even  a  complete  rehabilitation  of  the  euro 
area’s banking system (which is well on its way thanks to the various policy steps related to 
the Banking Union) will not guarantee a quick return to high growth and low unemployment. 
In  fact,  there  are  a  number  of  challenges,  both  immediate  and  particularly  medium-term 
ones,  that  the  euro  area  economy  is  facing  and  which  are  potentially  more  difficult  to 
overcome than repairing the banking sector. Let me name a few: in spite of the confirmed on-
going  economic  recovery,  investment  is  still  20%  below  its  2007  level;  there  is  a  general 
weakness of demand and medium-term challenges to introduce structural reforms necessary 
                                                
6   Vítor  Constâncio  “Banking  Union: meaning  implications  for the  future of  banking”  speech  at  Banking  Union 
Conference organised by Master in Banking and Financial Regulation, Navarra University, Madrid, 25 of April 
2014. 
7   Vitor  Constâncio  “Growing  out  of  the  crisis:  is  fixing  finance  enough?”  speech  at  the  Levy  Institute  Hyman 
Minsky  Conference  on  The  state  of  the  US  and  the  World  economy,  Washington  DC,  10  April  2014  (see 
ECB site). 
8   “Basel  III  Capital:  A  Well-Intended  Illusion”,  remarks  by  FDIC  Vice-Chairman  Thomas  M.  Hoenig  to  the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers, 2013 Research Conference in Basel, Switzerland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  for  a  quantum  leap  in  total  factor  productivity  are  compounded  by  negative  demographic 
developments. In fact, in the near future, the European workforce will start declining by 0.6% 
a year until 2030. 
Of course, this is not to say that financial sector weaknesses are not important, or sufficiently 
recognised. The broad Comprehensive Assessment that we have started reflects precisely 
the  importance  of  balance-sheet  repair.  My  point  is  rather  that  while  the  on-going 
deleveraging in the banking sector certainly plays an important role in the inadequate current 
levels of credit supply to the real economy, factors related to the demand side may play an 
even more important role. The weak demand outlook combined with the slack in industrial 
capacity is the most important explanation for the drop in private investment since the crisis, 
and the most relevant limiting factor for future investment. In addition, the protracted period 
of  low  inflation  and  consequent  low  nominal  growth  will  increase  the  burden  of  the  debt 
overhang of households and governments, further complicating the recovery process. 
The separation of banks from sovereigns 
As I mentioned before, the goal of separating the fortune of banks from that of the sovereigns 
and  vice-versa  through  direct  European  recapitalisation  of  weak  banks  via  the  European 
Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  was  present  in  the  embryo  of  what  later  became  the  Banking 
Union  project.  Somewhat  ironically,  however,  this  widening  of  the  focus  caused  the  initial 
objective to become obscured. The question of European direct recapitalisation – for which a 
framework has still not been published– ceased to be the main focus of attention. In the view 
of many commentators, the SRM became the expected instrument to achieve the separation 
between  banks  and  sovereigns.  But  I  think  this  is  a  somewhat  misleading  view  as  I  will 
explain later. 
The SSM and the SRM, both components of the Banking Union thus contribute to reducing 
the negative feed-back loop between banks and sovereigns. One important objective of the 
SSM Regulation is to improve the quality of supervision and to ensure strong homogenous 
supervisory  standards  across  the  euro  area.  The  essential  contribution  that  European 
supervision can give to the separation of banks and sovereigns is the build-up of trust in the 
robustness of banks as stand-alone entities, so that enhanced confidence by their peers can 
help normalise interbank markets and overcome financial fragmentation. 
The establishment of the SRM also addresses the problem of breaking the bank-sovereign 
nexus  because  the  orderly  resolution  of  banks,  even  large  ones,  helps  to  avoid  costly 
rescues by sovereigns that may endanger their own finances. 
In practice, however, the SSM and SRM may not be sufficient to completely sever the ties 
between  sovereigns  and  their  domestic  banks.  The  effect  of  SSM  and  harmonised 
supervision  on  trust  among  banks  may  be  more  limited  than  expected,  while  the  SRM, 
important  for  organising  orderly  resolutions,  is  limited  in  the  amount  of  resources  it  can 
contribute to recapitalisations. 
The  Bank  Recovering  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  is  in  my  view  the  most  crucial 
regulatory change in Europe in relation to breaking the bank-sovereign nexus. It represents a 
true paradigm change, ending the culture of bail-out and ushering in a culture of bail-in. As of 
2016, in all resolution cases, the BRRD will require a bail-in of shareholders and creditors 
equal to at least 8% of total liabilities of a given bank, including own funds. Only after the 
8% threshold  of  bail-in  is  attained  can  money  from  the  resolution  fund  be  used  and  for  a 
maximum  amount  of  5%  of  total  liabilities  (including  own  funds)  of  the  concerned  bank. 
Public money for recapitalisation, either national or European, can thus only be considered at 
the very end of the process after the other two sources of remedial action have been used. 
Furthermore, the “government financial stabilisation tools” that the Directive introduces is an 
instrument of last resort after having assessed and exploited the other resolution tools to the 
maximum extent possible. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  amount  of  8%  is  very  substantial  compared  to  the  losses  banks  faced  in  the  recent 
crisis. To give you an idea, between 2008 and 2010 only one bank had losses exceeding the 
8% threshold, and the average for all other banks was slightly less than 3%. Thus, under the 
BRRD,  the  injection  of public  money  into  banks,  either from  national  governments  or from 
direct  European  recapitalisation,  will  happen  only  in  quite  rare  occasions.  Bail-in  of 
shareholders and creditors plus the use of the Resolution Fund should in most conceivable 
cases be enough to cover the losses incurred by a failing bank. Consequently, part of the 
debate  about  direct  European  recapitalisation  and  about  the  role  of  the  SRM  in  delinking 
banks and sovereigns, was post-factum somewhat misplaced. 
The  implications  of  this  Directive  are  therefore  far-reaching.  Participant  countries  in  the 
Banking  Union  are  shedding  considerable  sovereign  power.  In  fact,  large  countries  with 
strong public finances are effectively renouncing their ability to provide domestic banks with 
the implicit subsidy of public support that would reinforce their advantages in increasing their 
market share. The strength of these banks when competing in the European market will be 
reduced as the new situation will be progressively reflected in their ratings and funding costs. 
Similarly, countries with vulnerable public finances and smaller banks will no longer be able 
to  support  and  possibly  not  be  able  to  keep  their  national  champions.  In  accepting  the 
transfer of supervision and resolution of banks to the European level, euro area countries are 
committing  to  a  remarkable  sharing  of  sovereignty  which  could  be  a  positive  sign  of  their 
willingness to deepen European integration in general. 
It is worth mentioning that the BRRD rules about bail-in enter into force only in January 2016. 
They  will  therefore  not  apply  to  the  recapitalisations  in  the  context  of  the  Comprehensive 
Assessment that the ECB is conducting and to be implemented this year and the next. The 
bail-in  rules  that  will  be  then  in  place  stem  only  from  the  European  Commission’s 
communication on “State Aid rules to support measures in favour of banks in the context of 
the  financial  crisis”  of  July  2013,  which  establishes  that  any  public  support  to  banks 
considered as State Aid should be preceded by bail-in of bank shares, capital hybrids and 
subordinated debt. The text contemplates that exceptions “can be made where implementing 
such  measures  would  endanger  financial  stability  or  lead  to  disproportionate  results”.  For 
specific cases at the end of the Comprehensive Assessment, it may be adequate to invoke 
such principles. 
On a more general note, it is clear that to avoid moral hazard, any public interventions should 
penalise shareholders and managers appropriately, as was done in the exemplary case of 
the Nordic banking crisis. Here financial and economic collapse was avoided with, in the end, 
virtually  no  costs  for  taxpayers  when  the  restored  banks  were  sold.  Thus,  after  the 
misbehaviour of several institutions that triggered the recent crisis – which by the way is still 
being uncovered – I fully support the change of culture from easy public bailouts to a new 
culture of private bailing-in. The burden of proof should be put on those who want to invoke 
exemptions to the new approach. 
Yet, we need to bear in mind that it is not only direct public support for banks that has a cost 
for  taxpayers,  but  also  financial  instability  –  indeed,  the  costs  of  the  latter  may  be  higher. 
Compare  the  worldwide  costs  for  taxpayers  stemming  from  the  absence  of  public 
intervention  to  rescue  Lehman  Brothers,  with  the  zero  cost  for taxpayers  following  the  US 
TARP  700  billion  dollars  injection  into  US  banks  in  2008  which  have  by  now  been  totally 
repaid  by  the  banks.  In  other  words,  financial  instability  can  have  a  meaningful  cost  to 
taxpayers  even  if  it  is  not  visible  in  the  very  short  term  –  a  notion  that  all  policy  makers 
should keep in mind. 
The  new  European  legislation  does  allow,  as  a  last  resort,  for  interventions  that  can 
safeguard  financial  stability  in  a  Member  State  or  in  the  area  as  a  whole.  I  trust  that  this 
legislation will be applied by the competent authorities with rigour, wisdom and a sense of 
proportion in the aftermath of our Comprehensive Assessment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  SRM as a necessary complement to the SSM 
My  remarks  about  the SRM  –  as  a  mechanism  less  relevant  than  the  BRRD  rules  for  the 
severing of the bank-sovereign nexus – do not aim to belittle the crucial importance of the 
SRM for Banking Union. To begin with, the implementation of the BRRD bail-in rules will be 
done  by  the  SRM  at  the  European  level.  The  credibility  of  the  SSM  as  supervisor  is  also 
dependent  on  the  existence  of  a  credible  mechanism  to  proceed  swiftly,  orderly  and 
efficiently in the resolution of banks that have attained the point of non-viability. 
The  crisis  showed  that  the  cooperation  and  coordination  between  national  resolution 
authorities  is  often  incapable  of  taking  swift  and  efficient  decision  on  cross-border  bank 
failures. In past cases, national interests tended to prevail, even if resolution costs became 
larger.  In  the  SRM,  the  Single  Resolution  Board  will  take  the  resolution  decisions  for  all 
cross-border banks and all banks under direct ECB supervision. Resolution decisions can be 
taken under a common interest, in swift and unbiased fashion, notably in the case of cross-
border cases, while taking into account spill-overs and contagion risks. 
A robust SRM, as a complement to the SSM, will address all these shortcomings. The ECB 
has  always  been  of  the  view  that  a  robust  SRM  should  contain  key  essential  features  for 
effective resolution, namely: (a) a single system, (b) a single authority with efficient decision-
making procedures (c) a single fund and (d) a backstop facility for bridge financing. We have 
stated this in our opinion on the SRM proposal as well as in many speeches. I am therefore 
very pleased that the agreed SRM regulation broadly fulfils these criteria. 
A single system 
To begin with, the SRM follows an integrated approach, in which all banks of EU Member 
States that participate in the SSM fall under the SRM. Any Member State outside the euro 
area which opts to join the SSM will thus automatically also fall under the SRM. 
The  powers  of  the  SRM  will  embrace  all  resolution  tasks,  e.g.  from  assessing  the 
resolvability of banks and drawing up resolution plans, to deciding on resolution schemes for 
failing banks and whether to make use of the Fund in such cases. These tasks are shared 
between the Board at the European level, which is directly responsible for all banks under 
direct  ECB  supervision  and  all  cross-border  banks,  and  the  national  resolution  authorities, 
which are responsible for the other banks. 
However, the Board may at any time decide to directly exercise all the relevant powers under 
the Regulation with regard to any of the indirectly supervised banks. In addition, the Board 
also  becomes  directly  involved  whenever  a  resolution  of  an  indirectly  supervised  bank  will 
make use of the Fund. Finally, there is also an option for Member States to choose that the 
Board will be responsible for all banks in their jurisdiction. These features make the SRM a 
single system. 
The Single Resolution Board 
At the centre of the SRM there needs to be a single authority with operational independence 
and sufficient decision-making authority to take resolution action in the interest of the euro 
area  and  of  the  Union  as  a  whole.  This  is  achieved  with  the  setting  up  of  the  Single 
Resolution Board. 
The Board will meet in two different compositions: the plenary and the executive sessions. 
The executive session will consist of a Chair, four independent full-time members and two 
observers  from  the  Commission  and  the  ECB,  respectively.  The  plenary  session  will 
encompass all members of the SRB, which – on top of the ones just mentioned – will include 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  one  member  appointed  by  each  participating  Member  State,  representing  the  national 
resolution authorities.9 
The fact that the ECB will be an observer in the Board, with no voting rights, is supported by 
the  ECB.  This  accurately  reflects  the  need  to  have  the  supervisor  involved  in  resolution 
matters, while maintaining the necessary separation of institutional responsibilities between 
the supervisory and resolution function in the Banking Union. 
The decision-making within the Board is designed to enable taking resolution action in the 
interest of stability within the euro area and of the Union as a whole. In particular, decisions 
in the executive session should be made by consensus. If the executive session is not able 
to reach a joint agreement by consensus, the Chair and the permanent members will take a 
decision by a simple majority. By reaching a decision either by consensus or by a majority, 
efficient a European decision-making should be ensured.10 
Decision-making in resolution 
It  is  important  that  the  decision-making  process  in  the  SRM  allow  for  timely  and  efficient 
decision-making,  if  necessary,  within  a  very  short  time  such  as  a  weekend.  It  is  therefore 
welcomed that the decision-making process in the SRM is capable of this, in spite of the fact 
that  it  may  involve  both  the  Commission  and  the  European  Council.  Let  me  describe  this 
process as simply as I can. 
If all the conditions for resolution are met, the Board will adopt a resolution scheme for the 
institution or group in question, which is thereafter transmitted to the Commission. This may 
be fairly straight-forward if the scheme is based on agreed and adequate ex-ante resolution 
planning  for  the  institution  or  group  in  question,  and  preparations  for  resolution  had  been 
taken prior to the triggering point. 
The Commission can approve the resolution scheme from the Board in two ways: approving 
it upfront or raising no objections within 24 hours. After this, the resolution scheme is adopted 
and can be implemented by the national resolution authorities as instructed by the Board. It 
is an important feature of the final text that the European Council only becomes involved in 
the decision-making at the explicit request of the Commission.11 
                                                
9   The plenary session will take decisions by simple majority when it discusses issues of a general nature, such 
as the annual work programme, the budget, or the rules of procedure. Each member will have one vote, and in 
case of a tie the Chair will have the casting vote. The executive session will prepare all decisions concerning 
resolution procedure and adopt those decisions. When deliberating on the resolution of a bank or group, the 
executive  session  will  also  involve  the  members  of  the  directly  concerned  Member  States  in  the  decision-
making process. Each member, including the Chair, will have one vote. In neither session will the observers 
have a vote. 
10   There  are  exceptions  to  this  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  plenary  and  executive  sessions.  First, 
whenever  a  resolution  scheme  would  require  the  use  of  the  Fund  above  certain  thresholds,  which  levels 
depend  on  what  the  Fund’s  means  will  be  used  for,  a  member  of  the  plenary  can  within  a  strict  deadline 
request the plenary session to decide. In such a case, the decision will be taken by a simple majority of the 
plenary members, but the majority must also represent certain levels of contributions to the Fund. Second, any 
decision  which  would  involve  the  raising  of  ex  post  contributions  from  the  banks  or  voluntary  borrowing 
between financing arrangements, among other things, will also be taken by the plenary session. During the 
transitional period, such decisions require a majority of 2/3 of the plenary members, representing at least 50% 
of contributions to the Fund. In the steady state, after eight years, the same majority share of the plenary only 
need to represent at least 30% of contributions to the Fund to take such decisions. 
11   This would be the case when the Commission does not agree with the scheme adopted by the Board. In such 
case, within 12 hours from receiving the resolution scheme from the Board, the Commission may propose to 
the  Council  to  either:  (i)  object  to  the  resolution  scheme  on  grounds  that  there  is  no  public  interest  of 
resolution, or (ii) approve or object to a material modification of how much the Fund is used in the resolution 
scheme. In such a case, the Council should, still within these first 24 hours, either approve or object to the 
Commission’s proposal by a simple majority decision. In other words, they cannot amend it, only approve or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The Single Resolution Fund 
Turning to the Fund, the Board’s control of a common resolution fund is an essential element 
of the SRM. The Fund will be key to ensure adequate resolution financing without drawing on 
public funds and for taking swift actions, since it eliminates the need for protracted burden-
sharing discussions for cross-border banks. 
Although  the  SRM  Regulation  set  up  the  Fund,  the  order  by  which  bank  contributions  are 
raised  at  national  level  and  pooled  at  EU  level  are  detailed  in  accordance  with  an 
Intergovernmental  Agreement  on  the  transfer  and  progressive  mutualisation  of  those 
contributions into a single fund. According to the political agreement reached, the target level 
for the  Fund  will  be  1  %  of the  amount  of  covered  deposits  of  all  banks  authorised  in  the 
participating Member States. This target should be reached in eight years, with the gradual 
mutualisation being frontloaded with 40% of the total in the first year. 
During the transitional period of eight years, the contributions collected at national level will 
be allocated to separate national compartments corresponding to each participating Member 
State. These national compartments will be subject to progressive mutualised usage and will 
cease to exist at the end of the transition period. If there is a need to draw on the Fund in the 
transition period, the Intergovernmental Agreement lays out a funding pecking order, which 
should be used by the Board.12 
Surely, one cannot rule out that situations may arise where the means available in the Fund 
are  insufficient,  e.g.  because  it  they  are  currently  being  tied  up  in  an  on-going  resolution 
case,  and  where  ex  post  contributions  cannot  be  accessible  in  a  timely  manner.  For  the 
credibility of the Fund, and thereby the SRM and the Banking Union as a whole, it will be of 
paramount importance that effective and sufficient financing of the Fund is ensured. 
The ECB pleaded for the creation of a credit line to be made available as it is the case the 
American FDIC or that, in alternative, that the Fund could go to the financial markets to raise 
resources with the guarantee of Member States. In the end, the final text only mentions that 
there is an obligation of the Board, in cooperation with the participating Member States, to 
take the necessary steps to develop the “appropriate methods and arrangements” that will 
boost of the borrowing capacity of the Fund by the date the SRM will be applicable. 
Nevertheless, it is somewhat encouraging that in addition the Inter-governmental Agreement 
specifies that a common backstop will be developed during the transition period of the Fund. 
Such  a  backstop  will  undoubtedly  facilitate  borrowings  by  the  Fund.  Let  me  be  clear, 
however,  that  in  an  event  that  the  credit  line  to  the  backstop  would  temporarily  be  drawn 
upon, it will be subject to the principle of fiscal neutrality, i.e. the banking sector will ultimately 
be  liable  for  repayment  by  means  of  contributions  in  all  participating  Member  States, 
including ex post contributions. 
                                                                                                                                                   
reject  to  it.  If  the  Council  approves  the  proposal  of  the  Commission,  the  Board  must  modify  the  resolution 
scheme accordingly within 8 hours. 
12   In  the  first  instance,  national  compartments  of  the  directly  affected  Member  States  will  be  used,  up  to  a 
predefined limit set for each year in the transition period. This limit will decrease during the transition period. 
Starting at 100% in the first year, it will decrease to 60% and 40% for the second and third year, respectively. 
Thereafter the limit will decrease linearly for the subsequent years. As a second step, only if the first step was 
insufficient, available means in all compartments – including the ones just used – will contribute up to another 
predefined  limit,  also  set  for  each  year  in  the  transition  period.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  pace  of 
mutualisation is substantially frontloaded, starting at 40% in the first year. It will increase to 60% in the second 
year and thereafter increase linearly for the subsequent years until it reaches 100%. As a third step, to be 
used  if  the  previous  steps  were  insufficient,  any  remaining  resources  in  the  national  compartments  of  the 
directly affected Member States will be used. If these three steps are still insufficient, ex post contributions 
from the institutions authorised in the affected Member States will be used. However, if such contributions are 
not  immediately  accessible,  including  for  reasons  relating  to  financial  stability,  the  Board  may  exercise  its 
power to contract borrowings or other forms of support for the Fund, or to make temporary transfers between 
national compartments. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Banking Union and European Integration 
I  mentioned  before  that  the  Banking  Union  complementing  Monetary  Union  will  have  far-
reaching  implications  for  European  integration  in  general  as  it  implies  a  vast  sharing  of 
sovereignty.  European  construction  is  still  under  the  grips  of  the  Jean  Monnet  functional 
method  of  integration:  at  each  new  reform  step,  other  become  logical  and  pressing. 
Regarding  Banking  Union  itself,  the  other  element  that  should  complement  centralised 
supervision and bank resolution in a banking union concerns a centralized deposit insurance 
scheme. 
Such a scheme would have several benefits. It would be commensurate to the centralized 
supervisory  regime,  and  ensure  that  decisions  that  are  taken  on  a  centralized  level  affect 
depositors  in  all  countries  in  the  same  way,  thus  ensuring  a  level  playing-field.  Depositors 
would be treated in a uniform way across countries, independently of their location and the 
location of the bank to whom they have entrusted their savings.13 
What  was  achieved  in  December  2013,  when  the  co-legislators  agreed  on  the  Deposit 
Guarantee  Scheme  Directive  (DGSD)  was  only  a  little  part  of  what  in  the  end  will  be 
necessary. Undoubtedly, the DGS Directive will further strengthen and harmonise depositors’ 
protection,  thereby  enhancing  financial  stability  in  the  EU.  It  will  ensure  that  deposits  will 
continue to be guaranteed up to €100 000, per depositor and bank, in all  Member States. 
Furthermore,  it  will  strengthen  the  financing  of  the  DGS  in  all  Member  States,  notably  by 
requiring a significant level of ex-ante funding (0.8% of covered deposits) to be met in ten 
years. However, a full-fledged scheme to foster financial integration would imply the setting 
up  of  a  euro  area  wide  deposit  protection  scheme.  In  particular  in  times  of  widespread 
financial instability, deposit insurance payoffs depend not only on the legal framework they 
are based on, but also on the ability of the deposit insurance fund to cope with large-scale 
banking failures. Doubts on this ability, due to concerns on the fiscal health of the sovereign, 
could for instance easily reinforce the possibility of local bank runs. 
From a central bank perspective, the establishment of a common deposit insurance scheme 
is  of  less  urgency  than  the  other  components  of  a  Banking  Union.  Still,  it  is  an  important 
element  that  that  should  be  pursued  later,  as  it  will  be  important  to fend  off  bank  runs  on 
cross-border banks, thereby enhancing trust in the European banking sector. 
The  completion  of  Banking  Union  is  however  not  the  end  of  the  journey.  For  instance,  I 
mentioned  before  that  Banking  Union  will  tend  with  time  to  consolidate  the  banking  sector 
and open the possibility for an increased role of capital markets in diversifying the financing 
of the European economy. However to fully reap the benefits of capital markets integration 
we need legislative changes that complete the programme of financial services integration, 
particularly in relation to the capital markets. That would include changes to company law, 
bankruptcy  rules  and  procedures,  and  higher  harmonisation  in  the  taxation  of  financial 
products. I would urge the Commission to promote these issues. 
Other  necessary  institutional  developments  have  also  been  well  identified  in  the  President 
Van Rompuy’s Report “Towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union”.14 They include 
the reference to progress towards fiscal union, economic union and political union. 
First,  a  more  complete  Fiscal  Union  along  the  lines  described  in  that  Report  seems 
necessary for the euro area, which goes beyond mere disciplinary rules. Specifically, it calls 
for  the  euro  area  “….the  establishment  of  a  fiscal  capacity  to  facilitate  adjustment  to 
                                                
13   Dirk Schoenmaker and Daniel Gros “A European Deposit Insurance and Resolution Fund: An Update” DSF 
Policy Paper Series September 2012. 
14   See “Towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union” a Report by the President of the European Council 
in  close  collaboration  with  the  Presidents  of  the  European  Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  the  ECB, 
(http://www.european-council.europa.eu/the-president/eurozone-governance). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  economic shocks. This could take the form of an insurance-type mechanism between euro 
area countries to buffer large country-specific economic shocks.” 
Second,  under  the  umbrella  of  Economic  Union,  we  need  further  progress  towards  the 
completion  of  the  single  market  in  services,  and  a  more  co-ordinated  approach  to 
macroeconomic policy at the euro area level. 
Finally,  the  sovereignty-sharing  that  monetary  union  represents  implies  moving  forward 
towards political union. We need now to complete the integration of European nations. The 
political  union  pillar,  is  needed  to  ensure  that  the  other  pillars  have  sufficient  democratic 
legitimacy. I will not dwell long on this issue, as it is fundamentally a matter for the Member 
States and European citizens. It should suffice to say that the crisis has shown the limits of 
applying  a  national  mind-set  in  a  deeply  integrated monetary  union. In  this  sense,  political 
union  is  not  about moving forward,  but  about  catching  up  with  the  depth  of  economic  and 
financial integration that already exists. 
What  is  at  stake  refers basically  to  democratic accountability  and  legitimacy.  An  important 
element  of  legitimacy  has  been  provided  in  the  past,  in  the  European  Union  and  other 
democracies, by what Fritz Scharpf called output legitimacy (or government for the people)15, 
that  is,  by  the  effectiveness  of  the  system  in  ensuring  the  continuous  improvement  of  the 
citizens´  quality  of  life.  All  advanced  democratic  countries  and  consequently  the  European 
Union will face challenges in this front stemming from the prolonged period of slow economic 
growth that has now just started. This is the consequence of two types of processes. First, 
the adjustment, in the form of balance-sheet recession, that the crisis represented. Second, 
by  the  structural  problems  created  by  ageing  populations,  globalisation,  energy  and 
environmental risks and decreasing returns of technological progress recently underlined by 
Robert Gordon16. 
In this context, the attention that will have to be given to the other form of political legitimacy 
referred by Scharpf gains accrued importance. This calls for greater participation by citizens 
in European decisions. In some ways, it may stand-out as contradictory with the search for 
effectiveness  linked  with  the  first  form  of  legitimacy  requiring  stronger  central  deciding 
bodies.  To  understand  the  great  difficulty  in  addressing  this  issue,  we  could  establish  an 
analogy with the political trilemma of the world economy, as recently stated by Dani Rodrik17: 
“we  cannot  simultaneously  pursue  democracy,  national  determination  and  economic 
globalization”, but I will not enter into such complications. I will recall, however, that in this 
context,  we  should  never  forget  that  Europe  is  unique:  it  is  neither  a  nation  nor  a  state. 
Political life and legitimacy continues to take place mostly at the level of nation-states. This 
implies  that  to  foster  legitimacy  we  have  to  act  on  the  two  levels  the  European  and  the 
national by giving for instance, the European Parliament a stronger euro area dimension and 
encouraging greater engagement of national parliaments in euro area discussions. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
We must  recognize  and  confront  the fact  that  the  logical  steps towards  deeper  integration 
that I just mentioned seem to run against what seems to be the mood of many Europeans, 
on the eve of European Parliament elections. It is true that crises always open the door to 
                                                
15   See F.W. Scharpf (http://www.mpifg.de/people/fs/publikation-art_en.html). 
16   Robert  Gordon  (2012)  “Is  US  growth  over?  Faltering  innovation  confronts  the  six  headwinds”  CEPR  Policy 
Insight  n.  63.  Robert  Gordon  (2014)  “The  demise  of  US  economic  growth:  restatement  ,  rebuttal  and 
reflections” NBER wp 19895, Feb 2014. 
17   David  Rodrik  (2011)  “The  globalizationparadox:  why  global  markets,  States  and  Democracy  can’t  coexist” 
Oxford University Press. Antonio Fatás blog “The UK makes the Euro Area look good” May 8, 2014. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  discontent  and  this  crisis  is  not  over  yet.  Some  policy-makers  seem  too  complacent  in 
showing a sense of relief because the situation in Europe has stabilised and turned a corner, 
since economic growth is resuming, even if at incipient level. This sentiment is not shared by 
public opinion in many countries. It should rather be recognised that adjustment costs across 
nations and segments of the population could have been more balanced. In this context, it is 
useful  to  retain  that  the  legitimacy  of  Europe  has  been  always  much  more  based  on 
outcomes of growth and prosperity than on values or input legitimacy. 
In any case, economists have good arguments to demonstrate, for instance, that subject to 
the turmoil of an international financial crisis, nations outside the euro, like the UK, Denmark 
or Norway did worse than the average euro area and many of its members in terms of GDP 
growth per aging population, since the beginning of the crisis18. Other studies, which build a 
counterfactual world by comparing the euro area countries with synchronised non-euro area 
countries in past periods, indicate that in terms of GDP and productivity growth, all countries 
(except Greece), did better as part of the euro area than they would have done outside the 
currency uniom.19 
We know nevertheless that times of crisis are not favourable to rational arguments and Goya 
famously  illustrated  how  the  sleep  of  reason  engenders  monsters.  The  same  reasoning 
underlines the renowned Vienna Lecture of May 1935 by the German philosopher Edmund 
Husserl20 as he characterised the European crisis of that time as “a collapse of rationalism”. 
In those more ominous times his conclusion was: “The existential crisis of Europe has only 
two  outcomes:  either  Europe  will  disappear  in  becoming  ever  more  distant  from  its  own 
rational  signification,  that  is  its  vital  sense,  and  will  sink  in  the  hatred  of  the  spirit  and  in 
barbarity; or Europe will be reborn from the philosophical spirit as a result of a heroism of 
reason that will overcome naturalism. … Europe’s greatest danger is weariness. Let us as 
“good europeans” do battle with this danger of dangers with the sort of courage that does not 
shirk even the endless battle”. He was right then. And today, Europe seems a tired and aged 
continent.  Declining  demography,  under  the  heading  of  “no  children,  no  immigrants”  is 
historically a sign of a declining civilisation. In these grim years of crisis, our nations, ever 
more interdependent, have been bound mostly  in a community of fear. We now need that 
European leaders return it into a community of hope. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
18   Antonio Fatás blog “The UK makes the Euro Area look good” May 8, 2014. 
19   Nauro  Campos,  F  Coricelli,  L.  Moretti  “How  much  do  countries  benefit  from  membership  in  the  European 
Union?” VoxEu, 9 April 2014. 
20   Edmund  Husserl  “Philosophy  and  the  crisis  of  European  Man”  in  “Phenomenology  and  the  crisis  of 
in 
Torchbooks, 
available 
Harper 
1965, 
also 
Philosophy”, 
www.users.cloud9.net/~bradmcc/husserl_philcris.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
