  Fadilj Bajrami: Continued cooperation with central banks of the Western 
Balkans 
Address  by  Mr  Fadilj  Bajrami,  Vice  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, on the occasion of the first Programme Steering Committee Meeting of the ECB 
Regional  Cooperation  Programme  with  central  banks  in  the  Western  Balkans,  Tirana, 
17 April 2014. 
 Honorable Governor Fullani, 
Honorable Governor Hamza, 
Dear Mr. Sturm, 
Dear Mr. Rumbold, 
Representatives of central banks, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honor and pleasure to be here with you in Tirana on the occasion of the first meeting 
of  the  Steering  Committee  for  the  joint  cooperation  project  between  the  European  Central 
Bank and the national central banks of the Eurosystem, and the central banks of the Western 
Balkans. 
As my colleagues have already noted, most of the activities of the project will be devoted to 
identifying  the  needs  of  the  central  banks  of  Albania  and  Kosovo  in  the  process  of  their 
joining  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  by  strengthening  their  capacities  and 
compliance with the standards of the central banking in the EU. 
Last year, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia successfully implemented such a 
project  in  cooperation  with  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem.  The  project  implementation  has 
clearly  identified  the  changes  that  the  NBRM  should  focus  on  during  its  preparations  for 
accession to the European System of Central Banks. Namely, the final report on the Needs 
Analysis  Programme  for  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  contained 
138 recommendations  addressing  the  gaps  in  terms  of  the  EU  benchmarks  established  in 
11 areas of central banking. It is my pleasure to point out that some of them have already 
been implemented, and some of them have been incorporated in the Strategic Plan of the 
NBRM,  that  is  in  the  National  Bank’s  Plan  of  Activities  for  this  year.  However,  the  overall 
implementation of the recommendations will require additional technical assistance in terms 
of experience and knowledge of the ECB and the national central banks of the EU. 
Therefore,  the  inclusion  of  the  NBRM  in  this  regional  project,  which  aims  to  facilitate  the 
preparations for the implementation of the recommendations we received in the report on the 
Needs Analysis Programme for the NBRM, by establishing a Plan for their implementation, is 
very  important.  It  will  be  the  basis  for  the  preparation  and  the  implementation  of  a 
subsequent project, as well as the basis for further planning and promotion of the bilateral 
cooperation  with  the  central  banks  with  which  the  NBRM  already  has  a  traditional 
cooperation, but also for the establishing of a cooperation with other European central banks. 
The  implementation  of  these  and  similar  projects  by  the  ECB  and the EU  in  recent  years, 
unequivocally  confirms their  continued  determination,  commitment  and dedication  to  assist 
the central banks of the Western Balkan countries on their way to joining the ESCB, and later 
the Euro system. On the other hand, the realization of such projects enables strengthening of 
the  cooperation  between  the  central  banks  of the  region  and the  central  banks  of  the  EU, 
which is inevitable in the process of integrating the entire region in the EU. 
Let me finally thank the ECB and the EU for enabling the NBRM to participate in this project. 
I  wish  success for  all  the  institutions  involved  in  the  project  in  anticipation  of  even  greater 
cooperation and I thank our hosts for organizing this event. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
