Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Continuing growth amidst recurrent risks and 
uncertainty 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Joint Meeting of the Rotary Club of Manila and the 
Rotary Club of Makati-Forbes Park, Manila, 9 January 2014. 
 Rotary Club of Manila (RCM) President Rudy Bediones, Rotary Club of Forbes Park (RCFP) 
President  Ruben  Torres,  other  officers  and  members  of  RCM  and  RCFP,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Thank you for the invitation to be part of the Joint Meeting of the Rotary Club of Manila and 
the  Rotary  Club  of  Forbes  Park.  It’s  always  a  privilege  to  be  included  in  your  New  Year 
tradition  and  your  celebration  of  the  Rotary  Awareness  Month,  which  I  understand  is 
commemorated in all Rotary Clubs across the globe.  
Today  isn’t  really  the  first  Thursday  of  the  year,  which  is  when  you  normally  invite  me  to 
speak. But January 2 would have been too close to New Year’s day, and most of you would 
still have been in the holiday mood. Today, I think everyone is on rev mode and  ready to 
tackle the challenges of 2014.  
Quite a few things happened in 2013 that have elevated the potential challenges of 2014. Of 
these, the one most felt by the country is the trilogy of natural and man-made events – the 
earthquake in Bohol and Cebu, the armed conflict in Zamboanga and from Yolanda – which 
we experienced in the second half of 2013. 
While these three events literally changed the landscape of the country, I think these events 
also, in the process, showed the best in the Filipino – our resilience and how we are at our 
very best when we work together.  
In this spirit of working together, the BSP also did its part to help ease the impact of Yolanda 
by putting in place regulatory relief for banks in the affected areas, so they could extend the 
same to their customers. Among others, the temporary relief measures include the following: 
For all banks 
 
Allowing banks to provide financial assistance to their officers and employees who 
were affected by the calamity including those types of assistance that may not be 
within the scope of the existing BSP-approved Fringe Benefits Program.  
For thrift banks/rural banks/cooperative banks: 
 
Excluding existing loans of borrowers in affected areas from the computation of past 
due ratios provided these are restructured or given relief; and  
Reducing  the  5-percent  general  loan-loss  provision  to  1  percent  for  restructured 
loans of borrowers in the affected areas.  
For all rediscounting banks 
 
Granting of a 60-day grace period to settle the outstanding rediscounting obligations 
as  of  8  November  2013  with  the  BSP  of  all  rediscounting  banks  in  the  affected 
areas; and  
Allowing banks to restructure with the BSP, on a case-to-case basis, the outstanding 
rediscounted loans of borrowers affected by the calamity.  
For quite a few other reasons, besides the calamities, 2013 has been described as a year of 
challenges, due to:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Failing to reach a consensus on a fiscal legislation, the US government shut down 
for several days.  
Eurozone recovery remained weak and uneven across the member-countries.  
China had to deal with growing shadow banking and rapid credit growth.  
Market anticipation of the Fed’s policies added uncertainty in the financial markets 
and led to greater volatility of capital flows.  
Nonetheless, the Philippine economy was able to ride out turbulence in the global financial 
markets  due  to  significant  sources  of  strength.  Notwithstanding  the  slowdown  in  global 
economic  growth,  the  Philippine  economy  continued  to  have  vibrant  growth.  For  the  first 
three quarters, GDP increased by 7.4 percent, higher than the 6.7 percent in the same period 
in  2012.  Growth  was  boosted  by  the  strong  performance  of  services,  manufacturing  and 
construction.  On  the  expenditure  side  growth  came  mainly  from  consumer  and  public 
spending  buttressed  by  increased  investments  in  Fixed  Capital;  exports  contributed  in  the 
third quarter.  
This was supported by a benign inflation environment. The full-year 2013 average inflation 
rate  of  3.0  percent  was  at  the  low  end  of  the  Government’s  inflation  target  range  of  
3–5 percent  for  2013.  This  is  the  fifth  consecutive  year  that  the  country  has  been  able  to 
keep inflation within the Government’s target inflation range.  
Moreover,  the  Philippines  has  substantial  cushions  to  ride  out  potential  turbulence  in  the 
global financial markets: 
 
Our gross international reserves reached US$83.7 billion as of end-December 2013. 
can adequately cover 12.1 months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of 
– 
services and income 
equivalent to 8.4 times the country’s short-term external debt based on original 
maturity and 5.8 times based on residual maturity 
    We  enjoy  a  current  account  surplus  owing  to  structural  sources  –  BOP  position 
yielded a surplus of US$4.7 billion for January-November 2013. The current account 
surplus was mainly on account of increased net receipts of primary and secondary 
income and in other services accounts.  
Our  banking  system  is  stable  and  strong  with  capital  adequacy  ratios  well  above 
international standards. As of end-June 2013, the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of 
UK/Bs stood at 18 percent on solo and 19.3 percent on consolidated bases.  
External  debt  dynamics  are  favorable  –  external  debt-to-GDP  ratio  decreased  to 
21.9 percent in the third quarter (2013) from 25.6 percent in September 2012 and 
24.1  in  December  2012.  Moreover,  more  than  four-fifths  of  our  external  debt  has 
medium- to long-term maturities.1  
The Philippines’ strong economic performance has been validated internationally.  
1) 
Credit  Rating  Upgrades.  The  year  2013  saw  the  Philippines  achieve  investment 
grade credit rating – not just from one, but from all the three major credit rating agencies. 
These  rating  agencies  have  cited  the  disciplined  fiscal  management  with  the  declining 
reliance on foreign currency debt, strong external position, and low and stable inflation levels 
as  bases  for  the  score.  In  a  recent  report,  Moody’s  maintained  its  positive  outlook  on  the 
Philippine banking system. In fact, in that report, Moody’s stated that the Philippines’ banking 
sector is the only one in the Asia-Pacific region which they have given a “positive” outlook.  
                                                 
1   Average Maturity: Public Sector: 20.1 years Private Sector: 9.8. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The IMF. An IMF mission report in September 2013 cited that the country’s strong 
2) 
fundamentals  would  enable  it  to  deal  with  any  capital  outflows  when  the  U.S.  Federal 
Reserve cuts its stimulus program. 
3)  Doing Business 2014. In the latest World Bank and International Finance Corporation 
report (October 2013), the Philippines was ranked among the top 10 countries that made the 
biggest  improvement  in  business  regulation.  The  report  took  note  of  the  government’s 
regulatory  reforms  in  three  areas:  introduction  of  a  fully  operational  online  tax  filing  and 
payment system, simplified occupancy clearances for construction, and new regulations that 
guarantee borrowers’ right to access credit information.  
While  most  of  the  sources  of  risks  have  dissipated,  in  particular  with  clearer  forward 
guidance from the US Federal Reserve (Fed), resolution efforts in Eurozone gaining broad 
agreement, and accommodative policies in Japan bearing fruit, risks still remain.  
First, due to these lingering concerns, global economic growth remains subdued. As a whole, 
the world economy is projected to have higher growth in 2014 but as the IMF puts it, global 
growth is “in low gear.” Of course, just yesterday, the IMF said it would raise its economic 
growth forecast.  
 
According  to  the  IMF’s  World  Economic  Report  of  October  2013,  advanced 
economies are showing signs of gradual, but steady, growth.  
Although  emerging  market  economies,  particularly  those  in  Asia,  continue  to  do 
better than advanced economies, China is seen to have slowing growth. In addition, 
ASEAN-5  countries’  projected  growth  rates,  while  projected  to  be  higher  for  2014 
than in 2013, these rates are still lower than those registered in 2012.2  
 Second, market reaction to the Fed’s actions. The Fed has consistently pointed out that their 
decisions on these matters will be dependent on incoming data, particularly US employment 
data.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  announced  a  reduction  of  its  monthly  bond  purchases  to 
US$75  billion  from  US$  85  billion  as  the  start  of  its  exit  from  the  stimulus  measures, 
beginning  January  this  year.  Accompanying  the  reduction  is  the  Fed’s  commitment  to 
maintain accommodative policy. The withdrawal of the stimulus (including QE tapering) could 
impact on global markets in a number of ways: 
 
On one hand, policy normalization in the US could mean that the major driver of the 
global  economy  –  and  trade  partner  to  many  EMEs  –  is  indeed  seeing  growth 
renewal, which would in turn be positive for EMEs, including the Philippines. 
On  the  other  hand,  as  markets  expect  interest  normalization,  this  could  lead  to 
global portfolio rebalancing. Should this happen, a weakening of capital flows to or 
even a pull-out of capital from emerging markets could ensue.  
And,  the  financial  stability  implications  of  global  funds  movements  could  prove 
stressful for less resilient economies – those with weak external positions and those 
with less developed financial systems. For the Philippines, the Fed taper may lead 
to greater volatility in domestic financial markets. But given sound fundamentals, we 
expect the price movements to be broadly manageable.  
  Across the other part of the globe, efforts to improve Europe’s debt position as well as the 
discussion towards completing the EU banking union continue. The full banking union reform 
deal includes a single supervisory mechanism, a single resolution mechanism and common 
deposit insurance. The single supervisor has been approved by the EU Parliament, and the 
ECB will perform this role. The single resolution mechanism has received broad agreement 
                                                 
2   Emerging  Asia  includes  China,  India,  and  the  ASEAN-5  countries  (Indonesia,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines, 
Thailand, and Viet Nam). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
at  the  finance  and  EU  leaders  level,  but  this  is  still  for  ratification  in  the  EU  Parliament  in 
May.  Market  volatility  may  heighten  as  markets  carefully  watch  how  the  issues  will  be 
resolved.  
In the face of these risks, the BSP has a menu of options that could be deployed: 
 
We have standing facilities to ensure adequate domestic liquidity for banks should 
funding sources dry up. 
We would maintain a strategic presence in the FX market, while keeping the value 
of the exchange rate essentially market-determined.  
We could implement targeted macroprudential measures.  
In addition: 
1. 
2. 
Timely and clear communication with market players would quell anxieties. 
The  careful  and  regular  surveillance  of  risks  would  allow  for  prompt  and 
appropriate responses. 
In  the  event  of  liquidity  problems,  there  are  regional  financial  arrangements 
that the Philippines can use.  
3. 
  In light of all these, the outlook on Philippine growth and inflation remains favorable.  
 
The economy is expected to grow between 6.5 to 7.5 percent in 2014, despite the 
chain  of  untoward  incidents.  Recovery  and  rehabilitation  efforts  are  expected  to 
bolster  growth.  For  the  medium-term,  growth  would  be  supported  by  stronger 
performance  from  the  construction,  manufacturing,  business  process  outsourcing 
and  private  services.  The  country’s  attainment  of  investment  grade  status  may 
attract foreign direct investments that would in turn generate jobs.  
Inflation is expected to remain within the target range over the policy horizon.  
In 2014, inflation is seen to be slightly higher than the mid-point of the target range 
of  3–5  percent,  due  mainly  to  higher  food  prices  and  possible  increases  in  utility 
rates but comfortably within the target range.  
 Moving  forward,  the  BSP  will  remain  committed  to  staying  the  course  toward  sustained 
growth, while firmly adhering to its mandate of safeguarding price stability and ensuring the 
financial system remains resilient.  
 
On  monetary  policy,  we  will  ensure  that  liquidity  remains  adequate  to  support 
economic growth with manageable inflation.  
On financial sector policy, the BSP commits to maintain the stability of the financial 
system  by  continuing  to  craft  banking  regulations  that  are  responsive,  consistent 
with best practice and in line with the international market reform agenda.  
On the external front, the BSP remains supportive of policies that will help cushion 
the  economy  from  external  shocks.  We  will  continue  to  maintain  a  market-
determined exchange rate and a comfortable level of reserves. The BSP will also 
continue 
the  country’s 
outstanding external debt manageable and within the economy’s capacity to service 
its debt in an orderly manner.  
to  promote  external  debt  sustainability  by  keeping 
  We will continue to monitor developments to keep ahead of emerging risks. 
Before I conclude, I would like to spend a couple of minutes on an advocacy of the BSP that 
we believe helps to translate the positive macroeconomic developments into the overarching 
goal of inclusive growth. Here, I refer to efforts towards financial inclusion that are within the 
area of the BSP. This advocacy is of particular importance now, in light of recent calamities, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as these calamities have resulted in a number of families losing their savings and needing 
vital access to financial services to rebuild their lives.  
The BSP financial inclusion framework is built on three areas:  
1. 
broad  access  to  appropriate  credit  at  reasonable  rates  through  responsible  and 
proportionate regulation that encourages market innovation,  
timely and relevant economic and financial learning, and  
well-founded financial consumer protection.  
2. 
3. 
How have we impacted the macroeconomy? Let me cite some examples: 
First,  financial  access.  Our  policies  on  simplified  or  scaled  down  branches  called 
microbanking  offices  (MBOs)  have  enabled  banks  to  have  a  presence  in  areas  that  were 
previously unbanked. There are now 50 municipalities from 37 in 2011, an increase of 35 pct, 
that are served by MBOs alone.  
We have also continued to leverage off mobile technology by enabling alternative financial 
service  providers  (FSPs)  as  effective  touch  points  to  banking  services.  FSPs,  including 
pawnshops, remittance and e-money agents, which tend to be available even in areas with 
small  population  and  have  high  incidence  of  poverty,  now  total  over  46,200  from  about 
38,400 in 2011, or a growth rate of 20pct.  
If  we  consider  only  banks  (including  MBOs),  thirty-seven  pct  of  municipalities  would  be 
without such presence. But if we now include FSPs, only 13.2 pct of municipalities would not 
have any form of access to financial services.  
Second, financial education. Since we revitalized this program in 2008 we have conducted 
numerous  domestic  and  international  roadshows  and  financial  expos.  Our  international 
roadshows have targeted cities where most of our OFWs  are deployed, including those in 
Asia, Europe and the United States.  
We  have  a  number  of  advocacy  programs,  including  the  Credit  Surety  Fund,  the  savings 
programs for the youth, i.e., Kiddie Savings Program, Bamboo to Bangko, Tulong Barya Para 
sa Eskwela, among others. This year, we plan to leverage on this strength to reach out to 
more sectors and regions across the country.  
Finally,  financial  consumer  protection.  We  have  strengthened  our  financial  consumer 
protection efforts by creating a consumer redress mechanism within the BSP. We are also in 
the final stages of completing a consumer protection framework that will formally rate the CP 
efforts of banks, and provide specific guidance on how banks can scale their efforts up.  
We are strong advocates of financial inclusion because in this way, we are able to empower 
our citizens, and therewith make them more effective partners in nation-building.  
Concluding remarks 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks,  the  recent  natural  calamities  once  again 
proved  the  Filipino  is  resilient  thru  the  Bayanihan  spirit  which  we  saw  work  so  excellently 
during  our  natural  calamities.  I  know  Rotarians  know  this  very  well…  for  you  follow  your 
motto is “service above self.” 
The painting by national artist Botong Francisco illustrates this point quite exquisitely. As we 
appreciate this masterpiece, we also appreciate each stroke of the brush that was skillfully 
made… how deliberate Botong was in building one brush stroke over the other to bring to life 
what he had imagined in his mind to do.  
Think about what we have done in 2013… And then imagine, what more we can do in 2014, 
if we continue to work together with the same purpose and goal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The BSP, national and local governments, and you, the private sector – we are all called to 
step forward and do our share in the rebuilding, not merely houses or even communities, but 
precious lives of our people. 
I  salute  you,  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Rotary  Club  of  Manila  and  the  Rotary  Club  of 
Forbes Park, for your service to the Filipino people.  
May your productive work continue this and the coming years. Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
