  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: The ASEAN Economic Community’s impact on 
the Greater Mekong Subregion’s economies 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Euromoney Conference “The Greater Mekong Investment Forum”, Bangkok, 12 June 2014. 
 Excellencies, Honorable Speakers, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1.  It  is  an  honor  for  me  to  be  back  here  at  the  Euromoney  Greater  Mekong  Subregion 
Investment  Forum.  Let  me  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  such  a 
distinguished forum once again. This conference takes place at an important juncture as we 
are on the eve of the ASEAN Economic Community which will be launched at the end of next 
year. My remarks today will focus on how the AEC will have meaningful impacts on the 
GMS economies. Also, I will share with you some thoughts on how we can overcome 
challenges to capitalize on the region’s growth and prosperity. 
2. The GMS has become one of the most vibrant regions in the world, transforming 
itself into a new investment frontier. The global attention on this region is reflected in the 
large inflows of foreign direct investment, which have increased dramatically in the past two 
decades. According to World Bank statistics, the FDI inflows to the CLMV countries over this 
period  increased  forty-fold  to  around  13  billion  dollars  in  2012.1  This  wealth  of  investment 
opportunity has been underpinned by the smooth transition to market-based economies, the 
rich and diverse resources as well as the improvement of intra-regional logistics. 
3.  Most  importantly,  we  are  in  an  exciting  time  for  the  GMS  when  the  AEC  draws 
closer. As most GMS countries are members of the AEC, the GMS will significantly benefit 
from the growth opportunities of the AEC in the coming years.  
4.  With  integrated  markets  being  forged  under  the  AEC,  this  will  greatly  benefit  the  GMS 
through a more interconnected production base. Let me give you three key examples where I 
see this will materialize: 
5. First, on the tariff reductions. Much has already been completed here, with the group of 
ASEAN-6 countries,2 including Thailand, having already removed tariffs for almost all of our 
products  since  2010.  The  plan  according  to  the  AEC  Blueprint,  will  see  CLMV  countries’ 
tariffs being removed by 2015. The benefits will of course multiply throughout production and 
distribution chains of the region. The increase in trade and related investments will naturally 
spill over to peripheral areas such as southern China, which has strong trade ties with the 
region as part of the GMS. 
6. Second, on trade logistics facilitation. This is another crucial element to complement 
tariff reductions to reduce costs and time in order to facilitate cross-border trade. One of the 
key initiatives under this area is the “ASEAN Single Window”, which will streamline customs 
procedures and expedite cargo clearance. Owing to this, cross-border traders can save both 
costs and time for customs clearance region-wide. 
7. Third, on payment systems linkages. What ASEAN central banks are aiming for is to 
enable  businesses  and  individuals  to  make  and  receive  electronic  payments  more 
conveniently  yet  less  costly.  A  prominent  example  here  is  the  “Asian  Payment  Network” 
which  translates  to  full  regional  ATM  interoperability.  Through  this  initiative,  an  ASEAN 
                                                
1  World Bank website (2014) (http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/BX.KLT.DINV.CD.WD) 
2  ASEAN-6 includes Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  resident, for instance, can use his or her local ATM card to withdraw cash from a machine in 
another  ASEAN  country  without  having  to  pay  the  fees  charged  by  third-party  payment 
providers. 
8. We can see that the upcoming realization of the AEC is a springboard for a more vibrant 
GMS region. However, the benefits for the region go beyond the AEC. I can see some points 
where tangible outcomes will take place in the near future. 
9.  The  first  one  is  the  more  integrated  production  networks  of  the  main  industries 
which  dominate  the  GMS.  We  all  know  that  the  region  has  a  comparative  advantage  in 
primary  industries  which  are  demanded  by  other  ASEAN  countries.  This  is  why  we  have 
observed  the  large  inflows  of  investment  into  agro-industry,  garment  and  mining  sectors. 
Realizing the high potentials of these sectors, we have also seen contract farming practices 
in Laos, where key commodities such as corn and sugarcane are produced using advanced 
technology and practices. 
10.  The  other  point  concerns  the  development  of  infrastructure.  This  is  particularly 
important  given  the  lack  of  well-developed  road  and  rail  networks  of  the  region. 
Countries in the GMS are addressing this through various projects, the main one being the 
road corridors. The North-South Corridor which  connects Yunnan in China, with  Myanmar, 
Laos and Thailand has been completed. Also, the East-West Corridor which links Vietnam, 
Laos,  Thailand  and  Myanmar  is  near  completion.  This  will  make  the  whole  region  more 
closely  interconnected,  hence  investments  in  any  of  the  GMS  country  stand  to  benefit the 
rest. 
11. The final point is on the demand side. The GMS will enjoy a larger consumer market 
base  with  distinct  needs  and  increased  purchasing  power.  The  AEC  is  home  to  over 
600 million people. In tandem with this is the significant rise of the middle class population. 
The Asian Development Bank estimates that the share of ASEAN’s middle class is expected 
to increase to 65% by 2030.3 Moreover, ASEAN continues to pursue closer integration into 
the global economy through various Free Trade Agreements. This includes China and India, 
both  superpowers  at  the  crossroads  of  the  GMS.  Therefore,  the  AEC  will  also  be  an 
important gateway, connecting the GMS to major markets of the Asia-Pacific region. 
12.  The  bright  future  is  ours  for  the  making.  The  GMS  economies  are  blessed  with 
abundant  resources  and  promising  growth  prospects. With  the  realization  of  the  AEC,  the 
region’s  opportunities  will  be  multiplied.  Yet  there  remain  important  challenges.  The  bright 
future is ours only if we work to overcome the challenges together. I will list two important 
challenges:  First  is  how  we  can  share  our  resources  and  expertise  to  capitalize  on  the 
region’s  growth.  Second  is  how  we  can  match  regional  demand  with  regional  supply  of 
savings and investment for the much-needed infrastructure development. 
13. On the first challenge. Our resources will be better utilized if we regard our neighbors 
not as competitors but rather as partners in the regional production network. Here, we need 
to explore new opportunities to create industry clusters in the region by taking on our 
diverse  comparative  advantages  and  specialization.  An  existing  example  here  is  the 
cluster of industries relating to the garment industry, where one GMS country imports textile 
yarn  from  another  country,  manufactures  it  into  apparels  and  then  exports  it  to  countries 
outside the region. 
14.  The  second  challenge  concerns  infrastructure  financing.  The  projects  that  I 
mentioned earlier cannot be efficiently realized without proper funding mechanisms. What we 
need is to match the huge amounts of regional savings with the much-needed investment in 
infrastructure, which is as high as 8 trillion dollars over the next decade as estimated by the 
                                                
3  ADB website (2012) (http://www.adb.org/features/fast-facts-asean-prc-and-india-great-transformation) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
ADB.4  To match this  huge  demand for funds,  ASEAN  along  with  China,  Japan  and  Korea 
have put in place several initiatives: two key projects include the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund, 
which pools regional saving into funds for investment in infrastructure projects and the Asian 
Bond  Markets  Initiative,  which  develops  and  deepens  regional  bond  markets  so  as  to  tap 
regional savings. 
15. To conclude, there are great opportunities in store ahead. At the end of the day, the 
benefits  of  trade  liberalization  and  infrastructure  development  will  extend  to  all  of  us  if  we 
work collectively to overcome the challenges. The AEC will be a springboard to benefit the 
whole region, particularly for the GMS. This is because the whole region will be more closely 
knitted,  not  only  in  terms  of  physical  connectivity  but  also  in  terms  of  shared  production 
networks.  I  believe  that this  conference  today  will  be  an  excellent  platform for  us  to come 
together and share our ideas towards realizing long-lasting prosperity in the GMS region. 
Thank you. 
                                                
4  ADB website (2009) (http://www.adbi.org/files/2009.08.31.book.infrastructure.seamless.asia.pdf) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
