  Philip Lowe: Australia’s RMB policies and future direction 
Introductory Remarks by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia 
at the RMB Internationalisation Roundtable, Sydney, 23 July 2014. 
 I would like to thank Michelle Wright for assistance in the preparation of these remarks.  
I  would  like  to  thank  David  Olsson  and  the  RMB  Working  Group  for  organising  today’s 
Roundtable.  It  is  very  encouraging  to  see  the  ongoing  interest  in  the  topic  of  RMB 
internationalisation  from  both  government  and  business  leaders.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  a 
strong supporter of the work that is going on and I am very pleased to be able to participate. 
For anyone interested in international trade or global finance, understanding the issues we 
are talking about this morning should be very high on their agenda. As I have said before, the 
internationalisation of the Renminbi (RMB) and the accompanying process of capital account 
liberalisation  in  China  could  well  turn  out to  be one  of  the  seismic  events  in global  capital 
markets over the coming years.1 Ultimately, this process could see Chinese citizens be able 
to hold internationally diversified portfolios, just as the citizens of many other countries are 
already  able  to  do.  It  could  also  see  citizens  from  other  countries  able  to  buy  and  sell 
Chinese financial and other assets with far fewer restrictions than are currently in place. And 
it could see the Chinese currency become one of the world’s most actively traded. If these 
things do come to pass, then they would reshape the nature of global capital flows and the 
international financial system, just as China’s entry into the global trading system reshaped 
global trade and production. 
As  Australians,  we  have  more  than  a  passing  interest  in  all  of  this.  China  is  our  largest 
trading partner and our financial linkages with China, while still relatively small, are growing. 
And by virtue of being a small open economy with an already liberalised capital account, our 
markets will be affected by changes in global capital flows. So understanding what is going 
on here is important. This is true not just for those involved directly in the financial sector, but 
for our society more broadly. 
I have had the privilege of participating in the first two Australia-Hong Kong RMB Dialogues, 
the first in Sydney last year and the second in Hong Kong quite recently. From participating 
in these dialogues my sense is that we are making progress and David Gruen in his remarks 
has outlined some of the examples. More businesses are genuinely interested in exploring 
the  advantages  of  having trade  invoiced  in  RMB. The financial  infrastructure that  supports 
this  trading  is  gradually  being  put  in  place.  And  some  of  the  stumbling  blocks  and 
misperceptions are being eroded. 
There  is,  though,  much further  to travel  on  this  journey.  Currently,  less  than  1  per  cent  of 
Australia’s merchandise trade with China is invoiced in RMB. For China, around 12 per cent 
of total merchandise trade in 2013 was invoiced in RMB, although we estimate the number 
was around 3 to 5 per cent if trade with Hong Kong is excluded. These figures suggest that 
there remains significant potential for growth in RMB trade invoicing, not only by Australian 
firms, but by firms in other countries as well. 
Australia’s  own  experience  with  liberalisation  is  that  the  growth  of  trade  makes  financial 
liberalisation easier. As financial markets develop to support trade relationships, those same 
markets  can,  in  time,  support  deeper  financial  relationships.  Trade  helps  deepen  financial 
markets, and deeper financial markets make it easier to liberalise. In the end, though, how 
                                                
1  Lowe  P  (2014),  “Some  Implications  of  the  Internationalisation  of  the  Renminbi”,  Opening  Remarks  to  the 
Centre  for  International  Finance  and  Regulation  Conference  on  the  Internationalisation  of  the  Renminbi, 
Sydney, 26 March.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  long this whole journey takes in China is largely dependent upon the pace of reform by the 
Chinese authorities. 
It  is,  of  course,  also  dependent  upon  the  speed  with  which  the  financial  sector  is  able  to 
respond  to  any  new  opportunities.  In  part,  the  development  of  the  appropriate  markets 
depends  on  commercial  decisions  made  by  financial  institutions.  The  Reserve  Bank  is 
seeking  to  play  a  positive  role  in  this  area,  partly  through  helping  create  a  constructive 
environment in which these decisions can be made. Given this, I would like to spend a few 
minutes outlining the various elements of our work in this area. 
First,  we  have  sought  simply  to  better  understand  how  the  RMB  markets  operate.  In 
particular  we  have  sought  to  understand:  the  nature  of  the  existing  arrangements  and 
products; any impediments to the development of an RMB market in Australia; and how the 
RMB market sits within the broader financial system. Our representative office in Beijing has 
been helpful here as have the frequent trips by RBA staff to China. We have also  worked 
closely with the financial sector in Australia, including with the RMB Working Group and have 
been  involved  in  two  separate  surveys  of  corporates’  attitudes  toward  the  use  of  RMB.2 
These  efforts  have  helped  us  develop  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  issues,  as  well  as 
understanding  in  the  broader  financial  community.  The  joint  work  has  also  assisted  in 
providing a forum to support and to coordinate industry-led discussions and initiatives. 
Second, the RBA has invested some of its foreign currency reserves in RMB. First and 
foremost, this portfolio shift reflects the growing importance of China in the global economy 
and  the  broadening  financial  relationship  between  Australia  and  China.  But  it  has  also 
allowed us to deepen our own understanding of developments in Chinese financial markets 
and the RMB. Currently, around 3 per cent of our net foreign reserves are invested in RMB. 
Third, is the bilateral local currency swap agreement between the RBA and the People’s 
Bank of China (PBC). This swap, which was signed in 2012, allows the two central banks to 
exchange their local currencies for mutually agreed purposes. The key benefit of the swap 
agreement  is  to  provide  confidence  to  the  Australian  market  that  RMB  liquidity  will  be 
available  through  a  “backstop”  channel  in  the  event  of  some  disruption  to  the  market  for 
RMB. The swap is not meant to provide a “cheap” source of RMB funding to the Australian 
market in normal times. Its existence, though, should be helpful for market development, as it 
provides market participants with greater confidence that RMB will be available in Australia 
during times of dislocation. Since the swap agreement was signed there has not been a need 
to activate it, although it could be used should it be required. 
Fourth, the RBA is currently  working with the PBC on future RMB clearing and settlement 
arrangements,  in  particular  the  establishment  of  an  “official  RMB  clearing  bank”  in 
Australia. In keeping with the process that has recently been followed in a number of other 
jurisdictions – including London, Frankfurt, Paris, Luxembourg and Seoul – this would involve 
the  signing  of  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  RBA  and  the  PBC,  and  the 
designation of an official clearing bank in Australia. It is important to note that the RBA would 
not expect to play a significant role in choosing which particular bank would be designated – 
this is, quite rightly, largely a matter for the Chinese authorities. In terms of timing, we are 
hopeful that an official RMB clearing bank could be designated over the coming months. 
The  concept  of  an  official  RMB  clearing  bank  is  one  that  is  sometimes  open  to  some 
misunderstanding, so I would like to spend a few moments setting out how these institutions 
                                                
2  The survey in 2013 was coordinated by the RBA, while the 2014 survey was coordinated by the Centre for 
International Finance and Regulation. The 2013 survey results are summarised in Ballantyne A, M Garner and 
M Wright  (2013)  “Developments in  Renminbi  Internationalisation”,  RBA  Bulletin, June, pp  65–74.  The  2014 
survey results are summarised in Centre for International Finance and Regulation (2014), “Internationalisation 
of the Renminbi: Pathways, Implications and Opportunities”, Research Report, March.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  operate. In essence, their key function is to facilitate cross-border payments and receipts of 
RMB for trade-related purposes on behalf of other financial institutions in the local market. 
Of course, Australian importers and exporters are already able to make and receive cross-
border  RMB  payments  through  a  number  of  existing  channels.  For  example,  Australian-
based  banks  can  facilitate  cross-border  RMB  trade  transactions  through  correspondent 
banking relationships with banks in mainland China, or through RMB clearing “services” that 
are  offered  by  Australian-based  Chinese  banks  via  their  mainland  Chinese  Head  Offices. 
Similarly, these transactions can also be effected through other offshore RMB centres, such 
as Hong Kong. 
In  fact,  the  differences  between  an  official  RMB  clearing  bank  and  the  channels  that  are 
already  available  are  quite  subtle,  though  still  important.  In  essence,  official  RMB  clearing 
banks  are  afforded  more  direct  access  to  China’s  onshore  RMB  and  foreign  exchange 
markets than other offshore institutions. More specifically, official clearing banks have direct 
access  to  China’s  interbank  RMB  payments  system  and  receive  a  quota  to  transact  in 
China’s onshore foreign exchange market. These changes also entail more direct access to 
RMB liquidity from the PBC. 
While  an  official  RMB  clearing bank  would  not  directly  increase  the  range  or type  of  RMB 
transactions  that  are  permitted  to  take  place  between  Chinese  and  Australian  entities,  it 
would  improve  the  efficiency  of  cross-border  RMB  transactions,  for  example  by  potentially 
reducing payment delays and/or reducing transaction costs. And, over time, the presence of 
an official clearing bank could encourage local financial institutions to offer a broader range 
of RMB products to the local market than is currently available. 
Given the way in which the Chinese authorities have chosen to liberalise trading in the RMB, 
these  clearing  banks  are  playing  an  important  practical  and  symbolic  role.  Indeed,  the 
establishment of a clearing bank in Australia would help ensure that we are well positioned to 
participate in the next stages in the process of RMB internationalisation. Ultimately, though, if 
China does follow the general path travelled by a number of other countries, these clearing 
banks  are  likely  to  become  less  significant.  In  other  currencies,  alternative  arrangements 
exist for the clearing of cross-border flows, with  financial institutions managing the liquidity 
and risk issues without access to an official clearing bank. If this eventually turns out to be 
the case for the Chinese currency as well, then there is likely to be a reduced need for these 
official clearing banks. In the meantime, they are an important stepping stone on the path to 
a more internationally integrated Chinese currency. 
Finally,  a  fifth  step  that  we  hope  to  take  soon  is  to  obtain  a  quota  for  Australian-based 
financial  institutions  to  invest  in  mainland  China  under  the  Renminbi  Qualified  Foreign 
Institutional  Investors  (or  RQFII)  scheme.  Following  the  granting  of  a  RQFII  quota  to  a 
specific  jurisdiction,  financial  institutions  operating  within  that  jurisdiction  can  apply  to  the 
Chinese authorities to obtain an individual investment quota. Approved institutions can then 
invest their own quota in selected mainland Chinese bonds and equities using RMB obtained 
in the offshore market. In this way, the RQFII scheme can be thought of as representing both 
a  partial  relaxation  of  controls  on  inward  portfolio  investment  to  mainland  China  and  as  a 
means of developing the offshore RMB market.3 An RQFII quota would therefore represent 
an important next step in facilitating cross-border RMB-denominated investment transactions 
                                                
3  The  RQFII  scheme  exists  alongside  two  other  schemes  that  allow  approved  institutions  to  invest  foreign 
currency  in  selected  mainland  Chinese  securities:  namely,  the  Qualified  Foreign  Institutional  Investors  (or 
QFII)  scheme  and  a  scheme  that  is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  China  Interbank  Bond  Market  (or  CIBM) 
scheme. A number of Australian-domiciled institutions have already received quotas under the QFII scheme, 
while  the  RBA’s  acquisition  of  RMB  reserves  was  facilitated  under  the  CIBM  scheme.  The  QFII  and  CIBM 
programs differ in a number of respects, including: the types of mainland securities that can be purchased; the 
types of investors that are eligible to apply; and the mechanisms that are available to convert foreign currency 
into RMB.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  between  our  two  economies.  And,  as  Australia  has  a  relatively  large  and  sophisticated 
private funds management sector, there is significant potential for growth in this area. 
So, in summary, a lot has been happening, both in the public sector and the private sector. I 
regard it as very much in our collective interest to continue this work. The changes that could 
occur  in  the  Chinese  financial  system  over  the  coming  years  have  the  potential  to  be  felt 
around  the  world.  To  benefit  from  these  changes,  we  need  to  understand  them  and  be 
prepared for them. 
Much  of  the  work  that  we  have  been  doing  has  been  aimed  at  identifying  and  reducing 
potential impediments to the development of RMB business here in Australia. But once those 
impediments  have  been  removed  –  and  we  are  moving  closer  to  that  point  –  the 
development of the market is very much up to the private sector. Ultimately, in order for the 
RMB  market  in  Australia  to  flourish,  Australian  corporates  must  be  able  to  identify  a  clear 
business case for paying, receiving, lending, borrowing and investing in RMB. Over time, I 
think this will happen, but there is more work to be done. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
