  Charles I Plosser: Systematic monetary policy and communication 
Speech by Mr Charles I Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia, at the Economic Club of New York, New York City, 24 June 2014. 
The view expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
 Highlights 
• 
  President  Plosser  gives  his  views  on  the  economy  and  the  FOMC’s  most  recent 
policy decisions. He also discusses the benefits of rule-like, systematic behavior in 
the  design  and  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  how  this  behavior  combined  with 
greater transparency leads to more effective communication. 
President Plosser explains how a detailed monetary policy report could promote the 
FOMC to conduct policy in a more systematic manner, which he believes will lead to 
better  decisions  and  better  economic  outcomes  over  the  longer  run.  When 
policymakers deviate, it would require that they explain why. 
President  Plosser  uses  five  widely  recognized  simple  rules  to  explore  their 
implications  for  the  future  path  of  policy  and  highlights  the  real  uncertainties  that 
policymakers face making policy. 
Introduction 
Thank you, Roger Ferguson, for that kind introduction and congratulations on your term as 
chairman of this august organization. You have continued to deliver the great programs and 
speakers that so many have come to expect from the club. As many of you know, this is the 
centennial year for the Federal Reserve. In the spirit of such an anniversary, my hat goes off 
to The Economic Club of New York, which has been around for 107 years. What a great and 
storied history you have, and it is an honor to be here. 
I  should  note  that  Congress  created  our  decentralized  central  bank  100  years  ago.  That 
decentralized structure is one of our great strengths, but it requires that I begin with the usual 
disclaimer that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 
In my remarks this morning, I want to discuss the benefits of rule-like, systematic behavior in 
the  design  and  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Such  behavior,  combined  with  greater 
transparency, leads to communication that is more effective. This, in turn, helps the public 
understand the FOMC’s strategies, individual policy decisions, and the likely path of policy. 
I  will  go  one  step  further  and  illustrate  how  the  FOMC  might  take  a  step  toward  a  more 
systematic policy framework by producing a detailed monetary policy report, similar to those 
issued by many central banks around the world. One aspect of such a report could highlight 
the policy paths implied by a few Taylor-like or robust rules and use them as benchmarks to 
set and communicate policy in a more systematic, rule-like way. 
I will begin with a brief overview of my thoughts about the economy and the FOMC’s most 
recent  policy  decisions  before  I  discuss  the  role  that  systematic  policy  can  play  in  the 
communication of policy. 
The economy and the recent policy decision 
First, the economy. My overall  view of the economy is fairly optimistic. After a first quarter 
buffeted by winter storms, I believe we are poised to grow at a rate somewhat above trend 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  for the remainder of this year and next before reverting back to trend, which I see as about 
2.4 percent. Steady employment growth and healthier household balance sheets will support 
consumption activity. The current data suggest economic strength is fairly broad based, as 
evidenced  by  recent  indicators  and  the  optimism  expressed  by  firms  in  both  the 
manufacturing and service sectors. 
As for inflation, recent readings have moved a bit higher, mitigating somewhat the concerns 
that low inflation will persist or decline further. We have ample monetary accommodation in 
the economy to ensure that we will be able to achieve our 2 percent target over time. It is 
important,  however,  that  we  continue  to  reinforce  our  commitment  to  that  goal  so  that 
inflation expectations remain well anchored near our target. 
At the meeting last week, the FOMC released its latest Summary of Economic Projections 
(SEP). The outlook going forward was largely unchanged. While real GDP growth for 2014 
was marked down, which reflected the disappointing first quarter, the outlook for the second 
half  of  the  year  and  the  projections  for  2015  and  2016  were  unchanged.  Unemployment 
projections were reduced slightly, and the inflation forecast remained stable. 
My own submission for economic growth was generally in line with my colleagues. But my 
forecast  for  unemployment  was  a  bit  lower  in  the  near  term.  Specifically,  I  think  the 
unemployment rate may reach 5.8 percent by the end of this year and 5.6 percent by the end 
of 2015. My view of inflation is that it will stabilize at about 2 percent in 2015. 
Some market participants and commentators have focused on the so-called dot charts and 
the movement of the implied median funds rate for 2014–16. I would remind everyone that 
the  dots  are  not  a  forecast  of  what  policymakers  think  the  Committee  will  actually  do,  but 
they are a reflection of the policymakers’ views of appropriate policy. 
Some have noted that the median path steepened ever so slightly. This should not come as 
a particular surprise as it likely just reveals greater confidence that the economy is improving. 
The rebound after the bad winter seems to be progressing, the outlook for unemployment is 
a bit better, and the inflation rate appears to be firming. The changes in the dots thus simply 
tell  us  something  about  individual  policymakers  reaction  to  the  change  in  economic 
conditions.  The  FOMC  statement  notes  that  the  Committee  will  adjust  future  funds  rate 
decisions based on the progress toward our objectives. So, it is entirely reasonable that the 
expected  path  of  “appropriate  policy”  should  adjust  as  we  close  in  on  those  objectives. 
Indeed, it would be surprising if they did not behave in such a manner. 
I believe that we are closing in on our goals – perhaps faster than some people might think. 
So, while I supported the recent policy statement, I have growing concerns that we may have 
to adjust our communications in the not-too-distant future. Specifically, I believe the forward 
guidance in the statement may be too passive, given underlying economic conditions. 
The benefits of systematic monetary policy 
Let me now turn to the importance of conducting monetary policy in a systematic manner. By 
systematic policy, I mean conducting policy in a rule-like manner as opposed to relying on 
discretion. Decisions are always made period by period, but in a rules-based approach, the 
decisions are guided by the rules. Discretion is the opposite of rules-based decisionmaking. 
Discretionary  decisions  are  made  without  being  constrained  by  past  promises  or  previous 
forward-looking statements. 
The monetary policy debate over whether rule-like behavior is preferable to pure discretion 
dates  back  at  least  to  Henry  Simons  in  1936.1  More  recently,  in  their  Nobel  Prize-winning 
                                                
1  Henry  C.  Simons,  “Rules  Versus  Authorities  in  Monetary  Policy”,  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  44:1 
(February 1936).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  work,  Finn  Kydland  and  Ed  Prescott  demonstrated  that  a  credible  commitment  by 
policymakers  to  behave  in  a  systematic  rule-like  manner  leads  to  better  outcomes  than 
discretion.2  Since  then,  numerous  papers  using  a  variety  of  models  have  investigated  the 
benefits of rule-like behavior in monetary policy and found that there are indeed significant 
benefits. Policies characterized by commitment have been shown to lead to more economic 
stability.  In  fact,  the  mainstream  theoretical  models  that  we  use  for  monetary  and 
macroeconomic analysis are built on the notion that monetary policy is conducted in a rule-
like manner. 
The benefits of a rule-like approach arise, in part, because consumers and businesses are 
forward looking. When policymakers credibly commit to a rule-like approach to setting policy, 
they can alter expectations in ways that make policy more effective and less uncertain. 
The appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on the 
state  of  the  economy.  That  is,  policymakers  should  describe  the  reaction  function  that 
determines  how  the  current  and  future  policy  rate  will  be  set  depending  on  economic 
conditions. Policymakers are, of course, no more certain about future course of the economy 
than anyone else is; therefore, they cannot realistically commit to particular future values of 
the  policy  rate.  Nonetheless,  describing  a  reaction  function  or  rule  that  explains  how  the 
policy rate will be determined in the future as a function of economic conditions can be highly 
informative. 
Unfortunately, the science of monetary policy has not progressed to the point where we can 
specify  the  optimal  rule  for  setting  monetary  policy.  Given  our  current  state  of  knowledge, 
judgment is still required in setting policy. One reason is that optimal rules, that is, those that 
maximize economic welfare, are highly dependent on the particular model from which they 
are  derived,  and  there  is  no  broad-based  consensus for the  right model.  Another factor  is 
that the optimal rule for one model can produce very bad outcomes in another model. A third 
reason  is  that  optimal  rules  can  often  be  quite  complex,  thus  making  them  difficult  to 
implement  and  to  communicate  to  the  public.  In  other  words,  they  may  not  be  very 
transparent. 
However,  these  limitations  to  implementing  optimal  policy  rules  should  not  deter  us  from 
efforts to adopt a more systematic, rule-like approach to the conduct of policy. Indeed, there 
has  been  a  great  deal  of  progress  made  in  identifying  simple,  robust  rules  that  appear  to 
perform  well  in  a  variety  of  models  and  environments.  The  most  well-known  rule  is 
attributable to John Taylor.3 The Taylor rule is a reaction function that indicates how to set 
the  policy  rate  as  a  function  of  deviations  of  inflation  from  the  inflation  target  and  some 
measure of economic slack. 
The attractiveness of Taylor-like rules goes beyond their intuitive appeal or the fact that they 
seem to describe the actual behavior of monetary policy reasonably well. The reality is that 
Taylor-like  rules  yield  very  good  results  in  a  variety  of  theoretical  models.  While  this  is 
surprising to some, it is of enormous practical importance. Given our uncertainty about the 
true model of the economy, knowing that systematic policy in the form of a Taylor-like rule 
delivers  good  outcomes  in  a  variety  of  models  means  that  these  simple,  robust  rules  can 
provide useful guidance for policy. Moreover, rule-like policies also play an important role in 
central bank communication. 
                                                
2  Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–91.  
3  John B. Taylor, “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public 
Policy, North-Holland, 39, 1993, pp. 195–214.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Communication 
The fundamental reason that communication is so important is that monetary policy is more 
appropriately viewed as the path of the policy rate, not simply the current rate. This is evident 
today as the markets seem highly attentive to signals regarding the future path of the funds 
rate not simply its current setting. 
Because systematic policy is easily communicated to the public, it also greatly improves the 
transparency  and  predictability  of  monetary  policy,  which  reduces  policy  surprises. 
Businesses and consumers are more informed about the course of monetary policy because 
they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances 
even if they are not certain what those economic conditions might be. Equally important in 
my  view  is  that  greater  clarity  about  the  policymakers’  reaction  function  strengthens 
accountability.  Thus,  systematic  policy,  communicated 
transparently,  strengthens 
accountability and serves to preserve the central bank’s independence. 
In this regard, Taylor-like rules have many of these desirable features. They are systematic, 
based  on  a  limited  number  of  variables,  perform  well  in  a  variety  of  models,  and  can 
therefore  provide  important  guidance  for  policy  decisions.  If  our  policy  is  guided  by  state-
contingent  rules,  then  by  reporting  our  assessment  about  the  evolution  or  forecast  of  key 
economic variables, the public will get a better understanding and appreciation of the likely 
path of policy. Indeed, that is likely to be the best information we can provide regarding the 
future path of policy. 
Rules as benchmarks: a step forward 
Given model uncertainty and data measurement problems, there are, of course, limitations to 
the use of a simple rule. A robust rule is intended to work well on average, but central banks 
look at many variables in determining policy. Inevitably, there will be times when economic 
developments  fall  outside  the  scope  of  our  models  and  warrant  unusual  monetary  policy 
action. Events such as 9/11, the Asian financial crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and 
the 1987 stock market crash may require departures from a simple rule. 
However,  in  such  unusual  circumstances,  policymakers  will  be  expected  to  explain  the 
departures from the rule. With a rule as a baseline, departures can be quantified and inform 
us  how  excessively  tight  or  easy  policy  might  be  relative  to  normal.  If  the  events  are 
temporary,  policymakers  will  have  to  explain  how  and  when  policy  is  likely  to  return  to 
normal.  Thus,  a  simple  rule  provides  a  valuable  benchmark 
for  assessing  and 
communicating the appropriate stance of policy. 
The  operational  question  is  how  might  we  go  about  the  effort  to  implement  a  more  rules-
based policy? 
One strategy could be to indicate the likely behavior of interest rates based on a few Taylor-
like rules that have been consistent with the conduct of monetary policy in the past or ones 
that are considered robust across various models. Doing so would require agreement on a 
particular  model  in  order  to  produce  the  resulting  rule-based  behavior.  For  the  Fed,  the 
economic model developed by the Board’s staff seems like a reasonable place to start. Such 
an  exercise  could  also  be  enhanced,  I  believe,  by  using  some  of  the  dynamic  stochastic 
general equilibrium, or DSGE, models that have been developed within the Federal Reserve 
System. 
As  a  start,  the  results  of  this  type  of  exercise  could  be  published  in  the  FOMC’s  current 
biannual  monetary  policy  report  to  Congress.  Perhaps  we  might  consider  releasing  these 
reports on a quarterly basis in keeping with other central banks. The Committee could then 
indicate  whether  and  why  it  anticipates  policy  to  be  somewhat  more  restrained  or  more 
accommodative  relative  to  the  projections  given  by  the  various  rules.  The  monetary  policy 
report could also include various views that may differ from the baseline summaries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A major benefit of this exercise would be to illustrate the various dimensions of uncertainty 
that  policymakers  face.  Financial  markets  often  prefer  certainty  about  the  future  path  of 
monetary  policy,  but  that  is  unrealistic  and  not  necessarily  desirable.  For  example,  this 
exercise  would  indicate  the  extent  of  model  uncertainty,  forecast  uncertainty,  and  the 
variations implied by different rules. Many central banks use fan charts and other devices to 
highlight such bands of uncertainty about the forecast, and the Fed should do the same. 
Overall,  this  exercise  would  provide  a  better  sense  of the  likely  direction  of  policy  and  the 
variables most related systematically to that policy. It would also lead the FOMC to discuss 
policy in the context of rules and a systematic approach to decision-making, which I believe 
will lead to better decisions and better economic outcomes over the longer run. Moreover, it 
would require policymakers to explain why they choose to deviate from the benchmarks and 
the guidelines they provide. 
An example 
As I discussed, communication is an important aspect of monetary policy. I have long been 
an advocate of the Fed producing a periodic monetary policy report similar to other central 
banks.  It  is  simply  too  difficult  to  convey  monetary  policy  design  and  strategy  within  the 
confines of the brief statements issued at the conclusion of each FOMC meeting. Therefore, 
what  I  am  about  to  suggest  should  not  be  viewed  in  isolation  but  as  one  part  of  such  a 
periodic report to the public. 
So, let me illustrate how we might begin to incorporate a more systematic and transparent 
approach to rule-like decision-making. I view this as one step in a journey, not as the end 
result. 
My example uses five simple rules that have been discussed in the literature and describes 
their implications for the projected path of the funds rate from now through 2015. Since these 
rules are contingent on economic conditions, I will use the midpoint of the forecasts derived 
from  the  most  recent  SEP  and  apply  an  Okun’s  law  relationship  to  convert  projections  of 
unemployment into projections of economic slack. I should immediately note that this is not a 
completely coherent exercise as each participant’s projections were based on his or her own 
view  of  optimal  policy  and,  as  you  are  well  aware,  those  views  differ.  Put  differently,  the 
midpoint of the projections arises from an amalgam of different models and thus represents 
no one’s forecast or model. Thus, the results are likely to be more diverse than otherwise 
expected.  So  my  example  is  purely  illustrative  yet  easily  replicable.  However,  given  the 
relevance of the SEP, I thought the exercise would be more interesting than if I used an off-
the-shelf economic model. 
The rules I have chosen are these: first, the original Taylor 1993 rule; second, a variant of 
Taylor’s original rule, sometimes called the Taylor 1999 rule, which places greater emphasis 
on  the  output  gap;  third,  a  version  of  the  Taylor  1999  rule  that  allows  for  considerable 
interest-rate smoothing and is called the inertial Taylor 1999 rule; fourth, a performance- or 
outcome-based rule developed by staff at the Philadelphia Fed that is simply an estimated 
rule that best mimics previous FOMC actions; and fifth, a first-difference rule that is based on 
academic  work  of  Athanasios  Orphanides  and  is  designed  to  take  into  account  the 
imprecision  and  uncertainties  of  our measurements  of  the  level  of  the  output gap  or  slack 
and the underlying or steady state real rate of interest.4  
I have plotted the outcome of this exercise in Figure 1. So what can we take away from this 
picture? First, all the rules suggest that liftoff of the funds rate from the zero bound should 
occur next quarter. This is considerably sooner than many seem to be expecting. 
                                                
4  See  the  Appendix  for  the  precise  mathematical  formulations  of  each  of  these  rules  and  the  relevant 
references.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Second, we can also see that although the rules point to policy being tighter, they do present 
somewhat different profiles of the future path of interest rates. The Taylor 93 and Taylor 99 
rules have a steeper path over the next several quarters than the other rules. The primary 
reason for this is that both of these rules are playing catchup as they would have had liftoff 
occur  earlier.  After  catchup,  they  increase  more  slowly.  This  dispersion  in  the  pace  of 
tightening also reflects model uncertainty. But ignoring or dismissing the rules does not avoid 
the problem such uncertainty poses. Robust rules, such as the first-difference rule, tend to 
have better outcomes on average across models. 
Third, we see that three of the policy paths are not that different from each other. Taylor 93, 
Taylor 99, and the performance based rules tend to converge to between 2.5 and 3.0 percent 
by mid-2015 and remain close thereafter. 
My own assessment of appropriate policy is similar to that described by the first-difference 
rule.  However,  my  point  is  not  to  decide  which  path  is  correct,  but  to  illustrate  how  such 
benchmarks can be useful for communications. 
For example, the exercise might suggest that policy choices that fall outside the bounds of 
these rules should be viewed with some caution. That does not mean they would be wrong 
but they would require careful and substantial discussion and justification. 
Even for policy choices that might fall within the bounds, the exercise can provide meaning, 
quantitative and qualitative, to phrases such as rates are expected to be “lower than normal”. 
Another  way  of  highlighting  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  future  path  of  policy  is  to 
consider  different  paths  for  the  economy.  Consider  Figure  2.  Here  I  employ  the  first 
difference  rule  but  consider  the  implications  of  a  stronger  and  a  weaker  path  for  the 
economy.  To  illustrate  the  range  of  policy  paths  that  could  ensue,  I  use  three  different 
forecasts,  the  midpoint  forecast  from  the  SEP,  as  in  the  previous  chart,  as  well  as  two 
hypothetical  forecasts.  The  first  takes  a  combination  of  the  lowest  inflation  and  highest 
unemployment  forecasts  (a  weak  forecast),  and  the  second  does  just  the  opposite  by 
combining  the  highest  inflation  and  lowest  unemployment forecasts  (a strong forecast). Of 
course, neither represents a particular forecast or model; they combine various elements of 
different  forecasts.  Thus,  the  exercise  represents  a  fairly  extreme  construction  of  forecast 
uncertainty. In any event, we observe a wide range for the predicted funds rate paths as in 
the first experiment. The weakest forecast anticipates a funds rate of nearly 1 percent by the 
end of 2015, while the strongest forecast envisions a funds rate of about 4.7 percent in part 
because both inflation and unemployment “overshoot” their long-run and sustainable values 
and corrections must follow. Note, however, that even the weakest economic view coupled 
with  the  first-difference  rule  has  the  funds  rate  rising  above  the  zero  lower  bound  next 
quarter. This picture is analogous, but not in a precise way, to a fan chart. 
I have indicated throughout my talk the imprecision of our knowledge about the economy. My 
understanding  is  no  more  precise  than  the  understanding  of  colleagues  or  private-sector 
economists. These two exercises highlight the model and forecast uncertainty policymakers 
face. Rather than trying to target particular future values of the policy rate, a monetary policy 
report  under  a  rules-based  approach  could  convey  the  uncertainty  and  still  assure  that 
decisions will be driven by the state of the economy. These two exercises indicate a need to 
explain more fully why policy is deviating from what is suggested by these rules. 
No doubt, there is a variety of views on this issue, but I think the policy process itself and our 
communication  of  policy  would  benefit  greatly  from  producing  a  detailed  monetary  policy 
report with some of the features I have discussed today.  
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Appendix 
Taylor 1993 
 Taylor, John B. “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference 
Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December 1993), pp. 195–214.  
(http://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/Papers/Discretion.PDF) 
 Taylor 1999 
Taylor,  John  B.  “A  Historical  Analysis  of  Monetary  Policy  Rules”,  in  John  B.  Taylor,  ed., 
Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1999, pp. 319–341.  
(http://www.nber.org/chapters/c7419.pdf) 
 First difference from Orphanides (2003) 
Orphanides, Athanasios. “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule”, Journal 
of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July 2003), pp. 983–1022.  
(http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2003/200336/200336pap.pdf) 
 Carlstrom and Fuerst Inertial Taylor Rule (2008) 
 Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy S. Fuerst, “Inertial Taylor Rules: The Benefit of Signaling 
Future  Policy”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis  Review  90(3,  Part  2)  (May/June  2008), 
pp. 193–203.  
(https://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/08/05/part2/Carlstrom.pdf) 
Philadelphia Fed estimated outcome-based rule 
This  rule  is  estimated  over  the  period  of  1Q1988  through  4Q2007  using  Greenbook 
forecasts. 
 is the four-quarter average of core PCE.  
  is a dummy variable with the values  
Where 
(Equation form on page 38 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20080130bluebook20080124.pdf)  
Estimation done by FRBP using Greenbook forecasts from 1Q1988 through 4Q2007. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
