  Ignazio Visco: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy 
Concluding  remarks  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Ordinary 
Meeting of Shareholders 2013 – 120th Financial Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 30 May 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since last autumn, monetary policy in the euro area has been faced with a scenario of very 
low  inflation  inconsistent  with  the  objective  of  price  stability,  in  a  setting  of  persistently 
modest and uneven economic growth. Work directed to the launch of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism in November has been stepped up and the advance towards the completion of 
Banking Union has continued. Substantial headway has been made in the full operation of 
the single euro payments area. In Italy, the road out of the most acute phase of recession 
has  been  rocky  at  times  owing  to  political  uncertainty.  The  recovery  has  not  found  a  firm 
footing, making it all the more urgent to proceed with reform action. 
For  the  Bank  of  Italy,  the  most  important  change  has  been  in  ownership  structure.  Our 
commitment  to  modernizing  the  Bank’s  organization  and  management  systems  has  been 
strengthened, and operating costs have been further curbed. The results for 2013 permit us 
to  submit  to  this  Shareholders’  Meeting  a  proposal  for  the  distribution  of  profits  which,  in 
addition  to  the  allocation  to  the  provision  for  general  risks,  calls  for  the  assignment  of 
adequate  resources  to reserves  against  the  risks  connected  with  the  crisis. Taking  market 
conditions  into  account,  the  proposal  is  for  the  distribution  to  shareholders  of  dividends 
amounting to €380 million, with the remaining €1.9 billion going to the State, in addition to 
taxes of €1.6 billion for the year. 
The  reform  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  ownership  structure,  enacted  by  Parliament,  involves 
technical  complexities  that  have  distracted  public  attention  from  the  objectives  that  have 
been  attained.  The  new  arrangements  maintain  the  model  of  shareholding  centred  on  the 
financial  industry,  a  feature  shared  with  other  major  central  banks.  They  reaffirm  that 
shareholders have no power to influence the Bank in fulfilling its institutional functions. They 
supersede  anachronistic  and  anomalous  features  that  had  developed  over  the  decades. 
They  make 
they  clarify, 
circumscribing them, the shareholders’ economic and equity rights. Shareholders continue to 
have no claim on the Bank’s foreign exchange and gold reserves, whose public function is 
beyond question. 
The value of the Bank’s capital, which the law now sets at €7.5 billion (against 300 million lire 
established in 1936) is consistent with the estimate made by the Bank at the behest of the 
Government.  This  valuation,  which  had  specified  both  a  minimum  and  a  maximum  value, 
was endorsed by experts of undisputed competence and independence. The methods and 
the results were made public. The increase was accomplished by means of the transfer to 
capital of a portion of the statutory reserves, without affecting the Bank’s own funds and at no 
cost to the public finances. 
The reform avoids undue transfers of wealth to the benefit or detriment of the shareholders. 
Under  the  previous  arrangement,  in  addition  to  dividends  shareholders  also  received  an 
amount  proportional  to  the  Bank’s  statutory  reserves,  which  were  bound  to  increase 
indefinitely owing to the automatic reinvestment of the return on them and the allocation to 
reserves of a part of each year’s profits. Eliminating any claim to the statutory reserves, the 
new  rules  entitle  the  shareholders  solely  to  a  dividend  drawn  from  net  profits,  up  to  a 
maximum  of  6  per  cent of  the  Bank’s  capital,  hence  not more  than  €450  million.  Amounts 
increasing over time with no limit have been replaced by a dividend that is higher initially but 
subject to a fixed ceiling. 
the  process  of  profit  distribution  more 
transparent.  And 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  concentration  of  shareholdings  in  the  hands  of  the  main  banking  groups  fuelled  the 
erroneous but persistent perception of possible interference in the Bank’s performance of our 
institutional  functions.  The  reform  has  broadened  the  potential  shareholder  base,  capped 
single  institutions’  stakes  at  3  per  cent  and  instituted  effective  measures  to  foster  a 
redistribution of shares to bring holdings down within that ceiling. We expect shareholders to 
act swiftly and on their own to dispose of their excess holdings. The rights associated with 
shareholding have now been defined with certainty, which favours trading in the shares and 
permits transparent price formation. We shall act to facilitate this process. 
The actual amount of dividends will be decided, each year, subject to the results for the year 
and the Bank’s capital needs. In order to foster compliance with the limit on shareholdings, 
the Bank may purchase its own shares temporarily;  we shall avail ourselves of this option 
only if necessary and in such a way as in no case to entail any risk of loss. 
The  newly  acquired  clarity  concerning  the  amount  realizable  from  sales  of  Bank  of  Italy 
shares  and  the  prospect  of  market  transactions  make  it  possible  to  include  them  in  the 
regulatory  capital  of  banks  and  insurance  companies,  which  could  have  a  modest  positive 
effect on the supply of credit. The shares do not form part of the banks’ initial capital for the 
asset quality review that the ECB is currently conducting together with national supervisors. 
The Bank of Italy: an institution open to change 
In performing its functions the Bank manages resources entrusted to it in the national and 
European interest, pursuing the express objective of efficiency. For some time now we have 
been  engaged  in  an  operation  of  reorganization  and  rationalization.  The  initiatives 
undertaken  in  this  regard  are  described  at  length  in  our  Relazione  sulla  gestione  e  sulle 
attività (report on operations and activities), which has a specific section dedicated to cost 
trends in the last few years. 
Relying on new technology, we have imparted impetus to the modernization of the payment 
system and made a sizeable investment in the computerization of our branches. Since the 
mid-1990s this has resulted in a steady diminution in the resources allocated to cashier and 
state treasury services. The reorganization carried out between 2008 and 2010 reduced the 
number of branches from 97 to 58, of which 31 have been converted into more streamlined, 
specialized units. The yearly cost of the branch network has been cut by about 25 per cent in 
real terms. A reassessment, open to the contribution of representatives of the staff, is now 
under  way  on  the  best  way  to  guarantee  the  Bank’s  efficient  presence  throughout  the 
national territory. 
At the start of this year our head office was reorganized. In place of the old functional areas, 
we now have eight directorates general, with autonomous management responsibilities. The 
directorates  with  responsibilities  for  human  resources  have  been  unified.  Procurement  has 
been assigned to a single specialized unit. The number of units assigned to administrative 
tasks has been reduced. 
The total staff of the Bank of Italy, including the Italian Foreign Exchange Office personnel 
taken on by the Bank in 2008, has come down from a peak of over 10,000 in the early 1990s 
to 7,850 on the eve of the branch reform and to some 7,000 at present. Operating costs have 
been lowered by 14 per cent in real terms over the past four years. 
We will continue along these lines, carefully reviewing every expenditure item. Our ongoing 
reform  action  has  lowered  costs  and  improved  efficiency,  maintaining  high  quality  service 
and capitalizing on staff skills. 
The  reduction  in  resources  employed  and  costs  incurred  has  been  achieved  despite  an 
increase in the number and complexity of the tasks performed. European integration, with the 
creation  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  has  not  resulted  in  any  diminution  of  the 
responsibilities  of  the  national  authorities  in  the  field  of  monetary  policy  or  banking 
supervision; nor will it in the future with Banking Union. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The ECB’s monetary policy decisions are taken collegially by the Governing Council, which 
consists of the governors of all the national central banks of the Eurosystem, acting in the 
European common interest and using for this purpose the research and analysis of their own 
institutions.  The  ECB’s  own  preparatory  analytical  work  is  conducted  through  the  intense 
activity  of  committees  and  working  groups  that  bring  together  experts  from  the  various 
national central banks. 
Our capability for economic, statistical and legal research and analysis is also placed directly 
at the service of the nation, with advisory services and operational support to Parliament, the 
Government and other institutions, and with activity in international forums. 
The  implementation  of  monetary  policy  is  delegated  wholly  to  the  national  central  banks: 
open  market  operations,  the  refinancing  of  banks,  and  the  acquisition,  management  and 
valuation of the collateral they provide in exchange for liquidity. 
The  central  banking  function  includes  the  production  and  distribution  of  banknotes.  Our 
works  print  about  18  per  cent  of  the  euro  area’s  paper  money,  with  a  peak  last  year  of 
1.36 billion notes. The Bank of Italy regulates and controls the activities of banks and other 
cash handlers, with off-site analysis and on-site inspections involving its branch network. 
Our institution develops and manages the technological platforms and infrastructure for the 
clearing  and  settlement  of  domestic  financial  transactions.  Together  with  the  Bundesbank, 
we are entrusted with operating the euro area’s TARGET2 gross settlement system, to be 
flanked by the TARGET2 Securities system for the settlement of securities trades in the euro 
area, now under development. The Bank of Italy is the Italian national authority competent for 
the  realization  of  the  single  euro  payments  area  for  retail  transactions.  The  Bank  and  its 
branch  network  also  manage  the  state  treasury  service.  We  exercise  oversight  of  the 
payment  system  and  financial  market  infrastructure  in  cooperation  with  our  European 
counterparts. Together with Consob, we oversee wholesale trading in government securities 
and post-trading activities in financial markets. 
In November, with the launch of Banking Union, the Single Supervisory Mechanism created 
by the ECB and the national competent authorities of the participating EU member states will 
be  operational.  With  the  decisive  contribution  of  the  national  authorities,  the  ECB  will 
supervise  banks  identified  as  systemically  important  according  to  specific  criteria,  such  as 
size.  For  Italy,  this  group  should  include  nearly  all  the  fifteen  intermediaries  currently 
subjected  to  the  comprehensive  assessment.  The  national  authorities  will  maintain  direct 
supervision  over  all  the  other  banks  –  in  Italy  they  number  around  600  –  according  to 
common standards and methodologies to ensure uniform supervisory action. 
The  Supervisory  Board,  which  is  charged  with  preparing  decisions  to  submit  to  the  ECB 
Governing Council, is already operational. It consists of representatives of the ECB and of 
the national supervisory authorities, including the Bank of Italy. Committees in which experts 
from individual countries can deal with issues of common interest are already active. 
The quality  of  European  banking  supervision  will  depend  strictly  on  the  contribution  of  the 
authorities that have had the most experience in this field. We are now actively working to 
ensure  the  adoption  of  best  practices  in  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  collaborating 
within the European Banking Authority on the design of a Single Rulebook to ensure a level 
playing field. In order to participate effectively  in the decision-making process of European 
banking  supervision,  we  shall  extend  our  analysis  to  the  banking  industry  and  the  major 
banks in other countries. 
The  launch  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  affect  the  daily  activities  of  all  the 
authorities involved. Off-site controls on systemically important banks will now be carried out 
by teams consisting of both ECB and national personnel. Inspections will be conducted by 
groups in which national staff may be flanked by members from other countries. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  also  entrusted  with  the  prudential  supervision  of  securities  firms  and 
asset  management  companies,  financial  companies,  payment  institutions  and  electronic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  money institutions. The Bank has full jurisdiction over all intermediaries, including banks, in 
matters  of  consumer  protection  and transparency.  It  is  engaged  in  the promotion  of  better 
financial awareness on the part of the general public, in particular in schools. It will continue 
to provide assistance to the panels of the Banking Ombudsman for dispute resolution. Our 
branches contribute significantly to these activities. 
Financial  stability  requires  a  macroprudential  commitment.  In  this  context  the  Bank  is  a 
member of the European Systemic Risk Board and participates in the work of the Financial 
Stability  Board  and  the  G20  to  complete  a  series  of reforms to  make  the  financial  system 
sounder and more resilient. 
We  have  intensified  our  efforts  to  combat  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing,  both 
within our directorate general for financial supervision and through the Financial Intelligence 
Unit, an autonomously managed body instituted within the Bank of Italy, which regulates the 
Unit’s operation and provides the necessary human, financial and technological resources. 
In  January  2013  the  new  insurance  supervisory  authority  (Ivass)  was  constituted,  in  close 
relation with banking and financial supervision. It is chaired ex officio by the Senior Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  who  runs  it  together  with  two  Councillors.  Measures  with 
significant  external  implications  are  decided  on  and  issued  by  the  Governing  Board  of the 
Bank  enlarged  to  include  the  two  Councillors.  Cooperation  between  the  operational 
structures of the two institutions is extensive and growing. 
The  public  functions  assigned  to  us,  which  I  felt  it  was  appropriate  to  recall  here  today, 
require  adequate  technology  and,  even  more,  high  quality  human  resources.  The 
competence,  motivation  and  commitment  of  individual  staff  members  are  essential  to 
effective action and to the Bank’s reputation. We are taking steps to ensure that the Bank of 
Italy maintains its ability to attract talented young people who have successfully completed 
rigorous courses of study. We are well aware that we can still improve the organization of 
work,  through  reconsideration  of  the  assignments  and  the  professional  development  of 
individual employees, in fruitful dialogue with the trade unions. I join the Board of Directors 
and  the  Governing  Board  in  thanking  the  staff  of  the  Bank  for  the  capability,  spirit  and 
dedication with which they perform their duties. 
The exit from the sovereign debt crisis: monetary policy, Europe, Italy 
Financial  conditions  have  improved  greatly  in  the  euro  area  since  last  year.  After  Ireland, 
Greece and Portugal too are once again issuing government securities. Yields on Italy’s ten-
year BTPs have fallen to 3.0 per cent, less than half the peak figure recorded in November 
2011.  The  yield  spread  with  German  securities  is  now  around  160  basis  points;  it  had  hit 
550 points in November 2011 and was still 470 points in July 2012. 
The  contribution  of monetary  policy  has  been  crucial:  during  the most  acute  stages  of  the 
crisis  it  prevented  the  situation  from  precipitating;  it  helped  allay  investors’  fears  for  the 
integrity  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union;  it  accompanied  the  implementation  of 
important reforms at national level and in European governance. 
Since last summer there have been large inflows of capital from the emerging economies, 
mainly following the announcement by the Federal Reserve of its plan for tapering monetary 
accommodation. The resulting downward pressure on long-term euro interest rates could be 
transient; less expansionary monetary policy in the United States could provoke a rebound in 
global yields. Volatility on the financial markets in the advanced economies has subsided to 
well  below  the  historical  norm,  reaching  levels  that  in  the  past  sometimes  preceded  rapid 
changes  in  the  orientation  of  investors.  The  fluctuations  in  government  securities  yields  in 
recent weeks remind us just how sensitive the markets can be to any signs of uncertainty. 
The consolidation of the public finances in the countries hit by the crisis, necessary per se 
and  imperative  to  eliminate  any  doubts  about  debt  sustainability,  constitutes  a  guarantee 
against the rekindling of tensions on the sovereign debt markets in the euro area. However, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the combined costs of the recession and restrictive budgetary policies have been high. The 
economy and, in particular, the labour market remain fragile. 
Structural reforms make our economies more resilient to future shocks, but it will take time 
for  them  to  yield  their  full  fruits.  Income  support  for  those  worst  hit  by  the  crisis  and  re-
employment mechanisms for workers forced out of traditional production work can make a 
contribution. In addition to expansionary policies in the countries where the public finances 
allow it, concerted action at European level could help to boost investment and consumption 
demand. The opportunities provided by favourable external conditions must not be missed; 
the  conditions for  transforming  the  capital  now  available  into  lasting  productive  investment 
have to be guaranteed. 
Monetary policy and Europe 
Monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  now  faces  challenges  somewhat  different  from  those 
addressed over the last two years. Economic activity returned to growth in 2013, but only in 
part of the euro area and at very uneven speeds. The most recent data confirm this. Credit 
market  conditions  remain  difficult.  Financial  fragmentation  along  national  lines  has 
diminished  but  it  has  not  disappeared.  Above  all,  there  has  been  a  sharp  reduction  in 
consumer  price  inflation;  since  the  middle  of  last  year  the  rate  of  inflation  has  been  well 
below the ECB Governing Council’s definition of price stability. 
During 2013 we lowered the official interest rates twice, in May and in November, bringing 
the  cost  of the  main  refinancing  operations  to  an  all-time  low  of  0.25  per  cent. In  July  we 
began  to  provide  explicit  indications  of  our  monetary  policy  stance,  announcing  that  the 
official interest rates would remain at or below the then current level for an extended period, 
in consideration of the outlook for inflation, the weakness of the real economy, and monetary 
and  credit  dynamics.  This  forward  guidance  attenuated  the  volatility  of  short-term  interest 
rates. 
The rapidity of the fall in inflation has surprised the main forecasters, who have revised their 
short- and medium-term expectations downwards. This pattern has been more pronounced 
in the countries directly hit by the sovereign debt crisis, but it is common to the entire euro 
area.  It  reflects  not  only  the  fall  in  energy  prices,  compounded  by  the  appreciation  of  the 
euro, but also the persistent weakness of the economy. Core inflation has fallen to its lowest 
levels since the introduction of the single currency. 
Just like excessively high rates of inflation – and we can still well remember how difficult it 
was  to  overcome  that  problem  more  than  twenty  years  ago  –  prices  that  are  growing  too 
slowly  are  also  detrimental  to financial  stability,  especially  when  public  and  private  debt  is 
high and growth is weak. Excessively low inflation must be countered with equal firmness, 
also to prevent it from being incorporated into medium-term expectations. The formation of 
expectations  is  not  a  linear  process:  even  large  changes  can  materialize  very  quickly, 
discontinuously. 
Since July 2012 the euro has appreciated by an average of 9 per cent against a basket of 
other  currencies;  against  the  dollar  it  has  gained  12  per  cent.  The  appreciation  began 
following  the  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  which  allayed  fears  about 
the reversibility of the single currency that had turned investors away from financial assets 
issued  in  some  euro-area  countries.  The  exchange  rate  is  not  in  itself  a  monetary  policy 
target,  but  at  this  stage  the  euro’s  appreciation  has  compressed  consumer  price  inflation, 
both  directly,  by  reducing  the  prices  of  imported  goods,  and  indirectly,  by  increasing 
competitive pressure on domestic products. 
Eurosystem inflation projections will be made public on 5 June. According to those published 
in March by the ECB, inflation is expected to remain well below 2 per cent over the next two 
years. This is not consistent with our definition of price stability. If this pattern is confirmed, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the Governing Council is determined to act, even with unconventional policies, to ensure that 
in the medium term price developments do not diverge from the desired path. 
Albeit in a situation of emergency, and not without some hesitancy, European policies have 
achieved significant progress during the crisis: the strengthening of fiscal rules, the extension 
of multilateral surveillance to macroeconomic imbalances other than those of public finances, 
the establishment of common funds for financial assistance to countries in difficulty, and the 
launch of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
As I have observed on other occasions, the euro is a currency without a state and suffers 
from this deficiency. To complete the journey towards integration other essential elements of 
sovereignty need to be shared; Banking Union, now being implemented, should be followed 
by the creation of a true common budget. Designing instruments that will make it possible to 
intervene in support of economic growth and better public welfare would help the European 
Union to regain the consensus that has been partially lost. 
In  the  shorter  term,  the  central  bank  can  support  domestic  demand  through  the  pursuit  of 
monetary  stability.  But  the  return  to  sustained  and  balanced  growth  requires  broader 
economic policy action at European level. Measures must be taken immediately to speed up 
the creation of infrastructure, both tangible and intangible, indispensable to the formation of a 
true  single  market.  Joint  intervention  would  help  to  give  market  expectations  a  positive 
orientation. 
The Italian economy 
In Italy, the long recession in progress since 2008 with only a brief interruption came to a halt 
at the end of last year, mainly thanks to foreign demand and to the reduced need for fiscal 
adjustment.  A  contribution  came  from  the  accelerated  payment  of  general  government 
commercial  debts.  A  real  recovery  is  struggling  to  get  under  way,  however.  The  gradual 
improvement  in  expectations  has  been  slow  to  translate  into  a  solid  upturn  in  economic 
activity. 
The  recession  has  left  a  burdensome  legacy.  Many  Italian  companies  have  managed  to 
safeguard  their  shares  of  foreign  markets  and  some  have  increased  them;  the  current 
account  is  back  in  surplus,  even  on  a  cyclically  adjusted  basis.  But  the  contraction  in 
domestic activity has been dramatic: industrial production has shrunk by 25 per cent overall. 
In the last quarter of 2013, while exports were almost back to the same level as at the end of 
2007, household consumption was still down by about 8 per cent and investment by 26 per 
cent, with a capacity loss in manufacturing of approximately 15 per cent. Although there are 
signs that confidence is picking up, the need to compensate for the erosion of accumulated 
savings and uncertainty about prospective income in the medium to long term will continue to 
weigh  on  household  consumption.  Household  spending  can  benefit  from  the  recently 
approved tax cuts, but it will not become the driving force of the recovery without an enduring 
increase in employment. 
The recession has had a heavy impact on the number of persons in employment and hence 
on household income. Between 2007 and 2013 employment fell by more than a million, with 
almost  all  of  the  contraction  in  industry;  the  average  number  of  hours  worked  also 
decreased. The unemployment rate has more than doubled compared with the low point of 
2007,  reaching  12.7  per  cent  in  March.  The  supply  of  jobs  will  only  begin  to  rise  slowly; 
usually the first variable to react to an increase in output is the number of hours worked per 
employee. 
We  must  not  underestimate  the  risk  that  a  further  lengthening  of  the  duration  of 
unemployment – and there are signs of this particularly in the South and among the younger 
population  –  may  erode  individual  skills  and  know-how  and  distance  them from those that 
firms require. In the past, deep recessions have been associated with extensive restructuring 
of  the  productive  system  that  has  resulted  in  the  introduction  of  new  labour-saving 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  is  responsible 
the  orientation  of  economic  policies 
technologies and organizational models. But the crisis can be the occasion for our firms to 
carry  out  and  extend  what  up  to  now  has  often  been  missing:  a  profound  renewal  of  the 
mode of production in connection with the digital revolution, which can give life to new forms 
of enterprise and employment in new fields of activity. 
Productivity gains and employment growth can go hand in hand if domestic demand revives. 
The  key  is  the  growth  of  fixed  investment,  which  forms  the  linkage  between  demand  and 
supply.  On  the  one  hand,  given  the  right  external  conditions,  investment  is  the  demand 
component  that  reacts  most  promptly  to  changes  in  expectations,  while  on  the  other  it 
bolsters supply capacity by exploiting technical progress and responding to the globalization 
of markets and production processes. 
The ratio of gross investment to GDP has fallen by 4 percentage points since 2007, reaching 
a post-war low of 17 per cent in 2013. The difficulty of many firms in accessing bank credit 
has  been  a  factor.  But  it  is  above  all  the  widespread  uncertainty  over  the  prospects  for 
demand  growth  and 
that 
for 
postponements and cutbacks of plant restructuring and expansion plans. 
Towards the end of 2013 opinions of the conditions for investment became more favourable, 
especially among the largest companies. In manufacturing industry, spending plans suggest 
a stabilization this  year, thanks to the support of the capital goods component. These first 
positive signs can strengthen if the business environment improves. 
Economic  policy  measures  that  act  on  both  the  demand  and  the  supply  side  in  a 
comprehensive,  consistent  framework  can  support  economic  activity  in  the  short  term  and 
lend strength to the reform project. If that project is vast, vigorous and credible, it can alter 
the  course  of  expectations,  reinforcing  the  growth  of  investment,  employment  and 
consumption. The response to the acute phase of the crisis was notable, but the results have 
suffered  from  the  fragmentary  nature  of  the  interventions  and  from  the  incomplete 
implementation  of many  of  the measures  adopted,  in  some  cases  owing to  successive,  at 
times substantial revisions made to them soon after. 
It is important to build on the foundation of what has already been done. For example, thanks 
to the measures in the service sector, the OECD indicators show that Italy is now more open 
to competition. But at the end of last year only half of the implementing measures envisaged 
by the 69 reform laws passed between November 2011 and April 2013 had been issued. In 
the field of taxation, the rapid implementation of the enabling act can ensure greater certainty 
in  the  application  of  rules  and  sanctions  and  make  the  fight  against  tax  evasion  and 
avoidance more effective and closely targeted. 
The main shortcomings of our economic system and the prospects for reform, which are also 
the subject of the National Programme that the Government presented in April, are examined 
in a chapter of this year’s Report. The list of areas requiring action is long; among the most 
urgent 
the  public 
administration. 
Corruption,  criminal  activity  and  tax  evasion  not  only  undermine  the  community  but  also 
distort  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents  and  market  prices,  reduce  the  effectiveness  of 
governmental  action,  increase  the  tax  burden  on  those  who  do  their  duty,  and  compress 
productive investment and job creation. A well-functioning public administration improves the 
operation of markets and competition, reduces firms’ costs, and is reflected in the quality and 
cost of public services and thus on the tax burden. The efficacy of the reforms depends on it. 
Restrictive  regulation  and  a  legal  and  institutional  environment  that  is  unfriendly  to 
entrepreneurial activity hamper the transfer of resources towards the more efficient firms and 
sectors and the growth of productivity. The same elements also affect the Italian economy’s 
ability to attract investment from abroad, which is very poor compared with other economies, 
ultimately  curbing  the  diffusion  of  innovative  technologies  and  managerial  practices.  For 
legality  and  efficiency 
interventions  are 
to  safeguard 
those 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  potential investors, both Italian and foreign, the lengthiness and complexity of administrative 
procedures pose the most significant obstacle. 
In many cases the benefits of reforms are inevitably deferred. This is true, for example, of 
interventions  on  the  education  and  training  system,  a  subject  to  which  we  have  dedicated 
another  chapter  of  the  Report.  But  this  is  no  reason  to  postpone  action.  The  level  of 
education  and  skills  on  which  the  Italian  productive  economy  can  count  is  inadequate:  a 
recent OECD survey ranks Italy last for functional literacy and next to last for numeracy; the 
gap with the average of the other countries is also found among the younger age groups and 
increases with the level of educational qualification. 
Important progress has been made in adjusting the public finances. The deficit is equal to 
3 per  cent  of  GDP,  below  the  European  average.  With  Germany,  Italy  has  the  highest 
primary  surplus  in  Europe,  and  Italy  is  close  to  achieving  structural  budget  balance.  The 
reforms  of  the  past  years  have  reduced  the  pressure  of  demographic  trends  on  public 
expenditure, pressure which instead remains strong in many other countries of the Union. 
The lowering of the ratio of debt to GDP remains the ineluctable challenge for our country; its 
speed depends on a return to stable, rapid growth. Economic growth and budgetary balance 
can only be pursued in tandem. 
The results won with so much sacrifice must not be squandered. They make it possible to 
undertake  actions  in  support  of growth, for  example  by  continuing  to  shorten  the  payment 
times of general government entities and to reduce the tax wedge on labour. The budgetary 
rules  that  we  have  agreed  in  Europe  and  transposed  into  our  national  law  are  aimed  at 
ensuring the long-term sustainability of the public finances. The margins of flexibility that they 
afford can be exploited as part of a cogent strategy of structural reforms directed at clear and 
credible objectives. 
Careful  action  to  recoup  efficiency  in  the  public  administration,  conducted  as  part  of  the 
spending  review,  can  assist  a  reallocation  of  expenditure  to  the  benefit  of  the  more 
productive  items.  This  objective  should  be  accompanied  on  the  revenue  side  by  greater 
reliance on the less distortionary items at both central and local level. 
The  endowment  of  infrastructure,  in  which  Italy  is  inferior  to  the  other  main  European 
countries, influences firms’ productivity, their choices of where to locate and the quality of life 
of  the  population.  The  delays  accumulated  in  the  past  decades  reflect  not  so  much 
insufficient resources as inefficiency in their use, but in the last four years public investment 
expenditure has diminished by nearly 30 per cent. European resources and private capital 
can contribute in greater measure to the financing of infrastructure and territorial protection, 
with benefits for the building industry, which has been hit especially hard by the recession. 
Banks, credit, supervision 
In Italy, more than in other countries, the banks play a central role in financing the economy. 
Their business is concentrated in the traditional intermediation of savings, mostly within the 
country.  This  is  one  reason  why  they  withstood  the  initial  impact  of  the  crisis,  which 
originated  in foreign  markets  and  speculative  financial  products.  In  recent  years,  however, 
they  have  been  badly  hit  by  the  protracted  recession  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Our 
Annual  Report  details  the  role  of  the  banks  in  the  intermediation  of  Italians’  savings;  the 
Report on Operations and Activities describes the supervisory action of the Bank of Italy. 
Bank loans to households and firms at the end of 2013 exceeded €1.4 trillion and 90 per cent 
of gross domestic product. Credit accounts for almost two thirds of firms’ financial debt. More 
than one third of households’ financial wealth is invested in bank deposits and bonds. 
In  recent  years  the  exceptional  decline  in  GDP  has  undermined  the  soundness  of  many 
firms,  increasing  their  debt-service  burden.  The  repercussions  for  banks  have  been  very 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  serious: loan losses accumulated since 2008 amount to €130 billion; those in the past two 
years have absorbed almost all of banks’ operating profits. 
Banks have stemmed the deterioration of profitability by curbing costs. Between 2008 and 
2013 the number of employees in banking was reduced by 30,000 and 2,400 branches were 
closed. The cost-to-income ratio was lowered from 66.7 to 62.1 per cent. 
Following  the  collapse  of  funding  on  the  international  markets  in  autumn  2011,  extensive 
resort to the Eurosystem’s three-year refinancing operations enabled Italian banks to sustain 
a volume of lending to the economy that exceeded domestic funding and to meet the future 
redemption of bonds previously placed in foreign markets. 
With  large-scale  purchases  of  government  securities  the  banks  built  up  resources  to 
withstand  new  liquidity  crises,  at  a  time  when  the  increase  in  sovereign  risk  was  driving 
foreign  investors  away  from  Italian  markets.  Interest  income  and  capital  gains  on  these 
securities partly offset the heavy losses on loans to households and firms. In mid-2013, with 
the return to orderly market conditions, banks began to sell off government debt. 
The financing of the economy 
Total credit to the Italian economy is shrinking. But the aggregate data mask different trends 
for the various categories of borrower. Given the persistent uncertainty about the timing and 
strength of the recovery, businesses have lowered their demand for credit. The largest firms 
have  increased  their  recourse  to  the  bond  market.  In  2013  gross  placements  by  Italian 
issuers were close to €40 billion, almost twice the amount recorded in the years preceding 
the crisis. 
Credit supply restrictions are hardest on small and medium-sized firms, generally more risky 
and now especially weakened by the recession. In this setting the funding difficulties of firms 
with good growth opportunities but no direct access to the capital markets are a cause for 
concern. 
In the coming weeks the Bank of Italy will adopt measures to improve banks’ liquidity further, 
thereby facilitating lending to small and medium-sized firms. The range of loans eligible as 
collateral for Eurosystem refinancing will be extended. Innovations in the characteristics of 
contracts  will  enable  banks  to  pledge  new  types  of  loan  such  as  credit  lines  that  are 
widespread among small firms. Banks will be allowed to use loan portfolios with more flexible 
collateral management and with lower haircuts; it will be possible to include mortgage loans 
to households. 
The chief obstacle to the supply of financing continues to be credit risk. Non-performing bank 
loans, net of provisions, have risen to 10.0 per cent of total lending; bad debts alone account 
for 4.0 per cent. At a time when banks are deeply concerned about borrowers’ soundness 
and  prospects,  the  dearth  of  credit  has  been  alleviated  by  the  granting  of  government 
guarantees. 
In 2013 the Central Guarantee Fund accepted more than 77,000 applications to guarantee 
loans  amounting  to  almost  €11  billion.  Recent  measures  have  expanded  the  range  of 
potential  beneficiaries  of  the  Fund  and  more  than  doubled,  compared  with  the  previous 
period, the resources allocated for the three years 2014–16. A portion of these resources has 
nevertheless been earmarked for purposes other than those originally envisaged. They must 
not be dispersed: the piecemeal nature of the interventions risks reducing the effectiveness 
of an instrument whose purpose must continue to be to facilitate access to credit for small 
and medium-sized firms that have been weakened by the recession but are fundamentally 
sound. 
A  recovery  in  the  securitizations  market  could  help  reactivate  the  flow  of  credit  to  the 
economy. Enabling investors to make an informed assessment of these transactions requires 
rules that increase their transparency and standardization, and distinguish between complex 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  and simple products in favour of the latter. The European Commission recently announced 
initiatives that move in this direction. 
Italian  firms’  indebtedness  and  dependence  on  bank  credit  are  signs  of  their  financial 
vulnerability. With  almost  €1.3  trillion  in  financial  debt  and  €1.6 trillion  in  net  equity, Italian 
firms’ overall leverage is 44 per cent; bank loans account for 64 per cent of the total debt. For 
the euro area these ratios are considerably lower, averaging 39 and 46 per cent respectively. 
A  larger  endowment  of  equity  capital  could  facilitate  firms’  access  to  credit.  This,  together 
with  greater  diversification  of  the  sources  of  external  funding,  would  make  them  stronger. 
Bringing  financial  leverage  into  line  with  the  European  average  would  require  a  capital 
increase of around €200 billion and an equal reduction in debt: this is an ambitious objective 
but one within the reach of Italian firms in the medium term. Structural reforms to kick-start 
growth would attract equity-type funds from external investors and encourage entrepreneurs 
to  invest  their  own  resources,  thereby  being  the  first  to  show  confidence  in  their  firms’ 
prospects. 
Firms’ funding model reflects the structural traits of Italy’s economy, such as the modest size 
and  family-based  ownership  of  businesses.  Entrepreneurs  are  reluctant  to  admit  new 
partners or to raise funds directly on the market, partly owing to a taxation system that has 
long done little to favour equity capital. 
The  capital-building  incentive  introduced  by  Decree  Law  201/2011  (the  Allowance  for 
Corporate  Equity),  reinforced  by  the  2014  Stability  Law,  corrects  the  tax  disadvantage  of 
equity with respect to debt. It represents an important opportunity for all firms; it is estimated 
that almost 40 per cent of firms with 20 or more workers increased their capital in 2012–13. 
Supervisory action 
In 2013 the Bank of Italy continued the verification of the adequacy of loan loss provisions 
that  we  initiated  in  mid-2012.  The  supervisory  authority  continued  to  call  on  banks  to 
strengthen their capital in order to ensure their solidity. 
At times our interventions have been harshly criticized. We believe that they were decisive 
first to preserve and then to reinforce investors’ confidence in the banking system’s ability to 
withstand the impact of the crisis. Thanks in part to this action, in 2013, notwithstanding the 
sharp  increase  in  non-performing  loans,  the  coverage  ratio  on  them  went  up  from  39  to 
42 per cent. 
Core tier 1 capital rose from 7.1 per cent of risk-weighted assets in 2008 to 10.5 per cent in 
2013; substantial issues of new equity and retained profits contributed nearly €60 billion to 
the increase in capital. Capital strengthening proceeds: in the first five months of this year ten 
banking groups made or announced capital increases amounting to €11 billion; for the banks 
subject to the comprehensive assessment carried out at European level this will raise capital 
ratios by around one percentage point. 
Capital  strengthening  has  been  achieved  almost  entirely  with  private  capital.  The  Italian 
State’s  contribution  has  been  minimal;  it  reached  €4.8  billion  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013 
(0.3 per cent of GDP), a level far below those of most of the other European countries; it will 
be wiped out by the repayment of the State’s loan to Monte dei Paschi di Siena, of which 
€3 billion  has  already  been  authorized  by  the  Bank  of  Italy.  Overall,  public  support  for  the 
banks has generated substantial net gains for the Italian State. 
The banking foundations have participated in capital-raising operations, thereby contributing 
to the solidity of the banking system in the most difficult phase; sometimes, as a matter of 
choice or out of necessity, they have reduced the share of capital they owned. The inflows of 
resources  connected  with  investors’  renewed  confidence  in  Italy’s  prospects  provide  an 
opportunity for banks to strengthen their capital bases and for foundations to further diversify 
their assets. At the same time it is necessary, as I have indicated on several occasions, to 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  introduced 
for  cooperative  banks  encourage  shareholders 
reinforce the separation between foundations and banks by prohibiting persons from moving 
between the governing bodies of foundations and banks and extending the ban on control to 
cases in which it is exercised de facto, even jointly with other shareholders. 
For many small and medium-sized banks close relationships with their home territory are a 
source of stability, which has a beneficial effect on the local economy. However, a misguided 
interpretation  of  these  relationships  can  distort  the  disbursement  of  credit,  thereby 
jeopardizing  the  soundness  of  banks’  balance  sheets  and  the  efficient  allocation  of 
resources. Cases of this kind become more likely during prolonged recessions, such as the 
one  we  have  passed  through.  We  are  working  to  persuade  banks  to  strengthen  their 
operational, organizational and corporate governance safeguards in order to prevent credit 
relationships with customers from degenerating and to take remedial action when they do. 
Taking account of the numerous suggestions deriving from public consultation, the Bank of 
Italy  has  recently  issued  regulations  on  bank  governance.  The  rules  foster  the  correct 
exercise  of  the  functions  of  strategic  guidance,  management  and  control,  enhance  the 
functionality  of  decision-making  chains,  exert  downward  pressure  on  costs,  and  make 
directors  more  accountable.  Some  of  the  rules  are  immediately  applicable,  others  could 
require  banks  to  make  changes  to  their  bylaws,  to  be  implemented  without  delay.  The 
innovations 
to  attend 
shareholders’ meetings, foster internal debate and facilitate the raising of equity capital. 
Bank crises are often associated with weaknesses in corporate governance systems, which 
sometimes  breed  episodes  of  malfeasance.  The  Bank  of  Italy  tackled  11  new  cases  of 
intermediaries in difficulty in 2013 and another six in the first four months of this year. The 
banks  currently  under  special  administration  are  small  or  medium-sized;  they  account  for 
about 1 per cent of the total assets of the banking system. Since 2009, ten intermediaries 
have been placed directly in liquidation and 55 under special administration; about half the 
crisis  procedures  that  have  been  completed  saw  the  banks  return  to  ordinary  operations, 
including by way of takeovers. The continuity of customer services was guaranteed together 
with the protection of depositors. 
In the last two years 340 inspections were carried out at banks that accounted for 80 per cent 
of the banking system’s total assets. In 63 cases serious shortcomings were found in banks’ 
corporate governance. In 45 of these there were irregularities of a possibly criminal nature 
that were promptly reported to the judicial authorities. With the proper distinction of functions 
and instruments, cooperation with the magistracy is intense. 
Where necessary the Bank of Italy requests banks to radically renew their board of directors, 
strengthen their organizational structure and capital base, and draw up new business plans. 
This makes it possible to avoid recourse to crisis procedures, which might be required if the 
problems found persisted. Our action would become even more effective with the attribution 
of the power to remove a bank’s directors when necessary and on the basis of convincing 
evidence,  as  is  envisaged  in  the  draft  law  for  the  transposition  of  the  European  Capital 
Requirements Directive. 
Italy’s large banks, as well as granting loans, often hold equity interests in non-financial firms. 
Such shareholdings must not distort lending decisions or delay the emergence of borrowers’ 
difficulties.  The  risks  associated  with  these  relationships,  in  the  same  way  as  for  those 
deriving  from  dealings  with  counterparties  closely  related  to  banks,  must  be  carefully 
monitored  by  the  latter’s  governing  bodies. The Bank  of Italy  cannot  and  must  not  assess 
individual  lending  decisions  in  advance,  but  lays  down  rules  for  related-party  transactions 
and  checks  that  they  are  complied  with.  The  rules  are  intended  to  prevent  allocative 
distortions  and  minimize  conflicts  of  interest;  they  establish  quantitative  limits  to  risk, 
strengthened  decision-making  procedures,  organizational  safeguards  and  obligations  to 
inform the supervisory authority. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Banking Union and the implementation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism 
The  ongoing  construction  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  driving  forward  the 
Banking Union project, one aim of which is to counter the fragmentation of the euro area’s 
financial markets. The new European supervisory system shares the basic principles of the 
approach  followed  in  Italy:  emphasis  on  close  integration  of  on-  and  off-site  controls, 
quantitative  and  qualitative  assessment  of  risks,  and  close  linkage  between  the  results  of 
analyses and remedial action. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism for crises will come into operation in 2015. The handling 
of banking crises will involve numerous national and European institutions participating in the 
context of a Single Resolution Board. Provision is made for recourse to a fund made up of 
contributions  paid  in  by  the  banks  themselves.  Even  though  the  decision-making  process 
appears complex and the pooled resources limited, the compromise reached is a further step 
towards the completion of Banking Union. 
Together with the ECB and the other national supervisory authorities, we are now conducting 
the  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  most  important  euro-area  banks.  The  aim  of  the 
exercise is to increase the transparency and reliability of banks’ balance sheets and increase 
the  market’s  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the  European  banking  system,  thereby 
contributing  to  the  recovery  of  lending  to  the  economy.  The  key  aspects  of  the 
comprehensive  assessment  are  an  asset  quality  review  and  a  stress  test  of  the  banks’ 
balance sheets. 
The  exercise  under  way  is  of  unprecedented  complexity,  both  in  terms  of  the  volume  of 
activities to be carried out and for their concentration in time. It considers a wide range of 
bank  assets,  going  from  loans  to  households  and  firms,  to  government  securities  and 
complex financial instruments, so-called third-level assets. 
In the cases where the assessment shows that a bank needs to raise its capital ratios, this 
can  be  done  in  several  ways,  ranging  from  not  distributing  profits  to  the  disposal  of  non-
strategic assets, the cutting of costs and the issue of new equity. The manner of carrying out 
these interventions and their timing will be determined in relation to the nature of the capital 
weakness  and  according  to  whether  it  derived  from  value  adjustments  to  balance-sheet 
items or from the results of stress tests. Capital-raising measures will have to be agreed with 
the national supervisory authorities. 
The credibility of the exercise and its success in restoring confidence in the soundness of the 
European banking system require that instruments of public intervention be available to act 
as financial backstops, as established by the European Council in June 2013 and reaffirmed 
by  the  Ecofin  Council  in  November. They  will  have  to  conform  with  the  basic  principles  of 
national and European law, with the ultimate objective of ensuring financial stability. 
The results of the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets will be published in 
October. The exercise is already making a contribution to the strengthening of banks’ capital 
bases.  The  effects  on  the  supply  of  credit  in  the  short  term  will  need  to  be  carefully 
monitored. In the longer run, the positive relationship between banks’ capital and growth in 
lending will be reinforced. 
The challenges immediately ahead 
In the  closing months  of  last  year the flow  of  new  bad  debts  began  to  diminish.  However, 
historical  experience  teaches  that  economic  recovery  will  improve  credit  quality  only 
gradually,  and  with  a  lag.  To  cope  with  the  additional  loan  loss  provisions  that  will  be 
necessary, the banking system will have to increase its efficiency further. 
The rationalization of the branch network is beginning to make a dent in operating costs, but 
there  is  still  ample  room  for  improvement  in  the  use  of  technology.  The  European-wide 
intensification  of  competition  in  the  banking  market  that  will  stem  from  the  shift  to  single 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supervision  will  stimulate  a  rethinking  of  banks’  business  models,  organization  and 
distribution methods. The structural measures on banking now under discussion at European 
level can work in the same direction, with effects circumscribed to a limited number of banks. 
Mergers based on solid economic foundations and market logic can facilitate the recouping 
of efficiency. In considering proposed mergers, the Bank of Italy weighs their compliance with 
the regulations and with the standards of sound and prudent management. 
Banks  must  reduce  the  volume  of  non-performing  loans  in  order  to  free  up  the  resources 
needed  to  finance  the  economy.  There  is  growing  interest  in  these  assets  on  the  part  of 
specialized investors, who are now willing to pay higher prices than in the past thanks to the 
easing  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  reduction  in  risk  premiums.  The  revival  of  this 
market also benefits from the increase in provisioning, which translates into a decline in the 
prices  at  which  banks  are  prepared  to  dispose of  these  loans. The  market  is  also  gaining 
from the recent changes in the tax treatment of loan losses, which have reduced – but not 
eliminated – Italy’s strong fiscal disincentives to the prudent valuation of risk. 
Some disposals of non-performing assets have already taken place, and others may be well-
received by national and international investors. Several large banks are acting to rationalize 
their  management  of  non-performing  loans  by  creating  special  units  for  the  purpose.  The 
need to shrink the stock of impaired loans arises also for smaller banks, which could find it 
hard to develop autonomous strategies for dealing with them. 
 The year 2013 was another trying one for Europe and for the Italian economy, harder than 
had been predicted twelve months back. The exit from the recession remains laborious, the 
recovery  fragile  and  uncertain.  In  Italy,  as  elsewhere,  there  is  no  lack  of  positive  signs: 
capital inflows are growing, consumer confidence is strengthening, manufacturing orders are 
rising. In order to consolidate these gains, it is necessary to build on what has been done so 
far, moving vigorously ahead on the path of reform and promoting the drive for efficiency in 
public services as in the private sector. We also know that gains in productivity, stagnant for 
too  long,  must  be  accompanied  by  the  expansion  of  demand,  and  hence  the  growth  of 
household  income,  which  has  to  be  sustained  by  the  formation  of  new  jobs.  Investment  – 
private and public, Italian and European – is essential. 
The union of the nations of Europe, whose fullest expression to date is the euro, is a work in 
progress that the  peoples  of  the  continent  must  be  able  to  believe  in,  to  recognize  as  the 
source  of  peace  and  prosperity.  What  is  asked  of  the  institutions  is  policies  to  make  the 
European construction robust but that also respond to the challenges of our time. We are all 
citizens of this Europe, and together we must make it grow – and not only in economic terms. 
In  the  face  of  public  opinion  that  is  divided,  not  always  well  informed,  the  need  is  for 
profoundly European policies, implemented within the limits of national responsibilities but in 
the spirit of cooperation. Monetary policy and Banking Union are two key areas in which the 
Bank of Italy is intensely engaged. 
In  monetary  management  the  primary  objective  is  price  stability.  Monetary  policy  as  such 
cannot stimulate productivity or determine growth paths. But these are premised upon stable 
monetary conditions,  which the Governing Council of the ECB is striving to ensure. As for 
banks, which are now subject to common rules and single supervision, in Italy they remain 
the  fundamental  pillar  for  financing  the  economy.  For  them  to  continue  raising  capital  and 
borrowing  in  the  markets,  which  is  indispensable  to  the  performance  in  full  of  their 
intermediation function, their governance must be strengthened, integrity of conduct must be 
guaranteed, and profitability must be increased. The possible repercussions of taxation and 
other burdens on their ability to compete in an integrated financial market must be weighed 
carefully. 
The recovery of the economy and renewed creation of jobs depend on the ability to finance 
deserving  investment  projects.  Even  in  the  present  difficult  phase,  this  is  the  fundamental 
task to  be  performed  by  bank  credit,  with  the  crucial  support  of  capital  invested  directly  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  firms  and  resources  procured  in  the  market.  Compliance  with  the  rules  and  transparent 
conduct are essential conditions, and we shall continue to monitor them. 
The path to recovery – economic and beyond – will be neither short nor easy. Uncertainty is 
intrinsic to the rapid transition towards a radically different world, more open and mobile, in 
which  protections  for  the  vulnerable  must  go  hand-in-hand  with  opportunities  for  young 
people.  Ambitious  policies  need  to  be  embodied  in  a  clear,  comprehensive  set  of  actions. 
Investors,  workers  and  consumers  must  be  presented  with  a  programme  that  takes  due 
account  of  all  the  aspects  of  society  and  the  economy  that  need  to  be  reformed,  fosters 
innovation,  inculcates  observance  of  the  law,  adheres  to  the  principles  of  efficiency  and 
equity, and rewards merit and responsibility. Although single measures may come at different 
times, not just for budgetary reasons, the visibility of such a coherent design will reassure 
citizens and bolster faith in the future, without which all progress is inconceivable. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
