  Gill Marcus: Press conference in connection with African Bank Limited 
Remarks  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  press 
conference in connection with African Bank Limited, Pretoria, 10 August 2014. 
 Members of the media, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you all for being here today. 
As you are aware from our invitation, we have called today’s press conference in connection 
with African Bank Limited. 
Against the backdrop of African Bank’s parent company African Bank Investment Limited’s 
(ABIL’s) trading update on Wednesday, 6th August, 2014, the SARB, in consultation with the 
Minister of Finance, has decided to implement a number of support measures. 
These  will  further  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system  as  a  whole,  and, 
importantly, they will provide African Bank with the best chance of a viable future. 
As you are all aware, African Bank has received considerable media coverage for some time 
now.  The  Registrar  of  Banks  and  his  team  intensified  their  active  engagement  with  the 
management  and  board  of  African  Bank  towards  the  end  of  2012.  The  concerns  they 
expressed particularly focussed on African Bank’s impairment and provisioning policy, their 
rapid credit growth, and the need for a strategic rethink of their business model. 
Given  these  concerns,  regular  discussions  were  held  by  the  Governors  with  the  Banking 
Supervision Department to ensure closer monitoring of developments affecting African Bank. 
These meetings  commenced  in  May  2013,  and the Governors received  regular  reports  on 
measures  taken  by  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  on  the  steps  they  required  African 
Bank to take in addressing the concerns. 
At that stage, African Bank had a capital adequacy ratio of 32%, which is above the minimum 
requirement. 
The measures taken by African Bank as a result of this engagement included a higher level 
of  provisioning for  non-performing  loans,  a review  of  their  provisioning  policy,  and  a  rights 
issue  that  raised  R 5.5 billion  in  December  2013. The management  was  also  requested to 
dispose of Ellerine Holdings Limited. 
At  the  initiative  of  the  SARB,  discussions  were  also  held  with  ABIL’s  board  to  appoint  a 
specialist team to assist with restructuring options. 
In the six month period to March 2014, ABIL posted a headline loss of R 3.1 billion. However, 
they assured the market that the book written after June 2013 was significantly better and 
forecast that they would return to profitability in the second half of the year. ABIL’s trading 
statement for the third quarter released on August 6th 2014 was markedly worse than what 
the  market  expected,  with  an  estimated  headline  loss  for  the  full  year  to  September  2014 
financial year of R 6.4 billion. 
Ellerine  Holdings  Ltd,  like  African  Bank,  is  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  ABIL.  Ellerine 
Furnishers has been a significant drain on ABIL, requiring funding support of a minimum of 
R 70 million per month. 
The  ABIL  Board  announced  its  decision  to  sell  Ellerine  and  endeavoured  to  find  a  buyer. 
African Bank is the only South African bank exposed in this way to a furniture chain. Ellerine 
Furnishers  was  placed  into  a  business  rescue  process  on  7th  August  2014.  One  of  the 
outcomes  of  this  is  that  the  significant  monthly  financial  support  required  from  ABIL  and 
African Bank has ended. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The problems that have beset African Bank are, in our view, largely specific to their current 
business model, which does not include a diversified set of products and income streams, 
nor does it offer transactional banking services. This has made African Bank and the ABIL 
Group  uniquely  vulnerable  to  a  changing  or  challenging  business  environment,  such  as 
currently prevails. 
It is against this backdrop that the decision has been taken to introduce a range of support 
measures for African Bank. 
The first important measure has been the conclusion reached by the Registrar of Banks and 
the decision by the Minister of Finance to place African Bank under curatorship with effect 
from 16.00 today, 10th August 2014. 
African Bank Limited’s Board has, after due consideration, advised the Registrar that it does 
not oppose curatorship and has taken the appropriate resolutions to facilitate the process. 
The curatorship provides the legal framework within which the necessary initiatives to enable 
resolution can take place. The Minister has appointed Mr Tom Winterboer as the curator. He 
will  be  responsible  for  African  Bank  with  immediate  effect,  with  the  full  authority  the  law 
confers on the curator. 
Tom  Winterboer  is  the  financial  services  industry  leader  for  Africa  and  a  member  of  the 
global financial services leadership team at PwC. You will be provided with his CV as part of 
the press pack and I would like to introduce him to you now. Mr Winterboer will be assisted in 
his task of securing a viable future for African Bank by a team of experts, including Mr Peter 
Spratt and Mr David Gard from PwC London. Mr Gard, who has been appointed as Senior 
Advisor,  Business  Restructuring,  has  been  working  with  African  Bank  for  the  past  four 
weeks. He will take particular responsibility for assisting the curator on the restructuring plan. 
Mr Spratt has been appointed as Special Advisor to the curator. Other members of the team 
will be announced by Mr Winterboer in due course. He will also ensure that there is a specific 
help line to answer questions that clients of African Bank may have. 
The curatorship is a protection procedure which gives the SARB the legal means to create 
the necessary space to implement a resolution plan capable of ensuring that the business of 
African  Bank  gains  a  secure  perspective  for  the  future  as  a  lending  institution  with  a 
transformed business model. 
The curatorship and resolution process will: 
• 
ensure  that  the  regular  operations  and  collections  of  African  Bank  continue 
effectively and efficiently 
identify performing loans and assets to be maintained in a good bank 
involve the purchase by the SARB of a substantial portion of the non- and under-
performing assets and other high risk loans from African Bank in order to separate 
them  from  the  good  bank,  and  also  as  a  first  step  towards  resolution  of  the 
challenges associated with these assets and loans 
recapitalise the new entity by a capital raising of some R 10 billion underwritten by a 
consortium 
provide current shareholders an opportunity to participate in the recapitalisation of 
the new entity and thereby of good bank 
   The measures that have been taken are, in our view, in the best interest of all stakeholders, 
whether depositors, shareholders, creditors, or clients. 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  package  of  proposals  that  will  guide  Mr  Winterboer  in  his 
endeavours to find resolution. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Firstly,  I  want  to  emphasise  that  African  Bank  continues  to  operate  during  the  curatorship 
and  that  Mr Winterboer will  make  decisions  regarding the  continued  granting  of  loans  and 
sound banking activities generally. African Bank continues to be open for business. 
Secondly,  retail  depositors  represent  less  than  1%  of  African  Bank’s  creditors.  We  are 
therefore able to make an unequivocal commitment to all existing retail depositors that their 
money is safe, and that they can continue with African Bank as their bank without fear that 
their deposits will be frozen or lost. They will have full access to their money in the ordinary 
course of business. 
Thirdly, the resolution will see a private/public sector partnership. A consortium has been put 
together by the private sector. The consortium comprises Absa Bank Limited, Capitec Bank, 
FirstRand  Bank  Limited,  Investec  Bank  Limited,  Nedbank  Limited,  Standard  Bank  Limited, 
and the Public Investment Corporation (PIC). The consortium has committed to underwrite a 
R 10 billion  capital  raising,  and  will  –  under  the  guidance  of  Mr Winterboer  –  be  engaging 
with  shareholders  and  other  interested  parties  in  this  regard.  Members  of  the  consortium 
have also offered to provide management and technical support. 
Resolution will see African Bank split into two parts: 
• 
On the one hand a good bank, which will be recapitalised as indicated above. Let 
me emphasise here that the R 10 billion recapitalisation is for the good bank, which 
has a book value of R 26 billion net of portfolio impairments 
On the other hand the bad book, which comprises a substantial portion of the non- 
and  under-performing  assets,  will  be  housed  in  a  vehicle  with  the  support  of  the 
SARB in order to separate these from the good bank. As a result, the bad book will 
no longer form part of African Bank 
– 
the  bad  book  currently  has  a  book  value  net  of  specific  impairments  of 
R 17 billion for which the SARB will pay R 7 billion 
collection  against  the  bad  book  will  be  continued,  and  indeed  strengthened: 
there is no payment holiday for anyone owing on a loan from African Bank 
  Every  effort  will  be  made  to  ensure that  collections  continue  with  the goal  of  avoiding  any 
cost to the taxpayer arising out of this measure. A claw back arrangement will be put in place 
for the bad book to the extent that performance exceeds expectations. 
The proposal for the restructuring of the liabilities of African Bank is set out below: 
• 
existing  depositors,  specified  sundry  creditors  and  instrument  holders  will  be 
restructured and assumed by the good bank as follows: 
‒ 
‒ 
retail depositors and specified sundry creditors will be transferred at full value 
senior debt instruments and wholesale deposits (excluding subordinated debt 
holders)  will  be  transferred  at  90%  of  face  value  following  the  restructuring 
(the absolute interest rate will be based on the revised face value) 
all other liabilities will remain in African Bank 
‒ 
existing  ordinary  shareholders  and  subordinated  debt  holders  will  be  afforded  the 
opportunity to participate in the good bank 
it is intended that the good bank holding company will be listed on the JSE in due 
course, and will include the acquisition at fair value of the various insurance entities 
within the ABIL Group 
  An  important  aspect  of  the  curatorship  is  that  the  curator  has  the  discretion  to  suspend 
payments of interest. While interest continues to accrue, he is expected to suspend interest 
payments generally with immediate effect except for interest payments on retail deposits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  We are greatly encouraged by the active and committed response by the private sector to 
partner us in seeking resolution for African Bank. We believe that the package that has been 
put together with the support of the consortium is  workable and substantive. Shareholders 
will have an opportunity, by following their rights in the capital raising, to participate in the 
recapitalisation. 
We take the opportunity to repeat what we said in our statement last week: 
South Africa’s banking sector remains healthy and robust. 
There  have  been  no  indications  that  other  South  African  banks  have  been 
affected negatively by ABIL’s trading update or African Bank’s current situation. 
This remains the case following today’s announcement. 
The role of banking supervisors is to make every effort to ensure that South Africa’s banks 
have  adequate  capital,  liquidity,  and  leverage  ratios,  as  well  as  sound  governance  and 
appropriate  policies.  We  are,  and  will  remain,  an  active  supervisor.  But  this  can  never 
substitute for management’s role and its responsibility to manage a bank. Nor can it remove 
a  Board’s  responsibility  to  ensure  sound  policies  and  practices  in  relation  to  corporate 
governance, effective risk management, as well as the strategic direction of a bank. 
Notwithstanding  the  challenges  facing  African  Bank,  government’s  policy  of  financial 
inclusion  is  appropriate  and  important.  This  requires  sound  practices,  appropriate  lending 
relating  to  affordability  and  an  increased  effort  to  provide  greater  access  to  finance  for 
entrepreneurs  as  well  as  small  and  medium  enterprises.  This  will  continue  to  be  the 
challenge for all of us going forward as we, together, continue to maintain the strength of the 
banking and financial system. 
Thank you and I will now take questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
