  Mario Draghi: Euro area economic outlook, the ECB’s monetary policy 
and current policy challenges 
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  prepared  for  the 
twenty-ninth  meeting  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee,  Washington 
DC, 10 April 2014. 
 I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  euro  area  economic  outlook,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and 
current policy challenges. 
The recovery in the euro area is ongoing. Euro area real GDP has now increased for three 
consecutive quarters and recent survey data are consistent with a continuation of this trend. 
Looking  ahead,  a  strengthening  contribution  from  domestic  demand  should  materialise, 
supported  by  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance,  ongoing  improvements  in 
financing conditions working their way through to the real economy, and the progress made 
by euro area countries in terms of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. In addition, real 
incomes are positively influenced by moderate commodity price developments, in particular 
lower  energy  prices.  Economic  activity  is  also  expected  to  benefit  from  a  gradual 
strengthening of demand for euro area exports. At the same time, however, unemployment in 
the euro area remains high, even if labour markets have shown first signs of improvement, 
and,  overall,  unutilised  capacity  is  sizeable.  Moreover,  the  necessary  balance  sheet 
adjustments  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  will  continue  to  weigh  on  the  pace  of  the 
economic recovery. The risks surrounding the euro area economic outlook continue to be on 
the downside. They relate to geopolitical risks and an insufficient implementation of structural 
reforms in euro area countries as well as to developments in global financial markets and in 
emerging market economies. 
Recent  information  remains  consistent  with  our  expectation  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
inflation  that  will  be  followed  by  a  gradual  upward  movement  in  consumer  prices  (HICP 
inflation  rates)  during  2015  to  reach  levels  closer  to  2%  towards  the  end  of  2016.  The 
gradual  decline  in  euro  area  inflation  rates  since  last  summer  primarily  reflects  negative 
contributions  from  energy  prices  as  well  as  a  substantial  fall  in  unprocessed  food  price 
inflation.  At  the  same  time,  medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly 
anchored in line with our definition of price stability. Both upside and downside risks to the 
outlook for price developments remain limited, and broadly balanced over the medium term. 
In  this  context,  the  possible  repercussions  of  geopolitical  risks  and  exchange  rate 
developments will be monitored closely. 
The ECB’s monetary policy stance continues to be geared towards maintaining the degree of 
monetary accommodation warranted by the outlook for price stability. It thereby assists the 
gradual  recovery  in  economic  activity.  Looking  ahead,  the  ECB  is  resolute  in  its 
determination  to  maintain  a  high  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  and  to  act  swiftly  if 
required.  Hence,  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  does  not  exclude  further  monetary  policy 
easing and it firmly reiterates that it continues to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain 
at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation is based on an 
overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based 
weakness of the economy, the high degree of unutilised capacity and subdued money and 
credit  dynamics.  The  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using  also 
unconventional instruments within the ECB’s mandate in order to cope effectively with risks 
of  a  too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  closely  following 
developments on money markets. 
Since  the  summer  of  2012,  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  improving  the  funding 
situation of banks in the euro area. In order to ensure an adequate transmission of monetary 
policy to financing conditions in all euro area countries, the fragmentation of euro area credit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  markets  should  decline  further  and  the  resilience  of  banks  must  be  strengthened  where 
needed. The comprehensive assessment by the ECB, which is now well underway, will make 
an important contribution in this regards. It should also foster transparency of banks’ balance 
sheets and strengthen confidence in the banks, thereby supporting a revival of bank credit in 
the euro area. As a matter of fact, banks in the euro area are continuing to strengthen their 
balance sheets already ahead of the execution phase of the asset quality review by the ECB 
and  the  subsequent  stress  test  foreseen  for  the  autumn.  The  ECB  is  also  contributing 
towards a revitalisation of the asset-backed securities market in Europe, which would be an 
important  avenue  to  further  support  credit  flows  in  the  euro  area  and  for  the  credit 
transmission channel. 
Important further progress on the road to banking union has been made since the previous 
IMFC  meeting.  The  ECB’s  internal  preparations  for  the  operational  start  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  are  well  underway.  The  Supervisory  Board  has  been  fully 
operational  since  the  start  of  this  year  and  is  among  other  things  finalising  the  SSM 
supervisory model. On the legislative front, political agreements have been reached at the 
European level between the EU Council and the European Parliament on the Bank Recovery 
and  Resolution  Directive  and  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Schemes  Directive.  More  recently, 
agreement  has  also  been  reached  on  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  with  an 
effective governance and a clear road map towards constituting a Single Resolution Fund. In 
combination with the agreement to enhance the Fund’s borrowing capacity, this will help to 
break the link between national banking systems and sovereigns within the euro area and it 
will protect taxpayers’ money in the orderly resolution, notably, of cross-border cases. It is 
important now to keep up the legislative momentum, also at the national level, in order for the 
SSM  and  the  SRM  to  become  operational  within  approximately  one  year.  It  is  worth 
acknowledging the very significant progress that has been made in less than two years on 
Europe’s ambitious commitment to build a genuine banking union. 
As  regards  fiscal  policies,  euro  area  countries  have  made  substantial  progress  with  fiscal 
consolidation  over  the  past  few  years.  In  the  euro  area,  the  average  budget  deficit  has 
halved  compared  with  the  peak  level  during  the  crisis.  This  has  created  some  room  for 
slowing the pace of consolidation. However, we must avoid the pitfall of being complacent in 
order not to repeat the mistakes from pre-crisis times. Euro area countries should not unravel 
past consolidation achievements and should put high government debt ratios on a downward 
trajectory over the medium term, in line with the Stability and Growth Pact. Fiscal strategies 
should  ensure  a  growth-friendly  composition  of  consolidation  to  achieve  better  quality  and 
more efficient public services. In this respect, we welcome the work presented in the last two 
editions  of  the  IMF  Fiscal  Monitor  on  identifying  well-designed  and  growth-friendly 
consolidation measures on the revenue and expenditure sides of the budget. 
Lastly, although major progress has been made, euro area countries need to strengthen their 
efforts  to  reform  their  labour  and  product  markets  in  a  decisive  way  in  order  to  improve 
competitiveness,  raise  potential  growth  and  generate  employment  opportunities.  More 
precisely,  labour  markets  need  to  be  more  inclusive,  flexible  and  resilient,  while  product 
markets,  including  those  for  services,  should  be  made  more  efficient  and  dynamic.  In 
addition,  countries  should  take  further  steps  towards  improving  the  business  environment 
and more growth-friendly taxation. Bold and effective implementation of these measures is 
crucial and primarily in the interest of the individual countries. At the same time, it is key for 
strengthening  the  functioning  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  and  will  support  the 
global recovery. Finally, it is also fully congruent with the call of the IMF Managing Director in 
her Global Policy Agenda for the euro area to make its contribution to reinvigorating global 
growth and employment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
