  
 
Deepali Pant Joshi: Banks must build a structure to provide superior and 
efficient customer service 
Inaugural address by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at the Conference of Principal Code Compliance Officers of banks, convened by the Banking 
Codes & Standards Board of India (BCSBI), Mumbai, 20 May 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Respected  Shri  Mahajan,  Smt  Rama  Bijapurkar,  member,  Governing  Council,  Banking 
Standards  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of  India  (BCSBI),  Shri  N  Raja,  CEO,  BCSBI  and 
banker colleagues. At the very outset, I thank Shri Mahajan, Chairman, BCSBI for the kind 
invitation  to  address  Principal  Code  Compliance  Officers  of  the  BCSBI,  this  afternoon.  I 
attach a great deal of value to this interaction. The day long deliberations will provide you the 
opportunity to 
• 
Code of Bank’s Commitment to Customers and 
Code of Bank’s Commitment to Micro and Small Enterprises 
Brainstorm  with  PCCOs  of  the  member  banks  on  issues  relating  to  Code 
implementation. 
Discuss how to raise the bar for customer service in your own banks.  
Share experiences and good practices. 
• 
• 
The Banking Codes and Standards Board of India is an autonomous and independent body 
set up by the Reserve Bank. BCSBI is mandated to evolve Codes and Standards for banks 
to follow while dealing with their customers so as to ensure that the customers are enabled 
certain minimum standards of customer service. BCSBI has developed two sets of Codes for 
member banks viz.  
1. 
2. 
These Codes are periodically reviewed and revised in order to reflect the extant regulatory 
guidelines,  contemporary  developments  in  the  banking  sector  and  evolving  customer 
expectations. 
Consumer confidence and trust in a well-functioning market for financial services promotes 
financial stability, growth efficiency and innovation over the long term. (Chart) 
Financial consumer protection, when reinforced with financial inclusion and financial literacy, 
will lead to enhanced financial stability. We have had a great thrust on financial inclusion; as 
a result, several new consumers of banking products have come into the banking system. 
We have to ensure adequate customer protection for these new users of banking services. 
We have to help them through financial education, literacy and awareness to use the diverse 
range of products and services offered by the banks. Awareness of the customer has to be 
increased.  With  greater  awareness  of  customers,  must  come,  heightened  responsibility  of 
the provider of financial services. Please appreciate that today RBI, BCSBI and banks are all 
working under a greater lens of public scrutiny and under Right To Information. Implementing 
the  consumer  protection  framework  in  such  an  environment  necessitates  that  banks  have 
complete knowledge of products and services offered and treat their customers fairly. This 
idea by itself does not mean much to the customers unless it is set against metrics enshrined 
in standards and codes. 
Through customer protection initiatives banks must ensure adequate protection of rights of 
their  individual,  vulnerable,  small  customers.  As  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan  expressed  in  his 
Seminal  Report,  A  Hundred  Small  Steps  -  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector 
Reforms  and  I  quote  “Consumer  protection  is  important.  Not  every  household  is  fully 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  cognisant of the transactions they enter into. While the line between excessive paternalism 
and appropriate individual responsibility is always hard to draw in a developing country like 
ours, it may well veer to a little more paternalism in interactions between financial firms and 
less sophisticated households”. In his much acclaimed book “Fault Lines”, the Governor has 
addressed the issue of multiple fault lines caused by a sophisticated, amoral and competitive 
financial  sector.  We  need  to  guard  against  such  fault  lines  by  ensuring  that  our  banking 
sector  which  has  done  well  so  far  continues  to  do  so.  We  have  a  banking  system  which 
abides by the laws, which is sensitive and empathetic to the needs of customers and has a 
robust grievance redress mechanism. 
The Pan India Banking Ombudsman Scheme functions as an inexpensive, swift grievance 
redress mechanism. Banking Ombudsman has to work through the processes of conciliation 
mediation and adjudication. Here, the nodal officer has an important role to play. The rules 
require that the banks must first examine the complaint and try to resolve it. It is necessary 
for the nodal officer to give a swift revert on the complaint to the Banking Ombudsman. It is 
also essential for the nodal officer to do a root cause analysis and drill down to the specific 
cause  of  the  complaint  to  ensure  that  the  same  is  addressed.  For  every  complaint  that  is 
received,  there  may  be  several  such  irritants  across  branches,  or  there  may  even  be  a 
systemic issue underlying the complaints which may be serious. 
All the member banks have adopted these codes, drawn up in consultation with the member 
banks through IBA. At ground level, the position of code implementation is not satisfactory. 
Complaints received by  Banking Ombudsman Offices across the country and also through 
interactions with customers in Town Hall meetings by both Banking Ombudsmen and BCSBI 
clearly reflect the need to raise the benchmark for customer service through more effective 
implementation of these codes. 
BCSBI  monitors  and  assesses  the  compliance  with  its  codes  and  standards.  These 
assessments bring into sharp focus the flagrant violations of the code and shortcomings in 
code implementation. This aspect merits serious attention by PCCOs. 10% of the member 
banks rated by BCSBI in 2012-13 have good rating, with 52% earning Above Average and 
38%  earning  Average/Below  Average  ratings.  These  clearly  show  that  a  number  of  banks 
need  to  tone  up  their  code  implementation  and  thereby  fulfil  their  commitments  to  their 
customers in terms of the codes. 
According  to  the  category-wise  data  on  complaints  sourced  from  all  15  offices  of  Banking 
Ombudsmen,  majority  of  complaints  were  regarding  credit/  debit  cards  fallowed  by  non-
observance of the fair practices code, deposits account, failure of commitments made under 
the  BCSBI  code  and  pensions.  There  is  serious  concern  on  the  number  of  complaints, 
though the disposal rate may be 95%. I find that there are several violations of the BCSBI 
codes. This is not a situation of comfort for the RBI and difficult to comprehend as the banks 
have voluntarily accepted the codes formulated by the BCSBI. (Charts) 
In  a  sense,  BCSBI  is  functioning  as  a  self-regulatory  organization.  There  is  a  need  to 
improve  customer  services  in  public  sector  banks  across  all  spheres  of  banking  and 
particularly in areas related to deposits accounts, loan and advances, failure of commitments 
made,  non-adherence  to  the  BCSBI  code  and  pension.  In  addition,  services  related  to 
credit/debit cards, which have been subject to frequent complaints from customers in recent 
years, need to be improved across all banks groups. With the advent of technology, there is 
a need to further strengthen customer service in areas of net and mobile banking to enhance 
customer confidence in these technologies. There is a further need to improve the customer 
data base, which apart from facilitating banks to acquaint themselves with the whereabouts 
of the customers, would help them to prevent incidents of fraud/money-laundering. 
Complaints related to unauthorized fund transfers, fraudulent withdrawals from ATMs using 
duplicate  cards,  phishing  E-mails  aimed  at  extracting  personal  information  have  registered 
significant increase in recent times. Going forward, there is a need for building up a robust 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the 
inform 
features  of 
the  customer  about 
the  product.  Mis-selling  will 
mechanism to prevent incidents of fraud in areas of mobile/net banking and electronic fund 
transfer. 
Treating  customers  fairly,  “TCF”,  also  must  ensure  that  there  is  a  clear  specification  of 
liability, if things go wrong. Simplicity of the product sold must be ensured and there is a duty 
to 
invite 
consequences. Banks must help customers fully understand the features, benefits, risks and 
costs of the financial products they buy, minimize sale of unsuitable products by encouraging 
best  practice  before,  during  and  after  the  sale  The  sense  of  protection  which  consumers 
expect and experience while dealing with banks is the benchmark against which we need to 
evaluate  our  customer  care  and  customer  service  policulture  of  customer-centricity  and 
sensitivity  to  the  needs  of  the  customers  especially  those  belonging  to  the  vulnerable 
sections  of  the  society.  The  market  forces,  competition,  technology  will  continue  to  help 
banks achieve better penetration and extend their reach, but these attributes must also result 
in better, affordable and easy access to banks and banking. As Dr. Rajan puts it, we need a 
frugal model. We all need to enshrine basic rights for all financial services consumers by way 
of a Charter of bank customers’ rights. 
FSLRC has expressed that all financial laws and regulations must protect the interests of the 
consumers.  It  recommends  a  framework  for  customer  protection  against  mis-selling  and 
defrauding  through  the  fine  print  stealth  banking  etc.  We  must  protect  customers  against 
unfair  contract  terms,  unjust  conduct  and  protection  of  personal  information  through  fair 
disclosure and redress of consumer complaints by financial services providers. 
Annual Policy Statement released on April 1, 2014 by Dr Rajan, Governor RBI has clearly 
spelt out that consumer protection is an integral aspect of financial inclusion. The Reserve 
Bank proposes to frame comprehensive consumer protection regulations based on domestic 
experience and global best practices. The banks that have internalized the codes enunciated 
by the BCSBI may not have much difficulty in adapting to the new statutory framework. The 
statutory  framework  also  comes  with  explicit  rights,  the  customers  enjoy  and  the  implicit 
duties that are cast on the banker. 
The  Nachiket  Mor  Committee  on  Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small  Businesses 
and Low Income Households has pointed out and I quote “When the fact is considered that 
imbalances  in  information,  expertise  and  power  between  the  buyer  and  seller  of  financial 
products  will  only  be  exacerbated  in  the  future  then  it  becomes  clear  that,  existing 
approaches  to  customer  protection  have  severe  limitations.  The  “Caveat  Emptor”  principle 
has  led  to  fundamental  flaws  in  our  present  consumer  protection  architecture.  From  the 
principle of “Caveat Emptor”, Let the Buyer beware, we have to move to the principle “Caveat 
Venditor”, Latin for “Let the Seller Beware”. It is a counter to “Caveat Emptor” and suggests 
that  seller  can  also  be  deceived  in  a  market  transaction.  This  forces  the  seller  to  take 
responsibility  for  the  product  and  discourages  sellers  from  purveying  products  of  inferior 
quality. The principle vests the burden of proving that the shortcoming, deficiency of service 
was  absent,  on  the  seller  of  the  product.  So  what  should  be  the  framework  governing 
customer protection? (Chart) 
We need to enshrine these principles in a Customer’s Charter of Rights and duties of banks 
towards  their  customers.  “Caveat  Venditor”  will  necessitate  these.  Last  but  not  the  least; 
banks must focus on improving the skillsets of staff and front-line managers who are face of 
the bank for the customers. With increasing competition, banks that survive and succeed will 
be  the  ones  that  provide  quality  service.  Research  studies  have  repeatedly  shown  that 
customers are willing to pay for quality service. 
Banks that  wish  to  stay  ahead  must therefore  systematically  build  a  structure that  aims at 
providing  total  quality  service  which  is  superior  and  efficient.  I  wish  your  deliberations  all 
success and close with the hope that, these will have an impact far beyond immediate issue. 
Thank you for a patient hearing.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Complaints received in the offices of Banking Ombudsmen: 2012-2013: 
Complaint Category wise 
Complaints regarding Non-adherence to BCSBI Codes: 2012-2013 
Complaint Category-wise 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    5 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
