Haruhiko Kuroda: Aiming at 2 percent inflation. Why? 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry, Tokyo, 20 March 2014. 
 Introduction 
It is my honor to be given the opportunity to speak in front of you, who are successful at the 
forefront of Japan’s economic world. 
The Bank of Japan, aiming at overcoming deflation at the earliest possible time, introduced 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) last April. Almost one year has passed 
since  then,  and  the  QQE  has  been  steadily  exerting  its  effects  and  Japan’s  economy  has 
been following a path toward achieving a price stability target of 2 percent as expected. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately in association with a virtuous cycle 
among  production,  income,  and  spending.  The  real  GDP  growth  rate  has  marked  five 
consecutive  quarters  of  positive  growth,  and  domestic  demand  has  been  registering  high 
growth at an annual rate of about 3 percent since last year (Chart 1). As for the outlook, while 
the economy will be affected by a swing of the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline 
in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike, it is expected to continue to recover 
moderately as a trend. 
As the economic recovery continues, prices have also been improving. The year-on-year rate 
of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food turned positive in June last 
year  and  accelerated  since  then,  and  was  plus  1.3  percent  for  December  last  year  and 
January  this  year.  Not  only  have  energy-related  goods  pushed  up  prices,  but  an 
improvement  has  also  been  seen  in  a  wide  range  of  items  given  that  underlying  upward 
pressure  on  prices  has  increased  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  has 
improved and inflation expectations have risen. Such spreading improvement is suggested 
by the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding food and energy has 
increased  to  plus  0.7  percent  (Chart  2).  As  for  the  outlook,  the  CPI  inflation  rate –  on  the 
basis  of  figures  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  –  is  likely  to  be 
around 1¼ percent until around this summer, as the underlying upward pressure on prices is 
likely to strengthen while the positive contribution stemming from the rise in energy prices will 
decline.  Subsequently,  against  the  background  of  further  improvement  in  the  aggregate 
supply  and  demand  balance  and  the  rise  in  inflation  expectations,  the  inflation  rate  is 
expected to gradually return to an increasing trend, and is likely to reach around the price 
stability target of 2 percent toward the end of fiscal 2014 through fiscal 2015. 
The Bank considers that 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is 
the price stability target the Bank should aim at. On this point, various concerns have been 
raised. Among these, two are that “daily life will become difficult if prices go up” and “only 
prices might increase without an increase in wages.” For firms, there might be a concern that 
they cannot mark up output prices to the extent input prices have risen. In particular, as the 
consumption tax will be raised from next month, many might be worried about an increase in 
general prices. Therefore, today, I would like to explain my views, focusing on why the Bank 
aims at 2 percent inflation. 
Problems of deflation 
I. 
Let  me  start  with  confirming  why  deflation  is  problematic,  by  looking  back  at  the  past 
15 years. 
In Japan’s economy, deflation has continued for 15 years since the second half of the 1990s. 
Deflation  was  not  only  a  result  of  economic  stagnation  but  also  a  cause  that  protracted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economic  stagnation.  Amid  15  years  of  deflation,  behavior  based  on  the  recognition  that 
prices  would  not  rise  or  prices  would  moderately  decline  has  been  embedded  in  the 
economy, and that led to protracted economic stagnation. 
Viewed from firms’ side, under deflation, as they cannot raise the prices of their products and 
services, their sales and profits will not increase. Therefore, firms will restrain labor costs and 
business fixed investment as much as possible. For households, as wages will not increase, 
consumption will be restrained. If households hold back consumption, firms will be forced to 
reduce the prices of their products and services in order to tap consumption. 
Deflation also affects the investment decisions of firms. For firms to decide on business fixed 
investment,  what  matters  is  developments  not  in  nominal  but  in  real  interest  rates.  If 
deflationary  expectations  are  embedded,  real  interest  rates,  which  are  obtained  by 
subtracting expected rates of inflation from nominal interest rates, remain high. Namely, even 
with  no  change  in  nominal  borrowing  interest  rates,  expected  profits  will  become  less  if  a 
price decline is expected to continue, and the effective burden of repayment of borrowings 
will increase. In this situation, it is natural that firms’ incentives for business fixed investment 
will wane. Also, for households, if they expect that general prices will decline in the future, 
they  will  become  more  inclined  to  defer  consumption  as  much  as  possible.  They  will  be 
better off if they buy goods and services after those prices decline. 
Meanwhile,  under  deflation,  holding  cash  and  deposits  will  become  a  relatively  better 
investment. Deflation will reduce the rate of return on investment in businesses and in risk 
assets such as stocks on the one hand, but on the other hand increase the real rate of return 
on cash and deposits, for which nominal values do not decrease. Therefore, for firms and 
households,  it  becomes  a  rational  behavior  to  restrain  business  fixed  investment  and 
consumption and to hold surplus funds in the form of cash and deposits. 
Thus, under deflation, as firms and households turn away from risk-taking activities, a vicious 
cycle  of  a  decline  in  prices,  a  fall  in  sales  and  profits,  restraint  in  wages,  stagnation  in 
consumption, and further decline in prices has continued. 
Looking back at Japan’s economy for the past 15 years through macroeconomic indicators, 
GDP  and  employee  income  on  nominal  bases  peaked  in 1997  and  have  since  been  on  a 
long-term downtrend (Chart 3). Amid deflation, Japan’s economic activity on a nominal basis 
has been consistently scaling down. Under deflation, Japan’s economy has been faced with 
the fallacy of composition that, despite each economic entity acting rationally, the economy 
as a whole has been contracting. As a result, it can be said that Japan’s economy has been 
trapped in deflationary equilibrium. 
Now, while deflation has been continuing in Japan’s economy, are you aware to what extent 
the CPI has declined? In the 15 years from fiscal 1998 to fiscal 2012, the annual decline in 
the CPI was actually only 0.3 percent on average (Chart 4). It may safely be said that the 
rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  during  this  period  was  negative,  but  almost 0  percent. This  fact 
suggests that even an almost 0 percent rate of change in terms of the CPI is actually a state 
of deflation. In terms of what firms recognize, in the Tankan survey (Short-Term Economic 
Survey of Enterprises in Japan) for the past 15 years, the proportion of firms responding that 
output prices of their products and services declined has almost consistently exceeded that 
of firms responding that those prices increased (Chart 5). 
Taking account of these points, in order to overcome deflation, we have to aim at an inflation 
rate in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI that is higher than 0 percent. The 
question is, to what extent of a positive rate should we aim? The Bank considers this to be 
2 percent. Let me explain the reasons for this in what follows. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
II. 
Aiming at 2 Percent Inflation. Why? 
Price stability 
A. 
As stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, an aim of the monetary policy the Bank conducts is 
“achieving  price  stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national 
economy.”  To  achieve  price  stability  is  an  aim  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  the  Bank’s 
responsibility. After all, what the Bank aims at is price stability in this sense, and it has no 
intention to artificially create inflation. 
On that basis, the Bank considers that, if price stability is to be defined numerically in terms 
of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, this is 2 percent. There are three reasons for 
this  (Chart  6).  First,  there  is  a  feature  to  note  in  the  CPI.  The  CPI  has  an  upward  bias  – 
namely,  there  is  a  tendency  toward  seeing  higher  figures  in  the  growth  rate  of  the  CPI. 
Second, there is a view that it is necessary to have a so-called buffer. In order to maintain 
the ability of monetary policy to respond to a substantial deterioration in economic activity, it 
would  be  better  to  secure  some  degree  of  an  inflation  rate.  Third,  these  views  have  been 
widely  shared  among  major  central  banks,  and  many  are  conducting  monetary  policy  that 
aims  at  achieving  an  inflation  rate  of  2  percent.  In  other  words,  2  percent  has  become  a 
global standard. Let me elaborate on these three reasons. 
Features of price indices: upward bias in the CPI 
B. 
The prices that monetary policy should target are not prices of individual goods and services, 
of course, but prices as a whole. That said, to measure the level of prices in general, it is 
necessary to weight prices of individual goods and services and compile them; according to 
compiling  methods,  various  indexes  are  then  created.  In  judging  price  conditions,  these 
indexes need to be used by taking account of the features they entail. While I will not go into 
detail,  as  this  becomes  too  technical,  it  is  generally  known  that  the  CPI  has  a  tendency 
toward its growth rate showing higher figures – that is, to exhibit an upward bias. As for the 
GDP deflator, which is a price index used to calculate real GDP, its growth rate has become 
somewhat  low.  This  is  mainly  because  the  deflator  includes  capital  goods,  for  which  price 
declines  have  been  substantial.  It  is  also  because  a  rise  in  import  prices  has  not  been 
completely  passed  on  to  output  prices,  and  this  has  worked  to  lower  the  deflator.  In  fact, 
since  fiscal  1998,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  has  been  about  1  percent 
higher on average than that in the GDP deflator (Chart 7). 
Many central banks, including the Bank of Japan, mainly use the CPI to judge price trends. 
This  is  because  the  CPI  is  an  index  in  line  with  the  public’s  actual  sentiment  that  covers 
goods  and  services  that  households  consume,  and  is  a  quickly  available  statistic  that  is 
published  monthly.  Taking  account  of  these  points,  the  Bank’s  price  stability  target  is  also 
defined as the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. However, as I have just mentioned, 
the CPI has an upward bias, and thus, when defining the price stability target in the form of 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, it needs to be presented as a somewhat positive 
figure. 
Ensuring room to reduce interest rates: the so-called buffer 
C. 
Let me turn to the view that there is a need to secure room for an interest rate reduction by 
maintaining  a  positive  inflation  rate,  thereby  enhancing  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to 
respond to economic deterioration; that is, that there is a need to have the so-called buffer. 
Put  in  extremely  simple  terms,  an  interest  rate  level  that  is  neutral  to  economic  activity  is 
determined by the sum of the economy’s growth potential and an average inflation rate. For 
example,  if  the  potential  growth  rate  is  1  percent  and  the  inflation  rate  is  2  percent,  the 
interest rate neutral to economic activity will be 3 percent．In this case, against economic 
deterioration,  there  is  room  amounting  to  3  percent  for  a  central  bank  to  stimulate  the 
economy  by  reducing  the  interest  rate.  However,  even  if  the  potential  growth  rate  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
1 percent, if the inflation rate is 0 percent, the room to reduce the interest rate amounts to 
only 1 percent as the level of the neutral interest rate is 1 percent. 
Therefore, when the level of the neutral interest rate is low, the interest rate will easily reach 
the 0 percent bound. A situation in which the interest rate reaches close to 0 percent and 
there is no room for further monetary easing through interest rate control is called the “zero 
interest rate lower bound.” 
Japan  was  the  first  among  advanced  economies  to  face  the  zero  lower  bound.  Since  the 
Bank reduced its official discount rate to 0.5 percent in September 1995, for almost 20 years 
now, Japan’s short-term interest rate has not exceeded 0.5 percent and has been hovering in 
the  range  of  0–0.5  percent  (Chart  8).  Of  the  two  pillars  of  macroeconomic  policy  –  fiscal 
policy and monetary policy – there has been a continuing situation whereby the effectiveness 
of monetary policy has been significantly impaired. 
In the meantime, the Bank took various initiatives ahead of other central banks in the world, 
including the adoption of various unconventional monetary policy measures ranging from the 
zero interest rate policy and quantitative easing to forward guidance in recent terminology. 
To be sure, even under the zero lower bound, there is still some room to pursue monetary 
easing through such unconventional monetary policy measures. However, it is also certain 
that, during this period, the most effective and traditional monetary policy channel of interest 
rate control has been lost. 
In  my  view,  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  has  yielded  results  to  some  extent  over  the  past 
15 years  in  smoothing  economic  fluctuations.  However,  it  was  not  sufficient  to  stave  off  a 
worsening of disinflation and preempt deflation from becoming entrenched. 
If the Bank had aimed at a price stability target of 2 percent at an earlier stage, it could have 
pursued  more  timely  and  bolder  monetary  easing  in  response  to  a  decline  in  the  inflation 
rate,  thereby  enabling  the  economy  to  overcome  deflation  at  an  early  stage.  With  its 
protraction,  deflation  has  become  a  problem  that  is  increasingly  stubborn  and  difficult  to 
overcome. 
Based  on  the  difficulties  of  the  past  15  years,  we  need  to  let  Japan’s  economy  overcome 
deflation at the earliest possible time and prevent, by any means, the economy from falling 
back  into  deflation  again.  To  that  end,  it  is  critical  to  preempt  deflation  with  a  conduct  of 
monetary  policy  that  aims  at  a  2  percent  price  stability  target.  And,  so  as  not  to  lose  the 
effective  measure  of  interest  rate  control,  I  believe  that  it  is  critical  to  secure  room  for  an 
interest rate reduction through achieving around 2 percent inflation in a stable manner and 
allowing an economic activity-neutral interest rate to be formed at a somewhat high level. 
Global standard 
D. 
So far, I have explained the reasons to aim at 2 percent inflation from two viewpoints: due to 
a feature of the CPI, and to secure room for an interest rate reduction. These views are not 
special ones that only the Bank is adopting. Based on similar lines of thinking, many central 
banks overseas have already been implementing policies aiming at 2 percent inflation. 
For example, central banks in the United Kingdom, Canada, and New Zealand have set an 
inflation target of 2 percent, and in the United States, the Federal Reserve has set its longer-
run goal for inflation at 2 percent. In the euro area, the European Central Bank (ECB) has 
presented  a  numerical  definition  of  price  stability,  which  is  below,  but  close  to,  2  percent 
(Chart 9). While there are various ways of expression, conducting monetary policy aiming at 
around 2 percent of inflation has become a global standard. 
If talking only about the buffer – namely, securing room for an interest rate reduction – the 
higher the inflation rate, the better. However, what monetary policy is aiming at is to achieve 
price stability. An issue will be the balance between the two. Based on past experience in a 
variety of economies, it has become a general view globally that around 2 percent would be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
desirable. In other words, the global standard of 2 percent inflation has become established 
through past experiences rather than based on theoretical analyses. 
Amid  long-term  stagnation  since  the  Lehman  crisis,  the  inflation  rate  has  recently  been 
declining  globally,  mainly  in  the  euro  area.  As  the  International  Monetary  Fund  Managing 
Director  Christine  Lagarde  said  in  a  speech,  “with  inflation  running  below  many  central 
banks’ targets, we see rising risks of deflation,” and thus a risk of deflation has become an 
important  topic  globally.  The  world  thoroughly  understands  how  Japan  has  been  suffering 
long-term stagnation amid deflation, and there is a strong recognition of the need to avoid 
being like Japan in this particular regard. 
In fact, the CPIs in the United States, the euro area, and the United Kingdom have recently 
been on a downtrend (Chart 10). That said, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI even 
in the euro area, where a risk of deflation has been most discussed, is plus 0.7 percent. That 
is  still  at  a  sufficiently  high  level  compared  with  Japan’s  CPI  inflation  rate  of  the  past  ten 
years or so. Nevertheless, at the press conference following each meeting of the Governing 
Council of the ECB, President Mario Draghi has been repeatedly questioned of late about the 
risk of deflation. While noting that having low inflation for a protracted period of time is a risk 
in itself and that he would not ignore such a risk, he also emphasized that medium- to long-
term inflation expectations are well-anchored at a level of “below, but close to, 2 percent,” a 
level  that  the  ECB  defines  as  price  stability.  Coupled  with  the  prospects  that  economic 
activity in the euro area will continue to pick up moderately, it is unlikely that the euro area 
will  fall  into  deflation.  Nevertheless,  these  developments  in  the  euro  area  indicate  that  the 
importance of aiming at 2 percent and, on the other side of the coin, the danger of falling into 
deflation, have been strongly recognized in the area. 
Wages and prices: prices viewed from the perspective of households 
III. 
As I have explained, aiming at a 2 percent price stability target in terms of the year-on-year 
rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  appropriate  in  terms  of  macroeconomic  policy  management, 
conceptually and as a global standard. Nevertheless, an opinion that there will be a negative 
impact if taken from the viewpoint of households is naturally heard. Therefore, let me next 
talk about prices viewed from the side of households, focusing on the relationship between 
wages and prices. 
From  households’  perspective,  it  is  quite  natural  to  think  that  price  increases  are  not 
desirable.  According  to  the  latest  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public’s  Views  and 
Behavior the Bank conducts on households, about 80 percent of respondents who have felt 
that prices “have gone up” have described the price rise as “rather unfavorable.” This is not 
surprising. If asked only about prices, respondents will respond on the assumption that other 
conditions,  including  wages,  are  unchanged.  If  wages  were  not  to  change,  price  declines 
ought to be desirable. 
However, it does not normally happen that prices rise without being accompanied by wage 
increases. If corporate sales grow and corporate profits increase due to a rise in prices of 
goods and services, wages paid to employees tend to increase accordingly. As employees 
will  demand  that  the  portion  of  an  increase  in a  firm’s  profits  to  which  they  contributed  be 
paid as wages, on a macro basis, the rate of increase in nominal wages will be the sum of 
the inflation rate and the rate of increase in labor productivity. Otherwise, the ratio of labor 
income to total income, which is the employees’ share, will continue to decline with a price 
rise. Such a thing might happen temporarily, but would not continue in a sustainable manner. 
In fact, this is underpinned by past data. Comparing developments in the rate of increase in 
wages per hour and that in the CPI in phases in which prices were rising, the rate of increase 
in wages has been exceeding that in the CPI on most occasions. There have been only two 
periods since 1971 when things did not go that way and the rate of increase in the CPI was 
higher  than  that  of  wages  –  the  second  oil  shock  in  1980  and  a  surge  in  international 
commodity  prices  during  2007  and  2008  (Chart  11).  Both  episodes  occurred  when  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
inflation rate surged temporarily due to a supply shock; namely, to external factors other than 
domestic demand. 
Therefore, the real options we are faced with are whether to aim at a world in which both 
wages and prices rise moderately, or to aim at a world in which wages and prices decline, as 
has been the case over the past 15 years. The choice is obvious. 
In the situation the Bank aims at, in which a 2 percent inflation rate continues stably, wages 
and prices would rise moderately in the normal course of things. This is the kind of economy 
in which each economic entity acts on the assumption that prices will rise by about 2 percent 
annually, even when the economy is in a normal state. In such a society, a 2 percent price 
increase will be factored into wage setting. In this regard, in Japan, an increase in base pay – 
a scheme that was lost amid protracted deflation – has gradually been restored recently. This 
can be regarded as a step toward transferring to a new social economic system in which a 
2 percent price increase is built in as a social norm, and this deserves focused attention. 
The extent to which nominal wages will increase in excess of inflation, or in other words, the 
extent  to  which  real  wages  will increase,  will hinge  over  time  on  the extent  to  which  labor 
productivity – the amount of goods and services produced by an input of one unit of labor – 
will  increase.  An  increase  in  real  wages,  which  is  a  critical  challenge,  will  ultimately  be 
attained  through  an  improvement  in  productivity.  In  this  regard,  in  addition  to  efforts  by 
individual  firms,  it  is  important  to  prepare  an  environment  in  which  to  improve  productivity 
through various growth strategies and deregulation. The government has demonstrated that 
measures  to  raise  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy  will  be  accelerated  and  reinforced 
through  implementation  of  its  Japan  Revitalization  Strategy.  It  is  expected  that  further 
improvement in productivity will be achieved through such initiatives. 
For  firms,  especially  small  and  medium-sized  firms,  there  might  be  a  concern  that  they 
cannot  mark  up  output  prices  to  the  extent  input  prices  have  risen.  In a  situation  in  which 
prices rise upon escaping from deflation, as I’ve just explained, it will become easier for firms 
to pass an increase in input prices on to output prices. 
I said earlier that, under deflation, a vicious cycle of a decline in prices, a fall in sales and 
profits,  restraint  in  wages,  stagnation  in  consumption,  and  further  decline  in  prices  has 
continued. In such a situation, it was not easy to pass an increase in input prices on to output 
prices.  In  fact,  according  to  the  Tankan  survey,  over  the  past  15  years  compared  with 
previous years, the diffusion index for input prices – obtained by subtracting the proportion of 
firms responding that their input prices were falling from that of firms responding that input 
prices  were  rising  –  has  been  substantially  exceeding  the  diffusion  index  for  output  prices 
(Chart 12). 
By contrast, in an economy and society in which 2 percent inflation continues stably, a cycle 
just  the  opposite  of  the  vicious  cycle  under  deflation  will  be  achieved.  Starting  from  a 
moderate  increase  in  prices,  a  virtuous  cycle  of  the  economy  of  an  increase  in  sales  and 
profits, an increase in wages, rejuvenated consumption, and a moderate increase in prices 
will be achieved and become entrenched. In a situation in which an economic virtuous cycle 
continues  and  firm  demand  is  maintained,  it  will  become  easier  for  firms  to  pass  on  an 
increase in input prices on to output prices. 
Consumption tax hike and inflation 
IV. 
Let me next talk about the consumption tax hike and its implications for inflation. 
From  next  month,  the  consumption  tax  rate  will  be  raised  to  8  percent  from  the  current 
5 percent. As items in the CPI include those that are tax-free or exempted from taxation, the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  will  be  pushed  upward  by  about  2  percent  in 
association with the 3 percent consumption tax hike. In relation to this, let me point out two 
things. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First, any increase in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI by the consumption tax hike 
will be a temporary one. With the consumption tax hike next month, it is estimated that the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food will be pushed upward on the 
surface by about 2 percent during fiscal 2014, but that this will disappear in fiscal 2015. As a 
specific  example,  let  us  look  at  developments  that  occurred  in  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI  when  the  consumption  tax  was  raised  in  April  1997  to  5  percent  from 
3 percent. It was plus 0.5 percent in March 1997 prior to the tax hike, and after the hike went 
to around plus 2 percent for one year, from April 1997 to March 1998. The rate of increase 
was pushed up by about 1.4 percent. However, in April 1998, one year after the tax hike, the 
rate  of  increase  dropped  to  plus  0.2  percent  and  the  effect  of  the  tax  hike  disappeared 
(Chart 13). Needless to say, the Bank aims at maintaining the 2 percent price stability target 
in  a  sustainable  manner.  Therefore,  in  assessing  the  price  situation  in  pursuing  monetary 
policy, we believe that it would be appropriate to make assessments by excluding the short-
term variation factor on prices brought about by the consumption tax hike. 
The second thing is a negative impact on real income due to the consumption tax hike. Given 
that  consumption  tax  is  tax  revenue  for  the  government,  it  is  unavoidable  that  the 
consumption tax hike will have such a negative effect. The increase in the year-on-year rate 
of  change  in  the  CPI  does  not  represent  a  rise  in  the  value  of  goods  and  services 
themselves,  but  rather  is  the  result  of  adding  a  tax  that  would  be  paid  at  the  time  of 
consumption  to  the  prices  of  goods  and services.  The  impact  of the consumption  tax  hike 
should  be  discussed  in  a  context  that  includes  taxation,  public  finance,  and  the  social 
security system, and it is necessary to clearly distinguish this from ordinary discussions on 
inflation. 
In sum, we believe that an increase in the CPI due to a consumption tax hike needs to be 
considered separately from the price increase as a trend. The Bank aims at achieving the 
2 percent  price  stability  target  on  a  trend  basis  that  excludes  the  direct  impact  of  the 
consumption tax hike. 
I  should  note  that,  for  some  fees  for  public  services,  the  old  tax  rate  of  5  percent  will  be 
applied as a transitional measure for a certain period after entering April. Such a measure 
will be reflected in compiling the CPI. Therefore, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
excluding fresh food that will be pushed upward due to the consumption tax hike will remain 
at about 1.7 percent in April and will become about 2 percent from May onward. The Bank 
will also take this point into account in assessing the price situation from next month onward. 
Future monetary policy 
V. 
Let me conclude my speech by briefly mentioning monetary policy for the near future. As I 
have indicated today, we believe it is necessary to achieve the 2 percent price stability target 
as swiftly as possible in order to overcome 15 years of deflation and prevent a recurrence of 
deflation. 
As the state of deflation has continued for many years, in the process of transitioning to the 
2 percent target, various changes might occur in the economic and social system. However, 
if  comparing  the  economy  in  which  good  and  expanding  equilibrium  has  been  achieved 
under  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  with  that  of  deflationary  equilibrium  during  these 
15 years, there will be no room for denying that the former is desirable. What is important is 
not to fear changes but to look for a style of business and living that suits the economy after 
overcoming deflation. 
The  QQE  has  been  steadily  exerting  its  intended  effects  and  Japan’s  economy  has  been 
following a path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected. The Bank 
will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, as long as it 
is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will thoroughly examine both 
upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  make  adjustments  as 
appropriate. If, in the future, the outlook will change due to the manifestation of some risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
factors and adjustments become necessary in order to achieve the 2 percent price stability 
target,  the  Bank  will  make  them  without  hesitation.  With  such  monetary  policy,  we  look  to 
overcome deflation at the earliest possible time. 
Thank you. 
 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
