Benoît Cœuré: Risks in Central counterparties (CCPs) 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  policy  panel  during  the  conference  “Mapping  and  Monitoring  the  Financial  System: 
Liquidity,  Funding,  and  Plumbing”,  organised  by  the  Office  of  Financial  Research  and 
Financial Stability Oversight Council, Washington DC, 23 January 2014.  
 I would like to thank Andreas Schönenberger for his contribution. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained 
herein. 
Accompanying  slides  can  be  found  on  the  European  Central  Banks’  website:  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/-
key/date/2014/html/sp140123_1.en.pdf. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to participate in this policy panel today on a topic of high importance to the 
ECB from the perspective of monetary policy implementation, financial stability, and banking 
supervision. 
Central  counterparties  (CCPs)  play  a  key  role  in  the  financial  markets  by  managing  and 
structuring  a  complex  web  of  counterparty  risk.  As  such,  risks  in  CCPs  are  of  interest  to 
CCPs themselves, their clearing members and the regulators who supervise them. 
What I would like to do in my brief introductory remarks is therefore not only to focus on the 
risks in CCPs, but also and importantly on the risk of CCPs. 
The  growing  importance  of  CCPs  certainly  brings  a  number  of  important  benefits  that 
alternative  bilateral  arrangements  could  not  do  to  the  same  extent.  However,  the  rise  of 
central clearing may also be accompanied by some unintended side effects that need to be 
addressed. 
The growing importance of central clearing 
First,  however,  let  me  illustrate  the  growing  importance  of  central  clearing  on  the  basis  of 
some figures [Slide 2]. The figures show the importance of CCPs already today for interest 
rate and credit derivatives in Europe. There are also CCPs for cash products and the role 
these CCPs would play for collateral pools of triparty repos is of increasing importance. 
With  the  forthcoming  implementation  of  the  central  clearing  requirement  for  standardised 
OTC derivatives contracts, the volume of transactions cleared by a CCP will rise significantly 
also  in  that market  segment  over the  coming  years  [Slide 3].  A  recent  quantitative  impact 
study  run  by  the  Working  Group  on  Margining  Requirements  of  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions 
(IOSCO)  estimated  that  the  global  volume  of  centrally  cleared  OTC  derivatives  could  rise 
from  a  notional  value  of  USD  142.7  trillion,  or  around  28%  of  OTC  derivatives  traded,  to 
USD 268  trillion  after  migration  to  the  clearing  requirement,  or  53%  of  OTC  derivatives 
traded. All these figures quite forcefully demonstrate the increasing systemic importance of 
CCPs. 
Now, why is there such a push for central clearing and what does that mean from a systemic 
risk perspective? 
Central clearing: benefits and side effects 
I  see  four  main  benefits  that  explain  the  market-driven  and  regulatory  push  for  central 
clearing [Slide 4]. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
First, CPPs overcome information asymmetries that typically exist in marketplaces, especially 
markets with a big number of heterogeneous players. CCPs allow participants to trade with 
one a single counterparty (the CCP), which greatly facilitates the due diligence efforts and 
risk management burden that counterparties normally face. 
Second,  CCPs  offer  state-of-the-art  margining  and  risk  management  methods  that  do  not 
exist to the same extent in the bilateral world, which either relies on standardised margining 
methods that are not very risk-sensitive or on bank-internal margining models that may not 
necessarily meet the same high standards that CCPs are required to meet. 
Third,  by  introducing  default  and  clearing  funds,  CCPs  are  able  to  mutualise  losses  in  a 
transparent and predictable way, which makes it easier for financial markets to handle huge 
losses and liquidity shortfalls that may occur in catastrophic events. By carefully designing 
their risk management framework, CCPs can help to ensure that losses fall predictably on 
those who are better able to cope with them. More generally, central clearing introduces ex 
ante  transparency  and  therefore  certainty,  provided  that  the  rules  are  clear  and  well 
understood by market participants. 
Finally, and most importantly, central clearing allows for the multilateral netting of exposures 
so that a given level of risk protection can be achieved with a smaller amount of collateral, or 
vice versa, a given amount of collateral can achieve a higher level of risk protection. 
Notwithstanding the numerous benefits of central clearing, the rise of central clearing may be 
associated with a number of side effects [Slide 5]. 
First, risk concentration within CCPs will grow, both nationally and internationally. CCPs are 
increasingly  turning  into  institutions  of  unprecedented  systemic  importance.  Their  failure 
could  lead  to  very  serious  systemic  disruptions,  which  is  why  not  only  sound  risk 
management, but also an effective recovery and resolution regime for CCPs is key. 
Second,  a  growing  number  of  banks  will  participate  in  key  CCPs  across  the  globe.  It  is 
essential  that  the  financial  institutions  that  participate  in  and  rely  on  CCPs  are  able  to 
conduct  effective  due  diligence  to  understand  the  risks  they  face  as  members  and  take 
appropriate steps to mitigate those risks. 
Third, owing to mutualisation, losses and liquidity shortfalls in the event of a member default 
may  spread 
further  driven  by 
interdependencies  of  changing  complexity.  These  can  exist  between  CCPs  and  other 
financial institutions, for example, through interoperability arrangements. Note that the same 
large 
increase 
interdependencies even in the absence of interoperability. 
Finally, existing differences in regulation may lead to regulatory arbitrage and potentially to a 
race  to  the  bottom.  Moreover,  the  use  of  a  centralised  infrastructure  depends,  in  some 
instances,  on  exemptions  from registration  or  the  application  of  equivalence  or  substituted 
compliance  with  foreign  infrastructures.  Where  foreign  CCPs  cannot  be  used,  compliance 
with mandatory clearing under domestic laws may inhibit cross-border transactions. 
institutions,  being  clearing  members  of  many  CCPs, 
to  other  participants.  Crisis  propagation  may  be 
financial 
New risks related to central clearing 
The globalisation process has triggered a trend towards global clearing that in itself may lead 
to further unintended consequences and may create new risks [Slide 6]. The trend towards 
increasingly large global CCPs is similar in nature to that of horizontal integration which the 
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  looked  at  in  greater  detail  in  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
report of 20101, concluding that larger global CCPs may have certain advantages, but may 
also lead to systemic risks, reduced benefits of central clearing, and regulatory frictions. 
Moreover, it appears that for many banks, indirect access is their preferred way to get access 
to clearing services so as to comply with the clearing obligation. Client clearing seems thus 
to  be  dominated  by  a  few  large  global  intermediaries.  A  factor  contributing  to  this 
concentration may be higher compliance burdens, where only the very largest of firms are 
capable  of  taking  on  cross-border  activity.  This  concentration  creates  a  higher  degree  of 
dependency on this small group of firms. 
There  are  also  concerns  about  client  access  to  this  limited  number  of  firms  offering  client 
clearing  services.  For  example,  there  is  some  evidence  of  clearing  firms  “cherry  picking” 
clients, while other end-users are commercially unattractive customers and hence unable to 
access centrally cleared markets. 
These are all developments that I believe the international regulatory community may wish to 
carefully monitor and act on as and when needed. 
The consequences of regulatory reforms 
There  are  a  number  of  (sometimes  unintended)  consequences  of  regulatory  reforms  that 
CCPs, regulators, and clearing banks need to respond to [Slide 7]. 
First, perhaps most obviously, the growing reliance and importance of CCPs calls for higher 
risk management standards, which has led to the revision of the CPSS-IOSCO Principles for 
financial  market  infrastructures,  specifying  a  number  of  new  and/or  more  demanding 
requirements for CCPs2. 
Second, it is essential that the financial institutions that participate in and rely on CCPs are 
able to conduct effective due diligence to understand the risks they face as members and 
take appropriate steps to mitigate those risks. It is very welcome therefore that the Payments 
Risk Committee issued last year their “Recommendations for Supporting Clearing Member 
Due Diligence of Central Counterparties”3, which complement CPSS-IOSCO new quantitative 
disclosure  requirements.  It  is  also  important  that  banks  are  subject  to  strict  capital  and 
liquidity  requirements  on  their  exposures  to  CCPs,  while  at  the  same  time  preserving  the 
incentives for central clearing. 
Third, given the dramatic consequences that a CCP default would have for financial stability, 
it is vital that there are robust recovery and resolution regimes for CCPs. The CPSS-IOSCO 
and Financial Stability Board (FSB) have made good progress to that end. 
Fourth, it is important to react swiftly to any structural developments that may cause systemic 
disruption.  The  FSB  and  the  standard-setting  bodies,  in  particular  the  CPSS,  continuously 
monitor any such developments to that end. 
Finally, I would not exclude that there could be a need for further adaptations and guidance 
on  some  selected  regulatory  requirements  for  CCPs  if  needed  to  ensure  cross-border 
consistency in regulation. In addition to the recognition processes by individual jurisdictions, 
the  ongoing  monitoring  by  the  CPSS-IOSCO  of  the  implementation  of  the  Principles  for 
                                                
1   See  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  “Market  structure  developments  in  the  clearing  industry: 
implications for financial stability”. Report of the Working Group on Post-Trade Services. November 2010. 
2   See  Committee  of  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  “Principle  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures”,  April  2012. 
http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss101.htm. 
3   See  Payments  Risk  Committee,  “Recommendations  for  Supporting  Clearing  Member  Due  Diligence  of  Central 
Counterparties”, 5 February 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
financial market infrastructures provides an opportunity to identify possible inconsistencies at 
a global level4. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude [Slide 8]. 
The trend towards more central clearing is welcome and needed as it helps to manage risks 
better  than  bilateral  clearing  could.  However,  the  greater  use  of  CCPs  concentrates  and 
redistributes risks and may even create new risks. 
Much  progress  has  been  achieved  by  CCPs,  banks  and  authorities  to  ensure  high  risk 
management standards of CCPs and enable clearing members to conduct due diligence. It 
strikes me however that further efforts are needed to be able to cope with CCP default, to 
address  risks  associated  with  changes  in  market  structures,  and  to  remove  cross-border 
differences in regulation where needed. 
I thank you for your attention. 
                                                
4   See “CPSS: Implementation monitoring of standards”, http://www.bis.org/cpss/cpssinfo2_5.htm. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
