  Yves Mersch: Launching the ECB-coordinated technical cooperation 
with central banks of the Western Balkans 
Introductory remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the press conference on the opening of cooperation programme in Western 
Balkans, Tirana, 17 April 2014. 
 Dear Governors, 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  in  Tirana  today  to  launch  the  ECB-coordinated  technical 
cooperation programme with central banks of the Western Balkan region. Let me first thank 
Governor  Fullani  for  his  warm  hospitality.  I  am  pleased  that  Governor  Fullani,  Governor 
Hamza  and  Vice  Governor  Bajrami  could  all  join  me  for  this  occasion  today.  This  is  the 
seventh  ECB-coordinated  programme  for  the  benefit  of  central  banks  of  EU  candidate 
countries  and  potential  candidates  from  the Western  Balkans.  I  think  this  underscores  the 
commitment  of  my  central  bank  colleagues  in  the  region  to  the  process  of  European 
integration  and  to  the  further  development  of  their  institutions  along  the  path  towards 
European  central  banking  standards.  The  current  programme  has  again  received  funding 
from  the  European  Commission,  through  the  Instrument  for  Pre-Accession  Assistance.  I 
would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  the  European  Commission,  represented  here  by  Mr 
Rumbold, for the continuous support of these activities. 
The programme is also a re-affirmation of the strong commitment of the ECB and the entire 
central  banking  community  in  the  EU  to  their  counterparts  in  the  Western  Balkan  region. 
Since 2007, the ECB, in partnership with the national central banks of the Eurosystem and 
the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB),  has  conducted  one  regional  and  five 
bilateral technical cooperation programmes. The programme that we are launching today will 
be implemented with the support of experts from 11 central banks in the EU, namely those of 
Bulgaria,  the  Czech  Republic,  Germany,  France,  Italy,  Malta,  the  Netherlands,  Austria, 
Portugal,  Slovenia  and  Slovakia.  The  number  of  partner  national  central  banks  in  this 
programme is a clear indication that our institutions have not become inward-looking, despite 
the major challenges faced over the past few years. I would like to use this opportunity to 
thank the experts from all central banks for their dedication and commitment in taking on this 
additional assignment. 
The purpose of the programme is to prepare the central banks of the region for membership 
of  the  ESCB,  once  their  respective  countries  join  the  EU. We  are  starting  the  programme 
here  in  Tirana  today.  Over  the  next  six  months,  the  experts  from  our  side  will  conduct  an 
analysis  of  13  different  fields  of  central  banking  and  provide  Governor  Fullani  with  an 
assessment that will benchmark the Bank of Albania in terms of the standards applicable in 
the ESCB in these areas. It will be followed by another six-month analysis of seven central 
banking  fields,  which  will  provide  Governor  Hamza  with  a  similar  overview  for  the  Central 
Bank of the Republic of Kosovo. I am very pleased that the National Bank of the Republic of 
Macedonia,  represented  here  by  Vice  Governor  Bajrami,  has  asked  the  ECB  –  as  an 
additional component of this programme – to assist his institution in prioritising the next steps 
for the implementation of the recommendations of the needs analysis programme which the 
Eurosystem completed for his central bank last year. 
Our institutional relations with the central banks in the region go beyond this programme. The 
ECB  monitors  economic  developments  in  the  Western  Balkans  and  regularly  exchanges 
views on a variety of topics with its counterparts. For example, the ECB, together with the 
central banks of the region, organises a dedicated seminar on statistics (The last one was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  integration 
from  on-going 
transformation,  benefiting 
organised jointly with the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia) and a similar event is 
planned on TARGET II and T2S project. Moreover, a series of regional workshops on other 
issues of mutual interest for central banks is in the pipeline. We have also expanded the list 
of ESCB training activities that are open to staff from central banks in the Western Balkans. 
Our work draws on the expertise of many EU national central banks that are also very active 
in a number of other initiatives in the region. 
Strong central banks are key for monetary and financial stability in Europe and around the 
world.  With  this  programme,  the  central  banking  community  in  the  EU  stands  ready  to 
support our colleagues in the Western Balkans in their endeavour to introduce the highest 
standards, for the benefit of their countries and people. 
The programme will strengthen the already well-developed relations between our institutions. 
These relations also reflect the importance of economic and financial links between the euro 
area  and  the  Western  Balkans.  The  region  is  undergoing  a  remarkable  economic  and 
institutional 
into  pan-European 
production  chains  and  the  resulting  trade  links,  as  well  as  from  sizeable  capital  inflows 
originating from Europe. This has helped the region to embark on a process of catching-up 
economically  with  the  wealthier  parts  of  the  EU  and  to  gradually  improve  their  living 
standards. At the same time, these close economic and financial ties imply that the Western 
Balkan  economies  have  also  become  highly  exposed  to  economic  developments  in  the 
region. This has been highlighted by the financial crisis in advanced European countries, and 
by the subsequent sovereign debt crisis in parts of the euro area. 
Let me make  a few  remarks  on  the  euro  area, which  witnessed  a  year of turnaround  with 
respect to the crisis in 2013. After three quarters of positive real GDP growth, the economic 
recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  gradually  taking  hold,  albeit  still  at  a  modest  pace,  but 
increasingly less unevenly than before. This is good news not only for us, but also for the 
whole European continent, including the Western Balkans. 
Substantial progress at the national level has been made across the euro area in terms of 
fiscal consolidation, and the structural reform process is ongoing. But there is no room for 
complacency and euro area countries cannot afford to let past consolidation achievements 
unravel,  thereby  jeopardising  the  medium-term  downward  trajectory  for  their  public  debt 
ratios. Decisive additional steps are also needed to reform product and labour markets with a 
view to further improving competitiveness, raising potential growth, generating employment 
opportunities and making the economy more flexible. These same issues are also relevant 
for Western Balkan economies, where the unfinished structural reform agenda constitutes a 
drag on potential growth and where countries also face the challenge of fiscal consolidation, 
even though circumstances differ from one country to the other. 
Just as governments and other policy-makers need to live up to their responsibilities in order 
to achieve their objectives, the ECB continues to focus on its primary mandate of delivering 
price stability. In the wake of the extraordinarily challenging circumstances of the past five 
years  or  so,  this  had  implied  taking  decisive  standard  and  non-standard  measures.  In 
particular,  the  need  to  deliver  on  our  mandate  in  conditions  marked  by  financial 
fragmentation  and  an  impairment  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  has  been 
demanding and has required taking recourse to exceptional tools. Well-anchored medium to 
longer-term inflation expectations in line with our definition of price stability are an indication 
of  a  successful  policy  in  the  context  of  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation.  Our  forward 
guidance  is  helping  to  deliver  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  warranted  by  the 
outlook  for  price  stability.  With  our  monetary  policy  stance,  we  are  also  supporting  the 
gradual recovery in economic activity. Let me stress, however, that what monetary policy can 
achieve in this regard is limited. Every policy-maker needs to live up to its responsibilities in 
order to overcome the challenges with which the euro area is still being confronted, and this 
is  no  different  in  the  Western  Balkans  region  or  elsewhere.  The  best  contribution  central 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in 
that  political  agreement  has  been  reached,  we  are  currently 
banks  can  make  is  to  remain  focused  on  their  mandate,  and  to  fulfil  that  mandate  in  the 
context of a sound institutional framework that ensures their independence. 
In  the  specific  case  of  the  euro  area,  something  more  than  good  policies  was  needed  to 
overcome  the  exceptional  crisis  that  was  posing  challenges  to  the  very  foundations  of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  The  authorities  have  responded  to  the  related 
challenges by significantly strengthening the institutional architecture of EMU. In the field of 
banking, this has led to a decision on the establishment of a banking union. It will be centred 
around  two  main  pillars,  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism (SRM). It will contribute to the stability of the euro area financial system, help to 
overcome  financial  fragmentation  and,  therefore,  also  facilitate  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  Now 
the 
implementation  phase.  For  the  ECB,  this  means  preparing  for  the  operational  start  of  the 
SSM  in  November  2014.  To  this  end,  we  are  currently  undertaking  a  comprehensive 
assessment  of  euro  area  banks’  balance  sheets.  This  exercise  will  be  instrumental  in 
restoring confidence in the euro area’s financial system and will thereby support a revival of 
bank lending. It will thus also have implications for the Western Balkans. 
Moreover, given the prominent role of euro area banks in the banking sector of this region, 
the establishment of the SSM will further intensify our institutional relations. For a substantial 
proportion  of  the  foreign-owned  banks  operating  in  the  Western  Balkans,  the  ECB  will 
become the home supervisor. In addition to enhancing financial stability in the euro area, and 
thus the home region of parent banks with subsidiaries in the Western Balkans, the SSM has 
the  potential  to  facilitate  home-host  country  cooperation  in  banking  supervision.  Host 
supervisors in the region will have only one counterpart as home supervisor for a large part 
of  their  banking  sector,  instead  of  several,  as  is  currently  the  case.  In  order  to  reap  the 
benefits of this simplification, appropriate mechanisms for cooperation between the SSM and 
local authorities will need to be developed. 
Let me conclude by saying that, as I have highlighted earlier, we not only have a number of 
policy  challenges  in  common,  but  also  share  a  common  future.  With  the  programme  of 
technical cooperation that we are launching today, and for which we will be signing the first 
interim  report  adopted  by  its  Programme  Steering  Committee,  we  will  further  develop  the 
links  between  the  central  banks  of  the  EU  and  those  of  the  Western  Balkans.  Governor 
Fullani, Governor Hamza and Vice Governor Bajrami, let me stress yet again that we stand 
ready  to  support  you  both  on  your  journey  towards  achieving  the  objectives  of  this 
programme and along the road towards accession to the European System of Central Banks. 
I wish all of us success in bringing this ambitious undertaking to fruition. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
