  Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Cinco Días 
Interview  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, with Cinco Días, conducted by Mr Bernardo de Miguel, published on 10 September 
2014. 
 Q: The ECB’s projections envisage less growth and lower inflation. Is there anything else in 
the pipeline if the measures adopted so far fail? 
A: New measures were adopted on Thursday and I cannot speculate on what can be done in 
the future. The ECB staff projections for 2014 and 2015 have been revised downwards, both 
in respect of growth and inflation, and the Governing Council is also seeing risks to growth 
being on the downside. Growth lost momentum in the second quarter and we want to prevent 
this weakness feeding into a fall in investment and creating a vicious circle. Furthermore, we 
have recently seen a change in inflation expectations, which have moved further away from 
2%. 
Q: Isn’t it a little late to realise that, after a year of inflation below 1%? 
A: We have to decide on the basis of the data. And until the summer, growth in the euro area 
was expected to accelerate. Then came other, more worrying data showing that it was at risk 
of losing momentum. 
Q:  However,  the  measures  were  not  adopted  unanimously  by  the  24  members  of  the 
Council. Who voted against? 
A: We don’t comment on that. You know that from January onwards we will begin to publish 
accounts  of  our  meetings.  But  even  for  that  it  has  been  decided  not  to  give  details  of  the 
voting. 
Q:  To  avoid  the  vote  being  interpreted  in  terms  of  the  country  of  origin  of  each  Council 
member? 
A:  Personally,  I  would  be  in  favour  of  publishing  all  the  details,  since  governors  are 
independent and should vote in the interest of the euro area, but I realise that there are also 
very good reasons for not doing so. 
Q. Might there be resignations from the Council like in 2010 and 2011 when the programmes 
to purchase public debt were approved? 
A: At that time the euro area was under great pressure due to the severity of the crisis. There 
was a risk of a euro break-up and the ECB was facing very difficult decisions in this respect. 
We are not in a comparable situation today. We have a low growth, low inflation and little 
credit. They represent major challenges, but are part of the normal monetary policy debate. I 
see  no  big  differences  among  governors  when  it  comes  to  analysing  the  situation.  The 
discussion on Thursday was focused more on whether it was advisable to wait for more data 
before reacting. But I don’t see any substantive differences at this point in time. 
Q:  Draghi  has  called  on  governments  to  go  for  fiscal  expansion  and reforms  –  it  sounded 
almost like a desperate plea. 
A: Mario Draghi’s speech at Jackson Hole in August and the conclusions of the Governing 
Council last Thursday reflect the seriousness of the situation. The euro area faces risks to its 
economic growth on such a scale that it’s necessary to use all available tools to support the 
economy. And that means using the instruments on the demand side and the supply side. 
On the demand side, you have monetary policy. And what the ECB has announced shows 
that we are committed to taking steps and that we have instruments we are ready to use. 
You have also fiscal policy, in those countries that have space to expand it. But what matters 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  most  are  the  structural  reforms,  because  without  them  no  supply  or  demand  measure  will 
have an effect. 
Q: Is that message aimed at France and Italy? 
A: We are not asking anything from anyone in particular. There is nothing of a give and take 
here. The ECB is independent and does not enter into this kind of bargaining. We do what 
we think we have to do and we expect others to do their job. We are just highlighting the 
conditions for it to be effective. For example, in our view, the countries that want flexibility in 
applying  the  Stability  Pact  should  announce  reforms  beforehand,  because  flexibility  is 
useless  if  it  isn’t  backed  by  reforms.  Fiscal  policy  should  be  used  to  support  aggregate 
demand – but within the framework of the Stability Pact, and that’s an important “but”. The 
Pact creates confidence. And stretching it or infringing it until it is no longer credible would 
undermine  confidence  and,  in  the  end,  be  counterproductive  for  growth.  In  other  words, 
flexibility without damaging the credibility of the rules. 
Q: Germany does not seem to share this need for fiscal stimulus. 
A:  Our  measures  will  be  much  more  effective  if  we  see  structural  reforms  and  a  fiscal 
position appropriate for the euro area. This should be discussed and evaluated at the euro 
area level. It is normal for the ECB to say this because it monitors the situation across the 
euro area and is interested in its stability and growth. 
Q:  Its  measures  have  flooded  the  market  with  liquidity.  But  it  will  be  difficult  to  have  a 
demand for credit if there are no jobs or if employment is at wage levels of the 1980s. 
A:  People  will  end  up  getting  work  if  companies  manufacture  good  products  and  provide 
good services and there are customers to buy them. Monetary policy can help by providing 
sufficient liquidity and by steering that liquidity to where it is most needed. This is what the 
targeted longer-term refinancing operations adopted in June and the measures announced 
last Thursday, namely the programme to purchase asset-backed securities from the private 
sector,  are  aimed  at.  We  want  there  to  be  sufficiently  ample  liquidity  and  for  the  ECB’s 
balance  sheet  to  move  back  towards  previous  levels  [note  from  the  editor:  to  go  up  to 
€3,000 billion  from  the  current  €2,000  billion].  And  we  want  to  do  this  in  a  way  that  is 
meaningful  for  the  economy.  That  is  why  it  is  not  a  quantitative  increase  in  liquidity 
(quantitative easing or QE), but is targeted and aimed at facilitating the flow of credit. In a 
way, I would describe it as a qualitative increase rather than as a quantitative one. However, 
we should not get into a debate over terminology. At the ECB, we do not believe in magic 
words, QE or otherwise. What we want to do is to devise a monetary policy that is effective in 
the current economic situation and that fits Europe’s economic framework. Thus, inevitably, 
the ECB’s monetary expansion is unlike that conducted in the United States or the United 
Kingdom. We are at a different juncture and our economy is structured differently. In fact, we 
cannot  draw  too  many  lessons  from  what  other  central  banks  have  done,  because  our 
situation is so different. 
Q: Has an actual target been set for the expansion of the ECB’s balance sheet? 
A: No, we have not set a particular target, because we will do whatever is useful to facilitate 
the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy.  We  have  announced  a  programme  to  purchase  asset-
backed securities and covered bonds. Depending on its impact on growth and inflation, this 
programme  can  be  expanded.  The  Governing  Council  will  monitor  developments,  discuss 
them, and take decisions as appropriate. 
Q: You have been accused by some of instigating a bubble, particularly of public debt. 
A:  It  is  true  that  there  is  currently  an  enormous  amount  of  liquidity  at  the  global  level  in 
general and in the euro area in particular. And there are very low risk premia across all asset 
classes, not just for public debt. This necessitates great vigilance on the part of investors and 
authorities  in  order  to  avoid  encouraging  excessive  risk-taking.  And  it  will  also  be  very 
important  to  exercise  macroeconomic  vigilance,  because  there  is  going  to  be  abundant 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  liquidity in the next few years. To achieve this, macro prudential instruments should be used 
to their full extend. 
Q: Spain is issuing bonds at historically low interest rates, but its debt is standing at around 
100%  of  GDP  and  within  ten  years  it  will  be  faced  with  enormous  payouts  upon  maturity. 
What is going to happen then? 
A: It is no mystery: debt sustainability depends on a sound fiscal policy, and Spain is on the 
way  to  achieving  this.  It  is  taking  time,  but  Spain  has  already  made  good  progress  on 
reducing  the  deficit.  This  work  is  not  yet  done  and  should  continue  until  equilibrium  is 
reached.  Debt  sustainability  requires  a  significant  increase  in  nominal  GDP  growth.  The 
ECB’s contribution is to bring inflation back to levels below and close to 2% for the euro area 
as a whole, as set out in our mandate. However, in the long term the most important thing is 
real  growth  and  this  can  only  be  achieved  by  increasing  productivity.  So,  the  only  way  to 
ensure debt sustainability is to raise productivity, invest and increase the employment rate, 
and this implies structural reforms. 
Q: None of these factors are present. There is hardly any growth, investment or jobs. 
A: I am aware that the situation is still very difficult in Spain and that the Spanish people have 
suffered  a  lot  in  the  process  of  reducing  imbalances  and  implementing  reforms.  However, 
they can rest assured that Spain has turned the corner, and that the outlook is once again 
improving. This will encourage firms to invest and to start recruiting again, not only Spanish 
firms  but  also  foreign  ones.  In  a  way,  Spain  can  stand  as  an  example  not  only  for  other 
countries that have been hit by the crisis, but for other large countries at Europe’s core, that 
have not been so active in reforming their economies. Spain is an example of how, through 
reforms, it is possible to redress imbalances and get out of the doldrums. 
Q: Which reforms are urgent? 
A:  It  depends  on  the  country.  The  European  Commission  has  already  issued  so-called 
“country specific recommendations”. The worrying thing, as the Commission acknowledges, 
is that these recommendations are too rarely followed. It would be preferable if countries took 
them seriously and felt collectively committed. In the case of Spain, my personal view is that 
much  remains  to  be  done  to  support  the  young  people  and  help  find  jobs.  They  are  the 
future. 
Q: Would you be in favour of the binding agreements proposed by Angela Merkel? 
A: Binding agreements are one way of achieving this. However, in my view, it is better to stay 
within  the  Community  framework.  It  should  be  a  multilateral  discussion  and  not  a  bilateral 
one between the Commission and each Member State. There should be shared sovereignty 
as far as structural reforms are concerned, because there is a common interest. 
Q: The stress tests are nearing completion. Can we expect many failures and are there likely 
to be any surprises? 
A: We are checking the results, which will be available in the second half of October, so I 
cannot make any comments on them at present. 
Q:  Will  the  tests  be  credible  after  what  happened  with  Portugal’s  Banco  Espirito  Santo 
(BES)?  It  collapsed  despite  the  fact  that  the  ECB  and  the  rest  of  the  Troika  had  been 
supervising Lisbon for the past three years. 
A: In the BES case, it appears that information was being kept from the supervisor, which 
was the Banco de Portugal and not the ECB. The ECB, the European Commission and the 
IMF  were  in  Lisbon  to  analyse  financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  outcomes.  The  ECB 
had neither the instruments nor the mandate to supervise banks, as this was the role of the 
national supervisor. I do accept, however, that the BES case has served as a reminder that 
there are risks beneath the surface in the European banking sector, and I am convinced that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  be  able  to  examine  the  financial  health  of  the 
institutions in depth. 
Q: Could something similar to the BES case happen in other countries? 
A: This is always a possibility. Risks are inherent in banking activities. The only solution is a 
robust  management  framework  within  each  bank  and  on  a  European  level,  coupled  with 
instruments such as the Single Supervisory Mechanism or the Single Resolution Mechanism, 
which will be available in case of crisis. 
Q: Some analysts are comparing the situation in the euro area to that in Japan. 
A: I would imagine that they are referring to the situation in Japan in the 1990s, rather than to 
present-day Japan. At that time, Japan did not have anywhere near as expansive a policy as 
ours and it did not have the definition of price stability that we have to anchor inflation. Its 
approach  to  the  financial  sector  was  also  different,  as  we  have  banking  union,  resolution 
rules, stress tests, etc. To put it plainly, European supervisors, in particular the ECB, are not 
going to allow European banks to turn into zombie banks lending to zombie businesses, as 
was said in the case of Japan in the 1990s. 
Q: I understand that you met with Syriza, an aspirant party for government in Greece. How 
do you view them as an alternative? 
A: I would prefer not to make any comments on the political situation in Greece. I do believe, 
however,  that  the  appearance  of  protests  in  countries  subject  to  financial  assistance 
programmes  [implemented  by  the  Troika]  is  the  reflection  of  the  huge  demands  that  have 
been placed on the population. Being in a democracy means that people have the right to 
voice  their  complaints.  Yet  it  is  also  a  warning  to  leaders  that  when  an  economy  is 
undergoing  reform,  sharing  responsibility  and  effort  is  key.  It  is  key  to  both  the  economic 
efficiency  and  political  sustainability  of  the  reforms.  Social  protests  are  there  to  remind  us 
that  we  cannot  reform  an  economy  by  placing  all  the  demands  on  workers  and  the  most 
fragile parts of society. 
Q: Can the euro survive without debt mutualisation? 
A:  The  debate  on  the  future  of  the  euro  should  not  be  centred  on  instruments  such  as 
mutualisation. This is in my view the tail that wags the dog. The question to consider is to 
what  extent  we  should  share  risk  and  sovereignty  in  order  to  make  monetary  union 
sustainable.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  we  have  made  a  lot  of  progress  in  creating 
various  instruments  to  establish  effective  solidarity  within  the  euro  area,  as  well  as 
governance  that  establishes  responsibility  at  a  national  level.  The  process  is  not  yet 
completed.  For  the  euro  to  be  sustainable,  we  need  a  stronger  framework,  particularly  in 
relation  to  structural  reform,  where  we  need  a  strong  and  shared  decision-making 
mechanism. Fiscal union is part of this debate, but it can only be implemented when there is 
a  sufficient degree  of  homogeneity  between  countries  and  when  a  mechanism  for  political 
responsibility becomes available. Fiscal union without democratic control is not possible and 
is incompatible with democracy. This subject will come up, but not until further down the line. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
