  Kikuo Iwata: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and Japan’s 
recent economic and financial developments 
Speech by Mr Kikuo Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a Newspaper Editorial 
Writers’ Meeting, Kyodo News, Tokyo, 26 May 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  providing  me  with  an  opportunity  to  speak  in  front  of  this  large  group  of 
columnists. 
Today,  I  want  to  explain  the  content  and  basic thinking  behind  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE) introduced by the Bank of Japan in April last year. I will also touch 
on the role-sharing between our monetary policy and the growth strategy being implemented 
by the government. 
I. 
Inflation targeting policy and deflation 
Downside of deflation 
A. 
Let me ask two basic questions. Why is deflation problematic, and why did the Bank adopt 
an inflation targeting policy? 
Deferring spending and decline in aggregate demand 
Deflation,  which  can  be  defined  as  a  persistent  decline  in  prices,  causes  economic 
stagnation through several routes (Chart 1). 
First, if prices decline persistently, one can purchase more goods and services with the same 
amount of money as time passes. In other words, the value of cash and deposits will rise 
simply  by  hoarding  them;  thus,  firms  and  households  will  defer  their  investment  and 
spending. Consequently, this will lead to a decline in aggregate demand. 
Such a decline will make firms reduce their production activity at a level consistent with the 
drop  in  sales.  Corporate  profits  will  deteriorate  and  employee  income  will  fall  accordingly, 
and these factors will contribute to a further decrease in spending, housing investment, and 
firms’  business  fixed  investment.  All  this  will  lead  to  yet  another  decline  in  aggregate 
demand, which will induce a further drop in prices. Hence, a vicious cycle of price declines 
and stagnation prevails. 
Increase in effective debt burden 
A  persistent  decline  in  prices  means  that  the  value  of  money  for  goods  and  services  will 
increase. For those who borrow money, the value of money that they will have to repay will 
increase. This represents an increase in the effective burden of debt. 
Thus,  firms  and  households  will  become  cautious  about  borrowing  money.  The  effective 
burden of debt brought about by money that has already been borrowed will become heavier, 
weighing  on  consumption  and  investment.  As  a  result  of  shrinking  aggregate  demand,  a 
vicious cycle of price declines and stagnation will prevail once again. Such a mechanism can 
also be referred to as “debt deflation”. 
Excessive appreciation of the yen 
A persistent decline in prices means continued appreciation in the value of the yen; that is, 
the value of money to buy goods and services. If deflation only takes place in Japan, it will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  lead to a rise in the yen’s value against foreign currencies; hence, the appreciation of the yen 
will prevail. 
The  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen  will  generate  negative  effects  on  the  export  sector 
through  a  decline  in  international  competitiveness  in  prices  and  a  decline  in  the  value  of 
foreign currencies exchanged in the yen. Moreover, it will raise the cost of labor and capital, 
compared with overseas economies; thus, the production sites of Japanese firms will shift to 
overseas  and  inward  investment  in  Japan  will  stagnate.  This,  in  effect,  will  reduce  the 
employment opportunities in Japan and generate a decline in growth rates. Owing to these 
developments,  through  the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen,  deflation  will  exert  negative 
effects on Japan’s economy. 
Merit of stable and moderate inflation 
B. 
By  contrast,  in  an  environment  of  stable  and  moderate  inflation  –  for  example,  in  a  case 
where  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  rises  about  2  percent  year-on-year  –  a  mechanism 
that is a reversal of what I have just explained under deflation will work (Chart 2). 
Namely, if one can envisage that prices will rise, an incentive to spend and invest as early as 
possible  will  consistently  be  at  work. With  stimulated  spending  activity  and  an  increase  in 
aggregate  demand  within  the  economy,  firms  will  boost  their  spending  activity  to  a  level 
consistent with a rise in sales. 
Modifying  the  inflation  differentials  with  trading  partners  will  lead  to  an  adjustment  in 
excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen.  Moreover,  narrowing  the  differentials  of  inflation 
expectations with other economies will contribute to the stability of foreign exchange rates. 
In this way, corporate profits will start to improve and employee income will increase. Thus, 
spending  and  housing  investment  by  households  as  well  as  business  fixed  investment  by 
firms  will  be  rejuvenated  further.  A  steady  increase  in  aggregate  demand  will  lead  to  a 
persistent rise in prices; henceforth, a virtuous cycle of economic recovery and rise in prices 
will be generated. 
Advantages of inflation targeting policy 
C. 
In order to achieve stable and moderate inflation, what kind of policy will be desirable? 
One  answer  is  a  policy  framework  called  inflation  targeting.  The  Bank  has  been  pursuing 
monetary easing under the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI. This can be understood as a typical example of an inflation targeting 
policy (Chart 3). 
Enhancing policy credibility and predictability 
An inflation targeting policy has a number of advantages. 
To begin with, as the policy contains a specific numerical target for the future inflation rate, it 
can be judged objectively whether the target has been met. Through enhanced transparency, 
a central bank’s obligation to be accountable with regard to policy judgment and the status of 
achieving  the  target  will  become  crucial.  This  will  create  a  situation  in  which  credibility  in 
monetary policy is likely to be enhanced. 
As  it  becomes  easier  to  forecast  price  levels,  various  economic  entities  can  conduct  their 
activity  on  the  basis  of  such  forecasts.  The  predictability  of  future  prices  will  be  further 
reinforced as credibility in monetary policy becomes enhanced. 
Preventing hyperinflation 
Regarding the Bank’s policy, some raise concern that, when the time comes for the Bank to 
change  the  course  of  monetary  policy,  it  might  be  difficult  to  do  so  due  to  pressure  from 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial markets or the government, and this eventually leads to inducing hyperinflation. The 
adoption of inflation targeting is effective in terms of alleviating such concern. 
The reason for this is that an inflation targeting policy is a device to hold a specific numerical 
target  for  the  future  inflation  rate  and  make  a  commitment  to  achieving  a  situation  that 
generates neither inflation above the target rate nor deflation. 
Though an inflation targeting policy is often discussed in Japan as a measure to overcome 
deflation, it was originally adopted in the 1980s in countries that suffered high inflation, such 
as New Zealand. 
I would like you to understand that, in case the economy should overheat and the inflation 
rate should rise well above the 2 percent price stability target, the Bank will take appropriate 
measures in line with the framework of an inflation targeting policy. This has already been 
made as a firm commitment. 
I should stress that, in line with the mission stipulated in the Bank of Japan Act, the Bank will 
conduct  monetary  policy  based  on  its  judgment  and  responsibility  while  facilitating 
communication with the government. 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
II. 
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  content  and  transmission  mechanism  of  the  QQE,  which  was 
introduced as a policy to overcome deflation. 
Two pillars of the QQE 
A. 
The  Bank  set  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI.  It  has  been  pursuing  bold  monetary  easing  policy,  called  the  QQE,  in 
order to achieve this target since April 2013 (Chart 4). 
The QQE consists of two pillars (Chart 5). The first pillar is the commitment under which the 
Bank will achieve the price stability target of 2 percent as soon as possible. The Bank has 
made  a  clear  commitment  that  it  “will  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the 
earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years”. 
The second pillar is to engage in actions that embody the commitment specified in the first 
pillar.  As  exemplified  by  the  phrase  “quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing”,  these 
actions are to increase the “quantity” of the Bank’s balance sheet and change the “quality” of 
its asset purchases. 
An increase in “quantity” means increasing the monetary base at an annual pace of about 
60–70 trillion yen, mainly by massively purchasing Japanese government bonds (JGBs). 
A change in “quality” refers to purchasing assets with a higher risk profile. Among JGBs, the 
Bank  has  started  purchasing  those  with  longer  remaining  maturities.  In  addition,  it  has 
increased the amounts of purchases in exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs) in order to reduce risk premiums on assets. 
Transmission mechanism 
B. 
The  most  important  factor  in  the  QQE’s  transmission  channels  is  to  lower  expected  real 
interest rates (Charts 6 and 7). 
Expected  real  interest  rates  are  obtained  by  subtracting  the  expected  rates  of  inflation  by 
economic  entities from the  nominal  interest  rates  actually  observed  in  financial  markets  or 
over  the  counter.  Viewed  from  the  borrowers’  side,  real  interest  rates  are  equivalent  to 
borrowers’  subjective  expectations  regarding  their  real  costs  of  borrowing,  taking  into 
account price changes, when they borrow money at a certain nominal interest rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  By  committing  clearly  to  achieving  the  inflation  target  and  taking  bold  monetary  easing 
actions  that  underpin  such  commitment,  one  can  generate  the  effect  of  raising  inflation 
expectations.  On  the  other  hand,  while  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  are  close  to  zero 
percent,  one  can  generate  the  effect  of  restraining  the  rise  in  long-term  nominal  rates  by 
massively purchasing JGBs. Consequently, the combination of restraining the rise in nominal 
rates  and  raising  inflation  expectations  will  provide  downward  pressure  on  expected  real 
interest rates that are derived as a difference between the two. 
If firms and households lower their expected real interest rates, this will stimulate demand in 
the real economy in a number of ways. 
For  example,  when  real  interest  rates  decline,  people  will  shift  their  portfolios  from  cash, 
deposits,  and  fixed-income  securities  to  equities  and  tangible  assets  such  as  land  and 
housing,  or  to  foreign  currency-denominated  assets  with  higher  returns.  The  rise  in  equity 
prices and the appreciation of foreign currencies will stimulate private consumption through 
the wealth effect (Charts 8 and 9). 
In addition to the decline in expected real interest rates, other factors – including an increase 
in consumption and an improvement in export conditions due to the depreciation of the yen – 
will encourage firms to be more aggressive in their business fixed investment (Chart 10). 
A shortage of aggregate demand within the economy as a whole will be eliminated through 
an increase in demand such as private consumption and investment, and thus price levels 
will naturally rise. This will further raise inflation expectations toward the price stability target; 
hence, a virtuous cycle prevails. 
Those who are skeptical of the Bank’s ability to achieve the price stability target often say 
that the 2 percent target cannot easily be achieved unless there is further depreciation of the 
yen. Nonetheless, as I just explained, the main driver in the QQE’s transmission mechanism 
is  to generate  the  virtuous  cycle  by  raising  inflation  expectations  and  improving  the  output 
gap.  By  no  means  is  it  intended  to  rely  on  a  rise  in  import  prices  backed  by  the  yen’s 
depreciation. 
If  the  rise  in  the  CPI  since  the  beginning  of  the  QQE  last  April  stems  from  the  cost-push 
inflation triggered by the rise in import prices on the back of the weaker yen, then the real 
GDP should have declined and an unemployment rate should have risen. We should have 
been in stagflation by now. 
Looking at the economy, the real GDP growth rate was negative for two consecutive quarters 
(–0.6 percent and –0.8 percent in the second and third quarter of 2012, respectively) shortly 
before  Abenomics  was  announced.  Since  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012,  however,  it  has 
registered positive growth for six quarters in a row. Thus, the real GDP growth has marked a 
big jump from 0.7 percent in fiscal 2012 to 2.3 percent in fiscal 2013. 
As  for  the  unemployment  rate,  it  has  come  down  to  3.6  percent  in  March  2014  from 
4.1 percent in March 2013, shortly before the introduction of the QQE. The unemployment 
rate of 3.6 percent is equivalent to the level registered in July 2007 before the Lehman crisis. 
This leads me to conclude that the rise in inflation we observe after the QQE is characterized 
by demand-pull rather than cost-push, as it accompanies an expansion of the real GDP and 
an improvement in employment. 
In  Japan,  in  the  midst  of  prolonged  deflation  since  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s,  people’s 
inflation  expectations  declined  and  deflationary  expectations  were  firmly  embedded  in 
society.  One  of  the  striking  features  of  the  QQE  is  that  it  sets  the  overcoming  of  such 
deflationary expectations by working directly on people’s expectations, or the lifting of their 
inflation expectations, at the center of policy effects. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Current assessment 
C. 
It has been a year and two months since the Bank introduced the QQE. So far, the QQE has 
been exerting its intended effects. Looking at the survey results that summarize the views of 
a  wide  range  of  economic  entities  as  well  as  break-even  inflation,  observed  in  the  JGB 
market, inflation expectations in Japan have been rising on the whole. In addition, nominal 
rates, including those of JGBs, have remained stable at low levels (Chart 11). 
Under  such  accommodative  financial  conditions,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  recovering 
moderately,  accompanying  a  virtuous  cycle  among  production,  income,  and  spending.  On 
the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, excluding fresh food, had been 
below  zero  percent  for  a  prolonged  period  of  some  years,  but  finally  has  risen  to  around 
1¼ percent (Chart 12). As such, Japan’s economy has been steadily following a path toward 
realizing the price stability target of 2 percent – that is, a path to overcome deflation – and we 
are now getting an increasingly better response under the QQE (Charts 13, 14, and 15). 
III. 
Monetary policy and economy’s growth potential 
Growth strategy and monetary policy: respective roles 
A. 
Lastly, I wish to touch on an issue of the relationship between the Bank’s monetary policy 
and the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
As we all know, Japan has engaged in macroeconomic policy that combines bold monetary 
policy, flexible fiscal policy, and a growth strategy to encourage private investment. 
Under such mix of policies, the role of monetary policy is in essence to overcome deflation 
and  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  That  said,  we  can  streamline  the 
relationship with the economy’s growth potential as follows (Chart 16). 
The  first  role  of  monetary  policy  is  to  stimulate  aggregate  demand  through  bold  monetary 
easing, close the negative output gap, and return the economy to a path toward achieving 
potential growth. It can be said that the aim is to end the vicious cycle between deflation and 
stagnation by overcoming deflation. 
During the course of closing the negative output gap after the introduction of the QQE, the 
potential growth rate is expected to rise to some extent as employees will be able to work 
more efficiently and firms with improved sentiment will take more risk, increase their capital 
stocks, and become more innovative. At the same time, in order to raise the potential growth 
rate  even  further,  it  is  not  the  role  of  monetary  policy  but  that  of  the government  which  is 
equipped with policy tools including regulatory reform. 
This leads me to say that the second role of monetary policy is to set out an environment 
necessary for the government to embark on the growth strategy and raise potential growth by 
overcoming deflation. 
Unless the economy exhibits favorable performance, structural reform to raise its efficiency 
and  dynamism  as  well  as  lift  its  productivity  cannot  proceed.  This  is  because,  under  a 
deflationary  slump,  the  pain  caused  by  promoting  competition  through  deregulation 
encounters strong resistance. One often refers to “creative destruction”, but under deflation 
there is no creation after destruction. 
Furthermore, even though structural reform is making progress under the growth strategy, it 
is  supply-side  policy  that  enhances  the  production  capacity  of  Japan’s  economy.  Unless 
there  is  aggregate  demand  to  meet  such  new  capacity,  it  will  end  up  aggravating  the 
deflationary  pressure.  It  is  for  this  reason  too  that  monetary  easing  needs  to  alleviate 
deflationary pressure stemming from structural reform. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Further challenges 
B. 
If the government policy for the growth strategy and accompanying measures in the private 
sector are delayed, and the strengthening of growth potential does not proceed, it is possible 
that the achievement of the price stability target will bring about an economy with low real 
growth rates under mild inflation. 
I must emphasize that it is already a significant achievement to end the deflation that had 
lasted for a long period, but this is not enough to rejuvenate Japan’s economy. The Bank has 
high  expectations that the  government  will  continue  to  make further  progress  in  its growth 
strategy in order to strengthen the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
It may be that, as a result of progressing with structural reform under the growth strategy, the 
potential  growth  rate  may  rise,  worsen  the  output  gap  temporarily,  and  put  downward 
pressure on prices. Nevertheless, the Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the 
price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable manner. Thus, it can address such downward pressure on prices. 
We will steadily pursue the QQE with a view that Japan’s economy will be able to grow at a 
higher rate in an environment of a stable inflation rate of about 2 percent. 
Thank you.  
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
