Gill Marcus: Creating the conditions for growth in South Africa 
Graduation speech by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Central University of Technology, Bloemfontein, 11 March 2014. 
 Good evening ladies and gentlemen. Good evening to Professor Thandwa Zizwe Mthembu, 
Vice Chancellor and Principal of the Central University of Technology. I am humbled by the 
honour you and your institution have bestowed on me tonight. While you are awarding this 
honour to me, I feel that this tribute is also in recognition of the efforts of many others, not 
just  in  the  struggle  against  apartheid,  but  also  in  the  on-going  endeavours  since  1994  to 
make South Africa a better place for all who live in it. 
Societies that are making progress are those in which the present generation enjoys a better 
standard  of  living  than  their  parents.  In  many  countries  this  can  no  longer  be  taken  for 
granted.  Slow  economic  growth,  high  levels  of debt,  poorly  performing  education systems, 
unacceptably high levels of long term unemployment and the rising cost of ageing societies 
imply that for many in the advanced world the long-standing trend of children being better 
educated than their parents and enjoying higher incomes appears to be slowing, or perhaps 
even  reversing.  Fortunately,  South  Africa  is  not  in  this  group  of  countries  and  today’s 
generation  enjoys  a  higher  standard  of  living  than  their  parents.  In  most  families  there  is 
confidence and optimism that the children will do better than their parents. 
Our  economy  has  grown  steadily  since  1994,  with  incomes  per  capita  over  a  third  higher 
than in 1994. Employment has increased, with formal sector employment having risen from 
about  7  million  20  years  ago  to  about  11  million  today.  The  global  financial  crisis,  which 
emanated from the advanced economies, set us and other emerging market countries back 
somewhat. Despite this, employment is rising and our economy is expanding, although more 
slowly  than  we  would  like,  and  the  unemployment  rate,  at  just  over  24  percent,  remains 
unacceptably high. 
South Africa has also made meaningful strides in social development. School enrolment is 
almost  universal,  school  completion  rates  amongst  Africans  has  increased  sharply, 
enrolment at universities has more than doubled and an increasing proportion of students are 
taking science, engineering and technology courses. This is very important as our economy, 
in line with global trends and the rapid advances of technology, has become more skills and 
knowledge  intensive,  with  skilled  workers  earning  a  growing  share  of  the  economic  cake. 
This trend poses a challenge given that the vast majority of South Africans experienced a 
history of inferior quality education. The efforts of this university bears testimony to efforts to 
broaden  access  to  quality  education.  Notwithstanding  the  progress,  greater  efforts  are 
needed to address the legacy of our past. 
Even  though  our  economy  has  improved  significantly  from  twenty  years  ago,  the  recent 
period  has  been  difficult.  The  world  is  in  its  sixth  year  of  economic  crisis.  While  most 
countries are out of recession, the crisis itself has not ended. Measures taken to address the 
unfolding crisis had unintended consequences resulting in a constant mutation – for instance 
from a sub-prime crisis in the US affecting home owners and lenders to a systemic banking 
crisis;  from  a  systemic  banking  crisis  to  a  fiscal  deficit  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  many 
countries in Europe; from a wave of significant capital inflows and appreciating currencies in 
emerging  economies  to  where  more  recently  emerging  markets  have  had  to  deal  with  a 
reversal of these flows and depreciating currencies, at a time when many of them are also 
facing rising inflation and slowing growth. 
What  is  consistent  through  this  period  is  that  growth  is  slower  than  historical  averages, 
unemployment is higher and in particular youth unemployment, globally, is a major challenge 
standing at over 50 percent in a number of countries, including our own. The International 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Labour  Organisation  projects  that  unemployment  levels  are  only  likely  to  reach  pre-crisis 
levels by 2017, a full ten years from the start of the crisis. Ten years is a long time in the life 
of  any  person.  The  effects  in  terms  of  human  suffering,  reduced  household  savings,  long 
term unemployment, skills atrophy and lost investment are likely to endure for an even longer 
period. 
The US economic recovery is still fragile and risks remain. The recovery in the US, still the 
largest economy in the world, is a positive factor for the rest of the world. However, partly as 
a  consequence  of  higher  growth,  the  reduction  in  their  quantitative  easing  programme, 
whereby  the  Fed  is  reducing  its  asset  purchasing  programme  by  US$10bn  per  month,  is 
having detrimental effects on many emerging markets and an unsettling effect on financial 
markets globally. Growth rates have slowed in major emerging markets such as China, India 
and Brazil. Many developing countries, from Turkey to Venezuela, are battling both domestic 
economic challenges and capital outflows. However, Africa remains a bright spot in the world 
economy  with  sub-Saharan  African  growth  at  over  5  per  cent  a  year,  providing  significant 
opportunities to South African investors and companies. 
The  hesitant  recovery  in  the  global  economy,  and  particularly  in  Europe,  is  negatively 
affecting  South  Africa’s  growth  performance.  The  South  African  economy  grew  by  just 
1.9 per cent in 2013, far below potential of around 3.5 per cent. Although the Reserve Bank 
projects an improved growth rate of 2.8 percent growth for this year, it is still too low to make 
a meaningful dent in our unemployment rate. Demand for our main exports is growing slowly 
and  trading  conditions  for  most  firms  remain  difficult.  In  addition  to  global  factors,  South 
Africa’s economic growth is also being adversely affected by a number of domestic factors 
including electricity supply constraints, strike action in key export sectors and infrastructure 
bottlenecks. In addition, the economy is constrained by persistent shortages of skilled labour 
that lowers our growth potential. 
For monetary policy, the present environment presents a dilemma of slowing growth on the 
one hand, but rising inflation on the other. Given the fragile growth environment, the Reserve 
Bank has been more tolerant of inflation at the upper end of the target range for some time. 
However,  the  recent  marked  deterioration  of  our  inflation  forecast  led  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee to raise interest rates for the first time in six years. Notwithstanding this increase, 
monetary  policy  remains  accommodative,  and  the  MPC  will  continue  to  focus  on  its  core 
mandate  of  price  stability,  but  with  due  regard  to  the  impact  of  its  actions  on  economic 
activity. 
Economic  growth  needs  to  be  driven  by  real  investment,  and  currently  growth  in  private 
sector  investment  has  been  relatively  subdued.  Government’s  massive  infrastructure 
programme  is  essential  to  eliminate  bottlenecks  and  shortages,  thereby  contributing  to 
raising long term growth and productivity in the economy. The implementation of the National 
Development  Plan  will  also  support  growth  and  investment  as  it  is  focused  on  raising  our 
capabilities as a country and investing in our human resources. Over the next two decades, 
South Africa needs to raise its productivity levels, boost exports and ensure that not only do 
we significantly raise the rate of economic growth, but that it is also more inclusive. 
There are three core challenges that today’s world faces: food, water and energy. To briefly 
expand on just one aspect: by 2050, the world will need to produce about 80 percent more 
food than today to satisfy growing populations and rising food consumption. Africa contains 
the largest proportion of underutilised arable land on the planet. 
This  provides  a  huge  opportunity  for  investment,  not  just  in  agriculture  but  in  agro-
processing,  in  water  management,  in  roads  and  ports  and  in  cold  storage  facilities.  South 
African firms in the agricultural and agro-processing sector have the expertise, the know-how 
and the capital to invest in food production and processing on the continent. Again, there are 
strong backward linkages between such investments abroad and jobs back home. 
It is often said that all economic progress is about moving up the value chain, producing ever 
more complex products. This can only be done through partnership and cooperation between 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the state, the private sector and our education and research communities. A major area of 
focus for the country is the manufacturing sector. Manufacturing is important because it is a 
sector where productivity levels are already relatively high and the sector is able to generate 
well-paying  jobs  for  millions  of  people.  A  major  obstacle  to  faster  growth  in  manufacturing 
has been a shortage of high level technical skills. That is where you come in. This university 
is at the cutting edge of producing the type of skills required for our manufacturing sector to 
move up the value chain, to enhance productivity and grow our exports. 
The Central University of Technology is the home of the Centre for Rapid Prototyping and 
Manufacturing. This university, supported by the National Research Foundation, is investing 
heavily in research in ‘additive manufacturing’, also known as 3D printing. 3D printing is likely 
to revolutionise aspects of manufacturing, lowering barriers to entry and allowing mid-sized 
economies  to  compete  more  effectively  with  other  global  players.  These  are  exciting 
developments and I have no doubt that this university will play a greater role in helping our 
country to develop its advanced manufacturing sector. 
In conclusion ladies and gentlemen, despite significant challenges, South Africa as a nation 
is in the process of determining its future; it is a country that is growing, and with that growth 
comes  opportunities.  We  must  continuously  raise  the  quality  of  our  education  system; 
continuously  keep  up  with  the  best  developments  globally  so  that  we  can  produce  young 
graduates who are at the cutting edge of the fields that they enter; young people who will 
shape the future, drawing on the extraordinary strengths of all South Africans. The future is 
contested  terrain,  and  it  will  be  determined  by  our  vision  of  what  that  future  could  be  and 
what we, together, do. It is largely in your hands now. 
Again,  thank  you  for  this  honorary  doctorate.  I  humbly  accept  it  on  behalf  of  all  South 
Africans  who  are  making  a  contribution  to  build  a  non-racial,  democratic  and  prosperous 
South Africa. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
