 Glenn Stevens: Economic update 
 Speech  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Econometric  Society  Australasian  Meeting  and  the  Australian  Conference  of  Economists, 
Hobart, 3 July 2014. 
 I  thank  Alexandra  Rush  for  assistance  in  compiling  these  remarks  and  Selwyn  Cornish  for  comments  on  the 
historical material.  
Thank you for the invitation to visit Hobart – in winter! – and to take part in this conference. 
Economics in Tasmania 
This year marks a century of economics at the University of Tasmania, dating from the time 
Herbert  Heaton  took  up  duties  as  a  lecturer  in  History  and  Economics  in  1914.  Heaton’s 
pacifist  and  somewhat  left-leaning  views  apparently  caused  some  controversy,  both  in 
Tasmania  and  subsequently  at  the  University  of  Adelaide.  He  left  Australia  in  1925  for 
Canada, and later had a successful academic career at the University of Minnesota.1  
Over the ensuing period, some of the greatest names in Australian economics studied here, 
taught here or otherwise carried out some part of their professional duties here. It’s quite a 
line-up. 
There  was  LF  Giblin,  born  in  Tasmania,  sportsman,  student  at  Cambridge,  some-time 
acquaintance of the Bloomsbury Set, Yukon adventurer, enlisted soldier in middle age and 
wounded three times in the First World War, Tasmanian Government Statistician, adviser to 
government  on  economic  policy  in  the  1930s  depression  and  board  member  of  the 
Commonwealth Bank. 
Then there were those called “Giblin’s Platoon” in the very nice book of that name by William 
Coleman, Selwyn Cornish and Alf Hagger:2 
• 
Sir  Douglas  Copland,  lecturer  at  University  of  Tasmania,  the  first  dean  of  the 
University  of  Tasmania  faculty  of  commerce,  Professor  at  the  University  of 
Melbourne, adviser, contributor to Depression era policies, inaugural Alfred Marshall 
lecturer  at  Cambridge,  diplomat  and  founding  Vice  Chancellor  of  the  Australian 
National  University.  He  was  succeeded  at  the  University  of  Tasmania  by  James 
Bristock Brigden. 
Brigden, like Giblin a soldier, also wounded, post-war lecturer in Economics here at 
the University of Tasmania, Director of the Queensland Bureau of Economics and 
Statistics,  Secretary  of  a  number  of  government  departments  during  WWII, 
influential  in  the  development  of  tariff  and  wage  policies,  and  diplomat  in 
Washington. 
Sir  Roland  Wilson,  born  in  Tasmania,  completed  a  bachelor  of  commerce  at  the 
University of Tasmania (taught by Brigden and Copland), where he later lectured in 
economics.  He  was  later  Commonwealth  Statistician,  turning  down  a  chair  at  the 
university here to remain in Canberra, took up diplomatic roles in Washington upon 
                                                  
1  See <http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/heaton-herbert-6626>. 
2  Coleman  W,  S  Cornish,  AJ  Haggar,  (2006),  Giblin’s  Platoon:  The  trials  and  triumph  of  the  economist  in 
Australian public life, ANU Press, Canberra. Available at <http://press.anu.edu.au?p=55501>.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Brigden’s  retirement,  became  Chairman  of  the  UN  Employment  Commission  and 
was the longest-serving Secretary to the Australian Treasury.3  
Coleman  et  al.  chronicle  the  way  the  relationships  between  these  four  bore  fruit.  It  was  a 
remarkable period of activity for the fledgling profession in this country, and people who had 
been or were associated in some way with the University of Tasmania were in the thick of it. 
It might be said that, in many respects, much of the genesis of modern policy economics in 
Australia occurred here in Hobart. 
Every generation has its own challenges. In the careers of today’s generation of economists 
we have had, as described by various authors, “the Great Inflation”, “the Great Moderation”, 
“the  Great  Recession”.  The  ensuing  slow  recovery  in  the  advanced  countries  could  be 
described  as  “the  Great  Disappointment”,  though  one  commentator  has  used  stronger 
language – describing it, rather biblically, as “the Great Tribulation”.4  
Maybe  there  is  undue  devaluation  of  the  adjective  “great”  in  such  characterisations.  Or 
maybe not. The generation of Giblin et al. faced enormous challenges, especially given the 
much more limited stock of accumulated knowledge at that time and the scarcity of trained 
economists.5  But  plenty  of  writers,  including  some  who  have  been  intimately  involved  in 
policymaking,  have  seen  the  recent  episode  as  potentially  as  catastrophic  as  the  1930s, 
averted only due to interventions framed with the lessons of the 1930s in mind. 
But  a  fuller  evaluation  of  those  issues  may  need  to  wait  for  another  occasion.  Today  I 
propose something less ambitious. In early May, the Bank published its latest Statement on 
Monetary Policy. Since then we have had the Federal and some state budgets, and some 
further  data  as  well  as  a  couple  of  interest  rate  decisions.  Hence,  it  seems  appropriate  to 
provide a brief update and some comments on a few issues connected with monetary policy. 
Economic update 
It appears that the economy’s pace of growth increased somewhat in the second half of last 
year,  and  that  this  persisted  in  the  first  few  months  of  2014.  Real  GDP  expanded  at  an 
annualised pace of about 3 per cent in the second half of 2013, up from just under 2½ per 
cent in the first half. Business survey readings are broadly consistent with this picture. The 
March quarter of 2014 saw a further pick up, to something that was above trend, measured 
either in the quarter or over the year. 
A  key  question  is  the  extent  to  which  these  recent  national  accounts  data  in  particular 
illustrate the likely ongoing pace of growth. The results owed a lot to a very substantial rise in 
resource exports. This in turn reflected new capacity coming on stream and also unusually 
benign  weather.  While  further  rises  in  resource  export  volumes  are  expected,  they  are 
unlikely to be at the same pace. 
Hence, the most recent set of GDP figures, while certainly encouraging, probably overstate 
somewhat the true ongoing pace of growth in the economy. The Bank’s forecasts from early 
May, which we have not materially changed, embody ongoing growth but, in the near term, 
probably a little below trend. We will provide an update of forecasts next month. 
                                                
3  We could add Sir Edward Ronald Walker, professor of Economics at the University of Tasmania, adviser to 
the  State  government,  head of  the delegation  to  the 1945  Paris  Conference,  diplomat and  chair of  the  UN 
Committee on Full Employment in the late 1940s. We could also mention Professor Gerald Firth, who travelled 
from the UK to take up the Ritchie Research Fellowship funded by Giblin at the University of Melbourne, was a 
senior economist in the Department of Post-war Reconstruction and was Professor of Economics at UTAS for 
around 30 years. 
4  See Charles Bean, <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2014/729.aspx>. 
5 
It’s remarkable that Sir Roland Wilson was, according to Coleman et al., the first university graduate appointed 
to an administrative position in the Commonwealth Public service, in 1932.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  stance  of  monetary  policy 
What are some of the key features of this outlook? 
The world economy continues to show moderate growth, probably a little below average but 
not by all that much. The advanced countries are seeing somewhat better outcomes than last 
year overall, while some emerging market economies slowed somewhat during the first half 
of 2014, including China. 
Looking  at  domestic  economic  policies, 
is  very 
accommodative, certainly when measured by the metric of interest rates. The level of rates, 
including  for  borrowers,  is  at  a  50-year  low.  The  cash  rate  measured  in  “real”  terms  is 
approximately  zero.  In  either  nominal  or  real  terms  the  cash  rate  is  well  below  “normal” 
levels, and comfortably below even the mooted lower “new normal” levels. Moreover, we still 
have “ammunition” on interest rates – we have not got close to the zero lower bound that has 
afflicted some other countries. 
The low interest rates have been having many of the effects they normally do. Savers have 
altered  their  behaviour  to  look  for  returns  in  slightly  more  risky  assets;  asset  prices  have 
risen;  demand  for  credit  has  strengthened;  and  interest  sensitive  areas  of  spending,  like 
some areas of consumption and especially dwelling construction, have firmed. The exchange 
rate also declined, though not by as much as might have been expected. The full effects of 
the  very  accommodative  stance  of  policy  have  not  been  seen  at  this  stage.  It  will  be 
supporting demand for some time yet. 
The  Federal  Budget  seems  unlikely  materially  to  change  the  near-term  outlook.  Over  the 
next couple of years the estimated impact of the budget is not very different from what we 
had  previously  been  assuming,  and  the  extent  of  fiscal  contraction,  as  conventionally 
measured,  is  actually  not  particularly  large  when  compared  with  past  episodes  of  fiscal 
tightening. 
Beyond that period, the measures in the budget will result in a more significant consolidation 
than earlier assumed. It was over that more medium-term horizon that the Commonwealth’s 
finances,  left  unattended,  looked  like  they  were  going  to  start  going  more  seriously  off 
course. So the timing of the intended consolidation seems broadly sensible. 
That  having  been  said,  the  fact  that  the  real  issues  with  public  finances  are  medium-term 
ones  is  not  a  reason  to  put  off  taking  decisions  to  address  them.  On  the  contrary,  as 
experience  in  so  many  other  countries  demonstrates,  by  the  time  these  sorts  of  problems 
have gone from being out on the horizon to on our doorstep, they have usually become a lot 
more difficult to tackle. Early, measured actions that have effects that build up over time are 
a much better approach than the much tougher response that might be required if decisions 
were delayed. 
There  has  been  discussion  about  confidence  effects  of  the  budget.  Some  surveys  do 
suggest  some  decline  in  household  confidence  of  late.  It  is  important,  though,  to  ask  how 
persistent such effects might be. Last year’s budget, which contained some tough messages, 
also  seemed  to  be  associated  with  a  decline  in  such  measures  of  confidence.  They 
recovered after a few months. We can only wait to see whether that pattern will be repeated 
this year. Measures of business confidence don’t show any obvious response to the budget. 
While there has been much focus on budget measures, the biggest sources of uncertainty 
about the pace of private demand growth remain the speed of the impending large decline in 
capital spending by the resources sector, and the timing of the recovery in non-mining capital 
spending and non-mining activity more generally. 
The biggest and most persistent terms of trade gain in at least a century ushered in a capital 
spending  response  by  mining  and  energy  companies  that  saw  the  private  business 
investment share of GDP reach a 50-year high, even though investment outside the mining 
sector  approached  recession-level  lows.  Now,  the  terms  of  trade  are  falling,  and  the 
investment  part  of  the  boom  has  peaked.  Mining  investment,  as  a  share  of  GDP,  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  probably  already  declined  by  about  1  percentage  point,  and  is  expected  to fall  by  another 
3 or 4 percentage points over the next few years. 
Unlike in all previous such booms, we did not experience serious overheating in the upswing. 
What  is  being  attempted  now  is  to  negotiate the  downswing  phase  without  the  slump that 
characterised the aftermath of all the other booms.6 The fact that the upswing was managed 
without the excesses of the previous episodes is no guarantee of success in the next phase, 
but it has to be a good starting point. 
We have  seen  some  encouraging  early  signs of  the “rebalancing” taking  place.  Consumer 
demand has been rising moderately, even if recently perhaps a little more slowly than it did 
over  the  summer.  Residential  construction  is  moving  up  strongly,  and  intentions  to  invest 
outside the resources sector have started to improve, from very subdued levels. The labour 
market has also shown some early indications of mild improvement. 
But these signs remain early ones. There is quite some way to go yet before the episode is 
completed. 
Meanwhile, the environment seems likely to be one in which a number of sectors are making 
serious efforts to contain costs and lift productivity (Graph 1). That amounts to an outlook for 
wages and prices that does not appear to threaten the inflation target, even were we to see a 
somewhat lower exchange rate. Perhaps more fundamentally, a better trend for productivity, 
if we can sustain it – and especially if it can be further improved – would be a reliable basis 
for optimism about the longer-run prospects for the economy and our living standards. 
Graph 1 
Communication about monetary policy 
It is in that context that the Board has left the cash rate unchanged at 2.5 per cent for almost 
a year now. 
                                                 
6  For  an  insightful  treatment  of  the  previous  booms,  see  Ric  Battellino’s  speech  “Mining  Booms  and  the 
Australian Economy” (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For rates to have been stable for this long isn’t unprecedented. But since markets and media 
commentators find the idea of masterly inaction neither appealing nor interesting, this has put 
more focus on communication. 
The  Bank’s  language  has  evolved,  given  the  passage  of  time  and  the  flow  of  new 
information.  Up  to  the  time  of  last  August’s  meeting,  the  post-Board  statement  for  some 
months included language about the inflation outlook, as then assessed, providing “scope” to 
ease  further  should  that  be  appropriate  to  support  demand.  At  the  May  and  August  2013 
meetings the Board used some of that scope. Subsequent post-meeting statements did not 
include that phrasing. The minutes of those meetings simply recorded the Board’s view that 
“the  Bank  should  neither  close  off  the  possibility  of  reducing  rates  further,  nor  signal  an 
imminent intention to reduce rates further”. That phrasing was retained until the December 
minutes. 
The  data  that  emerged  over  the  summer  saw  somewhat  firmer  growth,  a  lower  exchange 
rate and higher inflation than had been embodied in the outlook as at the end of last year. 
This led the staff forecasts for both growth and prices to be revised higher for the February 
meeting and the subsequent Statement on Monetary Policy. The December quarter CPI in 
particular was something of a surprise. We interpreted those data as containing a degree of 
noise but could not entirely discount the possibility that they may also contain some signal. 
Hence, the inflation forecast was revised up somewhat. 
With both growth and inflation forecasts moving higher, it would have been odd to continue 
with  the  earlier  language.  After  all,  policy  had  been  eased  a  great  deal,  it  seemed  to  be 
having many of the expected sorts of effects, inflation wasn’t threatening to be too low and, if 
anything, was going to be higher than earlier expected, and there was mildly better news on 
output.  Accordingly,  the  Bank’s  communication  continued  to  evolve  in  light  of  new 
information. 
Although this  shift  in  language  was quite gradual,  the  problem  we  can  sometimes  have  in 
such  periods  is  that  people  may  react  by  thinking  that,  if  the  Bank  is  not  thinking  about 
easing, then it must be thinking about tightening. But we were not contemplating tightening. 
In fact, the conclusion we had reached was that we might be on the brink of sitting still for 
some time. That is why we adopted language about “stability” in interest rates, the intended 
effect of which was to be clear to people that we did not think that higher interest rates were 
imminent.  That  has  not  stopped  people  from  opining  about  the  timing  of  possible  future 
increases  –  or,  indeed,  decreases.  That’s  what  makes  a  market  –  people  have  differing 
views, for various reasons. 
Overall, I judge that language to have served its intended purpose. Present market pricing 
suggests  that  market  participants  expect  interest  rates  to  remain  low  for  some  time  yet.  If 
anything, pricing in recent days has suggested that, if a move were to occur over the next 
several months, markets expect it would be down, not up. Any increase in rates is thought by 
market participants, on average, to be unlikely for quite some time. 
The evolution of language should be expected to continue, as more time passes and further 
information comes to hand. Long before any thought were to be given to an increase in rates, 
it would probably be sensible for the Board to cease references to a future “period of stability” 
and  revert  to  the  more  normal  formulation  that  the  stable  policy  settings  “remained 
appropriate”  or  something  like  that.  Such  an  evolution  would  amount  to  no  more  than  a 
recognition that a “period of stability” had in fact already been occurring and wasn’t entirely in 
the  future,  but  wouldn’t  imply  any  particular  change  in  the  Bank’s  views  about  the  future 
course of policy. It should go without saying that those seeking to understand our thinking 
should, in any event, look not just at the wording in the post-Board statement, nor just that in 
the minutes,  but  also  at  the  whole  analysis  of  the  economy  and  the  outlook  in the regular 
Statement on Monetary Policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The exchange rate 
Another issue in communication has been how to describe the exchange rate. For a period 
we  described  it  as  “uncomfortably  high”.  It  subsequently  declined,  though  we  suspect  that 
was due more to a change in mood in global capital markets than to our words per se. We 
altered  our  language  to  reflect  that  decline,  and  then  adjusted  it  again  as  the  currency 
re-traced some of that rise. 
There  seems  to  have  been  a  very  strong  focus  on  whether  the  adjective  “uncomfortable” 
would be put into use once more in the post-Board statements. It hasn’t been, though I don’t 
regard that to be as significant as many people seem to think it is. We have tried to avoid 
frequent and large language shifts about the exchange rate. It can vary enough from month 
to month that we risk chasing our tails if we seek to engage too actively in “jawboning” each 
month. 
But lest there be any uncertainty about this, let me be clear, again, that the exchange rate 
remains high by historical standards. There is little doubt that significant parts of the trade-
exposed sectors still find it quite “uncomfortable”: it continues to exert acute pressure for cost 
containment,  productivity  improvement  and  business  model  change. When  judged  against 
current  and  likely  future  trends  in  the  terms  of  trade,  and  Australia’s  still  high  costs  of 
production  relative  to  those  elsewhere  in  the  world,  most  measurements  would  say  it  is 
overvalued, and not by just a few cents. Of course, we live in unusual times, with interest 
rates  at  the  “zero  lower  bound”  in  several  major  jurisdictions.  Nonetheless,  we  think  that 
investors  are  under-estimating  the  likelihood  of  a  significant  fall  in  the  Australian  dollar  at 
some point. 
Housing prices 
Finally  on  communication  and  monetary  policy  generally,  there  is  the  question  of  housing 
prices. Few issues seem as capable of sharply dividing opinions as this one. Some use the 
“B”  word,  sometimes  followed  by  calls  for  interest  rates  to  be  higher.  Others  regard  it  as 
unthinkable  that  interest  rates  would  ever  respond  to  housing  prices.  Still  others  call  for 
regulatory  actions  to  constrain  housing  lending,  which,  by  the  way,  has  overall  remained 
quite moderate so far. 
The Bank’s views on this have been quite consistent. We have made four points. 
First, with dwelling prices having fallen between 2010 and 2012, some recovery was not in 
itself  particularly  cause  for  concern,  certainly  not  initially.  Moreover,  if  we  think  there  is  a 
need for higher construction, which we do, an environment of declining prices is probably not 
conducive to that outcome. Some pick-up in housing prices as a result of lower interest rates 
was  to  be  expected;  it  shows  that  monetary  policy  is  working  and  is  part  of  the  normal 
transmission process. 
Of course, this argument becomes less persuasive if valuations reach new highs and keep 
rising. So, second, were there to be a further big run-up in prices, with past increases leading 
to overconfident expectations of continuing gains, it would be a different matter. If this were 
accompanied by a return to significant increases in household leverage, from already high 
levels, that would be a matter for concern. It would be adding risk to the system. 
But, third, to date the amount of new borrowing does not appear, overall, to be imprudent. 
The rise in the value of loan approvals over the past year of around 20 per cent is certainly 
significant. It’s important to note, however, that scaled by the amount of credit outstanding, 
the rate of this flow over recent months, while clearly well off its 2011 low point, is actually 
not that high compared with longer-run history (Graph 2). It’s only a little above 2008 lows, in 
fact. The growth of credit outstanding for housing is about 6–7 per cent per annum, or slightly 
above trend nominal income growth. It’s hard to mount the soap box to complain about that 
pace. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  Nonetheless, fourth, investors should take care in the Sydney market, which is the main area 
where a large increase in borrowing has been occurring. The total value of credit approvals 
for investor loans in New South Wales as a whole is about 130 per cent higher than in 2008, 
and it is in the investor segment where there has been evidence of some increase in lending 
with loan-to-value ratios above 80 per cent in the past couple of quarters. 
Here we continue to have two messages. 
The first is that in forming expectations about future price gains and deciding their financing 
structure, people should not assume that prices always rise. They don’t; sometimes they fall. 
The  second  is  that  banks  and  other  lenders  need  to  maintain  strong  lending  standards. 
APRA has helpfully been reinforcing this point directly with bank boards, as well as stressing 
the importance of having adequate, higher, interest rate buffers in place, given the current 
very low level of rates in the market.7 The maintenance of strong standards will be all the 
more important given the significant improvement in access to funding via the securitisation 
market over the past year and the associated increase in competition to lend. 
Some segments of the housing market do appear to have been calming down lately. Prices 
have flattened out in several cities and even in Sydney the pace of increase has lessened. 
It remains to be seen whether this slower pace of growth in dwelling prices is temporary or 
more persistent. It would in my opinion be good, for a range of reasons, if it did persist for a 
while.  If  the  next  couple  of  years  saw  an  unremarkable  performance  on  prices,  and 
construction staying at the higher levels that will clearly be reached over the coming year, it 
would be an outcome that would contribute to a balanced growth path for the economy and 
to housing more people at manageable cost. 
Overall,  the  Bank  has  not  seen  developments  in  the  housing  market  as  warranting  higher 
interest rates than the ones we have had, in the current circumstances. This isn’t because 
we think that financial stability considerations should be ignored in the policy decision. On the 
                                                
7  See <http://www.apra.gov.au/adi/Documents/Draft-PPG-APG223.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  contrary, they should be, and have been, given due weight, along with all the other factors 
we have to take into account, in deciding the interest rate path we have chosen. We judge 
that path to have best balanced, to date, all the various considerations. 
Conclusion 
I wonder whether Giblin and his “platoon” could have imagined a meeting like this: hundreds 
of  economists  and  econometricians  converging,  from  around  the  country  and  around  the 
world, on Hobart for just a few days, travelling not at stately pace in ships and trains, as they 
would have, but through the stratosphere at just under the speed of sound. Probably not. 
But  at  least  some  of  the  issues  about  which  we  talk  today  would  sound  familiar  to  them. 
Swings in the terms of trade, the effects of massive international financial events with all their 
spillovers, policymakers grappling with events they had not seen before, come to mind. They 
would have seen a need, as should we, for the economics profession to make a constructive 
contribution to national debate about economic matters. 
I hope the discussions today and over the course of the conference will help us all to play our 
parts.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
