  Jwala Rambarran: Implications of the proposed regulatory regime for 
credit unions 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the 42nd Annual General Meeting of Aero Services Credit Union, Port of Spain, 
29 March 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  honour  to  be  asked  by  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Aero  Services  Credit  Union 
Co-operative  Society  Limited  to  address  its  42nd  Annual  General  Meeting.  I  believe  this 
invitation comes at an opportune time for the Central Bank to once again reach out directly to 
the credit union movement, as we move even closer towards regulation of the credit union 
sector. 
It  is  also  my  pleasure  to  speak  directly  to  you,  the  membership  of  Aero  Services  Credit 
Union. I have known some of your Board Directors for close to a decade and I am aware that 
Aero  Services  Credit  Union  has  been  responding  to  the  challenges  of  a  harsher 
socioeconomic climate. I note that, in light of an aging demographic, you have had to expand 
your  membership  bond  outside  the  aviation  industry.  Equally  impressive  is  that  you  have 
managed to grow your resource base to over TT$200 million while managing delinquency in 
a historically low interest rate environment and more competitive financial services sector. 
Apart  from  building  wealth  for  your  members,  Aero  Services  Credit  Union  continues  to 
demonstrate the fundamental values sacred to the credit union movement, a clear indication 
that you are living up to your motto “the credit union where every dream counts”. You are an 
example  of  how  credit  unions  when  managed  properly  can  meet  their  members’ 
expectations, maintain their trust and confidence, and fulfill your commitment to those who 
trust you with their hard earned money. For this reason, I want to underscore that the Central 
Bank  recognizes  the  important  contribution  that  credit  unions  are  making  to  our  society, 
especially in fostering greater financial inclusion by reaching out to the ordinary working men 
and women who are underserved by traditional financial institutions. 
Today,  about  one-third of  the  population  can  boast  of membership  in  credit  unions.  Credit 
unions have collectively  amassed an asset base of over TT$9.5 billion or 3 percent of the 
assets of the total financial system assets in Trinidad and Tobago. Your relevance, however, 
is much richer than your asset base.  
Credit unions have helped their members to develop a healthy savings habit, educated them 
on  financial  matters  and  financed  small  business  start-ups,  all  while  experiencing 
considerable  turbulence  and  consolidation.  You  have  propelled  the  ideals  of  financial 
inclusion as well. These ideals are what you live and breathe every day. So if I may humbly 
say this, ladies and gentlemen, you do not need the Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad 
and Tobago to tell you what your relevance is to the economy of our country. 
Accordingly, I would like to take the opportunity this afternoon to speak about issues related 
to  the  new  proposed  regulatory  regime  for  credit  unions,  which  is  expected  to  come  into 
effect in the coming year. 
• 
First, I will highlight why the proposed credit union regulatory regime will benefit your 
members and the entire credit union movement, paying particular attention to some 
of the areas of concern highlighted in your President’s Message on Page 7 of your 
2013 Annual Report; 
Second, I wish to speak about the proposed establishment of a Protection Fund for 
credit unions; 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Finally, I will seek to address some lingering concerns of the national credit union 
movement surrounding the impending credit union legislation. 
 Prudential regulation of the credit union sector 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now turn to prudential regulation of the Credit Union Sector by the 
Central Bank. 
Before I get into the substance of my address this afternoon and before you start to go into 
the information overload stage that we all get… let me start with what I like to call the latest 
and the greatest, that is, the most important point I want to leave you with today, And it is 
this: Regulation of the credit union industry will benefit you and it will benefit the people you 
serve. Regulation is needed and it is coming; embrace it, don’t fear it. Regulation will be your 
best tool for continuing to make every dream count. 
I  know  by  now  many  of  you  would  be  familiar  with  the  Policy  Proposal  Document  for  the 
Credit  Union  Bill  which  was  done  after  consultation  with  stakeholders  like  yourself.  This 
document is on Central Bank’s website and shows you exactly what is the basis for and how 
the new legislation will work. It is basically a blue print for the entire process. 
It tells you for instance the objectives of the Central Bank under the CUA which are: 
1. 
To  determine  the  safety  and  soundness  of  credit  unions  and  protect  members’ 
deposits and shares from undue loss; 
To  supervise  credit  unions  to  determine  whether  they  are  in  sound  financial 
condition and in compliance with the Act; 
To  maintain  confidence  in  and  promote  the  stability  of  credit  unions  and  by 
extension the financial SYSTEM of Trinidad and Tobago. 
2. 
3. 
It  is  important  you  understand  these  three  objectives  as  they  explicitly  tell  you  what  our 
intentions are and what we want to accomplish. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  back  in  July  2005,  when  Cabinet  took  the  decision  to  bring  credit 
unions  under  the  regulatory  authority  of  the  Central  Bank,  this  action  was  met  with  grave 
apprehension by the credit union movement. This uneasiness, perhaps rightly so at that time, 
stemmed from the fear that the Central Bank did not really understand the unique character 
of  credit  unions  and  would  unfairly  treat  them  just  like  banks.  The  fact  that  the  original 
regulatory proposal spoke about a division of credit unions by asset size into small and large 
credit unions (like banks) worsened these fears.  
I  feel  confident  almost  ten  years  later  the  Central  Bank  is  certainly  more  appreciative  and 
understanding of the special nature of credit unions, especially the co-operative ethos which 
distinguishes you from any other type of financial institution where usually the most important 
motive is profit. Many credit unions understand and support the rationale behind the Central 
Bank as prudential regulator of the entire credit union sector, although it seems that there 
may still be some low notes against change and regulation. 
Some may argue the industry has survived, grown and done very well for itself with a “lite-
touch”  regulatory  approach.  However  given  the  events  of  the  last  six  years  you  would 
appreciate operating under the outdated legislation of the Co-operatives Society Act of 1971 
cannot continue, as we have seen the enormous impact the failure of one credit union can 
have on confidence in the entire financial system of the country and how the same people 
you serve suffer. 
Do not see this as the Central Bank clamping down on you, but doing what has to be done to 
protect  our  citizens  and  our  economy.  I  know  it  will  take  more  convincing  than  this  to 
persuade  those  who  are  against  stronger  regulatory  oversight  of  credit  unions,  but  I  will 
attempt to show you how regulation will bring clarity to your operations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First, let me update you on where we have reached with the proposed regulation, the Draft 
Credit Union Bill. 
In  recognition  of  the  differences  between  credit  unions  and  other  financial  entities  that  we 
regulate, the Central Bank has been developing, in consultation with the sector, credit union- 
specific legislation in the form of a Draft Credit Union Bill (the Bill). These consultations have 
been extensive beginning in 2006 and ending in July 2013. During that seven-year period, 
the Central Bank engaged extensively with stakeholders on crafting a new, robust regulatory 
regime for credit unions. These stakeholders include the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of 
Labour and Small and Micro Enterprise Development, the Co-operative Credit Union League, 
the Association of Co-operative Credit Union Presidents, and members from the credit union 
movement. 
During the seven-year consultation period, the Central Bank made several concessions from 
its original negotiating position in an attempt to reach out to the credit union movement and 
to narrow, as much as possible, the existing gap between intention and policy. In fact, when I 
closed consultations last July, I made several concessions on our negotiating positions in the 
spirit  of  compromise  and  consensus  building.  By  my  count,  the  Central  Bank  made  more 
than 
requirements, 
non-financial services and penalties affecting credit unions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  must  indicate  that  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  recognizes  the  co-
operative  principles,  democratic  structure,  service  to  members  and  social  goals  of  credit 
unions. In developing the legislation, the Central Bank considered it important that many of 
the  current  services  and  practices  of  credit  unions  be  maintained.  However,  we  also 
considered it absolutely  necessary that relevant and appropriate prudential limits be put in 
place  and  enhancements  made  for  more  effective  governance.  In  these  two  areas  of 
governance and prudential limits, we did not accept several suggestions made by the sector, 
as they were not consistent with the desired safety and soundness objectives of the credit 
union legislation. 
ten  substantial  concessions  spanning  governance,  prudential 
Governance requirements 
The Draft Credit Union Bill recognizes that members are the ultimate decision-making body 
for  the  credit  union.  The  Bill  contains  provisions  for  proper  governance  and  effective  risk 
management in order to ensure the safety and soundness of credit unions. Credit unions that 
are sound can best meet the needs of their members, including providing financial services, 
training members in entrepreneurship and in financial literacy.  
Governance proposals seek to ensure that the directors of a credit union are fit and proper 
and  that  the  board  is  effective,  accountable  and  transparent  in  the  management  of  their 
credit  union.  As  far  as  fit  and  proper  goes,  the  proposed  legislation  seeks  to  establish 
minimum qualifications for Board Directors. The Bill requires that Board Directors who do not 
meet the minimum qualification requirements would have to obtain relevant training within a 
reasonable  period  of  18  months  of  becoming  a  Director.  Today’s  dynamic  financial 
environment  requires  persons  who  are  knowledgeable,  who  understand  the  complex 
products  being  offered  as  investments,  and  who  can  guide  the  credit  union  based  on  an 
understanding of the environment and the changes taking place. 
Prudential criteria requirements 
In  addition  to  strong  governance,  there  must  be  standards,  limits  and  prohibitions  which 
guide  the  financial  management  and  operations  of  the  credit  union  to  ensure  its  financial 
soundness. The Bill seeks to introduce prudential requirements aimed at strengthening the 
balance sheet and managing risk exposures faced by credit unions. 
At the heart of the Draft Credit Union Bill is a regime of prudential criteria covering capital, 
liquidity, asset quality and earnings, borrowing, credit exposure and non-financial activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  I would like to draw your attention to the minimum capital requirement, which is one of the 
concessions  made  by  the  Central  Bank.  As  you  can  well  appreciate,  adequate  capital  is 
essential  to  finance  all  non-income  generating  assets  of  your  credit  union.  Capital  is  also 
used to absorb losses from loan delinquency or operating deficits. The proposed legislation 
requires a credit union to have a minimum capital of 8 percent of total assets, reduced from 
10 percent in the original proposal. In addition, a credit union with capital below the minimum 
(at the time the legislation is passed) must submit a plan to the Central Bank to meet the 
capital requirement in three years, if it wants to make dividend payments.  
I would also like to draw your attention to the liquid funds ratio, which is another important 
prudential requirement that must be maintained in order to enable a credit union to meet the 
day-to-day demands by members for withdrawal of their funds and to ensure that the credit 
union remains liquid. A lack of liquidity can negatively affect a credit union given that the first 
time someone is unable to access their shares or deposits this sends negative signals and 
may lead to a run on the credit union. Liquidity is therefore critical to the confidence members 
have in a credit union and its continued viability. 
I hope you will forgive me if I sound a bit technical but I believe it is important to cover some 
of these points as I seek to convince you that while for some the devil is the details, for you, it 
will be the angel in the details. 
Establishment of protection fund for deposits and shares held in a credit union. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now turn to the establishment of a Protection Fund for credit unions. 
A  key  institutional  support  to  the  new  regulatory  framework  is  the  establishment  of  a 
mandatory deposit insurance system to protect credit union members and, by extension, to 
enhance  stability  of  the  financial  sector.  The  Protection  Fund  would  be  managed  by  the 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation.  Not  only  would  the  Protection  Fund  cover  deposits  but  it 
would  include  withdrawable  shares,  that  is,  shares  not  held  as  permanent  shares  which 
represent  most  of  the  sector’s  savings,  a  situation  that  is  unique  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago. 
Withdrawable  shares,  therefore,  pose  a  greater  loss  of  risk  than  deposits  for  credit  union 
members in the event of a credit union’s failure. 
In  January  2014,  the  Central  Bank  disseminated  its  Consultation  Paper  on  the  “Protection 
Fund for Deposits and Shares Held in Credit Unions” to the credit union sector for comments. 
The key elements of the proposed Protection Fund are the following:  
• 
All credit unions that have an Operating Certificate granted by the Central Bank will 
be eligible to join the Protection Fund, except if in they are liquidation; 
Initial  seed  funding  will  be  made  by  the  credit  union  sector  (and  possibly  by  the 
Central Bank and the government). Sound funding is critical as it is quite possible 
that there may be immediate claims on the Protection Fund; 
The Protection Fund is expected to be established one year after the enactment of 
the CUA; and 
The Protection Fund will cover deposits and withdrawable shares in the total amount 
of $125,000, of which $75,000 will apply to deposits and $50,000 to shares, subject 
to the number of accounts. 
   Initial feedback relating to the introduction of the Protection Fund surrounds the decision by 
the Central Bank to use to the DIC to administer the Fund and not the existing Trinidad and 
Tobago  Credit  Union  Deposit  Insurance  Fund  (TTCUDIF),  formerly  known  as  the 
“Stabilization Fund”. There are at least three reasons why the Central Bank chose the DIC as 
the administrator and not the Stabilization Fund. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These are as follows: 
• 
First,  membership  in  the  Protection  Fund  will  be  mandatory  for  all  credit  unions. 
Membership is voluntary in the Stabilization Fund, which is a co-operative. 
Second,  there  are  economies  of  scale  to  using  the  DIC.  It  has  the  track  record, 
infrastructure  and  requisite  expertise  from  over  twenty  five  years  of  managing  a 
similar protection fund for the banks and non-banks. 
Finally, the DIC stands as an entity with its own statute governing its administration 
and functioning and is therefore independent of the credit union sector. 
  Lingering industry concerns 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  despite  the  compelling  case  for  regulation  of  credit  unions  by  the 
Central  Bank  and  extensive,  broad-based  stakeholder  consultations  on  the  proposed  new 
regulatory regime, some industry concerns still linger. 
I would like to address the following three concerns: 
• 
• 
Potential conflict between two regulators; 
Non-recognition of the evolution of credit union services beyond “collecting people’s 
money and loans”; and 
Regime  of  criminalizing  violations  in  the  Credit  Union  Bill  that  will  hamper 
volunteerism in the movement. 
 First, in respect of the potential conflict between two regulators it is important to make a clear 
distinction between the regulatory role of the Commissioner of Cooperatives and that of the 
Central  Bank.  The  Commissioner  will  continue  to  look  after  registration,  membership, 
education  and  training  and  development  of  credit  unions.  The  Central  Bank  will  be  the 
prudential regulator with specific emphasis on safety and soundness of credit unions. There 
is little, if any, potential conflict of interest. 
As I indicated earlier, the Commissioner and the Central Bank have worked very closely on 
the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  and  on  amendments  to  the  Cooperative  Societies  Act  to  make 
sure  that  there  is  no  overlap  or  duplication  between  these  two  pieces  of  legislation.  We 
intend to continue working very closely together in regulation of the credit union sector, each 
focusing on its regulatory remit and area of competence. 
Second, and this is indeed a very important point to note as it touches on many real life and 
existing circumstances and in the case of the most recent and largest failure of a credit union 
to date, was one of the reasons their members and depositors suffered.  
Over the past few years, many credit unions have, with the approval of the Commissioner for 
Cooperatives,  ventured  into  non-financial  services.  These  include  travel  agency  services, 
resorts, gym facilities, daycare services, retail outlets and real estate development. 
We recognize that these non-core activities provide a supplementary source of earnings for 
credit unions and provide additional services to the credit union membership. However, these 
non-core  activities  represent  a  potential  drain  on  the  limited  managerial  capacity  and 
expertise of many credit unions. Moreover, these non-financial activities pose risks that are 
outside the supervisory responsibility of the Central Bank. 
As a consequence, the Credit Union Bill allows credit unions to provide these non-financial 
services  once  they  represent  no  more  than  5  percent  of  total  assets  or  10  percent  of 
revenues.  These  limits  seek  to  ensure  that  financial  intermediation  remains  the  core 
business  of  credit  unions  and  credit  unions  can  minimize  balance  sheet  risks  arising  from 
non-financial activities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In  the  event  non-financial  services  grow  beyond  the  proposed  limits,  the  members  of  the 
credit  union  must  direct  the  board  to  establish  a  new  cooperative,  singly  or  in  conjunction 
with  other  credit  unions,  to  continue  provision  of  these  services.  I  wish  to  emphasize  that 
there  is  no  prohibition  in  the  proposed  legislation  against  the  credit  union  and  the  new 
cooperative having the same governance structure and composition, an allowance that was 
requested by the sector. 
Finally,  the  Credit  Union  Bill  makes  most  violations  of  the  Act  or  failure  to  comply  with  a 
direction  issued  by  the  Bank,  a  criminal  offence,  for  the  credit  union  and  the  officer  or 
director. Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to advise that, in practice, the Inspector of Financial 
Institutions will first call on the credit union and the officers to fix a problem, by either letter of 
advice, recommendation or compliance direction. In giving a direction, the Inspector follows 
due process of the law by giving the credit union enough time to make representation of the 
cause of the violation and to submit a plan for correction.  
I also  wish to advise that the Central Bank will  not exercise the option to bring the matter 
before the Court where the credit union opts for the payment of an administrative fine. As 
such, even though the provision for criminal charges is in the law, it will be used only as a 
very last resort when all else has failed. 
Conclusion 
In closing, Ladies and Gentlemen, the proposed credit union legislation is an important step 
towards  placing  the  credit  union  movement  in  a  position  of  greater  strength,  safety  and 
soundness.  The  Credit  Union  Bill  is  now  before  the  Legislative  Review  Committee  of 
Cabinet. The Committee has indicated that it would like to have sight of the findings of the 
Colman Report of the Commission of Inquiry before it proceeds to the next stage. 
Credit  unions  are  urged  to  embrace  the  proposed  prudential  legislation  and  work  towards 
realigning their thinking towards prudential regulation, understanding how the decisions they 
make  affect  their  balance  sheets  and  ultimately  the  welfare  of  their members. The  current 
economic environment is conducive to growth and expansion and for a sector that has so 
much potential you should aspire to take advantage of this potential by putting your financial 
houses in order and setting a course for the future in a more tightly regulated framework. 
I again thank the Board of Aero Services Credit Union for inviting me to its AGM, and I wish 
members  well  in  their  future  contributions  to  community,  the  economy  and  national 
development. 
I thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
