Deepak Mohanty: Global liquidity and financial contagion 
Remarks  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Conference on “Capital Account Management and Macro-Prudential Regulation for Financial 
Stability  and  Growth”,  organised  by  the  Centre  for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and 
Learning (CAFRAL) and the Initiative for Policy Dialogue (iPD), New Delhi, 14 January 2014. 
 The assistance provided by Rajan Goyal, Rajeev Jain and Somnath Sharma is acknowledged. 
I thank Mrs. Usha Thorat, Director, Centre for Advanced Financial Research and Learning 
(CAFRAL) for the opportunity of being a part of this very distinguished panel. With the “great 
moderation” of high growth and low inflation, consideration of liquidity almost fell off from the 
lexicon  of  central  banks.  Arguably,  with  central  banks  targeting  interest  rates,  liquidity 
becomes endogenous. Of course, liquidity is the flip side of the same coin. If one were to 
target a very low interest rate, one would have to let go of liquidity. 
While monetary policy is conducted by countries keeping in view their domestic objectives, 
liquidity  cannot  be  confined  to  sovereign  boundaries.  The  bigger  and  more  systemic  a 
country  is,  the  greater  is  the  spillover,  particularly  if  it  is  a  reserve  currency  country.  The 
events leading up to the “great recession” made us cognisant of the role played by excessive 
global liquidity in the financial crisis. As the global economy pulled out of the great recession, 
liquidity played an even greater role in terms of unconventional monetary policy. 
As recovery takes hold in advanced economies and central banks exit from their excessively 
accommodative monetary policy, liquidity for sure will play an important role, some glimpse 
of  which  we  had  in the May  2013  announcement  of  taper by  the  US  Fed.  Though  market 
reaction  was  muted  in  the  subsequent  December  2013  Fed  announcement  of  calibrated 
reduction  of  its  bond  purchase  programme,  how  the  situation  will  evolve  is  uncertain.  But 
certainly, consideration of liquidity has come to occupy centre stage in policy analysis. The 
ebb and flow of global liquidity is of greater concern for emerging market economies (EMEs) 
like ours. 
Against this backdrop, I will begin by reviewing the concept and the trend in global liquidity. I 
then highlight the impact of global liquidity on asset markets and EMEs before turning to our 
experience in managing the spillover. 
Concept and trend 
Traditionally,  liquidity  is  seen  in  terms  of  the  balance  sheet  of  the  central  bank  or  more 
broadly the balance sheet of the banking sector. It could be some measure of narrow money 
or  broad  money.  However,  financial  innovation  and  technology  has  made  it  possible  to 
generate substantial financial liquidity outside the monetary sector. The global financial crisis 
has  prompted  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and  the  International  Monetary 
Fund (IMF) to come up with a much wider concept of global liquidity. 
The BIS-IMF definition of the global liquidity emphasises on the “ease of financing” as a key 
attribute. It depends upon the existing macroeconomic environment, monetary policy stance, 
financial regulation and a host of other factors such as the pace of financial innovation and 
risk appetite that guide the actions of market participants. 
Indicators  of  global  liquidity  can  broadly  be  classified  into  two  categories:  price  based 
indicators and quantity based indicators. Price based indicators tend to provide information  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
about the conditions at which liquidity is provided, while quantity measures capture how far 
such conditions translate into the build-up of potential risks1. Policy rates, short-term interest 
rates, long-term interest rates, term spreads, deviations of levels from trends, and deviations 
of  term  spreads  from  trends  are  all  regarded  as  important  indicators  of  global  liquidity 
conditions.  On  the  other  hand,  quantity-based  indicators  of  global  liquidity  measure  both 
assets and liabilities of globally active financial intermediaries. Generally, it is the asset-side 
approach,  which  is  considered  more  appropriate  as  it  represents  the  actual  extension  of 
international credit. These two approaches represent the same underlying phenomenon and 
complement each other2. Let me now turn to the recent trend in global liquidity. 
Immediate  rise  in  global  liquidity  in  the  post-crisis  period  was  the  result  of  unusual  policy 
accommodation in the advanced economies.In an effort to prop up their financial systems, 
monetary authorities in the advanced economies resorted to aggressive monetary easing by 
reducing  policy  rates  to  near  zero  (Chart  1).  However,  the  key  channels  of  conventional 
monetary policy were impaired once policy rates approached the zero lower bound. 
 
 
Recognising  the  limitations  of  conventional  policy  tools  and  the  severity  of  the  economic 
downturn,  major  central  banks  turned  to  substantial  liquidity  injection  by  expanding  their 
balance sheets in various unconventional ways (Chart 2). 
                                                  
1   BIS  (2011),  “Global  liquidity  –  concept,  measurement  and  policy  implications”,  CGFS  Publications  No  45, 
November 2011. 
IMF (2013), “Global Liquidity-Credit and Funding Indicators”, IMF Policy Paper, July 16, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
2  
2 
  
In the run up to the crisis, there was a buildup of international cross-border credit which was 
followed by a large decline immediately following the crisis (Chart 3). Let me now turn to the 
impact of such ebb and flow of global liquidity on asset markets and the EMEs. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
Impact on EMEs 
An environment of excessive global liquidity has been associated with high capital inflows to 
EMEs. During the phase of excess liquidity, global investors seeking higher yields shift their 
portfolios  towards  emerging  markets  exhibiting  higher  interest  rates  and  better  economic 
prospects.  This  is  reflected  in  strong  capital  flows  to  EMEs,  which  may  not  always  be 
consistent  with  their  domestic  fundamentals  (Chart  4).  This  has  implications  for  exchange 
rates, domestic monetary and liquidity conditions and overall macroeconomic and financial 
stability. 
While  high  and  unstable  capital  flows  can  lead  to  macro  and  financial  stability  concerns, 
managing capital flows to minimise such concerns has costs. Global liquidity could potentially 
lead to over-heating through augmenting domestic liquidity; loss of competitiveness through 
exchange rate appreciation; and increased vulnerability to crisis through spillover to various 
segments of financial sector. Furthermore, fluctuations in global liquidity make capital flows 
to  EMEs  more  unstable.  This  in  turn  makes  it  difficult  for  policymakers  to  assess  and 
distinguish between the durable and transitory components of capital flows, constraining their 
ability to effectively pursue domestic policy objectives. In short, capital flows inconsistent with 
domestic absorptive capacities in EMEs complicate macroeconomic management. 
 
 
It is also argued that major central banks engaging in ultra-accommodative monetary policies 
at the same time give a large positive shock to global liquidity that feeds into commodity and 
food price inflation.3 Easy access to wholesale funding markets saw increasing participation 
 
                                                  
3   Belke,  Ansgar,  Ingo  Bordon  and  Ulrich  Volz  (2012),  “Effects  of  Global  Liquidity  on  Commodity  and  Food 
Prices”, DIW Working Paper No.1199, Deutsches Institutfür Wirtschaftsforschung, Berlin.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of major investment banks in the commodity market leading up to 2008 crisis4. Correlation 
between  cross-border  credit  and  international  commodity  prices  suggests  a  possible  link 
between global liquidity and financialisation of commodity markets. 
In 2008, global capital inflows retreated from the EMEs. The resumption of capital flows to 
countries  in  2009  with  a  strong  growth  outlook  or  appreciation  expectations  brought  back 
pressures  on  the  exchange  rate  and  rising  asset  valuations,  including  equities  (Chart  5). 
Many emerging markets met these challenges with a mix of macroeconomic policies as well 
as macro-prudential and other capital flow management measures. 
 
 
Let me now turn to the Indian experience in managing the spillover from volatility in capital 
flows. 
Indian experience 
We have a deficit in the current account of our balance of payments (BoP). Hence, we are 
dependent  on  global  financial  markets  to  finance  our  current  account  deficit  (CAD).  The 
impact of capital flow volatility on our economy can best be captured in a snapshot by looking 
at the movement in our foreign exchange reserves and the exchange rate (Chart 6). 
                                                  
4   Lane,  Timothy  (2012),  “Financing  commodities  markets”,  Remarks  at  the  CFA  Society  of  Calgary,  Calgary, 
Alberta, 25 September 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
We experienced a phase of high growth and low inflation prior to the crisis. Financing the 
current  account  was  not  an  issue  for  two  reasons:  first,  the  CAD  was  small  and  second, 
capital inflows were far in excess of the absorptive capacity of the economy. Hence, capital 
inflows  resulted  in  both  the  appreciation  of  the  Rupee  and  accretion  to  foreign  exchange 
reserves. 
In the context of intervention in the foreign exchange market, the issue of cost of sterilisation 
invariably comes up for discussion. But the issue is a complex one: should one look purely at 
the financial cost measured largely in terms of interest rate differential between foreign and 
domestic  interest  rates?  Should  one  look  at  the  cost  of  non-intervention  in  terms  of  its 
implications for financial stability, which is of course difficult to quantify but perhaps easy to 
understand? In any case, the financial cost of sterilisation is in the nature of a quasi-fiscal 
cost: if it is borne by the central bank, profit transfer to the government reduces to that extent; 
if it is directly borne by the government, it is reflected in the budget. In addition, if sterilisation 
is  done  through  raising  unremunerated  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR),  the  cost  is  borne  by 
commercial banks, though they may benefit from easy liquidity. In its intervention operations, 
the Reserve Bank followed a cost sharing approach with the financial costs shared by the 
RBI, government and commercial banks. With the hindsight I could venture to say that the 
liquidity buffers that were built up earlier helped during the crisis. 
Deleveraging during the crisis led to reversal of capital flows. India’s balance of payments 
came under pressure in Q3 of 2008–09 due to capital outflows. It became necessary to draw 
down  reserves  to  finance  the  shortfall  and  maintain  orderly  conditions  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. This led to a corresponding contraction in the base (reserve) money. The 
Reserve  Bank,  therefore,  ensured  the  necessary  expansion  in  net  domestic  assets  (NDA) 
through  conventional  open  market  operations  (OMO)  involving  outright  purchase  of 
government securities in the secondary market as well as provision of liquidity through repos 
under its daily liquidity adjustment facility (LAF). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another instrument, which allowed the Reserve Bank to expand liquidity, was the unwinding 
of the market stabilisation scheme (MSS) securities5. The unwinding of MSS balances not 
only  created  the  scope  for  adequate  liquidity  expansion  by  the  Reserve  Bank  without 
expanding its balance sheet in any significant measure, but the timing of the unwinding could 
also be modulated in such a way that the large borrowing programme of the government was 
managed smoothly without exerting undue market stress. In addition, the reduction in cash 
reserve ratio (CRR) of banks from 9 per cent to 5 per cent released 
1.6 trillion of primary 
liquidity.  Liquidity  expansion  achieved  through  unwinding  of  MSS  and  reduction  in  CRR 
ensured that the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet did not expand significantly, unlike in several 
other central banks. Thus the liquidity buffer built up in the pre-crisis period helped to ease 
both foreign exchange and rupee liquidity. 
Since  India  witnessed  stronger  growth  ahead  of  the  global  recovery,  capital  inflow  revived 
during 2009–10 and 2010–11 and was reflected in significant appreciation of the Rupee. It 
was also supported by ample global liquidity conditions emanating from quantitative easing 
(QE). However, during the euro area crisis, deleveraging in European banking system again 
adversely  affected  capital  flows  to  India  towards  the  later  part  of  2011–12.  In  response, 
several policy measures were taken to encourage capital inflows, particularly giving greater 
access to international investors to domestic currency debt market. 
Again, volatility in the financial market returned following the announcement in May 2013 of 
the  US  Fed’s  intention  of  likely  tapering  of  QE.  Portfolio  outflows,  particularly  from  the 
domestic  currency  debt  segment,  were  substantial.  This  prompted  the  Reserve  Bank  to 
resort  to  somewhat  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  besides  drawing  down  of 
foreign exchange reserves to meet the immediate shortfall. Let me give you the essence of 
the key measures. 
 
In terms of monetary policy, the upper bound of the policy rate corridor (i.e., MSF 
rate)  was  raised  by  200  basis  points  and  the  quantity  of  central  bank  liquidity 
available  through  the  LAF  window  was  restrained.  This  had  the  desired  effect  of 
tightening the monetary conditions and raising the effective policy rate sharply to the 
MSF rate. 
In order to signal that the above measure is temporary so that the interest rates at 
the  longer  end  do  not  harden,  a  form  of  operation  twist  was  tried  by  conducting 
outright  OMO  purchase  of  government  securities  alongside  sale  of  short-term 
government  cash  management  bills.  This  inverted  the  yield  curve,  though 
accompanied by some increase in long-term rates. 
With  a  view  to  containing  the  current  account  deficit  (CAD)  on  the  balance  of 
payments (BoP), gold imports were restricted. 
The  non-resident  deposit  schemes  and  domestic  banks’  borrowing  abroad  were 
further  liberalised  with  incentives  for  swapping  these  inflows  directly  with  the 
Reserve  Bank.  This  substantially  augmented  foreign  exchange  reserves  despite 
some outflow on account of directly meeting the foreign exchange requirement of oil 
imports. 
   As  portfolio  capital  outflows  waned  and  BoP  improved,  stability  returned  to  the  foreign 
exchange  market.  This  prompted  the  Reserve  Bank  to  unwind  the  bulk  of  the  exceptional 
measures and normalise monetary policy by restoring the policy interest rate corridor to its 
original configuration and the repo rate to its signaling role of policy. 
                                                 
5   MSS securities are essentially short-term government securities, introduced in April 2004, as an instrument of 
sterilisation  to  partly  neutralise  the  expansionary  effects  of  surges  in  capital  inflows.  The  amount  sterilised 
through MSS remained immobilised in the Central Government’s account with the Reserve Bank of India. As 
at end-September 2008, MSS amount stood over 
1.7 trillion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Excess  global  liquidity  emanating  from  accommodative  monetary  policy 
stance  in  advanced  economies  has  raised  asset  prices  and  imparted  greater  volatility  to 
capital  flows  to  EMEs.  In  episodes  of  liquidity  stress,  capital  account  and  exchange  rate 
management  seem  to  override  the  domestic  monetary  policy  objectives  of  growth-inflation 
considerations. As aptly observed by Hélène Rey (2013), “independent monetary policies are 
possible  if  and  only  if  the  capital  account  is  managed”.6  In  India,  we  experienced  two 
episodes of severe stress on our balance of payments emanating from volatile capital flows 
which were managed with a combination of polity tools. Given that the central bank balance 
sheets in advanced countries are still bloated and the actual taper starting now, considerable 
uncertainties remain for global financial markets and capital flows to the EMEs. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
6   Rey, Hélène (2013), “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, 
paper presented in 2013 Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
