  Ardo Hansson: Celebrating the tenth anniversary of Estonia’s accession 
to NATO and EU 
Opening  speech  for  Europe  Day  by  Mr  Ardo  Hansson,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia 
(Eesti Pank), at the Seminar on the impact of the European Union on Estonia, Eesti Pank, 
Tallinn, 9 May 2014. 
 Today  we  are  celebrating  Europe  Day.  We  have  just  passed  the  tenth  anniversary  of 
Estonia’s  accession to  the  European  Union, though the move  towards Europe  had  started 
when the country regained its independence and linked the Estonian kroon to the German 
mark. 
To people in Estonia, being part of Europe means democracy, freedom, security and 
well-being.  Closer  integration  with  the  European  Union  has  been  driven  by  the  desire  to 
ensure that these benefits are maintained. These core European values remain more in the 
background  in  our  everyday  life  as  we  take  them  for  granted,  but  events  in  Ukraine  have 
given a sharp reminder of their importance. 
Accession to the EU has increased Estonia’s influence on the world. Estonia’s voice is 
heard better in Europe than ever before and Estonia is involved in setting the joint economic 
policy of Europe and the euro area. This gives us the power to affect processes ourselves, 
and the responsibility to do our work as well as possible and to answer for the results. 
As the central bank of the Republic of Estonia and a member of the Eurosystem, Eesti 
Pank has also contributed to the sustainable development and increased prosperity of 
the Estonian economy. It is our job to ensure that companies and households can make 
transactions and calculations using a currency with stable purchasing power. 
During the time Estonia has been a member of the European Union, the well-being of 
the  people  of  Estonia  has  improved.  EU  membership  has  meant  our  economic 
environment  has  been  more  stable  and  deserving  of  confidence.  In  the  past  ten  years, 
economic growth in Estonia has surpassed average economic growth rates in the European 
Union, so that Estonian GDP in purchasing power terms has advanced from 55% of the EU 
average in 2003 to 71% in 2012. The incomes of residents of Estonia have also increased, 
with real wages up more than 40% in the past decade. 
EU membership has brought both opportunities and risks. It is the job of those setting 
national policy to make sure that risks are minimised and that we are best able to profit from 
opportunities and I am sure that the analysis provided here today by my colleagues will help 
in guiding the decisions behind that policy. 
The  presentations  we  will  hear  today  have  been  prepared  thanks  largely  to  the 
initiative of the European Commission Representation in Estonia to celebrate the tenth 
anniversary of Estonia’s accession to NATO and the European Union. 
In summary we can say that in ten years we have made Estonia and the space where 
Estonian people operate much larger. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
