Manuel Sánchez: Mexico’s economic modernization and outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  2014 
Southwest Economic Summit: The Americas, Global Interdependence Center, Phoenix, AZ, 
24 February 2014. 
 Thank you for inviting me to participate in the 2014 Southwest Economic Summit, devoted to 
the discussion of the economic effects of international trade. This conference is timely as we 
celebrate the 20th anniversary of NAFTA, an accord that has yielded significant benefits to 
each of the three member countries. 
Being a developing nation, Mexico in particular has gained from the opening of the economy 
and NAFTA, in terms of higher consumer wellbeing, output expansion and efficiency, among 
other  benefits.  Yet,  in  spite  of  more  dynamic  foreign  trade,  the  country’s  economic 
performance during the last three decades has been far from satisfactory. 
Ongoing  structural  reforms  in  the  country  enhance  possibilities  for  progress  as  they  are 
intended  to  tackle  Mexico’s  most  important  drag  on  long-term  economic  growth,  stagnant 
productivity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  country  is  currently  undergoing  an  economic  rebound 
that faces challenges, including those from less favorable external financial conditions. 
Today  I  would  like  to  briefly  address  these  long-  and  short-term  issues  for  Mexico. 
Specifically,  first  I  will  review  the  impact  of  Mexico’s  economic  opening  and  second,  I  will 
highlight some features of the current momentum on structural reform; third, I will discuss the 
economic outlook; and finally, I will provide a few remarks on monetary policy and inflation. 
Mexico’s integration in the world economy 
Since  the  middle  of  the  1980s,  Mexico  has  implemented  a  strategy  of  gradual  trade 
liberalization  in  order  to  modernize  its  economy  and  promote  economic  growth.  The  first 
steps were unilateral, consisting of across-the-board reductions of import tariffs and non-tariff 
barriers. This policy was strengthened by Mexico’s incorporation in the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1986. 
External liberalization was later deepened through a number of free trade accords, among 
which NAFTA stands out. Mexico´s economic opening was mainly in foreign trade, although 
notable steps in removing obstacles to foreign direct investment (FDI) were also undertaken. 
The recent lowering of import tariffs for nations with which Mexico does not have any trade 
agreement widened the country’s openness to the world. 
Certain  effects  from  more  trade  seem  to  be  clear  in  Mexico.  By  far,  the  most  evident  and 
crucial benefit has been greater consumer welfare, the ultimate end of any economic policy. 
The reduction of trade barriers has provided the Mexican consumer with a wider variety of 
higher-quality  goods  at  lower  prices,  many  of  them  completely  unavailable  when  the 
economy was closed. 
Behind this development has been a considerable expansion of merchandise exchange with 
the  rest  of  the  world.  During  the  last  thirty  years,  total  trade  value,  defined  as  the  sum  of 
exports plus imports, has tripled relative to GDP, to reach approximately 60 percent. 
NAFTA seems to have contributed to the enlargement of trade not only with Mexico’s North 
American neighbors, but also with nations from other regions. In fact, there is evidence that 
trade  diversion  resulting  from  this  preferential  agreement  has  been  relatively  low.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
observation  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  during  the  last  ten  years,  the  importance  of 
shipments to the United States relative to Mexico´s total non-oil exports has declined.1 
At  the  same  time,  trade  opening  resulted  in  a  significant  change  in  the  composition  of 
exports, from one based on oil to one made up mainly of manufactured goods. Within this 
transformation, the share of high-tech products has been gradually increasing. 
Growth  in  exports  has  occurred  in  tandem  with  that  of  imports.  The  vertical  integration  of 
many firms in the North American region has implied significant growth of intermediate goods 
imports, which along with capital imports accounts for the majority of purchases from abroad. 
Less dramatic but also clear has been the contribution of economic opening to greater FDI. 
On  average  during  the  last  20  years,  FDI  relative  to  GDP  has  been  twice  as  large  as  the 
average  observed  ten  years  earlier,  although  this  ratio  still  remains  well  below  those  of 
leading recipient countries. Also, during the more recent past, the proportion of flows coming 
from the United States has been decreasing. 
In  addition  to  the  impetus  from  NAFTA,  other  factors  such  as  the  liberalization  of  FDI 
restrictions  in  several  areas,  such  as  the  financial  and  the  telecommunication  sectors, 
contribute to explaining the larger inflows. Through FDI, new firms have been established in 
the country, including those oriented to providing services, and companies have been able to 
adopt new technologies and modernize their productive processes. 
There is some evidence that the sectors more engaged in international trade in Mexico have 
enjoyed increasing efficiency. This seems to be largely the result of import competition and 
access to foreign intermediate inputs. Also, some studies suggest that FDI has contributed to 
an  increase  in  total  factor  productivity.  Greater  efficiency,  in  turn,  has  tended  to  support 
relatively higher wages in the sectors most exposed to international trade.2 
Mexico’s  economic  integration  with  the  United  States  has  been  strengthened  with  the 
opening of the economy. This effect, along with Mexico’s sounder macroeconomic policies, 
has resulted in an increased synchronization of its business cycles with those of the United 
States, thus making the economy relatively more stable than in the past. 
Structural reforms 
In  spite  of  the  benefits  from  economic  liberalization,  Mexico’s  long-term  economic 
performance  has  been  less  than  stellar.  During  the  last  three  decades,  per  capita  GDP 
growth has been below half that of the United States. This is surprising given that Mexico’s 
stage  of  development  should  translate  into  a  wide  range  of  profitable  opportunities  the 
exploitation of which could presumably increase potential growth rates.3 
Several  analyses  of  Mexico’s  per  capita  GDP  growth,  based  on  factor  and  productivity 
decomposition, confirm that the main impediment to more dynamic output is stagnant total 
factor  productivity.  Moreover,  examination  of  sectorial  productivity  suggests  that  common 
 Paper,  7429;  and  Lederman,  D.,  W.F.  Maloney,  and  L.  Serven  (2005),  Lessons  from  NAFTA,  Stanford 
1  See, for example, Krueger, A.O. (1999), “Trade creation and trade diversion under NAFTA,” NBER Working 
University Press and the World Bank. 
effects of Foreign Direct Investment in Mexico since NAFTA,” The World Economy, 33(5), 710–745. 
3  From  1980  to  2011,  annual  average  PPP-adjusted  per  capita  GDP  growth  was  1.7  percent  in  the  United 
Generation of the Penn World Table. 
2  For  productivity  and  wage  effects  from  NAFTA,  see  De  Hoyos,  R.  and  L.  Iacovone  (2013),  “Economic 
Performance under NAFTA: A Firm-Level Analysis of the Trade-Productivity Linkages,” World Development 
44;  and  Caliendo,  L.  and  F.  Parro  (2012),  “Estimates  of  the  Trade  and  Welfare  Effects  of  NAFTA,”  NBER 
Working  Paper  18508.  Evidence  of  the  FDI  channel  of  NAFTA  is  provided  by  Waldkirch,  A.  (2010),  “The 
States and  0.6 percent  in Mexico; based on Feenstra, R.C., R. Inklaar and M.P. Timmer (2013), The Next 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
including 
transformation  agenda  encompasses  several  areas, 
factors  in  the  lagging  segments  of  the  economy  include  low  competition,  poor  contract 
enforcement, and burdensome regulation resulting in widespread informality.4 
Current momentum for structural reform in Mexico is a welcome development as the reforms 
include  some  measures  that  may  tackle  inhibitors  of  productivity  in  key  sectors  of  the 
economy.  The 
labor, 
education, financial intermediation, telecommunications, and energy. 
The  legislative  changes  incorporate  deregulation  in  the  labor  market,  the  protection  of 
creditors’  rights,  and  the  exposure  of  sectors  to  competition  where  the  entry  of  private 
participants  is  either  completely  banned,  such  as  in  most  areas  of  the  energy  sector,  or 
restricted to different degrees, such as in telecommunications. 
As regulation improves and obstacles to competition diminish, higher efficiency may emerge 
in related areas, with eventual benefits for the consumer in terms of higher quality and lower 
prices for goods and services. 
It is worth noting, however, that as with any other structural change, the intended benefits 
depend  crucially  on  the  quality  of  the  rules  and  their  adequate  implementation,  so  that 
participants view the new framework as clear and reliable. In particular, secondary legislation 
is  pending  for  the  energy,  telecommunications,  and  financial  system  reforms,  and  these 
norms need to facilitate participation and competition. 
We should also recognize that, although a revival of private investment may occur in sectors 
such  as  energy  in  the  not-too-distant  future,  productivity  effects  and  eventual  consumer 
benefits will likely become evident only over the course of several years. 
The economic outlook 
In the year beginning in the 2012 third quarter, the Mexican economy underwent a process of 
deceleration.  The  main  factors  behind  slowing  GDP  growth  were  weaker  export  demand 
from  all  regions,  including  the  United  States,  and  a  contraction  in  domestic  investment, 
largely  driven  by  deterioration  in  construction.  Shrinking  construction,  in  turn,  reflected 
reduced public expenditures associated with the change in administration, and lower private 
housing investment linked to major developers’ financial problems. 
Since the middle of 2013, there have been signs of an economic upturn. GDP grew in the 
third quarter and continued to expand in the fourth, though at a much slower pace. A source 
of improvement has been more dynamic exports as the U.S. economic recovery has gained 
steam, and lately the normalization of public expenditures. 
Consumption  apparently  continued  to  grow  in  the  fourth  quarter,  as  suggested  by  the 
performance  of  service  production  and  retail  sales.  The  labor  market  provides  other 
encouraging  indicators.  Formal  employment  has  maintained  a  positive  trend  and  the 
unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest level since 2009, even though it remains above 
pre-crisis averages. 
Despite  this  progress,  the  rebound  remains  fragile,  as  shown  by  very  weak  fourth-quarter 
GDP growth. Investment has extended a declining trend, with deceleration involving not only 
construction  but  machinery  and  equipment  purchases  as  well.  Also,  consumer  confidence 
has been falling since last year, and recently more sharply. 
                                                 
4  For an analysis of GDP decomposition and sectorial productivity see, for example, Sánchez, M. (2013), “The 
search for Mexico’s economic progress,” presentation for Alamos Alliance XX, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Analysts’ consensus posits a gradual recovery for the Mexican economy this year and next. 
Elements that may support these forecasts include better expected economic prospects for 
the United States and the reactivation of government investment.5 
However, there are downward risks to this scenario, including a further decline in consumer 
confidence;  the  time  needed  to  restructure  the  housing  developers  market;  and  less 
favorable external financial conditions. 
Regarding the third factor, expectations of the tapering of U.S. Federal Reserve securities 
purchases last May brought about an increase in global risk aversion, reducing the prices of 
many financial assets, especially those of emerging markets, which had been favored in the 
previous two years. Although volatility declined by the end of 2013, partly as a result of lower 
uncertainty  after  the  Fed  finally  did  announce  its  decision  to  start  reducing  its  asset 
purchases, risk aversion has returned in 2014. 
The recent deterioration of global market sentiment has once again translated into a flight to 
quality,  away  from  emerging  economies.  Some  countries  with  significant  macroeconomic 
imbalances, high inflation or political upheavals have been hit severely. 
Heightened risk aversion apparently reflects uncertainty on the pace of the future unwinding 
of  monetary  stimulus  in  advanced  nations,  lower  growth  prospects  for  emerging  markets, 
notably  China,  and  the  unknown  capacity  of  vulnerable  developing  countries  to  undertake 
needed adjustments. 
Although emerging markets as a group have been affected negatively, there has been some 
differentiation  in  investors’  appetites  among  specific  economies.  So  far,  Mexico’s  financial 
asset  prices  have  been  relatively  less  affected,  and  the  availability  of  foreign  financing 
continues to be ample. 
Yet  the  country  cannot  take  the  present  situation  for  granted,  since  market  sentiment  can 
deteriorate further at any time. In the face of such an eventuality, the best strategy for Mexico 
is  to  buttress  its  economic  fundamentals,  including  fiscal  discipline,  financial  and  price 
stability, and productivity-enhancing reforms. 
Monetary policy and inflation 
For more than a decade, the Bank of Mexico has implemented its monetary policy within an 
inflation-targeting  framework.  Since  2003  the  permanent  objective  has  been  3  percent 
annual inflation, with a variability interval of plus or minus one percentage point around this 
target. 
The  interval  is  not  an  objective  or  an  indifference  range,  but  a  reflection  of  the  inherent 
volatility  of  the  non-core  components  in  the  National  Consumer  Price  Index  (INPC). 
Throughout  these  years,  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in  the  convergence  of 
general inflation towards the 3 percent target. 
In 2013, the Bank of Mexico lowered its policy interest rate by a total of 100 basis points in 
three  cuts,  leaving  it  at  its  current  3.5  percent.  The  reasons  for  these  adjustments  were 
previous gains in the reduction of inflation, and the softening of economic activity, viewed as 
consistent with diminished foreseeable inflation pressures. 
After a slight decline in average annual inflation, price growth picked up at the end of 2013 
and  surpassed  the  upper  limit  of  the  variability  interval  in  January.  The  main  proximate 
causes of the recent rise in inflation were increases in public transportation prices and tax 
                                                 
5  Consensus forecasts for Mexico GDP growth are 3.4 and 4.0 percent for 2014 and 2015, respectively. See 
Consensus Economics (2014), Latin American Consensus Forecasts, February. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
hikes approved for the present year. Although by nature, these elements will likely exert only 
transitory effects on inflation, future price developments should be monitored carefully. 
In particular, the balance of risks for inflation has deteriorated. Some factors to watch are the 
fact  that  analysts’  short-term  inflation  expectations  have  recently  risen,  inflation  will  likely 
exceed 4 percent for several months this year, and second-round effects cannot be ruled out. 
Furthermore, additional financial volatility could put pressure on the exchange rate with some 
pass-through  on  inflation.  These  considerations  are  all  the  more  important  as  inflation 
expectations for all terms remain above target. 
The Bank of Mexico expects inflation to return to the convergence path towards 3 percent by 
next year. In any case, the Governing Board has repeatedly stated that it will remain vigilant 
in order to detect elements that may put convergence at risk and act appropriately. 
Concluding remarks 
Integration  in  the  world  economy  through  the  liberalization  of  trade  and  investment  has 
yielded  Mexico  significant  benefits  in  terms  of  greater  economic  activity,  efficiency,  and 
especially,  consumer  wellbeing.  However,  Mexico’s  unsatisfactory  long-term  economic 
performance points to stagnant productivity related to factors such as excessive regulation 
and lack of competition in key areas. 
Current  structural  reforms  have  the  potential  to  tackle  some  of  these  problems  if  the  new 
rules  and  their  implementation  provide  a  reliable  framework  for  better  regulation  and 
increased  competition.  On  the  other  hand,  the  current  economic  upturn  faces  several 
challenges, including those associated with less favorable external conditions. Finally, a rise 
in  inflation  this  year  poses  risks  that  should  be  monitored  carefully  in  order  to  assure  that 
convergence to the permanent inflation target is renewed soon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
