Narayana Kocherlakota: Economics at the Federal Reserve Banks 
Opening statement by Mr Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Minneapolis,  at  the  Panel  Discussion,  American  Economic  Association  Annual  Meeting, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 4 January 2014. 
 I thank Dave Fettig and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl for their helpful comments. 
I’d like to use this opportunity to talk about the role of economic research and economists 
within  a  Reserve  Bank.  My  main  theme  is  that,  to  be  successful  at  their  host  of 
responsibilities,  Reserve  Banks  need  economists  with  a  wide  range  of  perspectives  and 
skills. Conversely, economists in a variety of fields can enjoy fulfilling and successful careers 
at  Reserve  Banks.  I’ll  illustrate  my  points  by  using  examples  from  my  own  institution,  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 
The views that I express today are my own and not necessarily those of others in the Federal 
Reserve System, including my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 
My first observation is that, just like economists who work at universities and colleges, many 
economists within Reserve Banks spend a great deal of time on independent research. Many 
Reserve  Banks  –  including  the  Minneapolis  Federal  Reserve  Bank  –  have  found  that, 
especially over the longer term, this self-directed research has the power to create valuable 
new insights into important public policy questions. For example, back in the 1990s, Harold 
Cole and Lee Ohanian – then at the Minneapolis Fed – developed an exciting and important 
new  way  to  think  about  the  slow  recovery  during  the  Great  Depression.1  This  work  in 
economic history has turned out to be a valuable resource for many who are thinking about 
the current slow recovery. 
Over the past four decades in Minneapolis, we have found that, to be effective, independent 
research should follow the usual rules of academic economics. More specifically, economists 
must be free to pursue any question, use any available tools and arrive at any answer. The 
quality  of  those  answers  is  ultimately  measured by  rigorous  academic  peer  review,  not  by 
internal managerial judgment. 
So,  university  and  Reserve  Bank  jobs  are  not  all  that  different  in  terms  of  the  role  of 
independent  research.  What  distinguishes  academic  jobs  from  Reserve  Bank  jobs  for 
economists  is  how  they  spend  their  non-research  time.  Economists  with  academic  jobs 
spend most of their non-research time teaching. Economists with Reserve Bank jobs spend 
most of their non-research time supporting public policy work. As I stated at the outset, my 
main theme today is that public policy work in a Reserve Bank relies on a much wider variety 
of economic specializations than might be generally appreciated. 
I’ll start by talking about the most visible of the Fed’s public policy responsibilities: monetary 
policy.  The  president  of  each  Reserve  Bank  participates  in  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  meetings.  Economists  play  a  key  role  in  briefing  and  generally 
supporting their president’s involvement in those meetings. I’m sure that I won’t be telling the 
people in this room anything new when I say that many of these economists are skilled at 
macroeconomic  modeling.  Indeed,  there  are  many  kinds  of  macroeconomic  models, 
grounded  in  a  wide  range  of  underlying  perspectives.  To  be  most  effective,  an  FOMC 
participant’s support team has to engage fully with this plethora of approaches. 
                                                
1   See  Harold  L.  Cole  and  Lee  E.  Ohanian,  “The  Great  Depression  in  the  United  States  from  a  Neoclassical 
Perspective,”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  Quarterly  Review  23(1),  2–24,  Winter  1999;  Harold 
L. Cole  and  Lee  E.  Ohanian,  “New  Deal  Policies  and  the  Persistence  of  the  Great  Depression:  A  General 
Equilibrium Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy 112(4), 779–816, August 2004. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I  suspect,  too,  that  many  in  this  room  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  to  be  effective, 
presidents  of  Reserve  Banks  need  support  from  economists  with  expertise  in  financial 
economics. After all, the Fed implements its monetary policy actions through financial market 
transactions.  Monetary  policy  advice  needs  to  be  grounded  in  a  keen  understanding  of 
financial markets, and the linkages between those markets and the broader macroeconomy. 
As well, financial markets are important to policymakers as a source of information about the 
public’s expectations for the future. At the Minneapolis Fed, we continue to work on how best 
to  use  information  in  asset  prices  –  as  encoded  in  so-called  risk-neutral  probabilities  –  to 
inform monetary policy choices.2 This is a joint effort that involves several parts of the Bank, 
and  we  have  benefited  from  interactions  with  other  economists  around  the  System  and  in 
academe. We see it as a critical area for future research. 
What is perhaps less understood is that people who are not specialists in macroeconomics 
or finance also play a key role in monetary policy support. For example, the Fed is charged 
with making monetary policy so as to promote maximum employment. The challenge is that 
the  level  of  employment  that  is  indeed  maximal  is  largely  outside  the  control  of  monetary 
policy and, moreover, varies over time. Hence, the Fed engages in continual efforts to obtain 
measures of the maximum level of employment. These efforts are fundamentally grounded in 
the  work  of  many  labor  economists  around  the  System,  but  I’ll  cite  an  important  recent 
example done in Minneapolis. My research director, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, and his co-author 
and  former  Minneapolis  Fed  economist  Greg  Kaplan  closely  studied  the  recent  decline  in 
internal migration in the United States.3 Some policymakers had expressed concern that this 
decline  indicated  that  the  Great  Recession  had  caused  a  sudden  increase  in  structural 
unemployment. But Sam and Greg’s research provided compelling evidence that this view 
was mistaken – rather, the decline in internal migration was better understood as being part 
of a very long-run trend. 
Let me transit to another Fed responsibility: supervision of financial institutions. The financial 
crisis made clear the fundamental linkage between the condition of large financial institutions 
and  the  macroeconomy.  That  lesson  has  translated  into  a  more  complete  integration  of 
economists – with expertise in banking, finance and macroeconomics – and the supervision 
of  financial  institutions.  Monetary  policymakers  continually  assess  systemic  financial  risks, 
and this assessment is informed in part by supervisory information. Conversely, economists 
contribute to the supervision process by helping to build a better understanding of risks that 
face the financial sector. 
I could illustrate this Systemwide effort to build more connections between economics and 
supervision in many ways. I’ll just mention two of the several lines of attack undertaken in 
Minneapolis. Minneapolis Fed economist Motohiro Yogo and his co-author Ralph Koijen are 
studying the incentive effects of regulatory policies on insurers’ risk-taking. Their work has 
shed important new light on “shadow insurance” risks from off-balance-sheet liabilities of life 
insurance  companies.4  As  well,  my  head  of  supervision,  Ron  Feldman,  and  his  team  are 
using  option  price  data  –  again,  as  encoded  in  risk-neutral  probabilities  –  as  a  source  of 
information about tail risks for large financial institutions.5  
                                                
2   See  Narayana  Kocherlakota, 
“Optimal  Outlooks,”  presentation  at  Conference  on  Extracting  and 
Understanding the Risk Neutral Probability Density from Options Prices, New York University Stern School of 
Business, New York, N.Y., Sept. 20, 2013. 
3   See  Greg  Kaplan  and  Sam  Schulhofer-Wohl,  “Interstate  Migration  Has  Fallen  Less  Than  You  Think: 
Consequences  of  Hot  Deck 
the  Current  Population  Survey,”  Demography  49(3), 
1061–74,  August  2012;  Greg  Kaplan  and  Sam  Schulhofer-Wohl,  “Understanding  the  Long-Run  Decline  in 
Interstate Migration,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Working Paper 697, revised December 2013. 
Imputation 
in 
4   See  Ralph  S.  J.  Koijen  and  Motohiro  Yogo,  “The  Cost  of  Financial  Frictions  for  Life  Insurers,”  April  2013; 
Ralph S. J. Koijen and Motohiro Yogo, “Shadow Insurance,” November 2013. 
5   See Estimates of the Future Behavior of Asset Prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I’ve talked a lot about monetary policy and the supervision of financial institutions. But these 
are  only  two  of  the  many  public  policy  roles  of  Reserve  Banks.  Let  me  briefly  mention  a 
couple  more:  the  payments  system  and  community  development.  Reserve  Banks  have 
recently  formulated  an  ambitious  strategic  plan  regarding  their  responsibilities  in  the 
payments  system  –  the  variety  of  mechanisms  by  which  people  and  businesses  transfer 
funds to one another. This strategic plan was informed in part by contributions from a large 
number of economists around the System who specialize in payments systems. In terms of 
community  development,  Reserve  Banks  engage  in  a  number  of  activities  to  encourage 
private-sector  investment  in  low-  and  moderate-income  communities.  Microeconomic 
analysis underpins these activities in important ways. For example, in Minneapolis, over the 
past  dozen  years,  our  Community  Development  function  has  worked  closely  with  tribal 
representatives on initiatives to help Native American tribes select and build a sound legal 
infrastructure  that  can  support  private  business  development  in  Indian  Country.  We  are 
engaged in efforts to buttress this work by using microeconometric techniques to measure 
the impact of these legal infrastructure improvements on economic outcomes. 
I have argued that Reserve Banks need a wide range of skills and perspectives to fulfill their 
public  policy  missions.  These  considerations  have  helped  inform  the  evolution  of  our 
Research department in Minneapolis in the past four plus years since I became president. In 
that  time,  we’ve  greatly  expanded  the  group,  by  hiring  folks  from  top  universities  like 
Stanford,  Penn  and  Princeton,  as  well  as  from elsewhere  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System. 
These  new  economists  have  skills  in  financial  economics,  labor  economics,  international 
economics, econometric forecasting and monetary economics. The department’s expansion 
has helped make the Minneapolis Fed even more agile and effective with respect to its public 
policy  contributions,  while  maintaining  its  historical  excellence  with  respect  to  independent 
research. 
But the skill diversity that I’ve been emphasizing is valued throughout the Federal Reserve 
System,  not  just  in  Minneapolis.  To  see  this,  one  need  not  look  any  further  than  the  key 
Research leadership positions around the Federal Reserve System. The Research director 
in Philadelphia is an economist with expertise in banking. The Research director in Chicago 
is an economist with expertise in labor economics and industrial organization. The Research 
director in New York is an economist with expertise in payments systems. 
I’ve described a Federal Reserve System in which each Reserve Bank has a broad-based 
group  of  economists.  Some  listeners  might  ask:  Why  not  put  all  the  economists  in 
Washington? Or why not have each bank specialize in a different subfield of economics? I 
have a couple of answers to these questions. The first is grounded in the nature of monetary 
policymaking  at the  Federal  Reserve. The  essence  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is that 
each  of  the  12  Reserve  Bank  presidents  brings  a  distinct  perspective  to  monetary  policy 
deliberations.  But  these  perspectives  need  to  be  appropriately  informed  by  economic 
analysis  –  and,  as  I’ve  argued,  that  kind  of  support  requires  a  broad  range  of  skills  to  be 
effective. 
Second,  I  view  geographic  diversity  as  a  necessary  ingredient  to  generating  valuable 
intellectual diversity across the System. Back in the 1970s, the Minneapolis Fed Research 
department  played  a  key  role  in  fostering  the  “rational  expectations  revolution”  that  has 
helped transform the making of monetary policy around the world. Would these economists 
have played this same role had they been working in Washington – or anywhere else in the 
System, for  that matter?  I  believe  that  the  answer  to  this  question  is  no.  The  ideas  in  the 
Research department were generated by synergistic interactions between Minneapolis Fed 
economists  and  University  of  Minnesota  economists  –  synergies  that  owed  a  lot  to  the 
geographical proximity between the two institutions. I see those same intellectual synergies 
as critical to the Minneapolis Fed’s, and the System’s, thinking as we move forward. 
Let me sum up. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Most  of  you  know  that  many  economists  work  in  Reserve  Banks.  What  I  wanted  to 
communicate  to  you  today  is  that  these  economists  have  many  different  fields  of 
specialization. This diversity is essential – Reserve Banks need that large variety of skills to 
fulfill our public policy missions. As a result, many kinds of economists can enjoy successful 
careers within the Federal Reserve. What it takes to be successful in our organization as an 
economist is extraordinary dedication to, and belief in, our public policy mission. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
