George A Provopoulos: The Greek financial crisis – from Grexit to 
Grecovery 
Speech  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  for  the  Golden 
Series  lecture  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF),  London, 
7 February 2014. 
 I  want  to  thank  David  Marsh for  inviting  me  to  be  here  today.  Since  its  establishment just 
4 years ago, OMFIF has quickly become an important platform for the exchange of ideas on 
issues that concern the global economy, with an emphasis on Europe. 
In  this  connection,  let  me  mention  that  I  became  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  in  mid-
2008. During the following year – that is, in 2009 – the Greek sovereign- debt crisis erupted. 
Consequently, I have been at the battlefront of the euro crisis throughout the turmoil, and I 
would like to share with you my perspectives about what went wrong and what needs to be 
fixed to make the euro area a better-functioning economic and monetary union. 
My  presentation  will  be  structured  as  follows.  I  will  begin  by  discussing  the  origins  of  the 
euro-area crisis. Next, I will describe the adjustment that has taken place within the stressed 
countries. With Greece at the epicenter of the crisis, my focus will be on what has happened 
in my own country. I will then turn to some related issues, notably, the reasons for the deep 
economic contraction in Greece and the problem of debt-sustainability. Finally, I will discuss 
changes that are being made to the euro-area’s institutional set-up and their implications for 
the single currency’s future. 
Origins of the crisis 
Five years ago the thought of a euro-area crisis seemed counter-intuitive. After all, as David 
Marsh points-out in his book on the euro, European monetary union was undertaken to make 
the kind of crisis that occurred impossible. However, when deciding on what architecture to 
give to the monetary union, policymakers settled on a “bare-bones” approach. 
The approach rested on a single independent, price-stability-oriented central bank – the ECB 
–  and  fiscal  discipline  by  the  member  countries,  fostered  by  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact  and  enforced  by  the  markets.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  called  on  countries  to 
pursue sound economic policies that would support the ECB in maintaining its price-stability 
goal. The founding fathers of EMU thought that, since the euro would eliminate exchange-
rate risk from national interest rates, the single currency would make it easier to evaluate risk 
characteristics and, therefore, investment opportunities across countries. In other words, the 
elimination of exchange-rate risk would lead to greater transparency and increased market 
discipline on governments. 
The dominant view at the founding of the EMU was that current-account imbalances among 
countries in the monetary union would become as irrelevant as they are among regions of 
individual countries. Persistent current-account deficits were interpreted as capital flows from 
countries  offering  relatively-low  returns  on  investments  to  countries  offering  relatively-high 
returns.  In  other  words,  they  were  part  of  an  equilibrating  process  under  which  the  fast-
growing periphery caught up to the core. 
This  architecture  proved  inadequate for  several reasons.  First, the fiscal  rules  were  poorly 
designed  and  under-enforced.  Second,  instead  of  increasing  the  pressure  for  structural 
reforms  and  policy  adjustments  needed  to  strengthen  competitiveness  in  the  periphery, 
market  forces  acted  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  markets  mis-priced  credit  risk, 
underpinning large capital flows into the periphery and reducing interest rate spreads. The 
reduction in spreads led to a relaxation of the budget constraints that the peripheral countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
faced and made it difficult to distinguish between those countries that were performing well in 
terms of policy adjustment and those that were performing poorly. To make matters worse, 
the current-account deficits in the periphery were financed through sources of volatile capital, 
such  as  debt  securities  and  bank  loans,  rendering  the  periphery  vulnerable  to  sudden 
reversals  of  capital  flows.  Third,  the  founders  of  EMU  underestimated  the  importance  of 
financial stability in a monetary union. Thus, whereas they focused on the prevention of fiscal 
imbalances and inflation, they made no provision to deal with private credit booms and busts 
or with the feedback loops between banking crises and fiscal crises. 
Under  the  original  architecture,  national  authorities  were  solely  responsible  for  banking 
supervision, resolution, deposit insurance, and financial stability. The combination of a lack of 
adequate fiscal rules, the absence of market-enforced discipline, the lack of attention to the 
interconnections between the banks and the sovereign, and increases in public and private 
indebtedness financed by volatile capital inflows was toxic. 
A tale of two crises 
Broadly speaking, the euro-area crisis has consisted of two separate crises – a sovereign-
induced crisis and a banking-induced crisis, as I will explain. A sovereign debt-crisis mainly 
occurred in Greece. 
What  the  crisis  countries  –  Cyprus,  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Spain  –  have  had  in 
common was large current-account deficits prior to the crisis. In the run-up to the outbreak of 
the crisis, Ireland had a current-account deficit of around 5 per cent of GDP. That was small 
relative  to  those  of  the  other  crisis  countries.  In  Cyprus,  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain,  the 
deficits ranged between 12 and 15 per cent of GDP. 
The  initial  tremors  of  the  euro-area  crisis  occurred  in  Greece  in  the  fall  of  2009  following 
news that the country’s fiscal deficit would be much higher than had been expected by the 
markets.  The  country  suddenly  found  itself  at  the  center  of  a  sovereign-debt  storm,  and 
interest-rate spreads began a relentless upward climb. The outbreak of the Greek sovereign-
debt crisis took the markets by surprise. It should not have done so. 
Greece joined the euro area in 2001. From that year until 2009, large and growing fiscal and 
external  imbalances  should  have  sounded  loud  warning  alarms  in  the  financial  markets. 
During those years: 
• 
Fiscal deficits consistently topped 5 per cent of GDP, peaking at 15.6 per cent at the 
end of the period. 
The  widening  of  the  fiscal  deficits  was  mainly  expenditure  driven;  the  share  of 
government spending in GDP rose by 9 percentage points – to 54 per cent. 
The  share  of  government  debt  in  GDP  rose  from  about  100  per  cent  at  the 
beginning of the period to 130 per cent at the end of the period. 
Greece’s competitiveness, measured in terms of unit labour costs against those of 
its major trading partners, deteriorated by 30 per cent. 
The  erosion  of  competitiveness,  coupled  with  growth  rates  generated  by 
consumption  and  an  unsustainable  fiscal  expansion,  led  to  a  widening  of  the 
current-account deficit. 
    Upon  becoming  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  in  2008,  I  began  to  publically  warn  the 
government – in not very subtle terms – that it needed to urgently take measures to address 
the fiscal and external imbalances. My warnings were overlooked. 
Once  the  crisis  started  in  late  2009,  it  rapidly  became  self-reinforcing.  The  sovereign-debt 
crisis  spilled  over  to  the  banking  system,  even  though  the  banking  sector  had  sound 
fundamentals – including high CARs, low loan-to-deposit ratios, and low ratios of total-bank-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  help 
through  national  banking  systems 
assets-to-GDP – prior to the outbreak of the sovereign crisis. As a result of the crisis, over 
the period from the end of 2008 until the end of 2013 real GDP contracted cumulatively by 25 
per cent, intensifying the debt dynamics and contributing to the self-reinforcing nature of the 
crisis. 
In the remainder of the periphery – especially Ireland, Spain and Cyprus – it was the banking 
sector  that  generated  a  sovereign  crisis,  not  the  other  way  around  as  in  Greece.  Capital 
inflows  were  channeled  mainly 
finance 
construction.  Private  indebtedness  financed  by  the  capital  inflows  surged,  leaving  the 
countries  prone  to  the  unwinding  of  the  capital  inflows.  As  with  the  case  of  Greece,  the 
inflows  fueled  large  competitiveness  losses  as  rises  in  the  prices  of  non-tradables  spilled 
over to the tradables sector, setting the stage for a boom-bust cycle. 
In these countries, the bust came through the banking systems. What happened was that the 
large size of the banks relative to national GDPs undermined confidence in the sovereigns, 
creating doom-loops between banking systems and the sovereigns. 
To explain why this happened, consider the following difference between banks in the United 
States  and  those  in  the  euro  area.  Although  the  largest  banks  in  the  euro  area  and  the 
United  States  are  of  roughly  the  same  size  in  terms  of  euro-area  GDP  and  U.S.  GDP, 
respectively,  the  largest  euro  area  banks  represent  a  much  larger  share  of  any  individual 
national economy compared with the situation of U.S. banks. Consequently, banking crises 
in  individual  euro-area  countries  placed  large  fiscal  burdens  on  governments,  calling  into 
question their solvency and making the use of counter-cyclical fiscal policy infeasible. 
In light of the exposure of the banks to the debt of their sovereigns, the deteriorating fiscal 
positions, in turn, affected the banks. The lesson from this experience was clear; an effective 
economic and monetary union needs to include a banking union. 
A crisis-induced economic adjustment 
The  euro-area  crisis  served  two  vital  purposes.  First,  it  acted  as  a  wake-up  call  to 
policymakers in economies that had become uncompetitive. Second, it brought to the surface 
fundamental weaknesses in the EU’s institutional structure. Consequently, since the onset of 
the  crisis,  policymakers  in  the  stressed  countries  have  made  significant  progress  in 
addressing fiscal and external imbalances. At the same time, institutional flaws in economic 
and financial governance are being addressed. 
In what follows I will first focus on the adjustment that has taken place in Greece. 
Consider, first, fiscal adjustment. From 2009 to 2013, the fiscal deficit was reduced by some 
13 percentage points of GDP. The structural fiscal deficit – that is, the deficit that corrects for 
the business cycle – has shrunk by 19 percentage points of GDP. The primary fiscal deficit – 
that is, the deficit that excludes interest payments – was 10½ per cent of GDP in 2009. Last 
year it swung into a small surplus. What makes these achievements especially impressive is 
that they have taken place despite a contracting economy, which creates moving targets for 
fiscal consolidation. 
Greece’s fiscal consolidation is one of the largest ever achieved by any country under an IMF 
program. In gross terms, fiscal-adjustment measures amounting to more than 30 per cent of 
GDP  were  implemented  between  2010  and  2013.  In  net  terms,  the  figure  is,  of  course, 
smaller since the gross measures have the effect of making GDP contract. Additional fiscal 
measures are being implemented this year. These measures will increase the primary fiscal 
surplus to 1 ½ per cent of GDP this year. The new measures place emphasis on expenditure 
cuts to reduce the size of the government sector and allow the tradables sector to expand, so 
that exports can help generate growth. 
Consider, next, external adjustment. As I mentioned, Greece lost about 30 per cent in terms 
of cost competitiveness against its major trading partners in the period from 2001 to 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Since 2010, the situation has been reversed. As of the end of last year, the entire loss – and 
more  –  had  been  recovered.  Competitiveness  is  also  being  promoted  through  structural 
reforms which have increased the flexibility of labour and product markets. 
As a result of these improvements in competitiveness, a rebalancing of the Greek economy 
is taking place. The share of exports of goods and services in GDP rose from 18 per cent in 
2009 to 28 per cent last year. This share continues to rise. The current account, which was in 
deficit to the tune of 15 per cent of GDP in 2008, moved into surplus last year. 
Two factors about the improvement in competitiveness stand out. First, it has been achieved 
without  the  benefit  of  a  nominal  exchange-rate  devaluation.  Reflecting  extensive  labour-
market  reforms,  it  has  been  based  on  reductions  in  unit  labour  costs  –  an  internal 
devaluation.  Second,  it  has  been  achieved  against  a  backdrop  of  low  inflation  in  the 
economies  of  Greece’s  trading  partners,  a  situation  that  makes  it  difficult  to  attain 
improvements in competitiveness. 
Consequently, in a matter of several years Greece has been able to transform its enormous 
external and primary fiscal deficits into surpluses – a remarkable achievement. 
Preserving banking system liquidity, and 
Restoring capital adequacy. 
The banking sector 
Let me now turn to the restructuring of the Greek banking system. It has been enormous. 
With the deepening of the crisis, the Bank of Greece stepped in to preserve banking system 
stability. Our efforts focused on two fronts: 
• 
• 
Ample  liquidity  was  provided  to  banks,  both  through  monetary  policy  operations  and 
emergency  liquidity  assistance.  Regarding  capital  adequacy,  the first  stage  of  our strategy 
included  a  viability  assessment  of  the  banking  system.  Based  on  this  study,  viable  banks 
were  fully  recapitalized  using  a  combination  of  state  and  private  funds.  State  funds  were 
provided  by  the  Hellenic  Financial  Stability  Fund,  which  had  been  established  with  a 
backstop  of  €  50  billion  for  that  purpose.  Non-viable  banks,  which  were  unable  to  raise 
private  capital,  were  resolved,  using  state-of-the-art  resolution  tools  –  tools  that  are  now 
being  introduced  in  other  EU  countries.  Before  the  crisis,  the  Greek  banking  system 
comprised almost 20 banks. Today we have four well-capitalized, viable pillar banks and a 
few smaller ones. 
We  are  now  implementing  the  second  stage  of  our  strategy.  This  stage  involves  a  new 
banking model that will allow banks to repay state aid and finance the recovery of the Greek 
economy.  Having  acquired  the  clean  portfolios  of  resolved  institutions  or  having  merged, 
banks  are  now  exploiting  synergies  and  economies  of  scale,  further  eliminating  excess 
capacity,  and  becoming  more  efficient.  They  are  also  refocusing  on  their  core  activities  – 
selling non-core assets and rationalizing their networks and activities abroad. 
Late  last  year,  we  re-engaged  BlackRock  to  update  credit  loss  projections  for  banks’  loan 
portfolios  up  to  2016,  and  to  study  the  efficiency  of  banks’  procedures  in  managing  non-
performing loans. The efficient use of the backstop during recapitalization and resolution has 
left a buffer of around € 8–€ 9 billion, should additional capital needs arise. Moreover, the 
sale  of  non-core  assets  and  the  exploitation  of  synergies  arising  from  mergers  could  add 
some €5 billion to the buffer. 
A “code of conduct” for banks’ dealings with distressed borrowers is being drawn up and will 
be implemented as of 2015. It has two objectives: first, to ensure the maximum repayment of 
non-performing  loans;  second,  to  alleviate  pressures  on  borrowers  whose  ability  to  repay 
their  debts  is  at  present  reduced.  Improvements  in  NPL  management  will  lower  capital 
requirements, freeing up resources that can be used to finance a new growth model for the 
Greek economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Why has the economic contraction been so deep in Greece? 
Is the present level of Greek government debt sustainable? 
Some important outstanding issues 
I will now touch upon two important issues. 
• 
• 
When Greece agreed to an adjustment programme with the troika – the IMF, the ECB, and 
the  Commission  –  in  May  2010,  a  recovery  was  projected  for  late-2012.  Clearly,  no  one 
expected that the contraction, which began in late 2008, would  last for 5 years and  would 
cumulate to more than 25 per cent. 
Why did the projections go so severely off track? There are several reasons. 
The  first  reason  concerns  the  magnitude  of  required  fiscal  adjustment.  The  magnitude  of 
fiscal consolidation was bound to be substantial, because the size of the initial imbalances 
was very large. What increased the effects of the fiscal consolidation was the mix of policies 
adopted.  Experience  shows  that  fiscal  consolidation  programmes  based  on  spending  cuts 
lead to smaller economic contractions than those based on tax increases. 
For this reason, I have been calling for fiscal adjustment comprised of two-thirds expenditure 
cuts and one-third revenue increases – mainly generated by expanding the tax base – since 
the  inception  of  the  programme.  During  the  initial  stages  of  the  programme,  however,  the 
adjustment measures comprised a mixture of 60 per cent revenue – largely tax – increases 
and  40  per  cent  expenditure  cuts. The  tax  increases  reduced  after-tax  income, restraining 
private  consumption,  and  decreased  the  after-tax  return  on  investment,  reducing  the 
incentive  to  invest.  They  thereby  had  a  negative  effect  on  consumer  and  investor 
psychology, contributing to a cycle of pessimism that engulfed the economy. 
The second reason for the deeper than expected economic contraction was that the Greek 
economy is relatively closed. In closed economies, any decline in demand hits domestically-
produced goods  more  than  imports. The  decline  in  demand for  domestic  production,  then, 
affects output more than if the economy were more open. I called attention to this matter in 
an article I wrote for the Financial Times in early 2012. 
The  third  reason  that  economic  contraction  reached  unprecedented  levels  concerns  the 
implementation of structural reforms, privatization, and measures to improve tax collection. 
For an adjustment programme to be effective, all the inter-connected parts must be in place. 
In the early stages of the programme, that did not happen. Implementation in each of these 
areas  was  slow  and 
the  contraction.  The  slow  pace  of 
implementation  of  structural  changes  contributed  to  a  rise  of  uncertainty,  including 
widespread speculation of a Greek exit from the euro. In turn, the uncertainty – and the fact 
that it inflicted a paralysis on the economy – magnified the size of the fiscal multiplier. 
Then,  there  is the  issue  of  the  sustainability  of Greece’s  public  sector  debt.  Presently,  the 
debt-to-GDP ratio stands at about 175 per cent and it is projected to decline to 110 per cent 
in  2023.  Decisions  agreed  by  the  Eurogroup  in November  2012  –  including  a  reduction  in 
interest  rates  and  lengthening  of  maturities  on  official  sector  loans  –  have  not  yet  been 
implemented.  Those  decisions  were  conditioned  on  the  achievement  of  a  primary  fiscal 
surplus.  That  condition  has  now  been  achieved;  the  exact  amount  of  the  surplus  will  be 
announced  in  April.  With  that  announcement,  I  expect  that  the  Eurogroup  will  agree  to 
measures to help improve Greece’s debt dynamics. 
That  agreement,  however,  is  not  all  that  can  be  done  to  improve  the  debt  dynamics.  The 
major reason for the rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio during the past several years has been the 
sharp decline in GDP. What, then, can be done to boost growth, so that the denominator of 
the debt-to-GDP ratio acts in a stabilizing way? My earlier discussion points to several areas 
that need attention. 
inefficient,  exacerbating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    First, the pace of reform of the product and services markets, and the restructuring 
of the wider public sector need to be stepped-up. This would lower production costs 
and improve competitiveness. 
Second, the size of the government sector should be reduced to facilitate a shift in 
production from non-tradables to tradables, allowing a competitive export sector to 
flourish. 
Third, more emphasis should be placed on scaling-back government consumption 
instead of public-sector investment, since the latter can be a key contributor to the 
country’s future economic growth. 
Fourth, a high priority needs to be given to privatisation and improving the ease of 
doing business, so as to attract more foreign direct investment. FDI has traditionally 
been low in Greece. Creating a more growth-friendly environment and speeding up 
privatization would clearly facilitate FDI. 
Addressing all of these areas would  improve the business climate  and reduce uncertainty, 
creating  what  I  call  a  “new  growth  model”.  That,  in  turn,  would  reduce  the  still-very-high 
borrowing costs faced by Greek firms while encouraging banks to begin lending to the real 
economy. 
Initiatives at the EU level 
What about the policy responses to the crisis? They have included actions in both the ECB’s 
monetary policy and in EMU’s architecture. 
The actions of the ECB have been decisive. The ECB has kept policy rates at historically-low 
levels;  it  has  satisfied  the  liquidity  needs  of  banks,  and  has  expanded  its  collateral 
framework. The announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions – the OMT – has helped 
reduce tail risks of a euro break-up. Furthermore, under its forward guidance the ECB has 
made it clear that policy rates will be kept at present or lower levels for an extended period of 
time. 
Changes in the architecture include both improvements in macroeconomic surveillance and 
efforts to establish a banking union. 
Economic  governance  has  been  improved  through  three  main  pillars:  the  so-called  “six-
pack”, the fiscal compact, and the “two-pack”. These pillars involve stronger macroeconomic 
surveillance  designed  to  identify  imbalances  earlier,  monitor  them  effectively,  and  thus 
ensure their timely correction. These measures should go a long way to preventing the build-
up of the large imbalances that were present before the crisis. 
Banking union is being designed to break the negative feedback loops between banks and 
the sovereign, as well as to create an integrated, stable and well-capitalised banking sector. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism, which will become fully operational this November, will 
lead to the transfer of the supervision of almost 85 per cent of total euro-area bank assets to 
the ECB. 
A necessary complement to a supervisory mechanism is a resolution framework to deal with 
non-viable banks. Our experience with the successful resolution of 12 banks in Greece has 
shown  that  resolution  mechanisms  need  efficient  decision-making  procedures,  allowing 
resolutions to be done within a weekend, in order to safeguard financial stability. Resolution 
will also need a credible back-stop. The Fund envisaged will be built up by contributions over 
a maximum 10-year period. I favour a shorter period to ensure that a credible backstop will 
be available sooner. 
Finally, the harmonisation of Deposit Guarantee Schemes will help prevent the emigration of 
funds in search of higher coverage. The scheme will begin operation in January 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
I  would  like  to  offer  some  concluding  remarks.  For  too  long,  the  countries  at  the  euro’s 
periphery sacrificed long-term gains for short-term gratification. We have seen the results. 
The  policy  reforms  that  the  euro-area’s  crisis  countries  are  now  implementing  follow  an 
established recipe. That recipe worked for the U.S. and the U.K. in the 1980s, Sweden and 
Finland in the early 1990s, Asia in the late 1990s, Germany in the early 2000s, and in many 
other  countries.  That  recipe  stresses  the  need  to  improve  competitiveness,  and  includes 
fixing  social  security,  strengthening  employment  incentives,  privatisation,  and  streamlining 
the public sector. 
Some of these measures – especially those related to structural reforms – take time to work. 
The gains  do  not  come overnight; they  require patience  and  the  ability  to  ignore  the siren 
calls of those who offer quick fixes. Supported by the ECB’s policies and the strengthening of 
the EU’s architecture, that recipe is now working. 
• 
• 
We have seen an end to the recession in the euro area. 
Spreads have declined sharply in peripheral countries, despite recent disturbances 
in emerging markets. 
Slowly  –  but  surely  –  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  has  become  less 
fragmented. 
As progress toward banking union continues, fragmentation will further diminish. 
Crisis countries have gone a very long way toward eliminating their imbalances. 
Confidence is increasing. 
• 
• 
• 
The case of Greece perfectly illustrates the progress that has been achieved. Since the peak 
of the crisis in mid-2012: 
• 
 Spreads  against  10-year  German  sovereigns  have  fallen  by  around  1,800  basis 
points, to around 700 basis points. 
The Athens stock exchange has risen by about 85 per cent. 
Bank deposits have increased by 9 per cent. 
Reliance of banks on Eurosystem financing is down by about 50 per cent. 
Economic sentiment has recently reached a 5-year high. 
The twin deficits have been transformed into twin surpluses. 
The  recent  release  of  the  PMI  for  manufacturing  for  January  2014  points  to 
expansion for the first time in 53 months. 
 It  is  now  generally  expected  that  2014  will  be  the  year  in  which  growth  –  although  very 
modest at first – returns to the Greek economy. Underlying this expectation of growth are the 
following factors. 
• 
The substantial progress achieved in terms of competitiveness, including the effects 
of structural reforms in labour and product markets, will lead to an improved export 
performance. 
The return of confidence will help support a rise in consumption and investment. 
Fiscal drag will be considerably less than in previous years. 
• 
• 
Nevertheless, the euro’s financial storm clouds have not yet completely cleared. Here, again, 
the case of Greece illustrates the situation in the euro-area more broadly. The economic and 
financial environment in Greece remains fragile and sensitive to negative developments. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
very high unemployment rate and the large sacrifices undergone by the Greek people led to 
social  and  political  polarization.  Political  uncertainty,  and  the  risks  associated  with  that 
uncertainty, could escalate ahead of the European Parliamentary and local Greek elections 
that will take place in May, undermining the recovery. 
It is my hope that such an unfortunate scenario will not occur. Greek citizens, like the citizens 
in the other crisis countries, have had to undergo tremendous sacrifices during the past few 
years.  These  sacrifices  are  now  bearing  fruit  and  it  would  be  tragic  to  see  them  washed 
away. Despite these risks, I am confident that Grecovery is on the way. 
The financial storm served an important purpose. It set in motion policy reforms at both the 
individual-country  level  and  the  euro-area  level  that  will  help  foster  a  stronger  and  more 
secure  Europe,  improving the  welfare  of  its  citizens  and  enhancing  its  position  as  a  major 
player on the world stage. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
