  Andrew G Haldane: Managing global finance as a system 
Text  of  the  Maxwell  Fry  Annual  Global  Finance  Lecture,  given  by  Mr  Andrew  G  Haldane, 
Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of England, at Birmingham University, 
Birmingham, 29 October 2014. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee.  
I would like to thank Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Edd Denbee, Jeremy Franklin, Carsten Jung, Matt Roberts-Sklar, 
Stephanie Quiet and Benedict Roth for assistance in preparing the text. I would also like to thank to Rob Elder, 
Jeremy  Harrison,  Kristin  Forbes,  James  Smith  and  Stacy  Williams  (HSBC  FX  Quantitative  Strategy  Team)  for 
insights and comments. 
It is a great honour to be giving this year’s Maxwell Fry Global Finance Lecture. Max was a 
tremendous colleague, both during his time here at Birmingham University and as Director of 
the Centre for Central Banking Studies at the Bank of England. 
Max also had a rare gift. Through his exceptionally rich academic and public policy career, 
he  was  able  to  integrate  the  insights from  disciplines  which  all  too  rarely  communicated  – 
monetary  theory  and  central  bank  practice,  advanced  and  emerging  market  experience, 
financial markets dynamics and mainstream macro-economics.  
The global financial crisis could not have provided a clearer demonstration of the benefits of 
combining these insights. Without them, it would have been impossible to make sense of the 
chaotic  dynamics  of  global  economies  and  financial  systems  at  the  time.  In  other  words, 
nothing could have provided a better case study of the importance of Max’s work than the 
crisis.  
And  it  is  lessons  from  the  global  financial  crisis  with  which  I  want  to  begin.  These  are  of 
course  many  and  varied.  But  among  the  most  important  is  also  perhaps  the  simplest:  to 
safeguard  against  systemic  risk,  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  managed  as  a  system 
(Haldane (2009)). As put, this statement seems rather obvious, perhaps even tautological.  
Yet, pre-crisis, it was far from obvious. The orthodoxy then was that safeguarding individual 
financial firms was a necessary and sufficient condition for system-wide stability. This  was 
the  financial  stability  equivalent  of  the  English  aphorism:  “look  after  the  pennies  and  the 
pounds  will  look  after themselves”.  And  so  it  appeared  during the  long pre-crisis  period  of 
stable growth and stable banks – the “Great Moderation” (Bernanke (2004)).  
The  crisis  has  rewritten  that  orthodoxy.  It  revealed  that  the  safety  of  individual  banks  was 
neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for systemic stability. Not necessary because, in 
any well-functioning system, individual banks can and should fail. Not sufficient because, in 
an integrated web, the chain is only as strong as its weakest link. 
In focussing on individual banks, policymakers had been, to coin another English aphorism, 
“penny-wise but pound-foolish”. That is why Great Moderation gave way to Great Recession 
(Gai and Kapadia (2010)). That is why systemic risk entered the public lexicon. And that is 
why financial regulation has, in the period since, been fundamentally re-oriented towards the 
monitoring and management of systemic risk. 
Interestingly, that lesson would have come as no surprise to anyone familiar with dynamic, 
integrated  networks  outside  of  the  world  of  finance.  Assessing  the  stability  of  almost  any 
network  known  to  man  –  whether  natural,  physical,  social  or  economic  –  relies  upon  a 
system-wide assessment. And protection mechanisms for this system need to be calibrated 
to  system-wide  characteristics  (Goldin  and  Mariathasan  (2014)).  Financial  webs  are  no 
exception. The history of financial crises suggests they may be closer to the rule. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This new orthodoxy has framed the post-crisis regulatory reform agenda. It is why so-called 
macro-prudential policy has risen in prominence. It is why the world’s most inter-connected 
banks  will  in  future  be  required  to  run  with  extra  capital  and  liquidity.  It  is  why  OTC 
derivatives  will  in  future  be  centrally  traded  and  cleared.  And  it  is  why  resolution  of  the 
world’s  largest,  cross-border  banks  has  become  such  a  priority.  For  the  global  banking 
system we now have a blueprint, an emerging new set of international rules of the road. 
Yet if instead of banks we consider the financial fortunes of countries; if instead of inter-bank 
exposures we consider cross-border flows of capital; and if instead of international banking 
regulation  we  consider  the  international  monetary  system,  it  is  far  from  clear  that  lessons 
have been learned, much less that the international rules of that road have been reformed. 
Arguably,  the  rules  of  the  road  for  this  system  have  failed  to  keep  pace  with  the  growing 
scale and complexity of global financial flows. It is for this reason that some have called the 
international  monetary  system  a  “non-system”  or  “anti-system”  (Truman  (2012)  and  De 
Larosiere (2014)) – a system whose shape and scale has outgrown its architecture. 
I want to discuss these developments and their public policy implications. I first discuss the 
historical  evolution  of  the  international  monetary  network,  including  the  remarkable  recent 
surge  in  financial  globalisation.  I  then  discuss  why  financial  globalisation  can  be  double-
edged  from  a  stability  perspective.  Finally,  I  consider  steps  to  strengthen  the  international 
architecture, to better manage global finance as a system.  
The historical evolution in global finance 
It is fascinating to track how global financial integration has evolved over the past century. 
One way of gauging that is by looking at measured stocks of external asset and liabilities – 
the  cumulative  consequences  of  past  cross-border  capital  flows  (and  valuation  changes). 
Charts 1 and 2 plot world gross external assets, measured relative to world GDP, over the 
past 140 years. As a comparison, world trade relative to world GDP is also shown. 
Global integration of trade and finance has followed roughly similar patterns. Both rose prior 
to  World  War  I  during  the  heyday  of  the  classical  Gold  Standard,  when  trade  and  capital 
liberalisation  were  last  at  their  peak.  Both  then  fell  during  the  interwar  years,  as  national 
protectionism  led  to  trade  and  financial  barriers  being  erected.  Then,  from  around  1960 
onwards, trade and finance once more began to rise due to the lifting of restrictions on cross-
border trade and capital flows (Broadbent (2014)). 
Despite this close historical correlation, the undulations in global finance are far greater than 
those  in  world  trade.  In  1960,  global  finance  was  around  one  third  of  its  value  in  1914, 
measured relative to world GDP. By 2010, it had risen to three times its value in 1914. Put 
differently, in 1980 global trade and global finance were on a broadly equal footing, at around 
a quarter of world GDP. By 2010, global finance was nine times global trade. At the same 
time world trade has flat-lined, global finance has come of age. 
Today, cross-border stocks of capital are almost certainly larger than at any time in human 
history. We have hit a new high-water mark. The same is probably true of cross-border flows 
of  goods  and  services  and  is  most  certainly  true  of  cross-border  flows  of  information 
(Haldane (2013)). We are accustomed to talking of the information technology revolution. Yet 
the revolution in global finance has in some respects been every bit as striking.  
While these trends tell us something about relative patterns of global interconnection, they 
leave  unanswered  the  question  of  whether global  finance  is  a truly  integrated  network. To 
gauge  that,  consider  an  alternative  measure  of  global  capital  market  integration  –  the 
correlation  between  national  saving  and  investment  rates.  From  Feldstein  and  Horioka 
(1980), we know that this correlation provides a proxy for capital market integration. 
For example, a savings/investment correlation of one indicates a closed capital account: all 
domestic investment needs to be fully financed from domestic saving. At a global level, this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  perfect  capital  market 
would signify something close to global financial autarky. By contrast, a correlation of zero 
implies that domestic investment can be fully financed on global capital markets. This would 
signal  something  close 
integration.  So  saving/investment 
correlations of zero and one define the outer limits of global capital market integration.  
Chart  3  plots  this  correlation  coefficient  over  the  same  140-year  period  shown  in  Chart  1. 
Broadly-speaking, the two series track one another fairly closely. But Chart 3 now allows us 
to  say  things  about  the  absolute  degree  of  capital  market  integration.  And  what  a  roller-
coaster  ride  it  has  been.  During  the  first  period,  from  around  1880  up  until  the  Great 
Depression,  global  financial  integration  sat  roughly  mid-way  between  its  outer  limits. 
Integration was high-ish, but far from perfect. 
For around a fifty year period, from the 1930s through to the 1980s, global finance then went 
into hibernation. The Feldstein/Horioka coefficient skirted one for large parts of this period. 
The  global  financial  system  operated  as  anything  but  a  system.  Indeed,  it  was  this  which 
prompted Feldstein and Horioka in the early 1980s to present the “puzzle” of still-low levels 
of capital market integration. 
Yet at pretty much precisely the point this puzzle was being identified, it began to disappear. 
Correlations quickly moved from close to unity in the early 1980s to close to zero by the start 
of the 21st century. This was an astonishingly rapid evolution from a world close to financial 
autarky to one close to financial nirvana. In the light of the crisis, measured levels of global 
capital market integration have fallen somewhat. But they remain at higher levels than at any 
point in history.  
Overall,  then,  the  picture  is  clear.  For  much  of  the  20th  century,  global  finance  was  more 
patchwork  than  network.  But  the  past  thirty  years  have  seen  that  picture  change 
spectacularly. Today, global finance is a well-connected network, a tightly-woven and tangled 
web, a genuine system. 
The double-edged nature of financial integration 
So what are the implications of this increase in global financial integration? There have been 
large numbers of studies exploring the growth and welfare implications of these trends, using 
cross-country and time-series evidence (Rey (2013)). This evidence paints, at best, a mixed 
picture.  While  capital  integration  ought  to  enhance  international  risk-sharing,  there  is 
surprisingly little evidence of this having conferred macro-economic benefits – and some of it 
having imposed costs. 
For some economists, this is a perplexing and contentious conclusion. It is made all the more 
so by the fact that the evidence on global trade integration points overwhelmingly towards 
positive effects (Kose et al (2009) and Berg and Krueger (2003)). Yet, outside of economics 
and finance, this conclusion would be far less perplexing and contentious.  
For many other disciplines, it is well-known that the increased integration of a network can be 
double-edged from a stability perspective (Watts (2002), Haldane and May (2011)): whether 
it  is  physical  networks,  like  utility  grids;  or  natural  networks,  like  eco-systems;  or  social 
networks, like the world wide web. The logic is straightforward. 
Within  limits,  connectivity  acts  as  a  shock-absorber.  Links  in  the  system  act  as  a  mutual 
insurance  device,  helping  distribute  and  disperse  risk.  These  systems  are  then  “robust”  to 
shocks. But when shocks are sufficiently large, connectivity may instead serve as a shock-
transmitter.  Risk-sharing  becomes  risk-spreading.  Links  in  the  system  act  as  a  mutual 
incendiary device, amplifying risk. These systems are then also “fragile”. 
So  connected  systems  tend  simultaneously  to  be  both  stable  and  unstable,  calm  and 
turbulent, robust-yet-fragile (Acemoglu et al (2013), Gai and Kapadia (2010)). In other words, 
integration can be double-edged. It generates a world with instances of more frequent and/or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  larger dislocations. In short, what is true of natural, physical and social systems is also true of 
global economic and financial systems.  
To illustrate that, consider Chart 4. This shows the results of a simulation of a hypothetical 
financial network of firms. These have differing levels of financial strength, measured on the 
x-axis. Think of this as a country’s level of official reserves or a bank’s level of liquid assets. 
On the z-axis is a measure of network interconnectivity – the scale of cross-border assets or 
interbank exposures. Finally, on the y-axis is a measure of systemic risk – the incidence of 
default across the network, whether of countries or banks. 
As the network becomes better integrated, for a given degree of financial strength, systemic 
risk remains low. We operate in a zone of systemic stability. That is because the network is 
operating  as  a  shock-absorber,  a  network  insurance  device  scattering  risk  to  the  four 
corners. So it was pre-crisis. 
But for a large-enough shock to financial strength, the system fundamentally changes shape. 
The network flips to a zone of systemic instability. That is because it is now operating as a 
shock-transmitter, a network incendiary device – and the greater the degree of integration, 
the sharper this knife-edge. So it was during the crisis.  
This is the robust-yet-fragile property of connected webs. The global financial crisis provided 
no  better  example.  The  flat  earth  that  was  the  Great  Moderation  gave  way  to  the  fragile 
planet  that  was  the  Great  Recession.  Risk-sharing  gave  way  to  risk  spreading,  risk 
distribution to risk contagion. 
This was by no means an isolated incident. Chart 5 plots a measure of global capital market 
integration (external assets/GDP) against a measure of the incidence of crises – all crises 
and  banking  crises  (Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2011)).  Integration  appears  to  have  been 
associated  with  an  increase  in  the  incidence  of  crisis  over  the  past  couple  of  decades, 
perhaps especially banking crises.  
It  is  not  just  the  incidence,  but  also  the  prospective  size  of  crises  and  their  spill-over 
consequences that has increased. Chart 6 provides one perspective on that. It looks at the 
scale  of  IMF  programmes  over  time,  normalised  by  the  borrowing  country’s  quota.  Two 
features  are  striking:  first,  the  increased  incidence  of  programmes;  but  second,  more 
dramatically, their increased scale. 
Academic  evidence  has  long  pointed  towards  important  spillover  effects  from  national  or 
international  disturbances  (Obstfeld  and  Rogoff  (1995),  Forbes  and  Warnock  (2012)  and 
Fratzscher (2012)). But recent evidence points towards more potent contagion channels. For 
example, Rey (2013) finds evidence that a common global risk factor drives asset prices and 
cross-border capital flows, for both advanced and emerging economies. 
It  is  worth  putting  under  the  microscope  these  shifting  patterns  in  global  financial  market 
correlations,  especially  over  the  most  recent  period.  Charts  7–9  plot  correlations  between 
long-term  bond  yields,  equity  prices  and  investment  grade  corporate  bond  spreads 
respectively in the US, UK and the euro-area over the past few decades. Two features stand 
out. 
First, there has been a steady rise in the degree of co-movement in asset prices over time. 
Take  government  bond  yields  over  the  past  50  years.  Over  the  first  quarter  century,  from 
1960  through  to  the  mid-1980s,  average  pairwise  correlations  between  bond  yields  were 
around  0.1.  Over  the  subsequent  quarter-century,  these  correlations  have  risen  steadily, 
averaging 0.7 over the latter part of the sample (Chart 7). 
Second, and more striking still, is the level reached by these correlation coefficients towards 
the end of the sample. Whether it is safe government assets or risky corporate bonds and 
equities, correlations typically lie in the range 0.7 to 0.9. Other things equal, a common global 
factor potentially accounts for perhaps 70–90% of the movements in advanced country asset 
prices. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These  correlation  patterns  are  stronger,  and  even  more  striking,  when  we  look  at  their 
evolution  over  time.  As  one  example  of  that,  Charts  10  and  11  plot  “heatmaps”  of  the 
strength  of  a  common  factor  in  the  variation  of  spot  and  forward  rates  respectively  for 
government bonds at different maturities in the UK, US and Germany over the period since 
1995.  
In general, they show the same pattern of high and rising correlations over time. But these 
correlations  also  show  distinctive  flare-ups,  associated  with  spasms  in  global  financial 
markets such as the global financial crisis and last year’s ‘taper tantrum’. By the end of the 
sample almost the whole of the yield curve, bar the very short end, is moving synchronously 
across  countries.  To  a  first  approximation,  global  yield  curves  appear  these  days  to  be 
dancing to a common tune.  
All of this evidence points in one direction: the global monetary system operates in a similar 
fashion to all other tightly-knit networks – it is robust yet at the same time fragile. It is driven 
by potent – increasingly potent – spillover effects and common global factors. In short, global 
finance can only be understood and managed as a system. 
Characteristics of the global financial network  
The next obvious question is what mechanisms are in place to underpin the resilience of this 
tightly-woven web? Let me highlight some key characteristics of the global financial network 
which are useful in assessing its robustness. And let’s start with the good news.  
One positive trend in the international flow of funds is their changing composition. Table 1 
breaks down these flows of funds into their foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio and debt 
components,  for  advanced  and  emerging  markets,  over  the  periods  1980–1994  and  
1995–2012. Two features stand out.  
First, the declining share of debt-based finance and second, as the counterpart to this, the 
rising  share  of  portfolio  and  in  particular  FDI  investment.  For  example,  since  1995  the 
dominant  source  of  emerging  market  capital  has  switched  dramatically  from  debt-based 
finance towards FDI. Equity and FDI together now account for two-thirds of emerging market 
financing.  
That is significant from a stability perspective. Empirical evidence strongly suggests that FDI 
and,  to  a  lesser  extent, equity  is  a  far  more  stable  source  of  external financing  than  bank 
debt (Kose et al (2009)).1 That is in part because of its longer duration and in part because of 
its  superior  risk-sharing  properties.  For  at  least  some  emerging  markets,  their  national 
balance sheets appear to be moving to a more robust footing. 
A second positive development comes from looking at countries’ degree of self-insurance, in 
particular their stock  of foreign  exchange reserves.  As  Chart  12  shows,  these  have  grown 
dramatically since the second world war and especially since the Asian crisis, both in money 
terms  and  relative  to  world  GDP.  Reserves  have  risen  from  $1.5  trillion  in  1995  to  over 
$11 trillion by end-2013, or from around 5% of world GDP to around 15% today. 
Third,  this  has  been  accompanied  by  some  augmentation  of  multilateral  official  sector 
facilities  for  helping  handle  external  financing  shocks.  For  example,  since  1980  IMF  quota 
resources have risen from just under $80 billion to around $370 billion, or from 0.7% to just 
less than 2% of world GDP (Chart 13). The most significant augmentation in resources came 
from  the  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow  (NAB)  in  2009,  which  were  agreed  to  increase 
temporarily the resources available to the IMF at the height of the financial crisis. 
                                                
1   Bank  of  England  research  adds  one  nuance  to  this  story.  Dell’Erba  and  Reinhardt  (2013)  find  that  financial  sector  FDI 
appears to behave more like debt flows than traditional FDI flows. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Fourth, alongside these multilateral facilities, the past few years have seen rapid growth in 
regional  and  bilateral  financing facilities  (Chart  14).  Regionally,  we  now  have  a  number  of 
financing arrangements, including the Chiang Mai initiative in Asia (established in 2000), the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (established  in  2012),  the  Latin  American  Reserve  Fund 
(established in 1991), the Arab Monetary Fund (established in 1976) and, most recently, the 
BRICS  development  bank  (established  in  2014)).  Regional  facilities  now  total  around 
$1.3 trillion. 
In addition, during the course of the crisis, bilateral foreign currency swap lines were agreed 
between  around  14  central  banks,  in  both  advanced  and  emerging  market  countries. 
Although these swap lines were temporary, in October 2013 they were replaced by a set of 
permanent,  and  potentially  unlimited,  swap  lines  among  a  group  of  advanced  economy 
central banks: the US, Canada, the UK, the euro-area, Switzerland and Japan.  
These  four  developments,  in  combination,  are  likely  to  have  increased  significantly  the 
potential  pool  of  liquidity  insurance  available  to  the  global  financial  system  in  dealing  with 
external financing shocks. The question is whether this degree of insurance has kept pace 
with the accompanying rising tide of global capital market integration.  
One metric for that is found by scaling countries’ foreign exchange reserves by a measure of 
financial globalisation – for example, total external assets (Chart 15). Despite the rapid rise in 
reserves, its ratio to external asset stocks has actually fallen since 1980, from 10% to around 
8%. 
Second, official reserves have risen unevenly across countries: the degree of concentration 
in reserves has increased threefold since 2000. Moreover, those countries most at risk from 
capital flight are not necessarily those with the highest reserves. Scaling countries’ reserves 
by  measures  of  their  external  short-term  indebtedness  suggests  a  highly-uneven  pattern 
(Chart 16), with a number of countries holding less than would be needed to meet a year’s 
worth of capital outflows. 
Third, this pattern is broadly mirrored when moving from measures of self-insurance, such as 
reserves, to official financing measures. Chart 17 scales IMF resources by external assets. 
Since the 1980s, this measure has roughly halved from 3% to 1.5%. And fourth, even once 
we  augment  multilateral  financing  with  measures  of  regional  official  financing,  total  official 
resources relative to external assets are still shy of their levels in 1980.  
Taken  in  combination,  this  paints  a  picture  of  an  international  monetary  system  whose 
underlying topology has fundamentally changed shape and scale – much larger, much more 
connected.  But  it  is  also  a  system  whose  architecture  may  have  failed  to  keep  pace  with 
those changes. Therein lies a key potential fault-line.  
Strengthening the system 
This naturally begs the question – what might be done to close this fault-line, to improve the 
resilience  of  the  international  monetary  system?  One  response  would  be  to  retreat  from 
financial  globalisation  by  re-imposing  barriers  to  capital  movement,  unravelling  the  tightly-
woven knitting of the global financial web. We have seen this movie before. It opened in the 
aftermath of the Great Depression and ended in disaster.  
There should be better ways of making financial globalisation work, while guarding against its 
darkest  consequences  –  to  achieve  robustness  without  fragility.  But  this  may  require  new 
tools and approaches, operating system-wide. It may even require a new architecture, strong 
enough to withstand the new scale and scope of systemic risks.  
Let me discuss four areas where progress could realistically be made in developing this new 
architecture: financial surveillance; debt structures; macro-prudential policies; and multilateral 
financing. Each would be an important new brick in the wall. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Improvements to global financial surveillance  
(a)  
Forewarned is forearmed. Understanding the dynamics of the international monetary system, 
its tipping points and edges, is a pre-requisite for effective management. Some progress has 
been made on this front. For example, the IMF’s Global Financial Stability Report has, since 
2002, sought to plot the evolving contours of global finance. And the publication by the IMF 
of “Spillover Reports”, since 2011, is a further step in the right direction. 
Nonetheless,  these  steps  only  take  us  so  far.  The  centrepiece  of  the  IMF’s  surveillance 
efforts  remain  the  country-specific  Article  IV  consultations.  Whether  that  country-specific 
focus, enshrined in the IMF’s 1944 Articles, can be justified in today’s highly integrated global 
financial  network  is  a  more  open  question.  This  year’s  IMF  Triennial  Surveillance  Review 
may be an opportunity to tilt the balance further towards multilateral surveillance.  
What more might be feasible? I have a dream. It is futuristic, but realistic. It involves a Star 
Trek chair and a bank of monitors. It would involve tracking the global flow of funds in close 
to  real  time  (from  a  Star  Trek  chair  using  a  bank  of  monitors),  in  much  the  same  way  as 
happens with global weather systems and global internet traffic (Haldane (2011)). Its centre 
piece would be a global map of financial flows, charting spill-overs and correlations. 
Such  a  global  financial  surveillance  system  could  serve  a  number  of  policy  ends.  It  would 
allow  policymakers  to  monitor  the  evolution  of  the  financial  system  in  real  time,  as  it 
expanded, contracted and changed shape. It would also allow them to simulate and stress-
test this system to help detect impending financial cliff-edges. The IMF would be the natural 
guardian of this global-financial-map-cum-stress-testing-machine.  
To  give  this  concept  some  (literal  and  metaphorical)  colour,  Chart  18  shows  a  bank  of 
heatmaps of correlations across a wide range of assets (safe and risky) and a large set of 
countries (advanced and emerging). There are shown at three dates – a pre-crisis period of 
calm, the Lehmans Brothers crisis of 2008 and at present. These correlations are grouped in 
two ways, by asset class and by country. 
The  correlation  matrix  broadly  matches 
the  earlier  heatmaps. 
Temperatures appear to be rising over time, with flare-ups at times of crisis. With this map 
now encompassing a wider range of assets and countries, the strength of these correlations 
underscores the genuinely global nature of today’s international financial system. 
But  there  is  a  second,  more  striking  pattern  which  emerges  when  these  correlations  are 
grouped by asset class and by country. Correlations are far higher by asset class than by 
country.  In  other  words,  there  is  greater  co-movement  among  similar  asset  types  across 
countries  than  among  different  asset  types  within  countries.  A  portfolio-level  cut  is  more 
revealing about the underlying dynamics of global finance than a country-specific cut. 
How to make sense of these patterns? One explanation may lie in the behaviour of global 
asset managers. Financial markets are increasingly driven by their behaviour (IMF (2014)). 
For  asset  managers,  the  key  determinants  of  their  portfolio  choice  may  be  the  risk 
characteristics of different asset classes, rather than their country characteristics. Certainly, 
that is consistent with the correlation patterns. 
Either  way,  these  patterns  serve  to  underline  the  importance  of  multilateral  and  spillover-
based  analysis,  as  distinct  from  country-specific  (Article  IV)  surveillance,  when  assessing 
risks  to  both  global  and  national  financial  systems.  They  also  carry  potentially  important 
implications  for  how  these  dynamics  might  most  effectively  be  managed  from  a  macro-
prudential perspective (discussed below). 
the  patterns 
from 
Improvements to country debt structures (and restructures)  
(b)  
Debt flows are known to be a potent source of instability  within the international monetary 
system.  The  instabilities  they  generate  are  exacerbated  by  frictions  in  the  design  of  debt 
contracts. One such friction is that debt is an inherently pro-cyclical instrument. For example, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  a  negative  shock  to  a  country’s  income  prospects  will  tend  to  raise  debt  sustainability 
concerns and hence borrowing costs, thereby worsening sustainability. 
Another friction is that, once internationally-held debt becomes unsustainable, restructuring it 
is usually a messy process because of the lack of an internationally-agreed legal framework. 
In part for that reason, countries have tended to delay tackling unsustainable debt. But if debt 
is  truly  unsustainable,  delay  tends  to  further  worsen  debt  dynamics,  ultimately  increasing 
costs for both debtors and creditors (Krugman (1988)).  
These contractual frictions can make debt a fickle friend. They will tend  to aggravate debt 
sustainability and debtor prevarication problems, thereby encouraging investors to withdraw 
credit at the first sign of trouble – so-called “sudden stops” (Calvo (1998)). These frictions are 
well-illustrated  by  historical  sovereign  debt  restructuring  experience,  most  recently  in 
emerging market economies such as Argentina.  
Yet  it  is  widely  accepted  that  there  are  straightforward  contractual  solutions  to  these  debt 
problems. One is to issue debt instruments whose contractual features reduce pro-cyclicality, 
such  as  GDP-linked  bonds.  Their repayment  profile  adjusts  with  a  country’s  ability  to  pay, 
thereby  acting  counter-cyclically  and  quasi-automatically  to  defuse  repayment  risk  (Shiller 
(1993 and 2003), Barr et al (2014)).  
The  impact  of  such  instruments  on  debt  dynamics  could  be  significant.  A  recent  Bank  of 
England  study  considered  the  debt-to-income  ratios  of  the  G7  countries,  given  shocks  to 
growth and real interest rates, comparing conventional and GDP-linked debt. The latter cut 
the variability of G7 debt-to-income ratios in half. Yet despite their attraction, no more than a 
handful of countries internationally have so far issued GDP-linked debt instruments. 
Contingent  convertible  (“CoCo”)  bonds  are  a  second,  potentially  useful,  debt  instrument. 
These have been popular recently among banks. For countries, they could be designed with 
a  duration  which  is  automatically  extended  if  a  country  breaches  certain  pre-set  stress 
conditions  –  for  example,  if  it  is  the  subject  of  an  IMF  lending  programme  (Brooke  et  al 
(2012)). This would then deliver some automatic alleviation of short-term liquidity pressures. 
So far, no country has issued such instruments. 
There  has  been  somewhat  greater  progress  towards  the  inclusion  of  contractual  clauses 
which  assist  in  the  restructuring  of  sovereign  debts  once  these  become  unsustainable.  In 
particular,  following  the  Asian  crisis  there  was  a  push  by  the  international  community  to 
include Collective Action Clauses (CACs) in international bond contracts.  
Yet  as  recent  Argentine  experience  illustrates,  this  has  not  closed  the  book  on  sovereign 
debt restructuring problems. Existing CACs tend only to cover one particular class of bonds. 
This gives rise to a potential aggregation problem if other classes of bond vote against – or 
hold-out from – a restructuring agreement. 
“Aggregation” CACs include the option for bonds to be restructured on the basis of a single 
vote across all affected bonds. A recent IMF paper proposed that these clauses be included 
in  foreign  law  bonds,  a  proposal  which  appears  to  have  the  support  of  the  international 
community  (IMF  (2014)).  Kazakhstan  recently  incorporated  these  clauses  into  its  bond 
programme.  
The international community may in future need to provide stronger incentives to countries to 
improve  debt  structures,  be  it  through  GDP-linked  bonds,  CoCos  or  CACs.  Linking  the 
availability or terms of IMF financing more explicitly to debt structures might be one way of 
doing so. 
Enhanced macro-prudential and capital flow management policies 
(c)  
Significant progress has been made over the past decade in the design and implementation 
of macro-prudential regimes and capital flow management policies. The shift in the prevailing 
orthodoxy, analytically and operationally, has been remarkable. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A decade ago, policies to manage actively inflows and outflows of capital were frowned upon 
by  the  IMF  and  the  international  community.  Yet today  these measures  have  been  largely 
accepted as part of the toolkit for protecting countries from boom and bust cycles in capital 
flows  (IMF  (2012)).  Perhaps  most  significantly  of  all,  more  than  40  countries  have  already 
deployed these measures since 2009.  
A great many analytical and operational issues remain open. What are appropriate states of 
the world for introducing and releasing capital flow management measures – a first or last 
resort? Which policy measures are likely to be most effective – outflow versus inflow, price 
versus quantity controls? And how do these policies operate alongside other arms of policy – 
monetary, macro-prudential and micro-prudential?  
At  present,  we  have  neither  the  theory  nor  the  experience  to  answer  these  questions 
definitively.  But  case  law  is  rapidly  emerging,  including  on  their  potentially  adverse  cross-
border spillover consequences (Forbes et al (2013) and Magud et al (2011)). Looking to the 
future, it is realistic to think that better-defined, internationally-agreed “rules of the road” could 
emerge for capital flow management policies in the period ahead. 
Macro-prudential  policies  have  also  come  significantly  into  fashion  over  recent  years,  with 
many  countries  implementing  them  and  a  number  having  distinct,  if  still  fledgling,  macro-
prudential  frameworks  (Nier  et  al  (2011)).  Case  law  is  being  built  rapidly  and  empirical 
evidence is emerging on the efficacy of different macro-prudential tools (Lim et al (2011) and 
Kuttner and Shim (2013)). 
The  new  Basel  III  banking  rules  have  added  international  momentum  to  this  policy  trend. 
They introduce, at an international level, an explicitly macro-prudential capital requirement – 
the Counter-cyclical Capital Buffer (CCB). This adjusts regulatory capital rules over the credit 
cycle, to help build resilience and smooth booms and busts. 
The  CCB  rules  also  hard-wire  in  a  degree  of  cross-country  co-ordination  –  a  “reciprocity 
provision”. In particular, there is a presumption that any adjustment in the CCB buffer by one 
country is reciprocated by countries whose banks are lending into that country. In that way, 
the potentially sterilising impact of cross-border capital flows on domestic macro-prudential 
measures is reduced. 
This reciprocity provision makes sense in a world of highly correlated cross-border banking 
flows. Chart 19 plots cross-border bank claims across a selection of countries over time. It 
suggests a high degree of cyclicality in cross-border credit. Table 2 suggests, furthermore, 
that these flows have become increasingly correlated over the past decade.  
But it is not just cross-border claims which are cyclical and correlated across countries. Chart 
20 plots the cycle in total credit across countries, while Table 3 looks at the degree of cross-
country  correlation  in  total  credit  provision.  They  suggest  total  credit  also  follows  a  global 
cycle  which  has  strengthened  over  time.  On  this  evidence,  the  credit  cycle  is  as  much 
international as domestic.  
If  credit  cycles  are  global  in  nature,  there  may  in  future  be  a  case  for  national  macro-
prudential  policies  leaning  explicitly  against  these  global  factors.  This  would  help  curb  the 
global credit cycle at source. It would take international macro-prudential policy co-ordination 
to  the  next  level. While  not  without  operational  problems, this  is  much more  likely  to  be  a 
practical policy option than co-ordinating national monetary policies.  
A second macro-prudential policy avenue for the future concerns the non-bank sector. For 
example, the pattern of correlations in Chart 18 is consistent with asset managers playing an 
increasingly important role in driving financial markets. Yet macro-prudential policies have, to 
date, focussed on banking sector-specific measures operating at a national level. 
The  next  phase  of  macro-prudential  policy  may  see  its  focus  shift  in  two  important  ways: 
towards  measures  targeted  at  the  non-bank,  as  well  as  banking,  sector  and  towards 
measures  targeted  at  particular  markets,  as  well  as  particular  countries.  In  this  second 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  phase,  some  macro-prudential  decision-making  would  naturally  reside  at  the  international, 
rather than national, level.  
Improved international liquidity assistance 
(d)  
This  is  plainly  the  thorniest  of  the  issues.  Fifteen  years  ago,  then-IMF  Deputy  Managing 
Director Stanley Fischer set out the case for the IMF becoming a quasi-international lender of 
last resort (Fischer (1999)). His argument was that the IMF’s financial firepower had failed to 
keep  pace  with  the  scale  of  cross-border  capital  flows.  At  the  time,  I  remember  being 
sceptical about the feasibility and desirability of this proposal. 
In the period since, there has been a further dramatic ratchet up in cross-border capital flows. 
This has not been matched by IMF resources. The mismatch between global financial risk 
and global financial resources has widened. Fifteen years, and several crises on, I think it is 
clear that Stan was right. 
Ratification by the US of the 14th general review of IMF quotas would help close the gap but, 
by itself, would not prevent it from yawning. Various proposals for augmenting IMF resources 
have  been  put  forward  (Lachman  (2006)  and  Farhi  et  al  (2011)),  but  have  foundered  on 
political rocks. Partly in response, regional facilities have sprung up as a partial substitute, 
growing broadly to match in scale multilateral facilities.  
But  the  financial  system  is  a  global,  not  regional,  one  –  indeed,  increasingly  so.  Regional 
facilities can be a complement, but are no substitute, for multilateral insurance mechanisms. 
Put differently, the global public good of financial stability risks being under-provided if it is 
reliant  on  regional  solutions.  Indeed,  access  to  some  of  these  regional  facilities  is  itself 
conditional on an IMF programme.  
Conclusion 
The  international  monetary  and  financial  system  has  undergone  a  mini-revolution  in  the 
space of a generation as a result of financial globalisation. It has become a genuine system. 
This  has  altered 
facing 
international 
policymakers: larger-than-ever opportunities, but also greater-than-ever threats.  
Dealing with these risks calls for turning the current “non-system” into one with an identifiable 
architecture. Measures to improve the monitoring and management of private capital flows 
and  to  augment  and  strengthen  official  sector  financing  facilities  are  important  milestones 
towards this long-term objective.  
the  risk-return  opportunity  set 
fundamentally 
References 
Acemoglu, D., Ozdaglar, A. and Tahbaz-Salehi, A. (2013), “Systemic risk and stability in 
financial networks”, NBER Working Paper No. 18727. 
Barr, D., Bush, O. and Pienkowski, A., (2014), “GDP-linked bonds and sovereign default”, 
Bank of England Working Paper No. 484. 
Berg,  A.  and  Krueger,  A.  (2003),  “Trade,  growth  and  poverty:  A  selective  survey”,  IMF 
Working Paper WP/03/30.  
Bernanke, B. (2004), “The great moderation”, remarks at the Eastern Economic Association, 
Washington, DC,  
20 February. 
Broadbent, B (2014), “The UK economy and the world economy”, Speech delivered at the 
Institute  of  Economic  Affairs  State  of  the  Economy  Conference,  London.  Available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2014/708.aspx  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Brooke,  M.,  Mendes,  R.,  Pienkowski,  A.  and  Santor,  E.  (2013),  “Sovereign  default  and 
state-contingent debt”, Bank of England Financial Stability Paper No. 27, November. 
Calvo, G. (1998), “Capital flows and capital-market crises: The simple economics of sudden 
stops”, Journal of Applied Economics, 1, pp.35–54. 
De Larosiere, J. (2014), “The international monetary ‘anti-system”, Central Banking Journal, 
May. 
Dell’Erba,  S.  and  Reinhardt,  D.  (2013),  “Not  all  capital  waves  are  alike:  A  sector-level 
examination of surges in FDI inflows ”, Bank of England Working Paper No. 474. 
Farhi,  E.,  Gourinchas,  P.-O.,  and  Rey,  H.  (2011),  ‘Reforming  the  international  monetary 
system’, CEPR Report.  
Feldstein, M. and Hoioka, F. (1980), “Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows”, 
The Economic Journal, Vol. 90, No. 358, pp. 314–329.  
Forbes,  K.,  Fratzscher,  M.  and  Straub,  R.  (2013),  “Capital  controls  and  macroprudential 
measures: what are they good for?”, MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 5061-13, December.  
Forbes,  K.  and  Warnock,  F.  E.  (2012),  “Capital  flow  waves:  Surges,  stops,  flight,  and 
retrenchment”, Journal of International Economics 88, pp. 235–251. 
Fratzscher, M. (2012), “Capital flows, push versus pull factors and the global financial crisis”, 
Journal of International Economics 88, pp. 341–356. 
Fratzscher, M., Lo Duca, M. and Straub, R. (2013), “On the international spillovers of US 
quantitative easing”, Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung Discussion Paper 1304.  
Gai, P. and Kapadia, S. (2010), “Contagion in financial networks”, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society A, Vol. 466, No. 2120, pp. 2401–2423. 
Goldin,  I.  and  Mariathasan,  M.  (2014),  “The  Butterfly  Defect:  How  Globalization  Creates 
Systemic Risks, and What to Do about It”, Princeton University Press, July. 
Haldane, A. G., Penalver, A., Saporta, V. and Shin, H. S. (2003), “Analytics of sovereign 
debt restructuring”, Journal of International Economics, Vol 65(2).  
Haldane, A. G. (2009), “Rethinking the financial network”, Speech delivered at the Financial 
Student Association, Amsterdam. Available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2009/speech386.
pdf 
Haldane,  A.  G.  (2011),  “To  navigate  economic  storms  we  need  better  forecasting”,  New 
Scientist, No. 2842, December.  
Haldane,  A.  G.  (2013),  “Why  institutions  matter  (more  than  ever)”.  Speech  delivered  at 
Centre  for  Research  on  Socio-Cultural  Change  (CRESC)  Annual  Conference,  School  of 
Oriental and African Studies, London. Available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech676.pdf 
Haldane,  A.  G.  and  May,  R.  (2011),  “Systemic  risk  in  banking  ecosystems”,  Nature, 
Vol. 469, No. 7330.  
Nier,  E.,  Osiński,  J.,  Jácome,  L. 
I.  and  Madrid  P.  (2011),  “Toward  effective 
macroprudential  policy  frameworks:  an  assessment  of  stylised  institutional  models”,  IMF 
Working Paper, WP/11/250.  
IMF  (2011a),  “Modernizing  the  framework  for  fiscal  policy  and  public  debt  sustainability 
analysis”, IMF Staff Paper. 
IMF 
external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/02/pdf/text.pdf  
“World  Economic  Outlook”,  Available 
http://www.imf.org/ 
(2011b), 
at: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 at: 
“Global 
Stability 
Report”, 
(2014a), 
Financial 
Available 
 
 
IMF  (2012),  “The  liberalization  and  management  of  capital  flows:  an  institutional  view”, 
Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2012/111412.pdf  
IMF 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2011/02/pdf/text.pdf  
IMF (2014b), “Strengthening the contractual framework to address collective action problems 
in  sovereign  debt 
restructuring”,  Available  at:  http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/ 
2014/090214.pdf  
Kose,  M.  A.,  Prasad,  E.,  Rogoff,  K.  and  Wei,  S-J.  (2006),  “Financial  globalization:  A 
reappraisal”, IMF Working Paper, WP/06/189.  
Krueger, A. O. (2002), “A new approach to sovereign debt restructuring”, IMF, April.  
Krugman,  P.  R.  (1988),  “Market-based  debt-reduction  schemes,”  NBER  Working  Papers 
2587, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Kuttner, K. and Shim, I., (2013), “Can non-interest rate policies stabilise housing markets? 
Evidence from a panel of 57 economies”, BIS Working paper, No. 433. 
Lachman,  D.  (2006),  “How  should  IMF  resources  be  expanded?”  in  Truman,  E.  (ed), 
“Reforming the  IMF for the 21st Century”, Special Report 19 (Washington DC: Institute for 
International Economics) ,pp. 471–82.  
Lim, C. H., Columba, F., Costa, A., Kongsamut, P., Otani, A., Saiyid, M., Wezel, T. and 
Wu,  X.  (2011),  “Macroprudential  Policy:  What  Instruments  and  How  Are  They  Used? 
Lessons from Country Experiences”, IMF Working Paper 11/238. 
Lim, J. J., Mohapatra, S. and Stocker, M. (2014), “Tinker, Taper, QE, Bye? The Effect of 
Quantitative  Easing  on  Financial  Flows  to  Developing  Countries”,  World  Bank  Policy 
Research Working Paper no. WPS 6820. 
Magud,  N.,  Reinhart,  C.  and  Rogoff,  K.  (2011),  “Capital  controls:  myth  and  reality  –  a 
portfolio balance approach”, NBER Working Paper No. 16805.  
McKinsey Global Institute (2014), “Global flows in a digital age: how trade, finance, people 
and data connect the world economy”, April.  
Obstfeld, M. and Rogoff, K. (1995),  “Exchange  rate  dynamics redux”, Journal  of  Political 
Economy, vol. 103, no. 3. 
Rey,  H.  (2013),  “Dilemma  not  trilemma:  The  global  financial  cycle  and  monetary  policy 
independence”, Paper presented at the 25th Jackson Hole symposium, Wyoming, August. 
Shiller,  R.  (1993),  “Macro  markets:  creating  institutions  for  managing  society’s  largest 
economic risks”, Oxford University Press. 
Shiller, R. (2003),  “The  new  financial  order:  risk  in  the  21st  century”, Princeton  University 
Press, Princeton. 
Truman,  E.  (2012),  “The  international  monetary  system  or  “non-system”,  in  “Global 
Economics in Extraordinary Times: Essays in Honor of John Williamson”, edited by Bergsten, 
C. F. and Henning, C. R., Peterson Institute for International Economics. 
Watts, D. (2002), “A simple model of global cascades on random networks” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol. 99, No. 9.  
 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Appendix  
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   16 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    19 
    20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
