  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Financial education for meaningful inclusion 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  Citi-FT  Financial  Education  Summit  2014  “Financial  Education  for 
Meaningful Inclusion”, Kuala Lumpur, 5 November 2014. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  at  the  Citi-FT  Financial  Education  Summit 
2014. First of all, allow me to welcome the Citi-FT Summit back to Kuala Lumpur. It is my 
honour  to  once  again  address  this  Summit  that  has  now  become  an  important  forum  for 
advancing  the  financial  literacy  agenda.  It  was  in  2004,  at  the  inaugural  Citi-INSEAD 
Financial Education Summit in Hong Kong that I spoke on financial education in the context 
of the demographic forces in Asia and their consequent implications for financial consumers, 
in particular for women in Asia. Today, another demographic shift – the “rapid urbanisation”  
–  provides  a  new  context  to  our  discussion  on  the  challenges  in  pursuing  meaningful 
financial education strategies to achieve effective and responsible financial management in 
our communities. My remarks today will focus on the changing demographics and the role of 
financial education in enhancing the ability to cope with the realities of this new environment. 
Asia  has  probably  experienced  the  most  rapid  demographic  change  in  the  world.  In  these 
recent  two  decades,  several  Asian  economies  have  had  to  deal  with  a  number  of  new 
challenges including slower population growth, rapid aging, the intensification of urbanisation 
and the consequences of increasing life expectancy. Asia’s urban population has risen from 
33%  of  total  population  in  1990  to  43%  in  2010.  The  United  Nations  projects  that  Asia’s 
urbanisation rate would rise to 56% in 2030, and further to 64% in 2050. Accompanying this 
urbanisation  has  been  the  growth  of  mega-cities  with  populations  exceeding  10  million. 
Twelve  of  the  world’s  21  mega-cities  are  in  Asia,  including  Tokyo,  Delhi,  Mumbai  and 
Shanghai to name a few. 
Urbanisation has become particularly more pronounced in Malaysia during this period. The 
proportion  of  the  Malaysian  population  living  in  urban  areas  has  increased  from  less  than 
50 percent  in  1990 to more  than  70  percent  in 2010,  and  is  expected  to  rise further to  75 
percent  in  2020.  The  improved  education  and  higher  income  levels  that  has  come  with 
urbanisation  has  enhanced  opportunities  for  greater  access  to  financial  products  and 
services. Indeed, financial institutions and markets have responded to the changing profile of 
financial  consumers  by  offering  a  broader  range  of  financial  instruments  and  providing 
convenient access to meet the changing consumer preferences. 
It is recognised however that economic growth and development, no matter how stellar, will 
begin to fade when inequality sets in and when income disparities widen. Balanced growth is 
therefore  an  important  imperative  if  socio-economic  progress  is  to  be  achieved  and  if 
conditions that limit opportunities for employment and which deepen inequalities of income 
and  wealth  are  to  be  avoided.  For  several  emerging  economies,  such  conditions  are 
reflective  of  the  growing  phenomenon  of  the  urban  poor,  with  significant  implications  for 
social stability and balanced growth. To address this, inclusive growth strategies have gained 
prominence in recent years among the policymakers in the region. This needs to be further 
reinforced  by  strategies  targeted  at  preparing  individuals  at  an  early  stage  to  be  well 
equipped to adjust to the new economic, financial and social realities that confront them. This 
is where financial education has a fundamental role. 
A key concern in this environment is to strengthen the capability of financial consumers, in 
particular  household  and  small  businesses,  so  as  to  avoid  being  marginalised  by  market 
forces  and  by  the  disproportionate  impact  of  the  changing  financial  and  social  landscape. 
Related to this is the need to reinforce socially responsible finance, and to address the new 
and  growing  risks  of  financial  exclusion.  Sophisticated  risk-profiling  methods  employed  by 
financial  institutions  can  make  it  more  difficult  for  deserving  individuals  and  businesses  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  qualify for financial services. Among those that qualify, aggressive marketing practices and 
more  complex  financial  products  can  also  lead  to  poor  financial  decisions  at  a  time  when 
economic and financial reforms are also shifting greater responsibility to individuals to plan 
and  provide  for  retirement  and  unexpected  developments.  Marketing  practices  that  target 
select groups of consumers often further deprive the broader segments of society from new 
products that can better meet their financial needs. 
The way in which financial services are delivered to consumers is also moving towards more 
cost-efficient  channels  that  reduce  the  need  for  face-to-face  contact.  Enquiries  and 
complaints  are  largely  handled  by  phone  or  e-mail,  and  usually  in  a  highly  fragmented 
manner  by  different  parts  of  a  financial  institution.  This  can  mean  less  effective  advisory 
support for the vulnerable groups of financial consumers. More recently, the wider adoption 
of electronic channels to make and receive payments has had enormous potential for greater 
financial  inclusion.  Key  to  this  progress  is  the  access  to  the  relevant  technology  and 
safeguarding  its  security  and  thus gain  the  willingness  to  trust  it. This  will  also  involve  the 
awareness of its benefits. 
These  developments  can  be  overwhelming  to  consumers  and  businesses  who  are  ill-
equipped  to  make  informed  financial  decisions  due  to  their  inadequate  knowledge  on 
financial  matters,  thus  diminishing  their  effective  participation  in  the  financial  system. 
Symptomatic of this has been the rapid growth in household debt and leverage in a number 
of countries. This has been particularly prevalent in an environment of ample liquidity and low 
interest  rates.  This  is  also  being  reinforced  by  changing  social  norms,  such  as  social 
pressures to spend, which has further eroded financial discipline among households. Such 
pressures are further compounded by the rising cost of living in the urban areas. Financial 
capability levels have however generally lagged the socio-economic changes that are taking 
place, resulting in poor financial management. 
While financial  products  and  services  have  become  more  complex,  new  delivery  channels 
are  also  having  the  effect  of  increasing  the  distance  between  product  providers  and 
consumers.  For  example,  more  pervasive  non  face-to-face  channels  can  make  it  more 
difficult  for  consumers  to  seek  information.  Financial  education  messages  are  also  often 
overshadowed  by  competing  commercially  driven  messages  that  dominate  the  delivery 
channels. While considerable attention has been directed at reforming the incentive structure 
to  better  align  the  interests  of  financial  agents  and  consumers,  such  changes  need  to  go 
further to improve outcomes for consumers. 
In this environment, the financial education agenda needs to be addressed by the collective 
efforts of policymakers, non-government organisations, consumer advocacy groups and the 
financial industry to deliver a sustained education programme that will equip all segments of 
the population with the necessary financial knowledge to save, invest and to insure against 
adverse  events.  The  financial  education  strategies  and  learning  interventions  need  to  be 
tailored to the consumers’ conditions, culture and education levels, and to be responsive to 
their  requirements,  thereby  enhancing  their  prospects  for  improving  their  economic  well-
being. 
A well designed financial education strategy can encourage greater effective participation in 
the mainstream financial system, and keep individuals already in the mainstream from being 
financially excluded as a result of changes in the financial landscape. A recent report by the 
OECD has highlighted that a lack of awareness of different types of financial products, low 
level  of  confidence  and  poor  knowledge  of  how  products  work  are  barriers  to  financial 
inclusion. These factors will become more acute in an increasingly complex and technology-
driven financial system. Financial education has an important role in breaking such barriers. 
This  will  require  more  innovative  approaches,  broader  partnerships  and  a  deeper 
understanding of the social attitudes. Our own experience in  Malaysia through the work of 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency  (a 
subsidiary of the Bank) has shown that the impact of financial education strategies depends 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  on the ability to effectively combine broad-based and targeted strategies, and having a well-
coordinated approach that relies on multiple channels to reach different groups. 
Financial  education  is  also  a  lifelong  endeavour,  from  encouraging  children  to  save  their 
pocket money to helping adults attain financial security and independence for their old age. 
In supporting the inclusion agenda, financial education initiatives in Malaysia are designed as 
an important life skill, where consumers are exposed to knowledge on financial management 
during  the  different  periods  in  their  life.  An  increasing trend  is for financial  capability  to  be 
promoted  from  an  early  age  through  the  integration  of  financial  education  into  the  formal 
school curriculum that covers basic money management, spending and savings, credit and 
debts, e-payments, financial risk management and consumer responsibilities. For the youth 
and adult segments of the population, Malaysia has also adopted a life event approach to the 
development  and  delivery  of  financial  capability  programmes.  This  is  reinforced  by  a 
dedicated  focus  on  the  vulnerable  segments  of  the  society,  such  as  how  to  plan  for 
retirement, the importance of living within one’s means and behaviours that can lead one into 
high  indebtedness.  These  programmes  are  delivered  to  consumers  in  the  workplace  and 
colleges. 
Our collaboration with employers has proven to be particularly effective in delivering financial 
education  on  responsible  financial  management.  Under  this  approach,  strategic  alliances 
have been forged by the Credit Counselling and Debt Management Agency with more than 
200 organisations in Malaysia to deliver financial capability programs at the workplace. Equal 
emphasis is given to developing the enabling infrastructure to support the effective delivery 
of  financial  capability  initiatives.  In  Malaysia,  the  meaningful  access  to  financial  education 
contents  and  tools,  a  rigorous  assessment  framework  and  an  effective  partnership  that 
involves  the  Government,  educators,  non-Governmental  organisations  and  the  financial 
industry form the vital components of the enabling ecosystem to support the overall financial 
education strategies. 
In many instances, changes in consumer behaviour are needed for the intended benefits to 
be realised. In Malaysia this is the case in the efforts to promote e-payment as a means of 
improving economic efficiency, productivity and competitiveness. Central to this agenda has 
been  the  implementation  of  various financial  education  initiatives  to  encourage  changes  in 
consumer behaviour and to inspire confidence in the use of e-payments. Financial education 
has  had  a  critical  role  in  equipping  consumers  with  knowledge  to  utilise  e-payments 
responsibly,  and  to  help  consumers  protect  themselves  from  risks  of  financial  scams  that 
exploit specific vulnerabilities associated with online payment platforms. Financial education 
has also been a lynchpin in our efforts to encourage retirement planning. As life expectancy 
increases,  consumers  are  expected  to  effectively  plan  and  manage  their  finances  for  their 
retirement. Specific financial education are being introduced, particularly for individuals at the 
early stages of entering the workforce to provide the relevant information and skills to save 
and manage funds for their retirement. 
A  further  objective  of  financial  education  is  to  reinforce  the  consumer  protection  agenda 
including to be adequately protected against market failures and misaligned incentives. This 
has  become  more  relevant  in  the  recent  period  with  increasing  global  pressures  being 
exerted  to  significantly  strengthen  prudential  and  market  conduct  regulation  following  the 
global financial crisis. Emerging economies in particular continue to face practical challenges 
in embracing global standards in a manner that is also aligned with enhancing opportunities 
for inclusive finance. Financial education is an important link in the efforts to build a financial 
system that is resilient against crises and abuse, while limiting the adverse socio-economic 
implications  that  can  arise.  While  the  government  has  a  key  role  in  driving  the  financial 
education agenda, the private sector also needs to be actively engaged in the education of 
financial consumers. A commitment to financial education should be a natural extension of 
the financial industry’s commitment to professional and ethical conduct in doing business. In 
Malaysia,  a  national  network for financial  education  is  being  pursued  involving  the  several 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  key  stakeholders  to  provide  a  platform  to  drive,  prioritise  and  coordinate  the  financial 
education initiatives. 
Financial  education  strategies  also  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  a  strong  focus  on 
developing  a  robust  consumer  protection  regime  with  emphasis  on  fair  treatment, 
transparency  and  effective  recourse  that  promotes  a  culture  of  responsible  conduct  by 
financial  service  providers.  The  experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis  has  clearly 
demonstrated  that  an  effective  consumer  protection  framework  serves  not  only  to  protect 
individuals from excessive risk; it also has an important role in protecting the financial system 
from systemic risk. A particular focus on consumer protection policies, and one that is key to 
advancing the financial inclusion agenda, should be to protect vulnerable groups and ensure 
that  financial  innovation  is  pursued  in  a  responsible  manner.  The  board  and  senior 
management of financial service providers have a key role in setting the right policies and 
incentive  systems  that  support  fair  and  responsible  business  practices.  Financial  service 
providers  that  embrace  fair  dealings  are  likely  to  enhance  their  competitive  advantage  by 
building stronger and more lasting consumer relationships and enhancing their brand value. 
Fair  dealings  can  also  reduce  exposures  to  reputational  risk  arising  from  poor  business 
conduct, as evidenced by recent incidents of mis-selling and resulting sanctions by conduct 
authorities. 
Going  forward,  the  challenges  imposed  by  the  rising  trend  of  urbanisation  and  other 
demographic  changes  are  set  to  become  more  pronounced.  The  implications  of  this  for 
financial  education  strategies  are  far-reaching.  It  will  require  a  fundamental  re-thinking  of 
current  approaches  to  delivering  financial  education  that  will  have  its  optimal  impact.  The 
approach will need to be comprehensive and with all stakeholders in the financial ecosystem. 
We  have  a  shared  responsibility  to  develop  effective  channels  for  delivering  financial 
education,  build  the  necessary  infrastructure  and  continuously  evolve  relevant  financial 
capability programmes that will facilitate consumers to make sound financial decisions with 
confidence,  and  cope  successfully  with  the  new  emerging  economic  and  financial 
challenges. This Summit provides an excellent opportunity for stakeholders to come together 
to generate new knowledge and ideas in our journey towards achieving effective participation 
in  the  financial  system  through  financial  education.  It  is  such  concerted  efforts  that  will 
strengthen  the  potential  to  create  an  enduring  impact  that  will  make  the  difference  in 
achieving a more balanced and sustainable economic future. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
