Vítor Constâncio: Thomas Philippon’s contribution to macro-finance 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
ceremony  awarding  the  Germán  Bernácer  Prize  for  Promoting  Economic  Research  in 
Europe to Thomas Philippon, Madrid, 3 November 2014. 
 I wish to thank Angela Maddaloni and Agnese Leonello, from the Directorate General Research, for their help in 
preparing this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  award  the  2013  Germán  Bernácer  Prize  to  Thomas 
Philippon,  Professor  of  Finance  at  the  Stern  School  of  Business  at  New  York  University. 
Thomas  Philippon  is  a  renowned  scholar  with  a  wide-ranging  research  agenda,  both 
theoretical and empirical. The numerous prizes he has won throughout his career, including 
“best paper” awards in several top journals, speak loudly about the academic quality of his 
contributions. Thomas’s research – being right at the intersection between macroeconomics 
and finance – is also highly policy-relevant, not least from a central banker’s perspective, as I 
will try to highlight today. 
In fact, many central banks and the ECB in particular have devoted considerable attention 
and  actively  contributed  to  the  burgeoning  literature  on  macro-finance.  The  financial  crisis 
underscored the need for a better understanding of the linkages between the health of the 
financial sector and the performance of the real economy. Promoting economic research in 
this  field  is  an  essential  step  in  the  process  of  developing  effective  policies  to  ensure  the 
stability of the financial sector and, ultimately, to foster economic growth. A prime example of 
this has been the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs), where researchers from the 
European  System  of  Central  Banks  closely  collaborated  with  experts  from  academia.  The 
MaRs  network  was  launched  to  develop  core  conceptual  frameworks,  models  and  tools 
providing  research  support  to  improve  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  EU.  Its  work, 
which was formally concluded last June, is summarised in a public report and represents a 
fine  example  of  policy-relevant  research.1  To  foster  a  constant  communication  with 
academics, the ECB also regularly organises seminars, conferences and workshops. These 
enable researchers, policy-makers and practitioners to meet and discuss the latest research 
findings  and  their  implications  for  policy.  In  addition,  to  stimulate  research  at  the  highest 
academic standards, the ECB invites leading scholars to visit and conduct their research at 
the  ECB,  for  example  via  the  Wim  Duisenberg  Fellowship,  and  offers  support  to  young 
researchers by funding five Lamfalussy Fellowships every year. 
Thomas Philippon’s contributions represent an excellent example of policy-relevant research. 
I will consider two main areas of his research which I find particularly interesting: the design 
of optimal interventions and the efficiency of the financial sector. 
In his 2012 paper, published as the lead article in the American Economic Review, Thomas 
and  his  co-author  Vasiliki  Skreta  study  the  design  of  optimal  public  interventions  in  debt 
markets. The intervention aims at restoring an efficient level of investment when productive 
investments  are  forgone  because  firms  face  unfairly  high  interest  rates  due  to  adverse 
selection.2  The  topic  of  the  paper  was  –  and  still  is  –  very  timely  since  asymmetric 
information  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  collapse  of  the  financial  markets  in  the  autumn  of 
                                                
1  Available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/events/pdf/conferences/140623/MaRs_report.pdf. 
2  Philippon,  T.,  and  V.  Skreta,  (2012)  “Optimal  Interventions  in  Markets  with  Adverse  Selection”,  American 
Economic Review, 102(1), 1–28. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
2008.3  Thomas  Philippon’s  paper  identifies  some  of  the  key  issues  associated  with  the 
intervention.  In  particular,  he  analyses  the  interaction  between  the  intervention  and  the 
conditions  that  firms  face  in  the  market.  Decisions  by  firms  to  participate  in  a  support 
programme  are  influenced  by  these  conditions  –  how  difficult  it  is  to  raise  funds  from  the 
market. At the same time, a firm’s acceptance of public assistance may be perceived as a 
“bad”  signal,  thus  limiting  its  incentive  to  participate.  This  is  the  problem  of  the  stigma 
attached to support programmes. 
The  paper  spells  out  two  clear  implications  for  policy.  First,  it  provides  robust  conceptual 
support  to  the  idea  that  the  choice  of  intervention  depends  crucially  on  the  nature  of  the 
frictions and that it should resemble the contract used by market participants. For example, in 
the  case  of  a  freeze  in  a  debt  market  due  to  adverse  selection,  the  optimal  intervention 
requires debt instruments, such as direct lending or debt guarantees. Second, it highlights 
that the stigma associated with the intervention can be a relevant issue and the design of a 
programme should take this into account. The ECB had to deal with this issue, for example, 
in  the  context  of  the  first  two  longer-term  refinancing  operations  announced  in  December 
2011. When some bankers raised concerns that there might be stigma attached to the ECB’s 
programme, we said that the decision to accept long-term loans from the ECB should have 
been seen as a rational business decision and not as a sign of bank distress.4 
The importance of clearly identifying the nature of the frictions leading to the market failures 
before  designing  the  intervention  is  also  emphasised  in  another  contribution  by  Thomas 
Philippon.  In  his  2013  paper  in  the  Journal  of  Finance  written  with  Philipp  Schnabl,  he 
characterises the optimal intervention in a financial industry plagued by the debt overhang 
problem.5 When banks are financed with too much debt, they forgo productive investments, 
i.e. lending, because in the event of bankruptcy the debt holders would appropriate most of 
the  cash  flows.  Thomas  Philippon  and  his  co-author  show  that  in  this  case  the  optimal 
intervention  consists  of  capital  injections  against  preferred  stock  (plus  warrants)  and  it  is 
conditional on sufficient bank participation. 
This design makes it possible to restore the efficient level of lending by providing capital to 
banks, and at the same time minimises the cost of intervention by controlling for the potential 
opportunistic  behaviours  of  banks.  In  particular,  the  authors  highlight  two  types  of 
opportunistic behaviours induced by the intervention. First, since banks that do not directly 
participate may  benefit from  the  overall  improvement  in  the  market  conditions,  a free  rider 
problem arises. Therefore, intervention should be conditional on the participation of a critical 
mass of banks. Second, if the conditions are very favourable, banks may choose strategically 
to participate in the programme, thus increasing its overall cost. Hence, it is paramount that 
the intervention entails some costs for the current shareholders. 
I don’t need to stress how relevant these issues became, especially in the aftermath of the 
financial  crisis,  when  massive  intervention  in  the  banking  industry  had  imposed  very  large 
costs on Europe’s taxpayers and had significant consequences for the sovereigns. Indeed, a 
key  concern for  policy-makers  is  that  the  large  support  offered to  the financial  sector  may 
spur opportunistic behaviour and generally distort financial institutions’ risk-taking incentive, 
possibly  magnifying  the  costs  of  the  intervention  while  reducing  its  effectiveness.  Thomas 
Philippon’s analysis is timely and tackles a very relevant issue as new rules for intervention 
and  resolution  of  banks  are  currently  being  implemented.  The  new  EU  rules  surrounding 
                                                
3  See, for example, Heider, F., M. Hoerova, and C. Holthausen, (2009) “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market 
spreads: the role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Paper No 1126 on the role of asymmetric information in 
the interbank market freeze during the recent financial crisis. Moreover, the de Larosière report pointed to the 
lack of transparency as being one of the causes of the financial crisis (EU Commission, 2009). 
4  See the Financial Times article “Draghi attacks bankers over ECB fears” from 9 February 2012. 
5  Philippon, T., and P. Schnabl, (2013) “Efficient Recapitalization”, Journal of Finance, 68(1), 1–42. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
bank resolution, which are founded on a strong change of culture – from easy public bailouts 
to  a  new  culture  of  private  bailing-in6  –  clearly  go  in  the  direction  of  preventing  these 
distortions,  while  retaining  the  possibility  of  direct  recapitalisation  to  safeguard  financial 
stability.7 
The new resolution framework that is going to be implemented in Europe will help to support 
a sustainable growth of the financial sector by inducing financial institutions to internalise the 
negative  spillovers  originating  from  their  failures.  Thomas  Philippon  and  his  co-authors  – 
among  whom  is  the  winner  of  the  2011  Germán  Bernácer  Prize,  Lasse  Heje  Pedersen  – 
have also contributed to the literature on systemic risk, a topic of particular policy relevance 
in which the ECB has also invested considerable research efforts.8 In this paper, the authors 
argue  that  a  financial  institution’s  contribution  to  systemic  risk  might  be  measured  by  its 
propensity  to  be  undercapitalised  when  the  system  as  a  whole  is  undercapitalised  –  the 
“systemic expected shortfall”. They also advocate the introduction of a “tax” proportionate to 
each bank’s systemic expected shortfall which should cover losses in the event of a crisis. 
Let me now turn to Thomas’s second research area, namely dealing with the efficiency of the 
financial sector. The crisis revived the debate about the optimal size of the financial industry 
and  the  finance-growth  nexus.  Often,  and  especially  at  the  beginning  of  the  recent  crisis, 
public opinion has blamed the excessive growth of the financial industry and the extremely 
advantageous remuneration packages in the sector. One argument in the debate against the 
traditional finance-growth paradigm is that the high wages may draw talent away from other 
productive sectors in the economy since financial and non-financial sectors compete for the 
same scarce supply of human capital.9 Thus, an excessive growth of the financial sector may 
not  be fully  desirable.  Thomas  Philippon  formally  analyses  this  trade-off  in  his  (2010)  AEJ 
Macro  paper  and  discusses  the  implementation  of  corrective  taxes  and  subsidies  to 
guarantee  the  optimal  allocation  of  resources  between  the  financial  and  the  productive 
sectors.10  
Thomas  Philippon’s  paper  published  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics  in  201211 
analyses the allocation and compensation of human capital in the financial industry. Together 
with his co-author Ariell Reshef, he documents the pattern in wages and skill intensity in the 
financial industry in the US between 1909 and 2006. The authors show that this pattern is 
non-monotonic.  High  compensations  in  banking  and  the  ability  of  the  financial  industry  to 
attract  the  most  skilled  workers  are  not  permanent  features  of  this  industry.  As  the  paper 
shows, changes in financial regulation are important determinants of these patterns. Tighter 
regulation tends to lead to an outflow of resources from the financial sector. 
This  line  of  research  points  to  the  wide  range  of  subjects  that  interest  Thomas  Philippon 
already  shown  in  his  2007  book  “Un  capitalisme  d´héritiers:  la  crise  française  du  travail”12 
                                                
6  See speech by Vítor Constâncio: Banking Union: meaning and implications for the future of banking at the 
Banking Union Conference, Navarra University, Madrid 24 April 2014. 
7  See  the  opening  speech  entitled  “The  implications  of  bail-in  rules  for  bank  activity  and  stability”  by  Benoît 
Cœuré at the conference “Financing the recovery after the crisis – the roles of bank profitability, stability and 
regulation”, held at Bocconi University on 30 September 2013. 
8  Acharya,  V.,  L.  H.  Pedersen,  T.  Philippon  and  M.  Richardson,  (2010)  “Measuring  Systemic  Risk,”  working 
paper. 
9  See, for example, the Vox article entitled “Finance and growth: Too much of a good thing?” by Thorsten Beck, 
27 October 2013. 
10  Philippon, T., (2010), “Financiers versus Engineers: Should the Financial Sector be Taxed or Subsidized?”, 
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3), 158–182. 
11  Philippon, T. and A. Reshef, (2012) “Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Finance Industry: 1909–2006”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4), 1551–1609. 
12  Philippon, T., (2007) “Un capitalisme d´héritiers: la crise française du travail”, Éditions Seuil. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
where he musters a lot of empirical evidence to show that the labour crisis in France stems 
from  bad  employers-employees  relations  associated  with  a  system  that  “preserves 
inheritance, direct or sociological”. 
This capacity to link serious economic research with practical social problems is yet another 
sign of the excellence achieved by Thomas in his body of work. I am confident that Thomas 
Philippon will continue making extraordinary contributions to this and other research areas in 
the coming years. I extend my sincerest congratulations to him for winning the 2013 Germán 
Bernácer Prize. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
