  Andreas Dombret: Trying to see in the dark – the challenge of financial 
regulation 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Centre for Financial Studies, Frankfurt am Main, 28 November 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Krahnen, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak at the Centre for Financial Studies. It is a pleasure to 
be  here  today.  As  you  know,  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Centre  for  Financial  Studies  are 
closely  linked  through  various  channels.  The  exchange  between  our  two  institutions  has 
proved very fruitful for both sides. Thus, I am glad to be able to continue this dialogue today. 
Henry  Kissinger  once  allegedly  said:  “There  cannot  be  a crisis  next week.  My  schedule  is 
already  full.”  With  that  remark  he  captured  the  true  nature  of  crises:  their  unpredictability. 
Crises usually do not adhere to people’s schedules – not even to Henry Kissinger’s. Instead, 
they occur unexpectedly – they come out of the blue, so to speak. The financial crisis was no 
exception in this respect. 
Thus, in order to prevent crises, banking supervisors as well as risk managers within banks 
must try to feel their way in the dark and to anticipate potential risks. This requires two things: 
The will to see in the dark and the ability to do so. Let us take a closer look at both issues. 
The will to see in the dark 
2.  
Dealing with risk is not something that is confined to the financial sector. It is something we 
all have to do every day. Crossing a street entails risk, as does eating sushi or investing in a 
new business venture. Yet, while we all have to deal with risks in our daily lives, it seems we 
are not very good at it. 
Much  research  has  been  conducted  on  how  people  deal  with  risk  under  different 
circumstances.  With  regard  to  economic  decisions,  this  research  shows  that  under  certain 
circumstances people’s decision are less driven by potential gain than by potential losses. 
Thus, they take on less risk than would be rational. 
Nobel  Laureate  Daniel  Kahneman  and  his  co-author  Amos  Tversky,  for  instance,  find  that 
most people will reject a gamble with even odds to win or lose, unless the possible win is at 
least twice the size of a possible loss.1 So, it seems that people are not only aware of risks, 
but even try to avoid them more than is strictly necessary. 
Against this backdrop, one question comes to mind. If people are naturally risk-averse, then 
what was wrong with the banks in the run-up to the financial crisis? Well, in the experiments I 
mentioned, it was always the people’s own money at stake. As soon as it is other people’s 
money at stake, things change. 
                                                 
1   Tversky, A; Kahneman, D (1992), Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. In 
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol 5, No 4, pp 297–323. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Joseph Stiglitz and his co-authors, for instance, find that financial crises have become more 
frequent  since  deposit  insurance  systems  were  introduced  and  central  banks  were 
established as the lenders of last resort.2 
From this, we can conclude that moral hazard plays an important role in the way banks deal 
with risk. The crisis has shown that we are faced with a situation in which “heads, the bank 
wins;  tails,  the  taxpayers  lose”.  Liability  and  control  are  off-kilter  and  this  reduces  banks’ 
incentives to manage risks prudently – hence their will to see in the dark is diminished. Thus, 
if we want to make banks care about risks, we have to restore the balance between liability 
and control. 
Here,  the  most  prominent  example  is  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem.  A  fundamental  lesson 
learned from the financial crisis is that the failure of very large or interconnected banks can 
destabilise the entire financial system. Just think of 15 September 2008, when the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers triggered the global financial crisis. 
Banks that are too big to fail are in a situation that is comfortable for them, but uncomfortable 
for society. Why is that? These banks benefit from an implicit insurance policy at no cost to 
themselves. They know that whenever they get into trouble, the government is likely to step 
in and bail them out in order to prevent a systemic meltdown. 
There is no doubt that this implicit insurance policy creates all the wrong incentives. If a bank 
can rely on state support when it gets into difficulties, it will no longer see risk and return as 
two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  Profits  from  risky  business  remain  with  the  bank,  while  the 
taxpayer  is  left  to  bear  any  potential  losses.  Thus,  to  promote  a  sound  risk  culture  within 
banks, we have to mitigate the “too big to fail” problem. 
In order to achieve this objective, we need mechanisms that allow even large banks to fail 
without destabilising the entire financial system. The possibility of failure is fundamental to 
any  market  economy  and  it  must  apply  to  banks.  As  the  economist  Allen  Meltzer  said: 
“capitalism without failure is like religion without sin – it doesn’t work”. Only if banks see a 
realistic threat of failure they will have an incentive to manage risks in a prudent manner. 
In Europe, we have recently taken some steps in the right direction. From 2016 onwards, we 
will have a European resolution mechanism that allows us to resolve failing banks without 
destabilising  the  financial  system  and  without  burdening  the  taxpayers.  In  my  view,  this 
Single Resolution Mechanism has the potential to restore the balance between liability and 
control. Thus, it will have a fundamental and positive effect on banks’ risk culture. 
At the global level, the G20 recently agreed upon a proposal that requires global systemically 
important  banks  to  improve  their  capital  structure.  In  particular,  these  banks  will  need  to 
ensure a minimum amount of total loss-absorbing capacity, which may be as much as 20%, 
including the minimum capital requirements. This will ensure that, in case of a bank failure, it 
is the owner and the creditors that will have to bear the costs, not the taxpayers. This will 
also strengthen the incentives of banks to engage in prudent risk management. 
However, we have to look beyond incentives for banks. We also have to look at incentives 
for those who work in banks. According to the Financial Stability Board, a crucial element of 
a sound risk culture is the alignment of compensation with prudent risk-taking. In the past, 
compensation  schemes  were  often  skewed  toward  rewarding  short-term  success  without 
taking into account related risks. 
Consequently, the European Union has taken action and implemented new rules. According 
to  these  rules,  the  variable  components  of  bank  managers’  remuneration  are  restricted  to 
                                                 
2   Hellmann, T F; Murdock, K C; Stiglitz, J E (2000), Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking, and Prudential 
Regulation:  Are  Capital  Requirements  Enough?  In  The  American  Economic  Review,  Vol  90,  No  1,  
pp 147–165. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  100%  of  the  fixed  components.  If  shareholders  agree,  this  can  be  increased  to  200%. 
Furthermore,  banks  have  to  establish  a  remuneration  committee  and  meet  several  new 
disclosure requirements on remuneration. 
Nevertheless,  we  certainly  have  to  be  wary  of  regulatory  arbitrage  and  unintended 
consequences. Capping the variable components of remuneration has led banks to increase 
the fixed components. This is likely to increase the fixed costs of banks and thus influence 
their competitiveness in a negative way. 
At the same time, the new EU rules are stricter than the rules which apply at the global level. 
Thus, we have to be aware of the danger of regulatory arbitrage; working toward a global 
level playing field for remuneration is therefore essential. 
Despite these caveats, I am confident that the regulatory measures will help to strengthen 
incentives for prudent behaviour. However, in the end it is the banks themselves that have to 
adopt  a  new  culture  which  is  focused  more  on  sustainable  returns  and  less  on  short-term 
gains. Here, we still have some way to go. 
The ability to see in the dark 
3.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  examples  of  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  and  of  compensation 
schemes show that regulation has done a great deal to increase the willingness of banks and 
of  bankers  to  see  in  the  dark.  The  incentives  for  banks  to  prudently  manage  risks  have 
certainly been strengthened. But are banks actually able to do so? 
Research  in  this  field  suggests  that  people  are  naturally  disadvantaged  when  it  comes  to 
dealing  with  risks  and  probabilities.  It  is  a  well-established  fact  that  people  are  prone  to  a 
number  of  systematic  biases  when  it  comes  to  decision-making  and  judgments  under 
uncertainty. Among those biases are, for example, the neglect of base-rate information, over-
confidence or incorrect perceptions regarding the frequency of certain events. 
But shouldn’t professional risk managers be aware of these biases and be able to mitigate 
them? Well, it seems that even professionals are not immune to systematic biases, a view 
that is underpinned by at least two studies. 
A  recent  study  addressed  the  question  of  whether  professional  managers  in  finance  were 
aware  of  the  housing  bubble  of  2004  to  2006.  To  answer  this  question,  the  researchers 
analysed  the  private  investment  decisions  of  financial  managers.  The  results  indicate  that 
financial  managers  did  not  behave  very  cautiously  when  investing  privately  in  the  housing 
market.  This  suggests  that  even  professionals  were  not  aware  of  the  bubble  that  had 
formed.3 
In another study, stock market professionals and laypeople provided forecasts for the prices 
of various stocks and estimated the size of their own and the other group’s errors in doing so. 
Both groups expected the professionals’ forecasting errors to be smaller than those of the 
laymen. In fact, however, the errors of both groups in predicting stock prices were roughly 
the same. In a subsequent set-up, both groups were asked to pick the best-performing stock 
from two options. Here, both the professionals and the laymen proved to be overconfident 
with  regard  to  their  ability  to  pick  the  best-performing  stock.  Eventually,  the  professionals 
picked  the  correct  stock  in  only  40%  of  cases.  Had  they  randomly  picked  one  of  the  two 
options that were offered they would have been right about 50% of the time.4 
                                                 
3   Cheng,  I;  Raina,  S;  Xiong,  W  (2014),  Wall  Street  and  the  Housing  bubble.  In  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol 104, No 9, pp 2797–2829. 
4   Törngren,  G;  Montgomery,  H  (2004),  Worse  Than  Chance?  Performance  and  Confidence  Among 
Professionals  and  Laypeople  in  the  Stock  Market.  In  The  Journal  of  Behavioral  Finance,  Vol  5,  No  3,  
pp 148–153. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Studies such as these led Nassim Taleb to provocatively state that: “certain professionals, 
while believing they are experts, are in fact not. Based on their empirical record, they do not 
know more about their subject matter than the general population, but they are much better 
at  narrating  –  or  worse  at  smoking  you  with  complicated  mathematical  models.”  This  is 
certainly an exaggeration, but it seems justified to conclude that our ability to see in the dark 
is somewhat limited. 
The  quote  points  to  another  issue  that  is  relevant  in  this  regard.  Can  statistical  models 
mitigate people’s biases when it comes to handling risk? To some degree, they certainly can 
raise our awareness of potential risks but they are by no means perfect. With regard to the 
financial crisis, some banks claimed to have experienced a “25 sigma” event – a point in the 
probability  distribution  that  is  25  standard  deviations  away  from  the  mean.  Statistically 
speaking,  such  an  event  should  have  only  occurred  once  since  the  universe  came  into 
existence. 
Statistical  models  are  often  criticised  for  systemically  neglecting  such  “high-severity-low-
probability” risks.5 One reason for this is that many models use the past as the basis for the 
future when assessing the probability of certain events. This weakness could be referred to 
as  the  chicken  fallacy.  A  chicken  that  is  fed  by  a  farmer  every  morning  may  expect  this 
pattern to continue in the future. However, as the philosopher Bertrand Russell concludes: 
“The  man  who  has  fed  the  chicken  every  day  throughout  its  life  at  last  wrings  its  neck 
instead,  showing  that  more  refined  views  as  to  the  uniformity  of  nature  would  have  been 
useful to the chicken”. 
A second criticism with regard to risk management models is that, for the sake of practicality, 
they are often based on the normal distribution. The drawback of this is that these models 
underestimate  the  probability  of  events  at  the  far  ends  of  the  distribution.  It  seems  that 
“25 sigma” events happen far more often than might be expected. Consequently, we have to 
be cautious and acknowledge the limits of the statistical models used in risk management 
and banking supervision. 
In the field of banking supervision, statistical models are used to calculate risk weights for 
assets in order to determine capital requirements. Here, studies by the Basel Committee on 
Banking  Supervision  indicate  that  these  risk  weights  vary  across  banks  to  a  somewhat 
worrying degree and that not all deviations can be properly explained.6 
Consequently, there has been some discussion about adapting the regulatory approach to 
these models. Among other things, it is envisaged that a capital floor will be set up based on 
the revised standardised approaches. In addition, consideration is being given to introducing 
fixed  loss-given-default  parameters  for  portfolios  of  unsecured  loans  with  a  low  share  of 
default.  In  addition,  a  risk-invariant  leverage  ratio  will  serve  as  a  backstop  for  the  risk-
weighted capital requirements. 
In addition to “high-severity-low-probability” events, there will always be true “black swans” 
that appear completely unexpectedly and with dire consequences. Such events are the real 
challenges for risk management and financial regulation. They are intractable and cannot be 
managed  within  the  scope  of  statistical  models  because  they  are  beyond  all  expectations. 
They lurk in the dark, and we are simply unable to see them. 
What lessons can we learn from these observations? I would like to emphasise three points 
in this regard. First, we have to be aware that our knowledge is limited and our decisions are 
probably biased. Second, we have to acknowledge the limitations of statistical models. Third, 
we  have  to  accept  that  black  swans  exist.  Banks  have  to  be  prepared  to  handle  such 
                                                 
5   Taleb, N (2007), The black swan – the impact of the highly improbable. London. 
6   For  example,  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2013),  Regulatory  Consistency  Assessment 
Programme (RCAP) – Analyses of risk-weighted assets for credit risk in the trading book, July 2013. Basel. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  extreme  events.  In  other  words,  risk  management  has  to  be  prepared  for  anything  at  all 
times. 
What role can regulation play? If we accept that the next crisis may come unexpectedly, out 
of  the  blue,  there  is  one  key  strategy  –  and  that  is  to  draw  a  line  of  defence  which  is 
independent of the nature of the crisis. 
The  central  building  block  for  such  a  line  of  defence  is  capital,  or  equity,  to  be  precise. 
Capital buffers are the most general means of protecting a bank from shocks, regardless of 
whether  they  are  expected  or  come  out  of  the  blue.  Consequently,  the  reform  of  financial 
regulation  has  focused  on  strengthening  the  capital  rules  for  banks.  The  new  Basel  III 
framework requires banks to hold more capital of a better quality. This will make banks more 
resilient and better prepared to survive future crises. 
Conclusion 
4.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the financial crisis came out of the blue and has left a lot of damage 
in its wake. Hence the starting point of my speech today – that we have to attempt to feel our 
way  in  the  dark  in  order  to  better  anticipate  future  crises.  This  requires  two  things:  the 
willingness to see in the dark and the ability to do so. 
With regard to the willingness to see in the dark, I talked about setting the right incentives for 
banks  to  engage  in  prudent  risk  management.  The  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  and 
compensation  schemes  were  two  examples  of  how  financial  regulation  can  strengthen 
incentives. 
With regard to the ability to see in the dark, the outlook is less optimistic. Research shows 
that people are naturally disadvantaged when it comes to handling risks and probabilities – a 
deficiency that statistical models can mitigate only to a certain extent. 
Consequently, banks need universal buffers to prepare for shocks, regardless of where they 
come from. And, in this context, equity is the most general buffer. That is why the reform of 
financial regulation focused on improving the capital rules for banks. However, we still have 
to feel our way in the dark when it comes to regulation. We have increased capital buffers, 
but have we reached the right level? This is an issue we must endeavour to shed more light 
on. 
To sum up, crises will never adhere to our schedules, and we will never be able to prevent 
the threat of future crises. All we can do is to mitigate its impact. Pursuing this objective is 
worth all our effort and the progress that has been made in the area of financial regulation is 
rather encouraging. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
