S S Mundra: Banking renaissance – inclusion, innovation & 
implementation 
Chief guest address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on 
“Banking  Renaissance:  Inclusion,  Innovation  &  Implementation”  at  the  seventh  Annual 
Banking Conference “Bank on it, 2014”, Mumbai, 11 October 2014. 
 1.  Shri  Arun  Tiwari,  Chairman,  Union  Bank  of  India;  Dr.  Rajan  Saxena,  Vice-Chancellor, 
Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies (NMIMS); Dr. Shamsuddin Ahmed, Dean; 
Dr.  Vrinda  Kamat,  Professor  and  Programme  Chairperson 
(MBA  Banking); 
Shri. C. B. Ramamurthy;  faculty  and  students  of  the  School  of  Business  Management, 
NMIMS University; distinguished invitees, members of the print and electronic media, ladies 
and gentlemen! At the outset, let me commend the NMIMS for imparting excellent education 
and practical knowhow to its students thereby equipping them to take on leadership roles in 
various organizations. Institutions such as the NMIMS are playing a key role in developing 
skilled and capable manpower and are, consequently, serving the nation. 
2. It is, therefore, a pleasure for me to be amidst these budding management professionals 
this  morning  to  deliver  the  opening  address  at  the  seventh  Annual  Banking  Conference 
“Bank on it, 2014” organized by the NMIMS University. I observe that the Conference has 
hosted some illustrious speakers in the past and deliberated upon various pertinent issues 
impacting the banking system. 
3. Before I get down to the theme of the Conference, let me begin by quoting two famous 
Americans. 
“It is well enough that people of the nation do not understand our banking 
and  money  system,  for  if  they  did,  I  believe  there  would  be  a  revolution 
before tomorrow morning.” – Henry Ford, founder of the Ford Motor Company 
“I sincerely believe that banking establishments are more dangerous than 
standing  armies,  and  that  the  principle  of  spending  money  to  be  paid  by 
posterity,  under  the  name  of  funding,  is  but  swindling  futurity  on  a  large 
scale.”  –  Thomas  Jefferson,  the  principal  author  of  the  Declaration  of 
Independence (1776), and the third President of the United States 
Now  that  you  know  what  some  of  the  leading  statesmen  of  the  world  have  to  say  about 
banks and the banking system, I am not sure whether we should attempt to spread greater 
awareness about them and risk a revolution! Also imagine these comments came at a time 
when  the  credit  card,  mortgage  loan  and  other  personal  loans  were  not  even  known. 
However, as a career banker with over thirty five years of experience in banking, I would like 
to comfort you that the bankers and the banking profession is not as iniquitous, as these two 
gentlemen would like the world to believe. 
Why the call for banking renaissance? 
4.  On  a  more  serious  note,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  theme  for  the  Conference,  which  is 
“Banking  Renaissance:  Inclusion,  Innovation  &  Implementation”.  As  you  might  know,  the 
word “Renaissance” has a French origin meaning re- “back, again” + naissance “birth” (from 
Latin  nascentia,  from  nasci  “be  born”).  Renaissance  refers  to  a  period  which  witnessed  a 
revival of European art and literature under the influence of classical models in the 14th–16th 
centuries. Another dictionary meaning of renaissance is “a revival of or renewed interest in 
something”. 
5.  I  am  not  too  sure  in  what  context  has  the  word  “Renaissance”  been  referred  to  in  the 
theme  of  this  Conference.  Obviously,  you  could  not  be  talking  of  revival  of  interest  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
classical mould of banking and about innovation in the same breath. Likewise, I am not too 
sure whether it has something to do with a revival of or a renewed interest in banking, as I 
don’t think the interest of the society in banking, more so, in a developing economy like ours, 
has ever waned. My understanding of the theme for the Conference is that we probably need 
to  deliberate  about  the  innovative  measures  needed  in  our  banking  sector  which  would 
render  it  more  inclusive,  vibrant,  productive,  efficient  and  above  all,  customer-centric. 
Therefore, in my address today, I would speak with this basic presumption and I do hope that 
I am not veering away from the theme. 
Evolution of banking 
6.  But  before  I  get  into  the  subject  proper,  just  to  set  the  context,  I  would  like  to  briefly 
highlight how the modern day banking has evolved. Banking, in the form that we know today, 
might have evolved during the 17th century. However, even in ancient Mesopotamia, all the 
modern banking practices such as deposits, interest, loans and letters of credit seem to have 
existed. The practice of safe-keeping and savings also seem to have been in existence in the 
temple of Babylon as early as 2000 B.C. Closer home, Kautilya, in his Arthashastra written in 
about  300  B.C.,  has  also  mentioned  about  the  existence  of  powerful  guilds  of  merchant 
bankers who received deposits, and advanced loans and issued hundis (letters of transfer). 
In the modern times, an experienced Scottish goldsmith, William Paterson, is credited with 
the  idea  of  setting  up  a  national  bank  in  Britain  in  1688,  which  gave  birth  to  the  Bank  of 
England.  The  modern  day  banking,  in  its  simplest  form,  is  meant  to  facilitate  financial 
intermediation between the savers and the borrowers. It also seeks to act as a safe place to 
store money and earn some return in the process, as also a place to seek simple financial 
solutions  to  individual  problems.  The  advent  of  technology  in  modern  times  has  heralded 
three  distinct  phases  in  banking:  a)  Computerization  of  back  office  processes  during  the 
1980s,  b)  Facilitating  higher  customer  convenience  during  the  1990s  and  c)  Enabling 
lifestyle/life  stage  banking  during  the  2000s.  Thus,  over  time,  the  banks  have  witnessed 
significant changes in their outlook and have emerged as financial supermarkets offering a 
range  of  complex  financial  products  and  services  on  a  round  the  clock  basis,  duly 
customized to the needs of their customers through multiple delivery channels. 
7. RBI, as the regulator of banks in India, has increasingly deregulated the sector and has 
allowed the market players to develop products and services best suited to their customers. 
As a result, both in terms of products & services and delivery channels, there has not been 
any dearth of innovations. On the product front, the innovations have led to emergence of 
complex  offerings  like  swaps,  derivatives  and  securitization,  while  on  the  other  hand,  the 
delivery channel is no more limited to brick and mortar branches, but has spread to modern, 
technology-driven  channels  like  ATMs,  mobile,  internet  and  the  social  media,  besides  the 
Business Correspondent model. Thus, over the years, there has been tremendous amount of 
progress and innovations in the sector. However, these developments have, simultaneously, 
raised certain pertinent questions: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Whom have these innovations benefited? 
Are these product offerings demand driven? 
Have the banks addressed the “suitability and appropriateness” question? 
Have 
discriminatory? Why banks are still a place where ordinary mortals fear to tread? 
Why has a large section of the society remained financially excluded despite sincere 
efforts of the regulator as well as the policy makers? 
for  various  services  been  made 
transparent  and  non-
the  charges 
 8. Having an insider’s view of India’s financial system, first as a commercial banker and now 
as a central banker, I intend to use this opportunity today to share my perspectives on the 
approach  adopted  by  RBI  as  the  regulator  of  Indian  banks  for  making  the  Indian  banking 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sector  more  inclusive  and  relevant  to  a  large  cross-section  of  the  Indian  economy  and 
society.  I  shall  also  delve  on  the  challenges  which  the  banking  system  is  encountering  in 
realizing the goal of universal financial inclusion and the innovation and reforms that may be 
necessary  to  overcome  some  of  these  challenges.  I  also  wish  to  emphasize  that  having 
bright and innovative ideas do not have any meaning until and unless they are acted upon. I, 
therefore,  compliment  the  organizers  for  including  “implementation”  as  an  element  of  the 
theme for the conference, as I believe that rigor in implementation is extremely important for 
realization of the dream of universal access to financial services and products. 
Why is financial inclusion necessary? 
9. The ILO Declaration of Philadelphia in 1944 proclaimed that “Poverty anywhere is a threat 
to  prosperity  everywhere.”  It  is  universally  agreed  now  that  Financial  Inclusion  helps  build 
domestic savings, bolster household, domestic and financial sector resilience and stimulate 
business  and  entrepreneurial  activity,  while  exclusion  leads  to  increasing  inequality, 
impediments  to  growth  and  development.  Thus,  financial  inclusion  is  an  important  tool  for 
poverty alleviation as it not only connects individuals to the formal financial system, but also 
inculcates  savings  habit  among  them.  Hence,  Financial  Inclusion  or  inclusive  banking  is  a 
precursor for inclusive and sustainable economic growth. 
Financial exclusion: dimension of the problem 
10. An accusation that has come to be levied against the banking sector in the aftermath of 
the  Financial  Crisis  is  that  it  has  failed  to  be  “inclusive”.  Let  me  tell  you  that  the  Indian 
banking system is not alone in failing the “inclusion” test. It is only the degree of exclusion 
that  varies  between  different  jurisdictions.  The  Financial  Inclusion  Action  Plan  (FIAP) 
developed by the G20 Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion mentions that the universal 
financial inclusion initiative requires bringing the 2.5 billion people (or about half the working 
age population) currently excluded, into the formal financial system. 
11. That brings us to the question how inclusive is the Indian financial system? Census 2011 
gives us some answers. Out of 24.67 crore households in the country, only about 14.48 crore 
or  58.70  per  cent  households  had  access  to  banking  services.  Further, of  the  16.78  crore 
rural  households  only  about  9.14  crore  or  54.46  per  cent  households  were  availing  of 
banking services. But that is only one aspect of the financial exclusion story. The statistics on 
number of individuals or households that are credit-linked makes for an even more gloomy 
reading.  The  World  Bank  Findex  Survey  (2012)  points  out  that  only  about  35%  of  Indian 
adults had access to a formal bank account and a meager 8% borrowed formally in the last 
12  months.  If  we  were  to  broaden  the  canvas  and  examine  the  exclusion  in  the  other 
financial segments of insurance and securities market, the situation is far worse. 
Initial efforts at financial inclusion 
12.  Having  recognised  early  the  social  and  economic  imperatives  of  broader  financial 
inclusion,  both  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  have  pursued  this  goal  over  the  last 
several decades, but with limited success. Starting with the nationalization of banks, priority 
sector  lending  requirements,  launching  of  Lead  Bank  Scheme,  establishment  of  Regional 
Rural Banks (RRBs), Service Area Approach, Self-Help Group-Bank Linkage Programme- all 
these innovative programmes were launched with the aim of taking banking services to the 
masses. Starting in 1990s, however, the focus shifted to strengthening financial institutions 
as  part  of  financial  sector  reforms.  Despite  all  the  above  efforts,  the  extent  of  financial 
exclusion has remained staggering. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Why did these efforts fail? 
13.  The  target  driven  approach  to  social  banking  could  be  counted  as  one  of  the  main 
reasons  for  the  failure  of  these  efforts  as  these  initiatives  could  never  become  part  of  the 
business strategies of banks. The banks were more interested in somehow trying to meet the 
lending targets, mostly at subsidized rates of interest, or with subsidy from the Government 
under various government directed schemes. The banks never treated social banking as a 
viable and profitable business proposition. They always worked under the presumption that 
the poor can neither pay normal interest rates nor could they earn enough without subsidies; 
while  in  reality  the  poor  continued  to  pay  exorbitant  interest  rates  to  informal  sources  of 
finance. For any activity to become sustainable and scalable it has to be viable. Regrettably, 
there has never been a concerted effort on the part of the banking system to identify specific 
business opportunities within these groups and to develop viable business models to realize 
them. I would like to reiterate our firm belief that banking for poor is viable and scalable only 
on commercial lines, of course, without an exploitative intent. 
Reform era setback 
14. During the period starting mid 1980s and till about 2005, the regulatory focus shifted to 
consolidation  and  profitability  of  banks.  Since  social  initiatives,  as  argued  earlier,  were  not 
integrated  with  business  plans  and  were  thought  of  as  non-viable,  they  were  the  first 
casualties. A number of rural branches were closed down or merged or were shifted to semi-
urban areas as they were considered unviable. 
Excessive reliance on public sector banks 
15.  The  thrust  of  social  initiatives  has  always  been  on  the  public  sector  banks  while  the 
private  sector  banks  and  foreign  banks  have  not  been  given  adequate  social  obligations. 
Besides, too many authorities involved in pursuing financial inclusion also, at times, resulted 
in dissipation of structured and planned efforts. 
Absence of technology 
16.  In  the  absence  of  appropriate  enabling  technology,  reaching  far  flung  areas  of  the 
country without a brick and mortar structure, proved to be a difficult and expensive ordeal. 
What has changed now? 
17. In the last few years, it has been realized that for financial inclusion to become a reality, 
there has to be a sustainable business and delivery model. Further, availability of technology 
as  an  enabler  has  now  created  avenues  for  developing  cost  effective  solutions  for  the 
mammoth  task  of  providing  banking  services  to  six  lakh  plus  villages  in  the  country.  The 
lessons learnt from the initial attempts at promoting financial inclusion have also proved to be 
vital inputs in recalibrating our financial inclusion strategy. 
RBI’s approach to financial inclusion 
18. The failure to achieve meaningful progress in financial inclusion forced the regulators and 
policy  makers  to  have  a  rethink  on  the  approach.  It  began  with  defining  what  Financial 
Inclusion  actually  meant  and  where  should  the  energies  be  focused.  RBI  has  defined 
Financial Inclusion as “the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products and 
services  needed  by  all  sections  of  the  society  in  general  and  vulnerable  groups  such  as 
weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  in  particular,  at  an  affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and 
transparent manner by regulated, mainstream institutional players”. Thus, financial inclusion 
has two fold objectives: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  To connect the excluded with the formal banking system in order to help them gain 
an  understanding  of  the  financial  services  available  and  equipping  them  with  the 
confidence to make informed financial decisions. 
Providing door step banking services to all the six lakh villages and meeting their life 
cycle financial needs through appropriate savings, credit, remittance and insurance 
products. 
Planned and structured approach 
19. RBI has been following a planned and structured approach to address the twin issues of 
demand  and  supply  of  financial  services.  The  efforts  have  been  aimed  at  creating  an 
enabling environment for the banks. Wide-ranging strategies from a relaxation of regulatory 
guidelines  to  provision  of  new  products  and  supportive  measures  have  been  adopted  to 
achieve sustainable and scalable Financial Inclusion. 
Bank- led model & leveraging technology 
20.  RBI  has  advocated  a  bank-led  model  for  financial  inclusion  with  thrust  on  leveraging 
technology. We firmly believe that the success of FI initiatives greatly depends on technology 
which would enable emergence of cost efficient delivery models. Though we have advocated 
the  use  of  technology,  we  are  agnostic  to  the  platform  to  be  used  for  pursuing  financial 
inclusion objectives. Banks have been accorded the freedom to adopt solutions which can be 
easily scaled up and customized as per their requirements. 
Recent innovations under financial inclusion 
21.  RBI  has  not  been  found  wanting  insofar  as  experimenting  with  innovative  solutions  to 
further the cause of financial inclusion is concerned. However, we have always believed that 
innovation does not mean developing complex solutions to simple problems. Also, innovation 
need not always  involve cutting edge technology. Hence, some of the innovative practices 
we  have  encouraged  banks  to  follow,  merely  involves  making  small  adaptations  and  a 
change in mindset. Let me explain some of these initiatives. 
Business correspondent / business facilitator model 
a)  
22.  Beginning  January  2006,  Reserve  Bank  has  permitted  banks  to  utilise  the  services  of 
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), micro-finance institutions (other than Non-Banking 
Financial  Companies)  and  other  civil  society  organisations  as  intermediaries  in  providing 
financial  and  banking  services  through  the  use  of  Business  Facilitator  and  Business 
Correspondent  (BC)  models  with  an  objective  of  solving  the  list  mile  connectivity  issue. 
Banks were encouraged to connect the BC network with their Core Banking Solutions (CBS) 
and  also  to  develop  offline  solutions  to  overcome  the  network  connectivity  issues 
experienced in some areas. As the uptime of the equipments was of paramount importance, 
the banks were advised to ensure that equipment and technology used by BCs are of high 
standards. Interoperability of BCs at the retail outlets or sub agents of BCs has also been 
permitted, provided the transactions were carried out on-line, on CBS. The list of entities that 
can be appointed as BCs has also been expanded substantially over time. 
Simplified branch authorisation 
b)  
23. RBI has considerably relaxed the branch opening norms for banks whereby they do not 
require prior RBI permission for opening branches in centres with population less than 1 lakh. 
To further step up the opening of branches in unbanked centres, banks were mandated to 
open at least 25 per cent of their new branches in unbanked rural centres. Banks have also 
been advised to consider frontloading (prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural 
centres over a three year cycle co-terminus with their Financial Inclusion Plans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
c)  
Combination of branch and BC structure to deliver financial Inclusion- ICT 
based accounts – through BCs 
24.  RBI  has  been  advocating  a  combination  of  Brick  and  Mortar  structure  and  the  BC 
network to extend financial inclusion, especially in geographically dispersed areas. In order 
to provide efficient and cost-effective banking services in the unbanked and remote corners 
of  the  country,  RBI  directed  commercial  banks  to  provide  ICT  based  banking  services  – 
through  BCs.  These  ICT  enabled  banking  services  have  CBS  connectivity  to  provide  all 
banking  services  including  deposit  and  withdrawal  of  money  in  the  financially  excluded 
regions. The use of smart cards, hand held devices / POS machines along with bio-metric 
authentication facilitates digitization of Financial Inclusion process. 
Opening of basic saving bank deposit accounts (no-frills accounts) 
d)  
25.  On  the  products  side,  banks  were  directed  to  make  available  Basic  Savings  Bank 
Deposit Accounts (BSBDAs) for all individuals with zero minimum balance and facility of ATM 
card/Debit card, effectively making opening of a basic savings account a fundamental right 
for  every  eligible  Indian  citizen.  Further,  banks  were  also  advised  to  provide  in-built 
overdrafts in such basic savings accounts so as to meet the emergency credit needs of the 
customer  and  prevent them from  having to  approach money  lenders  in  distress  situations. 
The provision for entrepreneurial credit has also been simplified in the form of KCC for farm 
sector households and GCC for non-farm sector households. 
Relaxed KYC norms 
e)  
26. One of the major constraints faced by the people in getting linked to the formal financial 
system  was  the  strict  Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  norms  prescribed  for  opening  bank 
accounts.  To  facilitate  easy  opening  of  accounts,  especially  for  small  customers,  the  KYC 
guidelines have been simplified to the extent that these accounts can be opened by way of a 
self-certification  in  the  presence  of  bank  officials.  Further,  to  leverage  upon  the  UIDAI 
initiative,  RBI  has  allowed  “Aadhaar”,  to  be  used  as  one  of  the  eligible  documents  for 
meeting the KYC requirements for opening a bank account. Very recently, the RBI has also 
allowed banks to use the E-Aadhaar facility provided by UIDAI for KYC purposes. 
Pricing of advances freed 
f)  
27. Banks have been provided the freedom to decide the pricing of loans given to customers 
with a view to ensuring the economic viability of banks’ Financial Inclusion initiatives. 
Financial literacy as a facilitator of financial inclusion 
28.  As  financial  markets  are  becoming  increasingly  complex  with  serious  problems  of 
information asymmetry, the need for financial literacy and education has become even more 
acute.  Besides,  there  is  a  general  lack  of  awareness  among  the  financially  excluded 
population  about  the  benefits  of  being  connected  to  the  formal  financial  system.  This 
highlights the importance of the task of promoting financial literacy, which faces numerous 
challenges  in  a  country  like  India,  on  account  of  wide  disparities  in  literacy  levels,  social/ 
economic  development,  widespread  use  of  regional  languages,  etc.  Recognizing  the 
importance  of  financial  literacy  as  the  stepping  stone  towards  financial  inclusion,  Reserve 
Bank  has  taken  several  steps  in  recent  times  for  promoting  financial  literacy.  “Project 
Financial Literacy” aims at disseminating information regarding the central bank and general 
banking concepts to various target groups (which includes school and college-going children 
and the rural/urban poor). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Implementation: issues and challenges 
29. Let me now dwell upon some implementation challenges that need to be overcome if the 
goal of attaining universal financial inclusion has to be achieved. 
Believing in financial Inclusion as a viable business 
a)  
30. There is still a widespread belief that if the poor have to be provided financial services, it 
must be done in a subsidized manner or as an act of charity. And this belief has kept the 
poor bereft of these services while keeping the regime of rationing, queuing and patronage 
alive.  Contrary  to  common  perception,  financial  inclusion  is  a  potentially  viable  business 
proposition  because  of  the  huge  untapped  market  that  it  seeks  to  bring  into  the  fold  of 
banking  services.  Financial  Inclusion,  prima  facie,  needs  to  be  viewed  as  “money  at  the 
bottom  of  the  pyramid”  and  in  order  to  tap  this  opportunity,  banks  would  need  to  have  in 
place  an  appropriate  business  and  delivery  model  in  line  with  their  business  strategy  and 
comparative advantage. If the banks start believing in this business, they would be able to 
innovate  and,  in  the  process,  start  reaping  the  benefits  of  economies  of  scale.  This  will 
ultimately  create  an  environment  of  competitiveness  amongst  banks  which  will  benefit  the 
unbanked population. 
Monitoring performance 
b)  
31. Along with the implementation efforts, the monitoring of the performance to access the 
impact is also very crucial. The impact assessment helps in initiating policies and removing 
barriers  to  Financial  Inclusion.  We  have  encouraged  banks  to  adopt  a  structured  and 
planned  approach  to  financial  inclusion  with  commitment  at  the  highest  levels,  through 
preparation  of  Board  approved  Financial  Inclusion  Plans  (FIPs).  A  structured  and 
comprehensive  monitoring  mechanism  for  evaluating  banks’  performance  vis-à-vis  their 
targets has also been put in place. 
c)  
Leveraging the banking network for extending social benefits: direct benefit 
transfer 
32.  The  introduction  of  direct  benefit  transfer  by  validating  the  identity  of  the  beneficiary 
through Aadhaar will help facilitate delivery of social welfare benefits by direct credit to the 
bank  accounts  of  beneficiaries.  The  government,  in  future,  has  plans  of  routing  all  social 
security  payments  through  the  banking  network  using  the  Aadhaar  based  platform  as  a 
unique  financial  address  for  transferring  financial  benefits  to  the  accounts  of  beneficiaries. 
Besides providing timely delivery of benefits at the door step of beneficiaries, it would save 
Government the administrative cost involved in delivering cash to the intended beneficiaries 
and  help  minimize  the  chances  of  leakages  in  the  system.  Banks  must  initiate  steps  to 
proactively  open  bank  accounts  for  all  eligible  individuals  and  seed  these  accounts  with 
Aadhaar  numbers  for  ensuring  smooth  flow  of  the  social  security  benefits  through  the 
banking channel. 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) 
33. Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana has been announced recently to give a further push to 
Financial Inclusion initiatives in India. The scheme has been launched with the objectives of 
providing  universal  access  to  banking  facilities,  providing  basic  banking  accounts  with 
overdraft  facility  and  RuPay  Debit  card  to  all  households,  conducting  financial  literacy 
programs,  creation  of  credit  guarantee  fund,  micro-insurance  and  unorganized  sector 
pension schemes. The objectives are expected to be achieved in two phases over a period 
of four  years  up  to  August  2018.  Under  the scheme, technological  innovations  like  RuPay 
card and mobile banking are also being made use of. Banks are also permitted to avail of 
RBI’s scheme for subsidy on rural ATMs and UIDAI’s scheme for subsidy on micro ATMs to 
augment their resources at the village level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Way forward 
34.  Banks’  business  models  for  financial  inclusion  should  be  designed  to  be  at  least  self-
supporting in the initial phase and profit-making in the long run, with an unwavering focus on 
affordability. The banks need to think and act differently and make themselves more flexible 
so as to meet even the smallest requirements of the rural population. Banks need to move 
from a cost centric model to a revenue generating model by offering a bouquet of deposit, 
credit  and  other  products  and  services.  The  products  and  services  should  be  designed  in 
such a way that it suits the needs of people in unbanked rural areas. 
BC model 
i)  
35. There are multiple challenges being faced while implementing BC model. Sustainability 
and  scalability  of  the  BC  model  is  essential.  There  are  issues  around  BCs’  cash 
management services and remuneration to be paid to them. There is a need to have a close 
look at the problems constraining the model and to develop practical solutions that help in 
realizing the full potential of this channel. More and more innovative products will have to be 
introduced which would benefit both banks as well as the rural people and at the same time 
make the BC model more viable. 
Differentiated banking 
ii)  
36. RBI is set to create a framework for licensing small banks and payments banks. These 
differentiated  banks  would  be  expected  to  serve  niche  interests  and  to  meet  credit  and 
remittance needs of small businesses, unorganized sector, low income households, farmers 
and migrant work force. This aims at allowing a wider pool of entrants into banking to further 
Financial Inclusion. 
PMJDY 
iii)  
37.  The  objective  of  Financial  Inclusion  as  defined  by  us  is  very  much  in  sync  with  the 
objectives  sought  to  be  achieved  under  the  PMJDY.  We  are  fully  committed  to  the 
implementation of the scheme and are trying to ensure that the efforts of RBI converge with 
the work under the PMJDY so that the common objective of financial inclusion is achieved. 
Further, the idea is to enable more transactions in these accounts and providing more credit 
products, which will not only help rural people to avail of credit at comparatively lower rates 
of interest but, at the same time, also make the financial inclusion process viable for banks. 
With implementation of PMJDY, it is expected that the beneficiaries of social security will get 
the  direct  credit  of  their  entitlements  without  any  leakage.  However,  for  successful 
achievement  of  the  same,  it  is  to  be  ensured  that  there  is  timely  and  accurate  listing  of 
beneficiaries. 
Message for students 
38. Before I conclude my address, let me leave you with a couple of thoughts. Very shortly 
you would be venturing into the job market and start working. My advice to you is that you 
should choose your profession/vocation carefully and  work hard in whichever field you opt 
for. But I would also advise you to work smart. Working smart, among others, also involves 
need for networking. You must choose your associates wisely and cultivate that association. 
My  second  thought  is  around  what  I  call  the  theory  of  “1-2-3”  being  practiced  in  the 
professional job market. These days, the organizations seek to hire one person, pay him/her 
the salary of two persons and expect him/her to work equivalent to three persons. If you do 
not guard against that, you would end up burning out very early in your professional lives. My 
advice to you would be to develop the spirit of a marathon runner and not that of a sprinter. 
Only then would you be able to fully realize the potential imbibed by you through the quality 
education received from this esteemed institution. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
39. Financial Inclusion cannot be achieved without the active and collaborative involvement 
of  all  stakeholders  like  RBI,  other  financial  regulators,  banks,  governments,  NGOs,  civil 
societies, media, etc. Good intentions always need to be supported by concerted action for 
achieving goals. The support of policymakers, regulators, governments, IT solution providers 
and  public  at  large  would  be  essential  to  bring  about  a  decisive  metamorphosis  in  Indian 
banking and making it inclusive. 
40. Finally, though Innovation is desirable, excess of the same could also mean higher cost 
and  time  overruns.  It  is  important  to  strike  a  balance  between  no  innovation  and  excess 
innovation. Innovation need not always be revolutionary. Enough on the financial inclusion 
front could be achieved even by thinking “inside the box”, that is, by focusing on doing the 
basics  right.  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  quoting  Gene  Roddenberry,  “It  isn’t  all  over; 
everything has not been invented; the human adventure is just beginning.” 
41. I once again thank Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies University and the 
faculty  and  students  of  the  School  of  Business  Management  for  inviting  me  to  this 
Conference for sharing my thoughts on a topical subject. I am sure that you would now have 
a  better  understanding  of  the  issues  involved  and  you  would  reflect  on  the  challenges  at 
hand in making banking inclusive. I am also confident that some of the students present here 
would join the banking sector and serve as torch bearers for “inclusive banking and inclusive 
growth” in the days ahead. I hope the deliberations during the day would also pick up some 
issues that I have laid down on the table. We have a lot of expectations from our youth and I 
do  hope  some  of  you  could  take  up  research  in  this  area  and  come  up  with  actionable 
solutions for financial inclusion. 
42. I wish you a successful conference today as well as success in all your future endeavors. 
Thank You. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
