  Luis M Linde: A review of the Spanish economic situation; Spain’s 
Budget for 2015 
Testimony by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Senate Budgetary 
Committee in connection with the Draft State Budget for 2015, Madrid, 19 November 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
In my appearance today before this Chamber as part of the discussion of the State Budget 
for  2015, I  will  focus,  as  usual,  on  analysing  the  developments  in,  the  outlook for  and the 
challenges  facing  the  Spanish  economy.  On  this  occasion,  I  am  speaking  just  two  weeks 
after the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, so I will also refer to the progress of 
the Banking Union. 
The euro area economy 
The Spanish economy is currently in a less favourable external environment than had been 
anticipated a year ago. In recent months, growth forecasts for the global economy for 2014 
and 2015 have been revised downwards, and the loss of momentum of the recovery is more 
marked in the European countries which, as we all know, are our main trading and financial 
partners. 
Euro area GDP flatlined in the second quarter of this year and the information received since 
has led international organisations and private analysts to revise their medium-term growth 
forecasts downwards. At present, the scenario considered most likely is one of weak GDP 
growth  rates,  which  will  be  uneven  from  one  country  to  another  and  prone  to  possible 
downscaling. 
The  behaviour  of  prices  in  the  euro  area  is  also  a  cause  for  concern.  Against  a  fragile 
macroeconomic  background,  as  at  present,  very  low  inflation  rates  entail  a  danger  that 
consumer and business expectations will stand excessively below the ECB’s medium- term 
price stability objective of 2% for the euro area as a whole. 
Contrary  to  the  downside  risks  surrounding  the  growth  projections  for  the  international 
economy  as  a  whole,  those  for  inflation  are  more  mixed  and  have  given  rise  to  different 
responses by various central banks. The US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have 
begun to withdraw some of the exceptionally expansionary non-conventional measures they 
introduced at the height of the crisis. Conversely, the European Central Bank has gone in the 
opposite direction, deepening the expansionary stance of its monetary policy. 
The euro area monetary policy stance has taken the form of a series of measures adopted, 
in  the  main,  at  the  June  and  September  meetings  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  where 
conventional  action  has  been  combined  with  other  exceptional  and  non-conventional 
measures. 
Among  the  conventional  measures,  official  interest  rates  have  once  again  been  cut.  The 
main refinancing operations rate currently stands at an all-time historical and technical low of 
0.05%. The deposit facility rate moved into negative territory in June and was further lowered 
in September to –0.20%, thus increasing the cost for banks of holding immobilised surplus 
liquid balances in their accounts with the Eurosystem. 
This policy has been complemented by three new extraordinary tools, designed to promote 
the  more  efficient  and  uniform  transmission  of  expansionary  monetary  impulses  and  to 
foment a greater expansion of lending in the area. 
First, a new long-term refinancing facility has been set in place. Last September, the first of 
these  fund-injection  operations  was  carried  out,  and  they  will  be  extended  to  June  2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  These  operations  may  have  a  maturity  of  up  to  4  years  and  are  carried  out  at  a  very 
attractive  cost  for  banks:  only  10  bp  above  the  main  refinancing  operations  rate,  which  is 
currently equivalent to a rate of 0.15%. 
So that these new long-term injections may translate into an increase in lending to the private 
sector, access to the funds has been tied both to the outstanding balances and to the flows 
of the credit extended by banks to households and firms. 
The ECB has also launched two new asset purchase programmes. The first, which is already 
under way, involves the acquisition of bonds issued by banks and backed by specific items 
on their balance sheets. This is the case, for example, of the various types of covered bonds 
traded in Spain. 
The  second  programme,  which  will  be  operational  in  the  coming  weeks,  envisages  the 
acquisition of securities derived from the securitisation of loans to households and firms. This 
programme will contribute to reinvigorating a market which has been greatly affected by the 
financial strains caused by the crisis but which, once suitably redirected and stripped of its 
toxic  components  highlighted  by  the  crisis,  should  play  a  key  role  in  the  financing  of  the 
private sector, particularly in the case of small enterprises, whose direct access to the capital 
markets is very limited. 
In  addition  to  these  measures,  I  would  also  like  to  recall  that  the  ECB  remains,  with  the 
unanimous support of its Governing Council, committed to resorting, as and when necessary, 
to additional measures. 
The Spanish economy 
In  contrast  to  the  progressive  weakening  of  the  euro  area,  the  recovery  in  the  Spanish 
economy  has  remained  firm.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  GDP  in  the  third  quarter 
rose  to  1.6%,  and  might  draw  close  to  2%  in  the  final  stretch  of the  year,  at  which  rate  it 
might hold on average in 2015. Naturally, this forecast is conditional upon the risks I shall 
refer to not materialising. 
Figures for the labour market have also trended favourably, showing net job creation since 
the second half of last year, which has prompted a 2 pp decline in the unemployment rate 
over  the  past  12  months  to  23.7%  of  the  labour  force.  Of  course,  this  remains  an 
unacceptable level that reflects the most serious imbalance in our economy, the correction of 
which must be the chief objective of our economic policy. 
Reactivating national demand has taken on a decisive role in the recovery, enabling the re- 
balancing  of  the  internal  and  external  components  of  expenditure.  This  change  in  the 
dynamics  of  domestic  expenditure  compared  with  events  during  the  crisis  years  is  in 
response to a series of factors, including most notably the growing normalisation of financial 
conditions, headway in the construction of the Banking Union, favourable developments in 
the labour market and the unquestionable improvement in confidence. 
Against  this  backdrop,  both  private  consumption  and  business  investment  have  regained 
momentum, underpinned by the improvement in the financial environment. Mention should 
also be made of the role being played by investment in construction, which might begin to 
turn around in 2015 or 2016. Recent developments in house prices are along the same lines, 
although certain caveats should be voiced: for the first time in six years, growth rates in the 
aggregate  domestic  indices  of  real  estate  prices  are  close  to  zero,  or  slightly  positive, 
although significant differences across regions remain. 
Since  the  crisis  began,  spending  by  private  agents  has  been  constrained  by  the  need  to 
reduce the high levels of debt built up during the expansion that ran to 2008. Recently, there 
has been progress in private sector deleveraging, while the attendant restrictive effects on 
spending  are  being mitigated  by  a  shift  in  lending flows  towards  more creditworthy  agents 
and, in particular, towards companies better placed to commit to new investment projects. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In recent years, goods and services exports have been the engine of our economic activity, 
against  a  background  of  marked  weakness  of  domestic  private  expenditure  and  contained 
imports from the rest of the world. During 2014, foreign trade flows have undergone changes 
of  some  scale,  as  a  result  of  the  loss  of  steam  in  our  export  markets  (in  the  emerging 
economies and, since the spring, in the euro area alike) and the acceleration in imports as 
the recovery progressively took hold. As a result, the contribution of the external sector to 
GDP  has  declined  appreciably  and  the  pace  of  adjustment  of  the  external  imbalance  has 
been less rapid than expected. 
Conceivably, some of these developments are temporary and will be reversed, in part, in the 
coming months. Moreover, the depreciating trend of the euro may help improve the external 
balance  in  the  near  future.  However,  the  weakness  of  the  euro  area,  along  with  the  high 
sensitivity of our imports to changes in final demand, highlight the need to further improve the 
competitiveness of our economy. 
As  regards  inflation,  the  Spanish  economy  is  currently  posting  very  low  rates.  This  partly 
reflects  temporary  factors,  but  also  structural  factors  that  account  for  the  subdued  tone  of 
core inflation. Inflation rates have been trending downwards for months throughout Europe, 
and Spain is one of the euro area countries that has moved most markedly in this direction. 
We  can  argue  about  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  a  price  situation  such  as  that 
described. Without forgetting the difficulties that a prolonged period of low inflation entails for 
reducing debt ratios and for price-competitiveness, it is important not to lose sight of the fact 
that  the  adjustment  witnessed  in  Spanish  relative  prices  and  costs  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area 
has  been  crucial  to  explaining  the  sound  performance  of  the  external  sector,  whose 
contribution continues to be vital for the recovery. 
Overall,  the  outlook  for  the  Spanish  economy  remains  favourable,  although  not  free  from 
risks. Spain has so far shown resilience in the face of the worsening international setting. But 
this should not lead us to believe that the loss of momentum in our external markets, and in 
particular  in  the  euro  area,  may  be  fully  averted.  In  addition,  at  home,  the  need  to  see 
through both private- and public-sector deleveraging might detract from the recovery capacity 
of domestic expenditure. 
The State Budget for 2015 
The  Draft  State  and  Social  Security  Budget  currently  under  discussion  is  framed  in  a 
macroeconomic setting in which real GDP would increase by 2% in 2015, as a result of the 
fresh momentum of national demand, which would contribute 1.8%, and of a small rise in the 
contribution of net external demand, to 0.2% of GDP. The process of job creation would firm, 
reaching a growth rate of over 1%, and taking the unemployment rate down to around 23% in 
annual  average  terms.  The  GDP  deflator  would  increase  by  0.7%,  whereby  the  rise  in 
nominal GDP would be around 2.6% compared with the potentially meagre end-2014 figure 
of 1%. 
Overall,  these  forecasts  coincide  with  those  on  which  analysts  concur,  although  the  latter 
generally  involve  a  somewhat  lesser  fiscal  effort  than  envisaged  in  the  Draft  Budget.  The 
macroeconomic setting accompanying the Draft Budget is subject to downside risks, owing 
to 
in  particular,  European  economic 
developments. 
It  is  against  this  macroeconomic  and  financial  background  that  the  Draft  State  and  Social 
Security Budget for 2015 was unveiled in late September. 
Before continuing, I should point out that, along with the Draft Budget, the Budgetary Plan for 
2015 was presented in October. The Banco de España considers that the preparation and 
publication of this Plan is a most valuable step forward for the control and transparency of 
our public finances. 
the  uncertainty  surrounding 
international  and, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The Budgetary Plan for 2015 includes information on the budgetary planning of the regional 
and local governments, and it thus offers a view of overall general government conduct. The 
Budgetary  Plan  is  important  because  it  fills  a  substantial  information  gap:  the  lack  of 
integrated  information  relating  to  all  general  government  activity  at  a  time  at  which  a  new 
budgetary  cycle  is  beginning.  Given  that  its  publication  marks  the  main  change  since  my 
appearance in Parliament in October, I shall now focus on its content. 
Budgetary  programming  foresees,  firstly,  fulfilment  of  the  budget  deficit  target  for  2014,  at 
5.5% of GDP. To August, the central government, Social Security and regional government 
budget  outturn  evidenced  a  deficit  of  4.3%  of  GDP,  a  0.3  pp  improvement  on  the  same 
period  the  previous  year.  To  meet  the  deficit  target  requires  an  improvement  of  0.8  pp  of 
GDP over the year as a whole; accordingly, the increase in revenue and/or the containment 
of spending in the final four months of the year will need to be greater than that recorded 
between  January  and  August.  This  greater  effort  should  be  concentrated  at  the  regional 
government level where, on the information available, the risks of slippage are located. 
For 2015, the Budgetary Plan sets a budget deficit target of 4.2% of GDP, 1.3 pp of GDP 
below  that for  2014.  In  terms  of  the  different  agents,  the  reduction  in  net  borrowing  would 
amount to 1 pp of GDP in the case of central government and the Social Security system, 
while the regional governments should adjust their fiscal imbalance by 0.3 pp of GDP and 
local governments should run a balanced budget. 
In 2015, the improvement in the cyclical position and the reduction in government debt yields 
will contribute to enhancing public finances. On the estimates available, meeting the deficit 
target for the coming year will require a budgetary adjustment drive, measured by the change 
in the primary structural balance, that is appreciably less than that made in previous years. 
Overall, what we have is a more favourable macroeconomic scenario for the adjustment than 
that in place in 2012 and 2013. 
In  terms  of  composition,  under  the  Budgetary  Programme  the  brunt  of  the  adjustment  is 
borne by government spending, since, as a proportion of GDP, it will be reduced by nearly 
1 pp, basically due to cuts in government consumption. Notable among the other expenditure 
items  is  that  pensions  rise  by  0.25%  as  a  result  of  application  of  the  indexation  formula 
included in the reform approved in December 2013. 
The Budgetary Plan envisages that the relative weight of revenue in GDP  will increase by 
0.4 pp, despite the fact that the phasing-in of the personal and corporate income tax reform 
is estimated to have a budgetary cost in 2015 of some 0.4 pp of GDP. The Budgetary Plan 
anticipates  that  the  loss  in  tax  takings  associated  with  this  reform  will  be  offset  by  tax 
increases of the regional and local governments, the anti-fraud scheme of the Social Security 
system and a pick-up in tax revenue attributable to the economic recovery. 
Meeting  the  spending  targets  will  call  for  a  very  strict  budget  outturn  by  all  levels  of 
government, as well as the achievement of savings from the reforms approved, particularly 
by local government. 
Finally, the Budget envisages a public debt ratio of 100.3% in 2015, up 2.7 pp of GDP on the 
projection for 2014. These figures illustrate the continuing importance the reduction of fiscal 
imbalances will have in the economic policy agenda for the coming years. 
The European Banking Union 
Allow me to conclude with a reference to the process of Banking Union in Europe. 
As you know, on 4 November the first pillar of the Banking Union project, namely the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism, came into being. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism aims to harmonise banking supervision in the euro area 
so  as,  among  other  things,  to  sever  the  negative  link  between  confidence  in  banks  and 
doubts over the sustainability of public finances. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Intense work was needed to implement the new supervisory system. Milestones included the 
completion of the Single Supervisory Mechanism Regulation in October 2013; the approval 
of  another  regulation  assigning responsibilities  to  the  European  Central  Bank  and  national 
authorities;  and  the  drafting  of  a  supervisory  manual  setting  out  the  best  supervisory 
practices  of  each  country  and  implementing  common  procedures  for  all  members  of  the 
system. 
One  of  the  main  objectives  of  the  new  institutional  design  is  to  ensure  that  the  ECB’s 
supervisory  functions  do  not  clash  with  its  monetary  policy  responsibilities.  To  this  end,  a 
new Supervisory Board was set up in the ECB to plan and conduct banking supervision. This 
Board  will  be  responsible  for  making  proposals  on  supervision  to  the  Governing  Council, 
which continues to be the highest decision-making body of the ECB in both monetary policy 
and supervision. 
The start-up of the SSM constitutes an unprecedented transformation of the responsibilities 
of  the  participating  national  supervisory  authorities,  which  naturally  include  the  Banco  de 
España. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism Regulation distinguishes two groups of banks. 
First,  the  120  banks  considered  to  be  significant,  15  of  which  are  Spanish  (although  their 
number will drop to 14 when the acquisition of Catalunya Banc by BBVA is completed). They 
will be directly supervised by the ECB through so-called Joint Supervisory Teams made up of 
staff from the ECB and the national supervisors. 
Second,  the  more  than  3,000  less  significant  banks  will  continue  to  be  the  direct 
responsibility  of  national  authorities,  although  the  ECB  will  indirectly  monitor  their  situation 
and the supervisory actions to which they are subject. 
As a prior step to the creation of the SSM, a comprehensive assessment of the euro area’s 
significant banks was conducted and the results were made public on 26 October. 
This exercise consisted of two parts: an asset quality review and a stress test. 
The assessment of asset quality involved an in-depth review of bank balance sheets as at 
end-2013. It was carried out with the assistance of the top audit firms. 
The stress tests assessed the capacity of banks, in a three-year period from 2014 to 2016, to 
absorb losses under two hypothetical macroeconomic scenarios: a baseline, more likely one; 
and an adverse one, less likely but not impossible. This second phase of the exercise was 
basically carried out by the banks themselves. 
Both  phases  were  subject  to  strict  quality  assurance  in  which  the  national  supervisory 
authorities, in our case the Banco de España, played a key role. 
The exercise considered minimum capital thresholds which had to be exceeded in each of its 
parts: the asset quality assessment and the baseline and adverse scenarios of stress tests. 
Banks not exceeding any of these thresholds had to submit within two weeks a capital plan 
for remedying their capital shortfall within a period of six to nine months. 
With the methodology used, 25 of the 130 banks assessed had a capital shortfall, which for 
the  whole  of  Europe  amounted  to  €24.6  billion.  It  should  however  be  noted  that,  in 
anticipation  of  the  exercise,  many  European  credit  institutions  strengthened  their  solvency 
over the past year. Of the aforementioned 25 banks, 12 increased their capital sufficiently in 
2014, so only 13 of them, with a capital shortfall of €9.5 billion, will have to take additional 
action to reinforce their solvency. 
We consider the results of the Spanish banks to be positive. Only one bank was below the 
threshold in one of the parts of the exercise, specifically in the asset quality review. In this 
case  the  estimated  shortfall  was  very  small  and,  during  2014,  the  bank  took  measures  to 
strengthen its capital by an amount well in excess of that needed to cover its shortfall. Taking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  into account these actions, at present all Spanish banks amply exceed the thresholds set in 
the exercise. 
It  should  also  be  noted  that  Spanish  banks  were  the  ones  that  had  to  make  the  smallest 
adjustments  as  a  result  of  the  asset  quality  review:  a  total  of  only  0.14%  of  their  risk- 
weighted assets. 
In  conclusion,  the  results  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  show  that  the  restructuring 
process undertaken in the Spanish financial system from 2012 has been successful and that 
our  credit  institutions  face  the  future  with  healthy  balance  sheets  and  a  sound  solvency 
position. 
Similarly,  the  structural  reforms  undertaken  in  recent  years  have  played  a  crucial  role  in 
providing for a firm recovery and in correcting imbalances. It is imperative to stay the course 
and  ensure  sufficient  growth  to  reduce  the  unemployment  rate  and  anchor  the  economic 
underpinnings needed to sustain domestic and foreign demand. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
