  Benoît Cœuré: “Towards Retail Payments 2.0: The New Security 
Challenges” 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the joint European Central Bank/Bank of France conference “Towards Retail 
Payments 2.0: The New Security Challenges”, Paris, 22 October 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, dear conference participants, 
First of all, I would like to apologise for not being with you today in Paris. 
You all know the common fraud security check based on the fact that one person cannot be 
in two places at the same time. Unfortunately, I am no exception to this rule and so cannot 
be with you in person today, but I am pleased to be able to use this video message to share 
some of my thoughts on innovative payment methods and the challenges that they pose for 
central banks. 
To  begin  with,  I  would  like  to  recap  some  of  the  history  of  SecuRe  Pay  and  why  it  was 
created. 
Back in 2011, the standardisation of SEPA credit transfers and direct debits was well afoot, 
and cards had been migrated to the EMV standard. 
However, we soon realised that the implementation of secure online payment methods was 
too slow, despite the fact that technical solutions were widely available. At the same time, we 
saw that Internet fraud was increasing. 
The situation was particularly bad when it came to cards. 
Our  latest  ECB  card  fraud  report  shows  that  60%  of  fraud  involves  so-called  “card-not-
present” payments, mostly in the form of Internet payments. 
Moreover,  we  observed  that  market  pressure  tends  to  make  people  take  a  race-to-the-
bottom approach to security. Payment service providers fear that their competitors will use 
less secure but more convenient and cheaper solutions, thereby compromising too much on 
payment security. 
With respect to fraud, I believe that this is only the tip of the iceberg. 
In  order  to  safeguard  their  reputation,  many  market  players  may  have  a  tendency  to 
understate major attacks or a high incidence of fraud to which they may have been exposed. 
Moreover,  we  have  come  to  realise  that  self-regulation  has  not  been  very  successful  in 
improving Internet payment security. We have to remember that it also took a very long to 
make point-of-sale payments secure. 
For a central bank, whose task it is to promote the safety and efficiency of payment systems, 
this was quite a worrying trend. 
And we were not the only ones to be concerned: according to the European Commission’s 
Cyber  security  report  2012,  one  out  of  every  three  European  citizens  had  concerns  about 
making payments online. 
But the situation was not as serious in all countries. 
A number of European countries had introduced minimum requirements for online payments, 
some as part of their oversight function and others as supervisors. Yet, these requirements 
were not harmonised and we needed to raise the bar for everyone. 
At the same time, as some of you might remember, some banks complained to the ECB that 
some countries were imposing stricter security requirements than others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  For  these  reasons,  we  took  the  initiative  to  invite  all  supervisors  and  overseers  within  the 
European  Union  and  the  European  Economic  Area  to  form  the  European  Forum  on  the 
Security of Retail Payments. 
This Forum united the interests of two different parties: the interest of public authorities in the 
safety of payment services and the market’s interest in homogenous requirements that allow 
for a level playing field. 
SecuRe  Pay  was  a  big  step  forward  and  is  also  an  excellent  example  of  European 
cooperation. 
It  is  a  place  where  authorities  can  share  their  insights  and  discuss  policies  as  well  as  the 
latest market developments. More importantly, we learn from each other and can agree on 
common minimum requirements. Thus, instead of leaving things in a grey area or duplicating 
efforts, the members of the Forum cooperate and optimise their resources. 
Until today, the Forum has focused its efforts on new technologies and emerging risks, such 
as Internet and mobile payments and third party access to payment accounts. 
The philosophy behind SecuRe Pay has been to try to develop generic requirements that can 
accommodate market developments and changes in technology. It also takes a risk-based 
approach. 
For example, exemptions from the requirement of strong customer authentication measures 
can be made provided that the payment service provider carries out a sound analysis of the 
risk involved in a particular transaction. 
Overall, the main changes brought about by the work of the Forum are that the industry will 
be  obliged  to  have  sound  risk  management,  thoroughly  identify  and  authenticate  the 
customer  and  the  transactions  he/she  wishes  to  make,  protect  sensitive  payment 
information,  upgrade  their  fraud  monitoring  tools  and  prevent  fraud  by  educating  the 
customer. 
I believe that these measures are necessary and effective. They are also in line with market 
needs. 
I would also like to point out that SecuRe Pay has provided substantial input for revising the 
Payment Services Directive. 
Therefore, I think that as an initiative based on voluntary cooperation the Forum has been 
very successful and productive. In order to implement the developed requirements, however, 
some countries have needed a more formal legal basis. 
In addition, the proposed Payment Services Directive envisages a number of mandates on 
security  requirements  for  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  to  work  on  in  close 
cooperation with the ECB. 
Therefore, the Forum is now co-chaired by the EBA and the ECB. It formally supports both 
the European System of Central Banks and the EBA in their decision-making processes. The 
European Commission and Europol are represented as observers, and there is also dialogue 
with other authorities, such as the EU’s Agency for Network and Information Security. 
Cooperation, in particular between overseers and supervisors, is essential since they have 
complementary views, and not every country has the resources to build up its own know-how 
in this relatively specialised field. For example, one country might be more focused on IT and 
risk management,  while  the  other focuses  more  on  the  payment  system  in  general.  Some 
authorities have mandates to look at investor and consumer protection, or competition, while 
others do not. 
Yet  we  all  share  a  common  interest  in  maintaining  trust  in  the  security  and  efficiency  of 
payment services. 
These values are sometimes at odds with innovation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Innovations  –  such  as  virtual  currencies  or  payment  account  access  services  –  can  be 
disruptive. They may reveal where the inefficiencies of mainstream solutions lie and change 
the way we think about the “service aspect” of payments, but we should not forget that they 
often imply financial or security risks, which need to be weighed up against the benefits. 
My philosophy is to learn from these solutions so as to make genuine payment services more 
secure and efficient. New players on the market are welcome so long as they are trustworthy 
and  manage  their  risks  adequately.  They  should  not,  however,  put  the  end  user  or  the 
security of other providers at risk. 
Today is an excellent opportunity to discuss not only what the Forum has delivered and how 
it has successfully combined security and efficiency, but also the challenges that lie ahead 
for the security of retail payments. 
I  wish  you  a  lively  and  interesting  debate.  Please  use  this  opportunity  to  exchange  your 
views with our experts. We constantly listen and learn from you and other security experts to 
shape our requirements. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  those  who  have  actively  contributed  to  this  work.  Please 
continue to make payments in Europe both more secure and more efficient. 
Last but not least, a big “thank you” to the Banque de France and my colleagues at the ECB 
who worked hard to organise this event. Have a great conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
