  Daniel K Tarullo: Physical commodities 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Permanent  Subcommitee  on  Investigations,  US  Senate, 
Washington DC, 21 November 2014. 
 Chairman Levin, Ranking Member McCain, and other members of the subcommittee, thank 
you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  at  today’s  hearing.  Let  me  begin  by  also  thanking  the 
subcommittee for its work on issues raised by the physical commodities activities of financial 
holding companies. Based on my quick perusal of the report you issued Wednesday, I am 
sure  it  will  be  an  important  input  into  our  deliberations  at the  Federal  Reserve  on  how  we 
might  adjust  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  programs  to  address  the  risks  that  can  be 
associated with these activities. 
My  testimony  today  first  reviews  briefly  the  history  of  bank  and  bank  holding  company 
engagement  in  physical  commodities  activities.  I  will  then  address  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
approach to supervising financial institutions engaged in physical commodities activities. I will 
close  my  remarks  by  discussing  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ongoing  review  of  the  physical 
commodities activities of the institutions we supervise, including a summary of the responses 
we  received  on  our  Advance  Notice  of  Proposed  Rulemaking  (ANPR)  inviting  public 
comment on physical commodities activities. 
History of physical commodities authority of banks and bank holding companies 
Before  the  enactment  of  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  in  1999  (GLB  Act),  bank  holding 
companies  were  authorized  to  engage  in  a  limited  set  of  commodities  activities  that  were 
considered to be “so closely related to banking as to be a proper incident thereto.”1 These 
activities included the authority to buy, sell, and store certain precious metals (for example, 
gold,  silver,  platinum,  and  palladium)  and  copper,  which  are  activities  that  national  banks 
were  generally  permitted  to  conduct  at  the  time.  Bank  holding  companies  were  also 
authorized to engage as principal in cash-settled derivative contracts based on commodities, 
and  in  commodity  derivatives  that  allowed  for  physical  settlement  if  the  bank  holding 
company made reasonable efforts to avoid delivery of the commodity.2  
Additionally,  under  the  National  Bank  Act,  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency 
(OCC)  has  authority  to  approve  national  banks  to  engage  in  commodity-related  activities 
under  national  banks’  authority  to  “exercise  .  .  .  all  such  incidental  powers  as  shall  be 
necessary  to  carry  on  the  business  of  banking.”3  The  OCC  has  approved  some  national 
banks to engage in customer-driven, perfectly matched, cash-settled derivative transactions 
referencing  commodities;  certain  types  of  commodity  derivatives  transactions  settled  by 
transitory  title  transfer;  the  purchase  and  sale  of  coin  and  bullion,  precious  metals,  and 
copper; and the holding of physical commodities to hedge customer-driven, bank-permissible 
derivative transactions. 
Under  the  GLB  Act,  Congress  created  the  financial  holding  company  framework,  which 
allowed  bank  holding  companies  with  bank  subsidiaries  that  are  well  capitalized  and  well 
managed4 to engage in expanded financial activities.5 Three provisions in the GLB Act have 
                                                
1   Section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding Company Act, 12 USC 1843(c)(8). 
2   12 CFR 225.28 (b)(8). 
3   12 USC 24 (seventh). 
4  
In addition to the capital and management requirements, the GLB Act also requires the subsidiary depository 
institutions  of  financial  holding  companies  to  have  at  least  a  “Satisfactory”  rating  under  the  Community 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  enabled  certain  financial  holding  companies  to  engage  in  commodities  activities.  The  first 
provision  –  section  4(k)(1)(B)  of  the  Bank  Holding  Company  Act  –  authorizes  a  financial 
holding company to engage in any activity that the Board finds to be “complementary to a 
financial  activity.”  This  provision  in  the  GLB  Act  enables  financial  holding  companies  to 
engage  in  commercial  activities  that  complement  their  financial  activities,  so  long  as  the 
activities do not pose a substantial risk to the safety and soundness of depository institutions 
or  the  financial  system  generally.6  In  reviewing  requests  for  complementary  authority,  the 
Board  is  required  to  consider  whether  performance  of  the  activity  can  reasonably  be 
expected  to  produce  benefits  to  the  public  –  such  as  greater  convenience,  increased 
competition, or gains in efficiency – that outweigh possible adverse effects, such as undue 
concentration of resources, decreased or unfair competition, conflicts of interest, or unsound 
banking practices.7  
Beginning in 2003, the Board issued a limited number of orders permitting individual financial 
holding companies to engage in specified commodities-related activities as complementary 
activities  under  this  statutory  authority.  These  activities  included  physical  settlement  of 
derivative  contracts  involving  certain  approved  commodities  and  spot  trading  of  those 
commodities.8 A dozen financial holding companies currently have this 4(k) authority.9  
In addition, a subset of these companies has been granted additional authority to engage in 
energy  tolling  and  energy-management  activities.  Energy  tolling  involves  making  fixed, 
periodic payments to power plant owners that compensate the owners for their fixed costs in 
exchange  for  the  right  to  all  or  part  of  their  plants’  power  output.  Energy-management 
activities are transactional and advisory services, which are provided to power plant owners. 
The  Board’s  orders  placed  prudential  limits  on  financial  holding  companies  that  engage  in 
commodities  activities  under  complementary  authority.  The  Board  limited  the  total  market 
value of all commodities held under this authority, including periodic payments under tolling 
agreements,  to  5  percent  of  the  financial  holding  company’s  tier  1  capital.  In  addition,  the 
Board  prohibited  financial  holding  companies  from  owning  commodity  transportation, 
storage,  extraction,  or  refining 
facilities  under  complementary  authority.  Moreover, 
companies  are  required  to  demonstrate  risk-management  processes  sufficient  to  support 
their activities and to put in place additional risk mitigants, such as insurance. 
A  second  provision  that  Congress  included  in  the  GLB  Act  permits  financial  holding 
companies,  without  prior  Board  approval,  to  make  merchant  banking  investments  in 
companies  engaged  in  activities  not  otherwise  permitted for financial  holding  companies.10 
                                                                                                                                                   
Reinvestment Act. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act added a requirement 
that the financial holding companies themselves must be well capitalized and well managed. 
5   Many bank holding companies of various sizes are financial holding companies. The Board maintains a list of 
financial holding companies on its website. 
6   Section 4(k)(1)(B) of the Bank Holding Company Act, 12 USC 1843(k)(1)(B). 
7   12 USC 1843(j)(2). 
8   This authority is generally limited to commodities for which derivatives contracts have been approved by the 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission for trading on a U.S. exchange. In a few cases, other commodities 
with comparable fungibility, liquidity, and other relevant characteristics have been approved. 
9   The  financial  holdings  companies  currently  authorized  by  the  Board  to  engage  in  complementary  physical 
commodities  activities  are  Bank  of  America  Corporation,  Barclays  Bank  PLC,  BNP  Paribas,  Citigroup  Inc., 
Credit Suisse Group, Deutsche Bank AG, JPMorgan Chase& Co., Scotiabank, Société Générale, The Royal 
Bank  of  Scotland  Group  plc,  UBS  AG,  and  Wells  Fargo  &  Company.  The  Board’s  approvals  regarding 
section 4(k) are publicly available. 
10   12  USC  1843(k)(4)(H).  The  merchant  banking  authority  permits  a  financial  holding  company  to  acquire  or 
control any amount of shares, assets, or ownership interests of any company or other entity that is engaged in 
an  activity  not  otherwise  authorized  for  the  financial holding  company  under  section  4 of  the  Bank  Holding 
Company Act. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There  are  several  statutory  conditions  on  merchant  banking  investments,  including 
restrictions on the authority of a financial holding company to routinely manage or operate a 
merchant banking portfolio company and a requirement that merchant banking investments 
be  held  only  for  a  limited  period.  To  implement  these  restrictions,  the  Board  adopted 
regulations  in  2001  that  require  merchant  banking  investments  to  be  disposed  of  within 
10 years after purchase (or 15 years for investments made through a qualifying private equity 
fund), and that limit the officer and employee interlocks between financial holding companies 
and  portfolio  companies.  These  restrictions  were  designed  to  help  ensure  that  merchant 
banking investments generally are passive investments and limited in duration. 
A third provision in the GLB Act permits certain companies to engage in a broad range of 
physical commodities activities. Section 4(o) of the Bank Holding Company Act authorizes a 
company that was not a bank holding company and becomes a financial holding company 
after November 12, 1999, to continue to engage in activities related to the trading, sale, or 
investment in commodities that were not permissible activities for bank holding companies if 
the company was engaged in the United States in any of such activities as of September 30, 
1997.11  In  contrast  to  section  4(k)  complementary  authority,  this  authority  is  automatic  – 
meaning  no  approval  by  or  notice  to  the  Board  is  required  for  a  company  to  rely  on  this 
authority for its commodities activities. Also, unlike the firms conducting limited commodities 
activities found to be complementary to financial activities under section 4(k), the section 4(o) 
grandfathered firms are authorized to engage in the transportation, storage, extraction, and 
refining  of  commodities.  Moreover,  while  the  cap  on  complementary  activities  under 
section 4(k)  is  5  percent  of  tier  1  capital,  commodities  activities  permitted  under  the 
section 4(o)  grandfather  provision  may  represent  up  to  5  percent  of  the  company’s  total 
consolidated  assets.  Only  two  financial  holding  companies  currently  qualify  for  these 
grandfather rights – Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. 
During  2008,  both  Goldman  Sachs  and  Morgan  Stanley  became  bank  holding  companies 
and  elected  financial  holding  company  status.  They  each  claim  the  right  to  conduct 
commodities  activities  under  the  grandfather  provision  found  in  section  4(o).  In  addition, 
during  this  same  period,  J.P.  Morgan  Chase  &  Co.  acquired  Bear  Stearns  and  Bank  of 
America Corporation acquired Merrill Lynch; both Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch engaged in 
a  substantial  amount  of  commodities  trading  activities.  However,  the  range  of  permissible 
physical  commodities  activities  of  these  latter  two  financial  holding  companies  is  limited 
because they are not grandfathered under section 4(o). 
Federal Reserve supervision of commodities activities 
The prudential supervision of the largest, most complex banking companies is a cooperative 
effort  in  which  the  Federal  Reserve  acts  as  the  prudential  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the 
consolidated  holding  companies,  with  some  of  the  principal  business  activities  of  such 
companies  supervised  by  other  functional  regulators.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory 
program  focuses  on  the  enterprise-wide  risk  profile  and  risk  management  of  those 
companies,  with  particular  focus  on  financial  strength,  corporate  governance,  and  risk-
management  practices  and  competencies  of  the  company  as  a  whole.  To  this  end,  we 
monitor  the  largest  of  these  institutions  on  a  continuous  basis  and  routinely  conduct 
inspections  and  examinations  of  all  of  these  firms  to  encourage  their  safe  and  sound 
operation. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  no  direct  role  in  the  supervision  of  the  commodities  markets 
generally. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) was created by Congress in 
1974 as an independent agency with the mandate to regulate commodity futures and option 
markets. Congress significantly expanded the authority of the CFTC to regulate the over-the-
                                                
11   12 USC 1843(o). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  involves 
regular,  simultaneous,  horizontal 
counter commodity derivative markets in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection Act. Additionally, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) oversees our 
nation’s  securities  exchanges  and  markets  and  disclosures  by  public  companies,  among 
other  things.  Other  independent  agencies,  such  as  the  Federal  Energy  Regulatory 
Commission (FERC), also regulate segments of the physical commodities market. 
Over  the  last  five  years,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  several  steps  to  strengthen  its 
ongoing supervision of the largest, most complex banking companies. Most importantly, we 
established the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) to ensure that 
oversight  and  supervision  of  the  largest  firms  incorporates  a  broader  range  of  internal 
perspectives  and  expertise; 
(cross-firm) 
supervisory  exercises;  and  is  overseen  in  a  centralized  process  to  facilitate  consistent 
supervision,  a  well-considered  response to risks  or  problems  that may  be  present  in more 
than one firm, and a perspective on the financial system as a whole. The committee includes 
senior  bank  supervisors  from  the  Board  and  relevant  Reserve  Banks  as  well  as  senior 
Federal Reserve staff from the research, legal, and other divisions at the Board and from the 
markets and payment systems groups at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. To date, 
the LISCC has developed and administered several horizontal supervisory exercises, notably 
the  capital  stress  tests  and  related  comprehensive  capital  reviews  of  the  nation’s  largest 
bank holding companies. 
Bank holding companies that conduct commodities activities pursuant to either section 4(k) 
complementary, merchant banking, or section 4(o) grandfather authority are typically subject 
to continuous supervision by the Federal Reserve. That supervisory oversight, for example, 
includes  review  of  internal  management  reports,  periodic  meetings  with  the  personnel 
responsible for managing and controlling the risks of the firm’s commodities activities, and 
targeted  examinations  of  those  activities.  The  primary  goals  of  our  supervision  of 
commodities  activities  are  to  monitor  the  management  of  risks  of  those  activities  to  the 
financial  holding  companies  and  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  firms’  control  environments 
relating to physical commodities activities. 
The  Federal  Reserve  expanded  the  scope  of  its  examination  and  review  of  the  firms 
engaged in physical commodities activities as the events of 2008 and 2009 alluded to earlier 
brought more firms engaged in commodities activities under the supervisory purview of the 
Federal  Reserve.  In  2009,  the  Federal  Reserve  formed  an  examination  team  to  conduct 
horizontal examinations of firms across the LISCC portfolio that are engaged in commodities 
activities. 
Among  the  supervisory  activities  taken  were  additional  reviews  by  examination  staff 
specializing  in  commodities  risk-management  practices.  During  these  reviews,  the  teams 
examined the ways firms managed risks from commodities activities. In addition, the teams 
reviewed  the  firms’  processes for  assessing  capital  needs  associated  with  these  activities. 
On an ongoing basis, supervisory experts monitored the firms’ exposures and assessed the 
strength of the corresponding risk-management and control processes. This work led us to 
explore possible additional actions in our ANPR. 
The Board requires financial holding companies that engage in commodities activities to hold 
regulatory  capital  to  absorb  potential  losses  from  those  activities.  Financial  holding 
companies have long been required to hold capital against the counterparty credit risk from 
commodity  derivatives  (and  other  types  of  over-the-counter  derivatives)  and  against  the 
market  risk  of  all  commodity  positions.  Following  the  financial  crisis,  the  Board  has 
strengthened its capital requirements for the credit risk and market risk of these transactions. 
Still, physical commodities activities can pose unique risks to the safety and soundness of 
financial holding companies. While firms engaged in physical commodities activities employ 
measures to limit liability – including using a variety of legal structures that attempt to limit 
liability  for  catastrophic  and  environmental  events,  purchasing  insurance,  and  allocating 
capital aimed at mitigating operational risk – there are considerable difficulties in estimating 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  possible  damages  related  to  environmental  or  catastrophic  incidents,  as  evidenced  by 
some  well-publicized  events  in  recent  years.  Moreover,  just  the  uncertainty  that  can  come 
about  after  a  catastrophic  event  as  observers  wait  to  see  the  ultimate  damages  could  put 
extraordinary  pressure  on  a  financial  institution  engaged  in  these  activities  that  could 
threaten its safety and soundness. 
Federal Reserve review of physical commodities activities 
This past January, the Federal Reserve invited public comment through an ANPR on a range 
of issues related to the commodities activities of financial holding companies. The scope of 
our  ongoing  review  covers  commodities  activities  and  investments  under  section  4(k) 
complementary  authority,  merchant  banking  authority,  and  section&  4(o)  grandfather 
authority.  Recently,  some  of  the  financial  holding  companies  engaged  in  physical 
commodities activities have publicly indicated that they are reducing or terminating some of 
these activities. 
As the ANPR explains, we are exploring what further prudential restrictions or limitations on 
the  ability  of  financial  holding  companies  to  engage  in  commodities-related  activities  as  a 
complementary  activity  are  warranted  to  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  these  activities. 
Such  additional  restrictions  on  complementary  commodities  activities  could 
include 
reductions  in  the  maximum  amount  of  assets  or  revenue  attributable  to  such  activities, 
increased capital or insurance requirements on such activities, and prohibitions on holding 
specific  types  of  physical  commodities  that  pose  undue  risk  to  the  company. We  also  are 
exploring what restrictions or limitations on investments made through the merchant banking 
authority would appropriately address those or similar risks. 
In  response  to  the  notice,  the  Board  received  184  unique  comments  and  more  than 
16,900 form letters. Commenters included members of Congress, individuals, public interest 
groups,  academics,  end  users,  banks,  and  trade  associations.  The  comments  present  a 
range of views and perspectives. Those opposed to financial holding company involvement 
in  physical  commodities  activities  argued  that  the  different  roles  of  financial  holding 
companies  in  the  commodities  markets  (such  as  trading  and  credit)  allow  these  firms  an 
unfair competitive advantage and present conflicts of interest in dealing with customers. They 
also  contend  that  physical  commodities  activities  pose  a  wide  range  of  risks  (including 
compliance with environmental laws and potential market conduct issues) to financial holding 
companies  that  are  difficult  for  companies  to  measure  and  mitigate,  and  for  regulators  to 
monitor. 
On the other hand, a number of commodities end-users, including corporate treasurers and 
municipalities, as well as several trade associations and others, argued that financial holding 
companies  provide  valuable  and  hard-to-replace  services  to  end-users.  They  also  argued 
that  financial  holding  companies  are  reliable  and  low-risk  counterparties  that  enhance  the 
efficiency  of  the  commodities  markets  and  provide  additional  liquidity  to  those  markets. 
These commenters contended that financial holding companies can successfully mitigate the 
risks of commodities activities with robust risk management, insurance, and maintenance of 
appropriate corporate separateness. 
As  would  be  expected  from  this  range  of  views,  commenters  also  suggested  a  range  of 
potential Board actions – from no action to prohibiting trading or ownership of commodities 
associated  with  catastrophic  risk,  strengthening  prudential  safeguards  (such  as  reducing 
caps  on  the  amount  of  permitted  activities),  strengthening  risk-management  practices, 
enhancing public disclosure, requiring additional capital, increasing regulatory coordination, 
and developing risk-management best practices. The Federal Reserve has been reviewing 
the comments and considering what steps would be appropriate to address the risks posed 
by physical commodities activities. 
The  Board  has  discretion  with  regard  to  the  complementary  activities  approved  under 
section 4(k).  We  are  also  considering  whether  additional  restrictions  are  appropriate  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  merchant banking investments to ensure that the investments are truly passive.  Moreover, 
we  are  exploring  measures  such  as  additional  capital  requirements,  enhanced  risk-
management  requirements,  and  additional  data  collection  and  reporting  requirements  on 
physical commodities activities to help ensure that such activities do not pose undue risks to 
the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  holding  companies  and  their  subsidiary  depository 
institutions, or to financial stability. 
Conclusion 
Our review of the commodity-related activities of the firms we supervise is ongoing. We are 
assessing the potential risk of physical commodities activities to the safety and soundness of 
the financial holding companies engaged in these activities. In doing so, we are focusing on 
the risk to safety and soundness presented by specific activities and on whether those risks 
can be appropriately and adequately mitigated. In addition, we are conducting a careful and 
thorough assessment of the costs and benefits of financial holding company engagement in 
these activities. Our work includes a complete assessment of the comments we received in 
response to the ANPR. We expect to issue a formal notice of public rulemaking regarding 
these matters in the first quarter of next year. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
