  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Payment card acceptance 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Payment System Forum and Exhibition 2014, Kuala 
Lumpur, 27 November 2014. 
 I am glad to be here today in welcoming you to the Payment System Forum and Exhibition 
2014, organised by Bank Negara Malaysia in collaboration with the National Cards Group (or 
NCG in short). This year’s forum and exhibition will centre on ‘Payment Card Acceptance’, an 
area in which Malaysia needs to make significant improvement, to reduce our dependency 
on cash and cheque usage and accelerate the country’s adoption of electronic payments (or 
e-payments). 
My remarks today will focus on 3 broad areas: 
• 
Firstly,  I  will  provide  the  context  of  where  our  position  is  in  comparison  with 
advanced  economies  in  the  use  of  debit  cards,  and  the  potential  benefits  that  we 
could gain in migrating from cash to debit cards; 
Secondly,  I  will  highlight  the  reform  measures  that  we  are  taking,  which  include 
enhancement 
infrastructure  to  facilitate  greater  adoption  of 
to 
e-payments; and 
Lastly, I will address the key priorities in the area of security and risk management 
with the aim, to further strengthen consumer confidence in the use of online banking 
and e-payments. 
the  existing 
  Malaysia should keep pace with the global shift in the adoption of debit cards 
Malaysia’s  cash  usage  remains  high.  In  2013,  our  cash-in-circulation  over  GDP  is  6% 
compared  to  only  2%  to  4%  in  advanced  countries.  In  terms  of  payment  card  usage,  our 
payment  card  transaction  per  capita  is  relatively  low,  at  only  13  transactions  per  capita  in 
2013. This is far below the level of payment card usage in the advanced countries with an 
average of more than 200 transactions per capita. 
It  is  also  important  to  note  that  Malaysia  has  a  higher  proportion  of  credit  card  usage 
compared to debit card usage, with a ratio of 7 credit card transactions for every debit card 
transaction. In contrast, debit card usage is more prevalent in the advanced economies, at 
an average of 6 debit card transactions for every credit card transaction. 
The  debit  card  is  a  more  cost-effective  payment  instrument  compared  to  the  credit  card. 
Greater use of debit cards would minimise the country’s retail payment cost and contribute to 
greater savings and efficiency. In this respect, the banking industry can play the important 
role of taking more proactive measures to widen the payment card acceptance infrastructure, 
and promote actively the usage of debit cards to the general public. It is a mutually beneficial 
relationship.  Consumers  can  conduct  their financial  transactions  in  a  safe,  convenient  and 
efficient  manner  while  the  banking  industry  can  benefit  through  reduction  in  the  cost  of 
handling and managing cash. 
High potential for debit cards to displace cash in Malaysia 
Cash  is  an  expensive  payment  instrument  which  imposes  an  unnecessary  cost  to  the 
economy.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  spends  about  RM359  million  a  year  on  the  printing  and 
distribution of banknotes and coins. 
The banking industry on the other hand, incurs an estimated cost of about RM1.8 billion a 
year in cash handling and the provision of cash services to the public. As for businesses, an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  estimated cost of about RM2.7 billion  is incurred annually for cash handling, in addition to 
bearing the risk of pilferage and theft. In total, the cost incurred by the banking industry, the 
business  community  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in  cash  handling  and  management  is 
estimated to be around RM4.8 billion a year. The cost to the economy would be even higher 
if we factor in the cost incurred by the households. 
With  45  million  debit  cards  for  a  population  of  30  million,  Malaysia  is  well-positioned  to 
migrate  from  a  high  dependency  on  cash  usage  to  the  use  of  cost-effective  debit  cards. 
Payment  cards  issued  in  Malaysia  are  already  on  chip-based  technology  since  2005. 
Malaysia  was  the  first  country  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  to  implement  an  industry-wide 
migration  out  of  the  less  secure  magnetic  stripe  cards,  which  are  prone  to  skimming  and 
counterfeit fraud. The adoption of chip-based technology gives us an enormous opportunity 
to leverage on our large base of secure debit cards and expand the acceptance points (or 
Point-Of-Sale terminals). We need to capitalise on this potential synergy. 
Strategy to accelerate migration towards e-payments 
Payment card reform framework 
a.  
Over  the  past  few  years,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  undertaken  various  measures  to 
encourage the use of e-payments as a means to enhance Malaysia’s economic efficiency, 
productivity and competitiveness. 
In 2015, we will be taking a significant step forward in this agenda with the implementation of 
the Payment Card Reform Framework. The Framework will provide a much more conducive 
environment  for  merchants  to  accept  card  payments  through  the  wider  deployment  of 
terminals and lower cost structures. 
The  Point-Of-Sale  terminals  have  not  been  growing  at  the  desired  pace  despite  the  high 
penetration  of  debit  cards.  There  are  only  8  terminals  per  1,000  inhabitants  in  Malaysia 
compared  to  more  than  20  terminals  per  1,000  inhabitants  in  advanced  countries.  The 
growth rate of the Point-Of-Sale terminals in Malaysia have slowed down considerably from 
14.6% in 2011 to 6.1% in 2012 and 3.2% in 2013, indicating a potential saturation of Point-
Of-Sale  terminals  among  the  higher  tier  merchants  who  can  afford  the  current  level  of 
merchant fees charged by the financial institutions. 
The recent hikes in interchange fee, which is the fee payable between financial institutions in 
a payment card transaction, are likely to make payment card acceptance even more costly 
for  merchants.  Interchange  fee  forms  a  significant  part  of  the  fees  paid  by  merchants  for 
accepting payment cards. The continued indiscriminate increases in interchange fee would 
hinder  the  expansion  of  Point-Of-Sale  terminals,  especially  among  small  merchants.  To 
prevent  a  system-wide  increase  in  merchant  fees,  the  Payment  Card  Reform  Framework 
would moderate the increases in payment card acceptance cost. This would be achieved by 
subjecting  interchange  fees  to  ceilings  which  are  set  based  on  objective  and  transparent 
criteria.  In  addition,  the  framework  also  seeks  to  address  distortions  in  the  payment  card 
market in order to foster an efficient, transparent and competitive payment card industry in 
Malaysia. 
Enhancing the payment card infrastructure 
b.  
To complement the Payment Card Reform Framework, the banking industry has committed 
to  invest  approximately  RM1.1  billion  over  the  next  6  years for  industry-wide  infrastructure 
development  to  further  enhance  the  payment  card  security  and  expand  the  Point-Of-Sale 
terminal  network.  This  would  make  Malaysia’s  payment  card  landscape  more  competitive. 
The  infrastructure  development  that  would  be  undertaken  by  the  industry  includes,  among 
others: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     the expansion of the Point-Of-Sale network by an additional 570,000 Point-Of-Sale 
terminals, especially among the lower tier merchants; 
the adoption of Chip and PIN, which is a more secure cardholder verification method 
for purchase transactions, by 1 January 2017; and 
the  migration  of  the  domestic  debit  card  from  its  proprietary  standard  to  the 
internationally-recognised EMV standard equipped with contactless functionality by 
1 January 2018. 
These developments are exciting changes in store for the payments sector. With it, comes 
an enormous opportunity to expand business and enhance value to consumers. 
c.  
Highlights of development in delivery channels and payment system 
infrastructure 
As banks serve various segments of the economy, it is important to widen the accessibility of 
e-payment  services  through  various  channels  to  cater  to  the  needs  of  different  consumer 
groups.  The  industry  should  continuously  identify  and  address  any  gaps  in  the  current 
e-payment  infrastructure  and  services  by  improving  their  product  offerings.  For  instance, 
building  on  the  wider  penetration  of  online  banking  services  which  now  have  a  total  of 
17 million  subscribers  (of  whom  7.5  million  are  active  users),  banks  have  also  provided 
alternatives  to  consumers  to  conduct  electronic  funds  transfers  using  either  the  Interbank 
GIRO (IBG) or the Instant Interbank Fund Transfer (IBFT) via 9,410 ATMs and 2,475 self-
service  Internet  kiosks  nationwide.  While  the  fees  imposed  for  IBG  and  IBFT  are 
differentiated, consumers are given choices that suit their preference. 
To promote infrastructure sharing and reduce cost and enhance online bill payment facilities 
in Malaysia, there is currently an ongoing industry initiative led by the Malaysian Electronic 
Clearing  Corporation  Sdn.  Bhd.  (or  MyClear  in  short)  to  develop  a  national  bill  payment 
scheme  known  as  JomPAY.  JomPAY  leverages  on  shared  infrastructure  to  significantly 
expand the scope and utility of bill payment facilities. 
At present, customers can only use the online channel of a bank to make bill payments to 
merchants who maintain banking relationships with the same bank. This is set to change with 
the implementation of JomPAY, which is a common and open platform that allows customers 
of any bank to make online bill payments to any merchant registered with JomPAY. In other 
words, a merchant will be able to receive payments from customers across all participating 
banks.  This  would  not  only  reduce  duplication  of  investment  costs  by  the  banks,  but  also 
bring about greater convenience, cost savings and efficiency gains to both consumers and 
merchants. JomPAY is targeted to be rolled-out in phases starting from next month. 
(In the  next  presentation,  the  Director  of  Payment  Systems  Policy  Department  will  provide 
you  with  further  details  of  the  supporting  e-payment  infrastructure  and  the  strategies 
undertaken by Bank Negara Malaysia to accelerate the country’s migration to e-payments.) 
Safeguarding the security of transactions 
d.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  now  move  on  to  the  issue  of  security  and  consumer 
confidence in the use of online banking and e-payments. 
Considerable efforts have also been taken by the industry to improve user confidence in the 
use  of  payment  cards.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  banking  industry  had  migrated  our 
payment  cards  to  the  more  secure  chip-based  cards  in  2005.  The  investment  cost  of 
RM200 million was subsequently recovered through the projected fraud savings in just two 
and a half years. 
This served not only to foster consumer confidence in payment cards but also boosted credit 
card spending by foreign tourists which increased from RM4.3 billion in 2006 to RM7.9 billion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  in 2013, an increase of 83% over 7 years. In 2013, fraud losses had remained low at less 
than 0.03% of the total value of debit and credit card transactions. 
Due  to  the  liability  shift  in  the  rules  of  the  international  payment  card  network  operators, 
about  89%  of  these  losses  are  borne  by  foreign  financial  institutions  who  have  yet  to 
implement  the  higher  security  requirements.  Consequently,  our  fraud  losses  amounted  to 
only 0.01% of the total payment card transaction value,  which  is quite low by international 
standards.  One  lesson  learnt  was  that  if  we  invest  intelligently  in  infrastructure,  we  would 
certainly reap the benefits faster than expected. 
Nevertheless,  there  have  been  recent  reports  on  concerns  over  emerging  fraud  threats  in 
online  banking  and  online  payment  card  transactions.  In this  regard,  I would  like  to  stress 
that  individuals  do  not  and  should  not  bear  any  loss  arising  from  any  unauthorised 
transaction  not  caused  by  them.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  not  tolerate  any  cases  where 
financial  institutions  have  acted  unfairly  by  passing  the  liability  of  fraud  losses  to  their 
customers.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  holds  the  board  of  directors  of  financial  institutions 
responsible  to  ensure  that  effective  safeguards  are  in  place  to  counter  both  present  and 
emerging  fraud  threats.  In  addition,  financial  institutions  must  also  ensure  that  consumers 
regularly receive sufficient information on ways to protect themselves against possible fraud. 
Fraud threats continue to evolve and financial institutions should anticipate such new threats 
and act ahead of the curve. While the number of new and emerging fraud threats is small 
relative to the total number of transactions and the fraud losses are negligible compared to 
the investment cost for security upgrades, financial institutions should not underestimate the 
potential for such threats to increase in frequency and impact. Aside from financial losses, 
the  reputational  damage  to  financial  institutions  arising  from  service  disruptions  can  be 
severe. 
This  is  especially  so  in  today’s  environment,  where  adverse  publicity  can  spread 
exponentially through the social media. 
Financial  institutions  must  therefore  keep  abreast  with  the  latest  fraud  schemes  in  and 
outside  the  country,  and  continuously  invest  in  fraud  prevention  technology  to  keep  fraud 
incidences  at  a  minimum.  Security  investment  decisions  must  carefully  weigh  the  likely 
growth of new fraud threats and the implications for financial institutions if such threats are 
not averted. The ramifications of failing to do so could be catastrophic. 
Importance of consumer education and awareness 
e.  
Consumers  also  have  an  important  role  to  play  to  avoid  becoming  victims  of  fraud.  As 
consumers,  we  should  learn  about  the  simple  yet  important  steps  that  we  can  take  to 
conduct safe payment transactions. 
There  have  been  cases  where  the  public  have  been  deceived  to  transfer  their  funds  into 
another account, only to be siphoned off by a fraudster. This is done through psychological 
manipulation where the fraudster impersonates a bank officer or an officer of Bank Negara 
Malaysia, to deceive the victim. Such fraud cases can easily be avoided if consumers are 
made aware of such methods and informed of the precautions that they should take to avoid 
being fraud victims. 
As consumers, we should pay particular attention to the fraud alerts provided by our banks 
and the police and take the necessary precautions. Consumers should know as a basic fact 
that  for  instance,  their  banks  or  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  never  ask  them  to  disclose  or 
validate  personal  details  such  as  login  ID,  passcode  and  mobile  phone  numbers  through 
SMS or emails. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Measures to be undertaken in 2015 
f.  
We  have  set  out  an  ambitious  roadmap  for  Malaysia’s  migration  to  e-payments.  Moving 
forward,  a  strong  focus  on  six  strategic  priorities  is  required  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  our 
country’s migration to e-payments. For 2015, I would like to suggest 6 key measures. 
i. 
Firstly,  we  need  to  deploy  an  additional  50,000  Point-Of-Sale  terminals  in  2015, 
targeting in particular lower-tier merchants. The idea is to widen the acceptance of 
debit cards. To promote wide usage among consumers, we need to intensify efforts 
to conduct promotional activities to drive the usage of debit cards to reach 89 million 
transactions in 2015, compared to about 65 million transactions this year. 
Secondly, we need to double our efforts to raise the level of awareness on the basic 
safety steps to deter payment fraud. The recent 2-month long “Think Online Safety, 
Think C.A.R.D.” campaign, jointly organised by the Association of Banks in Malaysia 
(ABM) and the NCG, to promote safe online payment practices, is a step in the right 
direction.  The  final  session  of  the  campaign  will  be  held  in  Sasana  Kijang  today. 
Similar campaigns should be organised and expanded to reach a wider segment of 
the Malaysian population. 
Thirdly,  the  industry  should  ensure  the  timely  implementation  of  JomPAY.  This 
would enable both consumers and businesses across the country to benefit from the 
strong  value  proposition  that  JomPay  will  create  in  increasing  the  efficiency  and 
convenience of online bill payments. 
Fourthly, banking institutions should conduct regular reviews on the adequacy and 
robustness of payment system risk management measures and the effectiveness of 
consumer protection measures. Where the review discloses gaps and inadequacies, 
banks  must  take  immediate  steps  to  rectify  the  weaknesses  to  preserve  public 
confidence. Adequate resources must be allocated to this effort. 
Fifthly, as part of the overall improvement in customer service, the banking industry 
should keep customers adequately informed of the dispute resolution procedures, in 
the event of fraud. Any disputes should be resolved in a timely manner. To minimise 
hardship  on  affected  customers,  I  suggest  that  banks  should  adopt  the  good 
practice of provisionally refunding the disputed amount into their customers’ account 
if they are not able to complete their investigations speedily. 
Lastly, to maintain public confidence and trust, we need to step up efforts to reduce 
cases of ATM robberies, which has spiked up from a total of 5 cases in 2011 to an 
average of 50 cases in the last 2 years. As at end October 2014, there have been 
41 cases of ATM robberies which caused the banking industry to incur a total loss of 
RM4.4  million.  Fortunately,  no  customer  has  lost  any  money.  To  prevent  ATM 
robberies, the banking industry should quickly adopt the ink-staining technology for 
new ATMs, which would deter future cases of ATM robberies as the stolen notes will 
be rendered worthless through the staining technology. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
In addition, I would like to add that an e-Payment Incentive Fund (ePIF) framework would be 
implemented  on  2  January  2015.  This  would  coincide  with  the  implementation  date  of  the 
new  cheque  processing  fee  of  50  sen  which  is  introduced  to  reflect  its  higher  processing 
cost. Under the ePIF framework, banks would channel the cheque processing fee collected 
from  their  customers  into  a  fund  to  be  used  for  infrastructure  development  and  to  provide 
incentives  to  their  customers to  adopt  e-payments. In  other  words,  the cheque  processing 
fee goes back to consumers for their benefit. 
Payment system forum programme 
Today’s forum aims to promote awareness and build confidence among merchants to accept 
payment cards. Among the various topics that will be discussed today are: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Payment card acceptance infrastructure and cost; 
Success stories on payment card acceptance; 
Card fraud and security management; and 
Innovation in payment cards. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These are all relevant issues for businesses to consider in accepting payment cards and in 
making choices that would be in their best interest. 
There  is  also  an  exhibition  held  in  Conference  Hall  1,  where  banking  institutions  and 
payment card companies will showcase their latest product offering on payment cards and 
other e-payment services. 
Businesses have an opportunity to learn more about payment card acceptance and sign up 
for the attractive packages being offered. 
Conclusion 
Our  country  is  at  a  critical  juncture  in  its  migration  to  e-payments.  The  various  reform 
measures  and  the  substantial  infrastructure  investments  have  created  an  enabling 
environment  to  transform  Malaysia’s  payment  landscape  into  one  that  is  highly  efficient, 
reliable  and  competitive.  To  ensure  a  successful  transformation,  the  support  from  all 
stakeholders for a bold reform is needed. An efficient and competitive payment system is an 
important  strategic  advantage  in  today’s  highly  challenging  and  rapidly  evolving  world. 
Consumers  and  businesses  alike  should  re-invent  themselves  and  take  full  advantage  of 
innovations in payment systems in order to capitalise on the benefits and opportunities that it 
brings. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
