  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Establishment of the Financial Services Professional 
Board in Malaysia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  Official  Launch  of  Financial  Services  Professional  Board,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
24 September 2014. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to this occasion of the official launch of the Financial 
Services Professional Board. 
Among the key challenges emerging from the global financial crisis and the recent episodes 
of financial market manipulation is for the need to have a strong culture of professionalism, 
integrity  and  ethics  permeating  throughout  the  financial  services  industry  to  restore  public 
trust in the financial system and to secure long-term sustainability of the industry. 
The 2008 financial crisis highlighted how business decisions that were predominantly driven 
by  short-term  incentives  critically  undermined  the  health  of  some  of  the  largest  global 
companies.  This  in  turn  had  enormous  consequences  on  entire  economies.  Not  only  has 
public confidence in the financial services industry been shaken, but the prevailing business 
models of financial institutions have been questioned with calls being made for changes that 
are  more  aligned  with  long-term  sustainability.  These  changes  relate  to  both  the  general 
structure and activities of financial institutions, and to the governance and culture within the 
institutions. 
While financial institutions have to create value for shareholders, of fundamental significance 
is  also  the  need  to  serve  the  public  interest  given  the  importance  of  a  well-functioning 
financial system in the economy. Additionally, in a highly interconnected global economy with 
greater international financial inter linkages, financial turmoil and stress in national financial 
systems will have ramifications that transcend borders. Given the high stakes involved, there 
has been increasing scrutiny of the values, professional norms, educational standards and 
incentives that drive and shape the behaviour of financial institutions. Much of this scrutiny 
has  aimed  at  reinforcing  the  responsibility  that  financial  institutions  have  to  the  broader 
society. 
The  establishment  of  the  Financial  Services  Professional  Board  (FSPB),  thus  marks  a 
significant  development  towards  achieving  the  highest  standards  of  professional  conduct 
including  fair  business  dealings  and  ethics  in  the  financial  services  industry  that  will  be 
consistent with the long-term growth, stability and integrity of the financial system. 
It  is  envisaged  that  the  Financial  Services  Professional  Board  will  act  as  an  industry-led 
independent board that will drive the development as well as the advocacy of professional 
standards,  ethics  and  continuous  professional  development  across  the  financial  services 
industry.  Central  to  this  aim  is  the  development  of  a  culture  within  the  financial  services 
industry which places an unequivocal commitment to professionalism and ethics. 
In  advancing  this  endeavour,  the  FSPB  will  promote,  advocate  and  facilitate  the 
identification, development and the adoption of professional and ethical standards across all 
sectors of the financial services industry. The primary purpose of such standards will be to 
clearly define the expected level of performance and ethical conduct that financial services 
professionals are required to achieve in the service of the public. It is particularly important 
that the standards are unambiguous about the values for the industry and its workforce. It 
would facilitate financial services practitioners to understand and embrace their professional 
obligations, and be held accountable for their own continuing professional development. 
Bank Negara Malaysia and the Securities Commission Malaysia believe that with its stature 
and global complexion, the FSPB is well positioned to lead efforts aimed at raising the bar of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  professional and ethical standards including continuous professional development for across 
the financial services industry, thereby strengthening confidence in the industry and affirming 
the industry’s commitment to better serve public interest. 
Its  membership  of  eminent  experts  and  financial  practitioners  from  the  United  Kingdom, 
Europe,  Australia  and  Asia  provides  a  valuable  global  perspective  that  will  enhance  the 
relevance of the standards developed by the FSPB and their universal application. 
The  establishment  of  FSPB  also  reflects  the  advancement  and  progress  of  the  financial 
services industry in Malaysia and the vision of its members to embrace and promote globally 
acceptable  and  applicable  standards  of  professionalism,  human  capital  development  and 
ethical behaviour that will provide the much needed clarity to the public and the industry on 
what is expected of financial services practitioners. 
Indeed,  in  moving  forward,  the  emphasis  on  the  development  of  human  capital  which 
includes elevating professionalism and ethical behaviour of financial services professionals is 
paramount.  Today,  professionalism,  ethics  and  the  quality  of  human  capital  have  become 
key drivers and enablers of change in the financial services industry. 
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the role of the Asian Institute of Finance 
(AIF).  The  idea  of  FSPB  culminated  from  engagements  initiated  by  AIF  with  the  industry 
which  was  followed  by  a  process  of  developing  the  conceptual  framework  to  reflect  the 
shared aspirations of the industry and the Board of AIF that has supported the establishment 
of FSPB. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight the participative role that the financial 
services industry would need to have in enabling FSPB to meet its objectives. The value of 
the  establishment  of  FSPB  lies  in  the  role  taken  to  develop  professional  and  ethical 
standards  that  are  relevant  and  practical,  which  could,  subsequently,  be  accepted  and 
adopted by the global financial services industry as a gold standard. 
With this,  let  me  congratulate the  Board  of  FSPB  with  this  launch.  In  taking this  important 
initiative  forward  it  is  necessary  for  FSPB  to  reflect  the  business  needs  of  the  financial 
services  industry  whilst  balancing  the  interests  of  the  community  that  the  industry  serves. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Securities  Commission  Malaysia  will  continue  to  be 
committed in supporting this important agenda of the financial services industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
