  Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference  following  the  release  of  the  Financial  System  Review,  Ottawa,  Ontario, 
10 December 2014. 
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins and I are pleased to be here today 
to discuss the December issue of our biannual Financial System Review (FSR), which  we 
published this morning. 
The purpose of the FSR is not to predict the most likely outcomes for the financial system. 
Instead, we use  it to highlight key financial vulnerabilities and the catalysts that could turn 
those vulnerabilities into a risk to the financial system. 
The  FSR  is  an  essential  complement  to  our  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Together,  the  two 
streams of analysis provide the basis for a fulsome discussion of monetary policy, within a 
risk-management framework. Although we view risks to the financial system separately from 
risks to growth and inflation, we think carefully about the interplay between them. 
In  this  FSR,  we  discuss  three  important  financial  system  vulnerabilities:  high  household 
indebtedness; imbalances in the housing market; and increased investor risk taking. 
To some extent, all three are normal side effects of stimulative monetary policy. However, 
the post-crisis recovery has been frustratingly slow – we have called it serial disappointment 
– and bond yields and policy interest rates have been unusually low for a long time. In this 
context, these financial vulnerabilities have built up over time. 
Fortunately,  Canada’s  economy  is  showing  the  first  signs  of  a  broadening  recovery.  Non-
energy  exports  have  been  responding  to  stronger  U.S.  growth  and  exchange  rate 
depreciation, investment spending appears to be picking up, and we have seen pockets of 
new job creation. This natural rebuilding sequence is key to reducing financial vulnerabilities 
over  time.  In  particular,  our  expectation  of  a  soft  landing  for  housing  hinges  on  stronger 
growth, employment and incomes. 
The  recent  weakness  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  raises  important  risks  to  this 
economic  outlook,  however.  This  shock  is  especially  complex:  it  is  likely  to  boost  global 
growth but to moderate growth and inflation in Canada, even though the effects should be 
tempered  by  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  stronger  non-energy  exports.  The  potential 
consequences for the financial system will be monitored carefully in the months ahead. 
Meanwhile,  the  global  financial  system  is  stronger  and  more  resilient,  thanks  to  continued 
progress  on  implementing  the  G-20  regulatory  framework  and  the  efforts  of  policy-makers 
and market participants around the world, including Canada. 
In light of this continued progress, and taking into account the early signs of stronger exports, 
investment and employment in Canada, we judge that the probability of an adverse shock 
has  eased  since  our  June  FSR.  This  mitigates  our  observation  that  some  financial 
vulnerabilities  appear  to  be  edging  higher,  leaving  our  overall  assessment  of  financial 
stability risk roughly the same as in June. That is why we continue to believe that the overall 
balance of risks remains within the zone for which the current stance of monetary policy is 
appropriate. 
Let me just add a few comments specific to the most important risk discussed in the FSR: the 
difficulty that highly indebted households would have servicing their debt if they were to face 
a sharp decline in their incomes or a sharp rise in interest rates. This situation raises the risk 
that a shock to the economy could trigger a correction in house prices. The probability of this 
risk materializing is low, but if it did occur, the effect on the economy would be severe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This  risk  would  be  greater  if  house  prices  were  judged  to  be  overvalued  relative  to 
fundamentals. Bank economists have done some new research on this risk, highlighted in a 
box in our FSR, and in a research paper released today on our website. Although there is 
considerable  uncertainty  around  this  question,  various  approaches  –  including  our  own  – 
suggest that there is some risk that the housing market is overvalued, and our estimates fall 
in the 10 to 30 per cent range. 
We experienced  housing corrections  in  the  early  1980s  and  the  early  1990s,  after  periods 
when  prices  became  overvalued  to  a  similar  extent.  But  both  of  those  episodes  were 
preceded by a much faster run-up in prices amid rising inflation expectations. In both cases, 
interest rates rose as monetary policy leaned against inflation, and a recession ensued. 
None  of those  conditions  is  present today. The rise  in  house  prices  has  been  much more 
gradual and, in the context of a broadening recovery, the unwinding of household imbalances 
should be gradual as well. That is why we continue to expect a soft landing in the housing 
market, but it is conditional on continued strengthening in the economy. 
Let me reiterate the bottom line of the Financial System Review: After careful analysis of the 
latest economic, financial and regulatory developments at home and abroad, our assessment 
is that while vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness and housing markets are 
edging higher, the overall risk to financial stability in Canada is roughly the same as it was at 
the time of our June FSR. 
With that, Carolyn and I are happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
