 Seppo Honkapohja: Bank of Finland’s 200 years 
 Speech  by  Mr  Seppo  Honkapohja,  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the 
CEPR-BoF  Conference 
innovation  and  growth”,  Helsinki, 
23 October 2014. 
“Entrepreneurial 
finance, 
 The Bank of Finland had its 200 year anniversary three years ago. The charter of the bank 
was promulgated on December 12, 1811, and we are the fourth oldest central bank operating 
today. Only the Swedish Riksbank, the Bank of England, and Banque de France are older. 
The Bank of Finland is also more than 100 years older than Finland’s political independence, 
which was achieved only in 1917. 
Establishment of a national bank of issue in Finland came about after, in 1809, the Russian 
Empire had annexed Finland as an autonomous Grand Duchy, with the Russian Tsar as the 
Grand  Duke.  The  Grand  Duchy  of  Finland  was  given  its  own  particular  administrative 
structure, separate from the government of Russia. The new national bank of issue was part 
of this newly created national administration. 
The  first  task  of  the  Bank  of  Finland  was  to  separate  the  Finnish  financial  system  from 
Sweden  by  issuing  (rouble-  and  kopeck-denominated)  notes,  and  by  granting  credits  to 
Finnish landowners and merchants. The Bank of Finland was originally established in the city 
of Turku, in the south-west of Finland, and moved to Helsinki, the new capital of the country, 
in 1819. 
Despite the efforts of the Bank of Finland, Swedish money remained widely used in Finland 
until 1840, when Finland went on the silver standard (following Russia), and the remaining 
Swedish paper money was withdrawn from circulation. After this milestone, the notes issued 
by  the  Bank  of  Finland  became  the  dominant  means  of  payment  in  the  country  and  the 
circulation was effectively controlled by the Bank of Finland. 
Finland  obtained  its  own  currency  unit,  the  markka  in  1860  –  i.e.  well  before  the  country 
became  independent.  This  happened  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Crimean  war  and  the 
international financial crisis of 1857–58, when the rouble was seriously destabilized and went 
off the silver standard. 
At  first,  the  new  currency  unit,  the  markka,  was  defined  simply  as  a  quarter  of  the  paper 
rouble.  In  1865,  however,  the  head  of  the  financial  department  of  the  Finnish  senate, 
J.V. Snellman, obtained from Tsar Alexander II the permission to link the markka to the silver 
standard independently of the rouble. As the Russian rouble remained inconvertible to silver, 
Finland’s monetary system was thus effectively separated from Russia’s. 
In  1868,  the  Bank  of  Finland  was  transferred  under  the  control  and  ownership  of  the 
parliament.  Until  then,  the  bank  had  been  subordinated  to  the  Imperial  Senate  of  Finland. 
The system in which the central bank belongs to the parliament was adopted following the 
Swedish example and has lasted to this day. 
Most European countries moved to the gold standard in the 1870s, and Finland followed suit 
in  1878.  At  that  point,  the  gold  content  of  the  Finnish  markka  was  defined  so  that  it  was 
exactly  equivalent  to  the  French  franc  (as  well  as  the  Belgian  and  Swiss  francs,  and  the 
Italian  lira).  Finland  thus  became,  by  a  unilateral  decision,  an  effective  member  of  the 
European  franc  zone  (the  Latin  Monetary  Union),  even  if  not  a  signatory  to  the  monetary 
union agreement. The Bank of Finland managed to keep the exchange rate of the markka 
vis-à-vis the French franc constant for 36 years, from the start in 1878 until the outbreak of 
the First World War. 
Finland  declared  her  independence  in  December  1917, following  the  October revolution  in 
Russia.  The  First World War  and  the  Finnish  Civil  War  of  1918  caused  sharp  inflation.  In 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  1923  the  Bank  of  Finland  finally  manages  to  stabilize  the  value  of  the  currency,  and  the 
markka  had  lost  almost  90  per  cent  of  its  prewar  value  in  gold.  At  this  lower  parity,  the 
markka was returned to gold as of the beginning of 1926, following the British pound sterling. 
In  the  interwar  years,  the  Bank  of  Finland  became  the  undisputed  leader  of  Finland’s 
economic policy. This was largely due to the very strong governor of the bank, Risto Ryti, 
who acquired considerable prestige in Finland and also abroad. 
Ever  since  Ryti’s  governorship,  which  lasted  from  1924  until  the  outbreak  of  the  Second 
World War, the governor of the Bank of Finland has been one of the most central figures in 
Finnish public life. This is illustrated by the fact that four members of the board of the Bank of 
Finland have become Presidents of the Republic: Kyösti Kallio, Risto Ryti, Urho Kekkonen, 
and Mauno Koivisto. Two of these, Mr Ryti and Dr Koivisto, had been governors of the bank. 
The  Great  Depression  forced  the  pound  off  gold  in  the  autumn  of  1931,  and  the 
Scandinavian  currencies  and  Finland  had  to follow  suit.  The markka  was floated  and then 
depreciated  vis-à-vis  most  foreign  currencies.  In  the  spring  of  1933,  the  worst  of  the 
depression was over, and the Bank of Finland pegged the markka to pound sterling. 
The  Second  World  War  caused  in  Finland  severe  inflation  which  was  only  brought  under 
control  by  the  early  1950’s.  This  allowed  the  Finnish  markka  to  enter  the  Bretton  Woods 
system in 1952 – Finland had become member of the IMF already in 1948. 
In  the  post-war  decades,  Finnish  monetary  policy  was  subordinated  to  a  vigorous, 
government-led growth policy which sought to promote investment and industrialization, and 
used  interest  rate  controls,  capital  controls  and  government-sponsored  lending  as  its 
instruments. Under this regime, the Bank of Finland’s operational tasks multiplied, including 
the operation of an extensive system of capital import policies and selective credit guidelines. 
This  financial  repression  policy  lasted  until  the  end  of  the  1970’s  and  achieved  very  high 
investment  rates  and  growth  rates  for  the  economy,  but  at  the  price  of  a  relatively  high 
inflation  rate  and  recurrent  balance-of-payments  problems.  The  markka  was  devalued  on 
several occasions. This financial and monetary policy regime changed only in the aftermath 
of the first oil crisis. 
In the 1980s the Bank of Finland, following international trends, gradually lifted the controls 
on capital movements and also liberalized domestic credit markets. After the deregulation, a 
very  strong  credit  cycle  developed  which  also  produced  a  sizable  current  account  deficit. 
This credit cycle ended in 1991 with a severe banking crisis. At the same time, Finland lost 
some of her traditional export markets when the Soviet Union collapsed. 
In the course of the ensuing economic crisis, Finland’s GDP fell by some 14 per cent. The 
Finnish  markka  was  first  devalued  (November  1991)  and  the  floated  (September  1992), 
depreciating all in all by about 30 per cent against the European currency unit (ECU). 
In February 1993, with the markka now a floating currency, the Bank of Finland committed to 
an inflation target of “less than two per cent” as the primary objective of its monetary policy. 
Under this regime, the confidence was gradually restored in financial markets, interest rates 
returned  to  normal  levels,  and  the  exchange  rate  recovered.  A  period  of  strong  economic 
recovery also took place. 
When Finland joined the EU from the beginning of 1995, she accepted all obligations of the 
Maastricht  Treaty,  including  the  plan  for  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  painful 
financial instability of the late 1980s and early 1990s was probably one main reason why the 
euro enjoyed relatively strong appeal among Finnish politicians and the population at large 
as well. 
After the banking crisis of the early 1990s, financial supervision was reorganized in Finland in 
1993. Financial supervision was made a part of the Bank of Finland, but as an independent 
institution  with  its  own  decision-making  bodies.  Later,  also  insurance  supervision  was 
merged to this supervision authority which operates in connection to the Bank of Finland. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  investing 
The  newly  re-established  financial  stability  of  the  mid-1990’s  allowed  Finland  to  join  the 
European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in October 1996. Finland was then among the 
first  group  of  countries  to  adopt  the  euro  in  1999.  The  governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland, 
Dr Sirkka Hämäläinen, became one of the members of the ECB’s first executive board, and 
actually its first female member. 
Now  a  part  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  Bank  of  Finland  continues  in  its  role  as  the  monetary 
authority and the bankers’ bank in Finland. Nevertheless, it has streamlined its operational 
functions,  while 
its  economic  research  and 
communications activities. The Bank now has 390 employees (at mid-2014) and 580 when 
the Financial Supervision Authority is included. 
The Bank of Finland has traditionally invested a significant amount of resources in economic 
research.  This  continues  today.  As  part  of  its  profile  within  the  Eurosystem,  the  Bank  of 
Finland  has  also  developed  a  research  concentration  on  the  economic  and  financial 
developments in Russia, which is again a very important trading partner for Finland. 
According  to  recent  polls,  the  Bank  of  Finland  is  now  among  the  top  three  most  trusted 
institutions  in  the  country.  The  current  Governor  of  the  bank,  since  2004,  is  Mr.  Erkki 
Liikanen,  who  has  previously  served  as  Finland’s  finance  minister  and  a  member  of  the 
European Commission. 
than  previously 
in  more 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
