  Stephen  S Poloz: Speculating  on the future of finance 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Economic Club of 
New York, New York City, 11 December 2014. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. It is always a pleasure to be in New York, 
and it is a special treat for me to address this distinguished audience. 
I’d  like  to  talk  with  you  about  the  future  of  finance.  Now,  I  know  I  don’t  have  to  convince 
anyone  in  this  room  of  the  importance  of  financial  intermediation.  Just  as  you  can’t have 
lights without power lines, you can’t have economic growth without financial intermediation. 
But  as  you  also  know  well,  our  financial  regulators  have  spent  the  last  five  years putting 
financial  reforms  in  place  in  the  wake  of  the  2008  financial  crisis.  There  is  absolutely no 
doubt that these reforms will affect the future of finance, but none of us really knows how. 
Financial intermediation is already evolving in response to the reforms, and I think it is worth 
speculating on how these trends might develop in the future. The only assumption I make is 
this one: no amount of regulation can snuff out the forces of competition – competition is a 
force of nature, and it is going to manifest itself in some way, for there is a lot of money at 
stake. 
Regulatory response to the crisis: too much or too little? 
At the G-20 Summit in Brisbane, leaders acknowledged that we have delivered on the core 
commitments made in response to the financial crisis. 
Yes, there are still some important issues to address, particularly with respect to consistent 
implementation  of  these  reforms.  But  for  the  most  part  the  core  of  the  world’s  financial 
system is far safer today. 
Depending  on  your  perspective,  these  reforms  are  either  overly  harsh,  or  too  lax.  A 
systemically important bank sees the steep cost of reform, while the unemployed worker still 
feels the steep cost of the crisis. 
My perspective as a central banker is a macro one, and I can tell you that by the end of last 
year,  the  cumulative  loss  to  global  output  owing  to  the  crisis  was  roughly  US$10  trillion, 
which is close to 15 per cent of global GDP. Over 60 million jobs were destroyed. 
We have rightly made a strong commitment to address the most serious fault lines exposed 
by the crisis, to reduce significantly the probability and severity of future ones. In short, we 
would  like  to  ensure  that  this  never  happens  again.  No  doubt,  the  sweeping  scope  and 
complexity  of  these  reforms  has  some  thinking  that  the  new  regulatory  architecture  is 
excessively tight, at least at first glance. 
Of course, optimizing the scope and intensity of regulation was never going to be easy. The 
new  regulatory  architecture is the outcome of a political process with many trade-offs and 
significant  differences  across  financial  systems.  Accordingly,  the  principles  behind  the 
reforms matter more than the rules themselves – principles, complemented by a high level of 
supervisory vigilance. 
Fact is, the financial world is a dynamic place, where competition is inherent to it, regardless 
of  market  structure.  Principles-based  financial  regulation  sets  a  high  bar  under  which 
competitive  forces  can  still  foster  financial  innovation,  innovation  that  is  more  likely  to  be 
socially improving than simply evasive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In  Canada,  active  and  vigilant  supervision  goes  hand  in  hand  with  this  principles-based 
approach to regulation. To help monitor potential emerging risks, we have a comprehensive 
radar system that includes surveillance, guidance and enforcement. Canadians have found 
that this complementary approach to regulation and supervision is conducive to responsible 
financial innovation. 
An important objective of these G-20 financial reforms is consistent implementation across 
jurisdictions, but in a manner that avoids unduly impeding financial innovation. 
I see such innovation in financial intermediation as essential to fostering regulatory balance 
between  maintaining  financial  stability  on  the  one  hand  and  facilitating  competitive market 
forces on the other hand. As people in the financial industry create new ways to do business 
–  some  call  this  regulatory  arbitrage,  which  of  course  sounds  like  a  bad  thing  –  their 
innovations  help  re-set  this  balance,  prompting  regulation  to  adapt  to  positive  progress in 
financial intermediation. 
There is a natural incentive behind financial innovation, since there is a lot of money at stake 
for  those  who  innovate  successfully.  There  is  a  lot  at  stake  for  the  macroeconomy,  too, 
because  a  return  to  sustainable  economic  growth  around  the  world will require continued 
financial  innovation.  Regulation  must  allow  these  natural  forces  to  manifest  themselves, 
albeit in a safe way. 
Where the creative forces might take us 
Given  this  context,  let’s  speculate  about the future of financial intermediation: How will the 
forces of competition manifest themselves in the years ahead? 
Let’s start with banks. Some may choose to shed business lines that have relatively low risk-
adjusted  returns.  In  particular,  capital  market  activities  could  shrink  as  the  risk  weights 
associated  with  them  increase.  This  has  already  started:  since  2007  global  banks  have 
already  sold  off  more  than  US$700  billion  in  assets  and  operations,  of  which  foreign 
operations account for almost half. 
Furthermore, in response to the new resolution requirements, some large banks may simplify 
their organizational structures. 
I’m not suggesting that large universal banks will disappear. They will likely persist, at least 
because  of  the  significant  economies  of  scale  associated  with  payments  and  foreign 
exchange.  Large  banks  will  also  remain  because  there  will  be  an  ongoing  need  to  serve 
global clients. 
For  their  part,  smaller  and  less-complex  banks  will  probably  increase  their  focus  on 
traditional banking. 
We can’t be definitive about these predictions, for we simply do not know how competitive 
forces will operate in this new environment. But it would be surprising if the net effect were 
not to reduce the availability of credit. If financial markets had imperfections before, some of 
those  imperfections  are  likely  to  be  even  more  evident  under  the  new  regulatory 
environment. This is straight out of your first economics textbook. 
It  goes  without  saying  that reduced availability of credit would be a headwind to economic 
growth. And, if there are funding gaps in our system at the best of times, and they turn out to 
be  a  little  bigger  under  our  new  regulatory  umbrella,  those  funding  gaps  will  probably  be 
found  in  all  the  usual  places:  lending  for  young  businesses,  small-  and  medium-sized 
companies, trade finance and infrastructure, to name a few. 
These  areas  of  retreat  by  banks  could  look  like  good  opportunities  for  other  financial 
intermediaries. We can imagine several different channels where the forces of competition 
might emerge, all of which could occur simultaneously. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First,  there  is  market-based  finance. As banks rein in their risk-taking, we can expect that 
market-based finance will play a larger role than it currently does. We can see this happening 
already. 
For starters, in some markets companies increasingly fund themselves by issuing bonds on 
the  market.  In  the  U.S.,  while  bank  dealers  have  significantly  reduced  their  inventories  of 
corporate  bonds,  non-bank  lenders  have  increased  their  holdings  of  corporate  bonds. 
Whether they are structured as asset managers, insurers, non-bank financial firms or retail 
investors,  these  groups  are  opportunistically  filling  the  void  that  traditional  bankers  have 
created. 
Securitization  is  another  market-based  channel that could really expand in this new world. 
Although the very word securitization has been tainted by the crisis, I can imagine that a new 
class  of  high-quality,  low-risk  securitization  products  could  differentiate  itself  from  the 
mistakes of the past. 
Such innovations are to be welcomed, provided that they are created in a manner that does 
not pose new or growing risks to the financial system, such as liquidity shortfalls in times of 
stress. Importantly, market-based finance can even be a source of economic stability, if such 
intermediaries  react  differently  to  market  turbulence  than  banks.  In  effect,  countries  with 
diversified financing sources may be better placed to weather shocks to the economy. 
However,  market-based  finance  is  unlikely  to  erase  all  of  the  imperfections  in  our  future 
financial  system.  In  particular,  market-based  finance  is  not  very  effective  in  reducing 
information  asymmetries,  so  it  probably  will  not  fill  the  funding  gap  for  young,  small-  or 
medium-sized businesses. 
No  doubt,  Mother  Nature has a plan to fill those gaps in time, and one probable source is 
private lending and equity, a second channel where competitive forces are likely to emerge. 
There  have  been  significant  advances  in  technology  that  are  sure  to  influence  the  future 
provisioning  of  private  capital.  One  notable  example  is  peer-to-peer  (P2P)  finance,  which 
directly connects private lenders with borrowers via the Internet. An important element of this 
model is that there is no middleman, nor is there any liquidity or maturity transformation as in 
traditional banking or market-based finance. 
While P2P finance is still in its infancy, it is already transforming private capital provision and 
growing  fast  in  pockets  in  the  U.K.,  the  U.S.  and  China.  Although  it  originally  focused on 
pooled  funds  from  smaller  investors,  P2P  finance  is  increasingly  being  dominated  by  big 
institutions  and  hedge  funds  with  about  two-thirds  of  the  funds  loaned  coming  from 
institutional  investors.  This  is  already  changing  the  face  of  P2P  finance  in  very  important 
ways. 
P2P finance has an impressive cost advantage over traditional banking and since there is a 
lot of money at stake, as usual, competitive forces are certain to manifest themselves. With 
automated credit checks and “no skin in the game,” the operating expenses in P2P lending, 
for example, run about one-third that of traditional banks. 
With that advantage, P2P lending provides the opportunity for both savers and borrowers to 
get a “better” deal. However, there is no such thing as a free lunch. The cost of that better 
deal is the significant risk that the participants take on. 
Despite the risks, we can easily imagine a world in which P2P finance thrives. It has already 
begun  to  spread  to  a  wide  variety  of  new  sectors,  such  as  student  loans,  real  estate, 
hedging, auto loans, equipment finance, medical loans, business-to-business lending, and so 
on.  Over  time,  we  could  see  P2P  finance  become  more  global,  and  could  also  see  the 
development of a deep secondary market in securitized P2P loans. 
If I am right that there will be less credit available from traditional banks, it’s not a stretch to 
think that the young, the small and the medium, and the risky companies, will begin to tap 
into this P2P finance channel to meet their credit needs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This evolution could be key to an eventual return to sustainable economic growth, as I am 
convinced that a return to natural growth – as opposed to policy-induced growth – will require 
a resumption of new firm creation, sustained by innovative financial intermediation. 
Will a surge in P2P finance mean new risks to the financial system? Perhaps. Will those risks 
be  systemic  in  nature?  We  don’t  have  a  clear  answer  yet,  but  with  the  increasing 
participation  of  institutional  investors  in  this  space  and  increasing  market  shares  of  P2P 
finance, there could be financial stability implications. 
And what if Mother Nature does not fix all the imperfections in our financial system through 
market-based  or  private  finance?  The  third  channel  that  we  might  expect  to  play  an 
enhanced role in a credit-constrained world is public finance. 
Public financial intermediaries are active in such areas as lending to small and medium-sized 
enterprises  and  trade  finance,  and  these  demands  could rise in the years ahead. But the 
bigger  need  for  a  public  sector  solution  is  more  likely  to  be  in  the  area  of  infrastructure 
investment. So-called “green infrastructure” is particularly susceptible to market failure, as it 
suffers  from  both  the  basic  free-rider  problem  and  societal  mispricing  –  a  double market 
failure, if you will. 
Public-private  partnerships  (or  P3s)  have  proven  to  be  an  increasingly  effective  tool  for 
funding these investments, but they have not been a panacea. The P3 space is not exempt 
from our call for more financial innovation. 
Innovative  ways  of risk-sharing in investment projects  – for example, governments offering 
innovative  guarantee  structures  where  they  take  on a contingent fiscal risk as opposed to 
laying out large expenditures up front  – are clearly worth experimenting with. Private sector 
intermediaries, pension funds, and sovereign wealth funds should be actively encouraged to 
develop and propose such innovations. Once again, there is a lot of money at stake. 
It should be clear by now that I am a big fan of market forces. The returns from successful 
financial innovation in market-based finance and P2P finance are likely to be very large, from 
the perspectives of both the innovator and the macroeconomist. Allowing those competitive 
forces to flourish, within principles-based regulation aimed at protecting the financial system, 
is essential for future economic growth. Tweaking public financial intermediation should take 
care of the rest of our market imperfections. 
But  all  of  these  market  structures  exist  already,  so  speculating  on  their  future  is not that 
much of a stretch. That makes me wonder if we are missing something big. How blue-sky do 
we want to get? Does anybody besides me wonder what the banking system looks like in the 
background of Star Trek? 
Or,  what  about  the  corporatist  model of finance, which lies in the background of Margaret 
Atwood’s  novel,  The  Year  of  the  Flood?  Now  that’s  blue-sky  thinking:  people  work  for  a 
massive corporation, live in the corporate compound, go to corporate restaurants and events, 
and  bank  with  a  financial  intermediary  wholly-owned  by  their  own employer, which in turn 
invests the funds in growth for the corporation. 
I suppose that model is far-fetched, but I present it as an illustration that the sky really is the 
limit in this space. I have offered you a range of possibilities today, but there are many other 
possible futures for finance. 
Financial stability is a shared responsibility 
A  bright  future  is  one  where  the  financial  system  is  safe  and  efficient  –  and  innovative. 
Financial  regulation  needs  to  be  designed  to  allow  competitive  forces  to  work,  and  allow 
innovation to happen. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I  said  earlier  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  strike  the  perfect  balance  between  regulation  and 
innovation. Indeed, public authorities can’t strike a perfect balance alone. That balance is the 
product of regulation and the underlying forces of competition I have talked about. 
The  simple  fact  is  that  financial  intermediation  is,  for  the  most  part,  a  scale  business. 
Operating  at  scale  creates  the  risk  of  market  failure, or market imperfections, as we well 
know. Accordingly, operating at scale demands that the financial intermediary do so under a 
social license which, of course, goes hand in hand with regulation. 
In short, this is a contract. All contracts function best when the two parties live not just by the 
letter,  but  by the spirit underlying the agreement. I’ve asked you to imagine some possible 
financial futures; now, can you imagine one where regulated financial players uphold not just 
the letter, but the spirit of the new global regulatory framework? 
What  I  am  suggesting  is  that  the  industry  be  at  the  vanguard  of  positive  change,  and 
voluntarily embrace the spirit of financial regulation. Use this positive response as a brand to 
rebuild  trust  in  the  street,  especially  Main  Street.  And,  in  the  process,  demonstrate  the 
effectiveness  of principles-based financial regulation that allows competition and innovation 
to facilitate economic growth. 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. 
Financial regulation is costly, but that cost pales compared with the fallout from the financial 
crisis. We are still paying for that. Global regulatory reform was absolutely essential. So let’s 
work together to make it better. Thankfully, the balance between regulation and innovation is 
dynamic, not static – competitive forces ensure this. 
We  are  at  a  critical juncture for the global economy. We have been through a destructive 
business  cycle,  and  policies  will  need  to  remain  stimulative  until  the  legacy  headwinds 
subside  and  the  rebuilding  phase truly gets underway. That rebuilding phase will require a 
substantial pickup in new firm creation and young firm survival, in particular, which will foster 
new  job  creation.  Creative  financial  intermediation  is  a  necessary  ingredient  for  this 
rebuilding process. 
In  Canada,  we  had  a less difficult cycle than most other countries, in part because of the 
resilience  of  our  financial  system.  Even  so,  we  saw  significant  destruction  in  our  export 
sector,  the  backbone  of  our  economy.  We  have  been  waiting  for  a  resumption  of  export 
growth, to be followed by a rekindling of animal spirits, investment in new capacity and new 
firm and new job creation, and it looks like that natural sequence may have finally begun. We 
have  plenty  of  room  to  grow,  however,  so  it  will  take  another  couple  of  years  before our 
economy can enjoy steady, natural growth with inflation sustainably on target. 
It is this return to natural growth that we all want to see. But it simply will not happen without 
vigorous  and  innovative  financial  intermediation.  We  need  to  embrace  our  new  regulatory 
architecture and get on with the job. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
