  Thomas Jordan: Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy decision and 
assessment of the Swiss economic situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  Media  News  Conference  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  Berne, 
1 December 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Welcome  to  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  six-monthly  news  conference.  I  will  begin  by 
explaining the Governing Board’s monetary policy decision and outlining our assessment of 
the  economic  situation.  I  will  then  hand  over  to  my  colleagues,  Jean-Pierre  Danthine  and 
Fritz  Zurbrügg,  who  will  comment  on  current  developments  in  financial  stability  and  the 
financial markets. Thereafter, we will be happy to take your questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
I will begin with our monetary policy decision. 
The  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  has  decided  to  maintain  the  minimum  exchange  rate  of 
CHF 1.20  per  euro.  The  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  remains  at  0.0–0.25%. 
Deflation risks have increased once again in recent months, and the Swiss franc is still high. 
We  will  therefore  continue  to  enforce  the  minimum  exchange  rate  with  the  utmost 
determination. If necessary, we are prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities 
for this purpose. With interest rates at zero, the minimum exchange rate is the key instrument 
to avoid an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions. This is especially important at the 
moment, as upward pressure on the Swiss franc has intensified once again. Furthermore, we 
will not hesitate to take further measures, should they prove necessary. 
Our new conditional inflation forecast has been revised downwards once again. Above all, 
the appreciably lower oil price will push inflation into negative territory during the next four 
quarters.  Moreover,  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  has  deteriorated  once  more. 
Together with persistently low inflation across the globe, this is dampening the medium and 
long-term inflation outlook for Switzerland. For the current year, we have revised our forecast 
downwards  by  0.1  percentage  points  to  0.0%.  For  2015,  we  are  now  even  anticipating  a 
negative  inflation  rate  of  –0.1%,  with  inflation  turning  positive  only  in  2016,  at  0.3%.  This 
constitutes a downward  adjustment of 0.3 percentage points for 2015, and 0.2 percentage 
points for 2016. These forecasts assume that the three-month Libor will remain at zero over 
the entire forecast horizon, and that the Swiss franc will weaken. The revision of the inflation 
forecast is a clear sign that deflation risks have increased once more. 
Global economic outlook 
The SNB’s inflation forecast is embedded in a global economic scenario. Let me now discuss 
our assessment of the global economy. 
Global economic developments continue to be mixed. The US, UK and China all saw robust 
growth  in  the  third  quarter.  In  the  euro  area  and  Japan,  by  contrast,  it  was  weaker  than 
expected. In addition, inflation in the advanced economies was below central bank targets – 
in some cases by a considerable margin. In the euro area, it is only just in positive territory. 
The decline in commodity prices, above all crude oil, will curb inflation further over the short 
term. 
We continue to assume that global economic growth  will gradually firm over the course of 
next  year.  The  considerable  fall  in  oil  prices  should  be  a  contributory factor.  However,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  prospects for individual countries vary widely. For the US, we are expecting that growth will 
remain robust over the next few quarters, leading to better utilisation of economic capacity. 
For the euro area, by contrast, we have revised the growth forecast downwards once more, 
and  the  outlook  for  this  region  remains  very  subdued.  The  picture  for  the  emerging 
economies is mixed. China will continue to be a driver of the global economy, although it is 
likely  to  see  a  gradual  weakening  of  growth.  For  India,  growth  prospects  are  picking  up 
again. The outlook for Brazil and Russia, by contrast, remains muted. 
Overall, the global economic outlook is still very uncertain and dominated by downside risks 
– the most important of which are the continuing difficult conditions in the euro area and a 
possible escalation in geopolitical tensions. 
Swiss economic outlook 
I will now look at economic developments in Switzerland. 
Following a weak second quarter, real GDP growth was unexpectedly favourable in the third. 
On  the  demand  side,  the  increase  was  supported  predominantly  by  goods  exports,  with 
manufacturing  the  main  beneficiary  of  the  strong  export  demand.  However,  private  and 
public consumption also picked up, after having registered only lacklustre growth in the first 
half of the year. Momentum in equipment investment, by contrast, remained weak. In part, 
growth was also boosted by special factors, including an unusually large increase in value 
added  in  the  healthcare  industry.  Despite  the  positive  developments  of  the  third  quarter, 
utilisation of economic capacity remains unsatisfactory. 
We are assuming that growth will be markedly lower in the fourth quarter. In particular, export 
demand and value added in manufacturing are likely to contribute significantly less to growth 
than  in  the  previous  quarter.  As  a  result  of  the  comprehensive  revision  of  the  national 
accounts, the reported figures for previous quarters are higher, and therefore GDP growth for 
the current year should also be somewhat higher than we assumed in September, by 1.5–
2%.  However,  the  underlying  economic  momentum  has  not  changed.  For  next  year  we 
expect  to  see  GDP  growth  of  about  2%.  Under  this  assumption,  the  underutilisation  of 
economic capacity will decline only gradually. We are also expecting only a modest recovery 
on the labour market. 
Monetary and financial conditions 
I will now turn to monetary and financial conditions. 
After a long period in negative territory, inflation has been hovering around zero for over a 
year. The minimum exchange rate has prevented deflationary developments, but inflation still 
lies towards the bottom of the range that we equate with price stability. Moreover, according 
to  the  available  surveys,  medium-term  inflation  expectations  have  fallen  steadily  in  recent 
years. Yet, at around 1%, they are still close to the long-term average inflation rate. 
Interest  rates,  too,  have  remained  very  low  across  all  maturities  in  the  past  few  quarters. 
Mortgage  rates  have  declined  further,  reaching  a  new  low  in  October.  Government  bond 
rates have also fallen to new lows. My colleague, Fritz Zurbrügg, will discuss developments 
on the financial markets in more detail. 
Despite  falling  mortgage  rates,  mortgage  lending  growth  slowed  again.  At  the  same  time, 
real estate prices continued to rise. However, as in 2013, price momentum is weaker than in 
previous years. This suggests that the measures to contain developments on the mortgage 
and real estate markets are starting to have an impact. Yet the imbalances that have built up 
on these markets in recent years remain the same. It is still too early for an all-clear. The 
SNB  will  continue  to  monitor  the  situation  closely.  My  colleague  Jean-Pierre  Danthine  will 
discuss this topic in more detail in his presentation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Since  the  last  monetary  policy  assessment,  the  Swiss  franc  has  moved  closer  to  the 
minimum  exchange  rate,  and  has  thus  strengthened  against  the  euro  once  again.  At  the 
same time, both it and the euro have depreciated against the US dollar. Overall, the export-
weighted real external value of the Swiss franc is virtually unchanged compared to last year, 
and thus continues to lie considerably above its long-term average. The Swiss franc is still 
high. 
In  view  of  the  elevated  deflation  risks,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  remains  the  key 
instrument for ensuring appropriate monetary conditions. A further appreciation of the Swiss 
franc  would  have  a  major  impact  on  wages  and  prices,  and  would  push  inflation  well  into 
negative  territory.  Companies  in  Switzerland  would  once  again  be forced  into  drastic  price 
cuts,  in  order  to  remain  competitive.  In  such  a  scenario,  price  stability  would  be  seriously 
compromised. The minimum exchange rate helps to reduce such deflation risks. 
SNB monetary policy 
Let me close with a few additional explanations of SNB monetary policy. 
On 30 November, the Swiss voters rejected the gold initiative. The initiative demanded that 
the SNB hold at least 20% of its assets in gold, that it sell no more gold and that it store all its 
gold in Switzerland. We are relieved that the gold initiative has been rejected. As we have 
pointed out on several occasions, had the initiative been accepted this would have seriously 
impaired  the  implementation  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy.  Let  me  just  take  this 
opportunity to reiterate that, in an international comparison, the SNB’s gold holdings are high. 
Gold  has  always  been,  and  will  remain,  an  important  component  of  our  currency  reserves 
and we have no intention of selling gold. 
In the prevailing international environment, the monetary policy challenges facing the SNB 
remain considerable. The situation is still particularly difficult in the euro area. In order that 
the SNB is able to fulfil its mandate – of ensuring price stability while taking due account of 
economic  developments  –  in  the  best  possible  way,  it  must  make  full  use  of  its  room  for 
manoeuvre  in  monetary  policy.  For  this  reason,  the  SNB  will  not  hesitate  to  take  further 
measures to fulfil its mandate, should they prove necessary. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
