  Norman T L Chan: Reform and liberalisation in China – the positioning 
and future of Hong Kong 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Hong Kong Economic Summit 2015, Hong Kong, 1 December 2014. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Hong Kong’s success story – borrowed time and borrowed place? 
1. 
I am glad to be invited to address the Economic Summit 2015. This year’s theme is 
“Connectivity  Breeds  Opportunities”  and  “Breaking  New  Grounds  for  Economic  and  Trade 
Development”.  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  Hong  Kong’s  positioning  and 
prospect amidst the reform and opening up of Mainland China. I always believe that Hong 
Kong will be all the more prosperous as Mainland China continues to deepen its reform and 
open  up  further  to  the  world.  I  do  not  subscribe  to  the  view  that  our  prosperity  is  built  on 
borrowed time in a borrowed place. 
There are some who think that time has changed and Hong Kong’s golden years are 
2. 
behind us. With China’s rise, Hong Kong will decline in its relative importance and relevance 
to the Mainland. Some also think that the Central Government will trigger a Plan B in favour 
of  other  Mainland  cities  to  replace  Hong  Kong  as  its  international  financial  centre  if  Hong 
Kong becomes unstable or is no longer reliable for whatever reasons. Indeed, there is even a 
feeling  among  some  that  Hong  Kong  will  inevitably  be  marginalised  no  matter  what  as 
Mainland  China’s  reform  and  liberalisation  gathers  pace  and  other  Mainland  cities  bypass 
Hong Kong to establish direct trade and financial links with the world. 
3. 
These people believe our future is doomed and would be eclipsed by the Mainland’s 
reform and liberalisation. They tend to look back with fond memories of the “good old days” 
in the 1980s and 1990s when Hong Kong was  the sole gateway between Mainland China 
and the rest of the world. So, I pose this question – Is their reasoning sound? 
Will Hong Kong become irrelevant as Mainland China opens up? 
4. 
First, let’s look at the changes in the role of Hong Kong as an intermediate trading 
hub for Mainland China over the past few decades. In 1979, Mainland China’s external trade 
amounted  to  a  mere  US$30  billion  and  container  throughput  amounted  to  just  30,000  to 
40,000 TEUs, which were mostly processed at the Kwai Chung Container Terminal in Hong 
Kong.  By  contrast,  in  2013,  the  Mainland’s  external  trade  ballooned  140  times  to 
US$4.2 trillion  with  container  throughput  up  to  190  million  TEUs.  The  throughput  at  Hong 
Kong’s container terminals increased more than 20 times from around 1 million TEUs in 1979 
to 22 million TEUs in 2013. However, if the majority of the Mainland’s imports and exports 
continue  to  be  routed through  Hong  Kong,  how  many  additional  container  terminals  would 
need  to  be  built?  Could  our  road  system  cope  with  trucks  hauling  containers  all  over  the 
territory? And is this what we want for Hong Kong? 
5. 
In fact, Hong Kong’s position as an intermediate trading hub for Mainland China’s 
external  trade  has  become  more  prominent  over  the  past  decades.  In  1979,  our  trade 
intermediation activities  (including logistics industry) accounted for about 15% of GDP and 
rose  to  20%  in  1990.  Since  China’s  accession  to  the  World  Trade  Organisation  in  2001, 
direct competition from the Mainland has increased, but the pie has also grown much bigger. 
The total trade volume of the Mainland surged from US$510 billion in 2001 to US$4.2 trillion 
in 2013. And, while the percentage of trade being directly processed in Hong Kong has been 
trending downwards (from 30% to 10%) during the same period, the value of goods has risen 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sharply  from  US$150  billion  to  more  than  US$400  billion.  Taking  into  account  the  fast-
growing offshore trade, the total value of trade in goods handled by Hong Kong would jump 
from  some  US$300  billion  to  US$900  billion  during  the  same  period.  This  shows  that  the 
trade  creation  effect  is  much  greater  than  the  diversion  effect.  Hong  Kong’s  trade 
intermediation  activities  (including  logistics  industry)  amounted  to  US$64  billion  in  2012, 
accounting for 25% of our GDP and employing 770,000 workers (21% of the total workforce). 
These  figures  demonstrate  that  we  should  be  able  to  seize  the  abundant  business 
opportunities arising from the Mainland’s expansion in external trade if we continue to fortify 
our  trade  relations  with  the  Mainland  and  the  rest  of  the  world,  just  like  our  trade 
intermediation activities growing from 15% of GDP in 1979 to 20% in the early 1990s, and 
then to 25% now. 
Let me illustrate with another example why Hong Kong will not be marginalised as 
6. 
the Mainland continues to open up to the world. Let’s look at the opening of the cross-strait 
“Three  Direct  Links”.  Prior  to  2008, there  were no  direct flights  between  the  Mainland  and 
Taiwan.  Passengers  had  to  make  a  mid-way  stopover  at  a  third  place.  As  a  result,  Hong 
Kong  became  the  busiest  transit  point  between  the  Mainland  and  Taiwan  by  virtue  of  its 
favourable  location.  Some  pundits  predicted  that  the  opening  of  the  “Three  Direct  Links” 
would deal a devastating blow to the aviation industry between Hong Kong and Taiwan. On 
the contrary, air traffic between Hong Kong and Taiwan increased by 15% from an average 
of 118 flights per day in 2007, before the implementation of the “Three Direct Links” in 2008, 
to  136  daily  flights  in  2013.  This  clearly  illustrates  that  as  long  as  Hong  Kong  is  able  to 
maintain its attractiveness and competitiveness, we can continue to effectively perform our 
role as an intermediary between the Mainland and Taiwan. 
Are Hong Kong and Shanghai deadly rivals? 
7. 
The tale of the rivalry between Hong Kong and Shanghai is another hotly debated 
topic. But I have never thought of these two cities as deadly rivals.  More than a year ago 
when Shanghai proposed the establishment of the “Free Trade Zone”, some predicted that, 
within  2  to  3  years,  Shanghai  would  wrest  from  Hong  Kong  the  position  as  Mainland’s 
offshore  financial  centre.  They  thought  that  further  liberalisation  of  the  Mainland’s  capital 
account would enable Shanghai and other Mainland financial centres to take business away 
from  Hong  Kong.  There  is  some  truth  in  it.  As  the  Mainland’s  capital  account  liberalises, 
Shanghai will certainly carry out more cross-border and international financial activities and 
compete with Hong Kong. However, I would like to point out that the gradual liberalisation of 
the capital account is a two-way process, meaning a more efficient flow of funds into and out 
of the Mainland. It will then be much easier for Hong Kong to develop businesses targeting 
Mainland  enterprises  and  residents,  such  as  financing,  debt  issuance  and  wealth 
management. If we look at the size of the onshore renminbi financial market, with RMB110 
trillion in total bank deposits and RMB160 trillion in total financial assets, we can imagine as 
the capital account continues to liberalise and create the necessary policy headroom for two-
way fund flows, it would mean a huge market with enormous business opportunities for Hong 
Kong’s competitive banks and financial institutions. 
8. 
So, I do not believe Shanghai and Hong Kong are rivals. The two cities are situated 
in  different  regions  and  their  real  economies  have  different  clientele.  With  capital  account 
controls  still  in  place  on  the  Mainland,  the  further  opening  up  of  Shanghai,  such  as  the 
development of its Free Trade Zone, will lead to closer and more extensive business, trade 
and  financial  links  between  the  two  cities,  meaning  more  business  opportunities.  In  2000, 
there were 23 flights a day between Hong Kong and Shanghai. In 2013, this had increased to 
75, clearly demonstrating that the continuous growth of Shanghai will result in more business 
exchanges with Hong Kong and creating a win-win situation. 
9. 
Indeed,  the  launch  of  the  Shanghai-Hong  Kong  Stock  Connect  on  November  17 
resonates with my assertions here in several ways. Last week, Vice-Premier Ma Kai told the 
visiting delegation of the Hong Kong Association of Banks that the scheme was not only a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  milestone for financial co-operation between Hong Kong and Shanghai, but also a strategic 
move towards the Mainland’s capital account convertibility and the opening up of its capital 
market.  Furthermore,  the  Shanghai-Hong  Kong  Stock  Connect  adds  another  important 
channel  for  the  circulation  of renminbi  between  onshore  and  offshore markets.  It  is  also  a 
strong vote of confidence in Hong Kong’s development as an international financial centre, 
reaffirming  our  unique  role  as  the  offshore  testing  ground  for  the  Mainland’s  financial 
liberalisation. 
Zero-sum vs positive-sum 
10. 
There are also those who believe that to maintain Hong Kong’s competitive edge, 
we must be the only conduit for foreign capital going into and out of the Mainland. It means a 
“single access” model, with Hong Kong as the only link and conduit between the onshore and 
offshore markets. The rationale for Hong Kong to continue to monopolise the access to the 
onshore market is understandable. It also serves practical purposes at the initial stage of the 
renminbi’s  internationalisation.  But  as  the  renminbi  internationalisation  progresses,  this 
model  is  not  sustainable  in  the  long  run.  The  aim  of  opening  up  the  capital  account  and 
internationalising the renminbi is to foster general acceptance of renminbi in global trade and 
investment  and  as  a  reserve  currency.  To  promote  the  extensive  use  of  renminbi  by 
corporations  and  investors  around  the  world,  renminbi  business  must  flourish  in  different 
parts of the world. The development of the offshore renminbi market must shift from a “single 
access”  model  to  a  “multiple  accesses”  model.  We  pride  ourselves  as  the  world’s  most 
important offshore renminbi centre, still far ahead of other centres in terms of the size of the 
liquidity  pool  and  various  financial  intermediation  activities.  But  there  is  no  time  for 
complacency. Our task is to consolidate Hong Kong’s unique advantages and leverage our 
first-mover  position  by  incessantly  upgrading  our  renminbi  platform,  making  it  the  ideal 
choice for companies and financial institutions, on the Mainland and around the world alike, 
to conduct various types of offshore renminbi business. Our challenge, therefore, is to evolve 
successfully in the face of this shift and it is a philosophy that the HKMA has been actively 
pursuing  in  the  past  few  years  –  exploring  new  policy  headroom,  improving  our  financial 
infrastructure,  promoting  Hong  Kong’s  offshore  renminbi  business  in  overseas  markets  in 
collaboration with the financial industry, and co-operating with other places, such as London, 
Paris, Australia, Malaysia and Thailand in developing renminbi business. 
A competition of soft power among international financial centres 
11. 
As  I  have  emphasised  on  many  occasions,  the  competition  among  international 
financial  centres  is  essentially  a  battle  of  soft  power.  That  is  not  to  say  hard  power  is  not 
important.  Quite  the  opposite,  the  building  of  hard  infrastructure  such  as  airports, 
transportation system, telecommunications, and efficient offices, is a prerequisite for entering 
the race. Yet it can only go so far. Funds, especially at the wholesale level, tend to flow to 
and aggregate in the more efficient and safe financial centres. Therefore, the race ultimately 
depends on soft power, which is made up of a wide range of qualities and strengths that are 
difficult  to  quantify.  They  include,  the  most  important  of  all,  the  rule  of  law,  protection  of 
property  rights  and  intellectual  property,  the  taxation  regime,  the  soundness  of  financial 
institutions,  the  robustness  of  supervisory  frameworks,  the  competency  and  integrity  of 
professionals,  such  as  financial  practitioners,  accountants  and  lawyers,  the  free  flow  of 
information,  the  free  and  convenient  movement  of  people,  and  a  favourable  business 
environment. Hong Kong’s competitive edge in hard power and soft power has been a hard-
earned success made possible through the cumulative effort of successive generations. But I 
think the most crucial factor lies in the “can-do” spirit of the people of Hong Kong, a drive to 
always look for a solution, agilely and tirelessly, with no fear of obstacles or competition. Our 
economic transformation and development in the 1960s and 1970s, migrating from entrepôt 
trade to light industry and then finance, is a story of constant change and innovation. And, 
especially  since  the  Mainland’s  reform  and  opening  up,  we  have  always  been  a  testing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  ground, a buffer zone and a springboard. When Hong Kong’s manufacturing base moved to 
the Mainland, we changed to trade intermediation and focused on logistics management and 
offshore trade. We also developed our services industries, especially high value-added and 
modern  services  including  professional  and  financial  services.  Our  economy  has  always 
adapted and transformed itself in response to the constantly shifting economic landscape of 
the Mainland and the rest of the world. 
Conclusion: levering the Mainland while engaging the world 
12. 
The  pivot  of  the  Mainland’s  economic  growth  is  expected  to  shift  to  domestic 
consumption, innovation and efficiency enhancement, as well as market opening. There will 
also  be  more  Mainland  companies  investing  abroad. The  prospects  of Hong  Kong  rest  on 
whether we can ride on this trend, developing and introducing the right products and modern 
services for the Mainland market; whether we can attract more Mainland companies to use 
Hong Kong as the springboard to go global, and anchoring in Hong Kong their operating and 
treasury centres for overseas expansion. 
13. 
I have always been optimistic about Hong Kong’s future. Yet my optimism rests on 
the very presumption that Hong Kong people would continue to make the right choice for our 
future. Indeed it is our choice: what’s the way forward? Where will it lead us? We could well 
choose to indulge in past success and languish in self-pity, fretting that our monopoly access 
to the Mainland market would chip away as reform and liberalisation continues to take hold. 
We could choose to squander our time and opportunities resting on our laurels. Alternatively, 
we can choose to maintain a healthy and positive interactive relationship with the Mainland 
on the basis of “One Country, Two Systems”. We can cherish the hard-earned success made 
possible by the concerted efforts of generations of Hong Kong people and pass on our “can-
do” spirit. We can also capitalise on our strategic position to leveraging the Mainland while 
engaging  the  world.  I  trust  and  remain  hopeful  that  we  would  make  the  right  choice  that 
promotes Hong Kong’s prosperity, maintains our stability and leads us to a bright future. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
