  Benoît Coeuré: Interview in Phileleftheros 
Interview with Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in Phileleftheros, conducted by Mr Theano Theiopoulou on 9 November 2014. 
 By becoming the supervisor of euro area banks, is the ECB able to completely 
Why  was  banks’  participation  in  the  ECB’s  targeted  longer-term  refinancing 
1.  
operations (TLTROs) lower than expected? 
There are many reasons, including the disclosure of our comprehensive assessment of euro 
area  banks  in  October,  for  which  reason  they  may  have  preferred  to  postpone  their 
borrowing to December. Having said this, the September outcome falls within the range of 
take-up values we had expected, based on banks’ behaviour under previous programmes. 
2.  
The  volume  of  non-performing  loans  in  Cyprus  is  one  of  the  highest  in  the 
euro  area.  Moreover,  lending  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  entails 
higher  risk  weights  and,  consequently,  capital  surcharges.  How  could  banks 
contribute to growth if lending is limited? 
Household and corporate indebtedness in Cyprus is among the highest in the euro area. The 
cost  of  risk  remains  elevated  despite  some  recent  improvements.  In  these  circumstances, 
deleveraging  is  a  natural  phenomenon.  Nonetheless,  banks  should  make  good  use  of  the 
available 
lending  opportunities  and  support  viable  borrowers.  The  comprehensive 
assessment  has  confirmed  that,  on  aggregate,  the  banking  sector  is  adequately  equipped 
with capital and that constraints on lending arising from the situation of banks are becoming 
less significant, both in Cyprus and the rest of the euro area. 
3.  
eliminate the risk of financial crises in the future? 
The assumption by the ECB of the responsibility for the supervision of euro area banks last 
Tuesday marked an important step in European economic and financial integration, probably 
the most important one since the introduction of the euro. It is a sharing of sovereignty but 
also a gain of sovereignty: for example, the Cypriot member of the Supervisory Board of the 
ECB will now have a say in the supervision of large euro area banks. Supervisory standards 
will be harmonised as the ECB’s banking supervision will draw on the best practices of the 
participating  countries,  and  the  ECB  will  draw  on  the  information  gathered  in  the 
comprehensive assessment to improve its supervision and foster convergence. Besides, the 
Single Resolution Mechanism and the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, with its new 
rules  for  dealing  with  banking  crises  entering  into  force  in  2016,  will  make  banks’ 
shareholders  and  investors  more  prudent  and  will  better  protect  European  taxpayers  from 
any misbehaviour by banks. That said, the best way to prevent crises in the future is to make 
sure that our economies are prudently managed and that we don’t let financial imbalances 
develop, as was unfortunately the case before the crisis. 
4.  
and resolve the extremely difficult and sensitive issue of loan servicing… 
The Cypriot economy needs a functioning banking sector which contributes to the economic 
recovery. That can only be achieved if the non-performing loan issue is addressed forcefully. 
For that, the structure of incentives would have to be changed, so that both borrowers and 
lenders have a common interest in finding a pragmatic solution to the debt problem. The data 
tell us that this is not happening. Conversely, non-performing loan levels are continuing to 
increase. The reform of the foreclosure process is part of the change that has to come about. 
In this respect, I welcome the Supreme Court decision on the unconstitutionality of the four 
Parliamentary  bills  concerning  the  foreclosure  law.  This  will  help  to  contribute  to  the 
reduction of non-performing loans in the banking system and recreate margins of manoeuvre 
for banks to extend loans to profitable projects supporting the recovery. 
The biggest challenge that Cypriot banks have to face today is how to manage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
5.  
The Cypriot economic adjustment programme was well on track until recently. 
However, when political decisions touch upon legal reforms, such as foreclosures and 
privatisation, delays arise amid reactions… 
The  work  of  the  Cypriot  authorities  and  their  commitment  to  the  programme  has  been 
commendable. Those measures were painful and they have imposed a large short-term cost 
on the economy and Cypriot society. But they have started to pay off. They have helped to 
stabilise the economy and to improve the confidence of international investors. Institutional 
and  legal  reforms  are  fundamental  to  enhancing  the  business  environment  and  boosting 
economic growth and job creation. This raises difficult political discussions in Cyprus, as in 
any country, but such discussions are nonetheless indispensable, as this is about changing 
the business model of the Cypriot economy, and we are in a democratic society. 
6.  
Policy in the euro area is characterised by the lack of a common approach, 
given  that  the  ECB  is  willing  to  proceed,  if  necessary,  with  further  monetary  policy 
easing and has called on those governments that have room for manoeuvre to loosen 
their fiscal policies. By contrast, Germany is set against US-style quantitative easing 
and urges continued budgetary discipline… 
Given the latest indicators, we face the risk of a self-fulfilling loss of momentum in euro area 
growth. The European Commission just marked down its growth forecast. There is a need for 
forceful and consistent action on all three fronts: monetary, fiscal and structural policies. On 
the  monetary front, the ECB  is  playing  its  part: we  have  substantially  eased  our monetary 
policy  stance  by  putting forward  several  new  monetary  policy  measures,  such  as  negative 
deposit rates and a credit easing package, including targeted loans to support lending to the 
economy,  and  private-sector  asset  purchase  programmes,  which  will  last  for  at  least  two 
years.  Together  with  the  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  to  be 
conducted  until  June  2016,  these  asset  purchases  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  our 
balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it had at the beginning of 
2012. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  all  euro  area  countries  have  room  to  make  fiscal  consolidation  more 
growth-friendly  by  cutting  unproductive  expenditures.  Some  countries  have  limited  fiscal 
space which can be used to boost their long-term growth potential. Most of them do not have 
that space, and they should not jeopardise the credibility of our common fiscal framework. 
Finally, all countries should act together in order to improve the productivity of the euro area 
economies, which is lagging behind that of the US. This can be done by creating a business 
climate that fosters private investment and the allocation of resources to competitive market 
segments. The planned investment package of the new Commission could play an important 
role in this process. I very much hope that the European Council will endorse it when they 
meet in December. 
7.  
With  interest  rates  at  zero  levels,  no  other  tools  remain  that  could  help 
countries achieve faster growth for their economies. What are the challenges that the 
governments are facing with regard to stimulating their economies? 
The ECB is committed to taking additional measures if we face the prospect of inflation being 
too low for too long. Price stability is the mandate which was entrusted to us by the people of 
Europe, and we will fulfil it. But monetary policy cannot support growth in a long-lasting way. 
Only an adequate mix of reforms and investment can do it. And it is a matter of urgency. 
8.  
Central Bank of Cyprus? 
I  don’t  have  specific  comments  to  make  on  that  matter,  but  let  me  say  that  Governor 
Georghadji is a trusted member of the Governing Council of the ECB and has worked hard 
for the well-being of Cyprus. After reading what the Government spokesman said on Monday 
I  am  pleased  to  see  that  there  is  no  disagreement  between  the  Governor  and  the 
Government and that the issue is abating. 
What are your comments on the recent controversy with the Governor of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
