  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Into the next chapter – transformative changes to 
strengthen industry linkage with the real economy 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Global  Islamic  Finance  Forum  2014  “Into  the  Next  Chapter: 
Transformative  Changes  to  Strengthen  Industry  Linkage  with  the  Real  Economy”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 2 September 2014. 
 It gives me great pleasure to welcome you to this fourth Global Islamic Finance Forum. In 
this new era of great transformative change in the world, the growth and evolution of Islamic 
finance  has  continued  to  be  very  much  part  of  the  changing  configuration  of  the  global 
financial system. An important part of this ongoing change, is the growing internationalisation 
of Islamic finance, that has resulted in greater cross-border financial flows which has in turn 
facilitated greater and more diversified economic inter linkages between countries. With this 
increased pace of the internationalisation of Islamic finance, the total global financial assets 
of the Islamic financial industry is now estimated to be more than US$2 trillion. The growth 
has  continued  to  gain  scale  with  its  geographical  outreach  now  extending  beyond  Muslim 
countries  to  the  more  established  international  financial  centres  and  to  other  emerging 
economies.  Across  continents,  Islamic  finance  is  therefore  having  an  increasing  role  in 
intermediating  funds  across  borders  and  creating  greater  financial  and  economic  inter-
linkages. 
The  increasing  international  dimension  of the global  sukuk  market,  in  particular,  affirms  its 
offering  as  a  distinct  platform  upon  which  international  inter-linkages  are  fostered.  The 
upcoming  debut  sovereign  issuances  from  established  financial  centres  and  emerging 
markets and the increasing diversity of the composition of sukuk investors across continents, 
in addition to the growing trend for multi-currency sukuk issuances, cumulatively contribute 
towards strengthening the dynamism of the sukuk as a global product for fund raising and 
investment  activities  in  the  international  financial  markets.  Malaysia,  has  witnessed  an 
increasing trend of issuances of foreign currency denominated sukuk in our domestic sukuk 
market, reinforced by an increasingly wider investor base as reflected by the increased and 
more diversified foreign investor participation in such issuances. 
In  parallel  with  this  rapid  growth  of  cross-border  financial  flows  has  been  the  increased 
attention  to  the  development  of  the  international  financial  architecture  relating  to  financial 
stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  With  the  important  two  international  institutions 
already well established, that is, the accounting standards setting organisation, AAOIFI, and 
the prudential standard setting body, the IFSB, concerted global efforts have been directed 
towards the progressive implementation of the recommendations in the eight building blocks 
identified in the Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability Report 2010. In particular, the 
efforts have been focused on the adoption and operationalisation of the prudential standards 
and the development of the potential for effective liquidity management as part of the efforts 
to safeguard financial stability. It is encouraging that there has been a higher adoption of the 
prudential  standards  issued  by  the  IFSB,  with  implementation  by  13  regulatory  and 
supervisory authorities worldwide with indications that there are more in the pipeline. Taking 
into  account  the  distinct  characteristics  and  specificities  of  Islamic  finance,  the  effective 
implementation  of  these  standards  will  contribute  towards  maintaining  the  soundness  and 
stability of Islamic financial institutions. 
Liquidity  management 
financial  system  has  also  been 
strengthened  with  the  establishment  of  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management 
Corporation  (IILM)  in  2010  that  will  contribute  towards  facilitating  efficient  liquidity 
management and cross-border flows by Islamic financial institutions. On the domestic front, 
in  Malaysia,  the  upcoming  issuance  of  a  ringgit  denominated  Mudharabah  Certificate  for 
international 
Islamic 
the 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  liquidity management purposes by the central bank is the introduction of a new profit sharing 
instrument that is expected to contribute towards increasing the range of instruments in the 
global Islamic short term securities market. With returns that are linked to the performance of 
the underlying asset and tradability in the secondary market, it is expected to draw significant 
interest of international investors. 
Moving forward: transformative changes to grow beyond numbers 
The efforts taken to strengthen the global financial infrastructure of Islamic finance thus far 
have provided a solid foundation for the growth and internationalisation of the industry that is 
underpinned with soundness and stability. While the rapid growth of Islamic finance, attests 
to its resilience and competitiveness, the challenge before us is also to enhance its capacity 
to contribute towards inclusion and more balanced economic growth. Statistical numbers and 
projections are important performance indicators and benchmarks for the industry. However, 
the  growth  of  the  industry  has  to  extend  beyond  the  numbers  to  sustain  its  growth 
momentum.  This  is  of  particular  importance  in  today’s  environment  of  growing  global 
uncertainties and when considerations that prioritise the linkage of finance to the economy, 
justice  and  fairness,  and  sustainability  and  inclusion  and  which  have  been  regarded  as 
essential  elements  of  a  modern  financial  ecosystem.  Islamic  finance,  with  these  inherent 
features and ethical dimensions, therefore has an immense potential role as a transformative 
agent in the economy, particularly in serving the requirements of the real economy and the 
broader society. Of importance is thus the role of the global Islamic financial marketplace in 
facilitating greater linkages with the real economy and inclusion and thus balanced growth. 
In  evolving  into  the  next  growth  phase,  it  remains  an  imperative  for  the  Islamic  banking 
industry in the global marketplace to reinforce meeting the very objective of its existence as 
an effective form of financial intermediation that serves the real economy and that complies 
with  the  requirements  of  the  Shariah.  As  an  extension  to  this,  Islamic  banks  have  the 
potential to extend its role to also include the role as an investment intermediary. This would 
require  the  diversification  of  banking  business  to  expand  beyond  credit  intermediation  to 
investment  intermediation,  in  which  the  alternative  modes  of  risk  sharing  contracts  can  be 
applied.  In  performing  investment  intermediation,  Islamic  banking  institutions  not  only 
strengthen  further  the  linkage  of  finance  and  real  economic  activity,  but  also  contribute 
towards more inclusive and more balanced growth. 
In 
the 
modernisation  of  laws  facilitate  the  maturing  of  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  with  the 
enactment of the new Act in 2013. It includes new provisions that strengthen the potential 
role of Islamic financial institutions as investment intermediaries for risk-sharing to effectively 
take place. Legal recognition of investment accounts provides differentiation from deposits, 
which  thereby  opens  up  the  avenue  for  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  further  explore  the 
various modes of operationalising such investment accounts. 
In advancing this quest, technological advances need to be leveraged upon to develop new 
innovative platforms that can facilitate the implementation of investment accounts. Aimed to 
assist Islamic financial institutions in performing this investment intermediary function more 
efficiently, a multi-bank platform is currently being developed in Malaysia to effectively and 
efficiently match funds from potential investors with industries and ventures in the real sector. 
The  platform  would  facilitate  efficient  mobilisation  of  private  sector  funds,  both  from 
individuals  and  corporates  to  finance  targeted  industries  and  ventures  that  are  in  need  of 
funding.  The  platform  would  also  be  positioned  to  spur  international  connectivity  as  its 
outreach  will  also  extend  to  international  participation  from  foreign  Islamic  financial 
institutions and investors, through the offering of multi-currency financing options for foreign 
projects. 
The potential for Islamic banks to progressively chart into this new territory would need to be 
supported by a state of readiness in terms of the capabilities of the industry to venture into a 
the  changes  associated  with 
finance  marketplace, 
the  Malaysian 
Islamic 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  diversification  into  such  business  offerings.  In  preparing  for  a  business  landscape  with 
different complexities, talent development in Islamic finance will need to be accorded with an 
even  greater  priority.  Existing  talent  needs  to  be  equipped  with  the  necessary  skills  to 
support  the  expansion  into  areas  of  specialisation  that  include  investment  intermediation. 
Stronger knowledge in the value propositions of the investment instruments require a greater 
understanding on the risks associated with business ventures in the respective growth areas, 
including in the non-traditional markets. This would require determining the viability of such 
business and investment proposals. Additionally, at the management level, and the directors 
and Shariah scholars of Islamic financial institutions need to be adequately equipped with the 
necessary knowledge so as to have an understanding important for steering the business to 
the new directions of the industry. 
To  realise  the  vision  of  a  highly  competent  and  high  performing  workforce  in  the  Islamic 
financial sector, of equal importance is the standards of quality of the education programmes 
in  Islamic finance  and  to  raise the  level  of  professionalism  of Islamic finance  practitioners. 
The Finance Accreditation Agency, an international and independent quality assurance and 
accreditation  body  for  the  financial  services  industry  that  was  established  in  Malaysia  in 
2012, has raised the bar for Islamic finance talent and professionals. The introduction of its 
Finance Qualifications Structure that will be launched today has strategic significance, as it 
aims  to  link  the  various  qualifications  relevant  to  financial  practitioners  under  a  cohesive 
framework which will allow for greater mutual recognition on qualifications and provide clear 
and  systematic  learning  path for financial  professionals.  Complementary  to  this  initiative  is 
the launch of the Learning Standard to ensure more global consistency for learning contents 
across the financial services industry in line with international industry benchmarks. 
Technology  can  also  be  explored  to  remove  barriers  or  impediments  in  promoting  greater 
interconnectedness  in  Islamic  finance  as  we  aim  to  create  stronger  linkage  with  the  real 
sector. As a catalyst to improve market access and enhance outreach, technology has the 
potential to disseminate information more efficiently, to promote greater market transparency 
and price discovery. Today, the launch of the digital application for Islamic finance is a further 
pioneering platform to facilitate sharing of information and for greater engagement, including 
between industry players that transcend borders. Such innovation is an impetus for raising 
greater awareness on benefits of Islamic finance as a form of financial intermediation. 
Realising cross-border business opportunities for greater linkages 
The next frontier of Islamic finance beckons the global Islamic finance marketplace to evolve 
its business models to that which would strengthen the nexus of Islamic finance with the real 
economy. This is an important consideration in our strategies, in parallel with the efforts to 
further  increase  the  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  that  can  cumulatively  contribute 
towards  strengthening  economic  linkages  and  thus  enhance  international  economic 
connectivity. 
Themed “Marketplace for Global Linkages”, with the presence of more than 1000 participants 
from  various  industries  across  the  globe,  this  year’s  Global  Islamic  Finance  Forum  brings 
unique  opportunities  for  industry  players  to  realise  cross-border  business  opportunities  for 
growth. It is our hope that this international platform would also provide the opportunity for 
intellectual  engagement  that  would  generate  new  thinking  and  knowledge  as  the  industry 
ventures  to  new  frontiers.  On  that  note,  I  declare  GIFF  2014  open  and  I  wish  you  a 
productive and successful Forum. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
