  Philip Lowe: Building on strong foundations 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Australian Business Economists (ABE) Annual Dinner, Sydney, 25 November 2014. 
 I would like to thank David Jacobs for excellent assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
Thank you for inviting me back to the Australian Business Economists’ annual dinner. It is an 
honour for me to be able to speak again in front of so many of Australia’s leading business 
economists. 
Before  I  turn  to  my  main  topic  this  evening,  I  would  like  to  pay  tribute  to  one  of  my 
predecessors  who  passed  away  earlier  this  month  –  and  that,  of  course,  is  John  Phillips. 
John served the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) (and before that the Commonwealth Bank) 
for more than four decades, and between 1987 and 1992 sat in the office that I now occupy. 
John epitomised the first of the RBA’s core values – that of serving the public interest. He did 
this  with  great  dedication  during  his  time  at  the  RBA  and  in  his  highly  distinguished 
subsequent career. At the RBA, John worked tirelessly to modernise Australia’s financial and 
monetary system, and to modernise the RBA itself. The institution that I now serve, as well 
as  the  broader  Australian  community,  owe  him  a  considerable  debt.  John  will  be  sorely 
missed. 
When  I  last  spoke  at  this  dinner,  two  years  ago,  the  title  of  my  remarks  was  “What  is 
Normal?”.1 My thesis was that as a country, we were going through a difficult adjustment in 
expectations.  Over  the  decade  or  so  to  the  late  2000s  we  had  got  used  to  consumption 
growing more quickly than income. We had also got used to asset prices, credit and fiscal 
revenues  growing  more  quickly  than  income.  We  had  got  used  to  employment  increasing 
more  rapidly  than  the  working-age  population.  And  we  had  got  used  to  growth  in  our  real 
incomes outpacing the rate at which we were improving our productivity. 
We  started  to  think  that  this  was  normal.  Retailers  thought  it  natural  that  their  sales  grew 
more  quickly  than  people’s  incomes.  Many  investors  thought  that  earning  capital  gains  on 
their existing assets was the key to wealth creation. Banks got used to very fast growth in 
their  balance  sheets.  And  we  all  got  used  to  the  annual  tax  cuts  that  came  from  strong 
revenue growth. 
But these trends were not normal. And so two years ago, my thesis was that the dawning 
realisation of this was affecting the national psyche. 
Two years on, I think we better appreciate the uniqueness of the earlier episode and there 
has  been  some  realignment  in  expectations.  But  I  suspect  that  this  realignment  is  not  yet 
over and it is one of the things that continues to weigh on the national economic mood. Also 
weighing on this mood is the prospect of the so-called “end” of the mining boom. As a result, 
I  sense  a  degree  of  nervousness  about  our  future  among  some  commentators  who 
sometimes  ask:  what  happens  to  Australia  after  this  boom  is  over?  how  can  Australian 
businesses compete internationally given our high costs? and, where will the jobs come from 
in the future? 
These are all good questions. But if I return to another theme from two years ago, it is that 
uncertainty is also normal. Given this, it is important that we guard against the possibility that 
this uncertainty mutates into chronic pessimism – that is, for it to become normal for us to 
                                                
1   See  Lowe  P  (2012),  “What  is  Normal?”  Address  to  the  Australian  Business  Economists  Annual  Dinner, 
Sydney, 5 December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  think  that  our  prospects  are  limited.  If  this  were  to  become  our  normal  mindset,  then  we 
would be well on the way to finding ourselves in the very world that we feared. 
So  this  evening,  I  would  like  to  turn  my  eyes  to  the  future  and  talk  a  little  about  how  the 
economy might look someway down the track. My central thesis tonight is twofold. First, the 
Australian economy does have the foundations for a successful and prosperous future. And 
second,  how  well  we  take  advantage  of  those  foundations  depends  increasingly  on 
investment not in physical capital, but in human capital. 
An aspiration 
So looking forward, what type of economy should we be aspiring to? 
One could answer this in many different ways. But I think a reasonable answer would be a 
highly  productive,  globally  competitive  economy  that  is  operating  close  to,  or  at,  full 
employment. 
Such  an  economy  would  be  characterised  by:  a  national  currency  with  sustainably  high 
purchasing power; sustainably high real wages; and sustainably high real returns on capital. 
High purchasing power and high wages mean that for each hour that we work we are able to 
buy more goods and services. And high returns mean that savers get rewarded when they 
take a risk or defer their spending and save for the future. 
If we are to meet this aspiration then we need to be an economy where value added is high. 
We need to be able to produce a range of goods and services very efficiently and/or be able 
to sell goods and services at a premium price because of their quality, their uniqueness or 
some other favourable attribute. This is true right across the industry spectrum. It is true in 
advanced manufacturing. It is true in the tourism industry. It is true in agriculture. And, it is 
true  in  the  technology  sector  and  in  business  and  household  services.  In  the  end,  it  is 
unlikely  that  we  can  achieve  this  aspiration  by  simply  selling  standardised,  homogeneous, 
mass-produced goods and services on the world market. We need to be at the high value-
added end in much of what we do. 
And this is why investment in human capital is so important. It is through human capital that 
we can create the goods and services that can deliver on this aspiration. The quality of our 
human  capital  is  critical  to  our  ability:  to  solve  complex  problems;  to  develop  and  use 
technology; to deliver premium quality goods and services; and to respond quickly and well 
to an ever-changing world. 
So one of the challenges that lies ahead is to create the environment that encourages the 
investment  in  human  capital  that  is  ultimately  required  to  sustain  the  high  living  standards 
and high returns to savers that we should be aspiring to. I want to return to this challenge in a 
few moments. 
Cyclical considerations 
Before I do, though, it is important to recognise that the exchange rate, wages and the return 
to saving each also play a key role in how the economy is performing at any point in time. 
In terms of the exchange rate, the RBA has been saying for a while now that a lower value of 
the  Australian  dollar  would  be  helpful  from  an  overall  macroeconomic  perspective.  If  the 
exchange rate is to play its important stabilising role, it needs to go down when the terms of 
trade and investment are declining, just as it went up when the terms of trade and investment 
were rising. To date, as we expected, we have seen some adjustment, but if our assessment 
of the fundamentals is correct we would expect to see more in time. 
In terms of wages, there is sometimes commentary bemoaning their high level in Australia. 
There are, no doubt, certain areas where wages are very high and working conditions are 
highly favourable and some adjustment is likely to be required. But it is also useful to recall 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that over the past two decades or so, aggregate wage outcomes have been consistent with 
the inflation target and with a trend decline in the unemployment rate. They have also been 
associated with a fairly low share of wages in national income. While we need to pay close 
attention  to  overall  labour  costs,  these  observations  point  to  the  conclusion  that  concerns 
about the overall level of wages in Australia are, to some extent, really concerns about the 
exchange  rate,  with  the  high  exchange  rate  leading  to  high  wages  expressed  in  foreign 
currency  terms.  A  lower  exchange  rate  would  obviously  make  a  difference  to  these 
comparisons. 
In  terms  of  the  return  to  saving,  it  is  currently  very  low.  As  I  spoke  about  last  month,  this 
largely  reflects  global  factors.2  A  lack  of  investment  around  the  world,  relative  to  people’s 
desire to save, means that savers everywhere are being offered low returns on their savings 
in bank accounts. This is causing them to look elsewhere, which, in turn, is pushing up the 
price of existing assets. 
So from a cyclical perspective – and largely as a result of global factors – our exchange rate 
is unusually high and, at the same time, savers are being offered unusually low returns. Of 
course,  Australia  is  not unique  in  being  in  this position.  And  this  particular  configuration  is 
causing complications for macroeconomic management here as well as in a number of other 
countries. 
But  as  we  deal  with  these  complications  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  longer-term 
challenge of building a highly productive, globally competitive economy. 
We should have some confidence that we are able to do this. We certainly have a number of 
strong foundations that provide the basis for this optimism. The question is how well we can 
use those foundations over the years ahead. 
Some strong foundations 
Rather than go through all of these strong foundations, I would like to draw your attention to 
just three. 
The first is our linkages with the fastest growing part of the world economy – namely Asia. 
I  am  sure  you  all  know  the  facts  about  the  trade  relationship.  Exports  to  Asia  are  up  by 
around 30 per cent over the past five years. Our three largest export destinations – China, 
Japan and South Korea – are all in the Asian region and free trade agreements have been 
concluded with each of them recently. 
But  the  aspect  of  the  relationship  that  I  would  like  to  focus  on  is  the  people-to-people 
relationship. 
Currently,  around  8  per cent  of the  Australian  population  was  born  in  east  and  south-east 
Asia or India (Graph 1). This is up from less than 1 per cent of the population around the time 
that  I  was  born.  In  comparison,  in  the  United  States,  only  around  3½  per  cent  of  the 
population  was  born  in  Asia  and  for  most  European  countries  the  figure  is  below  2  per 
cent.  
                                                
2   See  Lowe  P  (2014),  “Investing  in  a  Low  Interest  Rate  World”,  Address  to  the  Commonwealth  Bank  of 
Australia’s 7th Annual Australasian Fixed Income Conference, Sydney, 21 October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 1 
  There are also large numbers of students from Asia studying in Australia. Currently there are 
around 150,000 Chinese student enrolments at Australian educational institutions, more than 
double the number a decade ago (Graph 2). There are also large numbers of students from 
India, South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam and Singapore. All up, there are more than 
a quarter of a million Asian students studying here. In time, these students will add to the 
already vast network of our alumni across the region. 
Graph 2 
 The strong people-to-people linkages can also be seen in the broader data on international 
short-term  arrivals  (Graph  3).  At  the  moment,  more  than  250,000  citizens  from  Asia  are 
travelling to Australia every month, with arrivals from China reaching nearly 80,000 a month. 
As  is  evident  from  the  graph,  these  figures  have  grown  very  strongly  over  recent  years. 
There has, of course, also been very strong growth in the number of Australians travelling to 
Asia for both business and leisure. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 3 
  Taken  together,  this  deep  and  growing  people-to-people  engagement  is  an  increasingly 
important national asset. It helps us better understand the most dynamic part of the global 
economy.  It  promotes  goodwill  and  can  help  identify  cross-border  business  opportunities. 
Some of the students studying here will hopefully become “champions” for our country when 
they return home. Others will remain here and use their knowledge and relationships in their 
country of birth to build new and stronger business ventures between our countries. 
The second foundation that I would like to point to is our strong overall population growth. 
Over the past decade, Australia has had almost the fastest rate of population growth in the 
OECD and this is expected to continue for some time to come (Graph 4). In a decade’s time, 
our  population  is  forecast  to  be  17  per  cent  higher  than  it  is  today  –  that  is  an  extra  four 
million people. 
Graph 4 
These  people  will  require  somewhere  to  live,  to  work  and  to  play.  This  population  growth 
helps underpin the creation of new opportunities for businesses and for individuals. It means 
that  people  can  plan  with  the  knowledge  that  the  overall  size  of  the  pie  is  getting  bigger. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Contrast  that  to  the  situation  in  Japan  where,  over  the  next  decade,  the  population  is 
expected to decline by about as many people as currently living in Melbourne. In Australia, 
we are likely to add roughly another Melbourne to our population over this period. 
The  third  foundation  that  I  want  to  point  to  is  our  considerable  endowment  of  natural 
resources,  both  in  terms  of  minerals  and  agricultural  land.  One  illustration  of  the  recent 
benefit  that  Australia  has  gained  from  its  minerals  is  the  large  rise  in  export  revenue.  For 
many  years,  revenue  from  resource  exports  was  equivalent  to  around  5  to  7  per  cent  of 
GDP, but recently it has averaged double this, at around 12 per cent of GDP (Graph 5). With 
a large increase in LNG exports still to take place it is possible that this ratio will increase 
even further, although this will also depend on how the prices of our exports evolve. 
Graph 5 
 While not all the extra revenue accrues to Australian residents because of the high levels of 
foreign  ownership  in  the  resources  sector,  this  increase  has  helped  boost  our  average 
standard of living. Notwithstanding the current focus on the decline in mining investment, we 
should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  this  extra  export  revenue,  which  has  been  made 
possible  by  the  investment  in  extra  capacity,  has  made  us  better  off  and  has  created 
opportunities that we would otherwise not have had. 
In  terms  of  strong  foundations,  I  could  have  also  talked  about  our  strong  institutions,  our 
capable public sector, our generally flexible economy, a strong financial sector, low levels of 
government debt and generally healthy corporate balance sheets. 
Collectively, these various factors have helped deliver average living standards in Australia 
that  are  among  the  highest  on  the  planet,  and  they  have  given  us  opportunities  that  are 
available to only a few other countries. 
Taking advantage of the opportunities? 
How then do we make the best of these opportunities? 
There is of course no single answer here. But I find it difficult to escape the conclusion that 
investment in human capital is central to taking advantage of the opportunities that we have 
built for ourselves. 
Looking at where the jobs have been created over the past couple of decades, two trends 
stand  out.  The  first  is  the  fact  that  the  largest  increase  has  been  in  jobs  with  higher  level 
qualifications (Graph 6). The second is that, in terms of industries, the bulk of the new jobs 
have been in services, with over 3½ million service industry jobs having been created since 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the early 1990s (Graph 7). These jobs are in health, education, personal services, retailing, 
finance, engineering, information technology, software design, telecommunications – the list 
goes on. In contrast, just over half a million jobs have been created in the so-called goods-
producing  industries  –  manufacturing,  mining,  construction  and  utilities.  And  given  the  first 
trend, many of these jobs – both in the services and in goods-producing industries – have 
required higher levels of skills. 
Graph 6 
Graph 7 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  It would seem, therefore, that our future is increasingly dependent upon high-level cognitive 
skills  and  our  ability  to  understand  and  solve  complex  problems.  It  depends  upon  having 
people  who  are  curious,  who  are  able  to  grasp  new  opportunities  and  who  are  able  to 
transform and interpret information in new ways. And it depends on having the interpersonal 
skills to provide the premium services that will attract the premium price. Business practices 
everywhere  are  being  reshaped  and  disrupted by  developments  in  information  technology. 
This is true not just in the service industries but also in manufacturing, with much of today’s 
innovative capital equipment as dependent on the software that runs it as it is on the quality 
and ingenuity of the physical engineering. 
How to best take advantage of this new world is not the core expertise of the central bank. 
But I would like to make three observations. 
The first is the importance of culture. 
The type of human capital that is likely to be required in this world  is best developed in a 
culture  that  promotes  and  rewards  innovation  and  excellence,  whether  it  is  in  services, 
goods,  resources  or  agriculture.3  It  is  best  developed  in  a  culture  that  encourages 
entrepreneurship and for people to take a risk with a new idea. And it is best developed in a 
culture that promotes creativity and flexibility. Developing and sustaining such a culture takes 
effort across a whole range of areas. So if we hope to make the best of our opportunities 
then we should all be asking what we can do here. 
The second observation is the importance of ensuring that our workforce has an appropriate 
mix of sophisticated skills to produce premium goods and services. 
These  skills  are  those  required  to  solve  complex  problems,  identify  new  opportunities  and 
deliver  high-quality  customer  experiences.  Creativity  –  in  all  its  dimensions  –  is  a  key 
element  here.  One  of  the  areas  that  deserves  close  attention  is  the  STEM  subjects  – 
science,  technology,  engineering  and  mathematics.  Over  the  years,  Australia  has  done 
reasonably well here, but the share of Year 12 students studying higher level mathematics 
and the sciences has been in decline for many years now (Graph 8).4 I might also add that in 
our  schools,  considerably  more  young  men  study  many  of  these  subjects  than  do  young 
women.  Unfortunately,  this  is  also  true  for  the  study  of  economics.  In  terms  of  the 
international tests,  our scores  have  been  relatively  high,  although  they  too  have  tended to 
slip a bit over recent years (Graph 9).5 Looking beyond the STEM skills, we need to build a 
creative, innovative and flexible workforce. 
                                                
3   See  Australian  Government  (2014),  Industry  Innovation  and  Competitiveness  Agenda,  Commonwealth  of 
Australia, Canberra. Available at 
http://www.dpmc.gov.au/publications/Industry_Innovation_and_Competitiveness_Agenda/docs/industry_innov
ation agenda.pdf 
4   Kennedy J, T Lyons and F Quinn (2014), “The Continuing Decline of Science and Mathematics Enrolments in 
Australian High Schools”, Teaching Science, 60(2), pp 34–46. 
5   See  Thomson  S,  L  De  Bortoli  and  S  Buckley  (2013),  PISA  2012:  How  Australia  Measures  Up,  Australian 
Council for Educational Research, Camberwell, Victoria. Available at  
<http://www.acer.edu.au/documents/PISA-2012-Report.pdf> 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Graph 8 
Graph 9 
  And the third observation is the need to find ways of deepening collaboration between our 
universities and businesses. 
Australia has some tremendous places of higher learning. But as a number of reports have 
recently highlighted, the collaborative research connections between these universities and 
private  business  are  not  well  developed  by  international  standards.6  According  to  many 
                                                
6   For example, see OECD (2013), OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2013: Innovation for 
Growth, OECD Publishing, available at  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  entrepreneurs, strong collaboration and networking are critical elements in the development 
of  the  type  of  innovation  ecosystems  in  which  new  ideas  can  best  flourish  and  be 
commercialised. So this is an area to which we need to pay close attention. 
Conclusion 
I know I have strayed a long way from the setting of the cash rate, which I also know is of 
keen interest to many of you. But, in a very real sense, the issues that I have spoken about 
tonight  do  have  implications  for  monetary  policy.  The  reason  that  the  world  has  such  low 
interest rates at the moment is that people’s desire to save outstrips their desire to create 
new assets. A stronger global investment environment would be likely to see global interest 
rates rise and this is something that we should all hope occurs sooner rather than later. 
The issue that many countries are struggling with is how to do this – that is, how to improve 
the  investment  climate.  Very  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  playing  a  role  here.  But 
there are some real limitations to this and, in some countries, these limitations are becoming 
increasingly evident. What is needed is a genuine improvement in the underlying investment 
climate. 
And  so  this  is  where  the  issues  that  I  have  talked  about  tonight  come  in.  The  Australian 
economy clearly has some challenges ahead, but we would be selling ourselves short if we 
dwelt  exclusively  on  these  challenges.  Our  economy  does  have  some  very  strong 
foundations upon which we can build – I have talked about our links with Asia, our dynamic 
population  and  our  natural  resources.  These  foundations  give  us  opportunities  that  few 
countries have. They should also provide us with some confidence that new investment can 
deliver reasonable returns. This sense of confidence would be enhanced by further steps to 
improve  the  environment  for  the  accumulation  of  human  capital.  If  we  are  able  to  do  this, 
then  I  hope  that  it  would  become  normal  for  us  to  live  in  a  highly  productive,  globally 
competitive economy with sustainably high living standards and returns to savers. 
Thank you for listening and I look forward to any questions that you might have. 
Bibliography 
Kennedy  J,  T  Lyons  and  F  Quinn  (2014),  “The  Continuing  Decline  of  Science  and 
Mathematics Enrolments in Australian High Schools”, Teaching Science, 60(2), pp 34–46. 
 <http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/science-and-technology/oecd-science-technology-and-industry-scoreboard-
2013_sti_scoreboard-2013-en>, and Schwab K (ed) (2013), The Global Competitiveness Report 2013–2014, 
World Economic Forum, Geneva, available at <http://www.weforum.org/reports/global-competitiveness-report-
2013-2014>. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
