  Philip Lowe: Investing in a low interest rate world 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Commonwealth  Bank  of  Australia’s  7th  Annual  Australasian  Fixed  Income  Conference, 
Sydney, 21 October 2014. 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  the  invitation  to  speak  tonight  at  the  Commonwealth  Bank’s 
7th Annual Australasian Conference. I would like to extend a particularly warm welcome to 
those of you who are visiting Australia to gain first-hand knowledge of our economy and our 
financial markets. Welcome to our shores. 
The general topic that I would like to speak about this evening is investing in a low interest 
rate world. 
No doubt this is an issue that you have all pondered over recent times. No doubt you have all 
thought about which assets offer the most attractive returns in the post-crisis world in which 
interest rates in many countries are extraordinary low. And no doubt you have thought about 
the risks that come with those assets. 
I am not a financial advisor, so I will refrain from giving you advice on how to grapple with 
these difficult issues. But I would like to talk about a couple of the general challenges that we 
face in this world of low interest rates. 
The  first  issue  has  an  international  dimension  and  it  has  been  the  focus  of  many  of  the 
discussions around the G20 table this year – and that is, how do we translate greater risk-
taking  on  the  financial  side  of  the  economy  into  greater  risk-taking  on  the  real  side.  The 
second  issue,  which  has  a  more  domestic  focus,  is  recent  developments  in  the Australian 
housing market. 
The international challenge 
It  is  useful  to  start  with  a  reminder  of  just  how  unusual  the  current  global  environment  is. 
Interest rates are as low as they have ever been in most advanced economies. In the United 
States,  the euro  area,  Japan  and  the  United  Kingdom  official  interest  rates  are  essentially 
zero. In Germany, investors actually pay the government for the privilege of lending to it for 
terms of three years or so. And in the euro area, banks are now faced with negative interest 
rates on their deposits at the European Central Bank (ECB), and the ECB is prepared to lend 
money to banks for terms of up to four years at just 15 basis points. 
A number of the major central banks have also engaged in very substantial money creation 
to buy large quantities of assets from the private sector, including government bonds, asset-
backed securities and equities. As a result, financial institutions are holding record balances 
at central banks and central banks have become very large managers of assets themselves. 
While it is easy to lose track of time, global monetary affairs have been in this very unusual 
territory for quite some time. It is now six years since the financial crisis was at its peak. Even 
with  the  knowledge  that  the  recovery  from  financial  crises  can  be  frustratingly  slow,  few 
observers  predicted  that  the  crisis  would  throw  such  a  long  and  enduring  shadow  over 
monetary and financial conditions in so many countries. 
This  shadow  has  created  a  difficult  environment  for  savers  and  those  managing  savings. 
Perhaps at the risk of over-simplifying things, they have three basic choices: 
1. 
2. 
They can leave the savings in the bank and earn zero (or less). 
They  can  use  the  savings  to  purchase  existing  assets  from  other  investors  in  the 
hope of earning a positive return. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 3. 
They can use the savings to finance the development and creation of new assets, 
for  example  a  new  piece  of  capital  equipment,  a  new  building  or  some  new 
intellectual property. 
 It is this third use of savings that is critical to the resumption of strong growth in the global 
economy. 
When  the  crisis  hit  in  2008,  the  first  of  these  three  savings  choices  dominated.  Investors 
were intent on preserving their capital and remaining as liquid as possible. Many sold their 
more  risky  existing  assets  and  the  prices  of  these  assets  declined,  in  some  cases 
significantly. There was an even more precipitous decline in the demand for new assets, with 
aggregate investment in many countries dropping to very low levels as a share of GDP. 
As we gradually climbed out of the crisis, attitudes to investing evolved. Faced with very low 
interest rates on safe assets and evidence that the global economy has been on a recovery 
track  of  sorts,  investors  have  been  prepared  to  move  out  along  the  risk  spectrum  and 
purchase  existing  assets  as  they  search  for  yield.  In  response,  the  prices  of  these  assets 
have risen again. 
This rise in the prices of existing assets is understandable. Indeed, it is one of the channels 
through which stimulatory monetary policy works. Low interest rates make it less attractive to 
hold savings in bank deposits and more attractive to hold other existing assets – and prices 
respond. The higher asset prices should then both encourage, and make it easier for, firms 
to increase their investment spending – that is, to use their savings to finance the creation of 
new assets. 
It  is  this  latter  part  of  the  transmission  channel  that  is  proving  frustratingly  slow  in  many 
countries.  The  strong  demand  for  many  existing  assets  has  not  yet  generated  a  strong 
appetite  for  the  creation  of  new  assets.  Many  investors  remain  very  cautious  when 
considering  funding  business  expansion  and  aggregate  investment  remains  low.  In 
response,  central  banks  have  felt  that  they  have  had  no  choice  but  to  continue  with  very 
expansionary policies and, in some cases, to add yet further stimulus. The hope is that in so 
doing they will eventually induce a shift from the world of strong demand for existing assets 
to one in which there is strong demand for the new assets that will create the growth and 
jobs that are so badly needed. 
This slow transition has been one of the central issues that we have discussed around the 
G20  table  over  the  past  year  under  Australia’s  presidency.  A  key  question  we  have  been 
asking ourselves is what can be done to speed up this transition. 
One  perspective  is  that  it  is just  a matter  of  time.  It  takes  time  for  demand  to  recover,  for 
excess capacity to be wound back and for business confidence to return. Time also leads to 
the depreciation of the existing capital stock. So, maybe we just need to wait a bit longer. In 
the United States, we are, perhaps, getting close to the point where things will turn. But in 
Europe and Japan, it is difficult to have the same degree of optimism. 
The obvious problem with waiting is that it can be very costly in terms of jobs and overall 
economic  growth.  It  can  also  generate  new  risks.  In  particular,  the  prolonged  highly 
stimulatory  monetary  policy  that  is  required  during  the  waiting  period  can  lead  to  the 
development  of  new  financial  vulnerabilities.  Indeed,  this  appears  to  be  occurring  at  the 
moment.  The  search  for  yield,  the  low  volatility,  the  elevated  prices  of  some  assets,  the 
compressed  credit  spreads  and  the  pockets  of  higher  leverage  that  we  have  witnessed 
recently has made the system more vulnerable to unexpected events. 
So what can be done to promote healthy growth and reduce financial risk? 
The G20 discussions have highlighted two broad lines of attack. 
The  first  is  the  promotion  of  structural  policies  that  encourage  real  investment,  not  just 
financial investment. This is, of course, easier to say than to do. But policies that promote 
trade and competition, and that promote innovation and entrepreneurship, must surely be at 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  the heart of the solution. Globally, policymakers need once again to create an environment 
where  savers  feel  that  it  is  worth  taking  a  risk  developing  a  new  asset.  Higher  prices  for 
existing  assets  can  help  in  this  regard,  but  only  so  far.  It  is  reform-focused  government 
policy, rather than monetary policy, that is the key. 
The  second  response  is  increased  spending  on  infrastructure,  which  creates  new  assets 
directly. 
From a number of perspectives now is a favourable time to undertake such investment. In 
many countries, the infrastructure is ageing and/or underdeveloped and there is a growing 
likelihood  that  this  will  inhibit  future  economic  growth.  The  record  low  interest  rates  and 
limited  recent  investment  mean  that  there  are  likely  to  be  many  projects  that  yield  risk-
adjusted social rates of return greater than the cost of finance. There is also plenty of spare 
capacity to undertake such investment. In addition, higher levels of infrastructure spending 
could take some of the pressure off monetary policy globally, ultimately reducing some of the 
risk in the financial system that I referred to a moment ago. So, there is much to commend it. 
One of the main stumbling blocks continues to be financing. Typically, building infrastructure 
requires  somebody  to  borrow.  At  the  moment,  few  entities  want  to  do  this.  Many  private 
investors  remain  wary  of  borrowing  given  the  construction  and  patronage  risks  often 
associated  with  infrastructure  investments.  In  earlier  eras,  governments  might  have  been 
prepared  to  step  in  and  use  their  own  balance  sheets  to  boost  demand.  But  today,  many 
governments remain very wary of doing this, given the need to put public finances on a more 
sustainable footing. The end result is that investment in infrastructure remains low  despite 
record  low  interest  rates,  a  deficiency  of  global  aggregate  demand  and  infrastructure 
shortfalls in many countries. This is hardly an ideal situation. 
As  the  G20  has  identified,  finding  solutions  here  is  important  to  the  health  of  the  global 
economy.  In  Australia,  the  federal  government’s  asset  recycling  program  is  one  way  of 
increasing infrastructure investment without increasing government net debt. More generally, 
better  balance  sheet  accounting  by  the  public  sector  would  also  be  helpful.  Borrowing  to 
build assets can be thought of quite differently from borrowing to finance current expenditure 
provided – and this is important – that one can have a degree of confidence that the asset 
will deliver a reasonable return. So, more rigorous processes around project selection and 
governance are important. The G20 has also been working on ways of improving contracting 
and  the  private-sector  financing  of  infrastructure  investment,  including  through  appropriate 
pricing, as well as sharing experiences across countries. 
Both  of  these  elements  –  the  promotion  of  real  risk-taking  and  increased  spending  on 
infrastructure  –  are  central  in  delivering  on  the  G20  commitment  to  lift  global  GDP  by  an 
additional 2 per cent by 2018. They are both important in creating a stronger global economy 
where  investors  look  for  new  opportunities  rather  than  simply  seeking  out  existing  assets. 
Progress has been made on delivering on this commitment, although more is needed and 
effective implementation is clearly required. 
Australian developments 
I would now like to turn my focus more directly to domestic issues. 
For  reasons  that  I  expect  you  already  understand,  Australia  has  found  itself  in  a  different 
position  from  that  of  many  other  advanced  economies  over  recent  years.  Our  banking 
system came through the international crisis quite well. Aggregate investment has been high, 
not low. Interest rates are positive, and the Reserve Bank has not had to buy large quantities 
of assets from the private sector. 
But we do live in an interconnected world. So what is happening elsewhere does have an 
effect here. While our interest rates are positive, they are at record lows. While aggregate 
investment  has  been  very  high,  investment  outside  the  boom  in  the  resources  sector  has 
been  very  subdued.  And  as  we  have  seen  elsewhere  around  the  world,  many  companies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  have preferred to hold cash or distribute profits back to their shareholders rather than invest 
themselves. 
So  we  face  some  of  the  same  issues  as  other  countries.  This  means  that  the  discussion 
about the promotion of entrepreneurship and increased spending on infrastructure is not just 
relevant  to  the  global  economy,  but  to  Australia  too.  Over  the  period  ahead,  higher 
infrastructure spending can help with the transition from the mining investment boom to other 
forms  of  activity.  It  can  also  help  strengthen  the  foundations  for  future  growth  in  the 
economy.  And,  as  I  have  spoken  about  on  previous  occasions,  policies  that  promote 
innovation and entrepreneurship are likely to hold us in good stead not just in the short term, 
but over the long term as well. 
In terms of the financial side, it is in the housing market where the strong demand for existing 
assets  is  most  evident.  Many  investors,  including  those  in  self-managed  superannuation 
funds,  have  decided  that  investment  in  residential  property  is  an  attractive  option,  partly 
given the low level of interest rates. Prices have risen as a result. Nationwide, they are up by 
around 10 per cent over the past year, and in Sydney they are up by around 13 per cent. 
Auction clearance rates have been high and loan approvals for the purchase of residential 
property have risen very strongly. 
The good news is that this increased demand for existing housing assets is translating into 
increased  demand  for  new  housing  construction.  This  is  a  very  welcome  development. 
Investment  in  residential  construction  has  increased  by  9  per  cent  over  the  past  year  and 
further increases are expected. 
So  this  part  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  is working  in Australia,  and  working 
more effectively than it is in some other countries. The higher construction activity is adding 
to jobs and assisting with the rebalancing of demand in the economy as mining investment 
declines. 
But  recent  developments  do  raise  some  of  the  same  general  questions  that  are  being 
discussed internationally. In particular, a question that has a strong echo in the international 
discussions  is  whether  the  recent  increases  in  the  prices  of  the  existing  housing  stock, 
together  with  pockets  of  higher  borrowing, 
financial  and 
macroeconomic risk? And if it is, what, if anything, should be done? 
Questions  about  how  risk  is  evolving  are  often  difficult  to  answer  and  one  can  never  be 
completely confident that the conclusion reached is exactly right. But, it is possible to make 
informed judgements based on the balance of probabilities. And, the judgment that we have 
reached over recent times is that at least some aspects of the housing market have become 
somewhat unbalanced and that this has generated some increase in overall risk. 
The  area  that  has  attracted  most  attention  is  the  very  strong  demand  by  investors  to  buy 
housing for the purposes of renting. Currently, loan approvals to investors buying properties 
to rent out account for nearly 45 per cent of total loan approvals, with most of the investment 
properties  being  existing  properties.  Perhaps  not  surprisingly,  the  biggest  increases  in 
housing  prices  have  occurred  in  the  city  where  investor  demand  has  been  strongest  – 
namely Sydney. Overall, investor credit outstanding is growing at an annual rate of close to 
10  per  cent,  around  twice  the  rate  of  increase  in  household  income.  A  fairly  high  and 
increasing share of these investor loans do not require the repayment of any principal during 
the life of the loan. And this is all occurring in an environment in which growth in rents has 
slowed and the ratio of housing prices to income is at the top end of the range experienced 
over the past decade or so. 
Now as I said, one cannot draw conclusions with absolute confidence, but I contend that a 
reasonable interpretation of these events is that they are leading to some increase in overall 
risk. 
It is important to make clear that I am not saying that this will end badly, or even that is likely 
to end badly – just that, on average, recent loans are probably a bit more risky than those 
is  generating 
increased 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  made earlier. One reason this might be the case is that the likelihood of some type of painful 
household balance adjustment in the event that there is a correction in the housing market, 
while still not high, has probably increased. Given this, it is prudent for both borrowers and 
lenders to be careful. 
Quite  appropriately,  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (APRA)  has  been 
discussing this evolution of risk with financial institutions for some time, and there has been a 
strong  focus  on  maintaining  appropriate  lending  and  risk-management  standards.  As  has 
been well publicised, the members of the Council of Financial Regulators, including the Bank 
and APRA, have also held discussions regarding the merits of additional measures within the 
existing prudential framework. If risk has increased, then it might be appropriate to adjust one 
or more of the elements within that framework to reflect that change in risk. 
It is also important to point out that the fact that the Bank and APRA are talking about these 
issues does not mean that a return to the type of heavy regulation we saw in earlier decades 
is on the agenda. That earlier experience demonstrated all too clearly the distorting effects of 
such  regulation  as  well  as  the  ability  of  financial  institutions  to  circumvent  it,  including  by 
activities  outside  the  regulatory  net.  As  it  turns  out,  the  financial  system  is  very  good  at 
finding ways of getting money from the people who have it to those who want to borrow it, 
although perhaps less good at containing aggregate risk. All this means that we need to be 
realistic about what can be achieved through changes in the regulatory parameters alone. 
This  realism,  however,  need  not  preclude  consideration  of  modest  and  sensible  changes 
within the existing prudential framework. 
Obviously,  another  relevant  issue  is  the  overall  level  of  interest  rates.  As  I  have  said,  low 
rates  have  boosted  asset  prices  globally,  including  in  our  own  housing  market.  The 
judgement that the Reserve Bank Board has reached is that in Australia these low rates are 
entirely appropriate. They are required to assist in the necessary balancing of the Australian 
economy  following  the  once-in-a-century  boom  in  resources  sector  investment.  This  is 
especially  so  when  the  exchange  rate  has  not  been  providing  the  degree  of  support  that 
might  normally  have  been  expected.  The  low  interest  rates  are  helping  boost  construction 
activity and spending more broadly in the economy. This is the transmission mechanism at 
work. 
But just like the situation internationally, as the period of very low interest rates continues to 
run on, we all need to be cognisant of how risk is changing. Lenders need to ensure that their 
lending standards remain sound and that they hold the appropriate amount of capital against 
the  risks  they  face.  And  investors  need  to  evaluate  developments  in  the  broader  market, 
including how their investments might turn out in less benign scenarios. Careful attention to 
these issues will help ensure that in getting the economic benefits of low interest rates we do 
not generate unacceptable risks on the financial side. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by trying to tie these various strands together. 
Very low global interest rates have been with us for some time. And it is likely that they will 
stay with us for some time yet. 
Fundamentally, this reflects the low appetite for real investment relative to the appetite for 
saving. 
These low rates are encouraging investors to buy existing assets as they seek alternatives to 
bank deposits earning very low or zero rates. Asset prices have increased in response. 
Some of this is, of course, desirable and, indeed, intended. But the longer it runs on without a 
pickup in the appetite for real investment, the greater is the potential for new risks to develop. 
During this period, while we wait for the investment environment to improve, we need to be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  cognisant of potential risks of asset prices running too far ahead of real activity. This is true in 
Australia, as it is elsewhere around the world. 
The  underlying  solution  is  for  an  improvement  in  the  investment  climate.  Monetary  policy 
can, and is, playing an important role here. But ultimately, monetary policy cannot drive the 
higher ongoing expected returns on capital that are required for sustained economic growth 
and for reasonable long-term returns to savers. It is instead government policy – including in 
some countries, increased spending on infrastructure – that has perhaps the more important 
role to play here. 
Thank you very much for listening this evening. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
