  Janet L Yellen: Perspectives on inequality and opportunity from the 
Survey of Consumer Finances 
Speech  by  Ms  Janet  L  Yellen,  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, 17 October 2014. 
 Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
The distribution of income and wealth in the United States has been widening more or less 
steadily for several decades, to a greater extent than in most advanced countries.1 This trend 
paused during the Great Recession because of larger wealth losses for those at the top of 
the  distribution  and  because  increased  safety-net  spending  helped  offset  some  income 
losses for those below the top. But widening inequality resumed in the recovery, as the stock 
market rebounded, wage growth and the healing of the labor market have been slow, and the 
increase in home prices has not fully restored the housing wealth lost by the large majority of 
households for which it is their primary asset. 
The extent of and continuing increase in inequality in the United States greatly concern me. 
The  past  several  decades  have  seen  the  most  sustained  rise  in  inequality  since  the 
19th century after more than 40 years of narrowing inequality following the Great Depression. 
By  some  estimates,  income  and  wealth  inequality  are  near  their  highest  levels  in  the  past 
hundred years, much higher than the average during that time span and probably higher than 
for  much  of  American  history  before  then.2  It  is  no  secret  that  the  past  few  decades  of 
widening inequality can be summed up as significant income and wealth gains for those at 
the  very  top  and  stagnant  living  standards  for  the  majority.  I  think  it  is  appropriate  to  ask 
whether this trend is compatible with values rooted in our nation’s history, among them the 
high value Americans have traditionally placed on equality of opportunity. 
Some  degree  of  inequality  in  income  and  wealth,  of  course,  would  occur  even  with 
completely  equal  opportunity  because  variations  in  effort,  skill,  and  luck  will  produce 
variations  in  outcomes.  Indeed,  some  variation  in  outcomes  arguably  contributes  to 
economic growth because it creates incentives to work hard, get an education, save, invest, 
and undertake risk. However, to the extent that opportunity itself is enhanced by access to 
economic  resources,  inequality  of  outcomes  can  exacerbate  inequality  of  opportunity, 
thereby perpetuating a trend of increasing inequality. Such a link is suggested by the “Great 
Gatsby  Curve,”  the  finding  that,  among  advanced  economies,  greater  income  inequality  is 
associated with diminished intergenerational mobility.3 In such circumstances, society faces 
difficult  questions  of  how  best  to  fairly  and  justly  promote  equal  opportunity.  My  purpose 
today is not to provide answers to these contentious questions, but rather to provide a factual 
                                                 
1   See  Salvatore  Morelli,  Timothy  Smeeding,  and  Jeffrey  Thompson  (2014),  “Post-1970  Trends  in  Within-
Country  Inequality  and  Poverty:  Rich  and  Middle  Income  Countries  (PDF),”  IRP  Discussion  Paper  Series 
1419–14 (Madison, Wis.: Institute for Research on Poverty, March). 
2   For income inequality in the past 100 years, see Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez 
(2011),  “Top  Incomes  in  the  Long  Run  of  History  (PDF),”  Journal  of  Economic  Literature,  vol.  49  (March), 
pp.3–71.  For  wealth  inequality,  see  Emmanuel  Saez  and  Gabriel  Zucman  (2014),  “Wealth  Inequality  in  the 
United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data,” working paper and slides (October, 
14,  2014).  For  income  inequality  before  1913,  see  Peter  H.  Lindert  and  Jeffrey  G.  Williamson  (2012), 
“American Incomes 1774–1860,” NBER Working Paper Series 18396 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of 
Economic Research, September). 
3   See Alan B. Krueger (2012), “The Rise and Consequences of Inequality in the United States (PDF),” speech 
delivered at the Center for American Progress, Washington, January 12. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  basis  for  further  discussion.  I  am  pleased  that  this  conference  will  focus  on  equality  of 
economic opportunity and on ways to better promote it. 
In  my  remarks,  I  will  review  trends  in  income  and  wealth  inequality  over  the  past  several 
decades, then identify and discuss four sources of economic opportunity in America – think 
of them as “building blocks” for the gains in income and wealth that most Americans hope 
are  within  reach  of  those  who  strive  for  them.  The  first  two  are  widely  recognized  as 
important  sources  of  opportunity:  resources  available  for  children  and  affordable  higher 
education.  The  second  two  may  come  as  more  of  a  surprise:  business  ownership  and 
inheritances. Like most sources of wealth, family ownership of businesses and inheritances 
are concentrated among households at the top of the distribution. But both of these are less 
concentrated  and  more  broadly  distributed  than  other  forms  of  wealth,  and  there  is  some 
basis  for  thinking  that  they  may  also  play  a  role  in  providing  economic  opportunities  to  a 
considerable number of families below the top. 
In focusing on these four building blocks, I do not mean to suggest that they account for all 
economic  opportunity,  but  I  do  believe  they  are  all  significant  sources  of  opportunity  for 
individuals and their families to improve their economic circumstances. 
Income and wealth inequality in the Survey of Consumer Finances 
I  will  start  with  the  basics  about  widening  inequality,  drawing  heavily  on  a  trove  of  data 
generated by the Federal Reserve’s triennial Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), the latest 
of which was conducted in 2013 and published last month.4 The SCF is broadly consistent 
with  other  data  that  show  widening  wealth  and  income  inequality  over  the  past  several 
decades,  but  I  am  employing  the  SCF  because  it  offers  the  added  advantage  of  specific 
detail on income, wealth, and debt for each of 6,000 households surveyed.5 This detail from 
family  balance  sheets  provides  a  glimpse  of  the  relative  access  to  the  four  sources  of 
opportunity I will discuss. 
While the recent trend of widening income and wealth inequality is clear, the implications for 
a particular family partly depend on whether that family’s living standards are rising or not as 
its  relative  position  changes.  There  have  been  some  times  of  relative  prosperity  when 
income  has  grown  for  most  households  but  inequality  widened  because  the  gains  were 
proportionally larger for those at the top; widening inequality might not be as great a concern 
if living standards improve for most families. That was the case for much of the 1990s, when 
real  incomes  were  rising  for  most  households.  At  other  times,  however,  inequality  has 
widened  because  income  and  wealth  grew  for  those  at  the  top  and  stagnated  or  fell  for 
others. And at still other times, inequality has widened when incomes were falling for most 
households, but the declines toward the bottom were proportionally larger. Unfortunately, the 
past  several  decades  of  widening  inequality  has  often  involved  stagnant  or  falling  living 
standards for many families. 
Since  the  survey  began  in  its  current  form  in  1989,  the  SCF  has  shown  a  rise  in  the 
concentration  of  income  in  the  top  few  percent  of  households,  as  shown  in  figure  1.6  By 
                                                 
4   Asset  questions  in  the  SCF  are  based  on  the  value  at  the  time  of  the  survey.  Since  most  interviews  were 
completed  between  April  and  December  2013,  some  of  the  asset  values  do  not  reflect  price  increases 
experienced in late 2013, and none reflect increases in 2014. Income questions in the SCF refer to the prior 
calendar year, so the 2013 survey reports 2012 income. See Jesse Bricker, Lisa J. Dettling, Alice Henriques, 
Joanne  W.  Hsu,  Kevin  B.  Moore,  John  Sabelhaus,  Jeffrey  Thompson,  and  Richard  A.  Windle  (2014), 
“Changes  in  U.S.  Family  Finances  from  2010  to  2013:  Evidence  from  the  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances,” 
Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 100 (September), pp. 1–41. 
5   “Households”  and  “families”  are  used  interchangeably  in  these  remarks  because  the  SCF  uses  both 
interchangeably to describe its respondents. 
6   The share of income that went to the top 5 percent of households – a threshold of $230,000 in gross income in 
2013 – rose from 31 percent of income reported by all respondents in 1989 to 37 percent in 2007. The income 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  definition, of course, the share of all income held by the rest, the vast majority of households, 
has  fallen  by  the  same  amount.7  This  concentration  was  the  result  of  income  and  living 
standards  rising  much  more  quickly  for  those  at  the  top.  After  adjusting  for  inflation,  the 
average income of the top 5 percent of households grew by 38 percent from 1989 to 2013, 
as we can see in figure 2. By comparison, the average real income of the other 95 percent of 
households grew less than 10 percent. Income inequality narrowed slightly during the Great 
Recession,  as  income  fell  more  for  the  top  than  for  others,  but  resumed  widening  in  the 
recovery, and by 2013 it had nearly returned to the pre-recession peak.8  
The distribution of wealth is even more unequal than that of income, and the SCF shows that 
wealth  inequality  has  increased  more  than  income  inequality  since  1989.  As  shown  in 
figure 3,  the  wealthiest  5  percent  of  American  households  held  54  percent  of  all  wealth 
reported in the 1989 survey. Their share rose to 61 percent in 2010 and reached 63 percent 
in 2013. By contrast, the rest of those in the top half of the wealth distribution – families that 
in 2013 had a net worth between $81,000 and $1.9 million  – held 43 percent of wealth in 
1989 and only 36 percent in 2013. 
The  lower  half  of  households  by  wealth  held  just  3  percent  of  wealth  in  1989  and  only 
1 percent in 2013. To put that in perspective, figure 4 shows that the average net worth of the 
lower  half  of  the  distribution,  representing  62  million  households,  was  $11,000  in  2013.9 
About  one-fourth  of  these  families  reported  zero  wealth  or  negative  net  worth,  and  a 
significant  fraction  of  those  said  they  were  “underwater”  on  their  home  mortgages,  owing 
more  than  the  value  of  the  home.10  This  $11,000  average  is  50  percent  lower  than  the 
average  wealth  of  the  lower  half  of  families  in  1989,  adjusted  for  inflation.  Average  real 
wealth rose gradually for these families for most of those years, then dropped sharply after 
2007.  Figure  5  shows  that  average  wealth  also  grew  steadily  for  the  “next  45”  percent  of 
households  before  the  crisis  but  didn’t  fall  nearly  as  much  afterward.  Those  next 
45 households  saw  their  wealth,  measured  in  2013  dollars,  grow  from  an  average  of 
$323,000 in 1989 to $516,000 in 2007 and then fall to $424,000 in 2013, a net gain of about 
one-third over 24 years. Meanwhile, the average real wealth of families in the top 5 percent 
has nearly doubled, on net – from $3.6 million in 1989 to $6.8 million in 2013. 
Housing wealth – the net equity held by households, consisting of the value of their homes 
minus their mortgage debt – is the most important source of wealth for all but those at the 
very top.11 It accounted for three-fifths of wealth in 2013 for the lower half of families and two-
fifths of wealth for the next 45. But housing wealth was only one-fifth of total wealth for the 
                                                                                                                                                      
share for this group fell in the financial crisis, to 34 percent in 2010, then rose in the recovery, regaining a 
37 percent share in 2013. 
7   The top half of the distribution, except for the top 5 percent, earned 53 percent of all income in 1989 but only 
51  percent  in  2010.  In  2013,  households  in  the  “next  45  percent”  had  incomes  between  $47,000  and 
$230,000. While income has rebounded for the top 5 percent in the recovery, the share that went to the next 
45 percent declined further to 49 percent in 2013. The bottom half of the distribution saw their share of income 
fall from 16 percent in 1989 to 15 percent in 2007, edge up in 2010, and then reach a new low for the survey 
last year at 14 percent. 
8   Largely  because of  losses in income from financial  holdings, the share  of total  income received by the top 
5 percent of households fell 3 percentage points from 2007 to 2010, with the next 45 percent and lower half of 
households each gaining about half of that share. Some of the nominal income losses for households below 
the top 5 percent were offset by larger-than-normal transfer payments during the recession. 
9   All SCF income and wealth data prior to the 2013 survey are adjusted for inflation by expressing the values in 
2013 dollars. 
10   In  the  2013  SCF,  17  percent  of  all  families  reporting  zero  or  negative  net  worth  also  reported  they  were 
underwater on their home mortgages. 
11   Housing wealth includes the net equity in primary residences and other residential real estate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  top 5 percent of families. The share of housing in total net worth for all three groups has not 
changed much since 1989. 
Since housing accounts for a larger share of wealth for those in the bottom half of the wealth 
distribution, their overall wealth is affected more by changes in home  prices. Furthermore, 
homeowners in the bottom half have been more highly leveraged on their homes, amplifying 
this  difference.  As  a  result,  while  the  SCF  shows  that  all  three  groups  saw  proportionally 
similar increases and subsequent declines in home prices from 1989 to 2013, the effects on 
net worth were greater for those in the bottom half of households by wealth. Foreclosures 
and the dramatic fall in house prices affected many of these families severely, pushing them 
well  down  the  wealth  distribution.  Figure  6  shows  that  homeowners  in  the  bottom  half  of 
households by wealth reported 61 percent less home equity in 2013 than in 2007. The next 
45 reported a 29 percent loss of housing wealth, and the top 5 lost 20 percent. 
Fortunately, rebounding housing prices in 2013 and 2014 have restored a good deal of the 
loss in housing wealth, with the largest gains for those toward the bottom. Based on rising 
home  prices  alone  and  not  counting  possible  changes  in  mortgage  debt  or  other  factors, 
Federal Reserve staff estimate that between 2013 and mid-2014, average home equity rose 
49 percent for the lowest half of families by wealth that own homes.12 The estimated gains 
are somewhat less for those with greater wealth.13 Homeowners in the bottom 50, which had 
an average overall net worth of $25,000 in 2013, would have seen their net worth increase to 
an average of $33,000 due solely to home price gains since 2013, a 32 percent increase. 
Another major source of wealth for many families is financial assets, including stocks, bonds, 
mutual  funds,  and  private  pensions.14  Figure  7  shows  that  the  wealthiest  5  percent  of 
households held nearly two-thirds of all such assets in 2013, the next 45 percent of families 
held about one-third, and the bottom half of households, just 2 percent. This figure may look 
familiar, since the distribution of financial wealth has concentrated at the top since 1989 at 
rates similar to those for overall wealth, which we saw in figure 3.15  
Those are the basics on wealth and income inequality from the SCF. Other research tells us 
that inequality tends to persist from one generation to the next. For example, one study that 
divides  households  by  income  found  that  4  in  10  children  raised  in  families  in  the  lowest-
income fifth of households remain in that quintile as adults.16 Fewer than 1 in 10 children of 
families at the bottom later reach the top quintile. The story is flipped for children raised in the 
highest-income households: When they grow up, 4 in 10 stay at the top and fewer than 1 in 
10 fall to the bottom. 
Research also indicates that economic mobility in the United States has not changed much 
in  the  last  several  decades;  that  mobility  is  lower  in  the  United  States  than  in  most  other 
                                                 
12   The house price data used are from CoreLogic, and data track price changes at the Core Based Statistical 
Area level between the survey month in 2013 and June 2014. The average increase in home prices over this 
period was 8 percent. No adjustments are made to account for possible changes in mortgage leverage. 
13   Home  price  gains  in  2013  and  2014  are  estimated  to  have  raised  the  home  equity  of  home-owning 
households in the next 45 percent of households in the wealth distribution by 12 percent, and by 9 percent for 
home-owning households in the top 5 percent of the wealth distribution. 
14   The  SCF  defines  financial  assets  as  liquid  assets,  certificates  of  deposit,  directly  held  pooled  investment 
funds, stocks, bonds, quasi-liquid assets (including retirement accounts), savings bonds, whole life insurance, 
other managed assets, and other financial assets. 
15   In  1989,  the  top  5  percent  of  households  held  54  percent  of  financial  assets,  the  next  45  percent  (that  is, 
home-owning households in the 50th through 95th percentiles of the wealth distribution) held 42 percent, and 
the bottom half held 4 percent. 
16   See  Pew  Charitable  Trusts  (2012),  Pursuing  the  American  Dream:  Economic  Mobility  across  Generations 
(PDF) (Washington: PCT, July). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  advanced  countries;  and,  as  I  noted  earlier,  that  economic  mobility  and  income  inequality 
among advanced countries are negatively correlated.17  
Four building blocks of opportunity 
An important factor influencing intergenerational mobility and trends in inequality over time is 
economic  opportunity.  While  we  can  measure  overall  mobility  and  inequality,  summarizing 
opportunity  is  harder,  which  is  why  I  intend  to  focus  on  some  important  sources  of 
opportunity – the four building blocks I mentioned earlier. 
Two of those are so significant that you might call them “cornerstones” of opportunity, and 
you will not be surprised to hear that both are largely related to education. The first of these 
cornerstones  I  would  describe  more  fully  as  “resources  available  to  children  in  their  most 
formative years.” The second is higher education that students and their families can afford. 
Two additional sources of opportunity are evident in the SCF. They affect fewer families than 
the two cornerstones I have just identified, but enough families and to a sufficient extent that 
I believe they are also important sources of economic opportunity. 
The  third  building  block  of  opportunity,  as  shown  by  the  SCF,  is  ownership  of  a  private 
business.18  This  usually  means  ownership  and  sometimes  direct  management  of  a  family 
business.  The  fourth  source  of  opportunity  is  inherited  wealth.  As  one  would  expect, 
inheritances are concentrated among the wealthiest families, but the SCF indicates they may 
also play an important role in the opportunities available to others. 
Resources available for children 
For  households  with  children,  family  resources  can  pay  for  things  that  research  shows 
enhance future earnings and other economic outcomes – homes in safer neighborhoods with 
good  schools,  for  example,  better  nutrition  and  health  care,  early  childhood  education, 
intervention  for  learning  disabilities,  travel  and  other  potentially  enriching  experiences.19 
Affluent families have significant resources for things that give children economic advantages 
as adults, and the SCF data I have cited indicate that many other households have very little 
to  spare  for  this  purpose.  These  disparities  extend  to  other  household  characteristics 
associated  with  better  economic  outcomes  for  offspring,  such  as  homeownership  rates, 
educational attainment of parents, and a stable family structure.20  
                                                 
17   See  Raj  Chetty,  Nathaniel  Hendren,  Patrick  Kline,  Emmanuel  Saez,  and  Nicholas  Turner  (2014),  “Is  the 
United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility,” NBER Working Paper 
Series 19844 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January (revised May 2014)). 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2010),  “A  Family  Affair: 
See  also  Organisation 
Intergenerational  Social  Mobility  across  OECD  Countries  (PDF),”  in  Economic  Policy  Reforms:  Going  for 
Growth  2010,  pp.183–200  (Paris:  OECD);  and  Alan  B.  Krueger  (2012),  “The  Rise  and  Consequences  of 
Inequality in the United States (PDF),” speech delivered at the Center for American Progress, Washington, 
January 12. 
18   Business assets in the SCF include both actively and “non-actively” managed businesses but do not include 
ownership of publicly traded stock. 
19   See, for example, Janet Currie and Douglas Almond (2011), “Human Capital Development before Age Five,” 
ch. 15 in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4 (Holland: Elsevier), 
pp. 1315–1486. 
20   Homeownership by parents is strongly associated with economic success for children; see Thomas P. Boehm 
and  Alan  M.  Schlottmann  (1999),  “Does  Home  Ownership  by  Parents  Have  an  Economic  Impact  on  Their 
Children?”  Journal  of  Housing  Economics,  vol.  8  (September),  pp.  217–32.  Ninety-seven  percent  of  top-
earning families with children own a home, compared with fewer than half of the bottom 50 percent of families 
with children; educational attainment of parents is strongly predictive of outcomes for children that determine 
earnings. See Ayana Douglas-Hall and Michelle Chau (2007), “Parents’ Low Education Leads to Low Income, 
Despite  Full-Time  Employment”  (New  York:  National  Center  for  Children  in  Poverty,  Columbia  University, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  According to the SCF, the gap in wealth between families with children at the bottom and the 
top of the distribution has been growing steadily over the past 24 years, but that pace has 
accelerated recently. Figure 8 shows that the median wealth for families with children in the 
lower  half  of  the  wealth  distribution  fell  from  $13,000  in  2007  to  $8,000  in  2013,  after 
adjusting for inflation, a loss of 40 percent.21 These wealth levels look small alongside the 
much higher wealth of the next 45 percent of households  with children. But these families 
also saw their median wealth fall dramatically – by one-third in real terms – from $344,000 in 
2007  to  $229,000  in  2013.  The  top  5  percent  of  families  with  children  saw  their  median 
wealth fall only 9 percent, from $3.5 million in 2007 to $3.2 million in 2013, after inflation. 
For families below the top, public funding plays an important role in providing resources to 
children that influence future levels of income and wealth. Such funding has the potential to 
help equalize these resources and the opportunities they confer. 
Social safety-net spending is an important form of public funding that helps offset disparities 
in family resources for children. Spending for income security programs since 1989 and until 
recently  was  fairly  stable,  ranging  between  1.2  and  1.7  percent  of  gross  domestic product 
(GDP), with higher levels in this range related to recessions. However, such spending rose to 
2.4 percent of GDP in 2009 and 3 percent in 2010.22 Researchers estimate that the increase 
in the poverty rate because of the recession would have been much larger without the effects 
of income security programs.23  
Public funding of education is another way that governments can help offset the advantages 
some  households  have  in  resources  available  for  children. One  of  the  most  consequential 
examples  is  early  childhood  education.  Research  shows  that  children  from  lower-income 
households  who  get  good-quality  pre-Kindergarten  education  are  more  likely  to  graduate 
from high school and attend college as well as hold a job and have higher earnings, and they 
are less likely to be incarcerated or receive public assistance.24 Figure 9 shows that access 
to quality early childhood education has improved since the 1990s, but it remains limited – 
41 percent of children were enrolled in state or federally supported programs in 2013. Gains 
in enrollment have stalled since 2010, as has growth in funding, in both cases because of 
budget cuts related to the Great Recession. These cuts have reduced per-pupil spending in 
state-funded programs by 12 percent after inflation, and access to such programs, most of 
which are limited to lower-income families, varies considerably from state to state and within 
                                                                                                                                                      
November). A  considerable body  of literature establishes the correlation  between  educational  attainment of 
parents  and  their  children.  Other  research  has  identified  that  this  relationship  is  causal;  see,  for  example, 
Philip  Oreopoulos,  Marianne  E.  Page,  and  Ann  Huff  Stevens  (2006),  “The  Intergenerational  Effects  of 
Compulsory Schooling,” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 24 (October), pp. 729–60. Eighty-six percent of top-
earning households in the SCF with children are headed by a college graduate, compared with 12 percent in 
the bottom half of households with children; children raised by a single parent earn less as adults. See Mary 
Ann  Powell  and  Toby  L.  Parcel  (1997),  “Effects  of  Family  Structure  on  the  Earnings  Attainment  Process: 
Differences by Gender,” Journal of Marriage and Family, vol. 59 (May), pp. 419–33. Only 4 percent of top-
earning households with children are headed by unmarried parents, compared with 47 percent for the lower 
half of households with children. 
21   Distributional statistics for families with children are based on a sorting of only families with children. 
22   Congressional Budget Office historic budget data. Income security programs include UI, SSI, SNAP EITC, and 
other family support and nutrition programs. 
23   See Jeffrey P. Thompson and Timothy M. Smeeding (2013), “Inequality and Poverty in the United States: The 
Aftermath of the Great Recession (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013–51 (Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July). 
24   See  James  J.  Heckman,  Seong  Hyeok  Moon,  Rodrigo  Pinto,  Peter  A.  Savelyev,  and  Adam  Yavitz  (2010), 
“The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 94 (1-2), 
pp.  114–28;  and  Clive  R.  Belfield,  Milagros  Nores,  Steve  Barnett,  and  Lawrence  Schweinhart  (2006),  “The 
High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Followup,” Journal 
of Human Resources, vol. 41 (Winter), pp. 162–90. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
states, since local funding is often important.25 In 2010, the United States ranked 28th out of 
38  advanced  countries  in  the  share  of  four-year-olds  enrolled  in  public  or  private  early 
childhood education.26  
Similarly, the quality and the funding levels of public education at the primary and secondary 
levels  vary  widely,  and  this  unevenness  limits  public  education’s  equalizing  effect.  The 
United States is one of the few advanced economies in which public education spending is 
often  lower  for  students  in  lower-income  households  than  for  students  in  higher-income 
households.27  Some  countries  strive  for  more  or  less  equal  funding,  and  others  actually 
require higher funding in schools serving students from lower-income families, expressly for 
the purpose of reducing inequality in resources for children. 
A major reason the United States is different is that we are one of the few advanced nations 
that funds primary and secondary public education mainly through subnational taxation. Half 
of U.S. public school funding comes from local property taxes, a much higher share than in 
other  advanced  countries,  and  thus  the  inequalities  in  housing  wealth  and  income  I  have 
described  enhance  the  ability  of  more-affluent  school  districts  to  spend  more  on  public 
schools. Some states have acted to equalize spending to some extent in recent years, but 
there is still significant variation among and within states. Even after  adjusting for regional 
differences in costs and student needs, there is wide variation in public school funding in the 
United States.28  
Spending is not the only determinant of outcomes in public education. Research shows that 
higher-quality  teachers  raise  the  educational  attainment  and  the  future  earnings  of 
students.29  Better-quality  teachers  can  help  equalize  some  of  the  disadvantages  in 
opportunity faced by students from lower-income households, but here, too, there are forces 
that  work  against  raising  teacher  quality  for  these  students.  Research  shows  that,  for  a 
variety of reasons, including inequality in teacher pay, the best teachers tend to migrate to 
and concentrate in schools in higher-income areas.30 Even within districts and in individual 
schools, where teacher pay is often uniform based on experience, factors beyond pay tend to 
                                                 
25   The share of four-year-olds in state-funded pre-K programs increased from 14 percent in 2002 to 27 percent in 
2010 but has been 28 percent since. Head Start enrollments have been fairly steady since 2005. Forty-one 
percent  of  four-year-olds  were  enrolled  in  federally  funded  Head  Start  or  state-funded  pre-K  education 
programs in 2013. See National Institute for Early Education Research (2013), The State of Preschool 2013: 
State Preschool Yearbook (PDF) (New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers Graduate School of Education). For analysis 
of Head Start enrollment by age, see the Annie E. Casey Foundation KIDS COUNT Data Center. 
26   See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2013), “How Do Early Childhood Education 
and Care (ECEC) Policies, Systems and Quality Vary across OECD Countries? (PDF)” Education Indicators in 
Focus Series 11 (Paris: OECD, February). 
27   See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2013), Education at a Glance 2013: OECD 
Indicators (PDF) (Paris: OECD). 
28   See Education Week (2014), Quality Counts 2014: District Disruption and Revival (Bethesda, Md.: Editorial 
Projects in Education, January). 
29   See  Eric  A.  Hanushek  (2011),  “The  Economic  Value  of  Higher  Teacher  Quality,”  Economics  of  Education 
Review, vol. 30 (June), pp. 466–79; or, for estimates of the future earnings students gain by having a better 
teacher,  see  Raj  Chetty,  John  N.  Friedman,  and  Jonah  E.  Rockoff,  “The  Long-Term  Impacts  of  Teachers: 
Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood,” unpublished paper, Harvard University. 
30   See Eric Isenberg, Jeffrey Max, Philip Gleason, Liz Potamites, Robert Santillano, Heinrich Hock, and Michael 
Hansen (2013), Access to Effective Teaching for Disadvantaged Students (PDF), report NCEE 2014–4001, 
prepared  for  the  Institute  of  Education  Sciences  (Washington:  U.S.  Department  of  Education,  Institute  of 
Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance); and Kati Haycock 
and  Eric  A.  Hanushek  (2010),  “An  Effective  Teacher  in  Every  Classroom:  A  Lofty  Goal,  But  How  to  Do  It? 
(PDF)” Education Next, vol. 10 (Summer), pp. 46–52. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  lead  more  experienced  and  better-performing  teachers  to  migrate  to  schools  and  to 
classrooms with more-advantaged students.31  
Higher education that families can afford 
For  many  individuals  and  families,  higher  education  is  the  other  cornerstone  of  economic 
opportunity.  The  premium  in  lifetime  earnings  because  of  higher  education  has  increased 
over the past few decades, reflecting greater demand for college-educated workers. By one 
measure, the median annual earnings of full-time workers with a four-year bachelor’s degree 
are 79 percent higher than the median for those with only a high school diploma.32 The wage 
premium for a graduate degree is significantly higher than the premium for a college degree. 
Despite  escalating  costs  for  college,  the  net  returns  for  a  degree  are  high  enough  that 
college still offers a considerable economic opportunity to most people.33  
Along  with  other  data,  the  SCF  shows  that  most  students  and  their  families  are  having  a 
harder time affording college. College costs have risen much faster than income for the large 
majority of households since 2001 and have become especially burdensome for households 
in the bottom half of the earnings distribution. 
Rising  college  costs,  the  greater  numbers  of  students  pursuing  higher  education,  and  the 
recent  trends  in  income  and  wealth  have  led  to  a  dramatic  increase  in  student  loan  debt. 
Outstanding student loan debt quadrupled from $260 billion in 2004 to $1.1 trillion this year. 
Sorting families by wealth, the SCF shows that the relative burden of education debt has long 
been higher for families with lower net worth, and that this disparity has grown much wider in 
the  past  couple  decades.  Figure  10  shows  that  from  1995  to  2013,  outstanding  education 
debt  grew  from  26  percent  of  average  yearly  income  for  the  lower  half  of  households  to 
58 percent of income.34 The education debt burden was lower and grew a little less sharply 
for  the  next  45  percent  of  families  and  was  much  lower  and  grew  not  at  all  for  the  top 
5 percent.35  
Higher education has been and remains a potent source of economic opportunity in America, 
but I fear the large and growing burden of paying for it may make it harder for many young 
people to take advantage of the opportunity higher education offers. 
                                                 
31   Better and more-experienced teachers tend to move to better-resourced schools, including those with more 
active  outside  funding,  or  those  with  more-advantaged  students,  such  as  magnet  schools.  Even  within 
schools,  more  experienced  and  higher  performing  teachers  are  more  likely  to  teach  Advanced  Placement 
classes which tend to serve more advantaged students. The result is that lower income and lower achieving 
students  are  more  likely  to  be  taught  by  less  experienced  and  lower  performing  teachers.  See  Charles 
Clotfelter, Helen Ladd, Jacob Vigdor, and Justin Wheeler (2007), “High Poverty Schools and the Distribution of 
Teachers  and  Principals,”  North  Carolina  Law  Review,  vol.  85  (2),  pp.  1345–79;  Charles  Clotfelter,  Helen 
Ladd,  and  Jacob  Vigdor  (2005),  “Who  Teaches  Whom?  Race  and  the  Distribution  of  Novice  Teachers,” 
Economics of Education Review, vol. 24 (August), pp. 377–92; and Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and 
James Wyckoff (2002), “Teacher Sorting and the Plight of Urban Schools: A Descriptive Analysis,” Education 
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, vol. 37 (Spring), pp. 37–62. 
32   See  Sandy  Baum  (2014),  Higher  Education  Earnings  Premium:  Value,  Variation,  and  Trends  (PDF) 
(Washington: Urban Institute, February). 
33   Taking into account the cost of paying for education and years spent in college and not working, economists at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimate that the lifetime return to a college degree is 15 percent. See 
Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz (2014), “Do the Benefits of College Still Outweigh the Costs? (PDF)” Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 20 (3). 
34   Education debt in the SCF reflects the total amount of debt outstanding at the time of the survey. 
35   Education debt-to-income ratio is calculated based on what SCF respondents reported as their usual income. 
Numbers are for families with education debt. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Opportunities to build wealth through business ownership 
For many people, the opportunity to build a business has long been an important part of the 
American dream. In addition to housing and financial assets, the SCF shows that ownership 
of  private  businesses  is  a  significant  source  of  wealth  and  can  be  a  vital  source  of 
opportunity  for  many  households  to  improve  their  economic  circumstances  and  position  in 
the wealth distribution. 
While business wealth is highly concentrated at the top of the distribution, it also represents a 
significant component of wealth for some other households.36 Figure 11 shows that slightly 
more than half of the top 5 percent of households have a share in a private business. The 
average value of these holdings is nearly $4 million. Only 14 percent of families in the next 
45 have ownership in a private business, but for those that do, this type of wealth constitutes 
a substantial portion of their assets – the average amount of this business equity is nearly 
$200,000, representing more than one-third of their net worth. Only 3 percent of the bottom 
half of households hold equity in a private business, but it is a big share of wealth for those 
few.37 The average amount of this wealth is close to $20,000, 60 percent of the average net 
worth for these households.38  
Owning a business is risky, and most new businesses close within a few years. But research 
shows  that  business  ownership  is  associated  with  higher  levels  of  economic  mobility.39 
However, it appears that it has become harder to start and build businesses. The pace of 
new  business  creation  has  gradually  declined  over  the  past  couple  of  decades,  and  the 
number of new firms declined sharply from 2006 through 2009.40 The latest SCF shows that 
the percentage of the next 45 that own a business has fallen to a 25-year low, and equity in 
those  businesses,  adjusted  for  inflation,  is  at  its  lowest  point  since  the  mid-1990s.  One 
reason to be concerned about the apparent decline in new business formation is that it may 
serve  to  depress  the  pace  of  productivity,  real  wage  growth,  and  employment.41  Another 
reason is that a slowdown in business formation may threaten what I believe likely has been 
a significant source of economic opportunity for many families below the very top in income 
and wealth. 
                                                 
36   The  SCF  does  not  ask  households  whether  they  started  businesses  that  closed,  so  reported  business 
ownership and wealth is largely related only to those businesses that succeed. 
37   Distributional statistics for business ownership and assets exclude outliers with large negative net worth. 
38   Business wealth took a big hit due to the recession and has only partly recovered for most families. For the 
bottom half of the distribution, the $20,000 average in business wealth in 2013 was down from $29,000, after 
adjusting for inflation, in 2007. The nearly $200,000 held by the next 45 percent with businesses was down 
from $228,000 in 2007. The $4 million in business wealth of the top 5 percent in 2013 was down, in real terms, 
from $4.4 million in 2007. 
39   See, for example, Robert Fairlie (2004), “Earnings Growth among Young Less-Educated Business Owners,” 
Industrial Relations, vol. 43 (July), pp. 634–59; Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Harvey S. Rosen, and Robert Weathers 
(2000),  “Horatio  Alger  Meets  the  Mobility  Tables,”  Small  Business  Economics,  vol.  14,  pp.  243–74;  and 
Vincenzo  Quadrini  (2000),  “Entrepreneurship,  Saving,  and  Social  Mobility,”  Review  of  Economic  Dynamics, 
vol. 3 (January), pp. 1–40. 
40   See  Business  Dynamics  Statistics,  U.S.  Census  Bureau.  For  analysis  documenting  the  decline  in  new  and 
young firms, see John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2012), Where Have All the Young Firms 
Gone? (PDF) Business Dynamics Statistics Briefing, May. For a discussion of the link between a decline in 
young  firms  and  constrained  credit  access,  see  Michael  Siemer  (2014),  “Firm  Entry  and  Employment 
Dynamics in the Great Recession (PDF),” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014–56 (Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July). 
41   See Steven J. Davis and John Haltiwanger (2014), “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance (PDF),” 
paper prepared for “Re-Evaluating Labor Market Dynamics,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21–23. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Inheritances 
Along with other economic advantages, it is likely that large inheritances play a role in the 
fairly  limited  intergenerational  mobility  that  I  described  earlier.42  But  inheritances  are  also 
common among households below the top of the wealth distribution and sizable enough that 
I believe they may well play a role in helping these families economically. 
Figure 12 shows that half of the top 5 percent of households by wealth reported receiving an 
inheritance  at  some  time,  but  a  considerable  number  of  others  did  as  well  –  almost 
30 percent  of  the  next  45  percent  and  12  percent  of  the  bottom  50.  Inheritances  are 
concentrated at the top of the wealth distribution but less so than total wealth. Just over half 
of  the  total  value  of  inheritances  went  to  the  top  5  percent  and  40  percent  went  to 
households in the next 45. Seven percent of inheritances were shared among households in 
the bottom 50 percent, a group that together held only 1 percent of all wealth in 2013.43  
The average inheritance reported by those in the top 5 percent who had received them was 
$1.1 million. That amount dwarfs the $183,000 average among the next 45 percent and the 
$68,000 reported among the bottom half of households. But compared with the typical wealth 
of these households, the additive effect of bequests of this size is significant for the millions 
of households below the top 5 that receive them. 
The average age for receiving an inheritance is 40, when many parents are trying to save for 
and secure the opportunities of higher education for their children, move up to a larger home 
or one in a better neighborhood, launch a business, switch careers, or perhaps relocate to 
seek more opportunity. Considering the overall picture of limited resources for most families 
that I have described today, I think the effects of inheritances for the sizable minority below 
the top that receive one are likely a significant source of economic opportunity. 
Conclusion 
In closing, let me say that, with these examples, I have only just touched the surface of the 
important topic of economic opportunity, and I look forward to learning more from the work 
presented  at  this  conference.  As  I  noted  at  the  outset,  research  about  the  causes  and 
implications of inequality is ongoing, and I hope that this conference helps spur further study 
of  economic  opportunity  and  its  effects  on  economic  mobility.  Using  the  SCF  and  other 
sources, I have tried to offer some observations about how access to four specific sources of 
opportunity may vary across households, but I cannot offer any conclusions about how much 
these factors influence income and wealth inequality. I do believe that these are important 
questions, and I hope that further research will help answer them. 
 
                                                 
42   This  topic  is  discussed  extensively  in  Thomas  Piketty  (2014),  Capital  in  the  21st  Century,  trans.  Arthur 
Goldhammer (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press). 
43   Reported inheritances can have been received at any point in the respondent’s  life. As  with other forms of 
wealth cited in these remarks, inheritances have been adjusted for inflation and are expressed in 2013 dollars. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
