Prasarn Trairatvorakul: “The Role of the Central Bank in Driving 
Thailand’s Sustainable Growth” 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  before  the  Thai 
Forum, New York, 8 October 2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thailand  has  undergone  much  change  this  year,  and  the  usual  visitors  from  abroad  may 
have  chosen,  understandably,  to  watch  developments  from  afar.  It  is  thus  my  sincere 
pleasure to bring some of Thailand to your very doorstep. The country is now at an important 
junture. Political uncertainty has subsided and some promising government plans have taken 
place.  Therefore  there  is  no  better  time  for  domestic  and  international  investors  alike  to 
capitalize on the new wave of growth. 
Thailand’s  immediate  challenge  is  to  restore  growth  to  its  potential.  For  much  of  the  past 
seven years, we have been experiencing sub-par growth rates. As the economy now wakes 
up from its third contraction since 2008, it is time to focus on Thailand’s avenues for restoring 
normal growth again. How can an economy rebound from a contraction back to growth? Part 
of the answer lies in the economy’s strong fundamentals, and the Bank of Thailand, as the 
central bank, plays a part in safeguarding them as attested by quick rebounds of the Thai 
economy  after  the  Great  Recession  in  2008  and  the  Thai  floods  in  2011.  In  addition,  as 
caretaker of the country’s banking system, the Bank of Thailand also fosters development of 
the financial system to bring about growth. I would now like to lead you through the details of 
our role in growth and hope that by the end of our talk you will have gained firmer belief that 
Thailand’s policy makers are committed to the country’s long-term growth. 
My talk today will cover the two roles that the Bank of Thailand plays in building sustainable 
growth.  Firstly,  I  would  like  to  describe  the  ongoing  role  of  economic  stabilization,  as 
stability is a prerequisite for sustainable economic growth in the long term. Secondly, I will 
address growth opportunities available to Thailand and the Bank of Thailand’s role in 
developing the financial structure that enables the capture of these opportunities. Due 
to  necessity  as  well  as  design,  several  structural  changes  are  now  underway  in  Thailand, 
and  the  Bank  of  Thailand  aims  to  facilitate  the  transformation  of  these  changes  into 
sustainable long-term growth. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
When businesses go about their daily activity, they not only produce goods for consumption 
today, but they also innovate and improve their tools of trade in order to produce more and 
newer goods in the future. When the economy enters a long slump, these improvements are 
foregone  and  future  growth  potential  is  diminished,  a  situation  known  as  hysteresis. 
Therefore a smooth growth path is desirable for sustainable growth. This brings us to the first 
role  of  the  central  bank  in  this  talk,  safeguarding  stability  and  balance  in  the  economy.  In 
particular,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  monitors  three  facets  of  stability:  growth  stability,  price 
stability, and financial stability. 
In  terms  of  growth  stability,  we  have  been  on  the  low  end  of  the  balance.  We  observe 
Thailand’s average growth to be near zero in the past three quarters, and currently we are 
still  well  below  the  long-term  trend.  The  underperformance  was  contributed  to  by  political 
uncertainty  and  drawdown  from  earlier  accelerated  spending  encouraged  by  previous 
government policies. The long stretch of low growth calls for the central bank to step in with 
policy  that  shores  up  demand.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  implemented  accommodative 
monetary policy since the beginning of the year, while price and financial stability were also 
carefully monitored to ensure they were not compromised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The accommodative stance has shored up demand up until now, with businesses gradually 
upgrading  and  adding  capacity  during  the  downturn,  and  as  we  enter  recovery,  they  have 
retained the  ability  to  resume  production  at  normal  levels.  Continuation  of monetary  policy 
accommodation  will  benefit  further  investment  through  the  availability  of  funds,  especially 
now  that  the  recent  political  clarity  helps  restore  confidence  both  domestically  and 
internationally.  Revival  of  confidence  is  vital  to  recovery  and  restoration of growth  towards 
potential. Recent economic data is supportive, showing that consumption and tourism have 
started to pick up and stimulus measures from the government have risen. On the external 
front, the steady recovery of the world economy, especially the U.S, will bolster the export 
sector. All these positive prospects point to on-track economic recovery and movement 
towards fulfilling the growth stability objective. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We forecast Thailand to grow at around 4.8% next year, a rate that means steady recovery 
to normal levels of economic activity. As the economy returns to full capacity, inflation and 
financial risks may surface. To ensure sustainability, the process of growth must not create 
imbalances in the economy that will draw down future growth. This brings us to the two other 
aspects of stability: price and financial stability. The Bank of Thailand has had much success 
in anchoring inflation expectation through our Inflation Targeting framework, adopted since 
2000.  Many  times  during  this  period,  well-anchored  inflation  expectation  has  allowed 
flexibility  for  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  when  needed,  to  actively  support  growth  and  ensure 
financial stability. 
As  you  well  know  from  the  Subprime  Crisis,  an  economy  with  growth  stability  and  price 
stability  can  still  fall  into  contraction  due  to  financial  causes.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has 
learned  from  our  own  experience  with  a  financial  crisis  as  well  as  others’  and  has  been 
vigilantly monitoring indicators of risk to financial stability in the economy, and has policies 
developed  especially  to  ensure  financial  stability.  Conducting  policy  through  the  use  of 
interest rate  alone  may  not  be  sufficient  to take  care  of financial  imbalance.  In  addition  to 
monetary policy, which sometimes is too blunt to optimally take care of financial stability, we 
have  adopted  macroprudential  tools  since  2002  and  employed  them  to  help  us  cover  and 
specifically  target  areas  of  the financial  system. For  example,  we  monitor  excessive  credit 
card loans to sub-par debtors, excessive foreign exchange speculation, and formation of a 
real estate bubble. 
Apart from abovementioned policies, the managed float exchange rate regime helps maintain 
stability  in  capital  flows.  Under  this  regime,  Thai  Baht  is  allowed  to  move  in  line  with  the 
market forces but gives the central bank ability to influence the exchange rate in the time of 
excessive volatility. 
All the mentioned policies have helped to keep the current economy in good balance. 
Today,  capital  flows,  private  sector  balance  sheets,  as  well  as  real  estate  values  remain 
healthy, which should enable fast recovery. 
Although  the  economy  is  anticipated  to  recover  after  private  confidence  regains,  some 
notable  risks  must  be  addressed  and  closely  monitored  over  next  year.  One  that  is 
worth mentioning is the expected U.S. interest rate normalization after recovery of the U.S. 
economy, which could lead to capital flow volatility in Thailand. 
Even with headwind from the Fed’s action of hiking policy interest rate, we anticipate 
only limited impact on overall Thai economy as the market has already gradually priced in 
the  Fed’s  stance  since  last  year.  Additionally,  our  reserves  remain  high,  allowing  the 
economy to be cushioned from the possible outflows of capital. Moreover our managed float 
exchange rate regime automatically stabilizes against possible volatility. At the same time, 
household  debt,  currently  at  83%  of  GDP,  requires  a  long-term  solution.  While  its 
effect so far remains contained, its risk cannot be ignored. Over the recent years, the 
Bank of Thailand has built awareness of this risk in the public which has contributed to the 
natural  adjustment  of  the  market  and  therefore  the  slowdown  of  household  debt 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in 
for  Thailand 
accumulation. Going forward, the Bank is proposing a national agenda to the government to 
promote  financial  literacy  and  discipline  to  ensure  long-term  stability  in  line  with  our  own 
ongoing financial awareness projects. 
I  have  now  talked  about  the  central  bank’s  commitment  to  growth,  price,  and  financial 
stability  in  order  to  support  sustainable  growth.  Now  that  we  are  in  recovery,  minding  the 
future  risks  to  financial  and  price  stability,  and  being  in  possession  of  stabilization  tools 
tested  and  refined  over  time,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  will  carefully  weigh  the 
tradeoff between short-term growth and long-term risks and ensure that the economy 
will have enough financial ease to recover to sustainable growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  would  now  like  to  move  on  to  the  second  role  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand:  facilitating  an 
expansion of the growth frontier. Keeping balance as described in the first part is achieved 
through  the  use  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  tools  in  guarding  economic  stability.  To  allow 
stakeholders to move forward and capture new opportunities, the Bank of Thailand employs 
its other instruments to enhance financial sector efficiency and create a favorable financial 
environment for investment that would lead to higher productivity growth. 
Going forward, the strategic location of Thailand and regional trend towards more economic 
integration  provides  an  opportunity 
terms  of  market  reach. 
We are located in the centre of ASEAN, with a combined population of more than 600 million, 
a  large  proportion  who  are  of  middle  income  and  have  potential  to  spend  on  goods  and 
services. We  are  also  to  enter  the  ASEAN  economic  community,  a  regional  agreement  to 
liberalize and integrate trade in 2015 which would further develop trade prospects. Economic 
integration  with  CLMV  countries  will  open  up  the  opportunity  to  tap  into  a  rapidly-growing 
consumer  market  as  well  as  the  regional  workforce.  Thailand  is  well  known  as  a  high 
performance  production  base 
food  and 
petrochemicals.  Meanwhile,  the  CLMV  countries  have  a  young  and  abundant  labor  force. 
Thus  Thailand  can  benefit  from  a  production  supply  chain  that  makes  use  of  the  CLMV 
resources for more efficient production to support businesses at home. 
Seeing  these  chances,  the  government  has  given  priority  to  infrastructure  by  endorsing 
investment  plans,  especially  in  railways  and  roads,  to  reduce  transportation  costs,  and 
setting up Special Economic Zones at five locations along our border to reap the benefit from 
our strategic location as a gateway to other ASEAN countries. 
On  the  side  of  the  Bank  of Thailand,  we  facilitate  the  ease  of  doing  business  through  the 
Capital  Account  Liberalization  Master  Plan  so  that  businesses  can  benefit  from  this 
opportunity.  The  progress  can  be  observed  by  both  trade  with  CLMV,  which  has  been 
growing annually with double digits over the past 4 years, and more efficient allocations of 
capital and resources as seen in an increasing number of Thai companies doing outward 
Foreign Direct Investment. 
In addition the SMEs, which account for approximately 95% of total businesses in Thailand, 
have been playing an essential role in driving the economy and will continue to do so 
going forward. They  are  an  integral  part  of the  supply  chain  and  one of the key  success 
factors  of  Thailand’s  previously-mentioned  high-potential  industries.  There  are  also  SMEs 
who  have  the  capability  to  produce  high  value  added  products  by  creating  their  own 
innovation such as the seasoning packages you see in Asian grocery stores here. Another 
example  is  ready-to-drink  coconuts,  a  product  that  combines  a  coconut  in  its  natural  shell 
with  an  opener  such  as  one  you’d  find  on  a  soft  drink  can.  It  is  a  recent  entrepreneurial 
product that has outstanding growth in exports since launch. 
In 2004, the Bank of Thailand launched the Financial Master Plan which aims to increase 
efficiency  and 
the  market.  Since 
implementation,  we  have  observed  the  improvement  in  Thailand’s  financial  infrastructure 
from reduced cost-to-income of commercial banks and particularly from SMEs’ greater 
financial  access  by  promoting  competition 
the  region,  especially 
for  automobiles, 
in 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
financial access. The cost of raising funds in Thailand has been reduced through the well-
developed  financial  market  since  more  players  are  allowed  to  offer  variety  of  financial 
products. Moreover, the increasing in competition among commercial banks provides higher 
incentive  for  them  to  serve  a  wider  range  of  customers,  especially  SMEs,  who  once  have 
limited  access  to  raise  funds  and  relied  on  self-funding  in  a  less-developed  market.  In 
another project to ease SMEs access to funds, the Bank of Thailand has set up the SMEs 
Database  to  reduce  asymmetric  information  in  the  market  and  provide  a  more  favorable 
business environment. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Bank  of  Thailand  pursues  the  goal  of  sustainable  well-being,  and  strong  economic 
fundamentals are requisite to achieving this goal. We closely assess the growth, price, and 
financial stability in order to ensure our mandate. Meanwhile, to expand the growth frontier 
we consider thoroughly in all aspects to develop the financial system as a policy instrument, 
encouraging business to capture the rich opportunity from Thailand strategic location. 
In  the  soccer  game  of  the  economy,  the  Central  Bank  acts  as  Center  Back.  In  order  to 
safeguard stability during the recent circumstances, we have played a proactive role due to 
high economic uncertainty. Now that political and economic clarity is higher, the central bank 
will play a supportive role. At the back we can clearly see the whole field and choose a path 
to support the team’s offense, especially now that the government has gotten back to its 
position  as  the  play  maker  to  assist  the  private  sector  to  reach  the  goal  of  achieving 
growth potential. 
Thank you. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The resilience of the Thai economy 
Monetary Policy: 
Credible macroeconomic policies 
1.  
A key strength of the Thai economy is sound macroeconomic policy management, which has 
allowed the country to weather through various shocks relatively well. In fact, it often tops the 
list  of  positive  factors  cited  by  credit  rating  agencies  in  their  sovereign  credit  assessment 
reports. More specifically, the country is often credited for having a robust macroeconomic 
policy framework and close coordination among public agencies. 
– 
Under  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
cautiously weighs overall stability against downside risks to growth. In the absence of a fully-
functioning fiscal authority prior to changes in the political situation, the MPC stepped up and 
reduced the policy rate to support the economy. 
– 
Fiscal  policy  formulation  and  public  debt  management  are  guided  by  explicit  fiscal  rules, 
which  provide  checks  and  balance  against  potential  challenges  to  fiscal  discipline  from 
offbudget expenditure and financing. In this connection, public debt-to-GDP stood at 46.85% 
in July 2014, indicating favorable fiscal discipline. Recently, the government has announced 
concrete roadmaps which help bolster public confidence. Going forward, the government will 
continue to play proactive roles in supporting an economic rebound. 
Fiscal Policy: 
Strategic location 
2.  
Thailand is located in the center of the Greater Mekong Sub-region (GMS). Rich human and 
natural  resources  in  the  GMS  will  make  it  a  new  frontier  for  economic  growth  in  ASEAN, 
providing  clear  opportunities  for  the  region.  As  ASEAN  comprises  600  million  people,  the 
majority of which are growing middle class, economic integration via the ASEAN Economic 
Community  will  further  enhance  trade  prospects  through  increase  demands  and  an 
expanding market. Building upon this strategic location, the government investment plans on 
infrastructure,  particularly  railways  and  roads,  and  the  establishment  of  five  Special 
Economic Zones (SEZ) along provincial borders will help to facilitate an increase in border 
trade. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
Sound banking sector 
3.  
The Thai Banking sector is in a strong position to help accommodate economic growth and 
support  the  country’s  development.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  continues  to  improve  financial 
system  strength  and  efficiency.  Meanwhile,  the  Bank  of Thailand  has  also  conducted  risk-
based  supervision  and  enhanced  its  supervision  and  examination  frameworks  in  line  with 
international  standards  set  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  These 
transparent supervisory practices and the promotion of sound corporate governance, as well 
as risk management in financial institutions, help safeguard financial system stability. 
In the second quarter of 2014, Thailand’s capital adequacy ratio stood at 15.67%, well above 
the international requirement of 8.5%. Additionally, the ratio of actual to regulatory loan loss 
provision increased to 169.8%. These conditions ensure that the banking sector is capable of 
dealing with unexpected risks, particularly credit risks. 
External stability 
4.  
In light of global financial market volatilities, which resulted from divergent monetary policy 
paths  amongst  major  industrialized  economies,  Thailand’s  external  stability  is  strongly 
safeguarded against volatile capital fluctuations. Flexible exchange rate serves as a cushion 
against external shocks, while careful implementation of macroprudential policies and capital 
flow management options stand ready to preserve financial balance. Currently, Thailand has 
strong external position with international reserves exceeding the international benchmark for 
reserve  adequacy.  The  latest  data  indicate  that  reserve  to  short-term  debt  ratio  is  at  2.7, 
reassuring  that  the  policies  being  implemented  are  capable  of  safeguarding  the  economy 
against capital flow risks. 
Growth prospects 
5.  
Although  Thailand  has  averaged  near  zero  growth  in  the  past  three  quarters,  strong 
fundamentals  combined  with  overall  stability  have  contributed  to  the  ongoing  recovery  of 
Thai economy and, hence, to future growth. Looking ahead, the Bank of Thailand anticipates 
GDP  to  expand  by  4.8%  next  year.  The  revival  of  private  sector  confidence,  after  political 
clarity, will encourage private consumption and investment. At the same time, the resumption 
of a fullyfunctioning government allows government spending to further boost the economy. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 