  Andreas Dombret: Long-term challenges facing banks in Germany 
Dinner  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Bundesbank’s  autumn  conference  “Achieving  Sustainable  Financial 
Stability”, Berlin, 1 October 2014. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to this year’s Bundesbank autumn conference. In my 
view, the topic of this conference is well chosen. The crisis and the great uncertainties it has 
brought on have made the pursuit of financial stability all the more urgent. For this reason I 
am delighted that so many of you have been able to accept the Bundesbank’s invitation to 
discuss this sensitive issue. 
This evening I would like to take a closer look, with you, at the long-term challenges facing 
German credit institutions. 
With more than 1,800 institutions, the German financial system is the largest – in terms of 
sheer numbers – in the euro area. This large number reflects a special feature of the German 
banking  system,  namely  that  it  is  built  on  three  pillars.  Alongside  the  private  banks,  many 
regional savings banks and credit cooperatives are in operation. In the crisis, these locally 
important institutions played a major part in stabilising the German economy, because they 
were less strongly affected by the financial crisis thanks to their traditional business model. 
Nonetheless, all banks have felt the effects of a great loss of confidence since the financial 
crisis  erupted  in  2008  –  they  have  lost  the  confidence  of  the  general  public,  of  trade  and 
industry  and  of  the  interbank  community.  There  are  two  major  reasons  for  this  loss  of 
confidence. The first is uncertainty about how sound individual institutions actually are. The 
second  relates  to  wrong  investment  advice  in  connection  with  securitisation  products  and 
certificates.  More  recently,  confidence  suffered  again  as 
information  about  banks’ 
misconduct came to light – for example, the manipulation of reference rates such as Euribor 
and Libor or the legal violations that have often garnered so much attention from the media. 
The financial crisis and the subsequent loss of confidence have given rise to a major reform 
of  financial  regulation.  Basel  III  is  certainly  the  best  known  and  most  important  of  the 
measures designed to make banks more resilient by strengthening their capital and liquidity 
position. And many banks have indeed strengthened their capital position significantly over 
the past years. This elevated robustness is indispensable, as it was never possible at any 
point in the past to identify the specific causes of the next crisis in good time. 
This  means  that,  in  future,  institutions  will  also  have  to  be  prepared  for  hitherto  unknown 
dangers, uncertainties we may not even know exist. And here, a strong capital position is the 
best buffer against shocks, regardless of where they come from. 
However,  dealing  with  unknown  dangers  requires  German  banks  to  embrace  a  new  risk 
culture. The crisis made us painfully aware of just how far removed from a sound culture of 
risk the risk culture was at many banks in Germany. 
Risk culture 
2. 
One reason for an inadequate risk culture lies in the “too big to fail” problem, which was a 
central  issue  in  the  last  crisis.  The  failure  of  banks  that  are  very  large  or  strongly 
interconnected might endanger the whole financial system – the failure of Lehman Brothers 
in 2008 was a case in point. Thus, in the eyes of the markets these banks enjoy an implicit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  state guarantee: in case of trouble, the state would feel compelled to step in and rescue the 
distressed bank. 
Yet this implicit state guarantee creates flawed – and dangerous – incentives. If a bank can 
be sure of state support when it gets into difficulties, it will no longer see risk and return as 
being  two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  Essentially,  this  means  that  profits  from  risky  business 
operations remain with the bank, while the taxpayer is left to shoulder potential losses: this is 
an unjustifiable scenario. 
For this reason, I believe that an important signal to the market and to banks is to develop 
mechanisms that allow even big banks to fail without destabilising the entire financial system. 
The possibility of a market exit, which is fundamental to any market economy, must also exist 
for  the  banking  sector.  The  real  threat  of  actually  failing  is  in  itself  a  strong  incentive  for 
banks to be more aware of risk in their actions. The long-term goal, then, must be to put risk 
and return back onto the same page. 
One important step towards that goal is the European resolution mechanism which will start 
in 2016. This mechanism ensures that the owners and creditors of banks are the first in line 
when it comes to bearing losses. Consequently, the taxpayer will be the last in line to foot the 
bill. This realigns risks and rewards and will certainly have a fundamental and positive effect 
on the risk culture within banks. 
Yet what is crucial here is not only that rules are in place for dealing with a distressed bank, 
but that  banks  don’t get  into financial  dire  straits  in  the first  place.  Banks  have  to  improve 
their  risk  culture  regardless  of  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem.  At  the  spring  meeting  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  recommendations  for  action  were  agreed  on  and  subsequently 
announced. According to the Financial Stability Board, the foundational elements of a sound 
risk  culture  are  effective  risk  governance,  an  effective  risk  appetite  framework  and,  in 
particular, the alignment of compensation with prudent risk taking. 
Four practices may help in assessing the soundness of a risk culture. 
• 
First, the tone from the top: the board and senior management are the starting point 
for  setting  the  financial  institution’s  core  values  and  the  expectations  for  its  risk 
culture, and their behaviour must reflect the values being espoused. 
Second, accountability: employees must understand the institution’s core values and 
its approach to risk. And they have to be aware that they are responsible for their 
actions and risk taking. 
Third,  effective  communication  and  challenge:  a  sound  risk  culture  promotes  an 
environment of open communication and effective challenge, within which decision-
making processes encourage a range of views. 
Last but not least, incentives: performance and talent management encourage and 
reinforce  maintenance  of  the  financial  institution’s  desired  risk  management 
behaviour.  This  includes  changing  the  banks’  in-house  incentive  schemes.  One 
example  here  would  be  to  cap  bonus  payments  and  link  them  to  the  long-term 
development of institutions’ profits. 
   We must succeed in embedding awareness of sustainable business practices more firmly in 
the risk culture of banks. 
Profitability 
3. 
Of course, a new risk culture has its price, which will unquestionably also have a short-term 
impact on the banks’ profitability. What’s more, the current low-interest-rate environment also 
remains  a  major  challenge for  the  profitability  of  banks.  German  savings  banks  and  credit 
cooperatives  in  particular  rely  on  net  interest  income  as  the  most  important  earnings 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  component. Consequently, they expect a further decline in profitability in the current interest 
rate environment. 
In  addition,  competitive  pressure  is  high  due  to  the  sheer  number  of  institutions  in  the 
marketplace, and this will no doubt increase as the integration of the banking market across 
Europe deepens. 
Last but not least, the implementation of the new banking rules will come at a cost – to raise 
fresh capital, say, or to draw up recovery plans and build up a restructuring fund. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  essential  that  German  credit  institutions  recognise  their 
weaknesses  and  counteract  them  at  an  early  stage.  This  could  be  achieved  by  boosting 
income  in  fee  and  commission  business  and  by  taking  into  consideration  cost-cutting 
measures. There is traditionally a strong branch network in Germany. Streamlining this could 
reduce costs. Mergers could also make sense for several credit institutions, with the focus in 
each case being on the sustainability of each business model. 
Closing remarks 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
In  my  speech,  I  have  discussed  three  challenges  that  German  banks  currently  face: 
regulatory reform, necessary changes in risk culture and low profitability. 
Regulatory reform definitely comes at a cost for the banks. However, when we talk about the 
cost of regulation for the banks, we also need to talk about the cost of crises for the general 
public. Viewed from this perspective, I think the price we are paying for stricter regulation is 
entirely appropriate. Even for the banks themselves, the rising outlay for regulatory matters is 
not only a cost factor. They, too, benefit from a stable financial system. 
The same is true of a change in risk culture. There is evidence that institutions inadequately 
identified  and  managed  not  just  their  market  and  credit  risks  but  their  operational  risks  as 
well:  it  is  therefore  imperative  that  improvements  be  made.  Credit  institutions  have 
themselves  already  announced  their  intention  to  change  their  risk  culture.  However,  this 
fundamental  decision  is  not  one  that  should  be  merely  voiced  at  the  senior  management 
level. The banks must do more than simply talk the talk: their new values must be practised 
institution-wide by managers and employees alike. 
In  conclusion,  each  institution  faces  the  major  challenges  of  adjusting  to  new  regulatory 
requirements and of improving its risk culture without completely losing sight of profitability, 
particularly  as  profitability  is  already  challenged  by  the  current  environment  of  low  interest 
rates and fierce competition in the German banking market. 
However,  I  am  confident  that  German  credit  institutions  will  succeed  in  overcoming  the 
challenges ahead and in finding a healthy balance between risk and reward. The first steps 
to achieving these goals have already been taken. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
