DeLisle Worrell: Caribbean economies – has recovery arrived? 
Contribution by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, for the CIBC 
World Markets Panel on the Caribbean, Bridgetown, 9 October 2014. 
 Caribbean economies: has recovery arrived? 
• 
    For Barbados the answer is: not yet, but we are on course. The key messages we 
would like to share with you on the economy are: 
Barbados is among the most competitive economies in the Caribbean and Central 
America, as reported in the Global Competitiveness Index 2014–15; 
Barbados has good economic fundamentals, an appropriate growth and adjustment 
strategy for our circumstances, and a resilient framework for decision-making; 
Barbados’ growth is fuelled by the foreign exchange sectors in which the country is 
internationally competitive. The growth strategy is based on increased productivity, 
enhancement of the quality and appeal of the country’s products and services, and 
structural reform of the public sector; 
Barbados’  adjustment  strategy  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  Barbados  dollar  by 
aggressive measures to contain aggregate spending in line with foreign exchange 
availability. 
So, how well are we doing? 
Our aggregate demand management is working. In August and December of last year the 
Minister of Finance introduced a major programme of fiscal cuts, aimed to arrest the slide in 
foreign exchange reserves which began to appear in May last year. Foreign reserves have 
stabilised, and since the beginning of this year we have observed the normal daily pattern of 
foreign reserve movements.  
The  outlook  for  tourism,  Barbados’  main  foreign  exchange  earner,  has  improved.  Arrivals 
have picked up from the UK, Barbados’ most important source of visitors, and airlift from the 
US and Canada, also important markets for us, will increase significantly in the coming winter 
season.  There  has  been  something  of  a  revival  in  sales  to  visitors  of  second  homes  in 
Barbados,  and  Barbados  now  has  five  major  international  hotel  chains  advertising  our 
tourism  product:  Hilton,  Marriott,  Fairmont,  Radisson  and  Sandals.  Tourism-related 
investment in excess of US$2 billion is expected in the next 3 years.  
Barbados  remains  an  aspirational  tourism  destination,  offering  accommodation  and  other 
services  that  are  of  very  high  quality.  The  country’s  competitive  position  is  being 
strengthened  by  initiatives  to  improve  productivity  and  service  excellence,  the  further 
development  of  sports  tourism  (golf,  polo,  yachting  and  motor  sports,  especially),  and  the 
development of cultural and heritage tourism. (Bridgetown, once a major trading port, and its 
garrison, once the defense hub of the British Caribbean, were recently  declared UNESCO 
World  Heritage  Sites.)  A  major  initiative  is  on  to  improve  Government’s  facilitation  of 
business,  especially  tourism  and  international  business,  and  to  make  the  system  of  fiscal 
incentives more efficient and transparent.  
Barbadians remain confident of the future of our international business and financial centre in 
an  interconnected  digital  world.  The  globalisation  of  commerce  and  finance  is  the  present 
reality and the inexorable future of the 21st century, and small international financial centres 
like Barbados play an essential role in improving the efficiency of international transactions 
and the competitiveness of international firms. There is a small but growing literature on this, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
including the forthcoming report on an international conference on this topic which Barbados 
hosted on September 11.  
Barbados bases its appeal to potential investors in our network of Double Taxation Treaties 
(DTAs) and Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs), and the fact that our regulatory 
framework  is  kept  abreast  of  international  standards  through  reviews  by  the  IMF,  World 
Bank,  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force  on  anti-money  laundering  (FATF)  and  the  Global 
Forum of the OECD on tax information. In addition the country boasts a small but growing 
cadre of skilled professionals, and highly competitive support services and infrastructure.  
Barbados’  growth  strategy,  led  by  our  private  sector,  supported  by  reformed  Government 
services, incentives and infrastructure, will yield steadily improving, sustainable growth over 
the  medium term.  However, for  2014  the  priority  remains  economic  stabilisation  and  fiscal 
consolidation.  
So  far  the  correction  in  the  fiscal  deficit  is  only  about  2  percent  of  GDP,  compared  with 
almost 6 percent correction which is the target for the current fiscal year. The second half of 
the  fiscal  year  is  expected  to  yield  larger  gains,  as  some  measures  (such  a  tax  to  cover 
waste management expenses) are biased towards the second half. In addition, Government 
is tightening fiscal controls with the recent establishment of an independent oversight body 
for state owned enterprises, and the Barbados Revenue Authority, which began operations in 
April,  is  expected  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  revenue  administration.  The  IMF  and  the 
Caribbean  Technical  Assistance  Centre  are  providing  assistance  with  public  financial 
management and tax policy.  
The service costs of Barbados’ sovereign external debt in 2014 are about 7 percent of the 
country’s foreign exchange earnings on the current account of the balance of payments, and 
are  not  expected  to  exceed  10  percent  for  the  foreseeable  future.  The  domestic  financing 
needs for the target deficit of 6.6 percent of GDP can be met from excess liquidity of financial 
institutions, over and above the demand they encounter for private sector credit. Domestic 
financial institutions continue to roll over maturing Government local currency 4 obligations, 
in the absence of other low risk options with adequate rates of return.  
In  sum,  the  Barbados  economy  is  on  the  right  path.  We  know  from  experience  that 
sustainable  growth  is  not  an  overnight  phenomenon.  Growth  may  be  slow  in  coming,  but 
when it arrives it will persist, because it will be soundly based on the things we do best. In the 
meanwhile, we will do all that is necessary to keep the economy steady as we go. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
