  Ryuzo Miyao: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the 2014 
Autumn  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Japan  Society  of  Monetary  Economics,  Tokyo,  18  October 
2014. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to the 2014 Autumn Annual Meeting of the Japan Society of 
Monetary  Economics.  Both  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  I  have  been  deeply  indebted  to  the 
Society over the years. 
In the four and a half years since I took office as a Policy Board member of the Bank – how 
time flies – the global economy has faced strong headwinds caused mainly by the sovereign 
debt  crisis  in  Europe,  the  fiscal  cliff  in  the  United  States,  and  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake  in  Japan.  Central  banks  in  advanced  countries  have  adopted  their  own 
unconventional monetary policy, stepping further into uncharted territory. The Bank of Japan, 
for its part, introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013 and 
has been conducting further aggressive monetary easing. 
I am aware that there are various views and opinions in academia about the initiatives by the 
Bank  and  other  major  central  banks.  Discussions  and  research  have  been  actively 
underway. As a central banker who came from academia, I too have been asking myself the 
following questions. 
First, economic recovery has been driven by consumption in Japan for about the past two 
years.  Why  consumption,  and  why  now?  What  is  the  driving  force  behind  this?  Can  such 
recovery  be  sustained?  Second,  contrary  to  what  many  people  had  expected,  the  rate  of 
increase in the consumer price index (CPI) has been rising steadily since 2013. What is the 
driving force for that? Firms increasingly have been passing on costs to sales prices, but why 
is this happening now? Third, views are divided among those in academia with regard to the 
effects  of  the  unconventional  monetary  policy,  such  as  the  purchases  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs).  How  should  we  respond  to  skeptical  views  about  the  policy 
effects,  stating,  for  example,  that  (1)  the  policy  by  itself  does  not  produce  any  effects  in 
ordinary  times,  but  it  appears  effective  only  because  some  market  participants  believe  so; 
and  (2)  such  policy  will  only  cause  a  temporary  asset  price  bubble,  and  thus  make  the 
economy unstable? 
In finding my own answers to these questions, I realized that such answers critically depend 
on an assessment of the potential strength of the supply side of the economy; namely, its 
growth  potential,  profitability,  and  capacity  to  generate  income.  Needless  to  say,  it  is 
essential to accurately gauge the situation on the supply side of the economy in discussing 
the  mechanism  of  economic  recovery  and  its  sustainability,  as  well  as  the  effects  and 
challenges of monetary policy. 
Bearing that in mind, I have emphasized in my past speeches that the main feature of the 
current economic recovery in Japan is that it has been primarily driven not by exports, like in 
typical recovery phases in the past, but by consumption and nonmanufacturing activities, and 
that the driving force has been the heightened strength of the supply side from the standpoint 
of several aspects.1 Specifically, in the corporate sector, various positive efforts have been 
                                                
1   For  details,  see,  for  example,  Ryuzo  Miyao,  “Economic  Activity  and  Prices  in  Japan  and  Monetary  Policy,” 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Okayama, Bank of Japan, April 10, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  made in and outside Japan, and these have bolstered nonmanufacturers’ profitability as well 
as manufacturers’ ability to make profits through globalization; firms’ demand for labor has 
generally risen and the employment and income situation has continued to improve; and the 
household  labor  supply  has  been  increasing,  with  voluntary  labor  force  participation  by 
women and the elderly. 
The  Bank  has  been  conducting  QQE,  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent. As I will address in detail later, if the potential strength of the economy heightens, 
the 2 percent price stability target will be achieved more smoothly in a well-balanced manner, 
with a sustainable economic recovery, and price stability will be maintained. Moreover, with 
the  heightened  strength  of  the  economy,  monetary  policy  will  be  more  effective  while 
potential negative side effects – such as financial imbalances – will likely be suppressed. If 
the  decisive  measures  promote  further  effects,  a  virtuous  cycle  may  start  to  operate  that 
encourages positive efforts of firms and households as well as a structural transformation in 
the economy, which would further heighten the strength of the economy. 
Today, I would like to reexamine the improvements on the supply side of Japan’s economy. 
Based on that, I will then address some issues regarding monetary policy. At the end of my 
speech,  I  will  touch  upon  points  to  keep  in  mind  regarding  Japan’s  economic  and  price 
developments. 
I.  
Recent developments in economic activity and prices and improvements on 
the supply side 
Continued moderate recovery in Japan’s economy 
A.  
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, although some weakness, 
particularly  on  the  production  side,  has  been  observed,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the 
subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption 
tax hike. Real GDP for the April-June quarter of 2014 fell substantially at a rate of 7.1 percent 
on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis. However, this decline followed the front-loading 
of demand in the January-March quarter, for which real GDP had grown significantly at a rate 
of 6.0 percent (Chart 1). To exclude such fluctuations, when we compare real GDP for the 
January-June period of 2014 with that for the July-December period of 2013, the annualized 
growth rate was 1.0 percent. Therefore, on average, Japan’s economy has continued to grow 
at a pace above its potential and the recovery trend has been maintained. 
Japan’s output gap has continued to improve as a trend. The Bank’s estimated figures for the 
output gap turned positive in the January-March quarter of 2014 and were close to 0 percent 
in  the  April-June  quarter.  Thus,  the  output  gap  has  generally  disappeared.  The  weighted 
average of the production capacity DI and employment conditions DI in the September 2014 
Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  also  confirms  this 
improvement (Chart 2). 
Next, I will move on to price developments. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all 
items  less  fresh  food,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike)  has 
strengthened its uptrend from 2013 and has improved to around 1¼ percent recently. This 
uptrend  can  also  be  confirmed  by  the  CPI  figures  for  all  items  excluding  food  and  energy 
(Chart  3).  These  developments  reflect  the  improving  trend  in  the  output  gap  mentioned 
earlier and a rise in inflation expectations. The medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
according  to  Consensus  Forecast,  for  example,  have  turned  to  a  rising  trend  from  2013 
(Chart 4). 
The  main  feature  of  the  recent  economic  recovery  is  that  it  is  driven  by  consumption  and 
nonmanufacturing activities, and this trend can still be observed (Chart 5). The typical pattern 
of  past  recovery  phases,  driven  by  exports,  can  be  clearly  observed  in  the  expansionary 
phase of 2002 to 2008, but exports have subsequently been more or less flat in the longer 
run. Business fixed investment has been increasing moderately, albeit with fluctuations, but 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the pace has been gradual in comparison with the expansionary phase in the mid-2000s. In 
contrast,  consumption  has  consistently  followed  an  increasing  trend,  albeit  with  various 
effects, and has posted even higher growth since the start of 2012. Consumption expenditure 
for the April-June quarter of 2014 saw a large drop of 19 percent on an annualized quarter-
on-quarter  basis,  reflecting  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded 
increase  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike;  however,  after  smoothing  out  the  fluctuations, 
consumption  expenditure  for  the  period  of  January-June  2014  compared  with  that  of  July-
December  2013  declined  by  a  much  slower  pace  of  0.8  percent.  Private  consumption  has 
remained resilient as a trend with the employment and income situation improving steadily, 
and  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  have  been 
waning on the whole, albeit unevenly. It deserves special mention that consumption – which 
has  been  posting  increasingly  higher  growth  –  has  been  the  driving  force  of  economic 
recovery over the past two years or so without being accompanied by notable increases in 
exports  and  business  fixed  investment,  which  had  previously  been  the  driving  factors  of 
economic recovery. 
At the same time, it is evident that the current economic recovery has also been driven by 
nonmanufacturing activities (Chart 6). Looking at economic developments since 2012 – when 
the  effects  of  the  earthquake  disaster  mostly  dissipated  –  the  level  of  nonmanufacturing 
activities  has  continued  to  increase,  while  that  of  manufacturing  activities  has  turned  to  a 
pick-up  after  having  dropped.  Although  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded 
increase prior to the consumption tax hike has recently been somewhat large, it seems the 
improvement in nonmanufacturing activities is being maintained as a trend. 
increased 
further  (Chart  7).  Manufacturing 
Improvements on the supply side 
B. 
The fact that the economy has continued to recover, mainly in consumer demand, reflects 
improvements in the various aspects of the supply side; in other words, the potential strength 
of the economy. 
In  the  corporate  sector,  various  positive  efforts have  progressed  at  home  and  abroad  and 
firms’  profitability  has 
firms  are  further 
accelerating  their  efforts  toward  optimizing  their  global-based  activities,  such  as  through 
increasing  their  production,  procurement,  and  fixed  investment  as  well  as  hiring  local 
management  and  staff  in  overseas  countries  where  there  is  demand.  Efforts  to  stimulate 
potential  demand  have  been  spreading  to  a  wider  range  of  nonmanufacturing  sectors.  In 
Japan, these efforts range from the building of new advanced distribution centers, expansion 
of home-delivery service and online shopping, to active openings of new convenience stores 
and shopping malls. There also have been active moves to strengthen the economy’s growth 
potential by capturing local demand overseas, such as development of overseas business in 
the retail, wholesale, and service industries as well as acquisition of firms. 
Labor and employment conditions have also continued to improve as a trend. On the back of 
proceeding  with  their  positive  efforts, firms  are  increasing  their  demand for  labor  and their 
stance on employment is becoming active (Chart 8). Looking back on the past year, a sense 
of  labor  shortage  among  nonmanufacturing firms  has  heightened further,  and  labor  supply 
and  demand  conditions  at  manufacturing  firms  have  also  tightened,  recently  turning  to  a 
state  of  labor  shortage.  In  terms  of  the  quality  of  employment,  firms  have  gradually  been 
making a shift to hiring part-time workers as full-time, regular workers, mainly based on the 
need  to  secure  competent  human  resources  (Chart  9).  As  for  wage  developments,  the 
year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings has turned positive due to a rise in 
base pay at many firms, and special cash earnings have also steadily increased, due mainly 
to  a  rise  in  summer  bonus  payments.  As  a  result,  employee  income  –  that  is,  wages  per 
employee multiplied by the number of employees – has been increasing by about 2 percent 
year on year (Chart 10). 
With regard to labor supply conditions, the labor force participation rate that had been on a 
declining trend, mainly due to the demographic situation, bottomed out in 2012 and is moving 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  toward a pick-up (Chart 11). Breaking down the labor force participation rate by gender and 
age,  the  rising  trend  in  the  participation  rate  of  women  is  particularly  prominent,  and  an 
increasing  trend  is  also  becoming  evident  in  recent  years  for  men,  especially  in  the  age 
category of 65–74 years (Chart 12). This seems to reflect initiatives taken by firms amid a 
general  sense  of  labor  shortage  to  encourage  the  participation  of  female  workers  by 
introducing flexible working systems such as shorter working hours, and also to promote the 
employment of the elderly in order to pass on their skills and knowledge to younger workers. 
However, it will be necessary to wait for data to accumulate for some time before making a 
judgment  on  whether  such  improvements  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate  are  mainly 
temporary and cyclical ones, brought about by the economic recovery, or due to sustainable 
and structural changes. If the latter is the case to some degree, then the amount of potential 
labor  input  is  expected  to  bottom  out  and  the  potential  growth  rate  to  turn  upward, 
accordingly. 
Many researchers would agree that estimation of the potential growth rate entails technical 
difficulties.2  In  many  economic  analyses,  trend  components,  which  are  extracted  from  the 
actual economic data using methods such as the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter, are often used 
as proxies for the potential series of economic variables. However, it is difficult to estimate 
the recent figures for these potential series, particularly those toward the end of the sample 
period,  on  a  real-time  basis.  Let  us  now  take  a  look  at  Chart  11.  It  shows  that  the  trend 
estimates  of  the  labor  force  participation  rate  have  declined  over  the  past  year  or  two. 
However,  it  should  be  noted  that,  if  the  recent  increase  in  labor  force  participation  that  I 
explained earlier is sustainable and structural, we should be able in the future to look back 
and  confirm  that  the  actual  trend  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate  has  already  stopped 
declining;  as  a  result,  it  is  quite  conceivable  that  the  potential  growth  rate  will  be  revised 
upward. Thus, careful monitoring of such a possibility is required.3 
I have so far examined improvements on the supply side of the economy from the standpoint 
of aspects such as corporate profits, demand for labor, employment and wages, and labor 
supply. In all of these aspects, it is commonly observed that improvements became distinct 
from  around  2012.  That  is  to  say,  against  the  background  of  positive  efforts  by  firms  and 
households,  it  has  become  evident  that  the  economy’s  capacity  to  generate  income  –  as 
represented  by  corporate  profits,  employee  income,  and  labor  force  participation  –  has 
increased on the whole. This supports the view that, as a result, expectations for permanent 
income in the economy as a whole have improved and, in addition, anxiety and uncertainty 
regarding  future  employment  conditions  have  decreased  considerably,  which  has  led  to 
economic  recovery  driven  by  consumption.  In  other  words,  it  can  be  explained  that,  from 
around 2012, the improvement in the potential strength of the supply side of the economy 
has  been  the  driving  force  of  the  sustainable  recovery  in  domestic  demand,  particularly 
consumer demand. 
Given these factors, let us now take a look at the estimates of the potential growth rate of 
Japan’s  economy  (Chart  13). The  potential growth  rate  per  capita  seems  to  have  stopped 
declining in around 2010, and has been more or less flat thereafter. Although estimates of 
the potential growth rate should be judged with some latitude, at least the observations so far 
suggest that the potential growth rate over the past year or two may be revised upward in a 
few  years’  time.  I  consider  that,  in  order  to  assess  the  supply  conditions  of  the  economy, 
                                                
2  For  the  estimation  approaches  of  the  potential  growth  rate  and  related  issues,  see,  for  example, 
“Developments  in  the  Aggregate  Supply  and  Demand”  on  pages  36  and  37  of  the  April  2014  issue  of  the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released by the Bank. 
3   Normally, an upward revision of the potential growth rate or potential GDP figures will exacerbate the output 
gap.  However,  with  improvements  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  the  output  gap  may  improve  and 
upward  pressure  on  prices  may  heighten  if  demand  increases  in  the  somewhat  longer  term  at  a  pace 
exceeding growth in supply capacity. I will elaborate on this point in section I.C. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  particularly the recent ones, it is important not to solely rely on the estimates of the potential 
growth rate, but to make a comprehensive assessment taking into consideration the actual 
situation of firms and households. 
Increasing upward pressure on prices 
C.  
When  improvements  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  lead  to  a  sustainable  increase  in 
domestic  demand,  particularly  consumer  demand,  upward  pressure  on  prices  is  likely  to 
increase. Let me explain this from a theoretical viewpoint. 
First,  given  the  standard  analysis  based  on  aggregate  supply  and  demand  curves, 
improvement on the supply side shifts the aggregate supply curve (or the Phillips curve) to 
the right. In this case, economic activity improves while upward pressure on prices weakens. 
However,  if,  at  the  same  time,  aggregate  demand  increases  in  a  sustainable  manner,  the 
aggregate demand curve shifts to the right, thereby increasing upward pressure on prices. It 
is purely an empirical question as to which of the two factors – the shift of the supply curve or 
of the demand curve – outweighs the other. An empirical analysis using Japan’s data that 
examined the effects of an increase in total factor productivity (productivity shock) showed 
that  the  effects  of  an  increase  in  upward  pressure  on  prices  caused  by  the  increase  in 
demand outweigh those of an increase in supply; thus, an improvement on the supply side 
leads to an improvement in the output gap and causes a modest increase in prices.4 
Second, when sales of goods and services increase sustainably in line with firms’ strategy of 
creating  differentiated  products  and  higher  value-added,  their  price-setting  behavior  might 
become more active. In other words, in a situation  where demand is expected to increase 
sustainably, firms will be able to charge higher markups (profit margins) or pass production 
costs more directly on to sales prices. If these developments are structural, this will steepen 
the Phillips curve, which will also increase upward pressure on prices. 
Third, it is likely that a mechanism will operate through which improvements on the supply 
side  increase  people’s  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  If  people  expect  that 
economic activity and sales will continue to improve, their inflation expectations will increase 
– considering, for example, the Phillips curve relation in the future. This mechanism is called 
forward-looking expectation formation of the New Keynesian Phillips curve. Improvements on 
the supply side thus increase people’s somewhat long-term inflation expectations, and in turn 
shift up the intercept of the Phillips curve. 
In fact, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have been increasing gradually (Chart 4). 
Developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations seem to largely correlate with 
those in the potential growth rate per capita that I explained earlier, with the exception of the 
most recent period (Chart 13). 
In  a  situation  where  these  mechanisms  work  in  combination,  it  is  possible  to  say,  as 
suggested from Chart 3, that upward pressure on the consumer price inflation rate has been 
increasing. In other words, mechanisms such as (1) sustainable improvement in the output 
gap and increasing expectations for future improvement, (2) firms’ increased ability to pass 
costs on to sales prices, and (3) a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations have all 
contributed to heightening upward pressure on overall prices. 
I should note that, as a different kind of logic to explain the recent rise in prices in Japan, 
some argue that prices have risen due to the constraint of sluggish supply. How should we 
explain this argument? I consider the key to be whether the supply capacity of the economy 
is actually increasing. Price rises that are not accompanied by improvements on the supply 
side  will  restrain  growth  in  demand  and  thus  prevent  economic  activity  from  expanding. 
Looking  at  the  recent  situation  in  Japan,  however,  improvements  on  the  supply  side  have 
                                                
4   See  Ryuzo  Miyao,  Makuro  Kinyu-Seisaku  no  Jikeiretsu  Bunseki  (Time-Series  Analysis  of  Macroeconomic 
Monetary Policy), Chapter 8, Nikkei Inc., 2006, pp. 209–245 (available in Japanese). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  become clear over the past year or two; in fact, demand has been increasing sustainably. 
Specifically,  (1)  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  for  labor  has  been  increasing 
sustainably  at  a  pace  exceeding  growth  in  supply  capacity;  (2)  production  of  goods  and 
services  has  been  increasing,  and  the  employment  situation  has  been  improving;  and 
(3) prices as well as wages have been rising moderately. Given these observations, I think 
that it is difficult to attribute the recent price rises to sluggish supply or supply constraints. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
The  recent  macroeconomic  performance  that  I  have  described  so  far  will  also  create  a 
desirable  situation  with  regard  to  conducting  unconventional  monetary  policy.  As  I  will 
explain, if the potential strength of the economy heightens, the 2 percent price stability target 
will  be  achieved  more  smoothly  in  a  well-balanced  manner,  with  a  sustainable  economic 
recovery, and price stability will be maintained. Moreover, with the heightened strength of the 
economy, greater policy effects will be produced while potential negative side effects – such 
as financial imbalances – will likely be suppressed. 
The 2 percent price stability target 
A.  
In January 2013, the Bank released a joint statement with the government and introduced a 
price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year inflation rate of the CPI, making 
a clear commitment to achieving this target at the earliest possible time. 
Looking back at the situation around that time, some notable progress was made in terms of 
external  factors:  downside  risks  to  the  global  economy  caused  by  the  extremely  strong 
headwinds  –  such  as  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  and  the  fiscal  cliff  in  the  United 
States – had subsided in the latter half of 2012, and thus uncertainties had diminished to a 
considerable degree. Given these developments, the Bank showed its determination to attain 
sustainable  economic  growth  in  Japan  in  coordination  with  the  government,  aiming  to 
overcome deflation and dispel deflationary sentiment at the earliest possible time. 
The Japanese people expect to have price stability that is achieved not by a mere price hike, 
but by a moderate rise in prices brought about by balanced and sustainable economic growth 
together with improvements in employment, wages, and corporate profits. The Bank set the 
price stability target at 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI based 
on the recognition that the inflation rate consistent with price stability on a sustainable basis 
would rise as efforts by a wide range of entities toward strengthening growth potential and 
competitiveness of the economy made progress. 
In fact, steady progress has been made in a variety of initiatives toward strengthening growth 
potential and improving the supply side, with strong support from the financial side through 
QQE. Japan’s economy has continued to recover in a well-balanced manner as employment, 
wages, and corporate profits have improved in a sustainable manner, and the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI has been increasing gradually toward the 2 percent price stability 
target. 
The role of QQE 
B.  
In April 2013, the Bank introduced QQE to achieve the 2 percent price stability target at the 
earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. With the aim of achieving the 
target, the Bank decided to continue with QQE, as long as it was necessary for maintaining 
that target in a stable manner. 
QQE is mainly composed of three important components: a large expansion of the monetary 
base (at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen); large-scale purchases of JGBs (at an 
annual pace of about 50 trillion yen) with an extension of the average remaining maturity (to 
about  seven  years);  and  an  increase  in  the  purchase  of  risk  assets.  It  also  incorporates 
elements  of  an  open-ended  framework  that  links  the  continuation  of  such  large-scale 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  monetary  easing  with  its  policy  target.  That  is,  the  Bank  has  committed  to  continuing  with 
QQE “as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 2 percent price stability target in a stable 
manner” without restricting the time frame or the total amount in advance. This commitment 
seems to have helped create further accommodative financial conditions by exerting a strong 
influence on market expectations about future monetary policy. 
The  effects  of  QQE  are  more  likely  to  materialize  if  the  potential  strength  of  the  economy 
heightens.  Specifically,  given  an  increase  in  firms’  profitability,  extremely  accommodative 
financial  conditions  will  drive  their  positive  efforts  and  risk-taking  activities,  thereby  further 
heightening economic stimulus effects. Large-scale purchases of JGBs can exert downward 
pressure on longer-term interest rates and upward pressure on asset prices. If fundamentals 
such  as  corporate  profits  improve  at  the  same  time,  asset  price  rises  will  become  more 
sustainable  and  justified.  As  a  result,  potential  negative  side  effects  – such  as  heightened 
financial imbalances – will likely be suppressed. 
In addition, if some decisive measures produce further positive effects in a situation where 
the  potential  strength  of  the  economy  heightens,  positive  efforts  of  firms  and  households, 
business fixed investment, and a structural transformation in the economy will be stimulated 
further. This may then accelerate a virtuous cycle that further bolsters the potential strength 
of  the  economy  and  the  effectiveness  of  the  policy  measures.  The  economic  recovery  in 
Japan seems to have strengthened its sustainability, as corporate profits have been on an 
improving trend and potential strength has heightened further through the implementation of 
the measures in 2013. An improvement in corporate profits can be seen in Japan and in the 
United  States  while  aggressive  monetary  easing  continues  and  stock  prices  remain  on  a 
rising  trend  in  both  countries.  It  is  likely  that  firms’  positive  efforts  to  improve  profits  have 
been encouraged further by the extremely accommodative financial conditions (Chart 14). 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude  by  touching  on  the  outlook  for  the  economy  and  price  developments  in 
Japan. 
Japan’s economy is expected to continue on its moderate recovery trend, and the effects of 
factors  such  as  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike  are  expected  to  wane  gradually.  Supported  by  the  accommodative 
financial conditions, improvements on the supply side and the sustainable recovery trend of 
the economy, as well as the moderate improving trend in inflation expectations, are likely to 
continue. The economy is therefore expected to follow a path toward achieving the 2 percent 
price  stability  target  in  a  balanced  manner,  accompanied  by  improvements  such  as  in 
employment, wages, and corporate profits. 
On the other hand, as for private consumption, the effects of factors such as the decline in 
demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  have  somewhat  lingered  in  terms  of  the 
consumption of durable goods, and therefore the pace of recovery warrants a certain degree 
of attention. In order for the improvements in economic activity and prices to continue in a 
wide range of areas, it is important that the positive effects of the increase in corporate profits 
spread throughout the economy – including households and small and medium-sized firms – 
by way of increases in wages and employment, a raise in delivery prices paid to suppliers, or 
other channels. 
The Bank has committed to continuing with its aggressive monetary easing, as long as it is 
necessary for maintaining the 2 percent price stability target in a stable manner. It also will 
continue  to  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and 
make  adjustments  as  appropriate  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target.  In  standing  by  its 
commitment  and  clarifying  its  policy  stance,  the  Bank  will  further  encourage  positive 
initiatives  taken  by  a  wide-range  of  economic  entities  from  the  financial  side.  The  Bank  is 
therefore determined to fulfill its responsibility toward achieving sustainable economic growth 
through price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     13 
 14 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
