  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: ASEAN’s rapid economic growth and future 
potential 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  ASEAN  Fixed  Income  Summit  (AFIS),  Kuala 
Lumpur, 29 September 2014. 
 I am pleased to be here at the inaugural ASEAN Fixed Income Summit, which is hosted by 
Bank Negara Malaysia, together with Cagamas, the ACI – Financial Markets Association of 
Malaysia  and  Malaysian  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers.  We  have  here  today,  an 
impressive gathering of senior policy makers across ASEAN and senior representatives from 
major financial institutions and corporations operating in the region. I would like to welcome 
all of you to Sasana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur and to Malaysia. 
Today, we are in one of the most dynamic and fastest-growing regions in the world. Based 
on IMF’s forecast, world growth in 2014 and 2015 would be 3.4% and 4% respectively. The 
ASEAN region is expected to grow by 6.4% in 2014 and 2015. ASEAN’s GDP is expected to 
reach USD3 trillion by 2017, tripling in size relative to a decade ago. With a diverse range of 
economies in terms of size, stages of development and economic structure, including home 
to  many  dynamic  and  emerging  economies  such  as  Myanmar  and  Vietnam,  economic 
expansion  in  this  region  are  expected  to  be  sustained,  and  significantly  outpace  global 
growth. As ASEAN continues to open up to global investors, foreign direct investment flows 
(FDI)  is  expected  to  accelerate.  Going  forward,  ASEAN  with  a  sizeable  population  of 
618 million offers vast investment prospects as the economy is expected to grow strongly for 
the next few years. 
ASEAN  leaders  have  also  embarked  on  an  ambitious  vision  to  create  a  single  “common 
market”.  Realisation  of  this  vision  will  lead  to  a  freer  flow  of  goods  and  services,  capital 
investment and skilled labour across the region. Many initiatives and measures have been 
implemented under the ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint since its launch in 2007 and 
many  more  areas  of  importance  are  being  discussed  and  negotiated.  Like  most  regional 
economic community, ASEAN aims to promote greater regional connectivity in which lessons 
of history in economic development had shown, would expand economic growth potential. 
Data has also shown that intra-regional trade flows have already grown substantially among 
ASEAN-10 members countries reflecting the increasing phenomenon of freer trade with its 
neighbouring countries in recent years. Consequently, the share of intra-regional trade has 
also increased, from 22.5% in 1999 to 25% in 2011. 
Against this backdrop, ASEAN financial markets had also grown significantly in tandem. In 
particular, the ASEAN fixed income markets, are instrumental to support the growth of intra-
regional trade, financing and investment in infrastructure. 
ASEAN fixed income markets have expanded by more than six folds since 2000, and now 
stand impressively at USD1.1 trillion. The size of ASEAN local currency bond markets is now 
five times larger than the total USD-denominated bonds issued by ASEAN entities, indicates 
the  growing  maturity,  resilience  and  the  important  role  of  domestic  bond  markets  in  each 
economy. The compounded annual growth rate in ASEAN local currency bond issuance has 
been  12.9%  since  2003.  The  regional  individual  markets  have  experienced  growth  rates 
ranging from 5.3% to 42.2%. 
These  figures  are  very  encouraging.  The  potential  is  enormous.  A  relatively  new  area  of 
growth for ASEAN bond market is infrastructure financing. Infrastructure investments in Asia, 
by some estimates, will amount to a staggering USD8 trillion, over the next decade. ASEAN 
bond markets can play a big role in bridging this long term financing needs given that most 
economies  within  the  region  are  bank-dependence  for  long  term  financing.  Not  only  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economy would be better served by a new source of funds, but the risks of depending on the 
banking sector for long term financing would be greatly reduced. 
However,  formidable  challenges  still  exist.  The  financial  linkages  between  ASEAN  fixed 
income markets are insignificant and intra-regional investments by ASEAN investors are still 
small. Malaysia, the largest fixed income market in ASEAN, has seen a fair share of non-
residents participation and investment. Despite the growth of our fixed income market and 
the  substantial  non-residents  investment,  the  participation  from  other  ASEAN  countries  is 
limited. 
It  would  be  a  fair  guesstimate  that  this  is  similar  in  other  ASEAN  fixed  income  markets. 
Within the ASEAN region, more than 90% of cross-border portfolio investment flows are still 
with advanced economies outside Asia. 
For reserve management, Bank Negara Malaysia has for a number of years invested in both 
USD  and  local  currency  denominated  Asian  bonds.  It  has  been  an  enriching  experience 
investing  in  these  markets.  The  many  years  of  experience  in  our  neighbours’  financial 
markets has enabled us to have a hands-on understanding on the regulatory environments 
and nuances of the Asia local currency debt markets. For example, liquidity is a challenge in 
most  markets,  including  the  Malaysian,  for  some  issuances.  But  it  can  be  overcome  if  we 
look at the issue from a fresh perspective. 
Another area is the underdeveloped repo markets and hold-to-maturity behaviours of Asian 
investors  that  reduce  liquidity,  an  important  investment  criteria  for  many  investors.  In 
addition,  the  non-uniform  regulatory  environment  across  regional  markets  pose  significant 
resource and capacity challenges that prevent ASEAN fixed income market to function as a 
single large market. These shortcomings add to the complexities and cost in investing in the 
region, thus making it less attractive to potential investors. 
Collectively,  there  is  much  more  that  can  be  done.  The  capacity  and  capability  of  the 
domestic  players  need  to  be  elevated  and  to  enable  them  to  efficiently  facilitate  regional 
investment by providing to would be investors up-to-date and comprehensive information and 
advice on credit, regulatory requirements and tax implication. Equally important, they should 
be  able  to  effectively  offer  ancillary  services  such  as  FX  and  interest  rate  hedging  and 
securities  custody  services.  More  should  also  be  done  to  promote  the  participation  of 
domestic long-term investors such as insurance companies and pension fund into the region. 
Through  these  measures  the  intention  to  recycle  Asian  savings  and  surplus  funds  for  the 
productive use of the region would be realised. 
Malaysia has taken several steps to develop its market to facilitate cross border investment 
activities. Over the years, we have liberalized foreign exchange administration rules to make 
it easier for domestic investors to invest abroad and for foreign investors to invest in Ringgit 
assets. 
With this progressive liberalization, ASEAN investors can now buy Ringgit assets from the 
region or any part of the world. Together with the Malaysian Securities Commission, we have 
introduced  a  transparent  and  facilitative  framework  for  the  issuance  and  subscription  of 
ringgit  and  foreign-currency  denominated  Sukuk  and  bonds  in  Malaysia.  Our  efforts  have 
resulted in a growing trend of regional issuers participating in our domestic market. 
A leading Indonesian oil palm plantation company was the most recent issuer in Malaysian 
domestic  bond  market,  issuing  MYR500  million  Islamic  securities,  its  second  securities 
issuances.  Other  Asian  issuers  that  have  tapped  the  Malaysian  domestic  bond  market 
include  two  other  Indonesia’s  palm  oil  plantation  companies,  a  Hong  Kong  based  global 
supply  chain  company,  Korean  banks  and  corporations.  As  at  September  2014,  the  total 
issuances  by  non-residents,  including  ASEAN  issuers,  amounted  to  58  issuances.  This 
accounts to a total of MYR20.5 billion (USD6.5 billion equivalent). 
We  are  a  firm  believer  in  cooperation  between  financial  markets.  In  enhancing  market 
infrastructure connectivity and linkages, we have also collaborated with Euroclear and Hong 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Kong  Monetary  Authority  to  facilitate  custody  services  of  Ringgit  securities  by  launching  a 
platform for cross-border investment and settlement of debt securities. This would promote 
greater  efficiency  in  cross-border  debt  securities  settlement  and  would  strengthen  the 
capacity  for  debt  securities  issuances  in  the  region.  Accompanying  this  development,  the 
domestic Real Time Gross Settlement System, known as RENTAS, has been upgraded. Its 
capability  has  been  extended  to  act  as  a  central  depository  and  settlement  for  foreign 
securities.  RENTAS  now  includes  US  Dollar  and  Renminbi  securities.  Earlier  this  month, 
Cagamas’ inaugural Renminbi 1.5 billion bond  issuance, the largest to date by an ASEAN 
corporate  entity,  was  deposited  and  settled  via  domestic  payment  system,  RENTAS.  This 
success affirms the readiness of our infrastructure to serve as a platform for foreign currency 
issuances. 
The  growth  prospect  and  potential  in  ASEAN  is  tremendous.  Our  previous  cooperation, 
initiatives and efforts have been very fruitful and beneficial for the region as a whole. 
Looking forward, in further enhancing regional financial integration and strategizing towards a 
more  dynamic  ASEAN  financial  market,  there  are  many  proposals  and  ideas  that  can  be 
pursued. 
Among these proposals, which would provide significant benefits to our fixed income markets 
is the need to implement a regional framework to mutually recognize approvals in domestic 
jurisdiction  which  will  be  deemed  approved  in  other  ASEAN  member  country  jurisdictions. 
This effort should be expedited to provide issuance flexibilities and accelerate intra-regional 
cross border issuance. Much has been discussed and deliberated on this subject matter. It is 
timely to put idea into action. The benefits are significant, as ASEAN issuers will be able to 
raise long-term domestic currency funding not only from their onshore investors but across 
the  region.  Issuers  would  have  access  to  a  wider  base  of  investors.  A  wider  source  of 
funding would also potentially enable them to better match funding and investment needs. 
Such  a  framework  would  also  expedite  the  issuers’  compliance  with  regulatory  process, 
leading to a shorter time to market, which would result in more reasonable cost issuance. 
Another bold step is to recognize the credit rating given by the domestic credit rating agency 
for domestic currency bond or sukuk issuance. Such recognition ought to be given should the 
rating  agency  had  long  enough  credit  cycle  to  prove  its  rating  reliance.  Domestic  rating 
agencies  have  better  local  knowledge  and  insights.  The  rating  methodologies  are  similar, 
technical  model-driven  and  back  tested.  In  addition,  most  domestic  rating  agencies  have 
international partners for technical assistance, standard and quality assurance. 
Before I conclude, there are some ideas that could contribute to the further integration of our 
fixed income markets. Firstly, a crucial driver for greater financial integration is the availability 
of  efficient  and  effective  financial  intermediaries.  We  should  look  to  enhance  and  better 
connect the network of intermediaries in the region as it would support the development of a 
strong and integrated market. 
With the agreement of the region’s regulatory authorities, this can be achieved through the 
formation of a regional dealers’ network for the primary and secondary market. Such regional 
dealers will help to distribute securities around the region and more importantly create the 
market  to  facilitate  cross-border  transactions.  In  doing  so,  it  creates  liquidity  in  the  fixed 
income  market,  attracting  greater  foreign  investors’  participation  and  lowers  the  cost  of 
funding. ASEAN corporates are thus able to tap into new markets and investors and widen 
their sources of financing. This contributes to greater depth and breadth of the regional fixed 
income market. 
Secondly,  as  intra-regional  trade  within  ASEAN  is  becoming  more  significant  with  further 
potential in intra-regional investments, another untapped area is the cross currency foreign 
exchange market, that could support regional settlement for trade and investment. ASEAN is 
well positioned to advocate the greater use of regional currencies that will further enhance 
and deepen regional financial integration via use of regional currencies for trade settlement. 
The cost of hedging the exchange rate risk will be lower thus it promotes efficiency in trade 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and enhances export competitiveness of our businesses. We should therefore, work together 
and double our effort to promote and enhance the use of regional currencies for trade and 
investment settlement. Sovereign funds managers could also give a timely boost to this effort 
by investing a fraction of their funds into domestic currencies of regional bond markets. 
Finally,  this  Summit  itself  is  a  platform  to  promote  regional  integration,  as  it  can  be  an 
important  avenue  to  discuss  and  showcase  developments  of  the  ASEAN  fixed  income 
market  and  bring  together  policy  makers  and  industry  participants.  Given  the  benefits  and 
outcome  that  can  be  derived  from  this  Summit,  our  ASEAN  financial  market  community 
would be better served if this Summit is organized on an annual basis and hosted by rotation 
among the ASEAN countries. This would provide an excellent opportunity to each ASEAN 
member country to showcase their domestic fixed income market to regional policy makers 
and investors and further deepen our own understanding of the region. 
On  that  note,  I  wish  all  of  you  a  productive  Summit,  one  that  generates  ideas  for  us  to 
expand and prosper from the rapid economic growth of ASEAN. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
