  Jacqueline Loh: Integrating Asia’s capital markets 
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of  Singapore,  at  the  ASIFMA  (Asia  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets)  Annual 
Conference 2014 “Developing Asia’s Capital Market”, Singapore, 5 November 2014. 
 It is my pleasure to join you this afternoon at the ASIFMA annual conference held in 
Mark Austen – CEO, ASIFMA 
Ashley Alder – CEO, Hong Kong Securities and Futures Commission and my fellow keynote 
speaker 
Fellow regulators and central bankers 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
1. 
Singapore. 
2. 
We  have  a  very  ambitious  agenda  ahead  of  us.  The  title  of  the  conference, 
“Developing Asia’s Capital Markets”, certainly does not do full justice to the breadth of topics 
covered  in  the  breakout  sessions  and  roundtable  discussions  over  these  two  days.  These 
topics  are  very  wide  ranging  indeed,  from  traditional  equity  and  debt  markets,  to  foreign 
exchange, investment banking, fund management, financing of Asia’s infrastructure needs, 
market  infrastructures;  as  well  as  specific  geographic  markets  China  and  India.  Each 
segment  not  only  aims  to  address  opportunities  and  challenges  in  each  market  or  asset 
class, but also opportunities and challenges across markets and asset classes. 
3. 
natural pairing to the conference theme on developing Asia’s capital markets. 
Accordingly,  I  will  focus  my  remarks  on  integrating  Asia’s  capital  markets  as  a 
Economic dynamism and wealth creation in Asia 
I. 
4. 
Asia remains the fastest growing and most dynamic region in the world today and is 
likely  to  remain  so  in  the  foreseeable  future.  According  to  projections  by  The  Conference 
Board, China’s growth in the next ten years will average close to 5% per annum, with India at 
about  4.2%  and  the  rest  of  Asia  at  4.5%.1  These  projected  growth  rates  for  Asia  are  well 
above  the  3.8%  for  emerging  economies  as  a  whole,  and  the  1.7%  expected  for  the 
advanced  economies  over  the  same  period.  Looking  further  into  the  future,  the  Asian 
Development  Bank  has  projected  that  the  sum of  the  GDP  of  China,  India  and  ASEAN  in 
purchasing power parity terms could quadruple by 2030 and even exceed that of the US and 
Europe combined.2 
5. 
Asia’s already large middle class, will continue to register strong growth. In ASEAN 
for instance, the middle class is projected to rise to two-thirds of the population by 2030, from 
less than a quarter in 2010.3 The rapid expansion of the middle class will, from the demand 
side, spur the growth and development of a wide range of goods and services. 
6. 
Alongside  Asia’s  sustained  economic  development  in  the  medium-term,  financial 
services will be an important facilitator of growth as well as a growth engine in its own right. 
                                                
1   “New measures for global growth projections for The Conference Board Global Economic Outlook 2014,” The 
Conference Board, November 2013. 
2   “ASEAN, PRC and India: The Great Transformation,” ADB Institute, Asian Development Bank, 2014. 
3  
Ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As income increases and wealth accumulates, the demand for modern services is likely to 
grow  faster,  as  they  have  higher  income  elasticities.  Thus,  we  expect  that  demand  for 
financial services in Asia – such as wealth management – will rise more than proportionately 
to the increase in household income. For instance, assets under management attributed to 
mass affluent and high net worth investors in Asia is expected to expand by 60% to reach 
USD 176 trillion by 2020.4 
7. 
These positive economic factors will continue to drive the growth of Asian financial 
institutions and Asian capital markets. Today, five of the top ten largest banks in the world by 
market capitalisation are Asian banks.5 Primary market capital-raising in Asia via IPOs is the 
highest in the world. In the debt market, capital raised via Asian bond issuances have also 
doubled since 2009 after having achieved record sales in each of the past three years. 
Asia’s capital markets are ripe for closer integration 
II. 
8. 
The  strong  growth  of  Asian  economies  and  financial  markets  has  created  the 
conditions that are driving greater financial integration in the region. In China, home to the 
largest  bank  in  the  world  by  assets,  banks  and  asset  managers  have  acquired  sufficient 
scale domestically to expand and look abroad to grow their businesses. Since 2012, the total 
amount  of  RQFII  quota  awarded  by  China  has  more  than  doubled  for  qualified  foreign 
institutional  investors  to  purchase  mainland  RMB-denominated  securities.  The  RQDII 
scheme  will  allow  qualified  domestic  institutional  investors  to  purchase  RMB-denominated 
securities abroad, which was recently approved. In Myanmar, one of the most under-banked 
countries with bank loans amounting to just one-fifth of GDP6, the issuance of nine licences 
to foreign banks (including two Singapore banks) will help to bring much-needed capital for 
economic  development,  financial  services  and  technology  transfer.  These  are  but  two 
examples  of  the  blossoming  of  financial  services  in  Asia  –  whether  through  cross-border 
channels,  overseas  expansion  or  domestic  liberalisation  –  which  will  integrate  the  region 
financially. 
9. 
Financial  integration  brings  clear  benefits  to  both  users  and  providers  of  financial 
services. It leads to more effective mobilisation of savings from surplus countries to countries 
that need capital, and improve the efficiency of investment allocation. A well-developed and 
competitive financial sector can thus be a catalyst to spur and sustain economic growth. The 
opening up of the financial sector to foreign participation adds to the sector’s development as 
foreign financial institutions also promote competition and innovation, and create the urgency 
for local institutions to upgrade capabilities. This has been our experience in Singapore. 
10. 
International  regulatory  reforms  are  adding  impetus  to  market  integration.  Let  me 
cite two examples. First, as new Basel 3 capital and liquidity rules come into force, banks are 
seeking  ways  to  manage  their  capital  and  liquidity  more  efficiently.  Nowhere  is  this  more 
obvious than in the OTC derivatives market, where banks are trying to compress hundreds 
and  thousands  of  lines  (and  over  USD  700  trillion  of  notional  value7)  of  OTC  derivative 
transactions,  so  as  to  consolidate  liquid  collateral  for  margin  efficiency.  Second,  as 
jurisdictions  roll  out  clearing  and  trading  mandates  for  OTC  derivatives,  more  transactions 
will be traded and cleared on regional and global platforms to reap the benefits of scale and 
liquidity.  This  will  be  instrumental  in  transforming  complex  webs  of  gross  exposures  into 
smaller  sets  of  net  exposures,  reducing  systemic  risk  and  strengthening  the  derivatives 
                                                
4   “Asset Management 2020: A Brave New World,” PwC, 2014. 
5   Market capitalisation as of 31 March 2014, Relbanks. 
6   “Myanmar’s 
Liberalisation: 
Banking 
Sector 
http://pwc.blogs.com/growth_markets/2014/10/myanmars-banking-sector-liberalisation-a-win-win-for-all.html 
7   BIS derivatives statistics, September 2014. http://www.bis.org/statistics/dt1920a.pdf  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A  Win-win 
for 
All,” 
PwC, 
2014. 
  market. These pressures will naturally drive more aggregation across geographies and asset 
classes, and place the issue of market integration squarely on the agenda. Global reforms, if 
they  are  implemented  consistently,  can  also  support financial  integration  by  making  it  less 
burdensome for financial institutions to comply with regulations in different jurisdictions and 
for regulators to mutually recognise and defer to each other where appropriate. 
III. 
Market integration is happening at two levels: among jurisdictions and among 
participants 
11. 
Over the last three years, market integration has been taking place in Asian financial 
markets.  It  is  steadily  making  progress  in  individual  asset  classes,  among  small  groups of 
countries,  sometimes  bilaterally,  where  there  is  common  interest  and  where  markets  and 
institutions are at similar stages of development. 
12. 
a.  
We can see evidence of market integration among jurisdictions in several areas: 
Banking. ASEAN is in discussions to complete a banking integration framework that 
will  allow  qualified  ASEAN  banks  to  progressively  expand  in  each  other’s’ 
jurisdictions. This initiative aims to create opportunities to strengthen regional banks 
in  ASEAN  and  improve  banking  services  offered  to  local  markets.  Even  in  other 
Asian  countries  where  cross-border  bank  financing  is  restricted,  we  are  seeing 
pockets opening up. For example, since China issued cross-border RMB rules for 
Suzhou Industrial Park (SIP) and Tianjin Eco City (TEC) in the middle of the year, 
about RMB 2 billion of loans have been approved from Singapore-based banks to 
companies in the two industrial parks. 
Equity Markets. In 2012, stock exchanges and regulators in Malaysia, Thailand and 
Singapore  launched  the  ASEAN  trading  link  to  offer  easy  access  to  each  other’s 
stock  markets.  Singapore  and  China  have  also  established  a  Direct  Listing 
Framework for Chinese companies last year. The framework will facilitate interested 
Chinese companies seeking direct listing opportunities in Singapore. 
Debt Markets. ASEAN securities regulators have since April last year implemented 
common  disclosure  standards,  which  would  allow  issuers  to  issue  debt  securities 
across  various  ASEAN  markets  with  a  single  prospectus.  Under  this  scheme,  the 
time required to issue in multiple markets will be the same as that for issuing in one 
market,  reaping  both  cost  and  time  savings  for  issuers.  The  cross  border  RMB 
channels with SIP and TEC, which I mentioned earlier, would also allow corporates 
in  these  locations  to  issue  RMB  bonds  in  Singapore. These  initiatives  in  the  debt 
and equity markets will allow companies to diversify their sources of funding abroad, 
more easily tap investors in overseas markets as well as broaden the array of debt 
investment choices in local markets. 
Fund  Management.  There  are  two  similar  initiatives  for  mutual  recognition  of 
collective  investment  schemes  in  Asia.  The  first,  among  Singapore,  Malaysia  and 
Thailand, led by the ASEAN securities regulators. The second, involving Singapore, 
Korea, Australia and New Zealand, called the Asian Region Funds Passport under 
the auspices of APEC. These initiatives will widen the opportunities for investors and 
fund managers abroad. 
In addition, we see evidence of partnerships among market participants, especially 
13. 
in the area of OTC derivatives which has been typically a fragmented market: 
a.  
Collateral  Management.  The  global  reforms  for  OTC  derivatives  have  drastically 
increased the demand for collateral. To date, Asian collateral is not widely traded or 
commonly accepted outside of their home market. This has created inefficiencies as 
financial institutions can neither obtain specific, nor deploy excess, Asian collateral 
outside  of  their  home  market.  Two  developments  have  helped.  First,  private 
partnerships such as that between Clearstream and SGX, allow customers to better 
b.  
c.  
d.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  b.  
We  also  see  promise  for  integration  in  infrastructure  finance  and  insurance  to 
allocate  and  optimise  collateral  resources  in  Asia  by  enabling  collateral  to  be 
managed on a fully automated and real-time basis. Second, central banks have also 
stepped  in  with  cross-border  collateral  arrangements  to  permit  the  deployment  of 
head-office  cash  and  government  securities  to  support  local  currency  liquidity 
requirements of their branches and subsidiaries overseas. 
Futurisation.  Even  before  most  jurisdictions  introduce  trading  mandates,  some 
segments  of  the  OTC  derivatives  markets  are  already  coming  together  to  create 
exchange  traded  products.  One  example  lies  in  Asian  currency  futures  contracts 
traded on exchanges like SGX. With the introduction of new listed contracts, market 
participants  have  chosen  to  futurise  some  of  their  rolling  forward  contracts. 
Compared  with  OTC  markets,  exchange-traded  futures  have  more  transparent 
pricing, and are faster to execute and more cost effective. 
14. 
These  developments  demonstrate  that  commercial  incentives  can  be  brought  into 
alignment with regulatory priorities, which aim to reduce aggregate risk in financial markets 
and promote greater financial soundness and stability. 
15. 
produce exciting outcomes. 
16. 
The World  Bank  Group  Singapore  Hub,  expanded  from  the  initial  set  up  in  2010, 
draws  together  the  different  infrastructure  expertise  along  the  transaction  chain  –  firstly, 
project management of the World Bank; secondly, structuring expertise of the International 
Financial  Corporation  (IFC);  and  thirdly,  credit  enhancement  of  the  Multilateral  Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) – to deliver practical project advisory and financing solutions to 
governments globally. This includes its ongoing efforts to develop a bankable Public-Private-
Partnership (PPP) project pipeline for ASEAN. The Asian Infrastructure Centre of Excellence 
(AICOE),  set  up  in  April  this  year,  would  also  work  with  governments  to  catalyse 
infrastructure  development  in  Asia,  starting  with  Southeast  Asia.  Similar  to  the  Singapore 
Hub, the AICOE will select infrastructure projects based on needs in the region, grow them to 
a bankable stage, and match these projects with private investors. 
17. 
These efforts will help  make infrastructure financing more accessible to a broader 
group of investors, and help banks to recycle their capital more quickly to other greenfield 
projects. Transactions can be structured such that institutional investors can, through capital 
market  instruments  such  as  infrastructure  projects  bonds  or  securitisation,  take  over  the 
financing  of  projects  from  banks  after  the  construction  phase  is  completed.  By  facilitating 
financing to what industry estimates to be USD 300 billion of marginal bankable projects in 
Asia, these integration efforts will enhance long term growth prospects of Asian economies. 
18. 
One  less-talked  about  area  where  market  integration  holds  great  promise  is  in 
insurance. Although natural catastrophes – and damage caused by them – have risen in Asia 
in  the  last  ten  years,  we  remain  significantly  underinsured  against  perils  like  flooding.  As 
disaster  risk  exposures  grow  in  scale,  size  and  complexity,  it  would  exceed  the  individual 
capacity of local insurance markets, and governments, to insure the risks of its populations 
and  communities.  PPPs  between  public  and  private  sectors,  and  across  national  borders, 
can  be  effective  in  maximising  the  benefits  of  insurance.  Such  examples  of  horizontal 
integration  between  markets  are  key  in  managing  the  region’s  rising  exposures  to  natural 
catastrophe risks. 
Collation of natural catastrophe risk data and analytics across ASEAN countries is a 
19. 
necessary first step toward more comprehensive catastrophe protection, paving the way for 
insurance  integration  in  this  region.  Currently,  the  fragmented  market  structure  in  ASEAN 
constrains data sharing and the capacity of domestic insurers to pool and underwrite risks. In 
Singapore,  key  partners  from  academia  and  industry,  alongside  the  MAS,  have  come 
together to form a work group to explore the establishment of a Natural Catastrophe Data 
Analytics Exchange. This Exchange serves as a regional platform to collect data and model 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  less  understood  regions  at  risk  in  Asia-Pacific,  facilitate  better  pricing  of  such  risks,  and 
eventually pave the way for more comprehensive insurance against these risks. 
20. 
In  combination,  these  comprehensive  efforts  among  jurisdictions  and  participants 
are very encouraging. And if they are completed successfully and demonstrate meaningful 
benefits  for  the  countries  involved,  they  can  be  replicated  very  quickly  to  other  interested 
jurisdictions.  Singapore  is  helping  to  drive  many  of  these  market  integration  initiatives 
through our participation in ASEAN/ASEAN+3, APEC and G20, but also bilaterally with our 
economic partners. 
21. 
Vertical  integration  through  the  value  chain  can  achieve  cost  efficiency  and  more 
effective  surveillance,  particularly  in  capital  markets  and  in  OTC  derivatives.  Let  me 
elaborate: 
Capital Markets.  Although  the  ASEAN  Trading Link  created  horizontal  integration 
a.  
opportunities  for  investors  to  access  ASEAN  stocks  of  members  in  the  trading  link, 
settlement and custody still goes through non-exchange channels. This Link can be further 
enhanced and it is the reason why the ASEAN regulators and exchanges set up a task force 
to  design  the  ASEAN  Capital  Markets  Infrastructure  Blueprint  to  implement  post-trade 
linkages  that  are  vertically  integrated  with  exchange  trading.  The  post-trade  infrastructure 
linkages, which will allow investors in one country to purchase shares in the other markets 
through their local broker and hold them in their local account, will lower not only cost and 
transaction time, but also settlement risks. 
OTC  Derivatives.  Many  jurisdictions  will  eventually  implement  the  full  suite  of 
b.  
trading, clearing and reporting mandates. Indeed, the way the OTC derivatives market has 
blossomed today – if we extend the metaphor – is to “allow a thousand flowers to bloom”. In 
other words, a bank could trade a currency derivative on an electronic platform in Singapore, 
clear the transaction through a central counter party in London and report it to a repository in 
the  US.  And  the  bank  could  be  using  different  platforms,  clearing  houses  and  trade 
repositories for different types of derivatives. But if all three activities in the trade cycle could 
be vertically integrated into the same platform, with the trading linked to post-trade services, 
it would not only be more efficient for the bank, but also be more convenient for regulators to 
access  transactional  data  from  the  same  market  infrastructure for  market  surveillance  and 
monitoring financial stability. 
IV. 
Concluding remarks 
22. 
I am genuinely excited by the opportunities that I see in Asia’s capital markets. An 
integrated  capital  market  is  not  only  bigger,  but  offers  more  choices  for  investors,  more 
sources of financing for companies, and generally deeper liquidity and better pricing through 
competitive spreads. Over time, greater scale and greater integration within and across asset 
classes can create opportunities in new financial products, such as through securitisation. 
23. 
Singapore is well positioned to offer integrated capital market solutions, given that 
many of the different parts of the value chain – trading, clearing, settlement, reporting – are 
already being offered in Singapore across the spectrum of asset classes including equities, 
bonds, foreign exchange and derivatives. At the same time, financial institutions that are able 
to  harness  innovative  technology  to  increase  productivity  or  differentiate  their  business 
offerings  would  be  better  positioned  to  capture  these  opportunities.  With  technology 
transforming activity across financial markets, the profile of jobs in finance will change in the 
years  to  come.  Through  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance,  MAS  is  working  with  the 
industry on an enhanced set of desired competency standards to grow the pipeline of skilled 
talent ready to service the growth in capital markets in Asia. 
24. 
these two days, and may I wish you a most fruitful conference ahead. 
25. 
I hope I have touched on the key themes and issues that you will be discussing over 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
