   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Knowing Nusantara – money that made the region 
Opening  speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the launch of “Knowing Nusantara: Money That Made the Region”, Bank 
Negara Malaysia Museum and Art Gallery, Sasana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 26 August 2014. 
 The Numismatic heritage of the Malay Archipelago is as rich as the region itself. There were 
few other regions that had such a level of trade that has existed in this part of Southeast Asia. 
Every type of seafarer had been here over the centuries, bringing with them a wide range of 
currencies. From Chinese copper cash to South American “pieces of eight”, Nusantara has 
been a magnet for money of all shapes, sizes and materials. When these are combined with 
the indigenous currency minted in the Archipelago, the legacy is immense. 
“Knowing Nusantara: Money that Made the Region” explores the coins and banknotes that 
have circulated in the Malay Archipelago, telling a story that goes back 2,000 years and that 
continues to evolve. By telling this story, the objective is to create a deeper understanding of 
the region. 
The history of the archipelago is largely about contact and the interconnectivity that existed in 
the region even during that period. Movement between islands and the mainland are mirrored 
by  the  encounters  between  the  indigenous  and  foreign  peoples.  Farmers,  traders,  rulers, 
missionaries and the military have all had a part in the cosmopolitan societies that existed in 
Nusantara. 
Money has taken many forms over the millennia, and our region has seen a greater diversity 
than most. Cowrie shells, tin “tampan” and brass gongs are some of the more exotic stores of 
value. But among coins and banknotes there are some equally distinctive means of making 
commercial exchange a safe and convenient activity. Nowadays the central banks have taken 
on  this  role.  In  the  past,  there  was  less  clarity  about  issuing  authorities.  Many  different 
currencies could circulate in the same location, resulting in a variety of payment options. 
Often this resulted in confusion and even counterfeiting. In this exhibition there are examples 
of  forgeries  intended  to  deceive,  along  with  local  copies  that  represented  a  tribute  to  the 
originals. Good designs have always had their admirers, some of whom have created coins to 
pay homage to innovations such as the pohon pitis, the coin money tree that had coins which 
could be detached from its branches or used as an entire “money tree”. 
In  other  cases  it  is  the  name  of  a  coin  that  became  adopted  by  different  societies.  The 
“leeuwendaler” (“lion dollar”), which circulated in the Dutch colonies such as New York, ended 
up as the official US currency after the war of independence from Britain. The same Dutch 
coins were also common in the Malay Archipelago, but only in Brunei has the dollar survived 
as an official term for the currency. In Malaysia, the old British unit of the “shilling” lived on long 
after it ceased to exist in the United Kingdom. 
There is no end to the links that can be found between the different countries and their coinage. 
Nusantara was at the centre of this international network, leaving us with a diverse inheritance 
of numismatic material. Much of the physical evidence of this global trade has, however, been 
lost.  Evolution  is  an  intrinsic  part  of  the  nature  of  money;  coins  have  been  melted  down, 
misplaced or sometimes incorporated into other items such as jewellery; banknotes have been 
destroyed. We are left with shipwrecks as some of the most useful sources information on the 
money that was in circulation in our history. 
What remains is a faint reflection of the millions – literally – of coins that once circulated in the 
archipelago. Some are of the highest rarity while others may not be. Bank Negara Malaysia 
has for many decades been a custodian of local numismatic heritage, resulting in an unrivalled 
collection of Malaysian coins and banknotes. This is a natural role for a central bank to adopt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   We  would  like  to  thank  the  input  of  private  collectors  such  as  Mr.  William  Barrett,  whose 
passion for Nusantara numismatic material has produced the core of the present exhibition. 
“Knowing Nusantara” is the first numismatic exhibition of this nature to be held at Bank Negara 
Malaysia. It looks back over a very long time period, and encourages us to look into the future 
as  well.  The  changes  that  have  taken  place  during  two  millennia  have  been  substantial, 
including the introduction of paper money and the end of precious-metal coins in circulation. 
These are insignificant in comparison with the developments of the recent decade. The future 
is cashless. Some time in the future, the present contents of our purses and pockets will seem 
as quaint as some of the contents of this exhibition. Cheques may of course, become obsolete 
even sooner. 
This exhibition tells a story through the most significant numismatic items that have circulated 
in the region. They represent part of a picture that reveals the progress of mankind in the use 
of money. Given the 21st century will likely mark the end of physical money as we have known 
it for most of our history, the importance of looking at the past has never been greater. By 
looking beyond the physical appearance of money and examining its role instead, it is apparent 
how long the world has been globalised and how insular thinking would not in fact contribute 
to  economic  development.  Indeed,  this  exhibition  demonstrates  that  global  and  economic 
integration has existed in times of antiquity. 
We would like to thank everyone who have kept collecting and researching the currency of 
Nusantara. By doing this, they have highlighted the evolution and continuity of history and the 
importance and significance of the region in which we live. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
