  Andreas Dombret: The risk situation in the German financial system 
Opening statement by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  unveiling  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  Financial  Stability  Review, 
Frankfurt am Main, 25 November 2014. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am delighted to present the 2014 Financial Stability Review, which I am doing for the first 
time  together  with  Deputy  President  Professor  Buch.  This  press  conference  also  marks  a 
personal first for me, as, in this context, it is my first in my new role as the Executive Board 
member  responsible  for  banking  supervision.  In  addition  to  my  previous  experience  in  the 
private  sector,  my  move  from  the  field  of  financial  stability  to  banking  supervision  in  May 
2014 means that I can see things from many different perspectives – something for which I 
am thankful. 
And  we  have  another  premiere:  this  is  the  first  Financial  Stability  Review  to  be  published 
since  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  was  launched.  Under  the  new  European 
supervisory structure, the ECB assumed direct supervision of the 120 most significant euro-
area banks on 4 November. 
Ms Buch has already discussed many important aspects of the Financial Stability  Review, 
which  I  will  now  expand  upon  by  taking  a  look  at  the  current  risk  situation  of  the  German 
banking sector. 
German banks under the new supervisory structure 
2.  
The comprehensive assessment began just one year ago. This involved subjecting the major 
German institutions to closer scrutiny and testing their ability to withstand stress in a crisis 
situation. The objective was to create transparency and to detect any legacy problems and 
capital shortfalls. Elke König, President of BaFin, and I gave a detailed account of the results 
back at the end of October. 
You will recall that 24 of the 25 German institutions that participated in the comprehensive 
assessment  passed,  with  the  only  bank  to  fail  having  already  closed  the  capital  shortfall 
identified in the comprehensive assessment. 
From a German perspective, we can therefore state that the ECB’s prelude to the SSM in the 
form of the comprehensive assessment was an overall success. Much the same as a play or 
an opera, however, it takes more than one successful overture to secure a bank’s long-term 
success. 
Therefore,  banks  cannot  afford  to  rest  on  their  laurels  based  on  this  positive  outcome,  as 
several banks barely cleared the 5.5% capital hurdle in the stress test’s adverse scenario. 
Furthermore, five German banks would not have passed the stress test if it had been based 
on full implementation of the Basel III rules, which will apply from 2018 onwards. What this 
shows not least is: German banks cannot afford to stand still. 
Last but not least, Germany also has a some catching-up to do with regard to the leverage 
ratio. Although this non-risk-weighted capital ratio has improved in recent months – 20 of the 
German  banks  that  participated  in  the  comprehensive  assessment  are  already  compliant 
with the 3% leverage ratio figure, which will be in effect from 2018 onwards – German banks 
are still performing relatively poorly by international standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 3.  
Low-interest-rate environment and weak earnings: the situation of Germany’s 
banks 
 Let us now analyse the current situation of the German banking sector. 
In addition to a high level of resilience – as confirmed by the comprehensive assessment – 
banks also need, not least, to be successful in terms of sustainable profitability in order to be 
able to hold their own in the market in the long run. 
So what can we ascertain from banks’ earnings situation? Let us take a look at something of 
vital importance to German banks: interest income. This continues to be characterised by the 
ongoing phase of low interest rates. 
German banks’ business models rely strongly on interest income, relatively speaking. When 
interest rates are low, this naturally puts pressure on earnings. For instance, in the first half 
of  this  year,  the  operating  income  of  11  German  banks  with  an  international  focus  was 
roughly 8% down year-on-year. This decline was largely driven by falling net interest income 
and a drop in net trading income. 
Viewed in relation to the German banking system as a whole, the impact of low interest rates 
currently remains limited. Savings banks and credit cooperatives, in particular, managed to 
bolster net interest income by increasing lending business volumes. 
However, if interest rates remain at current levels for the foreseeable future, the pressure on 
earnings  will  intensify  further:  maturing  higher-yielding  loans  would  then  have  to  be  rolled 
over into lower-yielding loans. As it is almost impossible to lower deposit rates any further in 
many cases, it could be worth considering expanding lending business to counter the fall in 
net interest income. A protracted period of low interest rates, moreover, could spark a greater 
risk appetite among low-earning institutions, in particular. 
Furthermore,  a  cross-sectional  analysis  of  German  institutions  reveals  a  high  degree  of 
synchronisation with regard to interest rate risk. The Bundesbank has addressed this point 
as  part  of  a  macro  stress  test  conducted  on  small  and  medium-sized  institutions,  which 
simulated various paths of interest rate movement. 
An abrupt interest rate increase and a flattening of the yield curve are the scenarios which 
would  weigh  most  heavily  on  banks’  net  interest  income.  This  is  attributable  to  term 
transformation. 
The strains caused by a rise in interest rate would particularly lead to a stability problem if 
other  macroeconomic  risks  were  to  materialise  simultaneously.  Banks  need  to  equip 
themselves to deal with this by ensuring they have adequate capital buffers. 
Developments in this regard are positive. For instance, German banks have improved their 
resilience by raising new equity and retaining earnings. The visible overall drop in the Tier 1 
capital  ratio  is  attributable  to  the  stricter  regulatory  requirements  of  CRD  IV  and  the  CRR. 
Since we began carrying out our Basel III impact study in 2011, the average Common Equity 
Tier 1 capital ratio of the largest German banks has risen to 9.3%, almost doubling. 
Please  allow  me  to  outline  an  additional  aspect  of  the  banking  system’s  current  situation. 
Global regulation and European supervision are contributing to the level playing field that has 
been  called  for  and  which  is  necessary.  But  this  also  means  that  German  banks  are 
increasingly facing up to international comparison. 
In its most recent Global Financial Stability Report, the IMF warns that, in terms of return on 
equity  and  return  on  total  assets,  German  banks  languish  well  below  average  in  both  an 
international  and  a  European  comparison.  German  banks  lag  far  behind  their  foreign 
competitors  in  terms  of  the  diversification  of  their  earnings,  in  particular.  Effectively,  this 
means  that  the  German  banking  sector  needs  to  press  ahead  with  the  expansion  of  non-
interest income as a percentage of total earnings in order to be able to hold its own when 
competing for clients and investors in the long run. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In the past months, banks have cleansed their balance sheets of many legacy issues and 
strengthened  their  capital  base.  The  measures  taken  thus  far  to  strengthen  resilience  are 
very much to be welcomed. However, German banks are by no means “out of the woods” 
yet. 
So  where  should  the  focus  of  such  efforts  be  placed?  On  the  one  hand,  with  regard  to 
improving resilience, risk provisioning always needs to be brought into line with the prevailing 
economic  environment.  On  the  other,  methods  of  further  increasing  capital  levels,  for 
example  by  retaining  profits,  need  to  be  explored.  German  banks  need  to  review  their 
business models – not least given overcapacity in the banking market. 
The Bundesbank’s role in the supervisory structure 
4.  
There are perhaps some people who are wondering what the Bundesbank’s role will be in 
the new supervisory structure. Will it be the ECB that, together with Ms Buch, presents the 
banking chapter of the Financial Stability Review in future? 
Take it from me, everything will remain in experienced hands in this regard. We will – naturally – 
lose a little bit of our influence on the 21 banks which will be supervised by the ECB in future. 
On the other hand, we will gain some influence among the 99 foreign banks, as the President 
of the Bundesbank will also have a say in decisions, even those concerning other European 
banks, on the ECB’s Governing Council. 
Through  our  direct  involvement  in  the  off-site  supervision  of  SSM  banks  as  well  as  our 
continuing  responsibility  for  the  off-site  supervision  of  small  and  medium-sized  banks,  the 
Bundesbank’s  involvement  in  the  supervision  of  banks  will  continue  undiminished  –  in  the 
framework of our tried and tested cooperation with BaFin. 
And  our  cooperation  with  BaFin  was  particularly  good  during 
assessment, for which I would like to thank our colleagues at BaFin very much. 
Although we at the Bundesbank would have wished for a somewhat different legal basis for 
the  future  division  of  European  supervisory  tasks  with  BaFin,  we  naturally  repsect  the 
compromise  that  has  been  reached  and,  in  future,  will  cooperate  as  closely  and 
harmoniously with BaFin as we have in the past – and the same goes for our cooperation 
with the ECB. 
In this strong role, we will continue to deliver clear assessments of the risk situation of the 
German banking sector, but also, I expect, increasingly of the European banking sector as 
well.  Today’s  first  Financial  Stability  Review  following  the  inauguration  of  the  SSM  is 
therefore certainly anything but a curtain call. 
Thank you. 
the  comprehensive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
