  Graeme Wheeler: Cross-border financial linkages – challenges for 
monetary policy and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Bank 
for 
International  Settlement  (BIS)  Conference  on  Cross-border  Financial  Linkages, 
Wellington, 23 October 2014. 
 On  behalf  of  my  Reserve  Bank  colleagues,  I  bid  you  a  warm  welcome  to  Wellington.  I 
especially want to thank the conference organisers, and the participants and presenters who 
have travelled far to join us. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  co-host  a  conference  with  the  BIS  on  Cross-Border  Financial 
Linkages, as we think about these linkages a great deal. As the BIS triennial data indicates, 
the New Zealand dollar is the tenth most traded currency in the world with daily turnover of 
around USD105 billion. This is magnitudes beyond New Zealand’s economic weight by any 
metric – and about 250 times our daily external trade flows. 
In contrast with most other regions, the Asia-Pacific region has seen rapid growth in financial 
flows  since  the  GFC.  Asia-Pacific  currencies  are  currently  represented  on  40  percent  of 
global trades, up from 30 percent in 2007. 
However, cross-border financial integration is much more than capital flows. It also embraces 
trade linkages, incipient flows, remittances, price arbitrage, and risk transfer instruments. In 
its broadest form financial integration offers enormous benefits, particularly when it finances 
efficient resource allocation, smoothes consumption, and distributes and diversifies risk. It is 
especially important when linked to the global transfer of skill-enhancing technologies, and 
the financing of innovation and catch-up technologies. 
Cross-border  flows  can,  however,  present  challenges  for  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability and it’s to these issues that I turn. 
Cross-border financial linkages and monetary policy 
Cross  border financial  linkages  can  present  difficult  challenges for  monetary  policy  for  two 
main reasons. First, although the exchange rate is often the primary transmission channel for 
monetary  policy,  this  channel  is  often  stronger  than  we  would  wish.  Second,  and  just  as 
problematic,  we  often  do  not  know  what  factors  are  driving  the  exchange  rate  and  how 
efficient this transmission channel is. 
In an economy with an open capital account, with active arbitrage it is possible to have either 
a  stable  exchange  rate  or  an  independent  monetary  policy  capable  of  delivering  price 
stability. 
Like New Zealand, many of the Asian economies have experienced an appreciation in their 
real  exchange  rate  in  recent  years.  In  a  floating  exchange  rate  environment,  this  lowers 
inflation in the tradables sector and raises the real disposable incomes of many consumers. 
It also makes it cheaper for firms to acquire imported capital goods and new technologies, 
and can spur greater innovation and productivity in the tradables sector. 
However,  large  swings  in  the  real  exchange  rate  impose  significant  adjustment  costs  for 
firms that are forced to exit and re-enter markets due to large movements in competitiveness. 
And  it  can  generate  particularly  difficult  headwinds  for  those  export  producers  not 
experiencing high prices for their products, and for firms competing against cheaper imports. 
An  important  issue  for  policy  makers  is  whether  the  appreciation  in  the  real  effective 
exchange rate is justified and sustainable. A real effective exchange rate is unjustified when 
its  level  is  inconsistent  with  the  economic  factors  (such  as  commodity  prices,  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  growth, interest rate differentials) that can normally explain its movement during the business 
cycle. The level of the real effective exchange rate can be considered unsustainable when it 
is clearly deviating from its long-run equilibrium at the level that it would be expected to settle 
when business cycle factors have fully dissipated. In such a situation, persistent deviations 
from equilibrium are likely to result in external debt ratios that become unmanageable and 
cause misallocations of resources that can inhibit the country’s long term growth potential. 
Domestic monetary policy and changes in exchange rate regimes can do little to alleviate an 
overvalued real exchange rate. New Zealand has tried a variety of exchange rate regimes 
over the past 40 years – including a fixed exchange rate, crawling peg and floating exchange 
rate. However, the medium-term level and volatility of our real effective exchange rate has 
been largely unaffected by the type of exchange rate regime in place. 
Often the  appropriate  policy  response  lies  with  measures  to  reduce  demand  pressures,  or 
improve competitiveness and raise potential output growth. Such measures might include a 
better  balance  of  fiscal  policy,  addressing  impediments  that  distort  saving  and  investment 
decisions,  and  undertaking  reforms  that  raise  productivity  and  improve  competitiveness. 
They might also include prudential policies that address rising vulnerabilities directly. 
Commentators, including the IMF, sometimes suggest that capital controls might play a role, 
but this is seldom a desirable option for countries with open capital accounts. An open capital 
account  provides  powerful  incentives  for  improving  productivity  as  it  signals  to  domestic 
producers  that  they  need  to  be  competitive  if  they  wish  to  attract  capital  and  financing 
domestically  and  from  offshore.  Opening  the  capital  account  is  therefore  one  of  the  most 
powerful economic reforms that a government can undertake. This is partly because of the 
benefits of the policies that are usually pre-conditions for removing capital controls. Such pre-
conditions 
include  achieving  a  reasonable  degree  of  economic  stabilisation,  some 
liberalisation of the domestic financial market, and lower border protection (so that domestic 
savings do not flee offshore from a highly protected domestic capital market, and offshore 
capital does not flow into domestic sectors with high effective rates of protection). 
Although much is known about the factors that influence exchange rates in theory, empirical 
links  between  exchange  rates  and  their  driving  factors  have  been  difficult  to  pin  down. 
Exchange  rates  are  closely  linked  to  interest  rates  in  theory  through  uncovered  interest 
arbitrage but, empirically, the connection is weak. Internationally, we see markets adopting 
risk-on and risk-off strategies that are often linked to expectations of the timing of monetary 
policy decisions by the Federal Reserve. And sometimes capital flows seem to matter: we 
see  flights  to  quality  and  to  more  liquid  markets  accompanied  by  large  exchange  rate 
movements when risk and uncertainty increase. 
In  our  own  economy,  several  factors  appear  to  play  a  role  in  foreign  exchange  markets: 
actual and expected movements in commodity prices, information relating to expected future 
movements  in  policy  rates  and  appetite  for  New  Zealand  dollar  risk.  But,  without  a  strong 
empirical  understanding  of  what  determines  the  exchange  rate  there  is  considerable 
uncertainty regarding the efficiency of the exchange rate transmission channel. 
Cross-border financial linkages and financial stability 
Cross-border  financial  linkages  can  have  important  implications  for  financial  stability  when 
large institutions react in a similar manner and herding behaviour causes financing flows to 
amplify  financial  market  shocks.  We  have  seen  this  desperate  search  for  yield  across 
borders  many  times  before  with  investors  taking  on  more  and  more  risk  and  in  doing  so 
significantly lowering risk premia. Rather than requiring higher risk premia from increasingly 
leveraged borrowers, investors continue to provide financing at declining spreads, fearful of 
missing out on the returns of those who preceded them. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I would like to focus a little on the role that macro-prudential policy and liquidity management 
can play in reducing systemic risk in financial markets and will illustrate with reference to the 
New Zealand market. 
Residential property prices have been rising rapidly in several Asia-Pacific countries in recent 
years.  In  New  Zealand,  these  pressures  have  been  accentuated  by  housing  supply 
shortages, historically low mortgage rates, tax preferences that favour investment in housing, 
and  offshore  investor  interest.  Strong  housing  demand  can  add  to  financial  stability  risks, 
especially when accompanied by high household indebtedness. Housing market exuberance 
can  be  particularly  problematic  when  interest  rate  responses  are  not  warranted  because 
economic  growth  is  well  below  potential,  and  inflation  in  factor  and  product  markets  is 
benign. 
Macro-prudential  policies  can  be  helpful  in  addressing  financial  stability  concerns  in  such 
circumstances. But the introduction of macro-prudential policy requires policy makers to be 
clear about its goals, the duration of the measures, and how such measures might interact 
with monetary policy. 
The Reserve Bank introduced macro-prudential policy in the form of speed limits on loan-to-
value  ratios  (LVRs)  in  the  residential  housing  market,  on  1  October  2013.  House  prices  – 
which were already significantly overvalued based on historical and international indicators – 
were accelerating rapidly in our two largest cities (that account for around half of the national 
market).  In  addition,  household  debt  was  at  high  levels,  and  banks  were  competing 
aggressively  for  mortgage  lending  to  borrowers  with  small  deposits.  At  the  time,  annual 
consumer price inflation was running at 0.7 percent, the exchange rate was strong, and the 
economy had a negative output gap. It was not appropriate to raise interest rates, but the 
potential for further rapid house price inflation was considerable as sizeable supply-demand 
imbalances seemed likely to continue for several years. 
We  introduced  a  requirement  that  banks  reduce  their  high  LVR  lending  (defined  as  LVRs 
over 80 percent) to an average of no more than 10 percent of their mortgage commitments, 
and made this a condition of bank registration. The measure led to a significant reduction in 
high-LVR  lending,  a  decline  in  house  sales,  and  fall  in  house  price  inflation.  While  other 
factors, such as subsequent interest rate increases over the period March 2014 to July 2014 
are  also  helping  to  constrain  demand,  annual  house  price  inflation  fell  from  around 
10 percent to 5 percent currently, despite high levels of net immigration. 
We  established  clear  and  separate  primary  objectives  for  monetary  policy  and  macro-
prudential  policy.  These  primary  objectives  are  price  stability  and  financial  system  stability 
respectively. 
There  is  an  appropriate  role  for  coordinating  the  use  of  monetary  policy  and  a  macro-
prudential policy instruments provided they both affect outcomes relevant to the achievement 
of both policy objectives. This condition is likely to be met when the real and financial cycles 
are in sync and each policy can allow for the complementary effects of the other. The two 
policies will be in greatest potential conflict when the real and financial cycles are in opposite 
phases. 
While LVRs have a financial stability goal, they have been an important consideration in our 
monetary  policy  assessment.  We  believe  the  dampening  impact  of  LVRs  on  house  price 
inflation and credit, and the diminished “wealth effects” on spending associated with it, have 
reduced  consumer  price  inflation  pressures  by  an  amount  similar  to  a  25–50  basis  point 
increase in the OCR. In essence, the reduction in housing pressures allowed us to delay the 
tightening in interest rates, thereby reducing the incentive for any additional capital inflows 
into the New Zealand dollar in search of higher yields. 
We  have  seen  little  financial  sector  disintermediation  to  date,  and  have  indicated  that  the 
LVR  speed  limit  is  not  intended to  be  permanent. It  will  be  removed  once  housing  market 
pressures  have  moderated  and  when  we  are  confident  there  will  not  be  a  resurgence  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  house  price  inflation.  We  will  be  reviewing  these  criteria  and  their  implications  for  LVR 
restrictions in next month’s Financial Stability Report. 
My final comment is on liquidity risk 
Liquidity  risk  and  rollover  risk  are  often the two  major financial  shocks  that  hit  economies, 
and especially smaller economies, during episodes of financial market contagion.  
Unsurprisingly,  given  current  yield  curves,  debt  issuance  almost  everywhere  has  shifted 
towards longer-term funding. 
We  still  have  much  to  learn  around  liquidity  risk  and  the  emergence  of  “black  holes”  in 
funding and asset markets. Liquidity risk is a key concern for countries with large external 
borrowing needs, especially if investors become skittish, trading volumes begin to thin and 
some  price  gapping  occurs.  Left  unabated,  liquidity  problems  can  mutate  into  solvency 
problems. 
The Reserve Bank introduced a prudential liquidity policy in April 2010. This policy includes 
minimum liquid asset requirements, and a minimum core funding ratio. Like the Basel III net 
stable funding requirement scheduled for 2018, the policy requires a minimum proportion of 
total lending to be funded by more stable “core funding” instruments such as retail deposits 
and long term borrowing (beyond one year). 
In New Zealand, the commercial banks’ core funding ratios fell to around 60 percent prior to 
the  GFC.  Today  the  banks’  core  funding  ratios  stand  at  around  85  percent  (against  a 
minimum  of  75  percent)  and  the  vulnerability  of  New  Zealand  banks  to  developments  in 
offshore wholesale funding markets has been substantially diminished. 
Concluding comments 
One of the eight lucky signs of Buddhist philosophy, drami or the “endless knot”, illustrates 
how  individuals and institutions across the world and over time are connected in a web of 
mutual interdependence. 
Another valuable insight from Asia is that of the four friends (the elephant, the monkey, the 
rabbit, and the bird). By standing on each other’s shoulders the bird is able to reach the fruit 
for all of them. 
Preventing  future  global  financial  crises  requires  us  to  understand  the  web  of  mutual 
interdependence characterised by the endless knot, and the wisdom of the four friends. 
Despite  the  invaluable  data  gathering  and  research  by  the  BIS,  our  understanding  of  the 
drivers  and  impact  of  cross-border  financial  linkages  remains  limited  in  many  areas.  Our 
theoretical  benchmark  for  much  policy  analysis  continues  to  be  based  on  capital-free 
arbitrage that assumes efficient and smooth changes in asset prices, with no material effect 
for capital flows. 
We  have  excellent  speakers  and  papers  over  the  next  two  days  and  an  opportunity  to 
explore  many  of  these  and  other  important  issues.  I  wish  you  productive  discussions  and 
deliberations. Certainly, my Reserve Bank colleagues and I will take a great deal of interest 
in the conference sessions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
