  Benoît Cœuré: Taking stock of the global role of the renminbi 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the European-Chinese Banking Day, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2014. 
 Dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is an honour to be invited here to the European-Chinese Banking Day, part of the Frankfurt 
Euro Finance Week, and I would like to thank my hosts for giving me the opportunity to share 
some thoughts on the issue of yuan (or RMB) clearing. Clearly, the increasing importance of 
the Chinese economy and its currency over the last decades brings many new challenges, 
some  of  which  also  encompass  international  payment  activities.  As  a  major  economy,  the 
euro area is naturally affected by this process. 
The rise of China has been astonishing. Since 1990, its weight in global GDP has increased 
from just below 2% to over 13% this year, and is projected to surpass 15% before 2020. In 
PPP terms, China’s share in the global GDP is, as of this year, even larger than that of the 
US1.  This  rapid  economic  development  would  not  have  been  possible  without  China  also 
becoming one of the world’s main trading nations, together with the euro area and the US. 
This  economic  prowess  is  also  gradually  translating  itself  into  a  greater  presence  in  the 
financial sphere. China has liberalised cross-border financial transactions, first those related 
to  trade  and  direct  investment,  but  increasingly  also  those  related  to  portfolio  investment. 
Approved  investments  under  the  different  schemes  that  allow  domestic  and  foreign 
institutional investors to make cross-border investments in and out of China have been rising 
steadily,  although,  so  far,  they  amount  only  to  about  2%  of  China’s  GDP.  However,  we 
should  not  forget  that  financial  liberalisation  is  an  ongoing  process,  which  is  still  not 
complete. 
Additionally,  in  the  last  few  years,  central  banks  across  the  world  have  started  to  hold 
onshore Chinese renminbi (CNY) in their reserves portfolios, usually with the expectation that 
CNY may become a reserve currency in the coming years. Many others indicate interest in 
reserve asset diversification into CNY once China’s onshore market opens up further. This is 
an issue that the Eurosystem will also have to further reflect on in the future. 
Also, the Shanghai – Hong Kong Stock Connect programme, which allows institutional and 
private investors from mainland China to invest up to a certain quota in Hong Kong and vice 
versa, is operating as of today and represents a further important step in opening the capital 
account and liberalising financial flows. The growth in cross-border transactions has also led 
to an increasing volume of RMB circulating outside China, giving rise to local RMB markets, 
in Asia and in the euro area. In response to these developments, many central banks have 
established a bilateral currency swap arrangement with the People’s Bank of China (PBC). In 
October  2013,  the  ECB  signed  a  bilateral  currency  swap  arrangement  with  the  PBC  with 
maximum sizes of 45 billion euros when euro are provides euros to the PBC and 350 billion 
yuan  when  yuans  are  provided  to  the  ECB.  From  the  ECB’s  perspective,  the  swap  line 
serves  as  a  backstop  facility  to  address  sudden  and  temporary  disruptions  in  the  RMB 
market owing to liquidity shortages, so as to reassure market participants that a safety net is 
in  place  to  address  possible  future  market  malfunctioning  and  reassure  euro  area  banks 
regarding the continuous provision of RMB. After having launched direct trading between the 
renminbi and a number foreign currencies in China’s onshore forex market over the last few 
years, direct trading between the euro and the onshore renminbi was launched in September 
2014. This has the potential to reduce transaction costs, enhance the price discovery of the 
                                                
1  16.5% vs 16.3% for the US, IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  EUR/CNY  exchange  rate  and  ultimately  improve  the  functioning  of  the  global  financial 
system. 
Considering the rise of China in the global economy, the extent of its external trade and the 
continuing  development  of  its  domestic  financial  markets,  it  is  no  surprise  that  also  the 
number  of  payments  and  financial  transactions  being  conducted  between  parties  in  China 
and elsewhere has been growing rapidly. Five years ago, the use of RMB in trade settlement 
was marginal, but according to SWIFT statistics, it is now already the seventh most popular 
payment currency, accounting for 1.72% of global payments in September 2014. This might 
not sound like a lot, but the growth rates are impressive; and it is worth noting that even the 
fourth  most  popular  currency,  the  Japanese  Yen,  only  accounts  for  2.74%  of  global 
payments. The RMB as an invoicing currency for international trade has also been growing 
sharply: nowadays, about 25% of Chinese trade is invoiced in RMB, up from less than 2% in 
2011.  Looking forward,  the  RMB  clearly  has  the  potential  to  become  a  major  international 
currency and to be included, when the International Monetary Fund will deem it appropriate, 
in the basket of currencies that determines the value of the Special Drawing Rights (SDRs). 
That  said,  any  currency  of  a  truly  global  reach  needs,  amongst  others,  safe  and  efficient 
arrangements and seamless processes to clear and settle transactions in that currency. In 
the  euro  area,  we  have  undertaken  great  efforts  to  introduce  safe  and  efficient  financial 
market infrastructures for payments and the clearing and settlement of financial instruments. 
Also within China, extensive work has been, and is, underway in this regard. However, while 
these  infrastructures  facilitate  the  safe  and  efficient  handling  of  transactions  within  the 
respective economies, they do not yet provide for effective automated linkages between the 
two  currency  areas.  Therefore,  the  institutions  participating  in  domestic  infrastructures  are 
acting as intermediaries and service providers to corporates and financial actors wishing to 
transact within and between the two currency areas. 
Various challenges exist in the processing of cross-border transactions. One is the need to 
have common or interoperable technical standards, a lack of which hamper a fully automated 
and fast processing of transactions, leading to higher failure rates and costs. In this regard, 
we appreciate the efforts undertaken in China to introduce state-of-the-art standards such as 
ISO20022, as well as those by SWIFT to increase fully-automated processing, for example 
by developing a standardised dictionary for the Chinese Commercial Code (CCC). 
The  setting  up  of  RMB  clearing  arrangements  like  the  one  introduced  here  in  Frankfurt  –
which  I  understand  is  starting  operations  today-  and  those  existing  or  planned  for  other 
centres in Europe and other parts of the world, will play an important role in facilitating cross-
border  payments,  as  well  as  closer  integration  and  relations  between  economies.  I  am 
convinced  that  the  continuous  development  of  more  efficient  payment  and  clearing 
arrangements will benefit corporates and financial actors, both in the euro area and in China. 
To conclude, we should not forget that, together with many opportunities, the integration of a 
new major currency in the global economy also brings risks, as it allows shocks to propagate 
more easily across borders. To minimise risks, such a process therefore must be monitored 
carefully and complemented by close cooperation between authorities in China and abroad. 
Even  more  important  however,  is  to  strengthen  the  Chinese  financial  sector,  in  particular 
banks,  so  that  it  is  sufficiently  resilient  to  cope  with  the  new  pressures  that  financial 
liberalisation inevitably brings. I fully trust Chinese authorities to continue upgrading financial 
sector supervision and cooperate closely in order to safeguard overall financial stability. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
