  Ronald Waas: Handling alleged payment system and currency exchange 
crime 
Speech  by  Mr  Ronald  Waas,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  signing  of  the 
working guidelines between Bank Indonesia and the National Police, as a follow-up action to 
the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) “Cooperation to support task implementation and 
the  authority  of  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  National  Police  of  the  Republic  of  Indonesia”, 
Jakarta, 24 September 2014. 
 Honourable, 
Chief of the Criminal Investigation Agency, Commissioner General Suhardi Alius, M.H.; 
Leaders of MABES POLRI: KADIVKUM, KADIVHUMAS, DIRTIPIDEKUS, DIRTIPIKOR; 
Leaders of Bank Indonesia as well as all other attendees and invitees. 
Assalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh, good morning to you all. 
• 
First,  let  us  praise  God  Almighty  that  we  may  gather  here  today  to  witness  the 
signing  of  working  guidelines  between  Bank  Indonesia  the  National  Police,  in  this 
case  the  Criminal  Investigation  Agency,  concerning  “The  Handling  of  Alleged 
Payment System and Currency Exchange Crime.” 
The  signing  of  the  working  guidelines  represents  a  follow-up  action  to  the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  signed  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the 
National  Police  on  1st  September  2014  regarding  “Cooperation  to  Support  Task 
Implementation and Institutional Authority.” 
Pursuant to the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed by the Governor of 
Bank  Indonesia  and  Police  Chief,  the  following  tasks  will  be  spotlighted  for 
synergised implementation: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Data and/or information exchange; 
Security and escorts; 
Supervision;   
Law enforcement; 
Enhanced human resources; 
Socialisation. 
  Concerning  law  enforcement,  one  aspect  that  will  be  synergised  through  cooperation 
between Bank Indonesia and the National Police is the handling of alleged payment system 
and currency exchange crime, otherwise known as money changers. 
• 
Law  enforcement  in  the  area  of  currency  exchange  is  essential  considering  its 
susceptibility  to  abuse  by  unauthorised  parties,  including  money  laundering  and 
terrorism  funding,  the  narcotics  trade  as  well  as  trafficking  disguised  as  currency 
exchange activity. 
In order to prevent various forms of criminality in the currency exchange business, 
Bank  Indonesia  recently  promulgated  Bank  Indonesia  Regulation  (PBI)  Number 
16/15/PBI/2014,  dated  11th  September  2014,  concerning  Non-Bank  Currency 
Exchange  Activity.  The  regulation  fosters  stronger  and  more  refined  non-bank 
currency  exchange  activity  that  must  be  licensed  by  Bank  Indonesia.  The  recent 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  regulation will help mitigate potential risk in the form of misuse and crime linked to 
currency exchange. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
• 
In  accordance  with  its  mandate,  Bank  Indonesia  is  the  monetary  and  payment 
system  authority.  As  the  monetary  authority,  the  mission  of  Bank  Indonesia  is  to 
maintain  rupiah  stability  and  preserve  effective  monetary  policy  transmission. 
Currency exchange, as a supporting sector of the financial industry, plays a strategic 
role in terms of achieving rupiah stability. 
Meanwhile,  the  mission  of  Bank  Indonesia  as  the  payment  system  authority  is  to 
create secure, effective and uninterrupted cash and non-cash payment systems. 
One vision of Bank Indonesia regarding the non-cash payment system is to advocate 
and  promote  a  less  cash  society  through  greater  public  utilisation  of  non-cash 
payment instruments. The realisation of a less cash society is important to nurture a 
more efficient economy, in addition to fostering good governance in terms of financial 
management by the public, business players as well as government institutions. 
A  crucial  stepping-stone  towards  the  realisation  of  a  less  cash  society  is  that  all 
parties  feel  secure  when  performing  non-cash  transactions,  namely  feeling 
protected  from  the  threat  of  criminal  activity  by  unauthorised  parties.  A  survey 
conducted  by  Bank  Indonesia  confirmed  that  security  when  performing  non-cash 
transactions is the overarching concern of the public, followed by convenience and 
interoperability amongst the providers of financial transaction services. 
In  order  to  combat  potential  criminality  in  the  payment  system  and  currency 
exchange  industry,  more  intensive  handling  of  alleged  payment  system  and 
currency exchange crime is required. Furthermore, the imposition of strict sanctions 
pursuant to prevailing regulations should act as a deterrent to potential criminals. 
It  is  necessary  to  include  tight  coordination  and  cooperation  in  a  clear  and 
transparent  mechanism,  in  accordance  with  the  tasks  and  authority  of  Bank 
Indonesia and the National Police, referring to prevailing laws and regulations with 
due consideration paid to the principles of justice, utility and legal assurance. 
We  warmly  welcome  the  signing  of  these  working  guidelines  concerning  the 
handling of payment system and currency exchange crime, which also represent a 
part of the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed previously. Implementation 
of the working guidelines will be complemented through cooperation between Bank 
Indonesia Representative Offices and local police departments. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
• 
Through  the  working  guidelines,  we  are  confident  that  efforts  to  handle  payment 
system and currency exchange crime will be more effective moving forward, hence 
realising  the  common  objective  of  protecting  the  public  through  the  creation  of  a 
sound and secure payment system and currency exchange industry. 
The  working  guidelines  are  expected  to  become  a  form  of  good  communication, 
intensive coordination and synergetic collaboration between Bank Indonesia and the 
National Police, related ministries, law enforcement officers and other stakeholders. 
That  concludes my  opening  remarks  with  the  belief  that God  Almighty  will  always 
bless us and light out way towards a better future. 
Wassalamu’alaikum wR. wB. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
        