  Ravi Menon: Introducing Mark Carney 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the 2014 Monetary Authority of Singapore Lecture, Singapore, 17 November 
2014. 
 Mr Mark Carney, Governor, Bank of England, 
Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman, MAS, Tharman Shanmugaratnam, 
Ambassadors, distinguished guests, friends and colleagues, good morning, 
Welcome to the eighth MAS Lecture. 
First held in 2000, the MAS Lecture has over the years featured several eminent members of 
the  international  financial  community  who  have  offered  their  perspectives  on  important 
economic and financial issues. 
Today, Mark Carney joins that distinguished band of leaders in finance, and it is my pleasure 
to  introduce  him.  Carney  has  the  rare  distinction  of  serving  as  governor  for  not  just  one 
central bank but two: 
• 
From 2008 to 2013, Carney was Governor of the Bank of Canada, playing a major 
role in helping Canada avoid the worst effects of the Global Financial Crisis. 
And since the middle of last year, he has been Governor of the Bank of England, the 
first  time  that  a  non-Briton  has  taken  the  helm  of  that  hallowed  institution  in  its 
320-year history. 
Perhaps the transition was made easier by the fact that the appointments of both the 
Governor of the Bank of England and that of the Bank of Canada are made in the 
name of the Queen. 
    But it is testimony to the strong credentials that Carney brought to these jobs: 
• 
• 
a solid academic grounding – with a PhD in Economics from Oxford University; 
extensive  experience  in  the  private  sector  –  having  spent  more  than  a  decade  at 
Goldman Sachs; 
a  background  in  public  policy  –  working  on  a  variety  of  economic  issues  at  the 
Canadian Department of Finance; and 
most important, a commitment to serve the larger good of society. 
Carney’s topic today is The Future of Financial Reform. He is uniquely well placed to 
talk about this, having lived and breathed financial reforms in the aftermath of the 
Crisis, especially as the Chairman of the Financial Stability Board. 
Under Carney’s leadership, the FSB has worked intensely to correct the fault lines 
that led to the Global Financial Crisis. 
The  FSB,  in  partnership  with  various  standard  setting  bodies,  has  presided  over 
perhaps one of the boldest and most far-reaching set of regulatory reforms in recent 
memory. 
We look forward to hearing from Carney the progress and implications of that work, 
the new risks emerging on the financial horizon, and the forward agenda of the FSB. 
I have had the pleasure and privilege of working with Mark at many international meetings 
over the last three-and-a-half years, at the BIS, the FSB, and the IMF. There are many smart 
central bankers on the international circuit. There are also many sharp financial regulators. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      But Mark is one of the few who understand both worlds well, equally versed in the 
big, strategic issues related to macroeconomics and monetary policy and the nuts 
and bolts of financial markets and regulation. 
It is this combination that has enabled Mark to bring to our meetings a breadth of 
vision and depth of insight that make people sit up and listen. 
He  has  a  knack  for  “herding  the  cats”  as  it  were,  bringing  people  together  and 
finding consensus in the cacophony of views that international meetings are noted 
for. 
And  Mark  does  this  with  a  cheery  disposition,  a  witty  sense  of  humour,  and 
considerable charm. 
Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in warmly welcoming Mark Carney. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
