  Paul Fisher: Microprudential, macroprudential and monetary policy – 
conflict, compromise or co-ordination? 
Speech by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director for Supervisory Risk Specialists & Regulatory 
Operations and for Insurance Supervision of the Bank of England, at Richmond University, 
London, 1 October 2014. 
 The author is also chair of the ifs School of Finance. Any views aired in this speech are personal and should not 
be taken as a policy statement by the Bank of England. Nevertheless, the speaker is grateful to colleagues at the 
Bank for helpful comments, and to Andrew Hughes Hallett for his advice on policy coordination issues over many 
years, including comments on the content of this speech. 
Thank you for inviting me once again to speak at Richmond University. In the last year I have 
moved within the Bank of England from the Markets Directorate to the Prudential Regulation 
Authority (PRA) and from the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to the PRA Board. The PRA 
Board is one of our three formal policy committees, and makes the highest level supervisory 
decisions for those firms authorised by the PRA. That includes insurance companies, banks, 
building societies, credit unions and major investment firms. I have been attending meetings 
since June and will become a voting member in due course. 
Having previously also served on the interim Financial Policy Committee (FPC) for 2 years, 
and  the  MPC  for  5  years,  I  want  to  use  this  lecture  today  to  set  out  how  the  three  policy 
committees of the Bank work together. 
I  have  seen  and  heard  assertions  in  the  press  and  other  commentary  that  the  three 
committees with their different objectives will inevitably be in conflict. Whilst there are many 
difficult  policy  challenges  for  each  of  the  committees,  and  different  judgements  can  be 
reached by reasonable people on any policy question, I will argue today that conflict is not 
inherent  in  the  structure  in  the  sense  of  having  to  choose  between  competing  objectives. 
There should not be any compromise in terms of achieving those objectives over the medium 
term, even if the actual setting of each policy lever needs to take others into account. The 
key to realising this outcome is effective co-ordination. 
Much  of  the  economics  literature  around  policy  co-ordination  traditionally  focussed  on  two 
problems:  the  coordination  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  especially  in  the  case  of  an 
independent central bank; and international macroeconomic policy co-ordination1. In the past 
decade or so there has been rather more on inter-institutional coordination2. I will be drawing 
on that body of established work and applying it to the challenge of co-ordination faced by 
the Bank’s three policy committees: the MPC, the FPC and the PRA Board. First, what are 
their objectives? 
• 
The  MPC’s  objective  is  to  deliver  price  stability  –  defined  by  the  Government’s 
inflation target of 2% – and, subject to that, to support the Government’s economic 
objectives including those for growth and employment. 
The FPC’s objective is to protect and enhance the stability of the financial system of 
the  UK  –  and,  subject  to  that,  to  support  the  Government’s  economic  objectives 
including those for growth and employment. 
                                                 
1  See  for  example,  R  Bryant  (1995)  International  Coordination  of  National  Stabilization  Policies.  Brookings, 
Washington, and the many references therein. 
2  See for example some of the material in N Acocella, G Di Bartolomeo and A J Hughes Hallett (2013), The 
Theory of Economic Policy in a Strategic Context, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  PRA  has  two  statutory  objectives:  to  promote  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
deposit takers, insurers and major investment firms and, specifically for insurers, to 
contribute to the securing of an appropriate degree of protection for policyholders. It 
also has a secondary objective, to facilitate effective competition in the markets for 
services provided by PRA-authorised firms. 
 The PRA Board 
The PRA Board is the least well known of the 3 committees and so I want to say a few words 
about how it operates. 
I have been attending as an observer since I moved to the PRA on 1 June. The Board is 
constituted in a similar way to the other committees in that it is chaired by the Governor and 
has  both  internal  executive  members  and  externally  appointed  independent  members.  On 
the  basis  of  current  announcements  it  will  have  a  total  of  5  internal  members3,  and 
6 independent  members4  including  the  CEO  of  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority  (FCA).  It 
meets approximately twice a month for formal meetings. 
In summary, the Board is responsible for meeting the PRA’s statutory objectives, including 
taking all the major supervisory decisions for the 1700 or so firms and groups it authorizes; 
formulates  regulatory  policy  to  meet  those  objectives;  and  has  a  range  of  strategic  and 
management responsibilities including delegating some matters, principally to the CEO of the 
PRA or to formal PRA committees. Matters reserved to the Board and its delegations can be 
found in documentation on the Bank’s website via a link in this text.5 In what follows I shall 
treat the PRA Board and the PRA as one policy making body, referring to one or the other as 
best fits the context. 
Before moving on, it is worth completing the picture by noting that the PRA works alongside 
the FCA, creating what is known as a “twin peaks” regulatory structure in the UK. The FCA is 
a  separate  institution  and  not  part  of  the  Bank  of  England.  It  is  responsible  for  promoting 
effective  competition,  ensuring  that  relevant  markets  function  well,  and  for  the  conduct 
regulation of all financial services firms including all those authorised and regulated by the 
PRA. This includes acting to prevent market abuse and ensuring that consumers get a fair 
deal  from  financial  firms.  The  FCA  also  operates  the  prudential  regulation  of  financial 
services  firms  not  supervised  by  the  PRA,  such  as  asset  managers  and  independent 
financial advisers. In consequence it regulates a much larger number of firms than the PRA – 
over 50,000. But the FCA and PRA have a joint MoU and co-operate closely on a range of 
matters,  most  especially  for  those  firms  which  are  regulated  by  both  ie  by  the  PRA  for 
prudential matters and by the FCA for conduct. 
Policy co-ordination basics 
The  theoretical  conditions  under  which  one  can  achieve  a  number  of  different  economic 
policy objectives at the same time was long ago embedded in the Tinbergen counting rule6, 
named after the great Dutch Nobel prize  winning economist. A necessary condition is that 
                                                
3 
In addition to Mark Carney as Governor, the proposed internal members from May 2015 will be Andrew Bailey 
as  Deputy  Governor  and  CEO  of  the  PRA;  Nemat  Shafik  as  Deputy  Governor  for  Banking  and  Markets; 
Jon Cunliffe as Deputy Governor for Financial Stability; Paul Fisher as Deputy Head and Executive Director at 
the PRA.  
4  As I speak the independent members are Sandy Boss, Iain Cornish, Charles Randall and Martin Wheatley as 
CEO of the FCA. Mark Yallop is due to join on 1/12/14 and David Belsham on 1/5/15.  
5  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/about/default.aspx. 
6  See for example, AJ Hughes Hallett (1989) ‘Econometrics and the Theory of Economic Policy: The Tinbergen-
Theil Contributions 40 Years On.’ in Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 41, issue 1, pages 189–214. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  there should be at least as many independent and effective policy instruments as there are 
independent  policy  targets.  By  an  instrument  I  mean  any  policy  setting  which  can  be 
changed: such as Bank Rate or the required amount of capital to be held by firms. To be 
satisfied,  the  Tinbergen  rule  requires  that  the  policy  tools  being  used  must  each  have  an 
impact on at least one of the objectives in sufficient size to make a substantial contribution 
towards achieving it. And that the pattern of effects of one tool on all objectives cannot be 
perfectly reproduced by changing any other tools singly or in combination ie the policy tools 
are each unique in their precise pattern of effects. 
Additional conditions are necessary if the objectives are assigned to different policy making 
bodies. So I will add a number of other sufficient conditions to cover this case. 
• 
Each policy tool should be assigned to meeting a target that it is relatively effective 
upon (ie to exploit comparative advantage). This may seem obvious, but is less so if 
one  is  uncertain  about  a  particular  policy’s  effectiveness.  If  a  policy  is  not  very 
effective on its primary objective, one of the consequences could be unnecessarily 
large policy changes. 
The authorities need to be able to co-ordinate or communicate in some way about 
what they are doing and why. Otherwise one can show that there is a risk in some 
circumstances  of  a  dynamic  being  created  which  is  destabilising  (eg  where  one 
authority tries to offset the effects of another in turn). 
And perhaps most importantly, the targets need to be achievable & coherent as a 
set. 
  Let me explore this last point briefly by taking an extreme case. If the MPC were to be set a 
target of absolute zero unemployment, that would be physically impossible and however hard 
they tried, it would not be achieved. If they did try hard nevertheless, it would probably lead 
to an over-expansion of the economy that threatened both financial stability and prudential 
safety and soundness. In a less extreme case one could imagine an MPC target for money 
supply  growth  which,  given  time-varying  shocks  to  the  velocity  of  money,  might  not  be 
consistent with the other objectives. 
Applying these conditions to the UK authorities 
So the first question I want to ask is whether the MPC, FPC and PRA Board have been set 
an  achievable  and  coherent  set  of  targets?  Is  it  possible  to  achieve  CPI  inflation  at  2%, 
financial stability, and safety and soundness of firms simultaneously7? I assert that there is 
no  inherent  absolute  conflict  –  these  are  different  elements  that  can  be  associated  with  a 
single  economic  equilibrium.8  In  the  absence  of  events,  random  shocks  or  other 
disturbances, it would be possible to achieve that triple objective simultaneously. If that were 
not possible, there would be a truly deep conflict, and the only solution would be to go back 
to government and ask for the remits to be changed so that coherency was achieved. I see 
no arguments to support that. 
But even though the different policy objectives can be achieved simultaneously, that does not 
mean that each committee can ignore the others. That would only be true in a special case 
when use of each committee’s policy tools affected its own objectives and not those of others 
ie  if  the  policy  effects  were  perfectly  independent.  In  practice  independence  is  inevitably 
                                                
7  With  apologies  to  my  insurance  colleagues  I  am  going  to  leave  on  one  side  the  objective  of  policy  holder 
protection. That should not affect this discussion. 
8  There  is  an  interesting  longer  term  issue  of  whether  stability  –  on  any  one  objective,  let  alone  all  three  – 
necessarily  breeds  the  conditions  for  subsequent  instability,  given  that  humans  take  more  risks  when 
conditions are thought to be stable and safe. I am not going to address that issue in this lecture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  partial: each policy tool is likely to affect all the objectives, albeit in different degrees. In this 
general case, the choices of one committee will affect the choices of the others. An example 
of  this  was  when  the  MPC,  in  giving  it’s  forward  guidance  on  monetary  policy,  included  a 
financial  stability  “knockout”  –  acknowledging  explicitly  that  there  might  be  circumstances 
when monetary policy settings had to reflect the risks to financial stability. That interaction or 
“spillover” is not the same as having a conflict between the objectives. Policy spillovers will 
be reflected in adjustments to the precise settings of policy levers at particular moments in 
time,  but  should  not  compromise  achievement  of  the  ultimate  objectives.  But  to  keep  on 
course  for  multiple  objectives  certainly  requires  co-operation  to  reflect  these  policy 
interactions. 
One aspect of this co-ordination is a common understanding of the economy. For example, 
the gap between actual and potential output levels could have an important bearing on policy 
settings for each committee. If the three committees had different views about the size of that 
gap or just different economic models, then they could set inconsistent policies. That would 
be  a  conflict  of  judgements  –  not  a  conflict  of  objectives.  The  presence  in  the  Bank  of  a 
single forecasting function  and  cross-use  of  its outputs,  helps  to  avoid  that  particular  trap. 
Any single central forecast would still most likely be wrong of course, but the committees will 
learn about changes to the outlook consistently, allowing consistent policy adjustments. 
Another angle to cooperation arises from the “long and variable lags” in the economy – and 
not  just  in  the  monetary  transmission  process.  Each  committee  can  face  very  long  and 
uncertain  lags  between  deciding  to  take  a  policy  action  and  the  maximal  impact  on  its 
objective.  That  makes  it  unlikely  that  any  one  objective  can  be  achieved  precisely  at  all 
points in time. 
As well as predictable lags, policy outcomes are subject to all sorts of random disturbances 
that constantly require changes to policy settings. Suppose, however, a committee actually 
tried  to  obtain  its  objectives  at  every  moment  in  time  regardless.  That  would  likely 
necessitate wild swings in policy settings: imagine the MPC trying to set Bank Rate so that 
2% inflation was achieved exactly every month! Not only would it quickly prove impossible, 
attempting the feat would drastically reduce the chances of the other committees achieving 
their  objectives.  So  a  degree  of  humility  is  required  by  each  committee,  for  the  sake  of 
coordination as well as the credibility of each. 
In their commitments to hit their statutory primary objectives I would say that: 
• 
• 
• 
That  is  supported  helpfully  by  the  secondary  objectives  of  each  policy  maker.  One  can 
interpret them in several ways, but to me they help put the primary objectives in an overall 
context.  We  want  all  three  objectives  to  be  met  in  an  economy  which  is  growing  at  its 
maximum sustainable potential. Excessive zeal in meeting any primary objective too quickly 
could  act,  not  just  to  slow  actual  growth,  but  reduce  sustainable  potential  and  this  is 
important to keep in mind. 
Cooperation  and  coordination  are  generated  in  the  framework  by  several  structures. 
Essentially, these are about information sharing. The most important is via cross-committee 
membership:  the  Governor  chairs  all  three  committees,  and  there  is  further  cross-
membership of internal members. And there is also joint briefing meetings/staff support. The 
Strategic  Plan  of  the  Bank  announced  earlier  this  year,  is  designed  in  part  to  enable  the 
different policy functions of the Bank to work more effectively together, reducing overlap and 
exploiting synergies. 
A  notable  example  of  policy  co-ordination  across  the  Bank’s  committees  has  been  on  the 
question of housing. Rising house prices could generate rising debt levels over time, creating 
The MPC should not be “inflation nutters”. 
The FPC should not seek the “stability of the graveyard”. 
The PRA Board should not seek to implement a “zero failure regime”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  then  set 
risks to monetary stability as well as financial stability and the safety and soundness of firms. 
But addressing this by trying to adjust Bank Rate would potentially adversely affect the whole 
of domestic demand at a time of economic recovery and low price inflation, and it could have 
needed  a  very  large  change  in  Bank  Rate  as  it  is  not  very  effective  in  controlling  house 
prices. 
At  the  end  of  June,  the  Bank  announced  a  set  of  macroprudential  actions  designed  to 
mitigate the risks from the housing market (not to control house prices per se). The Bank was 
able to construct policies which would operate directly on the flow of debt arising as a result 
of the housing market. It was clear that the FPC should take the lead in using these tools, but 
drawing  on  a  common  macroeconomic  assessment  (provided  by  the  MPC’s  forecast,  with 
policy analysis coming jointly from across the Bank) and a micro assessment provided by the 
PRA.  The  FPC  could 
the  overall  macroprudential  parameters  by  a 
Recommendation, with the particular policies being implemented by supervisory processes 
consistent with the PRA’s objectives, and by the rules of the FCA. Indeed it is worth noting at 
this point that the coordination circle does include the FCA – the CEO of which sits on both 
the FPC and the PRA Board. One could extend the three-committee analysis in this lecture 
to four. 
That  brings  us  to  the  question  of  the  policy  levers  themselves.  Is  it  the  case  that  each 
committee has instruments which are both sufficiently effective and independent? 
The MPC clearly has strong influence over the price and quantity of money. Bank Rate is a 
basic  price  of  money:  the  rate  paid  to  commercial  banks  on  their  reserve  holdings  at  the 
Bank of England. The quantity of narrow money (those reserve holdings plus banknotes in 
issue)  is  also  set  by  control  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet:  either  by  adjusting  the  stock  of 
purchased  assets  or  by  adjusting  the  stock  of  secured  lending  to  the  banking  system.  In 
respect of this latter policy lever, the Bank’s executive and its board of directors (Court) are 
ultimately  responsible  for  management  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  but  there  are  formal 
agreements in place such that if operations need to be conducted for monetary or financial 
stability  motivations,  then  the  appropriate  committees  are  consulted  and  will  ultimately  will 
make the decision9. 
Distinguishing the FPC and PRA’s instruments takes us into more interesting territory. The 
FPC  can  make  recommendations  to  pretty  much  anyone  about  anything  that  would  help 
meet  its  objectives.  That’s  very  wide  ranging  but  effectiveness  depends  on  those 
recommendations  being  accepted  and  implemented.  That  can  only  be  guaranteed  where 
there  is  effective  coordination  between  the  FPC  and  those  to  whom the  recommendations 
are made. PRA, FCA, Bank and HMT all fall into that category. The FPC’s most enforceable 
powers (of direction) relate to setting the counter-cyclical capital buffer and sectoral capital 
requirements  which  they  can  direct  the  PRA  to  implement  across  all  deposit  takers.  A 
leverage ratio is likely to be added in due course and the Government have also stated that 
they  intend  to  grant  other  powers  to  the  FPC  to  ensure  that  it  has  sufficient  policies  to 
address issues arising from the housing market. 
Capital and liquidity requirements are the most basic tools for controlling the banking system 
in  aggregate.  Superficially,  and  taking  directions  and  recommendations  together,  the  FPC 
could therefore be interpreted as undertaking coordinated supervision. If that were the case, 
the question must arise whether the PRA has any independent instruments and whether the 
FPC and PRA Board arrangements mean that both can achieve their objectives. Specifically, 
does the FPC dominate the PRA? The answer of “no” comes in two parts. 
                                                
9  These arrangements with MPC and FPC have been published. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  First, beyond the formal powers of direction, the FPC can make recommendations on a wide 
ranging basis. Only the PRA and FCA may be obliged to respond10, but in principle, the FPC 
could seek to involve itself in much wider matters than those over which the PRA has legal 
powers.  Second,  the  FPC  cannot  involve  itself  in  matters  relating  to  specific  firms.  For 
example, ultimately only the PRA Board can sign off on what levels of capital an individual 
deposit taker must hold, adding their independent judgements to the minima which are set by 
a combination of international standards and any FPC decisions. Those judgements reflect 
the  specific  risks  being  faced  by  individual  firms  and  there  are  a  range  of  factors,  any  of 
which  may  cause  a  capital  requirement  to  be  made.  The  PRA’s  judgemental  approach  to 
supervision is set out in its Approach Documents for Insurance and Deposit Takers which are 
published on our website. 
In  exercising  its  authority,  following  its  published  approaches,  the  PRA  also  makes 
judgements around a broad set of firm-specific factors that the FPC would not be involved in: 
risks  not  captured  in  the formal  capital  definitions,  senior  appointments, approving  specific 
transactions, risk and governance controls etc. In short the FPC makes decisions to ensure 
financial  stability  in  the  system  as  a  whole  and  the  PRA  acts  to  support  the  safety  and 
soundness of individual firms. 
But  the  PRA  approach  to  supervision  also  involves  other  considerations.  I  have  already 
mentioned that we must not operate a “zero failure” regime. That was in the context of not 
taking extreme decisions in over-zealous pursuit of our objectives. But if investors and other 
market participants believe that supervisory effectiveness leads to a situation in which a firm 
cannot fail, then they will likely take inappropriate exposures to those firms and the market 
will become distorted. In particular if a firm is likely to be bailed out by the public sector then 
that reduction in risk means that firms will have to pay less for their liabilities – giving them an 
implicit subsidy. That has been discussed at length in a number of Bank publications, but a 
key point for today is the Bank’s continuing commitment to end the “Too Big to Fail” problem 
and, specifically, to seek to establish realistic recovery and resolution plans for the firms it 
authorises. That consideration also affects supervisory decisions on legal entity structures, 
transactions, senior persons and so on. 
In  short,  the  FPC  and  PRA  have  many  different,  independent  policy  decisions  to  make. 
Ensuring both financial stability and safety and soundness of firms, requires both policy sets. 
The  issue  is  sometimes  raised  as  to  how  systemic  stability  and  safety  and  soundness 
interact – especially during or after a financial downturn, when defensive actions by financial 
firms may be pro-cyclical. This is perhaps the period when cooperation and communication 
between the committees comes to the fore most strikingly, and forward guidance on policy 
can  be  most  effective  and  necessary.  The  FPC  and  MPC  will  want  to  make  sure  that  the 
regulatory  system  is  not  pro-cyclical  –  they  will  want  to  avoid  anything  that  reduces  the 
capacity for credit creation when the wider economy needs most support from its financial 
sector. One might worry that supervisors would see the general relaxing of requirements – 
the  use  of  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  –  as  weakening  the  safety  and  soundness  of  their 
firms. In fact, the PRA also needs to recognise the relevance of the economy-wide situation 
to its objectives. Weakness in the real economy in a general downturn is one of the biggest 
threats to the safety and soundness of firms, as it can lead to substantial impairment of asset 
values.  More  than  this,  the  consideration  of  capital  and  liquidity  is  more  subtle  than  many 
people seem to appreciate. 
It  is  often  asserted  that  requiring  firms  to  hold  more  capital  automatically  reduces  the 
capacity to lend. That is not the case. Capital is a source of funding and sits on the liability 
side of the balance sheet. What matters is how a firm goes about improving its capital ratios. 
                                                
10  Recommendations  to  PRA  or  FCA  could  be  made  on  a  “comply  or  explain”  basis.  That  is  not  the  normal 
approach, which is more consensual. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Reducing  lending  is  only  one  way  of  adjusting  a  capital  ratio  up.  As  well  as  raising  new 
capital,  retaining  more  cash,  rather  than  paying  dividends  or  staff  bonuses,  can  also 
contribute. And it turns out that, at the start of the financial crisis, the larger banks had many 
non-core  assets11  on  their  balance  sheets,  beyond  lending  to  households  or  non-financial 
companies.  In  the  past  few  years,  capital  positions  have  been  rebuilt  in  many  firms  by 
running down or selling on these other, non-core assets, rather than seeking to reduce direct 
lending to households and businesses. 
The regulatory action most likely to affect the capacity to lend is that of increasing liquidity 
requirements – liquid assets obviously do compete with other assets on the balance sheet 
including  less  liquid  loans.  But  in  a  proximate  sense, most firms fail  not  at the  point  when 
they  have  run  out  of  capital,  but  when  they  run  out  of  cash  (although the  latter  may  be  a 
forward indicator of the former). Firms holding enough liquidity in reserve is a crucial defence 
in maintaining a robust financial system and hence financial and monetary stability. 
The key to solving this policy dilemma is to make sure that firms hold enough liquidity (and 
capital) in the good times so that, when a downturn hits, supervisors can take a relaxed view 
about  firms  using  those  holdings  as  buffers  to  absorb  the  macro  shock.  That  was  not  the 
position  post  2008/09  when  banks  had  not  been  holding  enough  liquidity  or  capital  in  the 
good times. It is an aim of the new regulatory frameworks put in place post-crisis, that banks 
should hold bigger liquidity buffers in normal times. 
The Bank of England’s balance sheet can also be used actively to backstop liquidity for the 
system as a whole, via the banking system, and the new operating frameworks put in place 
over the past 5 years will allow that to happen more quickly and easily. 
How will this all co-ordinate in practice? When the Bank, HMT and FSA took joint action in 
2012  to  reignite  the  recovery  via  the  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme  –  reviewed  in  my  two 
previous talks to you – the FSA, as predecessor to the PRA and having two members on the 
interim FPC, contributed by relaxing liquidity requirements and making it clear that liquidity 
buffers were there to be used. This was a crucial element of the package. 
Coherence vs agreement 
I believe I have set out so far a reasoned view that the three Bank policy Committees – the 
MPC, FPC and PRA have a coherent set of objectives, structures, appropriate policy tools 
and coordination to ensure that there is not any inherent absolute conflict in the framework. 
And the strategic changes internally at the Bank announced earlier this year could be seen 
as  being  a  reinforcement  to  that  structure  by  maximising  the  synergies  across  the  Bank, 
including the PRA. 
But  coherence  doesn’t  always  mean  agreement.  There  will  no  doubt  be  disagreements  at 
some  point. Indeed, the  appointment  of  independent  members to  the  policy  committees  is 
intended to ensure challenge and the absence of “group-think”. Dissenting views on the MPC 
are  not  only  an  established  part  of  the  culture  but  actively  encouraged  by  the  Treasury 
Committee in Parliament. 
The  FPC  and  PRA  Board,  in  contrast,  generally  work  by  consensus,  although  there  are 
provisions for recording dissent and votes if necessary. But disagreements over judgements 
between individuals are normal – that’s why we have decision making by committee in the 
first place. What we have not seen is any reason why the structure should be regarded as 
internally conflicted. How likely is it that there will be dissent across committees? There are 
mitigants in place to reduce the chances of that. Cross-chairmanship and membership from 
Bank  executives  should  enable  us  to  keep  to  coherent  policies  even  when  there  are 
                                                
11   Derivatives, prime brokerage, secondary market trading activities are all examples of what I mean here.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  differences of opinion. And I say that – despite evidence from operation of the MPC where 
there has generally been as much dissent recorded between the Bank executive members 
as by the independent members – because we have a collective institutional need to make 
the whole framework function in the best interests of the UK economy. And another structural 
way  of  addressing  divergent  views  is  to  have  joint  meetings  and  briefings  on  the  issues 
which  have  most  cross-over,  which  help  bring  the  different  externally  appointed  members 
together. That has already happened successfully on several issues, most notably housing. 
Concluding remarks 
It is important that we give the new structure time to work. First, because we will learn a lot. If 
there are flaws – and it would be reasonable to think there will be some – we need a bit of 
time to identify them and iron them out. Macroprudential tools are being used in the UK for 
the first time. And the PRA’s new approach to supervision is still being embedded. Second, 
the  regulatory  reform  agenda  is  still  being  decided  and  implemented  internationally  – 
insurance  regulation  in  particular  has  a  long  way  to  go  to  set  truly  global  standards. 
Measures  to  tackle  Too-Big-to-Fail  are  still  being  finalised.  So  we  are  still  some  way  from 
having a stable international regime within which to operate. Third, policy changes take time 
to  have  their  effect.  Indeed,  the  experience  of  monetary  policy  over  the  past  few  years 
demonstrates the need for patience. 
As well as addressing the issues around policy coordination, I hope I have also drawn your 
attention today to some aspects of how the PRA and its Board work. These are not secrets, 
and there is a wealth of information already published. But prudential supervision tends not 
to attract the same public attention as monetary policy unless something goes wrong. The 
work of the PRA and its Board is nevertheless a vital and distinct part of the new system and 
we need to be as open and transparent about our role, policies and operating procedures as 
we can be. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
