Mario Draghi: Statement at the Thirtieth Meeting of the IMFC 
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  at  the  Thirtieth 
Meeting of the IMFC, Washington, DC, 10 October 2014. 
 Against the backdrop of an uneven global recovery, which is also influencing the shape and 
strength of the euro area upturn, the ECB has been determinedly pursuing its mandate of 
maintaining price stability over the medium term for the euro area. 
Following four quarters of moderate expansion after two recessionary spells in the wake of 
first a global financial crisis and thereafter a euro area sovereign debt crisis, euro area real 
GDP  growth  remained  unchanged  between  the  first  and  the  second  quarter  of  this  year. 
Recent  survey  data,  available  up  to  September,  confirm  a  weakening  in  the  euro  area’s 
growth  momentum.  Looking  ahead,  the  recovery  is  expected  to  resume,  while  remaining 
modest. Domestic demand is projected to be supported by our monetary policy measures, 
the  ongoing  improvements  in  financial  conditions,  the  absence  of  fiscal  headwinds  on 
account  of  past  progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  and  a  gradual  payoff  of  structural 
reforms  undertaken  in  euro  area  countries.  Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  is  also 
expected  to  benefit  from  a  gradual  strengthening  of  demand  for  its  exports.  However, 
unemployment  in  the  euro  area  remains  high  and,  overall,  unused  capacity  is  sizeable. 
Moreover,  the  necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  the  public  and  private  sectors  are 
likely  to  continue  weighing  on  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  for  some  time.  The  risks 
surrounding  this  economic  outlook  remain  on  the  downside.  The  current  weakening  in 
economic momentum may postpone somewhat more the resumption in private investment, 
which is also negatively affected by heightened geopolitical risks. Steadfast implementation 
of  fiscal  consolidation  in  a  growth-friendly  manner  and  determination  in  structural  reform 
efforts should contribute to supporting business and consumer confidence going forward. 
This  real  economy  picture,  together  with  the  continued  subdued  monetary  and  credit 
dynamics corroborates our expectation that inflation will remain low over the coming months 
before  increasing  gradually  during  2015  and  2016.  The  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  will 
require  close  monitoring,  which  include  possible  repercussions  of  dampened  growth 
dynamics, geopolitical as well as exchange rate developments, and the pass-through of our 
monetary policy measures. 
It  deserves  to  be  underlined  that  the  downward  trend  in  euro  area  HICP  inflation,  which 
started in late 2011, has to a large extent been driven by global factors, such as commodity 
and food price developments, until earlier this year exacerbated by the appreciation of the 
euro  exchange  rate.  More  recently,  however,  the  weak  level  of  aggregate  demand  has 
become a factor contributing to a lower than forecast inflation outcome. 
Our  monetary  policy  continues  to  aim  at  firmly  anchoring  medium  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations, in line with our objective of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term. In this context, we have taken both conventional and unconventional 
measures  that  will  contribute  to  a  return  of  inflation  rates  to  levels  closer  to  our  aim.  Our 
unconventional  measures,  more  specifically  our  TLTROs 
(Targeted  Longer-Term 
Refinancing Operations) and our new purchase programmes for ABSs and covered bonds, 
will  further  enhance  the  functioning  of  our  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  and 
facilitate credit provision to the real economy. Should it become necessary to further address 
risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation, the ECB’s Governing Council is unanimous in 
its commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. 
As regards fiscal policies, comprehensive fiscal consolidation in recent years has contributed 
to  reducing  budgetary  imbalances.  Euro  area  countries  should  not  unravel  the  progress 
made with fiscal consolidation and should proceed in line with the Stability and Growth Pact. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
There  is  room  for  fiscal  strategies  to  better  exploit  the  existing  scope  for  a  more  growth-
friendly composition of fiscal policies. We therefore concur with the IMF WEO that there is a 
need to prioritise efficient productivity-enhancing public investment, while taking due account 
of the overall limited fiscal space in euro area countries. In this respect, we also welcome the 
work presented in the IMF Fiscal Monitor on how well-designed fiscal strategies can support 
job creation. Reducing the high tax burden on labour, while maintaining the agreed strategy 
of differentiated growth-friendly fiscal consolidation, is one of the Eurogroup’s current policy 
priorities. 
When  looking  at  the  structural  reform  picture,  important  steps  have  been  taken  in  several 
euro  area  Member  States,  while  in  others  such  measures  still  need  to  be  legislated  and 
implemented. Further efforts now clearly need to gain momentum to achieve a higher and 
more sustainable rate of growth in the euro area. Determined structural reforms in product 
and  labour  markets  as  well  as  action  to  improve  the  regulatory  environment  for  firms  will 
encourage investment activity and job creation. More specifically, labour markets need to be 
more  inclusive,  flexible  and  resilient,  while  product  markets,  including  those  for  services, 
should be made more open to competition. In addition, countries should take further steps 
towards improving the business environment, reducing the regulatory burden and pursuing 
more growth-friendly taxation. Bold and effective implementation is not just in the interest of 
the individual countries, it is also key for strengthening the resilience of the Economic and 
Monetary Union and for supporting growth at the global level. 
One  domain  in  which  the  euro  area  has  been  bold  and  determined  concerns  the financial 
sector, and more in particular the banking sector. Indeed, important further progress on the 
road to banking union has been made since our previous IMFC meeting. The ECB’s legal, 
governance  and  organisational  infrastructure  that,  as  of  4  November,  will  support  the 
operations  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  is  close  to  being  completed.  The 
Supervisory Board has been fully operational since the start of this year, helping to steer this 
process. In less than one month from now, the ECB will be assuming full responsibility for the 
micro-prudential supervision of all banks in the euro area and more directly by becoming the 
single supervisor of around 120 significant banks. Together with the national supervisors, the 
ECB  will  be  enabling  and  facilitating  coherent  and  consistent  application  of  the  EU  Single 
Rule Book across the euro area in the Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
As a second pillar to the Banking Union, the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) will start 
operating in the new year, even if the Single Resolution Board will only start exercising all of 
its responsibilities from 1 January 2016 onwards. Based on a wider-ranging set of pertinent 
legal provisions in the financial regulatory domain, the banking union in Europe is about to 
take off, barely two years after this important decision was taken by the European Council. 
One  of  the  elements  in  preparation  of  the  banking  union  has  been  the  so-called 
Comprehensive Assessment of all significant banks in the euro area by the ECB. It has been 
a  challenging  undertaking,  involving  almost  85%  of  the  total  balance  sheet  of  euro  area 
banks, More than 6,000 supervisors and auditors were involved in the execution of the Asset 
Quality Review. An EU-wide bank stress test was added on to it. Numerous quality checks at 
all  levels  were  undertaken  to  underpin  the  credibility  of  the  exercise  and  to  ensure  level 
playing-field conditions across the participating countries and banks. The results of this year-
long  exercise,  which  will  become  available  on  26  October,  will  substantially  increase 
transparency of balance sheets of European banks. The exercise has already contributed to 
a further strengthening of the capital base of banks and for some of them further efforts will 
be needed, once the results of the comprehensive assessment are known. 
The ultimate aim of the exercise is to enable euro area banks to strengthen their capital base 
and thereby substantially increase their credit provision capabilities. Together with the policy 
measures  taken  by  the  ECB  since  June  2014  to  further  enhance  the  transmission  of  our 
monetary policy and support the provision of credit to the real economy, this should lead to a 
rebound in investment demand and growth. To make it sustainable, economic policy makers 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in the euro area will need to do their part to create an environment conducive to sustainable 
growth.  I  fully  share  the  call  of  the  Managing  Director  in  her  Global  Policy  Agenda  that 
addressing  structural  deficiencies  are  a  priority  to  unlock  growth,  at  the  global  level  and 
definitely also in the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
