  Ewald Nowotny: The rebalancing challenge in Europe – perspectives for 
Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  (CEEI)  2014,  Vienna, 
24 November 2014. 
 Your Excellences, 
Dear Governors, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to welcome you to the annual Conference on European Economic Integration 
(CEEI) hosted by the Oesterreichische Nationalbank. Thank you for coming to Vienna. Many 
of you have traveled long distances to be with us today – a fact that highlights the importance 
of the topic we are going to discuss over the next two days: “The Rebalancing Challenge in 
Europe – Perspectives for Central, Eastern and Southeastern Europe (CESEE).” 
What  do  we  mean  by  “rebalancing”?  Obviously,  the  term  signifies  a  readjustment  from  a 
state of imbalance – an economic imbalance in our case. Typically, economists distinguish 
between  external  and  internal  imbalances.  By  external  imbalances,  they  usually  mean 
disequilibria  (mostly  deficits)  in  the  current  account  which,  if  protracted,  might  lead  to  an 
unsustainable  net  international  investment  position.  The  underlying  reason  for  a  current 
account deficit can differ from case to case; it can be trade-induced via export weaknesses, 
indicating  a  lack  of  competitiveness;  it  could  also  reflect  strong  import  demand  due  to 
unsustainably  high  growth.  This  leads  us  directly  to  internal  imbalances,  which  comprise 
accumulated  private  and  public  debt,  asset  price  bubbles,  unemployment  or  excessive 
inflation (or deflation). One could also add sectoral or distributional imbalances contributing 
to  uneven  growth.  Internal  and  external  imbalances  are  often  interlinked,  but  their 
interrelation is not always clear-cut. 
This  year’s  CEEI  coincides  with  three  anniversaries,  which  are  crucially  linked  to  our 
conference topic:  25  years  since  the fall  of  the Berlin Wall,  15  years  since  the  creation  of 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and 10 years since the – so far – biggest round of EU 
enlargement. This is not only a reason for celebration but also an occasion for honest stock-
taking  and  thoughtful  reflection.  I  think  that  the  developments  that  followed  these  events 
have been broadly successful. For an overwhelming majority of Europeans, the last quarter 
of a century brought hugely improved living standards and a much higher level of freedom. 
The CESEE region in particular saw a period of accelerated growth rates in the years prior to 
the global financial crisis. This was a win-win situation not just for the acceding countries but 
also for the EU, in general, and for Austria with its strong trade and investment links to the 
CESEE region, in particular. The episode following the introduction of the euro in 1999 and 
up to the beginning of the financial crisis was beneficial to the euro area. But those countries 
who apparently profited the most had to find out that they had built their performance on the 
untenable foundation of private debt backed by overvalued assets. 
The  crisis  has  revealed  that  the  previously  remarkable  catching-up  process  is  neither 
automatic nor irreversible. The new Central European Member States fared relatively well in 
terms  of  trade  performance  even  after  the  financial  crisis.  By  contrast,  a  dramatic  stop  of 
private financing flows required the economies under stress in the euro area, the Baltics and 
the  Balkans  to  quickly  adjust  their  external  imbalances.  Even  though  they  improved  their 
competitiveness,  external  rebalancing  resulted  in  internal  imbalances  such  as  high 
unemployment  and  overcapacities,  while  the  development  of  new  export  capacities  was 
hampered by financial constraints and weak European and foreign demand. Hence, a lot of 
the  adjustment  had  to  take  place  via  diminished  import  demand  caused  by  painful  cuts  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  income  and  employment.  Whether  this  import  reduction  is  sustainable  depends  on  the 
structural  nature  of  the  related  economic  slump  –  something  we  will  only  know  with  a 
sufficient degree of certainty at the beginning of a new cycle. 
A very interesting aspect of external imbalances is their relation to the patterns of sectoral 
specialization in a given economy. The countries featuring the best export performance prior 
to and after the financial crisis are exactly those that have a large manufacturing sector. The 
four countries that form the Visegrad Group have been fortunate in terms of foreign direct 
investment,  which  enabled  their  re-industrialization.  Via  cross-border  production  networks, 
these  economies  are  involved  in  a  “new  industrial  core”  of  Europe  together  with  Germany 
and  Austria.  Those  countries,  however,  that  have  not  been  able  to  establish  sufficient 
tradable industries and have neither abundant natural resources nor tourist attractions have 
difficulties to escape the dilemma of either chronic disequilibria or contractive deleveraging. 
Even worse, investment, which is crucial for future growth, has been cut over proportionally. 
Six years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, investment levels in the EU-28 are about 
18% below their peak; in some euro area economies under stress, investment was cut by 
about one-half. Taking into account some necessary correction of previous overinvestment in 
the construction sector, a prolonged period of below-trend business investment will certainly 
weigh on future productivity growth. The investment gap can be partly explained by financial 
constraints,  in  particular  for  SMEs,  start-ups  and  infrastructure.  Another  factor  is  demand 
uncertainty,  triggered  by  private  and  public  deleveraging  –  typical  for  balance  sheet 
recessions. 
Having  said  that,  one  should  not  forget  that  because  the  level  of  economic  activity  differs 
widely between the euro area average and the CESEE region, the latter has the best long-
term growth prospects in Europe – even if convergence will, most likely, proceed more slowly 
than  in  the  past  (with  the  annual  growth  differential  dropping  from  up  to  4  to  below 
2 percentage  points).  Thanks  to  its  proximity  and  its  traditional  ties  to  the  CESEE  region, 
Austria is in an excellent position to take advantage of this growth process. CESEE’s share 
in  Austria’s  total  goods  exports  rose  to  22%  (2013)  –  with  the  euro  area  countries  still 
accounting  for  half  of  all  Austrian  exports.  Conversely,  Austrian  banks’  high  international 
exposure  is  concentrated  with  their  CESEE  subsidiaries  despite  a  slight  decline  in  the 
respective exposures due to reduced activities in countries like Hungary and Ukraine. While 
a  tendency  toward  greater  diversity  is  desirable,  banks  ought  to  promote  a  sustainable 
growth model in countries with adequate economic and legal conditions – in the spirit of the 
Vienna Initiative. 
How  to  maintain  the  hope  for  convergence  as  enshrined  in  Article  3  of  the  Treaty,  which 
states that the European Union “shall promote economic, social and territorial cohesion”? I 
think  that  the  new  European  Commission  is  setting  the  right  priorities  by  proposing  an 
investment  package  combined  with  regulatory  reforms  targeted  toward  fostering  smart 
infrastructure, education, research and energy. Not only should this package provide short-
term  stimulus  but  also  improve  the  potential  for  long-term  growth  in  Europe.  At  the  same 
time, a reform of industrial policy focusing on new companies in the manufacturing sector of 
vulnerable Member States could help create export capacities. At the same time, the process 
toward a governance structure worth of a “genuine EMU” as outlined by the Presidents of the 
European  Central  Bank,  the  European  Commission,  the  European  Council  and  the 
Eurogroup  in  2012 contributes  to  confidence  building. While  the successful  creation  of the 
banking  union  marked  a  major  step  toward  completing  the  architecture  of  EMU,  the  other 
three pillars necessary for this completion – fiscal, economic and political union – are still in 
the making. To the extent that the new EMU architecture will be able to eliminate economic 
uncertainty, it may also contribute to economic growth in the euro area and beyond. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Some  of  you  might  have  noted  that  an  important  historic  event  was  missing  from  the 
anniversaries  I  listed  before:  2014  also  marks  the  centenary  of  the  First  World  War.  This 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  “great  seminal  catastrophe”  of  the  20th  century  marked  the  end  of  an  initial  era  of 
globalization and the beginning of a 30-year period of misery and barbarism. Importantly for 
us,  in  hindsight,  this  tragedy  was  by  no  means  inevitable.  Recent  work  by  historians 
reconfirms the view that European leaders at the time would have had better alternatives, but 
they made the wrong choices. It took decades to overcome the division of post-war Europe, 
and in many aspects this process is still under way. The devastation brought about by the 
wars, however, prompted an unprecedented European peace project – a process of political 
and economic integration, including monetary integration. The tragic events happening these 
days  just  1,500  kilometers  east  of  Vienna  should  remind  us  not  only  of  the  fact  that  war 
destroys lives, but that it also destroys countless opportunities of living in prosperity. 
Remembering  our  past  helps  us  prepare  for  a  better  future.  In  this  context,  I  am  glad  to 
advertise the publication of a data volume entitled “South-Eastern European Monetary and 
Economic Statistics from the Nineteenth Century to World War II.” The volume will also be 
available electronically on the OeNB website as from December. It is the result of the work of 
a  joint  Data  Collection  Task  Force  that  comprises  the  central  banks  of  Albania,  Austria, 
Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Serbia and Turkey. The book provides the first comprehensive 
collection of monetary data on Southeastern Europe for the period between 1830 and 1949. 
Let me thank all the contributors and the entire South-Eastern European Monetary History 
Network (SEEMHN) for their efforts to eliminate the white spots on our map of the region’s 
monetary  history  and  policy.  European  economic  history  research  had  largely  neglected 
Southeastern  Europe,  presumably  because  data  were  not  readily  available  in  the  past. 
Remarkably, what we find today is that the countries covered in this volume already had to 
deal with problems of imbalances and rebalancing in the period discussed. Thus, the volume 
allows  us  to  study  the  particular  problems  peripheral  economies  typically  face  after 
international crises: credit squeezes, capital flight and fiscal imbalances, all of which lead to 
strong economic contraction and often collapse. 
To sum up: Internal and external rebalancing has always been a complex challenge. So far, 
countries  at  the  Southern  and  Eastern  European  periphery  have  made  good  progress  in 
improving  their  external  competitiveness.  Unfortunately,  this  progress  entailed  internal 
disequilibria  in  terms  of  high  unemployment,  contracting  demand  and  sometimes  even 
deflation. Eventually, their rebalancing efforts can only be successful – both externally and 
internally  –  if  the  macroeconomic  environment  improves  all  over  Europe.  Such  an 
improvement, in turn, requires a comprehensive decision-making framework including a set 
of  functioning  monetary,  fiscal  and  structural  policy  instruments.  Our  recent  and  historical 
experience suggests that decisions should be taken from a responsible and stability-oriented 
political perspective – not only for one country alone, but for the whole region concerned. 
All too often, we let ourselves be guided by what a famous European leader once has said: 
“There is no alternative.” For an economist, there are always alternatives. What we should 
accept, however, is the trivial truism that any alternative has its costs or risks. There is no 
free lunch in economics, but we definitely have choices to make. In order to make the right 
ones, we must learn from each other. This conference should be a convenient opportunity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
