  Joachim Nagel: How the Banking Union has transformed banks’ IT 
requirements 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Joachim  Nagel,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 20th Handelsblatt Annual Conference on Banking Technology, Frankfurt 
am Main, 3 December 2014. 
 Opening remarks 
1. 
Professor Bott 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to address this Handelsblatt Annual Conference today. 
“All  Digital  –  All  Mobile  –  All  Compliant”,  the  motto  of  this  year’s  annual  conference  on 
banking technology, points to the major challenges faced by the IT departments of financial 
institutions. 
In my capacity as a member of the Bundesbank’s Executive Board, I am responsible for the 
Markets  and  Information  Technology  Departments.  So  I  am  familiar  with  some  of  the 
problems  and  difficulties  associated  with  a  bank’s  IT  infrastructure.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
yardstick by which a bank’s chief information officer (CIO) is measured is the way in which he 
or  she  supports  the  institution’s  core  business  areas  by  delivering  high-quality  IT  services 
and products, which should ideally be standardised and streamlined. IT security is coming 
increasingly into play here. On the other hand, he or she is also expected to demonstrate a 
high  level  of  agility  and  innovative  ability  in  the  face  of  stiffer  competition,  including  from 
enterprises  outside  the  traditional  banking  sector.  Together  with  all  other  business  units, 
then,  it  is  important  for  banks’  IT  to  reap  greater  business  benefits  by  implementing  joint 
projects and employing innovative information technology. 
It is crucial that we recognise and harness the business relevance of trends in the field of 
information technology – trends such as mobility, as referred to in the conference’s motto. 
Big data, “datability”, social media and cloud computing undoubtedly all open up additional 
major  opportunities  for  banks.  Yet  at  the  same  time  they  pose  new  challenges,  especially 
with respect to IT security. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  shed  some  light  on  the  third  facet  of  this  event’s  motto  –  “All 
Compliant” – with regard to the European banking union. 
The  German  Corporate  Governance  Code  defines  “compliance”  as  adherence  to  legal 
provisions  and  corporate  guidelines,  which 
the  responsibility  of  senior 
management.1 Compliance therefore means adhering to and satisfying legal and regulatory 
requirements.  The  financial  community  is  now  confronted  with  many  new  and  revised 
requirements and conditions, particularly as a result of regulation adopted in the course of 
the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Banks  need  to  demonstrate  their  “regulatory 
compliance” with these, which also has a direct impact on their IT. 
falls  within 
The Banking Union – a response to the financial market crisis 
2. 
The current financial and sovereign debt crisis has also exposed flaws in the architecture of 
banking supervision. I would therefore like to highlight four weak points that we have either 
eliminated or are working towards eliminating on the road to a European banking union. 
                                                 
1   German Corporate Governance Code as approved by the Code’s Government Commission on 24 June 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 1. 
 
 2. 
 
3. 
 
4. 
 
 Consistent European banking supervision 
Banking  supervision  at  the  national  level  was  replaced  on  4  November  2014  by 
direct, ECB-led supervision of the largest European banks. 
Under the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), all prudential reporting data from 
significant banks are now collected by a central authority, with information assessed 
in a manner that allows cross-border comparisons to be drawn. 
Harmonisation of banking supervision 
The  establishment  of  a  uniform  prudential  framework  has  brought  about  greater 
harmonisation  of  banking  oversight  in  member  states,  with  regulatory  arbitrage 
being prevented by shifting responsibility for banking supervision and resolution to 
the European level. 
Liability cascade in the event of resolution 
One lesson the crisis has taught us is that no bank should be “too big to fail”: if the 
worst  comes  to  the  worst,  they  must  be  able  to  fail.  The  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism  (SRM)  defines  this  usually  self-evident  liability  cascade,  according  to 
which shareholders and creditors are first and second in line to absorb any losses. 
Taxpayers are the last link in this chain of liability. 
Capital backing for government bonds 
On the other hand, high levels of sovereign debt can also destabilise the domestic 
banking sector – I am referring specifically to the zero risk weighting of government 
bonds. In future, this vicious circle between sovereign and banking risks could be 
broken  by  implementing  appropriate  measures.  After  all,  we  have  seen  that 
government bonds are not risk-free. That is why the preferential regulatory treatment 
afforded  to  government  bonds  and  other  exposures  to  the  public  sector,  in 
particular, needs to be brought to an end. 
The idea behind the banking union is a common financial regulatory framework, known as 
the Single Rulebook, and rests on two main pillars. 
The  first  pillar  is  central,  joint  responsibility  for  banking  supervision  under  the  aegis  of  the 
ECB. This has already been put in place in the shape of the SSM. 
The  second  pillar  is  the  SRM,  which  is  responsible  for  the  recovery  and  resolution  of 
insolvent  banks  in  times  of  crisis.  The  SRM  is  a  necessary  complement  to  the  SSM  and, 
together, they represent two sides of the same coin: they aim to facilitate the orderly recovery 
or resolution of institutions in the event of insolvency. 
There was also talk of a third pillar in the form of a single deposit guarantee scheme. But this 
would entail joint, cross-border fiscal responsibility, which is a step that policymakers are not 
yet prepared to take. The recently revised EU Directive on deposit guarantee schemes did, 
however, bring about greater harmonisation in European deposit guarantee schemes. 
It is now more or less exactly one month since the SSM came into force. On 4 November, 
the  ECB  took  on  the  far-reaching  supervisory  responsibilities  assigned  to  it  for  credit 
institutions  in  the  euro  area.  In  the  SSM,  the  ECB  and  the  euro-area  national  competent 
authorities  work  together.  The  division  of  tasks  between  the  European  and  national 
institutions  is  based  on  the  distinction  between  significant  and  less  significant  institutions. 
Specifically, the following institutions are defined as significant: 
 
banks with total assets of more than €30 billion or more than 20% of national GDP 
with total assets also in the latter case having to amounting to at least €5 billion; 
banks receiving direct or indirect assistance from the EFSF or the ESM; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
   the three most significant credit institutions in an SSM member state. 
the integration of the financial markets by means of uniform standards 
the separation of bank and sovereign risks and 
the stability of the financial market. 
 
These are “either/or” criteria. This means that one criterion alone is sufficient to classify the 
institution as “significant”. For such significant institutions – at present, there are 120 of them 
with roughly 85% of aggregate total assets across all banks – the ECB is taking on complete 
supervision. 
For the 3,600 “less significant” institutions across Europe these tasks will be performed by 
the national supervisory authorities. So, about 1,700 German institutions will still be subject 
to ongoing supervision by the Bundesbank and potential measures by BaFin. Nevertheless, 
the ECB exercises oversight over the system as a whole. The ECB is to ensure consistent 
and  high-quality  supervisory  practice  in  the  SSM  by  setting  standards  and  issuing 
instructions.  The  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  is  responsible  for  the  development  of 
regulatory  standards  for  European  banks;  compliance  is  a  matter  for  the  ECB  and  the 
national competent authorities. 
European supervision will make a major contribution to 
 
 
 
From an IT perspective, the SSM will introduce new work processes as well as changes in 
the exchange of information and reporting channels. Via the national competent authorities 
(NCAs)  –  in  Germany,  through  the  Bundesbank  –  the  ECB  will  be  receiving  the  reporting 
data of all banks in the SSM area, irrespective of the significance of the given institution. For 
significant  banks,  the  Bundesbank  will  become  a  supplier  of  data  to  the  ECB.  The  data 
reported by the NCAs are analysed by the ECB and serve as a basis for regulatory decisions 
about significant institutions. 
For  non-significant  institutions,  the  national  applications  will  continue  to  exist,  but  will  be 
adapted in future to harmonised European specifications. 
Supervision of the significant banks will be undertaken by joint supervisory teams (JSTs). A 
JST  is  being  established  for  each  of  these  institutions.  These  teams  will  be  headed  by  a 
coordinator who is a member of staff of the ECB. The teams themselves are largely made up 
of staff from the national competent authorities. In future, the supervisors will have access to 
the  ECB  banking  supervisory  applications  via  the  SSM  Information  Management  System 
(IMAS). 
IMAS will provide the infrastructure to ensure harmonised processes and consistency in the 
supervision of banking institutions. It is a key element for safeguarding the application of the 
common methodology and standards by all the JSTs. 
The  system  offers  ECB  decision-makers  and  banking  supervisors  efficient  access  to 
operational and analytical data via a stable and user-friendly interface. The first harmonised 
application  in  the  European  regulatory  framework  is  designed  for  receiving  and  analysing 
institutions’  solvency  and  financial  data  from  all  the  SSM  countries  based  on  the  XBRL 
format2 in conformity with the EBA’s technical implementing standards. 
New requirements for banking infrastructure 
3. 
The implementation of the new supervisory standards has become the greatest challenge for 
the financial industry since the Lehman insolvency according to a recent Forrester study. It 
                                                 
2   XBRL (eXtensible Business  Reporting Language)  is a language based on  XML used for the  preparation of 
electronic documentation in the field of financial reporting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  finds  that,  from  a  corporate  viewpoint,  compliance  with  regulatory  requirements  has  the 
highest priority, with 60% in agreement. This is followed by improved customer services and 
operational efficiency, which have a lower ranking.3 The direct costs associated with this for 
the banking industry in Germany as a result of regulation in the period from 2010 to 2015 
also represent a challenge, however. According to a study by KPMG, these are projected to 
total around €9 billion.4 
Reports in the press recently made frequent mention of a “wave of regulation” inundating the 
banks’ IT. There was even talk of “excessive regulation” or a “regulatory tsunami”. With all 
sympathy for the great challenges that the banks are facing, we should not forget why these 
demands arose. They were due to sometimes glaring errors in developments and to a lack of 
meaningful  possibilities  of  analysing  the  data  that  existed  at  the  banks  –  both  before  the 
crisis and to this very day. 
What we have observed from inspections at the banks is that IT at most banks is suffering 
from data not being collected and maintained in accordance with uniform standards and that 
there are only limited automated facilities for analysing these data and thus utilising them for 
a forward-looking risk management. Risk silos exist. 
The outcome of this is that the management often finds itself in a situation where decisions 
have to be made with insufficient knowledge of the facts. This chiefly concerns banks with an 
international  focus,  which  admittedly  find  it  difficult  to  coordinate  IT  spread  over  a  large 
number of locations. More than for others, however, it is absolutely essential for them to do 
so in order to hold their own in a volatile economic environment. The whole thing is not just a 
problem for German banks; according to a study by the Basel Committee, it concerns more 
or  less  all  international  banks.  It  goes  without  saying  that  no  “data  graveyards”  should  be 
created. I think that, together with the financial institutions, we will strike a healthy and, above 
all, viable balance in the future as well. Furthermore, many of the regulations have not been 
newly invented; they are already national banking supervision reality. 
the  Banking  Act 
In  Germany, 
the 
(Kreditwesengesetz,  KWG)  and 
for  Risk  Management 
(Mindestanforderungen  an  das  Risikomanagement,  MaRisk)  means  that  many  of  the 
mentioned requirements are already common practice among supervisors. 
Warren Buffett is quoted as saying “Someone is sitting in the shade today because someone 
planted a tree a long time ago.” As I see it, the IT departments that have consistently and 
promptly implemented the requirements of earlier inspection practice are well equipped for 
the future demands of IT. 
The  new  “Principles  for  effective  risk  data  aggregation  and  risk  reporting”  (BCBS  239) 
adopted  by  the  Basel  Committee  at  the  beginning  of  2013  will  apply  initially  from  2016  to 
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs). A bank is deemed to be systemically important 
in global terms if its insolvency would severely impede the functioning of the global financial 
system  or  significant  parts  thereof,  and  would  also  have  negative  effects  on  the  real 
economy.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  classified  30  institutions  worldwide  as 
systemically important, including Deutsche Bank as the sole German institution. It is already 
envisaged that this will be extended to domestic systemically important banks. 
Risk information should be complete, correct, consistent and current and made available in a 
form  appropriate  to  the  addressees.  This  has  always  been  a  demand  of  the  supervisory 
authorities. However, the Basel standards now set out, for the first time, globally coordinated, 
specific regulatory requirements for the architecture of risk and data management. 
implementation  of  section  25  of 
the  Minimum  Requirements 
for  example, 
                                                 
3   Forrester: Preliminary Results of 2014 Global Financial Services Architecture Online Survey, August 2014. 
4   KPMG: Impact of regulatory requirements, December 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  The  implementation  of  these  provisions  should  make  possible  improved  management 
information across all legal entities, an improved quality of strategic planning options and a 
complete assessment of the risk exposure at the highest consolidated level. Responsibility 
for this lies with senior management. 
The  regulatory  provisions  will  lead  to  a  harmonisation  of  IT  infrastructures,  flexible  and 
consistent processes in risk management and to enhanced analytical capabilities. 
The  challenges  in  implementing  these  principles  are  highly  ambitious  and  will  require 
considerable input in terms of human resources and technology. This applies in particular to 
risk  management,  finance  and  information  technology.  In  the  medium  and  long  term, 
however, this will also bring many opportunities. Even at an early stage, it should be possible 
to assess risks more quickly and more reliably; there will also be a crucial improvement in the 
quality  of  the  basic  elements  of  management.  These  changes  are  therefore  also  in  the 
interests of the enterprises themselves. 
Resulting challenges for institutions 
4. 
The requirements placed on institutions by the SSM have been a catalyst for major changes 
in the relevant business areas and IT departments, particularly with regard to reporting data. 
The expansion of the report contents has led to a marked increase in the volume of data to 
be submitted. For example, a tenfold rise in volume is expected for harmonised solvency and 
financial  data.  Another  new  aspect  is  that  large  institutions’  reports  of  large  exposures 
exceeding  €300  million  could  contain  up  to  200  MB  of  data  per  submission.  And  I  must 
confess that the European harmonisation of credit reporting is still in its infancy and further 
requirements  are  on  the  cards.  Given  the  sheer  scale  of  affected  data,  “Big  Data”  with 
innovative analytical, visualisation and reporting tools as well as in-memory technology5 will 
gain greater importance in banks’ IT, if they haven’t done so already. 
Up  until  now,  many  data  were  already  aggregated  by  institutions  as  part  of  the  reporting 
process  and  the  total  figures  were  submitted  to  the  supervisory  authority.  It  is  now 
increasingly the case that individual data are required, which are then aggregated by banking 
supervisors. The information and data to be reported by banks are now considerably more 
granular and serve as a basis for extended analyses in the field of banking supervision. 
Institutions  need  to  get  used  to  the  idea  that  regulatory  requirements  will  have  to  be 
implemented in a much shorter space of time. Time pressure and the associated planning 
uncertainty are likely to pose the main problems in this respect. Up until now, there has been 
a  time  lag  of  about  one  year  between  the  publication  of  new  requirements  by  the 
Bundesbank and the first-time submission of data in line with these new requirements. In the 
wake of the launch of the SSM, the EBA has now reduced this timeframe to 2–3 months. The 
same  applies  to  completely  new  areas  for  which  there  was  previously  no  systematic 
collection of data. 
The advantages of XBRL as the lingua franca for exchanging financial information is obvious. 
Data structures based on defined, uniform procedures allow information to be transmitted in 
a  more  efficient  manner  that  is  less  prone  to  errors,  and  subsequently  processed  and 
evaluated. The complexity of taxonomies and reporting formats and the resulting increased 
volume of data are just some of the disadvantages compared with the previous, more simple 
formats. These directly impact on IT, placing greater demands on IT infrastructures, such as 
processor  performance  and  storage  requirements.  Banks  therefore  need  to  upgrade  their 
capabilities. 
                                                 
5  
In-memory  databases  permanently  store  the  entire  data  pool  in  the  main  memory,  thereby  enabling  much 
faster read-only access than traditional database systems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  The  previous  interfaces  between  commercial  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  have 
changed. Up to now, incoming reports were only subjected to syntactic checks, with technical 
verification  taking  place  as  a  downstream  process.  At  the  Bundesbank,  for  example, 
Bundesbank staff reported any inconsistencies to the respective institutions. The correction 
could then be made by the institution in consultation with this member of staff. 
Gradually – the process started back on 1 April 2014 with COREP (common solvency ratio 
reporting) – the submission and correction process will be automated as far as possible, as 
the SSM continues to takes shape.6 The reported data will be machine-checked for technical 
correctness as well as subjected to initial specialist entry checks. At the end of the process, 
erroneous reports will be automatically rejected. Each individual submission will be subjected 
to several thousand automated checks. Institutions must expect error messages and be able 
to  deal  with  not  yet  standardised  contents  and  formats.  Overarching  examinations  of 
economic, financial and large exposure data mean that institutions will need to cross-check 
figures down to the very last detail, even if they stem from different systems. 
The  timeframe  for  corrections  by  institutions  is  being  reduced.  This  means,  inter  alia,  that 
banks’ internal correction processes need to be made more efficient and consistent, which 
might require more resources. 
I  think  that  the  challenges  I  have  presented  can  be  summarised  in  the  following  areas  of 
action for banks’ IT financial architecture: 
 
Data  governance  and  data  architecture  need  to  be  optimised  in  order to  enhance 
the quality, accuracy and integrity of data. 
Analytical  and  reporting  processes  need  to  facilitate  faster  decision-making  and 
direct availability of the relevant information. 
Processes  and  databases  for  the  areas  of  finance,  control  and  risk  need  to  be 
harmonised. 
Increased  automation  of  the  data  exchange  processes  with  the  supervisory 
authorities is required. 
Fast and flexible implementation of supervisory requirements by business units and 
IT  necessitates  a  modular  and  flexible  architecture  and  appropriate  project 
management methods. 
    Banks must ensure that their IT is equipped for this. 
Further developments and framework conditions are in the pipeline: 
 
The SSM is gradually harmonising the banking supervision reporting system at the 
European  level.  Thus,  new  frameworks  are  continually  being  developed  in  a 
European context. 
The  ECB  and  EBA  are  setting  out  requirements  in  liaison  with  the  national 
competent  authorities.  COREP  and  large  exposure  reporting  have  already  had  to 
report for the first time in line with European requirements. 
The  requirements  concerning  the scope  and contents  of  reporting  have  increased 
significantly,  while  the  response  times  for  new  requirements  have  been  slashed. 
This trend looks set to continue in the future. 
New  standards  such  as  BCBS  239  require  the  relevant  institutions  to  have 
integrated and automated data processing in place. 
                                                    
6   The Europe-wide standardised COREP provides a binding solvency reporting system. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  European harmonisation of credit reporting is presently being discussed (Analytical 
Credit  Dataset  –  AnaCredit).  It  will  be  fundamentally  different  from  the  current 
reporting system. We are expecting regulations which lead to an increased number 
of  metrics,  and  which  additionally  have  a  finer  granularity.  Furthermore,  lower 
reporting thresholds and increased reporting frequencies are on the cards. 
 In my opinion, there are two key messages: 
1. 
2. 
Banks  need  to  invest  in  their  information  technology.  The  implementation  of 
supervisory requirements will tie up considerable resources and entail costs. 
Regulatory projects reduce operational risk, permit a better and faster assessment 
of risks and possible courses of action. This can, in turn, diminish operating costs 
and offer a crucial competitive edge. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentleman 
To  achieve  our  common  goal  of  making  financial  markets  more  stable,  the  various  bank 
governance functions – in particular, risk management, reporting and finance – need to be 
much better integrated than they have been up to now. Overarching data and methodological 
governance, and the integration of processes and IT systems need to oust the existing silos 
and monolithic systems. Furthermore, institutions need to be capable of safeguarding flexible 
and timely reporting for different target groups. 
Thus  the  modernisation  of  IT  systems  is  one  of  the  big  challenges  faced  by  banks. 
Institutions want to keep their costs for fulfilling new – above all regulatory – requirements to 
a  minimum.  To  do  this,  they  will  have  to  modernise  their  IT  architecture.  The  Senior 
Supervisors Group7 emphasised the importance of strong IT governance, bringing together 
business units and IT, in its 2010 report8 This is also a key point for me: IT strategy needs to 
be embedded in the business strategy. The necessary transformations must not be an end in 
themselves  from  an  IT  perspective,  but  need  to  be  strategically  anchored  and  founded  on 
business  policy.  Many  regulatory  requirements  have  been  necessary  precisely  because 
banks’  systems  are  not  integrated.  Only  a  holistic  cross-business  approach  can  take  IT 
financial architecture to the next strategic level. 
Ladies and gentleman 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
7   This body comprises representatives from the supervisory authorities of 10 countries, which are responsible 
for the world’s largest banks. 
8   “Observations on Developments in Risk Appetite Frameworks and IT Infrastructure”, 23 December 2010. 
 
The  SSG’s  analyses  were  carried  out  to  support  the  Financial  Stability  Board  in  its  task  of  addressing 
weaknesses in the financial system and promoting the stability of the international financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
