  Jens Weidmann: Reforms for recovery and resilience 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Bank of Latvia 
Economic Conference 2014, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I thank you for the invitation and for the opportunity to speak here today. Latvia is the latest 
member of our Economic and Monetary Union. But in a sense, Latvia’s capital could also be 
considered part of the vanguard. 
The  history  of  European  integration  has  been  a  process  of  back-and-forth,  marked  by 
spectacular advances and equally huge setbacks. However, when we did witness progress 
on the road to integration, more often than not it was driven by one single factor: trade. And 
when it comes to trade driving integration in Europe, one early example immediately springs 
to mind: the Hanseatic League. 
Prior to the foundation of the league, trade in the Baltic Sea was for the adventurous only. 
Raids and piracy made it a risky endeavour. The scale of international trade in the Baltic area 
remained insignificant. 
The  growth  of  the  Hanseatic  League  changed  that.  From  the  13th  to  the  17th  century, 
stretching from the Baltic to the North Sea, the league protected trade routes and sheltered 
its members from tariffs and customs restrictions. As a result, trade soared, and with it the 
wealth of the members of the league. 
The Hanseatic cities had their own legal system, and they maintained their own armies for 
mutual protection and aid. But the league did not constitute a federation – similar to the euro 
area today. 
Riga’s membership in the league dates back to 1282. So when it comes to taking an active 
role in European integration, Latvia is clearly a leader, not a laggard. 
Unfortunately, the economic association of which Latvia is now a member does not seem to 
be leading in terms of economic growth. 
What will it take to change that? What reforms are needed to spur sustainable growth and 
enhance stability? What are the respective roles of monetary, fiscal and structural policy in 
this context? In the next 20 minutes, I wish to lay out my perspective on these questions. 
Current situation and monetary policy 
2. 
But first, let us have a look at where the euro area stands at the moment. 
Euro-area  GDP  is  still  2.4%  below  its  pre-crisis  level,  and  growth  stalled  in  the  second 
quarter  of  this  year.  The  biggest  three  economies  –  Germany,  France  and  Italy  –  did  not 
provide  any  growth  impetus,  with  Germany  and  Italy  contracting  by  0.2%  and  France’s 
economy stagnating. 
Although the decline of German GDP in the second quarter must be seen in the context of 
the strong increase in the first quarter due to the mild winter weather, indicators for the euro 
area suggest that growth will pick up only at a moderate pace. This is confirmed by the latest 
data, notably in Germany, which have been rather disappointing. 
In sync with the subdued pace of the recovery, inflation in the euro area has been low as 
well. Still, the risk of becoming enmeshed in a deflationary scenario is considered to be low – 
I think in this respect we share a common view in the Governing Council. Rather than fearing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  broad-based  deflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  more  concerned  about  a  too  prolonged 
period of low inflation. 
But so far, the low inflationary pressure is for a large part due to the decline in energy prices 
and  the  adjustment  processes  in  some  euro-area  countries  –  factors  beyond  the  direct 
influence of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy and to which the monetary policy should react 
– simply speaking – only in the case of second-round effects. 
Monetary policy in the euro area, then, is facing difficult times – especially as it has reached 
the  lower  bound  on  interest  rates.  Further  accommodation  can  therefore  happen  only 
through unconventional measures. 
And unconventional measures are what the Governing Council decided on in its June and 
September  meetings  with  the  launch  of  targeted  long-term  refinancing  operations  and  two 
asset purchase programmes, the details of which were presented two weeks ago. 
The asset purchase programmes have triggered a debate, as their justification insinuates a 
shift  from  programmes  specifically  aimed  at  credit  easing  towards  a  quantitative  easing 
philosophy. 
One should bear in mind that even before these decisions were made, the monetary policy 
stance  was  already  very  accommodative.  The  Governing  Council  therefore  has  to  judge 
whether  additional  stimulus  is  needed  or  would  be  effective,  and  what  unintended  side-
effects would come with the measures. 
The declared goal of expanding the balance sheet of the Eurosystem poses challenges for 
another reason, too. Purchases of Asset Backed Securities (ABS) are problematic when they 
imply a transfer of risks from banks to the balance sheet of the central bank. 
In the end, this could amount to a transfer of risks from banks to the taxpayer. And this would 
run  counter  to  everything  we  have  strived  to  achieve  in  banking  regulation  over  the  last 
years. 
The higher the target for the expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet, the higher the 
risks of overpaying for the assets. The pricing mechanism that is currently being determined 
needs to pay special attention to these risks. In any case, monetary policy accommodation 
can  only  do  so  much,  and  the  longer  it  stays  ultra-expansive,  the  higher  could  be  the 
corresponding risks to financial stability. 
What monetary accommodation definitely cannot do is tackle the root causes of low growth 
potential in the euro area – the structural barriers that hamper competition, innovation, and 
hence  productivity.  Addressing  these  structural  deficiencies  would  also  go  a  long  way 
towards improving the transmission of monetary policy impulses. 
Reforms for recovery 
3. 
In many member states, particularly in those worst hit by the crisis, substantial efforts have 
already been made towards that end. In order to unleash productivity, labour markets have 
become more flexible, and competition in goods and services has become more intense. 
And according to the World Bank’s Doing Business Report, the efforts are starting to pay off: 
Portugal,  Italy  and  Spain  have  climbed  up  the  ranking  ladder  by  17,  13  and  10  positions 
respectively over the last four years. Greece has moved up by 37 positions. 
But it is obvious that ample room remains for further improvements. While Portugal, Spain, 
Italy  and Greece  have  moved  up  the  ladder  in the  Doing  Business  Report, they  are  still  a 
considerable  distance from the top,  with  Portugal  ranking  31st,  Spain  52nd, Italy  65th  and 
Greece 72nd. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Accordingly, recent estimates1 by the European Commission suggest a medium-term growth 
potential (2014–23) for the euro area of only 1%. 
The  potential  gains  from  structural  reforms  therefore  remain  especially  large.  A  study2  by 
economists from the OECD suggests that a comprehensive package of labour, product, tax 
and pension reforms could raise GDP per capita in the EU by about 11% after ten years. For 
the US, the potential GDP increase of structural reforms is 5%, less than half that of the EU. 
And by no means are gains to be reaped in the peripheral countries only. Ranked 111th in 
the  World  Bank  Doing  Business  category  “ease  of  starting  a  business”,  for  instance, 
Germany  has  ample  room  for  improvement  here  as  well.  And  this  also  goes  for  other 
economic policy areas where some reforms have even been rolled back recently. 
By the same token, growth-enhancing reforms are not confined to the national level. A lot of 
the potential inherent in our most important European catalyst for growth, the single market, 
is still untapped. 
The single market has been very successful in facilitating trade in goods. Hence, competition 
in this area is intense. The mark-ups that firms are able to charge in addition to their costs 
due to market power are low and are comparable to those in the US, for example. 
When  it  comes  to  services,  however,  the  picture  looks  different.  Mark-ups  are  higher,  on 
average, than in the US. It is probably safe to say that the Services Directive has fallen short 
of  expectations.  Completing  the  single  market  for  services  therefore  holds  the  promise  of 
substantial economic gains. 
This could be achieved by finally establishing the “country of origin”, as is already the case in 
the  common  market  for  goods.  This  principle  states  that  a  firm  should  no  longer  be 
hampered by regulation in the importing country if it has already complied with the national 
regulations in its home country. 
The  same  goes  for  bringing  the  single  market  into  the  digital  age.  When  it  comes  to  the 
digital economy, fragmentations still abound, in particular with regard to legal issues such as 
privacy  and  data  protection,  content  and  copyright,  liability  of  online  intermediaries,  e-
payments and electronic contracts. The EU is still comprised of 28 individual digital markets 
rather than one single digital market. 
This  is  holding  back  innovation,  growth  and,  ultimately,  jobs.  Studies3  suggest  that 
establishing a harmonised and well-regulated digital single market holds the same potential 
as  the  introduction  of  the  original  one,  raising  GDP  by  as  much  as  4%.  In  Germany,  for 
example, this could imply an additional 427,000 jobs over the period 2015 to 2020. 
Some steps have already been taken towards a true single market for the digital economy, 
but we are not there yet. Continuing along this path to the end would provide a major boost 
to European competitiveness. It is therefore more than worth the effort. 
Another push to EU GDP could potentially stem from an EU-US trade agreement. The US is 
the EU’s biggest export market and its third most important import partner for trade in goods. 
The ties between the two regions are even closer in terms of service trade. 
Given the already low average tariff rates, non-tariff barriers are probably the greatest still-
existing  impediment  to  bilateral  trade.  In  the  first  round,  the  effects  on  trade  and  GDP, 
                                                
1   European Commission (2013), “The euro area’s growth prospects over the coming decade”, Quarterly Report 
on the Euro Area 12(4). 
2   Bouis, R and R Duval (2011), “Raising the Potential Growth after the Crisis: A Quantitative Assessment of the 
Potential  Gains  from  Various  Structural  Reforms  in  the  OECD  Area  and  Beyond”,  OECD  Economics 
Department Working Paper No. 835. 
3   Copenhagen Economics (2010), The Economic Impact of a European Digital Single Market, Final Report. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  however,  are  level  effects,  and  it  is  only  through  increased  competition  that  growth  could 
follow. 
Furthermore,  many  aspects  of  the  deal  are  still  highly  controversial.  The  European 
Commission now hopes to reach an agreement within “a couple of years”. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
An increase in investment is a precondition for higher growth rates. Durable growth requires 
reforms that cut red tape, spur innovation, and make labour costs more calculable. 
This is not only conducive to higher growth potential in the future: it acts as a nearer-term 
stimulus in its own right. Investment is not only tomorrow’s supply: it is also today’s demand. 
How does public investment come into this equation? 
Various  commentators  have  called  on  euro-area  countries  with  perceived  fiscal  space, 
notably  Germany,  to  seize  the  opportunity  presented  by  low  interest  rates  and  increase 
investment. Olivier  Blanchard, the  IMF’s  Chief  Economist,  has  argued that  this  would  also 
help the euro-area periphery. He argues that in the current situation, spillover effects could 
be particularly high due to monetary policy being constrained by the lower bound on interest 
rates and the prevalence of liquidity-constrained households. 
But even if this were the case, the periphery’s share of German imports is very low, which 
suggests that spillovers would remain very modest – all the more as the import content of 
public investment is especially small. The boost to the peripheral countries from an increase 
in German public investment is therefore likely to be negligible. 
What is more, the argument that Germany should seize the opportunity of low interest rates 
does not hold up to closer scrutiny, either. Debt totalling more than €2 trillion and the huge 
demographic burden Germany faces in the coming years will weigh on its growth and public 
finances. In that light, pursuing a balanced budget makes perfect sense for the country. 
And  with  the  economy  operating  at  normal  capacity  utilisation,  Germany  is  not  in  need  of 
stimulus  either  –  and  this  will  remain  the  case  with  the  revised  forecasts  that  still  foresee 
growth in line with potential. On the contrary, in the face of coming demographic challenges, 
costly stimulus measures could even backfire via negative confidence effects. 
Is the case for higher investment therefore completely without merit? No, but arguments in 
favour  do  not  stem  from  cyclical  considerations:  they  stem  from  structural  considerations. 
Where  Germany’s  growth  potential  is  concerned,  there  is  agreement  that  higher  public 
investment does have a role to play. 
With regard to the size of the investment gap, however, there is probably no agreement. It is 
important  that  all  investment  measures  are  judged  on  a  case-by-case  basis,  as  we  have 
seen in the past that not all public investment measures have been money well spent. 
And we should focus on shifting priorities in public expenditures. There is no need for a debt-
financed  fiscal  stimulus,  but  for  a  structural  shift  of  government  expenditures  from 
consumption to investment. Reforming the financial arrangements between the federal, the 
state, and the municipality level could encourage that shift. 
Somewhat  more  autonomy  with  regard  to  revenues  might  alleviate  the  problem  of  lacking 
funds to some extent. At the same time, however, it has to be ensured that the overall tax 
burden does not increase. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Reforms for resilience 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  reforms  laid  out  so  far,  together  with  other  widely  discussed  structural  measures  and 
sound public finances, would allow the euro-area economy to shift gears and accelerate. But 
they do not in themselves guarantee that the engine will run more smoothly and reliably. 
This is where reforms addressing the euro area’s institutional architecture come in. 
The euro area teams up one common monetary policy with 18 national fiscal and economic 
policies.  This  approach reflects  a  currency  area  composed  of  sovereign  member  states. It 
grants  member  states  sufficient  leeway  to  preserve  their  diversity,  that  is  to  establish their 
own business models or to tailor institutions and policies to their own national preferences. 
At the same time, it leaves the consequences of such decisions with the respective member 
state  and  consistently  rules  out  the  option  of  mutualising  public  debt  with  other  euro-area 
states. 
But this set-up also creates vulnerabilities. 
First,  a  combination  of  this  kind  gives  rise  to  a  deficit  bias,  as  it  allows  the  costs  of  fiscal 
imprudence  to  be  shifted  partially  on  to  others.  An  unsustainable  fiscal  situation  in  one 
country has repercussions for monetary union as a whole. 
You  can  compare  this  to  what  economists  call  the  “tragedy  of  the  commons”.  Just  as 
overfishing creates negative externalities for other countries, excessive public debt harms the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  Excessive  debt  in  one  member  state  drives  up  longer-term  interest 
rates for all euro-area countries. 
And  second,  each  member  state  issues  debt  in  a  currency  it  cannot  create.  Thus,  a  high 
level  of  fiscal  discipline  is  needed  to  ensure  that  solvency  concerns  do  not  spiral  out  of 
control. 
But  the  precautions  taken  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  to  ensure  sound  public  finances  have 
proven insufficient. The rules of the Stability and Growth Pact have been broken numerous 
times in the past, not least by Germany, France and Italy. 
And the no bail-out clause failed to exert the expected disciplining effect on governments in 
the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  as  markets  did  not  take  sufficient  account  of  the  different 
macroeconomic developments in the countries concerned. 
The rescue packages provided to countries which lost market access did help to contain an 
escalating crisis. But at the same time, they have thrown the balance between liability and 
control  out  of  kilter.  While  spending  decisions  essentially  remain  a  national  prerogative, 
liability  has  become  partially  mutualised.  The  tendency  to  incur  further  debt  is  thus 
strengthened, not weakened. 
What is to be done? 
Some necessary steps have already been taken. The fiscal rules have been stiffened, with 
greater  automaticity  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  introduction  of  the  fiscal 
compact. 
However, as we have learned from the crisis, rules can only be the first line of defence and 
they have to be applied to fulfil their purpose. Thus, the current debate in Italy and France 
about their fiscal stance is not reassuring. This underscores the need to buttress the rules 
with functioning market discipline. 
Sound public finances will only be achieved if we rigorously set about restoring the balance 
between liability and control. One way to do this would be a genuine fiscal union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  If  common  debt  were  matched  by  common  control,  incentives  could  be  aligned.  But  this 
would require a quantum leap in terms of ceding sovereignty to the European level, a leap 
neither the electorates nor the governments of the member states seem willing to take. 
If a true fiscal union that requires extensive changes to the European Treaties is not on the 
cards, then we need to take the second avenue. This avenue implies enhancing the original 
Maastricht framework that is based on the principle of individual responsibility. 
This principle requires that sovereigns, banks and investors bear the consequences of their 
decisions.  We  need  to  make  sure  that  sovereign  debt  restructuring  is  possible  without 
bringing down the financial system as a whole. 
To that end, more than three years ago the Bundesbank proposed automatically extending 
government  bonds’  maturity  by,  say,  three  years  if  the  member  state  is  granted  financial 
support from the European Stability Mechanism. This would help to figure out if the country’s 
problem is one of temporary illiquidity or insolvency. 
Additionally, doing away with the preferential treatment of sovereign debt in banks’ balance 
sheets is of the essence. The current regulatory framework permits preferential treatment of 
sovereign exposures in various forms. 
While bank exposures to a single counterparty are limited, in principle, to a quarter of their 
eligible  capital,  exposures  to  sovereigns  are  exempted  from  that  large  exposures  regime. 
Thus, many European banks hold bonds from one sovereign only – their home country. But a 
high level of undiversified sovereign exposure is what makes sovereign default a potentially 
systemic event. For this reason, the large exposures regime needs to apply to sovereigns as 
well. 
Moreover,  sovereign  exposures  are  privileged  by  low  or  zero  capital  requirements.  An 
adequate  risk-weighting  of  sovereign  bonds  would  make  banks  more  resilient  if  the  fiscal 
position of the respective sovereign were to deteriorate. And it would bring spreads more into 
line with the underlying risk, thus sending a disciplining signal to the sovereign. 
If  additional  capital  requirements  for  European  banks  were  imposed  to  cover  sovereign 
exposures, the additional capital would be rather small on aggregate – albeit with substantial 
differences between banks. 
The  inclusion  of  sovereigns  in  the  large  exposures  regime  might  lead  to  more  substantial 
repercussions. But these would be manageable if introduced over a transition period – which, 
without question, has to be granted. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me come to a close. 
The biggest bottleneck for growth in the euro area is not monetary policy, nor is it the lack of 
fiscal  stimulus:  it  is  the  structural  barriers  that  impede  competition,  innovation  and 
productivity. 
If these  barriers  were  torn  down  by  all  euro-area  countries, the growth outlook  would  shift 
considerably  –  and  this  would  instantly  give  rise  to  higher  investment.  Complementary 
reforms  on  the  European  level  aimed  at  the  services  sector  could  provide  a further  boost. 
Taken together, these measures are expected to lift growth by as much as 15% above the 
current baseline level after ten years. To me, that sounds like a goal worth expanding some 
political capital to achieve, as do efforts to bring liability and control further into balance. 
The  resolve  the  Latvian  government  showed  in  securing  the  joining  of  the  euro  has  set  a 
shining example in that regard – an example that reminds us of the collective efforts more 
than 750 years ago, and an example that can serve as a lodestar for the challenges of today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
