  Amund Holmsen: The theoretical background for macroprudential policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Amund  Holmsen,  Executive  Director  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at Norges Bank’s Finance Workshop, Oslo, 9 October 2014. 
Thanks to Henrik Borchgrevink. 
 This speech does not contain any assessments of the current economic situation or 
policy-related statements. 
Songs  about  financial  stability  are  few  and  far  between.  But  Odd  Nordstoga  has  written  a 
song about just that, entitled Lykkeliten (Happy Times)1: “Happiness is a time without debt, 
and  reading  the  end  of  a  book  when  in  bed”.  That  financial  stability  can  be  so  directly 
associated  with  a  feeling  of  happiness  is  an  encouraging  point  of  departure  for 
macroprudential policy. 
Nordstoga  has  actually  turned  economic theory upside  down.  Happiness  –  or  utility  as  we 
economists tend to call it – is usually associated with consumption. We can borrow to finance 
consumption. Credit provides an opportunity to advance consumption in time. In that respect, 
more credit engenders more happiness – not the opposite. But after the goods have been 
consumed, the loan still exists. Debt creates risk in the financial system. Nordstoga may then 
prove to be right. A time without debt may be a happier one. 
The  business  of  banking  is  such  that  it  can  trigger  or  amplify  an  economic  downturn. 
Subsequent to the financial crisis, macroprudential policy has evolved into a supplement to 
both  traditional  banking regulation  and  stabilisation  policy.  Even  if  individual  banks  comply 
with the applicable regulations, they can engage in herd behaviour and topple both their own 
business and the rest of the economy. 
While  traditional  banking  regulation  seeks  to  restrict  an  individual  bank’s  risk-taking, 
macroprudential measures seek to limit the risk that the financial system inflicts on the wider 
economy. Somewhat simplified, we can say that traditional banking regulation focuses on the 
risk that goes into banks, while macroprudential policy focuses on the risk that comes out of 
banks.  The  aim  is  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  curb  financial 
vulnerabilities that build up in the economy. 
Since the establishment of banks some centuries ago, banking regulation has largely been 
the result of learning by experience. The subject field and reality have evolved hand in hand. 
The  field  of  economics,  like  other  scientific  subjects,  has  evolved  in  leaps  –  or  paradigms 
shifts, and the shifts have often followed in the wake of international economic breakdowns. 
The world economic crisis that erupted at the end of the 1920s entailed such a breakdown, 
and ushered in a paradigm shift in the field of economics and in economic policy. In the US, 
the  Glass-Steagall  Act  was  adopted,  separating  commercial  and  investment  banking. 
Deposit insurance was introduced and banks that managed clients’ savings were subject to 
new restrictions. In Norway, the banking crises in the 1920s also prompted the authorities to 
establish  a  supervisory  framework  for  commercial  banks.  The  global  economic  recession 
paved  the  way  for  Keynes’  concept  of  demand  management  and  active  government 
intervention, and the rewriting of textbooks began. After the war, universities produced a new 
generation of economists filled with ideas of planned economies and regulation. 
The interest rate was regulated downwards to promote distributional aims. Other regulations 
had  to  be  tightened  to  curb  the  consequences  of  distorting  market  prices.  And  new 
                                                
1   Odd Nordstoga, Lykkeliten from the album November, Universal in 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  regulations  were  then  added  to  alleviate  the  consequences  of  the  former  ones.  One 
regulation came on top of the other and so on. That was the case not only in Norway, but 
also in many other countries. 
Detailed regulation – or fine-tuning – prevailed until the 1970s. The scale of regulation was 
summarised in a speech by Norges Bank Governor Knut Getz Wold at the Norwegian School 
of  Economics  in  1972:  “Pursuant  to  the  Act  relating  to  access  to  regulating  monetary  and 
credit conditions of 1965, the King can decide to use a wide spectrum of instruments, such 
as  liquidity  reserves,  foreign  exchange  reserves,  supplementary  reserves,  investment 
obligation, direct lending regulation for certain credit institutions, interest rate caps on loans 
and  issuance  control  in  addition  to  reporting  requirements  in  certain  areas.  All  these 
instruments,  with  the  exception  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  interest  rate  caps,  have 
been used or are being used in practice.”2 
Milton  Friedman  had  already  predicted  five  years  earlier  that  this  system  of  managing  the 
economy  would  collapse  because  economic  policy  expectations  reduced  the  scope  for 
pursuing the objective of permanently low unemployment. Friedman proved to be right. The 
Great Inflation  in  the  1970s  and  into  the  1980s,  combined  with  an  economic management 
crisis,  spurred  a  new  paradigm  shift  in  the  field  of  economics.  Regulations  and  planned 
economies  had  to  give  way  to  economic  thinking  guided  by  the  central  role  of  well-
functioning markets. The shift also occurred in Norway, but it took somewhat longer than in 
other countries. 
The  US  banks  that  had  been  harnessed  in  the  1930s  were  freed  up.  The  trend  gradually 
pervaded Europe. The freeing up of the banking sector was a bit too abrupt for many and 
banking  crises  again  made  their  appearance  in  western  countries,  not  least  here  in  the 
Nordic countries. The big picture is nonetheless one of a long period of stable growth and 
low inflation from the 1990s and into the 2000s. At the same time, debt levels rose in many 
countries. 
Deregulation  fuelled  the  flow  of  capital  across  borders.  Banking  regulation  had  to  be 
coordinated  at  an  international  level.  The  Basel  regulatory  framework  came  into  place 
towards  the  end  of  the  1980s  and  represented  a  breakthrough.  But  the  regulations  would 
prove to be too weak. The next version, Basel II, came in 2004 and was more extensive and 
refined,  but  also  contained  a  source  of  the  instability  that  ensued,  at  least  in  Europe.  The 
new framework allowed the denominator of the capital adequacy ratio to shrink if the banks 
themselves estimated loss probability as low. And they did. The reported capital ratio could 
rise without increasing the real capital base. 
The financial crisis of 2008 was the biggest global economic setback since the 1930s. The 
banking sector had contributed to fuelling the economic upturn in the years leading up to the 
crisis, but triggered and amplified the downturn. The financial crisis brought with  it a fiscal 
crisis in many countries, following the exact pattern of earlier crises as described by Reinhart 
and  Rogoff.3  Euro  area  GDP  is  still  below  the  pre-crisis  level,  and  in  some  countries  far 
below that level. 
The course of history should then be that we are now facing a new paradigm shift in the field 
of  economics.  So  far,  the  Basel  II  framework  has  been  replaced  by  Basel  III.  That  is 
something, but can hardly be called a paradigm shift. That does not, however, exclude the 
possibility that greater concepts are in the making. It is food for thought that paradigm shifts – 
                                                
2   Getz  Wold,  Knut,  “Norges  Banks  samarbeid  med  statsmaktene,  bankene  og  utlandet”  (Norges  Bank’s 
cooperation with the government authorities, banks and abroad), Kristofer Lehmkuhl Lecture, 1972. 
3   Reinhart,  Carmen  M.  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff,  “This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”, 
Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University Press 2009. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  as described by Thomas Kuhn – do not come about because the defenders of old truths see 
the light, but rather because they eventually die.4 
If  we  take  a  closer  look  at  the  Basel  III  framework,  there  are  still  signs  of  innovation. 
Macroprudential policy is a new element of the framework, aimed at containing systemic risk 
in banks and financial institutions. For the first time, international banking regulation includes 
requirements  grounded  in  the  interplay  between  the  banking  sector  and  the  rest  of  the 
economy. 
We must acknowledge that in the run-up to a financial crisis, the authorities, banks and other 
economic agents often confuse good times with normal times. Strong growth in real estate 
prices, credit and tax revenues are perceived as normal. Statistical filtering methods confirm 
that trend growth is high and that debt growth is sustainable. This time is different. 
We should know better – because we have fairly extensive knowledge about the economic 
background  leading  to  financial  crises.  Analyses,  including  our  own,  show  that  a  rapid 
accumulation of debt almost always precedes a financial crisis. Empirical studies document 
that high debt growth increases the probability of a crisis and results in a deeper crisis.5 Debt 
is at the core of all financial crises. Real estate prices also rise rapidly ahead of a crisis. And 
it  is  warning  signal  when  banks  have  to run  to securities  markets  to finance  growth faster 
than  deposits  alone  allow  them  to  do.  Systemic  risk  increases  when  imbalances  build  up. 
Macroprudential  policy  is  designed  to  address  the  systematic  features  of  financial  crises, 
strengthen bank resilience and curb the probability of a crisis. Policy rules and transparency 
are  aimed  at  avoiding  complacency  in  good  times.  For  example,  the  Basel  III  framework 
specifies that the ratio of credit to GDP should be a conditioning variable when setting the 
level of the countercyclical capital buffer for banks. The authorities must explain and justify 
their actions, or their inaction. 
If banking regulation is to be effective, not only must we be able to identify imbalances that 
are  building  up,  but  we  must  also  understand  the  interaction  between  banks  and  other 
economic agents and how systemic risk arises. Lessons from the 1960s and 1970s showed 
that detailed regulation was not very effective. If we are to intervene in the markets, we must 
understand how the market functions and why the market cannot be left to its own devices. 
This provides a basis for regulating markets and insight into regulatory effects. 
From  the  textbooks  we  are  well  aware  of  the  ingredients  of  market  failure  –  or  the 
preconditions for regulating markets. Environmental economics is often used as an example. 
If  a  polluter  does  not  bear  the  costs  it  inflicts  on  others,  a  fee  should  be  imposed  on  the 
polluter.  The  financial  system  is  also  exposed  to  such  external  effects,  which  we  could 
perhaps call pollution. 
The external effects can be classified by the resulting symptom; excessive risk or excessive 
credit. 
Moral hazard arises when a bank’s owners take a big gamble with creditors’ money. While 
the owners might earn a huge profit by investing depositors’ savings, depositors will never 
earn more than the interest on their deposits. As long as the owner takes the upside and the 
depositor is left with the downside, the bank has an incentive to take greater risk than socially 
desirable.  The  distortion  is  amplified  by  deposit  guarantees  or  public  guarantees.  When 
many banks or big banks play moral hazard, risk in the financial system becomes excessive. 
                                                
4   Thomas Kuhn uses in his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) this statement from Max Plancks 
Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers (1949). 
5   Jorda, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, “When Credit Bites Back”, Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking, 2013, 45, pp 3–28. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Contagion effects between banks can also lead to a vulnerable financial system. Banks lend 
each  other  money  in  interbank  markets  and  can  become  more  closely  intertwined  than  is 
socially  desirable.  Losses  at  one  bank  can  spread  through  the  system,  creating  a  domino 
effect. The contagion effect can also be indirect. When a bank has to sell assets to redeem 
debt, the value of equivalent assets of other banks decline, as many experienced during the 
financial crisis. Individual banks do not have an incentive to take into account a fall in value 
that  it  inflicts  on  its  counterparties.  Contagion  effects  are  externalities  between  banks  that 
can lead to a situation where the risk in the financial system becomes greater than the sum 
of what individual banks believe their risk to be. Over the past years, I have travelled around 
the  country  and  visited  many  savings  banks  in  Norway,  and  without  exception  they  report 
that risk management has improved considerably at their banks. That is no doubt true, but I 
cannot without a doubt conclude on that basis that systemic risk has been fully eliminated. 
Herd behaviour amplifies risk in the financial system. The more banks’ portfolios are alike, 
the more they are exposed to indirect contagion through a fall in the market value of their 
portfolios. When banks have similar portfolios, they are also vulnerable to the same external 
shocks. The banking system as a whole becomes vulnerable. The assumption that banks are 
intertwined and alike can lead to problems spreading between banks through expectations 
alone. If depositors see problems in one bank, they will run to their own bank and withdraw 
their funds before it is too late. Paradoxically, banks become more alike when they apply the 
same diversification strategies. The savings banks I mentioned may have become more alike 
if they are using the same risk management systems. 
That  banks  become  more  similar  may  also  be  a  sought-after  result  on  the  part  of  banks. 
They may want to move in herd. When many banks encounter problems at the same time, 
history shows that the authorities have little recourse other than to help them. In that case, 
being  different brings  little  gain. When they  are all  in  the  same  boat,  bank  executives  can 
easily  argue  that  the  problems  were  not  self-inflicted.  However,  the  loss  associated  with 
being different is considerable if a bank is alone in encountering problems. The result is that 
banks engage in herd behaviour and the risk in the financial system becomes excessive. 
So far I have spoken about how various forms of market failure in the banking system lead to 
systemic risk that is higher than what is socially optimal. The level of credit in the economy 
may also become excessive. The economy then becomes vulnerable. The reason is external 
effects between banks and the wider economy. 
Loan collateral can give rise to such external effects. One reason banks demand collateral is 
because they do not have complete information about loan applicants. The collateral value is 
a  security  and  a  restriction  on  the  amount  that  can  be  borrowed.  When  overall  credit 
increases, the value of residential and non-residential property rises. Other economic agents 
experience  a  rise  in  their  own  collateral  values,  which  they  then  use  to  borrow  more.  But 
rapid credit growth increases the risk of a deep economic downturn. The interaction can go 
into  reverse.  Borrowers  that  have  to  sell  the  collateral  to  deleverage,  push  down  the 
collateral values of other borrowers. Profitable projects no longer receive funding and the real 
economic  costs  may  prove  substantial.  Individual  borrowers  do  not  take  into  account  how 
collateral values will affect other economic agents, or in other words do not take into account 
the increased systemic risk they inflict on others. The parallel with environmental economics 
fits well here. When pollution has no cost, it becomes excessive. 
In addition to the contagion effects through loan collateral, costs may arise from the market 
failure that occurs in a crisis when some economic agents deleverage substantially and the 
real interest rate cannot be set sufficiently low to underpin aggregate demand for goods and 
services among other economic agents. This theory seems to fit well with the situation in the 
US and Europe after the financial crisis, where it has been difficult to set policy rates below 
zero. The result is amplification of the real economic costs associated with a financial crisis. 
Individual borrowers do not take into account that more credit during good times increases 
the risk that the economy ends up in such a situation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The theory can be briefly summarised. The financial system left to its own devices creates 
excessive debt and excessive risk in upturns and insufficient credit in downturns, giving rise 
to  credit  cycles  that  amplify  fluctuations  in  the  economy.  That  is  the  background  for 
macroprudential  policy  of  banks.  Regulation  should  be  tightened  during  goods  times  and 
relaxed during bad times. 
The mechanisms I have described are not new or unfamiliar. But it is only in recent years 
that researchers have managed to incorporate banking behaviour and economic policy in a 
dynamic  general  equilibrium  model.  These  are  the  same  type  of  models  we  use  in  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  These  models  are  also  useful  for  macroprudential  policy 
because  we  must  understand  both  what  is  happening  in  the financial  system  and the  real 
economy – simultaneously. Important advances have been made in modelling systemic risk 
and how various instruments can be used. This will help us in our thinking – for example in 
distinguishing  between  credit  growth  that  is  good  and  credit  growth  that  is  bad.  So,  even 
though theory lags behind reality to some extent, it is useful. Perhaps we can draw a parallel 
to  Isaac  Newton.  The  force  of  gravity  as  a  phenomenon  was  hardly  unknown  before  he 
formulated his theories, but they nevertheless proved to be very useful. 
A  number  of  macroprudential  instruments  can  be  applied.  In  Norway,  Finanstilsynet 
(Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway)  has  tightened  the  guidelines  for  sound 
residential mortgage lending. The risk weights for the capital banks must hold for residential 
mortgage loans have been adjusted upwards. Liquidity buffer requirements for banks are in 
the  pipeline  and  stable  funding  and  leverage  ratio  requirements  will  be  introduced.  The 
Ministry of Finance has implemented a systemic risk buffer for banks and the biggest banks 
are required to hold additional capital. Norges Bank gives advice to the Ministry of Finance 
on the size of the countercyclical capital buffer for banks. 
Many  other  countries  have  applied  macroprudential  measures.  The  institutional  framework 
and  the  formulation  of  the  measures  vary.  Macroprudential  policy  will  by  its  nature  vary 
across  countries.  The  credit  cycle  and  systemic  risk  vary  over  time  and  across  countries. 
That  being  the  case,  neither  banks  nor  other  economic  agents  should  be  surprised  that 
macroprudential policy in Norway differs from that of surrounding countries. 
In many countries, the central bank has a prominent role in macroprudential policy. Monetary 
policy objectives and macroprudential objectives are not the same. Monetary policy is aimed 
at securing low and stable inflation and is the first line of defence against cyclical fluctuations. 
Macroprudential policy is aimed at strengthening the resilience of the financial system and 
curbing financial vulnerabilities that build up in the economy over time. 
Macroprudential  policy  and  monetary  policy  nevertheless  share  many  features.  In  Norges 
Bank, we can build on the experience of monetary policy when providing advice on the size 
of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  for  banks.  Both  macroprudential  policy  and  monetary 
policy  must  be  based  on  an  assessment  of  the  state  of  the  Norwegian  economy  and 
developments in credit, inflation, output and employment. The buffer works through banks, 
as does monetary policy. The analysis of the capital buffer therefore has much in common 
with  the  analysis  we  perform  when  setting  the  key  policy  rate.  In  our  monetary  policy 
analysis, we must assess whether output and employment lie above or below their long-term 
trends; in our financial stability analysis, we must assess whether credit lies above or below 
its long-term trend. Both policy areas must give weight to the risk of a build-up of financial 
imbalances. 
The communication of monetary policy also offers some lessons. Whereas monetary policy 
was previously veiled in secrecy, we are now open about our view of the likely future interest 
rate  path.  The  theoretical  foundation  for  transparency  builds  on  the  notion  that  prices  are 
sticky. Adjusting prices goes smoother if central banks’ response pattern is known. Market 
participants then have a solid basis for forming expectations about future interest rates. 
The same line of reasoning may be valid with regard to transparency about our advice on the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer.  It  takes  time  for  banks  to  adapt  to  changes  in  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  requirements.  A  predictable  policy  will  facilitate  the  adjustment  process.  The  size  of  the 
friction is difficult to assess. Banks tend to restrict themselves to a very limited number when 
they present their options for increasing capital ratios. If banks choose to raise new equity 
capital,  the  adjustment  process  will  be  considerably  faster.  Irrespectively,  we  believe  that 
predictability will facilitate adjustment. 
“Happiness is a time without debt 
and reading the end of a book when in bed 
Happiness is ours in a prosperous nation 
with a just appropriate level of inflation» Odd Nordstoga sings on.” 
Nordstoga reminds us that happiness is not only about little debt, but also the other areas of 
Norges  Bank’s  operations.  A  prosperous  nation  is  also  dependent  on  the  sound 
management of the Government Pension Fund Global, which is operated by Norges Bank 
Investment Management. An appropriate level of inflation is also the objective of monetary 
policy. We call it inflation targeting. By just appropriate we mean that inflation should be not 
too high, nor too low. 
A  balanced  economic  policy  must  first  be  in  place  in  order  to  provide  a  sound  basis  for 
financial stability. Macroprudential policy can then make an important contribution to reducing 
the sizeable costs associated with financial crises. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
