  Már Guðmundsson: The work of the Monetary Policy Committee 
Opening remarks by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at an 
open meeting of the Parliamentary Economic Affairs and Trade Committee on the work of 
the Monetary Policy Committee, Reykjavik, 17 November 2014. 
 The last meeting between representatives of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) and the 
Parliamentary Economic Affairs and Trade Committee took place on 5 March 2014. 
At  that  time,  inflation  had  recently  fallen  below  target,  while  short-  and  long-term  inflation 
expectations were still above it. By now, inflation has been below target for nine months and 
is expected to be at target well into 2015, at least. The main difference in the situation now 
versus that in March is that inflation expectations have fallen back towards the target and, by 
some measures, are quite close to it, particularly short-term expectations. 
The  big  picture  is  that  the  economic  recovery  is  now  well  enough  advanced  that  spare 
capacity  is  disappearing.  There  still  appears  to  be  a  sizeable  current  account  surplus, 
although  it  has  diminished  since  last  year.  The  surplus  covers  net  capital  outflows  and 
significantly  more,  as  the  Central  Bank  has  bought  foreign  currency  on  the  market  for  the 
equivalent of 95 b.kr., or 5% of GDP. 
According to the Bank’s forecast from early November, GDP growth is projected to measure 
just under 3% this year and then rise to about 3½% in 2015 before easing back to 3% in 
2016. This level of growth is expected to exceed the growth potential output, giving rise to a 
positive  output  gap,  particularly  in  2015.  Other  things  being  equal,  this  will  contribute  to 
higher inflation. 
GDP growth in 2014–2016 will be driven by domestic demand, both private consumption and 
investment, and the contribution from net trade will be negative for the entire period. As a 
consequence,  the  sizeable  current  account  surplus  we  have  seen  in  2013  and  2014  will 
shrink rapidly next year and give way to a small deficit by 2016. This is cause for concern in 
and of itself, and we hope that this forecast will not materialise, as Iceland needs to maintain 
a current account surplus in the next several years as it focuses on putting its external debt 
onto  a  more  solid  footing  and  building  up  FX-reserves  that  are  not  financed  with  foreign 
loans. Economic policy and economic incentives would then have to centre on improving the 
outlook for the current account balance. 
According  to  the  forecast,  which  extends  until  end-2017,  inflation  will  be  at  target  for  the 
entire forecast horizon, apart for the last quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of 2016. It will 
average 2.6% for the three-year period from 2014 through 2017, which is well in line with the 
2½% inflation target. 
But the current equilibrium is fragile, the future is highly uncertain, and there are important 
known  risks  ranging  from  the  global  economy  to  the  liberalisation  of  Iceland’s  capital 
controls. We will doubtless discuss some of these at this meeting. 
On 5 November, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) announced its decision to lower the 
Bank’s  interest  rates  by  0.25  percentage  points.  This  was  done  in  view  of  the  rise  in  the 
Bank’s  real  rate  caused  by  the  past  few  months’  decline  in  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations, which has been more pronounced than previously anticipated. The rise in the 
real  rate  was  greater  than  is  warranted  by  the  business  cycle  position  and  the  near-term 
outlook.  In  other  respects,  for  the  rationale  behind  the  decision,  I  refer  you  to  the  MPC 
statement  and  the  speech  I  gave  at  the  Iceland  Chamber  of  Commerce’s  monetary  policy 
meeting the following day. Naturally, we are also ready and willing to answer your questions 
about both this decision and the interest rate outlook. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Finally,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  the  MPC  has  been  examining  its  monetary  policy 
instruments in the recent term and, although certain changes have been made, this review is 
still underway. According to the statement from its March meeting, the aim of this review is 
primarily to ensure that monetary policy instruments are optimally suited to the achievement 
of  monetary  policy  objectives,  given  that  it  is  also  desirable  that  monetary  policy 
implementation be as effective, comprehensible, and economical as possible in terms of the 
Central Bank’s balance sheet. We are ready  and willing to answer any questions that you 
have on this topic. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
