  Peter Praet: Repairing the bank lending channel – the next steps 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the European Macro Conference, organised by Credit Suisse, London, 17 November 2014. 
 I would like to thank Marie Hoerova and Kirstin Hubrich for their contributions to this speech. 
Summary 
The effectiveness of monetary policy in the euro area depends on a well-functioning banking 
sector as it operates through the bank lending channel. In recent years, efforts have been 
made to repair this channel. Policymakers agreed to establish Banking Union and the ECB 
assumed  supervisory  responsibilities  within  it.  Against  that  background,  we  expect  the 
monetary policy initiatives we adopted in June and September to gain pace in the coming 
months, thus incentivising lending to the real economy and ultimately bringing inflation closer 
to  2%.  Indeed  we  have  already  observed  a  considerable  easing  of  the  effective  monetary 
policy  stance.  We  sustain  that  these  measures  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it had at the 
beginning  of  2012.  But  as  banks  adjust  to  a  new  business  environment,  it  is  essential  to 
ensure that they continue to have microeconomic incentives that coincide with our desired 
macroeconomic objectives, while we keep developing a banking landscape that is sufficiently 
efficient and diversified to sustain credit supply. 
 The effectiveness of monetary policy in the euro area depends on a well-functioning banking 
sector.  Different  to  other  advanced  economies,  the  transmission  of  our  policy  impulses 
operates  predominantly  through  the  bank  lending  channel.  This  means  that,  as  monetary 
policymakers,  we  have  to  pay  particular  attention  to  developments  in  the  banking  system. 
Indeed, since 2008 many of our policy measures have been focused precisely on addressing 
blockages in bank intermediation, ranging from short-term liquidity to longer-term funding. 
In recent years, other European policymakers have joined the ECB in this effort to repair the 
bank  lending  channel.  In  several  vulnerable  countries  there  has  been  a  far-reaching 
restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  banking  sector.  And  at  the  European  level, 
policymakers  agreed  to establish  Banking  Union,  the  opening  act  of  which  was  the  ECB’s 
Comprehensive Assessment of euro area banks’ balance sheets. What I would like to focus 
on today is what these efforts have achieved so far – and what still needs to be done to fix 
the bank lending channel sustainably. 
Credit at a turning point 
There are several factors that indicate credit dynamics in the euro area have now reached a 
turning point. First, credit data have improved over recent months, albeit from low levels. The 
annual  growth  rate  in  bank  loans  to  households  again  increased  in  September  to  0.6%  – 
twice  the  average  growth  rate  recorded  last  year.1  Bank  lending  to firms  has  continued  to 
contract  but  the  decline  is  bottoming  out.  And  the  latest  bank  lending  survey  saw  banks 
report a further easing of overall credit standards. 
Second,  the  Comprehensive  Assessment,  which  we  concluded  just  a few  weeks  ago,  has 
encouraged  banks  to  frontload  their  balance  sheet  repair  and  recapitalisation  efforts.  The 
                                                
1  The figures are adjusted for sales and securitisation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  exercise  has  also  identified  €25bn  in  capital  shortfalls  and  imposed  important  prudential 
requirements on banks. Taken together, these actions increase transparency and confidence 
in the banking sector, which is a pre-condition for stronger recovery in credit. 
Third, against that background, we expect the monetary policy initiatives we adopted in June 
and  September  to  gain  pace  in  the  coming  months,  thus  incentivising  lending  to  the  real 
economy  and  ultimately  bringing  inflation  closer  to  2%.  As  evident  from  the  latest  bank 
lending survey, participation in the Targeted Long-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs) is 
likely  to  pick  up  in  December  and  beyond;  the  covered  bond  purchase  programme  has 
begun; and the operational preconditions to start asset-backed securities (ABS) purchases 
are now met. 
Indeed, reflecting this progress in implementing the June and September packages, we have 
already observed a considerable easing of the effective monetary policy stance – although 
the  liquidity  injections  via  the  TLTROs  and  purchase  programmes  are  only  starting  to 
accumulate.  These  measures  will  have  a  sizeable  impact  on  the  Eurosystem’s  balance 
sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it had at the beginning of 2012. 
And the Governing Council underlined at its recent meeting that, should it become necessary 
to  further  address  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low  inflation,  it  is  unanimous  in  its 
commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. 
Thus, many of the necessary conditions to restart credit growth are now in place. Yet, I think 
it would be short-sighted to claim that these alone will be sufficient. Coming out of a major 
financial crisis, it was always clear that repairing the bank lending channel would be a longer 
process, and the measures I have just described would only be the first steps in that process. 
One  of  the  most  important  issues  now  in  the  repair  process  is  how  banks  adapt  to  the 
challenging business environment that has been bequeathed by the crisis. 
The banking sector in transition 
The  euro  area  banking  sector  remains  in  transition.  At  present  banks  generally  have  low 
revenues and profitability arising from several factors, including legacy factors such as loan 
losses during the crisis; cyclical factors such as the weak macroeconomy; and in some cases 
regulatory  factors  such  as  the  costs  of  adapting  to  new  legislation.  This  is  reflected  in 
historically  low  returns  on  equity:  the  median  return  on  equity  for  euro  area  significant 
banking groups is currently 5%. 
It is unlikely, and indeed undesirable, that we will see a return to the high returns on equity 
we  saw  before  the  crisis,  which  were  distorted  in  particular  by  excessive  leverage  and 
maturity  mismatch.2  Banks  nonetheless  face  expectations  from  shareholders  to  raise 
profitability  and  returns on  equity  above  their  current  levels  –  as  reflected  in  a  rather  high 
cost of equity – which many will have to react to by adapting their business models. 
This could involve a variety of measures, including repricing loans, reducing operating costs 
or streamlining business models – for instance, by shrinking credit provision in less profitable 
business lines, or exiting those business lines altogether. As policymakers we are in principle 
indifferent to how individual banks respond. But some of these strategies, when aggregated, 
may  have  system-wide  effects  that,  as  monetary  policy  operates  mainly  through  banks, 
become relevant for our policy objectives. 
                                                
2  For  example,  Altunbas,  Manganelli  and  Marques-Ibanez  (2011)  document  that  over-reliance  on  market 
funding was a major source of bank risk in the recent crisis. See Altunbas, Y., Manganelli, S. and Marques-
Ibanez,  D.  (2011),  “Bank  risk  and  business  models  during  the  Great  Recession”,  ECB  Working  Paper 
No. 1394. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  example,  repricing  may  counteract  our  monetary  policy  objective  to  ensure  there  is 
sufficient financing for a robust economic expansion. If banks lower costs in the short-term 
through underinvestment rather than efficiency gains, this may undermine their viability over 
the longer-term. And perhaps most importantly, if banks exit certain business lines due to the 
pressures of the difficult environement, this may imply cutting back on types of lending that 
are  macroeconomically  important,  such  as  lending  to  SMEs  or  long-term  infrastructure 
financing. 
Part of solution to this is to create a more diversified and contestable financing mix, such that 
if  banks  finance  becomes  too  expensive  or  scarce,  non-bank  finance  can  efficiently 
substitute for it. This is what the ongoing agenda to deepen and integrate capital markets in 
Europe  aims  to  achieve  –  the  so-called  Capital  Markets  Union.  Non-banks  such  a  private 
equity  investors  or  institutional  investors  can  also  play  an  important  role  in  filling financing 
gaps, especially for the latter in long-dated lending such as infrastructure that matches their 
liability profile. 
But we also know that for certain types of lending that are the preserve of banks, in particular 
SME financing, asymmetric information problems and high costs of monitoring means banks 
cannot easily be replaced by non-banks. And perhaps even more importantly, such lending 
cannot  quickly  be  replaced  by  other  banks,  as  exit  from  the  market  tends  to  destroy  the 
relationship networks – or “soft information” – that is crucial for small business lending.3 In 
this way, exit can in fact create a form of hysteresis in the banking sector. 
What this shows is that, as policymakers, we cannot be agnostic as to how banks adapt to 
the  current  environment.  We  need  to  stay  alert  to  the  fact  that  actions  by  banks  that  are 
rational at the microeconomic level can create negative externalities at the macroeconomic 
level  –  analogous  to  the  “fire  sales”  problem  during  financial  crises.4  And  where  those 
externalities risk becoming sufficiently large, there is a justification for policy actions. 
In  my  view  there  are  two  main  areas  today  where  this  applies:  first,  ensuring  that  banks 
retain  the  incentives  to  lend  in  markets  where  to  all  intents  and  purposes  they  are 
irreplaceable, namely for SMEs; and second, ensuring that they have capacity to do so. 
Ensuring that banks’ retain incentives to lend 
Ensuring  that  banks  retain  the  incentives  to  provide  an  elastic  supply  of  credit  to  SMEs 
involves  a  variety  of  issues,  but  the  priority  in  the  current  environment  is  addressing  the 
factors that could drive unwanted adjustment in the sector: in particular, the cyclical, legacy 
and regulatory factors I described above. 
Cyclical  factors  matter  for  banks’  incentives  because  the  longer  weak  demand  conditions 
persist,  the  greater  the  risk  that  banks  will  shrink  their  balance  sheets  more  than  is 
necessary. Thus, a stronger recovery with stronger credit demand is a key part of repairing 
the bank lending channel. Achieving this means economic policies must do their utmost to 
bring  the  economy  back  to  potential  as  quickly  as  possible,  by  strengthening  both  supply 
capacity  and  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  As  this  is  now  high  on  the  EU  policy 
agenda, I will not dwell on it today. 
In terms of legacy factors, the main issue today is dealing with non-performing loans (NPLs). 
The  ECB’s  Comprehensive  Assessment  has  gone  a  long  way  towards  ensuring  adequate 
recognition  and  provisioning  of  NPLs,  but  there  is  still  a  legacy  stock  of  NPLs  on  many 
                                                
3  For a discussion of the “switching costs” created by relationship lending see Kim, M., D. Kliger, and B. Vale 
(2003),  “Estimating  Switching  Costs:  The  Case  of  Banking”,  Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation  Vol. 12, 
Issue 1. 
4  Brunnermeier,  M.  (2009),  “Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007–2008”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, Vol. 23, No. 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  banks’ balance sheets. This affects incentives to lend because, although some tolerance by 
banks towards NPLs can act as a shock-absorber, when NPL ratios exceed a critical level 
slow and inefficient resolution becomes a major impediment to both banks and the economy 
at large. 
From  the  bank  side,  it  undermines  the  payment  culture,  as  it  rewards  strategic  defaulters 
while  discouraging  performing  debtors  from  continuing  to  repay  their  debt.  The  process  of 
handling and supervising NPLs also often raises operating costs.5 And in the wider economy, 
it prevents creative destruction in the form of resolving non-viable companies, as well as swift 
restructuring  of  viable  but  over-indebted  firms.  All  this  perpetuates  the  macroeconomic 
effects of the debt overhang and retards the economic recovery, which in turn slows down 
the recovery in credit demand. 
Critical to addressing this problem is a legal and operating environment that encourages both 
banks and firms to accelerate NPL resolution. And this depends in turn on several factors at 
the  national  level  including  the  efficiency  of  insolvency  regimes,  out-of-court  restructuring 
frameworks and judicial systems. 
For  example,  differences  between  countries  in  the  speed  of  insolvency  proceedings  can 
affect the ability of banks to seize collateral, and hence influence their incentives and ability 
to  resolve  NPLs.  To  illustrate,  according  to  the  World  Bank,  to  resolve  insolvency  in  Italy 
takes 1.8 years, compared with just 0.4 years in Ireland.6 Ineffective insolvency systems also 
render out-of-court restructuring frameworks less operable, as they fail to act as a credible 
threat, thereby dissuading creditors and debtors from agreeing on a restructuring. 
This latter point may be particularly important because, in a debt overhang environment, the 
overall efficiency of NPL resolution and the cost for society hinges crucially on the ease with 
which  debt  can  be  restructured  outside  of  the  insolvency  framework.  For  firms  whose 
business  models  remain  fundamentally  viable,  liquidation  may  be  economically  inefficient 
and some form of voluntary debt restructuring could be essential to restore their viability and 
allow them to borrow and invest again. 
Several countries have already made progress in reforming their national legislation. To give 
just one example, in Portugal the government introduced new regimes for fast-track in-court 
and formalised out-of-court restructuring in 2011 and 2012. Experience has shown, however, 
that  the  effectiveness  of  an  improved  legal  framework  depends  on  various  accompanying 
factors, such as improving debtor-creditor coordination and building sufficient administrative 
and judicial capacity to successfully mediate restructuring. 
In short, improving the overall environment for NPL resolution would afford an opportunity not 
only to repair bank balance sheets, but also those of their clients. Both of these are ultimately 
necessary to achieve a sustainable recovery in bank lending, and in doing so to restore the 
effectiveness monetary policy transmission. 
Finally, banks’ incentives are necessarily affected by regulation. This is indeed its purpose. 
Regulation  aims  to  internalise  negative  externalities,  but  it  is  the  nature  of  regulating  that 
policymakers must always be watchful that, in the process, they do not inadvertently create 
new forms of negative externalities. 
Regulations passed so far have rightly aimed to make banks internalise systemic risks and 
markets to better price them. And there is in principle no long-run trade-off between higher 
                                                
5  For a discussion of how NPLs can affect cost efficiency see Berger A.N., and R. DeYoung (1997), “Problems 
Loans and Cost Efficiency in Commercial Banks”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 21. 
6  World  Bank  (2013),  Doing  Business  2014:  Understanding  Regulations  for  Small  and  Medium-Size 
Enterprises. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
capital  and  higher  lending.7  But  at  the  same  time,  much  depends  on  the  calibration  of 
specific  requirements,  and  here  very  careful  macroeconomic  impact  assessments  are 
required – for instance, to ensure that the transitional costs of implementing regulations do 
not have unwanted effects on credit. 
Moreover, as such assessments necessarily contain a degree of uncertainty, policymakers 
need  to  continuously  monitor  how  new  regulations  are  actually  affecting  incentives  in 
practice,  and  adapt  them  accordingly  where  unintended  consequences  appear.  We  have 
seen this, for example, with the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. Another example is securitisation. 
It is now widely acknowledged that regulatory initiatives aimed at preventing a replay of the 
sub-prime crisis may have indiscriminately affected all ABS, including simple and transparent 
structures that can play an important role for SME financing. In line with on-going work at the 
international level, this is now in the process of being addressed through the amendments to 
the  Solvency  II  (for  insurers)  and  Capital  Requirements  Directives  (for  banks),  recently 
published by the Commission. 
As part of this agenda, we also need to ensure that regulations are mutually consistent. For 
example,  a  well-functioning  SME  ABS  market  requires  banks  that  can  market  and  trade 
securitised  products.  This  depends  in  turn  on  their  capacity  and  willingness  to  absorb 
temporary  demand-supply  imbalances.  Thus,  we  should  be  careful  to  ensure  that  new 
regulations,  for  instance  aimed  at  separating  the  banking  and  trading  arms  of  universal 
banks, do not have negative consequences for market-making activities that are not justified 
by significant risks, in particular in less liquid markets. 
In all these ways – cyclical, legacy, regulatory – setting the right microeconomic incentives 
for  the  banking  sector  can  have  significant  macroeconomic  consequences.  They  are 
therefore  areas  where,  if  we  want  to  sustainably  repair  the  banking  lending  channel,  the 
attention of policymakers is warranted. 
Ensuring that banks have the capacity to lend 
If  the  first  aim  for  policy  is  ensuring  that  banks  have  the  incentives  to  remain  engaged  is 
economically important lending, the second is ensuring that they have the capacity to do so. 
A  pre-condition  for  this  is  that  banks  are  appropriately  capitalised,  as  I  have  already 
discussed. But what also matters is the landscape of the banking sector – that is, whether 
the banking sector is sufficiently efficient and diversified to ensure a stable supply of credit. 
According to some indicators the European banking sector is characterised by over-capacity 
relative to the size of the market. For example, the Herfindahl-Hirschman concentration index 
for  the  euro  area  currently  stands  at  around  700;  as  a  general  rule,  a  figure  below  1000 
signals  low  concentration.8  This  suggests  that  one  factor  in  difficulties  facing  the  sector  is 
that  it  is  not  operating  at  the  efficient  frontier  –  and  consequently,  that  there  would  be 
macroeconomic benefits to some restructuring and consolidation. 
We also saw during the crisis that the banking sector in the euro area was not well-diversified 
on either the asset or liability sides. Cross-border exposures mainly comprised of short-term 
debt,  which  meant  that  when  bank  assets  were  hit  by  an  adverse  shock,  funding  quickly 
dried  up.  The  result  was  that  risk-sharing  through  the  banking  system  virtually  collapsed 
                                                
7  See for example Buch, Claudia and Esteben Prieto (2014), “Do better capitalized banks lend less? Long-run 
panel evidence from Germany”, International Finance 17:1. 
8  The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is defined as the sum of the squares of the market shares of all firms 
within  the  industry,  where  the  market  shares  are  expressed  as  fractions.  As  a  general  rule,  an  HHI  below 
1,000 signals low concentration, while an index above 1,800 signals high concentration. For values between 
1,000  and  1,800,  an  industry  is  considered  to  be  moderately  concentrated.  See  ECB  Banking  Structures 
Report, October 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  during  the  crisis,  with  negative  spillovers  to  credit.  Thus,  there  would  be  macroeconomic 
benefits not only to within-country consolidation, but also to cross-border consolidation. 
In a single market, we would expect the private sector to drive such a rationalisation process, 
especially given the efficiency gains that can be reaped from cross-border M&A in terms of, 
among of things, information technology and corporate overhead costs.9 There are several 
explanations for why this has not happened, but part of the reason seems to be the effect of 
a fragmented supervisory and resolution regime, which raises the costs of entry for cross-
border banks and reduces the economic synergies of integration. 
For  example,  industry  surveys  suggest  that  an  important  factor  in  low  cross-border  M&A 
before the crisis was opaque supervisory approval procedures. The high compliance costs 
created  by  different  sets  of  national  rules  and  interacting  with  several  different  authorities 
also affected the deal economics.10 Moreover, the fact that European countries have tended 
in the past to merge failing banks, rather than resolve them, probably reduced space for new 
entrants: only a handful of new banks enter national markets each year. 
Against that background, the establishment of Banking Union will be catalytic in triggering a 
change in the banking landscape. The balance sheets of cross-border banking groups will 
become  progressively  more  fungible,  allowing  liquidity  and  capital  to  be  more  efficiently 
managed at the group level. And with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the new 
resolution framework barriers to entry and exit into national markets are expected to fall. All 
this  should  meaningfully  lower  the  cost  of  doing  business  for  cross-border  banks  and 
increase efficiency in the sector. 
At  the same  time,  a more  integrated  banking  landscape  implies greater  risk-sharing  within 
the  sector,  which  should  in  turn  support  the  stability  of  credit  provision.  Cross-border 
integration  entails  greater  geographical  diversification.11  And  the  local  affiliates  of  cross-
border banks are also less likely to be exposed to the kind of market funding dry-ups we saw 
during the crisis, as intragroup funding acts as a shock-absorber.12 
That  said,  we  of  course  do  not  want  to  move  from  a  situation  of  too  low  concentration 
towards  a  banking  landscape  dominated  by  large  banks  with  excessive  market  power. 
Recent  research  looking  at  the  pre-crisis  period  suggests  that  where  banks  face  limited 
competition in their domestic markets, financing constraints for SMEs are higher. Moreover, 
the effect of bank market power on financing constraints increases in financial systems that 
are more bank dependent.13 
This  underscores  the  general  need,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  to  create  a  more  balanced 
financing mix between banks and capital markets. But it also points again to the particular 
importance of securitisation. With well-functioning securitisation markets some of the benefits 
of cross-border banks – for instance risk-sharing – can be replicated by having small, local 
banks originate-to-distribute loans while larger, global banks securitise and market them. In 
                                                
9  See for example Anna Kovner, James Vickery, and Lily Zhou, “Do Big Banks Have Lower Operating Costs?,” 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, Volume 20, No. 2, forthcoming. 
10  “Financial  Integration  in  Europe”,  March  2007.  In  line  with  this,  Carletti,  E.,  Hartmann,  P.,  and  Ongena,  S. 
(2007), “The economic impact of merger control: What is special about banking?”, ECB Working Paper No 
786,  July,  find  empirical  evidence  that  the  opacity  of  national  bank  merger  reviews  entered  elements  of 
inefficiency in banking relative to non-financial corporate sectors. 
11  For a discussion on why retail bank integration may be a particularly attractive risk-sharing mechanism, see 
e.g.  Fecht,  F.,  Grüner,  H.P.  and  Hartmann,  P.  (2007),  “Welfare  effects  of  financial  integration,”  CEPR 
Discussion Paper No. 6311. 
12  See  for  instance  Reinhardt, D.  and  Riddiough,  S.  (2014),  “The  two  phases  of  cross-border  banking  flows”, 
mimeo, Bank of England. 
13  Ryan, R., O’Toole, C. and McCann, F. (2014), “Does bank market power affect SME financing constraints?”, 
Journal of Banking and Finance. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  other words, it creates the conditions for diversity and competition within the sector so that an 
optimal market structure can evolve. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Repairing bank lending channel after a major financial crisis is inevitably a long and difficult 
process.  Monetary  policy  has  an  important  role  to  play,  but  the  agenda  is  also  broader:  it 
involves supply and demand factors, and multiple aspects of national and European policy. 
The steps we have taken so far to strengthen the banking sector are necessary conditions 
for  a  stronger  recovery  in  credit,  and  I  am  confident  that  we  will  see  increasingly  positive 
effects. But as banks transition to a new business environment, ensuring that they continue 
to have microeconomic incentives that coincide with our desired macroeconomic objectives 
is essential, as is developing a banking landscape that is sufficiently efficient and diversified 
to sustain credit supply. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
