Christian Noyer: Central banking – the way forward? 
Opening speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the International Symposium 
of the Bank of France “Central Banking: The Way Forward?”, Paris, 7 November 2014. 
 Mesdames et Messieurs, ladies and gentlemen, 
[Je vais parler anglais pour remercier la majorité d’étrangers présents ici, une interprétation 
simultanée étant assurée en français.] 
I am delighted to welcome you to Paris for this Banque de France Symposium. This recurrent 
event brings together a large number of experts from the world over: not only central bankers 
– of whom there are more than a hundred in this room, representing all five continents – but 
also  academics,  practitioners  and  members  of  financial  institutions,  governments  and 
international organizations alike. 
This extraordinary mix of participants will surely provide some answers to the open question 
concerning the future of central banks, as indicated by the title of this Symposium, “Central 
Banking: the Way Forward?” Central Banks have been considered the only game in town. 
Might the very high expectations placed on them backfire in the future? Yet, we all know that 
central bankers do not act in a vacuum when pursuing monetary and financial stability. 
First,  monetary  policy  interacts  with  fiscal  policy,  the  legacy  of  which  has  resulted  in  high 
public debt in many countries after the Great Recession. This is the topic of our first session 
chaired by my esteemed colleague, Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan. 
Second,  central  banks  and  financial  regulators,  which  work  closely  together,  have  had  to 
adapt  to  important  changes  in  financial  intermediation,  especially  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
financial  crisis.  My  dear  European  neighbour,  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, will chair the second session dedicated to this question. 
Third, globalization means that cross-border flows have to be taken into account and raises 
the question of the scope and limits of policy autonomy, not only in smaller open economies, 
but also in larger ones because of spillovers and the resulting feedback effects. This will be 
tackled in the third session chaired by my good friend, Jacob Frenkel, President of both JPM 
Chase International and the G30 Board of Trustees. 
Last,  to  wrap  up  all  aspects,  what  better  than  a  Panel  on  the  future  of  the  policy  mix, 
including  monetary, financial,  macroprudential, fiscal  and  structural  policies?  The  latter  will 
comprise five  prominent  decision-makers, moderated  –  or,  should  I  say,  stimulated  –  by  a 
“pillar” of our series of Symposiums: Martin Wolf, whom so many of us read regularly in the 
Financial Times. 
Having  briefly  outlined  the  programme  and  mentioned  the  names  of  the  chairs  of  each 
session,  I  will  not  list  all  the  eminent  speakers,  discussants  and  panellists  whom  I  wish 
nevertheless  to  thank  most  warmly  in  advance  for  their  contributions.  Yet  I  would  like  to 
highlight their diversity in terms of background and experience. I would also like to share with 
you some thoughts on each session, which – far from pre-empting future discussions – aim 
to spur the debates with our audience. 
The first topic today concerns the challenges of conducting monetary policy with large public 
debts.  Numerous  questions  arise  including  fiscal  dominance,  the  trade-off  between  debt 
sustainability and fiscal discipline, multiple equilibria and financial instability. 
First, I will comment briefly on how high public debt increases the risk of fiscal dominance on 
monetary  policy.  Low  interest  rates  may  very  well  be  justified  by  specific  business  cycle 
conditions or risks of undershooting the inflation target. They also facilitate the sustainability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
of  higher  public  debts.  Hence  the  need  to  ascertain  whether  risks  related  to  public  debt 
sustainability considerations might in turn jeopardize price stability. Another paramount risk 
of very low interest rates is to entertain the illusion that governments can continue to borrow 
rather  than  make  difficult  and  yet  necessary  choices  and  indefinitely  put  off  the 
implementation of structural reforms. Such risks are very real in the euro area. 
Very  high  public  debts  are  also  a  factor  of  financial  fragility.  Market  participants  therefore 
expect  central  banks  to  intervene  on  public  debt  markets  to  safeguard  financial  stability. 
Indeed,  in  extreme circumstances  a  central  bank should  mitigate  the  effects  of  confidence 
shocks  on  sovereign  yields  by  purchasing  government  bonds.  Such  an  action  may  be 
vindicated if there are risks to macroeconomic or financial stability or even if self-fulfilling runs 
on  public  debt  may  be  a  threat  to  market  access,  or  lastly  to  avoid  the  deflationary 
consequences of a public debt event. 
However, one may be tempted to underestimate risks for inflation, especially since they only 
materialize with a lag, and such interventions could also increase moral hazard in terms of 
government  incentives  to  keep  their  finances  in  order.  These  considerations  explain  why, 
when  we  set  up  the  OMT,  we  required  central  bank  interventions  to  be  conditional  on 
resolute fiscal policy adjustments, guaranteed collectively by euro area Member States. 
In  addition  to  highlighting  the  main  trade-offs  between  public  debt  sustainability  and 
monetary policy, the great merit of Professor Gita Gopinath’s presentation is to use a formal 
model  to  support  her  rigorous  analysis.  In  particular,  she  shows  how  the  degree  of 
commitment to low inflation may change the level of sustainable public debt. This analysis is 
most  welcome,  not  only  because  public  debts  are  very  high,  but  also  because  in  several 
parts of the world inflation appears stubbornly low in spite of extremely aggressive monetary 
policies. 
The  second  session  examines  changes  in  financial  intermediation.  Hyun  Shin  will  focus 
today on the surge of bond-financing in the global economy over the last few years and the 
pros and cons associated with a broader shift from bank to market financing. 
Admittedly,  our  objective  as  regulators  remains  relatively  simple:  it  should  be  primarily  to 
ensure that financial institutions, infrastructures and markets properly do their job of smoothly 
and  efficiently  channelling  savings  into  productive  investments.  Yet  our  task  is  difficult  as 
finance  constantly  evolves  as  a  result  of  technological  advances  or  as  an  answer  to 
regulatory changes. This should prompt us to be both resolute and cautious in dealing with 
many questions such as whether there is an optimal mix of bank and market financing. The 
financial crisis has indeed revealed at least three major failures of our financial systems, be 
they  bank  or  market  oriented:  excess  leverage,  excess  complexity  and  excess  opacity. 
Corrective actions have been implemented in these three areas. 
First, over the past few years, Basel III and various national or regional initiatives have led to 
a sizeable recapitalization of the banking system and especially SIFIs [systemically important 
financial  institutions].  In  the  euro  area,  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  of  the  balance 
sheets  of  130  major  banks  shows  how  much  progress  has  been  made.  Second,  major 
reforms  have  been  undertaken  in  order  to  facilitate  the  orderly  resolution  of  large  and 
complex financial institutions, thus providing better incentives ex ante to these large financial 
conglomerates. Such progress can be seen both in Europe, where the Banking Union is a 
major step forward, as well as abroad. Last, the scope of regulation has been extended to 
products and markets that remained too opaque in spite of their systemic relevance, such as 
some major classes of OTC derivatives. 
That said, much work still lies ahead to stimulate new intermediation mechanisms in order to 
diversify  the funding  of the  economy  when  a  single  channel,  such  as the  banking  system, 
cannot  adequately  satisfy  demand.  The  financing  of  small  and  medium-sized  firms  in  the 
euro  area  is  a  case  in  point.  In  this  regard,  our  new  ABS  purchase  programme  in  the 
Eurosystem clearly aims to stimulate this nascent market in order to broaden the sources of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
funding of medium-sized corporates that do not yet enjoy direct access to financial markets 
and to free space in banks’ balance sheets for financing the smaller SME’s . 
In  an  increasingly  globalized  world,  the  third  session  will  try  to  reconcile  central  banking 
policy  autonomy  with  international  capital  flows.  Professor  Hélène  Rey  will  revisit  her 
groundbreaking conjecture that, in spite of flexible exchange rates, the Mundell trilemma may 
actually boil down to a dilemma because of the Global Financial Cycle. 
True,  globalization  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  spillovers  cannot  be  limited.  As  an 
illustration, let me take the euro area: since our business cycle differs from that of the USA, 
the Eurosystem has been able to disconnect the whole yield curve from the expected rise in 
US interest rates. But the euro area is a large economy. 
By  contrast,  some  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have  learnt  the  painful  way  how 
capital  flows  can  destabilize  their  domestic  financial  systems.  This  raises  a  series  of 
questions  such  as:  how  to  optimize  the  size  and  use  of  international  reserves  while 
combining  them  with  multilateral  tools?  How  to  strengthen  resilience  and  avoid  financial 
protectionism which may hide behind macroprudential policies? 
Indeed  EMEs  have  accumulated  international  reserves,  developed  local  currency  bond 
markets to avoid currency mismatches and resorted to macroprudential tools or even capital 
controls. Multilateral responses have also been enhanced. Here, I should mention the scaling 
up  of  global  safety  nets,  including  the  diversification  of  IMF  lending  facilities,  and  closer 
cooperation  between  central  banks,  through  extensive  dialogue  and  the  agreement  on  a 
number of international swap lines. 
Today’s  Symposium  will  close  with  a  Panel  on the future  of  the  policy  mix  that could  help 
address many of the policy challenges mentioned earlier. In particular, while central banks 
have clearly played a pivotal role in the global policy mix in recent years, they cannot deal 
with all problems by themselves. In other words, questions asked to the Panel may include to 
what  extent  central  banking  can  help  governments  buy  time,  and  for  how  long  they  can 
bridge financing while waiting for structural reforms to bear fruit. 
Indeed, central banking cannot replace decisive structural reforms, which are necessary both 
for  increasing  aggregate  supply  and  demand  and  enhancing  our  economies’  resilience  to 
shocks.  However,  I  shall  not  stand  in  for  the  Panel  and  will  thus  shortly  conclude  this 
introduction by welcoming in advance the fruitful sharing of experience to which all of you will 
contribute today. 
Central bankers frequently meet in international policy fora, such as those organized under 
the auspices of the BIS, IMF or G20, etc. Yet I hope today’s Symposium will be a special 
occasion  to  stimulate  this  exchange  of  views  and  build  on  it  with  academics,  financial 
institutions and the public at large, since it is broadcast live on the internet. 
Therefore, I would like to hand the floor without further ado to Haruhiko Kuroda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
