  Sabine Lautenschläger: How innovative should central banks be? 
Keynote  speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Wirtschaftsgipfel 2014 “Wirtschaft neu denken – die Kraft der 
Innovation”, organised by Süddeutsche Zeitung, Berlin, 29 November 2014. 
 Tradition and innovation in monetary policy 
More than six years after the start of the global financial crisis, monetary policy in the euro 
area still faces major challenges: 
Monetary policy, the ECB, faces a challenge – perhaps more than ever before. 
It faces a challenge because inflation rates are too low. At 0.4% for the whole euro area, the 
inflation rate is well below our target of nearly 2%. The prospects for economic growth and 
further price developments in the medium term are subdued. Monetary growth and lending 
are  weak.  Geopolitical  risks  are  adding  to  the  uncertainties  which  are  causing  investor 
appetite to continue to fall. 
Expectations  of  the  ECB  are  high, from markets  and from  politicians.  Every  month  people 
give us good advice, often referring to actions taken by other central banks. And they do so 
despite  the  fact  that  our  monetary  policy  decisions  from  June  and  September  haven’t  yet 
been able to fully take effect. 
So  what  else  can  a  central  bank  do  in  the  current  situation?  How  innovative  may  central 
banks be? How innovative is an ECB allowed to be, which as a start-up from the year 1999 is 
in many ways itself an innovation, and as a custodian of a currency without a state can only 
partly be compared with other central banks. Of course I can only give you today, less than a 
week  before  our  ECB  Governing  Council  meeting,  some  general  reflections  from  my 
personal point of view. 
I think we can all readily agree that innovation cannot be an end in itself. The ECB must and 
will  act  only  in  accordance  with  its  mandate.  Price  stability  is  the  guiding  principle  of  our 
actions. The definition of our mandate does not allow for innovations. Moreover, in uncertain 
times of crisis a clear focus is not less, but doubly important. Central banks therefore have a 
particularly strong understanding of tradition, and for a good reason: monetary policy is all 
about trust, reliability and consistency. 
Innovative  measures  must  therefore  be  judged  against  our  mandate  of  maintaining  and 
creating  price  stability.  As  with  any  decision,  innovation  demands  a  sober  analysis  of  the 
costs  and  benefits,  the  opportunities  and  risks.  Allow  me  to  slip  briefly  into  legalese: 
innovative  monetary  policy  measures,  too,  should  be  suitable  to  achieve  their  objective. 
Since  monetary  policy  measures  also  have  side  effects,  a  central  bank  should  use  the 
mildest means to achieve the fewest possible side effects. 
Low inflation rates and the catalogue of measures 
So what does this mean for the current situation? Unanimous monetary policy can and must 
maintain  price  stability.  No  more  and  no  less.  We  are  judged  on  whether  we  achieve  an 
average rate of inflation for the euro area as a whole which is in line with our target of below, 
but close to 2%. The commitment to price stability is symmetrical. That means that the ECB 
must act exactly the same when the target is undershot for a sustained period as when it is 
overshot. We take a medium-term view when it comes to achieving our target, because our 
aim is to ensure price stability over the medium term. 
At the moment, with an inflation rate of 0.4% for the whole euro area, we are a long way off 
our target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And in the coming years, too, we can only expect a moderate rise in the inflation rate. There 
are  a  number  of  reasons  why  the  challenges  of  monetary  policy  will  probably  continue  to 
occupy  us for quite  some  time  to  come.  Some banks  will  still  have  to  adjust  their  balance 
sheets, and this applies to an even greater extent to public finances, private companies and 
households in some countries. This has a structurally dampening effect on overall economic 
demand, and particularly on investments. Furthermore, important long-term determinants of 
the  real  interest  rate  are  pointing  downwards:  demographic  trends,  namely  longer  life 
expectancy and weak population growth worldwide – but particularly pronounced in the euro 
area – are creating an environment which necessitates low real interest rates and thus low 
balanced nominal interest rates. 
The euro area suffers from a lack of competitiveness and productivity, which of course take 
different forms in individual Member States. Structural problems and current weak demand 
lead  to  unsatisfactory  economic  growth  and  unacceptably  high  unemployment  in  many 
countries. Tackling these challenges in the long term is not the job of monetary policy. Crisis 
management must tackle the root causes for the long term and we, the ECB, will therefore 
not tire of reminding governments that we can only provide them time for the urgently needed 
reforms. 
Against this backdrop we could ask whether it was appropriate that the ECB took action. I 
think it was – precisely because of the path of inflation, even if there is room for discussion 
about  the  some  of  the  measures  and  their  design.  The  list  of  our  crisis  management 
measures  is  long.  In  June  and  September  this  year  we  lowered  key  interest  rates  further. 
The main refinancing rate is now just 5 basis points. The interest rate channel has thus been 
exhausted. For the first time in our history we have resorted to a negative deposit rate in an 
effort  to  achieve  the  desired  monetary  policy  accommodation  within  the  tried  and  tested 
corridor system. This justified monetary policy step – which favours investment – was not an 
easy decision for us, not least because of its possible side effects for the financial sector and 
for savers. At the same time, we have the tool of forward guidance, which we have used and 
later reaffirmed: with regard to the inflation outlook, based on current data we expect that the 
central bank interest rates in the euro area will remain at the current level for an extended 
period. 
In  addition  we  have  taken  a  number  of  targeted  unconventional  measures  which  should 
improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism. One of these is targeted longer-term 
refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  with  which  banks  can  obtain  liquidity  for  a  fixed  interest 
rate for up to four years. We have drafted two purchase programmes, one for covered bonds 
and  one  for  asset-backed  securities  (ABS).  The  purchase  programme  for  covered  bonds 
started in October. So far purchases of around €16 billion have taken place. We started the 
ABS  programme  just  last  week.  I  anticipate  that  together  the  longer-term  refinancing 
operations and both purchase programmes will have a strong impact on the balance sheet of 
the Eurosystem. 
Innovation or imitation 
Every month there are fresh calls for further measures. But is it appropriate to contemplate 
further measures at this moment in time? 
Under  normal  conditions,  central  banks  are  in  a  position  to  ensure  price  stability  in  an 
environment of positive nominal interest rates by means of conventional interest rate policy. 
Once interest rates are at zero, a central bank is left with only unconventional measures in 
order to fulfil its mandate. Central banks all over the world have indeed been anything but 
idle.  In  particular  they  have  significantly  expanded  their  balance  sheets,  and  by  making 
changes in their balance sheet structure they have taken various measures to make targeted 
investments  in  submarkets  affected  by  liquidity  shortfalls,  maintain  important  credit 
relationships and ensure a functioning monetary policy transmission. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  weaknesses 
We,  too,  have  turned  to  innovative  measures,  to  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing 
operations  and  the  purchase  of  covered  bonds  and  asset-backed  securities  which  I 
mentioned earlier. 
For sure, in times such as these we need to be prepared. That is why the ECB’s Governing 
Council  agreed  at  the  beginning  of  November  that  the  appropriateness  of  the  monetary 
policy  stance  should  be  closely  observed.  In  concrete  terms,  this  means  that  if  it  should 
become necessary to further counteract the risks of a prolonged period of low inflation, the 
Governing Council intends to take additional unconventional measures within its mandate. 
Even if it is good to be prepared, one should beware of showing activism. 
There  is  no  automatic  mechanism  to  initiate  further  programmes.  The  ECB’s  Governing 
Council  has  not  decided  on  a  target  for  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet;  it  has  rather 
unanimously  expressed  an  expectation.  A  kind  of  mechanical  expansion  of  the  ECB’s 
balance sheet cannot be an end in itself. All of our decisions are to be evaluated against the 
background of current and medium-term inflation expectations. 
Consequently,  we  must  continually  analyse  current  price  increases  to  identify  the 
components  which  comprise 
in  price  developments.  Short-term 
developments are not key, especially when they are largely determined by energy and food 
prices. The underlying trend and the firm anchoring of inflation expectations are decisive, as 
well  as  the  orientation  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Low  inflation  rates  in  some  Member 
States – even when negative – are not in themselves a breach of the target. They can be 
necessary  to  restore  lost  competitiveness. One could  also  argue  about whether  it  is  really 
necessary to consider further measures given that the measures already taken have not yet 
been able to have an effect. Monetary policy does not take effect immediately, but only with a 
certain time lag. As a rule we should take this time and wait and see. 
Which measures are we talking about here? 
The  large-scale  purchase  of  securities,  including  government  bonds,  is  often  seen  as  a 
panacea. As I said, even for innovative or unconventional measures, the costs and benefits, 
and the opportunities and risks must be carefully considered. 
Some  central  banks  have  used  quantitative  easing  to  quickly  and  decisively  provide 
monetary  policy  impetus,  adjusted  to  the  specificities  of  their  environment.  It  is  these 
particular central banks and their measures to which we are compared. For me, these are 
idle  comparisons.  The  following  saying  applies  here:  those  who  constantly  compare 
themselves  with  others  might  become  more  like  them,  but  they  won’t  necessarily  become 
any better. 
When making a comparison  with the measures of other central banks, people often forget 
that  monetary  policy  measures,  including  unconventional  ones,  have  to  be  adapted  to  the 
institutional conditions, economic specifics and financing structure which make up a currency 
area.  Measures  which  are  appropriate  in  one  currency  area  can  be  ineffective  elsewhere. 
What seems like the first option in one place can be the very last resort elsewhere, without 
the actual aim of the measures having to differ much from one another. 
Instead,  we  should  ask:  would  such  purchases  have  the  desired  effect  on  the  rate  of 
inflation? What “quantities” would need to be purchased to have an effect? How long would 
such effects last? 
The  euro  area  is  characterised  by  a  bank-based  financial  system  which  makes  it 
considerably different from more strongly market-based financial systems, particularly in the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States. This  explains  our  focus  on  refinancing  operations, 
which  have  enabled  the  banking  system  to  overcome  liquidity  bottlenecks,  maintain  credit 
relationships and enter new credit arrangements. Our measures from June and September 
2014  also  serve  to  support  the  credit  channel.  In  essence,  it  is  about  improving  funding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  conditions  for  borrowers  in  the  real  economy.  The  same  logic  can  also  be  applied  to  the 
selective purchase programmes for covered bonds and asset-backed securities. 
The Eurosystem is currently faced with 18, soon to be 19, issuers of government securities. 
Should we not take into account during a broad purchase programme of securities the fact 
that government securities in the euro area are not without credit risk? There are very few 
shared  competencies  in  fiscal  policy.  As  long  as  this  is  the  case,  the  ECB’s  purchase  of 
government  securities  is  inevitably  linked  to  a  serious  incentive  problem.  After  all,  the 
required cost-benefit considerations should also take into account the fact that other central 
banks bought government securities in a different economic environment with considerably 
higher long-term interest rates. In the euro area, the long-term interest rates on Spanish and 
Italian government bonds, for example, are already lower than those from the United States 
or  the  United  Kingdom.  It  is  therefore  questionable  whether  we  should  “depress”  interest 
rates for the securities class even further. 
Moreover, the interest on national government bonds in the euro area doesn’t operate as a 
benchmark for all further refinancing operations, as is the case in the United Kingdom or the 
United  States for  example.  Besides,  the  effect  of  intervening  in  capital  markets  in  a  bank-
based  financial  system  is  weaker  than  in  a  market-based  system,  as  illustrated  by  wealth 
effects, for example. 
Therefore with regard to the purchase of government bonds, measures which are obvious in 
one place could be the last resort at best for us – for instance when there is the threat of 
deflation, but only if the cost-benefit analysis is favourable. 
As  you  see,  there  are  more  questions  than  answers  at  the  moment.  In  my  view,  a 
consideration of the costs and benefits, and the opportunities and risks of a broad purchase 
programme of government bonds does not give a positive outcome at the current time. 
Concluding remarks 
Owing to my position, I have limited myself today to talking about innovations in monetary 
policy. At this point we should look first at the effect of our recent measures and of the asset 
quality review and the stress test on bank lending. 
Innovations in other political areas are also necessary, if not even more so. The reasons for 
weak  growth  and  funding  shortfalls  primarily  lie  elsewhere,  not  in  a  lack  of  central  bank 
liquidity, to say nothing of capital markets. Innovative political approaches are called for when 
it comes to increasing growth potential in the euro area, strengthening economic adjustment 
efforts and making budget consolidation compatible with growth and employment. 
But  let  me  conclude  by  returning  to  the  original  question:  how  innovative  may  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy be? As innovative as necessary and as effective as possible. This requires 
careful consideration. The risks and side effects must always be taken into account. For me, 
given  the  current  situation,  the  hurdles  for  further  measures  are  very  high,  especially  for 
broad  purchase  programmes.  The  interest  and  spreads  for  many  debt  instruments  are 
already very low: the risk of market distortions cannot be dismissed. The deciding factor for 
all programmes is their effectiveness for the real economy and ultimately for price stability, 
which is what we – the ECB as the central bank for the whole euro area – must be judged 
on. Innovation is not therefore a taboo, but neither can it be an end in itself. 
I look forward to our discussion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
