  William C Dudley: The 2015 economic outlook and the implications for 
monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  Bernard  M.  Baruch  College,  New  York  City,  1  December 
2014. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. In my remarks, I will focus on the 
2015  economic  outlook  and  the  implications  for  monetary  policy.  In  general,  I  will  paint  a 
reasonably positive picture – an economy that is likely to make further progress towards the 
Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objectives of maximum sustainable employment 
in the context of price stability. In fact, if my own forecast is realized, I would expect to favor 
raising the FOMC’s federal funds rate target sometime in 2015. This would be a  welcome 
development, because it would signify that the economy has healed sufficiently to warrant a 
somewhat less accommodative monetary policy. As always, what I have to say today reflects 
my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. 
The growth outlook is improving 
Since the official end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy 
has grown at a disappointing 2.3 percent annualized rate. Several times over that period, it 
appeared  that  growth  was  breaking  out  on  the  upside,  but  each  time  such  hopes  were 
disappointed.  We  are  again  at  a  similar  junction.  Over  the  past  few  quarters,  the  pace  of 
economic growth has picked up and the broad consensus is that the U.S. economy will grow 
at about a 2 ½–3 percent annual rate over the next year.1  
Will these forecasts once again turn out to be too optimistic? Subject to a few caveats that I 
discuss  later,  my  view  is  that  the  likelihood  of  another  disappointment  has  lessened.  The 
consensus  forecast  seems  like  a  reasonable  expectation,  in  part,  because  several  of  the 
“headwinds”  restraining  U.S.  economic  activity  in  recent  years  have  subsided.  First,  the 
housing sector is currently in much better balance. The overhang of housing associated with 
the  housing  boom  has  largely  been  absorbed,  and  a  recovery  in  housing  prices  has 
significantly shrunk the proportion of borrowers that are underwater on their mortgages – that 
is, those households that have outstanding mortgage balances higher than the value of their 
homes. Also, measures of distress such as mortgage delinquencies and homes entering the 
foreclosure process have fallen. 
Second,  consumers  are  in  better  financial  shape.  Households  are  carrying  less  debt,  with 
total  household  liabilities  roughly  $500  billion  below  their  cyclical  peak  in  2008.  Moreover, 
lower interest rates have facilitated significant mortgage debt refinancing, which has lowered 
the household debt service burdens. Depending on the particular measure used, household 
debt service burdens relative to income have fallen back to levels last seen in the 1980s and 
1990s. In addition, household net worth has recovered sharply, boosted primarily by higher 
financial asset valuations, but also by some recovery in home prices. 
Third,  the  fiscal  restraint  that  has  held  back  growth  in  recent  years  has  ended,  with  the 
federal budget deficit now at a level consistent with a stable to slowly declining federal debt-
to-GDP  ratio.  In  the  aggregate,  state  and  local  governments  have  also  ended  their 
retrenchment. One important piece of evidence in this regard is the fact that state and local 
                                                
1   See,  for  example,  the  latest  Blue  Chip  consensus  survey  (volume  39,  no.  11,  November  10,  2014).  The 
median real GDP forecast for 2015 (fourth quarter over fourth quarter) is 2.9 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  government  employment  is  now  rising  at  between  5,000  and  10,000  per  month,  after 
generally contracting during the 2009 to 2012 period. 
Now  that  these  headwinds  have  subsided,  buoyant  financial  market  conditions  spurred,  in 
part, by a very accommodative monetary policy should do more to support economic activity. 
In particular, compared to historical patterns, the current household net worth-to-income ratio 
is high relative to the personal saving rate. This suggests some scope for a decline in the 
household  saving  rate.  If  this  were  to  occur,  consumption  growth  would  outstrip  income 
growth. Similarly, financial market conditions are conducive to sustained gains in business 
fixed investment. Equity prices are high, borrowing costs are low, cash flows are strong and 
corporate balance sheets are healthy. 
Another positive development for both the U.S. and the global economy is the sharp decline 
in energy prices. Let’s start with the U.S. perspective. Despite the impressive recent gains in 
natural gas and crude oil production, the U.S. still is a net importer of energy. As a result, 
falling  energy  prices  are  beneficial  for  our  economy.  In  economist  parlance,  falling  energy 
prices are a positive “terms of trade” shock for the U.S. Over the near-term, this will lead to a 
significant  rise  in  real  income  growth  for  households  and  should  be  a  strong  spur  to 
consumer spending. Since energy expenditures represent a higher proportion of outlays for 
lower  income  households,  falling  energy  prices  disproportionately  raise  their  real  incomes. 
Also, because such households are more liquidity constrained, with budgets that often bind 
paycheck to paycheck, they have a higher tendency to spend any additional real income. As 
a result, much of the boost to real household income from falling energy prices is likely to be 
spent, not saved. 
More broadly, the decline in energy prices also will be supportive to the global growth outlook 
in  two  other  ways.  First,  by  pulling  down  inflation  in  many  countries  it  will  spur  more 
expansive  monetary  policy.  We  are  already  seeing  this  response  in  Europe  and  Japan. 
Second, the decline in energy prices is also likely to ease the global fiscal stance. Over the 
near-term, for oil exporting governments, falling revenue  will not be fully offset by reduced 
expenditures. This  will  cause  major  oil  exporters  to  run  either  smaller  budget  surpluses or 
bigger budget deficits. In the aggregate, the swing from oil producers to consumers is quite 
large. For example, a $20 per barrel decline in global oil prices results in an income transfer 
of about $670 billion per year from producers to consumers.2 This understates the total effect 
because  it  does  not  include  any  knock-on  reductions  in  other  energy  prices  –  such  as  for 
natural gas – that, outside the U.S., often are linked to oil prices. 
Obviously, if the oil price declines were to both intensify and persist, this would have negative 
implications for oil and gas investment in the U.S. At a minimum, as cash flows fall, some 
producers  will  cut  back  on  their  drilling  activity  rather  than  plug  the  shortfall  with  outside 
financing. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  several  reasons  why  I  don’t  think  this  risk  should  be  overstated, 
especially  if  oil  prices  stabilize  around  current  levels.  First,  even  after  the  large  gains  in 
recent  years,  oil  and  gas  investment  remains  a  small  fraction  of  GDP.  Second,  domestic 
natural gas investment should be relatively unaffected because U.S. natural gas prices are 
largely  insensitive  to  global  energy  price  developments.  This  reflects  the  high  costs 
associated with exporting natural gas and the fact that most of our oil production is used for 
transportation purposes. Thus, the ability to substitute lower cost natural gas for oil is limited. 
Third, extraction costs vary appreciably across the different major oil fields. There is not a 
single  critical  price  that  will  constrain  production  or  investment.  Fourth,  with  respect  to  oil 
produced by fracking, productivity gains have cut drilling costs and raised oil production, so 
breakeven  costs  per  barrel  have  been  falling.  Finally,  if  oil  investment  were  to  soften,  this 
                                                
2   Current world oil consumption is 92 million barrels per day (International Energy Agency, October Oil Market 
Report). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  would  lead  to  lower  breakeven  costs  as  resources  currently  in  short  supply  –  e.g.,  water, 
welders, housing and transport – became more available and less expensive. 
Of course, as with any forecast, there is some meaningful chance that growth will turn out to 
be  either  weaker  or  stronger  than  expected.  However,  I  believe  that  the  risks  around  this 
forecast are reasonably well balanced. The subsiding headwinds that I discussed earlier are 
the  primary  reason  for  seeing  the  downside  risks  as  limited.  In  contrast,  the  ongoing 
geopolitical risks remain substantial. 
At  the  same  time,  several  factors  suggest  that  growth  is  unlikely  to  turn  out  to  be 
substantially stronger than the consensus forecast. First, the upside from housing relative to 
the forecast is likely limited. Although there has been an impressive recovery of multi-family 
housing starts over the past few years, single-family housing starts are growing only slowly 
and are unlikely to climb much faster over the next year or two. The demand for new homes 
is still hindered by tight credit conditions for homebuyers. Mortgage lenders continue to be 
extremely risk averse in extending new credit, and mortgage availability to those with lower 
credit scores is still significantly constrained. I don’t anticipate that this situation will change in 
a material way any time soon. 
Second, because motor vehicle sales are now close to their pre-recession levels, the future 
growth  impetus  from  this  cyclical  sector  will  likely  also  be  restrained  going  forward.  Third, 
growth in the rest of the world has slowed slightly and the dollar has appreciated somewhat. 
This  will  limit  the  growth  in  U.S.  exports,  and  suggests  that  the  trade  sector  is  unlikely  to 
provide much support to growth over the next year or two. 
Inflation: lower now, but likely to drift gradually higher next year 
Let me now turn to discuss the inflation outlook. Inflation has been running below the Federal 
Reserve’s  objective  of  a  2  percent  annualized  rate  for  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures  (PCE)  deflator.  For  example,  over  the  past  twelve  months,  the  overall  PCE 
deflator  has  risen  by  1.4  percent,  and  the  core  PCE  deflator,  which  excludes  food  and 
energy, has increased by 1.6 percent. Recently, the overall index has been pulled down by 
sharply lower oil and gasoline prices. Also, I expect that core goods prices will be held down 
somewhat over the near-term by the recent appreciation of the U.S. dollar. Nevertheless, I 
expect  inflation  will  begin  to  move  back  towards  our  2  percent  objective  in  2015.  As  the 
economy expands and the labor market continues to tighten, resource slack should decline 
and  this  should  gradually  exert  some  upward  pressure  on  prices.  Also,  despite  some 
softness  in  market-based  measures  of  inflation  compensation,  inflation  expectations  still 
seem well-anchored and this should also work to pull inflation gradually higher. 
Implications for monetary policy 
So, what does this assessment of the growth and inflation outlook imply for monetary policy? 
Since  the  September  2012  announcement  of  the  Treasury  and  agency  mortgage-backed 
securities  asset  purchase  program,  there  has  been  substantial  improvement  in  the  labor 
market outlook. Recognizing its success in meeting the FOMC’s stated objectives, the FOMC 
decided to end the asset purchase program at the end of October. 
Now that we have ended our asset purchase program, attention has turned to the monetary 
policy  normalization  process.  There  are  four  important  questions  regarding  this  process: 
When to begin? How to begin? How fast to go? And, how far to go? Let me consider each 
question in turn. 
With respect to the question of when to begin, it is still premature to begin to raise interest 
rates,  that  is,  to  “lift  off”  from  the  zero  lower  bound.  As  the  FOMC  concluded  in  its  most 
recent statement: “The Committee anticipates, based on its current assessment, that it likely 
will be appropriate to maintain the 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate for 
a considerable time following the end of its asset purchase program this month.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  But this sentence should not be viewed as an iron-clad commitment unaffected by economic 
and  financial  developments.  The  statement  goes  on  to  say:  “However,  if  incoming 
information  indicates  faster  progress  toward  the  Committee’s  employment  and  inflation 
objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal 
funds  rate  are  likely  to  occur  sooner  than  currently  anticipated.  Conversely,  if  progress 
proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than 
currently anticipated.” In other words, the FOMC’s monetary policy actions and the timing of 
lift-off will depend on how the economic outlook evolves, particularly with respect to the labor 
market and inflation. 
In  considering  the  appropriate  timing  of  lift-off,  there  are  three  important  reasons  to  be 
patient.  First,  the  Committee  is  still  undershooting  both  its  employment  and  inflation 
objectives. Unemployment is too high and inflation is too low. Thus, monetary policy needs to 
be very accommodative in order to close these gaps relative to the Committee’s objectives. 
Second, when interest rates are at the zero lower bound, the risks of tightening a bit too early 
are likely to be considerably greater than the risks of tightening a bit too late. A premature 
tightening  might  lead  to  financial  conditions  that  are  too  restrictive,  resulting  in  a  weaker 
economy and, in turn, an aborted lift-off. This would be problematic in that it would harm the 
Fed’s  credibility  and,  more  importantly,  would  be  difficult  to  rectify.  The  U.S.  experience 
during  the  Great  Depression  and  the  Japanese  experience  over  the  past  two  decades 
illustrate the risks of raising interest rates too soon, especially when inflation is running below 
the central bank’s objective. Finally, given the still high level of long-term unemployment and 
the outlook for inflation, there could be a significant benefit to allowing the economy to run 
“slightly  hot”  for  a  while  in  order  to  get  those  that  have  been  unemployed  for  a  long  time 
working again. I believe this can be done without jeopardizing our price stability objective. If 
the long-term unemployed are not employed relatively soon, their job skills will erode further, 
reducing their long-term prospects for employment and, therefore, the productive capacity of 
the U.S. economy. This would be a very unfortunate outcome for them, their families and the 
country. 
Market expectations that lift-off will occur around mid-2015 seem reasonable to me. Although 
that could change depending on how the economy evolves, my views on “when” do not differ 
appreciably  from  the  most  recent  primary  dealer  and  buy-side  surveys  undertaken  by  the 
New York Fed prior to the October FOMC meeting.3  
I hope the economic outlook evolves so that it will be appropriate to begin to raise interest 
rates sometime next year. While raising interest rates is often portrayed as a difficult task for 
central bankers, in fact, given the events since the onset of the financial crisis, it would be a 
development to be truly excited about. When the FOMC begins to raise its federal funds rate 
target,  this  would  indicate  that  the  U.S.  economy  is  finally  getting  healthier,  and  that  the 
Committee believes it is on a sustainable track to achieving its dual mandate objectives of 
maximum employment and price stability. That would be very good news, even if it were to 
cause a bump or two in financial markets. 
So, when the appropriate time comes, how is the process of monetary policy normalization 
likely to unfold? In this regard, the revised policy normalization principles and plans that the 
FOMC released following the September FOMC meeting are informative.4 In particular, the 
Committee  will  begin  to  normalize  monetary  policy  by  first  raising  its  target  range  for  the 
federal funds  rate  and  short-term  interest  rates will  be  the  primary  tool used for  tightening 
monetary policy. After lift-off looks sustainable and the federal funds rate is somewhat above 
the  zero  lower  bound,  the  Committee  will  cease  to  reinvest  those  funds  generated  by 
maturing  Treasury  securities  and  prepayments  of  agency  MBS  securities.  The  Committee 
                                                
3   See Primary Dealer Surveys and Pilot Survey of Market Participants. 
4   See Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  anticipates that the balance sheet will gradually normalize passively as these assets run off, 
not actively via asset sales. 
The  effective  federal  funds  rate  will  be  pushed  into  a  higher  target  range  by  raising  the 
interest rate paid on excess reserves (IOER). The overnight reverse repo repurchase (ON 
RRP) facility will play a secondary role, in the sense that it will be used “only to the extent 
necessary” to help put a floor under the federal funds rate, and it will be phased out when it is 
no longer needed. 
With  respect  to  “how  fast”  the  normalization  process  will  proceed,  that  depends  on  two 
factors  –  how  the  economy  evolves,  and  how  financial  market  conditions  respond  to 
movements in the federal funds rate target. Financial market conditions mainly include, but 
are not necessarily limited to, the level of short- and long-term interest rates, credit spreads 
and availability, equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar. When the FOMC 
adjusts its short-term federal funds rate target, this does not directly influence the economy 
since  little  economic  activity  is  linked  to  the  federal  funds  rate.  Instead,  monetary  policy 
affects  the  economy  as  the  current  change  in  short-term  interest  rates  and  expectations 
about future monetary policy changes influence financial market conditions more broadly. 
Developments  in  financial  market  conditions  are  thus  an  important  element  in  the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  to  the  economy.  Changes  in  financial  market 
conditions  influence  economic  growth  through  a  number  of  channels.  For  example,  a 
stronger equity market raises household wealth and lowers the desired personal saving rate 
–  lifting  consumer  spending.  A  stronger  equity  market  also  reduces  the  cost  of  capital  for 
business, which may help encourage greater investment spending. Lower long-term interest 
rates push down business financing costs, which also supports investment spending. At the 
same  time,  lower  mortgage  rates  support  housing  demand  and  reduce  household  interest 
outlays.  A  weaker  dollar  supports  growth  by  making  imports  more  expensive  and  by 
increasing export competitiveness. The combined effect is to increase net exports. 
If the linkage from the federal funds rate to financial market conditions were stable over time, 
there  would  be  no  need  to  focus  on  financial  market  conditions.  In  a  world  in  which  the 
linkage  was  solid  and  unchanging,  adjustments  to  the  short-term  interest  rate  and 
communication about future policy would have a predictable and reliable effect on financial 
market conditions. Central bankers, then, could keep their focus narrowly on their policy rate. 
However, as has been very clear, especially in recent years, this linkage is not stable. Thus, 
how much one pushes on the short-term interest rate lever depends, in part, on how financial 
market conditions respond to such adjustments. Imagine driving a car where the connection 
between the gas pedal and the engine speed was variable and uncertain. The driver would 
have to constantly monitor and adjust the pressure on the gas pedal to achieve the desired 
speed.  Similarly,  we  will  have  to  monitor  and  adjust  short-term  interest  rates  to  achieve 
financial  market  conditions  consistent  with  achieving  our  labor  market  and  inflation 
objectives. All else equal, less responsiveness implies larger interest rate adjustments and 
vice versa. 
Quickly,  let  me  give  two  examples  that  illustrate  how  variable  this  linkage  can  be.  First, 
during the 2004–07 period, the FOMC tightened monetary policy nearly continuously, raising 
the  federal  funds  rate  from  1  percent  to  5.25  percent  in  17  steps.  However,  during  this 
period,  10-year  Treasury  note  yields  did  not  rise  much,  credit  spreads  generally  narrowed 
and  U.S.  equity  price  indices  moved  higher.  Moreover,  the  availability  of  mortgage  credit 
eased, rather than tightened. As a result, financial market conditions did not tighten. 
As  a  result,  financial  conditions  remained  quite  loose,  despite  the  large  increase  in  the 
federal funds rate. With the benefit of hindsight, it seems that either monetary policy should 
have  been  tightened  more  aggressively  or  macroprudential  measures  should  have  been 
implemented in order to tighten credit conditions in the overheated housing sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Second,  during  the  financial  crisis,  especially  during  the  fall  of  2008,  financial  market 
conditions tightened dramatically even as the FOMC was cutting its federal funds rate target 
to  zero.  Monetary  accommodation  turned  out  to  be  insufficient  to  produce  an  easing  of 
financial market conditions, and the economy fell into a deep recession. 
Over  time,  financial  market  conditions  have  become  a  much  more  important  factor  in 
evaluating  the  appropriate  setting  of  monetary  policy  and  the  level  of  short-term  interest 
rates.  This  reflects  several  factors.  First,  over  the  past  few  decades,  as  the  U.S.  capital 
markets  have  grown  in  size  and  scope,  the  U.S.  financial  system  has  become  much  less 
bank-centric.  This  has  loosened  the  linkage  between  the  federal  funds  rate  and  financial 
market  conditions.  Second,  the  U.S.  economy  and  financial  markets  have  become  more 
interconnected globally. Thus, the impact of U.S. monetary policy has become more diffused, 
and financial market conditions have come to depend increasingly not only on developments 
in  the  U.S.,  but  also  on  developments  elsewhere.  As  an  example,  the  low  level  of  U.S. 
10-year Treasury yields presumably is due, in part, to the fact that long-term interest rates in 
Europe and Japan are much lower. 
So, if the effect of short-term rate changes on financial market conditions has become less 
predictable and more variable over time, what implications does this have for U.S. monetary 
policy? From my perspective, there are three major implications that deserve attention. 
First, when lift-off occurs, the pace of monetary policy normalization will depend, in part, on 
how financial market conditions react to the initial and subsequent tightening moves. If the 
reaction is relatively large – think of the response of financial market conditions during the 
so-called  “taper  tantrum”  during  the  spring  and  summer  of  2013  –  then  this  would  likely 
prompt a slower and more cautious approach. In contrast, if the reaction were relatively small 
or even in the wrong direction, with financial market conditions easing – think of the response 
of long-term bond yields and the equity market as the asset purchase program was gradually 
phased out over the past year – then this would imply a more aggressive approach. The key 
point  is  this:  We  will  pursue  the  monetary  policy  stance  that  best  generates  the  set  of 
financial market conditions most consistent with achievement of the FOMC’s dual mandate 
objectives. This depends both on how financial market conditions respond to the Fed’s policy 
actions and on how the real economy responds to the changes in financial conditions. 
The second major implication is to be cautious about overreliance on simple monetary policy 
rules, such as the Taylor Rule, that do not include measures of financial market conditions in 
their formulation. As you may recall, in a Taylor Rule the nominal federal funds rate depends 
on an equilibrium or neutral real rate of interest – which is assumed to be constant over time 
– the deviation of the level of economic activity from estimates that would be consistent with 
long-run price stability and the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target. 
As I have noted elsewhere, the Taylor Rule formulation has a number of characteristics that 
make it a useful input into the policy-setting process. First, it very explicitly focuses on the 
two parameters – the long-term inflation objective and the level of potential output consistent 
with  that  objective  –  that  map  directly  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  dual  mandate  objectives. 
Second, standard Taylor Rules are self-equilibrating. They respond to economic shocks and 
forecast errors in a way that pushes the economy back toward the central bank’s objectives. 
Market participants incorporating information about the rules in their price-setting decisions 
helps  keep  inflation  expectations  well-anchored.  Third,  academic  research  shows  that 
Taylor-type rules typically perform quite well across a wide range of economic models. This 
is  important  because  we  want  guides  to  policy  that  are  robust;  that  is, guides that  are  not 
overly  sensitive  to  model-specific  assumptions  about  how  the  economy  works,  or  how 
households and businesses alter their expectations and behavior in response to changes in 
monetary policy.5  
                                                
5   See Conducting Monetary Policy: Rules, Learning and Risk Management. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Despite these attractive features, I do not believe that simple policy rules can take the place 
of in-depth analysis of economic and financial market conditions. While simple policy rules 
provide  useful  benchmarks  to  policymakers,  their  very  virtue  –  their  simplicity  –  is  also  a 
significant shortcoming. Policy rules cannot capture all of the information that is relevant for 
policymaking. In particular, such rules do not capture the fact that the linkage between the 
federal  funds  rate  and  financial  market  conditions  can  be  very  loose.  This  is  a  critical 
shortcoming  because  this  looseness  affects  the  stability  of  the  relationship  between 
monetary  policy  and  economic  outcomes.  If  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy, 
financial conditions and the real economy were stable over time, then following a relatively 
simple and unchanging policy rule would likely generate acceptable results. However, if the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real  economy  is  more  variable  and  uncertain,  as  I 
believe  it  is,  then  an  approach  that  takes  this  explicitly  into  consideration  will  be  more 
effective. 
The third implication that stems from the fact that financial market conditions matter in the 
conduct of monetary policy pertains to the so-called “Fed put” with respect to equity prices. 
The  notion  here  is  that  because  the  Federal  Reserve  cares  about  unanticipated  and 
undesired changes in financial market conditions, the Fed will respond to weakness in equity 
prices  by  easing  monetary  policy  –  essentially  providing  a  put  to  equity  investors.  The 
expectation of such a put is dangerous because if investors believe it exists they will view the 
equity market as less risky. This will cause investors to push equity market values higher, 
increasing  the  likelihood  of  an  equity  market  bubble  and,  when  such  a  bubble  bursts,  the 
potential for a sharp shock that could threaten financial stability and the economy. 
Let me be clear, there is no Fed equity market put. To put it another way, we do not care 
about the level of equity prices, or bond yields or credit spreads per se. Instead, we focus on 
how  financial  market  conditions  influence  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real 
economy. At times, a large decline in equity prices will not be problematic for achieving our 
goals.  For  example,  economic  conditions  may  warrant  a  tightening  of  financial  market 
conditions. If this happens mainly via the channel of equity price weakness – that is not a 
problem,  as  it  does  not  conflict  with  our  objectives.  In  contrast,  when  we  want  financial 
market conditions to be extremely accommodative – as has been the case in recent years 
when  we have been far away from our employment and inflation objectives – then we  will 
take into consideration a broad set of developments with respect to interest rates, the stock 
market  and  other  measures  of  financial  conditions  in  choosing  the  appropriate  stance  for 
monetary policy. 
Because  financial  market  conditions  affect  economic  activity  only  slowly  over  time,  this 
suggests  that  we  should  look  through  short-term  volatility  and  movements  in  financial 
markets. We should not respond until we become convinced that the movements will likely, 
without  action  on  our  part,  prove  sufficiently  persistent  to  conflict  with  achievement  of  our 
objectives. Often, financial  markets  can  be quite  volatile  and  move  a  lot  without  disturbing 
underlying economic performance. 
Finally, let me turn to the issue of “how much,” in other words, what federal funds rate target 
over the long term is consistent with our employment and inflation objectives. This issue is 
more difficult to judge for a number of reasons. First, it depends on how financial conditions 
evolve in response to our monetary policy adjustments. Second, it depends on other factors, 
such as potential real GDP growth, which in turn, depends on the growth of the labor force 
and  productivity  growth  trends.  My  current  thinking,  in  this  regard,  is  that  the  equilibrium 
federal funds rate consistent with 2 percent inflation will be somewhat lower in the future than 
in  the  past.  In  part,  this  reflects  the  likelihood  that  potential  real  GDP  growth  will  likely  be 
somewhat lower going forward due to slower growth in the labor force. But my confidence in 
this conclusion may change on the basis of incoming empirical evidence. In fact, I suspect 
my views will evolve as I see how the economy responds over time to higher interest rates 
and tighter financial market conditions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Conclusion 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  have  provided  my  current  thinking  about  the  U.S.  growth  and  the 
inflation  outlook,  and  the  implications  for  monetary  policy.  To  sum  up,  the  U.S.  economic 
outlook  looks  brighter,  with  growth  likely  to  be  somewhat  above  the  trend  of  the  past  five 
years.  The  risks  to  growth  appear  generally  balanced,  without  unusually  high  risks  that 
growth  will  either  be  much  stronger  or  weaker  than  my  forecast.  On  inflation,  I  remain 
confident,  despite  the  recent  softening,  that  inflation  will  begin  to  move  up  towards  our 
2 percent objective next year. This move will not likely happen immediately, however, given 
the recent weakness in energy prices and the fact that non-energy import price trends are 
also likely to soften a bit over the near-term. 
With respect to monetary policy, I believe that market expectations as captured by the most 
recent New York Fed’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants are reasonable – 
with  lift-off  expected  to  take  place  sometime  around  the  middle  of  next  year.  But,  life  is 
uncertain and my judgment of the appropriate timing could change in response to incoming 
data  and  other  factors  that  change  the  economic  outlook.  When  we  do  begin  to  tighten 
monetary policy, the pace of tightening will depend not only on the outlook but also on how 
financial market conditions respond as we begin to remove monetary policy accommodation. 
Financial  market  conditions  are  an  important  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy. 
This is why I don’t favor indiscriminately adhering to simple policy rules that exclude financial 
market conditions. 
I hope the FOMC can begin to raise its federal funds rate target next year. This would signify 
that the economy has made sufficient progress towards the FOMC’s objectives and that the 
time  had  finally  come  to  begin  to  unwind  the  current  high  degree  of  monetary  policy 
accommodation. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
