Jean-Pierre Danthine: Are central banks doing too much? 
Translation of a speech given in French by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Vice Chairman of the 
Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  Foire  du  Valais,  Martigny,  9  October 
2014. 
 The speaker thanks Fabian Gunzinger for his valuable support in drafting this speech. He is also indebted to Irma 
Cruz, Till Ebner, Peter Kuster, Claudia Strub and the SNB Language Services for their assistance. 
Introduction 
In  recent  years,  central  banks  have  been  active  in  their  attempts  to  mitigate  the  financial 
crisis and its aftermath, and they have also assumed a more prominent role in the regulatory 
efforts  to  prevent  similar  crises  in  the  future.  This  has  led  many  commentators  to  ask  the 
question I raised in the title of this speech: are central banks doing too much? 
The short answer to the question – you may not be surprised – is “no”. The measures which 
central  banks  have  taken  since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis  in  2007  are  a  direct 
consequence of the severity of the crisis itself. First, conventional central bank measures – 
cutting interest rates, providing liquidity and acting as lender of last resort – were required to 
prevent  the  collapse  of  the  financial  system.  Second,  the  use  of  various  unconventional 
measures was a responsible step to support weak recoveries, given the shortage of available 
alternatives. And third, a reinterpretation of central banks’ financial stability mandate towards 
a more active role in crisis prevention is necessary to reduce the need for another round of 
extensive crisis management in the future. 
This, in a nutshell, is the main argument of my speech today. In what follows, I will elaborate 
on  the  rationale  behind  the  conventional  and  unconventional  measures  that  central  banks 
have adopted to mitigate the crisis, and explain why central banks need to play an active role 
in the new regulatory framework which is being implemented in response to the crisis. 
Central  banks  may  not  exactly  have  a  reputation  for  being  big  innovators.  But  just  as  the 
Foire du Valais has developed into French-speaking Switzerland’s pre-eminent fair over the 
past  50  years  by  successfully  combining  innovation  with  its  core  strengths,  central  banks 
have evolved over the past few decades by remaining focused on their core mandate – price 
stability –  while adapting to a changing environment and being open to learn  new lessons 
when 
themselves.  The  financial  crisis  was  such  a  moment,  and  a 
reinterpretation  of  central  banks’  financial  stability  mandate  is  an  important  lesson  to  take 
away from it. 
they  present 
Preventing the collapse: conventional monetary policy 
The economist John Kenneth Galbraith quipped that financial memory is brief and that “there 
can be few fields of human endeavor in which history counts for so little as in the world of 
finance”.1 Given that the sixth anniversary of the collapse of Lehman Brothers passed just a 
few  weeks  ago,  let me  briefly  remind  you  of  the  hectic  events  that  gave  rise  to  the  policy 
actions of the past few years. 
The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008 turned what had previously been 
a crunch in the interbank market into an outright financial panic. In the weeks and months 
after the collapse of Lehman, the prospect of a second Great Depression was real. In fact, 
key economic indicators showed worrying parallels in the early stages of the two crises; by 
                                                
1   Galbraith (1990). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
January 2009 global industrial output had dropped by more than 10%, global trade by almost 
20%, and the global stock market had lost about half of its value.2 In the 1930s, all three of 
these  indicators  continued  to  fall  for  another  two  years,  eventually  leading  to  record 
unemployment  of  25%  in  the  United  States  and  around  30%  in  the  United  Kingdom  and 
Germany, the second and third largest economies at the time. 
This, at the end of 2008, was the environment in which policymakers found themselves and 
the prospect that they were trying to avoid. So how did they react? Almost immediately after 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers central banks, including the SNB, began to lower interest 
rates to almost zero. Over the following months, they also injected liquidity into markets that 
were on the verge of drying up, and acted as lenders of last resort by providing liquidity to 
distressed financial institutions.3 
The importance of providing liquidity and acting as lenders of last resort is the main lesson 
which central banks took away from the experience of the Great Depression, and it has been 
seen as their main role in times of financial distress ever since.4 
Thus, as regards central banks’ reaction in the early days of the crisis, what we saw was not 
them doing too much – it was them doing their job. For most, certainly for the SNB, they were 
doing what their mandates required them to do. Collectively, they helped stabilise economies 
and financial markets that were in danger of collapsing. Many challenges remain, to be sure, 
but avoiding a rerun of the 1930s does constitute a success. 
Supporting the weak recovery: unconventional monetary policy 
Once central banks had lowered nominal short-term interest rates all the way to zero, they hit 
a  natural  limit  at  which  conventional  monetary  policy  becomes  powerless.  Their  decisive 
reaction, together  with fiscal  policy  measures  by  governments,  had  succeeded  in  stopping 
the free-fall, but economies were still weak, unemployment rates high, and recoveries feeble. 
More  action  was  clearly  required.  Conventional  economic  wisdom  asserts  that  at  the  zero 
lower  bound  fiscal  policy  is  the  most  effective  lever  on  which  to  act.  Unfortunately,  most 
governments  perceived  themselves  unable  to  do  more  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  Most 
importantly, many governments entered the crisis with high levels of public debt and, with the 
crisis already putting pressure on their budgets, they were reluctant to spend yet more. 
So even after having exhausted their conventional policy tools, central banks found that they 
were the only ones left to support weak recoveries. With many of them mandated to react to 
below-potential output, they turned to unconventional policies.5 
While their motives were somewhat different, all the major central banks resorted to either 
one  or  both  of  two  measures:  quantitative  easing  –  the  large-scale  purchase  of  long-term 
securities, and forward guidance – the commitment to keep short-term interest rates low for a 
                                                
2   Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2010). 
3   Liquidity provision to distressed financial institutions typically occurred in the context of state intervention and 
state capital injections to ensure the solvency of these institutions. In Switzerland, the SNB acted as lender of 
last resort by providing liquidity assistance to UBS in October 2008, once the bank’s solvency was guaranteed 
by a capital injection from the Swiss government. 
4   Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argue convincingly that it was the reduction in the money supply that caused 
the  large  drops  in  output  and  prices  between  1929  and  1933,  and  that  this  drop  in  the money  supply  was 
amplified by the large-scale bank failures in that period, which the Fed did not prevent through lender of last 
resort action.  
5   The path was not entirely untrodden: in the 1990s, Japan was facing weak growth and the threat of deflation in 
the wake of its asset price crash, even though the Bank of Japan (BoJ) had slashed rates to zero. The BoJ 
thus started to experiment with unconventional monetary policy measures. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
certain period of time. Both of these tools are intended to lower long-term borrowing rates 
and, through that channel, to stimulate economic activity. 
The  SNB  is  a  bit  of  a  special  case.  In  summer 2011,  Switzerland  was  confronted  with  an 
excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc as a result of the euro area crisis, an appreciation 
that continued to the point where it posed a serious threat to price stability. As a result, we 
resorted to a range of unconventional tools to increase Swiss franc liquidity and – eventually 
– introduced an exchange rate floor of 1.20 Swiss franc per euro in September 2011. 
So,  are  central  banks  doing too much  in terms of  unconventional  policy?  The  answer  is  – 
again – “no”, but less categorically than in the case of conventional policies. 
On  the  one  hand,  being  the  only  ones  left  to  react  to  weak  economies  and  high 
unemployment forced many central banks to take further action – action that was justified by 
their mandates. 
On the other hand, the jury is still out on the overall assessment of unconventional policies. 
For  one  thing,  while  evidence  suggests  that  quantitative  easing  in  particular  succeeded  in 
lowering  long-term  borrowing  rates,  its  effect  on  the  real  economy  is  less  certain.6  For 
another thing, such policies may have important side-effects: they may lead to additional risk-
taking  in financial  markets  and thus  contribute to financial  instability,7  and  they  can  create 
spillover effects to the rest of the world – notably emerging markets, where capital flows in 
search  of  higher  yield  can  fuel  asset  prices  and  currency  movements.8  A  complete 
assessment of the positive and negative effects of these measures will thus have to wait until 
we have data on the full experience, that is, until the complete exit from these policies. 
An  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  SNB’s  minimum  exchange  rate  is  clearer:  this 
measure  has  played  a  decisive  role  in  addressing  the  imminent  risk  of  deflationary 
developments and has thus been successful. Given the still weak economic environment, it 
remains  the  central  tool  to  ensure  that  monetary  conditions  are  appropriate  and  that  the 
SNB’s primary objective of price stability is fulfilled. 
The period since the collapse of Lehman Brothers has also underlined the value of central 
banks  being  able  to  respond  flexibly  to  unexpected  circumstances.  On  30  November,  the 
Swiss  electorate  will  vote  on  the  so-called  “gold  initiative”  (“Save  our  Swiss  gold”,  in  full), 
which,  paradoxically,  would  severely  constrain  the  SNB’s  room  for  manoeuvre  in  a  future 
crisis. Let me digress for a few minutes to explain why the SNB is opposed to this initiative. 
The initiative is calling for three things: first, the SNB should hold at least 20% of its assets in 
gold; second, it should no longer be allowed to sell any gold at any time; and third, all of its 
gold reserves should be stored in Switzerland. 
Let  me  address  the  last  point  first.  Today,  70%  of  our  gold  reserves  are  stored  in 
Switzerland, 20% are held at the Bank of England and 10% at the Bank of Canada. As you 
know,  a  country’s  gold  reserves  usually  have  the  function  of  an  asset  to  be  used  only  in 
emergencies. For that reason, it makes sense to diversify the storage locations. In addition, it 
makes sense to choose locations where gold is traded, so that it can be sold faster and at 
lower transaction costs. The UK and Canada both meet that criterion. In addition, they both 
have a strong and reliable legal system and we have every assurance that our gold is safe 
there. 
                                                
6   Christensen and Krogstrup (2014), Filardo and Hofmann (2014), Stein (2012), Williams (2013) and references 
therein. 
7   Chodorow-Reich (2014), IMF (2013). 
8   Rajan (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The initiative’s demand to hold at least 20% of our assets in gold would severely restrict the 
conduct of monetary policy. Monetary policy transactions directly change our balance sheet. 
Restrictions on the composition of the balance sheet therefore restrict our monetary policy 
options. A telling example is our decision to implement the exchange rate floor vis-à-vis the 
euro that I mentioned above: with the initiative’s legal limitation in place, we would have been 
forced during our defence of the minimum exchange rate not only to buy euros, but also to 
buy  gold  in  large  quantities.  Our  defence  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  would  thus  have 
involved huge costs, which would almost certainly have caused foreign exchange markets to 
doubt our resolve to enforce the rate by all means. 
Even worse consequences would result from the initiative’s proposal to prohibit the sale of 
gold at any time. An increase in gold holdings could not be reversed, even if necessary from 
a monetary policy perspective. In combination with the obligation to hold at least 20% of total 
assets  in  gold,  this  could  gradually  lead  the  SNB  into  a  situation  where  its  assets  would 
mainly  consist  of  gold:  each  extension  of  the  balance  sheet  for  monetary  policy  reasons 
would necessitate gold purchases, but whenever the balance sheet needed to be reduced 
again for the  same  reasons,  we  would  not  be  able  to  resell  our gold  holdings. This  would 
severely restrict our room for manoeuvre. 
Furthermore, because gold pays no interest or dividends, the SNB’s ability to generate profits 
and distribute them to the Confederation and the Cantons would be impaired. 
As a final point, note that currency reserves which cannot be sold are not truly reserves. It 
does not make sense to call for an increase in emergency reserves – gold holdings – and 
simultaneously prohibit the use of these reserves even in emergencies. 
The SNB’s overriding objection to the gold initiative stems from the danger it poses to the 
conduct of a successful monetary policy. It would severely impair the SNB’s ability to fulfil its 
constitutional  and  legal  mandate  to  ensure  price  stability  while  taking  due  account  of 
economic developments, in the interests of the country as a whole. 
Drawing the lessons: reinterpreting the financial stability mandate 
Let me close this digression and return to my main theme. Once the initial shock of the crisis 
waned,  policymakers  began  to  address  the  root  causes.  The  crisis  has  revealed  two 
deficiencies of the existing regulatory framework. And because central banks are well placed 
to  address  these  deficiencies,  it  has  led  to  a  reinterpretation  of  their  financial  stability 
mandate away from managing financial crises and towards preventing them. 
In this final section of my speech, I will explain in more detail what the deficiencies of the pre-
crisis regulatory framework were, and why central banks are well placed to address them. 
The first deficiency of the framework was the focus on crisis management. Before the crisis, 
it  was  thought  best  for  central  banks  to  act  decisively  once  financial  crises  had  occurred, 
rather than to try and prevent these crises from happening. The large cost of the recent crisis 
in  terms  of  social  welfare  has  made  it  clear  that  more  effort  needs  to  be  invested  in 
preventing such events altogether. 
The framework’s  second  deficiency  was  that  it  missed  out  an  important  dimension  of  risk. 
Because it focused on preventing distress at individual financial institutions (microprudential 
regulation), the framework failed  to  capture the build-up  of financial-system-wide  risk. This 
“systemic  risk”  can  arise  from  two  sources.  One  is  financial  institutions  that  are  either  so 
large (think UBS or AIG) or so interconnected (think Lehman Brothers or Bear Stearns) that 
their  failure  would  threaten  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system.  In  this  regard,  the 
failure of Lehman Brothers has demonstrated just how real the problem is. The other source 
from  which  systemic  risk  can  arise  is  small  financial  firms  who,  by  acting  together  and 
procyclically, amplify booms and busts in financial markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Addressing  systemic  risk  directly  requires  a  specific  set  of 
instruments,  so-called 
macroprudential  tools,  which  were  first  discussed  more  than  a  decade  ago.9  In  terms  of 
systemic risk, these tools fall into two broad categories. The first category is tools which aim 
to strengthen institutions that are systemically important because of either their size or their 
interconnectedness. An example is the Swiss ‘too big to fail’ legislation. The second category 
of tools aims to enhance the resilience of the financial system and to limit the procyclicality of 
financial  institutions’  collective  behaviour.  The  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  which  is 
currently activated in Switzerland, is an example of such a tool. 
In short: we have learned that system-wide financial crises can be very costly, and that we 
should focus on preventing rather than managing them. There is also a broad consensus that 
we require macroprudential tools to address systemic risk directly. 
One last question remains: why should central banks play an important role in implementing 
these tools? There are four main reasons. 
First,  as  lenders  of  last  resort,  central  banks  are  the  ultimate  providers  of  liquidity  to  the 
economy in times of financial stress, and thus play an important role in managing crises. But 
these  operations  are  not  without  risks,  so  that  central  banks  have  a  particular  stake  in 
preventing such situations. To do that, they need the appropriate tools. 
Second,  financial  stability  is  a  critical  precondition  for  central  banks’  ability  to  fulfil  their 
primary  mandate  of  ensuring  price  stability.  Financial  instability  can  distort  prices  directly, 
and it can impair the proper functioning of monetary policy transmission mechanisms. 
Third, macroprudential and monetary policy tools interact, in the sense that the use of one 
may have an effect on the use of the other – for example when low policy interest rates not 
only stimulate economic activity (as they should), but also translate into an excessive reach 
for  higher  yields  in  financial  markets,  thereby  contributing  to  the  build-up  of  systemic  risk, 
which in turn justifies the tightening of a macroprudential tool. In such a case, the chances of 
achieving the best policy mix are higher when macroprudential and monetary policy tools are 
well coordinated, which is considerably easier if they are both managed by the central bank. 
Finally,  analysing  and  monitoring  systemic  risk  and  the  impact  of  macroprudential 
instruments  requires  competences  akin  to  those  that  are  traditionally  assembled  within 
central banks, where having a macro perspective on the economy and an understanding of 
financial markets is paramount for the fulfilment of the price stability mandate. 
In sum, then, there is a compelling rationale for giving central banks a prominent role in the 
fight against systemic risk, in the design of macroprudential policy and in the management of 
macroprudential  instruments.  Uniting  the  responsibilities  for  monetary  and  macroprudential 
policy  within  the  same  institution  is  sure  to  improve  information  sharing  and  policy 
coordination. 
For  many  central  banks,  and  certainly  for  the  SNB,  the  responsibility  for  macroprudential 
policy and the shift in focus from crisis management to a more active role in crisis prevention 
constitute  a  reinterpretation  of  our  financial  stability  mandate.  For  the  SNB,  it  brings  new 
competences  on  two  levels:  first,  the  SNB  is  endowed  both  with  the  responsibility  for 
identifying  financial  institutions  that  are  systemically  important  and  with  the  authority  to 
designate them as such. And second, it is responsible for monitoring cyclical risks and, to 
that  end,  for  proposing  to  the  federal  government  the  activation  and  the  level  of  the 
countercyclical capital buffer. 
So, the answer to the question whether central banks have too prominent a role in the new 
regulatory framework is once again “no”. Given our recent experience, it would be negligent 
not to address systemic risk directly in order to prevent system-wide crises in the future, and 
                                                
9   Crockett (2000). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
because  addressing  these  risks  involves  a  set  of  tools  and  competences  that  naturally 
belong  to  the  domain  of  central  banks,  their  prominent  role  in  this  task  is  a  direct 
consequence. It is also important to bear in mind that the expanded efforts to prevent future 
crises will, if they succeed, reduce the need for extensive crisis management in the future. 
Conclusion 
History is a great teacher. And central banks must learn from its critical episodes. The recent 
crisis is such an episode and is thus an exceptional learning opportunity. 
Central banks were active in managing the crisis with both conventional and unconventional 
tools. Their efforts played a major role in preventing the collapse of the financial system in 
the early days of the crisis, and have contributed to mitigating the economic damage of the 
aftermath. These actions were only possible because central banks, including the SNB, were 
able to act flexibly in exceptional circumstances – a flexibility which the gold initiative would 
severely constrain. 
But the social costs of the crisis were – and still are – enormous, and the main lesson that 
central  banks  need  to  take  away  from  it  is  the  necessity  of  reinterpreting  their  financial 
stability  mandate,  away  from  managing  crises  and  towards  a  more  prominent  role  in 
preventing them. 
This means that systemic risk has to be addressed directly and effectively, a job for which 
central  banks  are  well  placed.  If  we  succeed,  the  need  for  extensive  crisis  management 
measures will be reduced. In other words, one should expect to see more of central banks on 
one front so as to see less of them on another. 
Let me conclude by reiterating the answer I gave right at the very beginning: in responding to 
the  crisis  and  in  implementing  new  regulatory  measures  to  prevent  another  one,  central 
banks did not do too much; they did what was and is necessary. 
References 
Christensen, Jens H.E. and Signe Krogstrup (2014). Swiss unconventional monetary policy: 
lessons for the transmission of quantitative easing. Working Paper Series 2014-18, Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco. ideas.repec.org/p/fip/fedfwp/2014-18.html 
Crockett, Andrew (2000). Marrying the Micro- and Macro-prudential Dimensions of Financial 
Stability. Speech at the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Basel. 
Chodorow-Reich,  Gabriel  (2014).  Effects  of  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  on  Financial 
Institutions. Forthcoming in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 
Eichengreen, Barry and Kevin H. O’Rourke (2010). A tale of two depressions: What do the 
new  data 
tell  us?  www.voxeu.org/article/tale-two-depressions-what-do-new-data-tell-us-
february-2010-update 
Filardo, Andrew and Boris Hofmann (2014). Forward guidance at the zero lower bound. BIS 
Quarterly Review, March 2014. www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1403f.htm 
Friedman,  Milton  and  Anna  J.  Schwartz  (1963).  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States, 
1863-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Galbraith, John K. (1990). A Short History of Financial Euphoria. New York: Penguin Group. 
IMF,  International  Monetary  Fund  (2013).  Do  Central  Bank  Policies  Since  the  Crisis  Carry 
Risks 
In:  Global  Financial  Stability  Outlook,  Chapter  3. 
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2013/01/ 
to  Financial  Stability? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Rajan, Raghuram (2013). A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis. 
Andrew  Crockett  Memorial  Lecture,  delivered  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements, 
Basel. www.bis.org/events/agm2013/sp130623.htm 
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2012).  Evaluating  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchases.  Speech  given  at  The 
Brookings 
Institution,  Washington,  D.C.  www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ 
stein20121011a.htm 
Williams,  John  C.  (2013).  Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis  for  Unconventional  Monetary 
Policy. NBER Conference, Boston. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
