  Carlos da Silva Costa: Address to the Banco Espírito Santo and Grupo 
Banco Espírito Santo parliamentary inquiry 
Initial  address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  before  the 
Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry into the management of Banco Espírito Santo (BES) and 
Grupo Banco Espírito Santo (GES), Lisbon, 17 November 2014. 
 Good morning Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen 
My initial intervention will be divided into three parts. The first part focuses on the resolution 
measure, namely the reasons that have led Banco de Portugal to decide to apply it, and a 
description of the facts occurring during the preceding week. In the second part, I will present 
a  summary  description  of  the  monitoring  and  supervision  of  Grupo  Banco  Espírito  Santo 
(GES) in recent years. In the third part, I will present some considerations on lessons to be 
learnt for the future following the Banco Espírito Santo (BES) case. 
The resolution measure 
I. 
On  3  August,  Banco  de  Portugal  applied  a  resolution  measure  to  Banco  Espírito  Santo, 
transferring its general activity to Novo Banco. This decision was time critical, in view of the 
imminent risk of cessation of payments by BES – the third largest Portuguese bank – with 
serious consequences for the Portuguese economy. As I have already mentioned in this 
Parliament,  during  the  weekend  in  which  the  resolution  measure  was  decided,  the 
stability of the financial system was severely compromised, due to the seriousness of 
the  risks  faced.  Today,  we  can  say  that  the  initiative  taken  by  Banco  de  Portugal, 
adopted in compliance with the bank’s obligation by law, has safeguarded deposits, 
depositors’  confidence  and  the  continuity  of  the  financing  of  the  economy,  i.e.  the 
stability of the financial system. 
Let us recall that, on 30 July, Banco Espírito Santo published losses of €3577 million, relating 
to the 1st half of 2014, greatly exceeding values implied by information disclosed up to the 
last two weeks of July. Such unexpected and exceptional losses: 
• 
challenged  information  provided  to  the  market  on  10 July  by  BES’s  Board  of 
Directors; 
were the result of management acts seriously detrimental to the interests of BES, 
resulting in additional losses of around €1.5 billion; 
exhausted the capital buffer of €2.1 billion held by BES to meet its exposure to 
the non-financial arm of Grupo Espírito Santo (according to its communication to the 
market on 10 July); 
and  left  BES  seriously  non-compliant  with  the  minimum  solvency  ratios  in 
force. 
   These facts are under inquiry as part of the forensic audit already launched by Banco de 
Portugal in early July: 
1. 
2. 
to assess compliance with the prudential determinations of Banco de Portugal; 
and to ascertain and document evidence of possible illicit acts undertaken by Grupo 
BES or by the members of its corporate bodies. 
As disclosed to the public by Banco de Portugal, the forensic audit is at an advanced 
stage but has not yet been concluded. This work is highly complex and faces limitations of 
access to relevant information, beyond the reach of auditors, as this information belongs to 
other corporations of Grupo Espírito Santo or to other jurisdictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  At present, the entity in charge of the audit is finishing the final reports in four of the five lines 
of  inquiry.  These  reports  and  the  respective  supporting  documents  will  form  part  of  the 
penalty proceedings already initiated or to be initiated by Banco de Portugal, to assess the 
respective responsibilities, in particular individual responsibilities. The final reports will also 
be conveyed to the Public Prosecution Service for establishing any criminal responsibilities. 
I would like to stress that, to date, Banco de Portugal has already initiated a number of 
penalty  proceedings,  which  are  under  secrecy  in  order  to  safeguard  their  effectiveness. 
These proceedings involve subjects such as: 
• 
risk-assessment  conditions  in  placing  commercial  paper  issued  by  Espírito 
Santo International (ESI) with retail customers, concealing losses incurred by that 
entity; 
the  relationships  between  BES  and  BES  Angola,  from  different  perspectives, 
including inadequate procedures in terms of money-laundering risk prevention; 
and  evidence  pointing  to  harmful  mismanagement  regarding  the  issue  and 
placement of debt issued by BES  with special-purpose vehicles having their head 
office  abroad, 
intermediary, 
simultaneously with the massive substitution of BES debt for GES debt, to bypass 
the ring-fencing imposed by Banco de Portugal. 
through  movements 
included  a  Swiss 
  that 
The  conclusions  of  the  forensic  audit  will  make  it  possible  to  document  the  evidence 
collected  in  these  proceedings  regarding  severe  irregularities  committed.  New  penalty 
proceedings are expected to be brought in the very short term, especially as regards non-
compliance with Banco de Portugal’s determinations. Unfortunately I am unable to refer to 
these subjects in detail. As you may understand, secrecy is required in order to protect the 
interest of smooth investigations, and to safeguard the rights and guarantees of the different 
procedural participants, given that defendants have already been identified in one of these 
proceedings. 
I would like to stress that Banco de Portugal was only informed of the BES’s preliminary 
results for the first half of 2014 on the evening of 25 July. On that date, KPMG quantified 
for the first time the deviation of BES’s half-yearly resultsvia-à-vis the information provided to 
the market on 10 July. 
These results, which, I repeat, dramatically challenged information provided by BES to the 
market on 10 July, warranted: 
• 
an  immediate  solution  for  BES  capitalisation,  preferably  with  recourse  to  private 
investors – plan A; 
and  the  preparation  of  contingency  scenarios  –  plan  B  –  in  case  the  private 
capitalisation option would not be feasible in time. 
 Remember that, in accordance with the Portuguese legal framework, the contingency plan 
could  involve  various  measures,  with  different  enforceability  levels,  in  terms  of  time  and 
decision  procedures:  public  capitalisation 
(including  mandatory  capitalisation), 
nationalisation, resolution and liquidation. The detailed description of the different options 
is available as a note, which I leave for analysis by the Committee. 
Final confirmation of the preliminary results for the 1st half of the year was provided by the 
external  auditor  on  Monday,  28  July.  In  view  of  the  resulting  severe  liquidity  shortfall,  on 
Tuesday,  29  July,  Banco  de  Portugal  triggered  plan  A,  determining  that,  by  COB  on 
31 July,  BES  should  submit  a  restructuring  and  capitalisation  plan  through  private 
financing, allowing compliance with own funds requirements in the very short term. 
I  would  like  to  remind  you  that,  as I mentioned to the  Committee  on  Budget,  Finance  and 
Public Administration (COFAP), in the course of July, a number of private entities had shown 
their  interest  in  taking  positions  in  BES’s  equity.  Indeed,  this  was  stressed  in  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
communication addressed to the market by the CEO of BES’s Executive Board on 30 July, 
following  the  release  of  the  half-yearly  results.  However,  the  order  of  magnitude  and  the 
nature  of  the  losses  made  public  significantly  damaged  the  external  perception  of  BES’s 
financial  position,  making  a  private  capitalisation  solution  unfeasible  in  the  short  run.  On 
Thursday, 31 July, the Board of Directors of BES informed Banco de Portugal that it would 
be unfeasible to submit a capitalisation plan based on private investment, under the terms 
and within the deadlines required. 
In view of the serious breach of BES’s minimum own funds requirements, and its failure to 
submit  a  capitalisation  plan,  on  the  evening  of  31 July  I  was  informed  by  the  ECB’s 
Executive Board that it would propose the suspension of BES’s Eurosystem monetary 
policy counterparty status to the ECB Governing Council, effective as of the following 
day, Friday, 1 August. This would oblige the bank to repay its credit to the Eurosystem in 
full (to an amount of around €10 billion). 
In  view  of  the  above,  and  in  order  to  prevent  immediate  suspension,  on  the  evening  of 
31 July  and  in  the  early  hours  of  1  August,  it  was  necessary  to  consider  the  single 
contingency  measure  feasible  in  the  short  run  that  would  safeguard  the  stability  of  the 
financial system: the resolution measure. After a teleconference that started at 12:00 p.m. on 
Friday, 1 August, the ECB Governing Council decided to postpone the suspension of BES’s 
counterparty  status  to  Monday,  4  August,  subject  to  the  compromise  that  the  resolution 
measure would be implemented during the weekend, before market opening on Monday. 
In the wake of this decision by the ECB’s Governing Council, Banco de Portugal decided 
to apply a resolution measure to BES. I immediately informed the Minister of State and 
Finance of this decision. 
It is crucial to understand that, at that moment, given the loss of access to ECB financing on 
the  following  Monday,  the  only  options  available  to  Banco  de  Portugal  were  resolution  or 
liquidation. 
The public recapitalisation option, even as mandatory capitalisation, would no longer be 
feasible, as it would require complex and time-consuming prior procedures. 
With regard to this option, which would not be feasible due to the urgent response required, it 
is important to bear in mind that: 
• 
From a burden-sharing perspective, according to the current State aid regulations – 
in force since 2013 and transposed into the Portuguese legal recapitalisation system 
approved  in  this  Parliament  –  BES’s  losses  are  primarily  absorbed  by 
shareholders and subordinated creditors, similarly to a resolution scenario. 
and  from  the  perspective  of  the  impact  on  public  funds,  balance-sheet  risks  and 
other contingencies associated with BES’s prior management practice could not be 
ring-fenced, unlike under a resolution, and would therefore be borne by taxpayers. 
 In  turn,  the  liquidation  of  an  institution  as  systemically  important  as  BES  would  entail  very 
high costs for depositors, severe risks to financing of the economy and, consequently, would 
jeopardise the financial system’s stability. For shareholders and subordinated creditors, the 
liquidation  option  would  not  be  more  advantageous  either,  given  that  the  resolution  legal 
framework  guarantees  that  their  losses  cannot  exceed  those  that  would  result  from  a 
liquidation process. 
To  sum  up,  given  the  imminent  suspension  of  access  to  ECB  financing  and  the  lack  of 
feasible alternatives given the time-frame, resolution was the sole solution that made it 
possible to preserve most of BES’s activity, secure the safety of deposits, ensure the 
continuity  of  credit  to  the  economy,  prevent  systemic  risks  and  safeguard  the 
interests  of  taxpayers  and  BES’s  employees.  In  pursuance  of  its  legal  obligations, 
Banco de Portugal made the only decision that would safeguard the national financial 
system’s stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  complexity  and  operational  risk  of  such  a  measure  cannot  be  downplayed.  Over  the 
weekend of 2–3 August, it was necessary to analyse the valuation of assets, estimate capital 
needs, separate the bridge bank’s and BES’s balance sheets, prepare legal and regulatory 
instruments,  appoint  the  corporate  bodies  of  the  new  entities  and  prepare  several 
communication instruments. 
This  was  only  possible  given  that,  as  mentioned  above,  since  the  weekend  of  26–27  July 
Banco de Portugal had been actively working on the various contingency scenarios set out in 
the Law. This planning included: 
• 
arranging for  the  assistance  of  all  entities  that,  in  accordance  with  the  law,  would 
need to be involved in the preparation and approval of any solution that were to be 
adopted: 
the  European 
Commission’s Directorate-General for Competition; 
preparing the intervention instruments that would allow for any chosen option to be 
viable. 
the  European  Central  Bank  and 
the  Government, 
 Thus,  having  taken  action  to  safeguard  and  prepare  all  options,  on  30  July  Banco  de 
Portugal  proposed  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance  that  a  series  of  changes  be  made  to  the 
resolution scheme envisaged in the Regime Geral das Instituições de Crédito e Sociedades 
Financeiras  –  RGICSF  (Legal  Framework  of  Credit  Institutions  and  Financial  Companies), 
with the goal of greater legal certainty and the protection of small investors’ deposits. 
Its main goal was to ensure that: 
• 
(i)  should  a  resolution  measure  be applied,  no  creditor  would  bear greater  losses 
than those that would arise from a liquidation process (“no creditor worse off”); and 
(ii) the protection of small shareholders would be reinforced, thereby guaranteeing 
that their deposits would not be unprotected should a resolution measure be applied 
(as envisaged in the scheme in force at the time). 
 These  proposals,  which  were  part  of  the  CRD  IV  transposition  “package”  and  have  been 
available  on  the  Portuguese  Parliament’s  website  since  14  May,  had  been  submitted  by 
Banco de Portugal to the Government in November 2013. 
Discussions with the Government also covered financing scenarios for a possible resolution 
measure,  given  that  the  Resolution  Fund  was  only  launched  in  2012  and  did  not  have 
sufficient own funds. 
As regards the European Central Bank, dialogue was established with the President of the 
ECB,  members  of  the  Executive  Board  and  the  Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board,  and,  on 
30 July, information was given on BES’s situation and the preparation of a contingency plan. 
The prospect of BES’s resolution was, as mentioned above, discussed as of the evening of 
31 July and the early hours of 1 August, as a way to prevent the immediate suspension of 
BES’s status as a monetary policy counterparty. 
The  European  Commission’s  Directorate-General  for  Competition  was  first  contacted, 
on a technical and informal level, on 30 July, to discuss the various contingency scenarios 
that would entail recourse to State aid. On the afternoon of 31 July, I called Vice-President 
Almunia, to inform him that the Commission’s services might be needed over the weekend 
and during a holiday period. 
Given that this issue was raised in my address to COFAP on 8 October, I reiterate that all 
communication with the Directorate-General for Competition was not, and could never 
have  been,  a  notification  of  State  aid,  nor  prior  indication  of  such  a  notification.  As 
previously explained, Banco de Portugal does not formally correspond with DG-COMP in the 
event of a notification of State aid processes and their follow-up. These fall within exclusive 
competence of the Government. Naturally, without prejudice to this formal framework, Banco 
de Portugal is in regular contact and shares information with DG-COMP, in the fulfilment of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  its  tasks  and  in  the  scope  of  State  aid  to  national  financial  institutions,  always  in  close 
cooperation with the Ministry of Finance. The documentation sent by Banco de Portugal to 
the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry includes a detailed chronology of all contacts with the 
Directorate-General for Competition, between 30 July and 5 August. 
I wish to conclude on this point, stressing that the resolution measure was taken in a legal 
framework  approved  by  the  Parliament  in  2012,which  is  very  similar  to  the  European 
resolution  scheme  (the  Banking  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  –  BRRD),  approved  in 
May 2014, to be transposed into national Law by the end of 2014. 
II.  Monitoring and supervision of BES 
Over  the  past four  years,  Banco  de  Portugal  has  carried  out permanent and particularly 
intrusive monitoring of Espírito Santo Financial Group (ESFG). The supervisory exercise 
took  place  against  a  background  of  particular  complexity  within  ESFG,  which  comprises 
numerous entities with their head office in several jurisdictions,  some  of  which  place 
constraints on information sharing, as described in the technical note sent to the Committee. 
As is well known: 
• 
credit institution subsidiaries having their head office in third countries are subject to 
supervision, on an individual basis, by the local supervisory authority; 
Banco  de  Portugal’s  supervision  on  a  consolidated  basis  relies  on  information 
shared  by  such  authorities  and  their  supervision,  in  addition  to  analyses  and 
certifications conducted by local auditors; 
to  overcome  constraints  on  access  to  relevant  information  regarding  these 
subsidiaries’  activity  in  some  of  these  jurisdictions,  Banco  de  Portugal  has 
established  protocols  with  the  respective  supervisors,  which  does  not  preclude 
difficulties in accessing information in some of these jurisdictions. 
  Banco de Portugal’s monitoring of ESFG over the past four years intensified at two distinct 
points: 
• 
(i) in the context of the Economic and Financial Assistance Programme, since mid-
2011; and 
(ii) due to the specific problems stemming from the exposure to GES as of the last 
quarter of 2013. 
 In  the  context  of  the  Economic  and  Financial  Assistance  Programme,  and  pursuing  the 
strategy  that  had  started  in  mid-2010,  Banco  de  Portugal  has  developed  an  even  more 
intrusive  supervisory  model,  with  a  greater  focus  on  risk  and  a  more  cross-cutting  and 
prospective  nature.  Similarly  to  other  Portuguese  banks,  ESFG  was  subject  to 
unparalleled balance sheet scrutiny. 
In addition to the preparation of financing and capital plans and quarterly stress-testing, five 
horizontal  audits  were  conducted,  as  has  been  thoroughly  documented  in  the  information 
sent to this Committee and also mentioned in my hearings with COFAP. 
Following these exercises, ESFG was obliged to reinforce its overall impairment level by a 
total amount of EUR 1366 million. More than half of this amount was defined in the course of 
ETRICC2, i.e. an exercise launched in early September 2013, which involved an assessment 
of the business plans of the major economic groups that are debtors of the banking system 
and whose credit recovery depends on the generation of financial flows from the business. 
A  second  arm  of  BES’s  monitoring  resulted,  as  mentioned  above,  from  specific  problems 
related  to  the  exposure  to  the  non-financial  area  of  Grupo  Espírito  Santo,  detected  in  the 
scope of ETRICC2, in November 2013. It was in this context that it was discovered that the 
accounts  of  Espírito  Santo  International  (ESI),  with  its  head  office  in  Luxembourg  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
outside  the  supervisory  perimeter  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  had  not  registered  the  total 
amount  of  debt  issued:  EUR  1.3  billion  had  been  omitted.  This  fact  was  brought  to  light 
following  a  particularly  intrusive  inspection,  on  Banco  de  Portugal’s  own  initiative, 
although ESI was not subject to Banco de Portugal’s supervision. 
The seriousness of this state of affairs, which jeopardised ESI’s solvency, with an impact on 
BES’s balance sheet, and which entailed high reputational risks to ESFG, has resulted in: 
• 
a requirement to prepare proforma consolidated accounts for ESI immediately, with 
reference to 30 September 2013, accompanied by an external auditor’s opinion. 
a significant strengthening of Grupo BES’s segregation policy from the risks arising 
from its non-financial arm, on the basis of four pillars: 
1. 
reinforcement of ring-fencing from risks arising from Grupo Espírito Santo, as 
described in detail in a technical note provided today; 
reinforcement of solvency ratios; 
strengthening  of  the  governance  model,  including  the  adoption  of  a 
management model independent of shareholders; 
permanent scrutiny of actions for suitability purposes. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
 Hence, firstly, on 3 December 2013 Banco de Portugal determined the following: 
• 
elimination of ESFG’s full direct and indirect exposure to ESI not covered by legally 
binding and prudently assessed guarantees; 
setting-up  of  an  escrow  account  fed  by  resources  outside  ESFG,  with  an  amount 
equivalent to the debt issued by ESI and held by BES’s retail customers, exclusively 
for the purpose of repaying said debt; 
obligation to set up a provision, with reference to 31 December 2013, defined by the 
external  auditor,  should  the  measures  not  be  implemented.  The  amount  of  this 
provision, €700 million, was established by KPMG and confirmed by PwC. 
  Secondly, Banco de Portugal has determined an increase in ESFG’s capital to an amount 
ensuring that the Core Tier 1 capital ratio would stand, with reference to 31 December 2013, 
at  a  value  higher  than  the  regulatory  minimum  by  at  least  50  b.p..  The  capital  increase 
should  also  include  a  capital  buffer  that  would  allow  ESFG  to  accommodate  shocks 
stemming  from  adverse  scenarios  and  address  the  results  of  the  ECB’s  comprehensive 
assessment exercise, which was ongoing at the time. On 16 June 2014 a capital increase of 
€1045 million was concluded. 
Thirdly, Banco de Portugal has issued a series of determinations on corporate governance: 
• 
obligation to disseminate Banco de Portugal’s determinations to all members of the 
ESFG  and  BES  management  boards  and  to  discuss  the  measures  adopted  in 
response to said determinations, which should naturally be approved at a meeting of 
the Board of Directors; 
simplification of ESFG’s group structure; 
reinforcement  of  the  provisions,  processes,  mechanisms  and  strategies  created 
within the scope of corporate governance, internal control and risk self-assessment, 
so as to ensure appropriate independence from GES’s non-financial arm; 
development  and  implementation  of  the  necessary  measures  to  ensure  total  and 
definitive separation from the brand names used by each arm of GES; 
prohibition  from  directly  or  indirectly  trading  (notably  through  investment  funds  or 
other  financial  institutions)  debt  from  entities  of  GES’  non-financial  arm  with  retail 
customers; 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    changes to the code of conduct with a view to preventing, detecting, monitoring and 
reporting conflicts of interests; 
creation  of  a  committee  on  transactions  with  related  entities,  with  countervailing 
powers, designed to control all credit operations or significant business relationships 
(i)  with  members  of  the  management  or  supervisory  boards  of  BES  or  related 
entities, (ii) with any direct and indirect holder of over 2% of BES’s equity capital or 
voting  rights  (iii)  or  with  any  entity  belonging  to  the  same  economic  group  of  the 
shareholder. 
 Fourthly, Banco de Portugal’s supervision pursued the objective of obtaining explanations 
for facts  as  they  came  to  light  within  the  limits of  the  legal framework governing  suitability 
assessment, a subject also addressed in a Note that I am submitting to this Committee. 
This exercise, which has always taken into account a need to comply with the RGICSF and 
safeguard depositors’ confidence and financial stability, has led to: 
• 
the presentation in mid-April 2014 of a succession plan with the removal of family 
members from BES’s executive body; 
the  withdrawal  of  registration  requests  to  perform  tasks  in  other  entities  of  the 
Group; 
finally, the early resignation from BES of all members of the Espírito Santo family. 
• 
Measures  designed  to  isolate  the  financial  group  from  GES  risk  have  been  successively 
reinforced  by  Banco  de  Portugal  over  time,  which  also  imposed  a  number  of  monitoring 
mechanisms to ensure compliance with Banco de Portugal’s determinations. 
Taking into account the four lines of defence of a banking institution’s financial soundness, 
Banco de Portugal has maintained extensive interaction through written correspondence and 
meetings  with  several  members  of  ESFG’s  and  BES’s  Executive  Boards  and  Audit 
Committees, and naturally with KPMG, taking into consideration the responsibility assigned 
to them by law in the performance of their tasks. 
Through these initiatives, Banco de Portugal has sought to ensure strong involvement of all 
members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  and  the  Board  of  Auditors  and  external  auditors  in 
compliance  with  the  determinations  issued.  It  is  important  to  stress  that  BES’s  Board  of 
Directors  was  composed  of  25  members,  the  large  majority  of  whom  had  extensive 
experience in the banking sector, and included representatives from important shareholders 
other than GES. 
Banco  de  Portugal’s  conduct  in  this  process  has  always  been  guided  by  the 
objectives  of  protecting  depositors,  preserving  public  confidence  and  ultimately 
safeguarding the stability of the financial system. 
III.  Lessons for the future 
The implementation of the resolution measure in BES has made it possible to preserve 
stability  and  confidence  in  the  Portuguese  financial  system,  protect  depositors  and 
ensure ongoing provision of key financial services. Stock and debt market indicators of 
other  listed  Portuguese  banks  and  Portuguese  public  debt  spreads  in  the  period  after 
implementation of the measure point to an absence of systemic disruptions in the market. In 
addition, the trend of bank deposits has shown considerable stability at aggregate level (with 
a  certain  reallocation  within  the  system),  along  with  the  maintenance  of  depositors’ 
confidence  in  Portuguese  banks.  Finally,  the  most  recent  data  on  credit  granted  by  the 
financial  sector  to  non-financial  corporations  and  households  also  do  not  show  that  the 
resolution measure adopted had a significant impact on the evolution of bank financing to the 
economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  BES’s  case  highlighted  a  series  of  weaknesses  and  limitations  of  our  legal  supervisory 
framework and also the existence of internal governance practices that are deficient or do 
not comply with the established standards (not only in the banking system). 
At regulatory level, I would like to stress four areas for improvement: 
1. 
to  be 
located 
legislation  allows 
these  conglomerates 
First, current European legislation allows banks to be part of mixed conglomerates, 
simultaneously financial and non-financial, which encourage contagion mechanisms 
that  are  difficult  to  control.  It  is  an  illusion  to  think  that  control  of  the  so-called 
“related  entities”  is  captured  through  exposure  limits  in  the  balance  sheet. On the 
one  hand,  these  result  from  information  supplied  by  customers  and  a  risk 
assessment  by  the  bank,  which,  in  the  case  of  related  entities,  increases  the 
probability of lenience as to information quality and risk assessment. On the other 
hand, the limits envisaged in legislation do not make it possible to cover off-balance-
sheet exposures, which, as in BES’s specific case, may be much more important. 
Second, 
in  multiple 
jurisdictions, some of them not very cooperative or transparent as regards access to 
relevant  information.  It  is  necessary  to  assess  the  existing  legal  framework  and 
analyse  how  to  supervise  institutions  with  subsidiaries  located  in  jurisdictions  with 
limitations  to  information  access.  Will  it  suffice  to  deduct  from  capital  the  values 
referring  to  them  or  should  we  prevent  this  type  of  jurisdiction  to  be  part  of  the 
conglomerate?  This  is  a  question  worthy  of  discussion  at  European  level,  and  is 
very important for all those making up the information analysis chain. 
A third problem relates to institutions’ governance model. It is important to guarantee 
that the institution’s actual practice conforms to the rules of its governance model. In 
particular,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  boards  of  auditors  perform  the  tasks 
entrusted  to  them  by  law  fully  and  effectively.  Given  the  complexity  of  institutions 
that carry out banking activities, audit boards should operate on a permanent basis 
and  not  on  the  basis  of  periodical  quarterly  or  monthly  meetings.  This  is  the  only 
way  to  ensure  effective  monitoring  and  to  make  timely  decisions.  One  must  also 
ensure that those responsible for compliance, risk management and internal audit 
have  the  autonomy  and  independence  to  perform  their  tasks  and  are  seen  by 
stakeholders as allies in the defence of the institution’s general interest. Institutions’ 
internal  governance  issues  should  be  addressed  at  the  level  of  legislation  and 
practices.  Supervisors  have  to  scrutinise  the  governance  practices  of  institutions 
under their supervision on a periodical basis. 
Finally, supervisors must be able to act decisively and swiftly. The legal framework 
governing  Banco  de  Portugal’s  activity  imposes  such  a  degree  of  protection  of 
financial institutions’ managers that the scope for Banco de Portugal to act – without 
the risk of breaking rules or the law – is very limited. I must stress that, as regards 
suitability, the changes introduced to the RGICSF that have been recently approved 
under a legislative authorisation of the Assembly of the Republic have fallen short of 
what Banco de Portugal would deem necessary to lift some restrictions on its activity 
at  this  level.  I  must  also  remind  you  that  the  Courts’  case-law  has  successively 
reinforced the limitations faced by Banco de Portugal in this matter. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Also at supervisory level, it is important to assess supervisory processes and practices in an 
aloof, calm and knowledgeable manner as allowed by time. Banco de Portugal believes that 
it  has  acted  in  a  fully  committed  manner,  making  decisions  based  on  the  information 
available at any one time and within the scope of said limitations, to the best of its abilities 
and always with the main concern of protecting the interests of depositors and safeguarding 
the stability of the Portuguese financial system. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Banco de Portugal, however, does not claim to be infallible and will certainly make its own 
assessment of the experience gathered from this case, as is indeed every institution’s duty in 
all  circumstances.  Also,  such  assessment  is  necessary  so  that,  in  the  new  context  of  a 
Banking Union, adjustments can be made allowing for an increase in supervisory efficiency. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
