  Yves Mersch: Monetary policy and economic inequality 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the Corporate Credit Conference, hosted by Muzinich, Zurich, 17 October 
2014. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to join you for this annual conference on corporate credit hosted by 
Muzinich. In my remarks today, I would like to discuss an unusual topic for central bankers – 
namely the interactions between monetary policy and inequality. All economic policy-makers 
have  some  distributional  impact  as  a  result  of  the  measures  they  introduce  –  yet  until 
relatively recently, such consequences have been largely ignored in the theory and practice 
of monetary policy. 
Of  course,  central  banks  are  not  charged  with  the  task  of  addressing  inequalities  in  the 
distribution  of  wealth,  income  or  consumption  –  nor  are  they  dealing  with  the  broader 
challenge of promoting economic justice for society as a whole. This is certainly true of the 
European Central Bank (ECB), which has been assigned a clear mandate – to maintain price 
stability over the medium term. 
But particularly at a time of exceptionally low interest rates and non-standard monetary policy 
measures,  it  is  essential  for  us  to  be  aware  of  all  collateral  effects  –  including  the 
distributional  ones,  i.e.  the  potential  economic  damage  to  some  parts  of  society;  and  the 
potential benefits for others. 
So  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  explore  some  of  the  emerging  evidence  on  the 
distributional  effects  of  monetary  policy.  I  will  begin  with  a  brief  discussion  of  the  rising 
prominence of inequality as an issue of global public concern. 
I  will  then  review  what  we  are  learning  about  the  impact  of  low  interest  rates  and  non-
standard measures on household finances. My main focus will be on the euro area but since 
this is a universal phenomenon, I will also look at the experiences of other major economies. 
I will conclude by touching on the implications for ECB policy. 
The rise of inequality 
Let  me  begin  with  inequality,  which  has  recently  re-emerged  as  a  topic  of  wide  public 
debate.1  From  a  central  banker’s  perspective,  the  most  relevant  aspects  of  recent  works 
concern  the  assessment  that  monetary  policy  can  have  sizeable  distributional  effects. 
Indeed, inequality has been largely ignored in discussions of monetary policy. But this might 
be changing. 
In  part,  this  is  because  of  the  potentially  negative  impact  of  rising  inequality  on  financial 
stability. For example, some – not least the current governor of the Reserve Bank of India – 
have argued that US policies to circumvent the consequences of inequality fuelled financial 
instability ahead of the crisis.2 But while income inequality may have driven the credit boom 
                                                
1   See in particular Piketty, T., Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Harvard University Press, 2014. 
2   See  Raghuram,  R.,  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World  Economy,  Princeton 
University Press, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  that  preceded  the  US  subprime  crisis,  comparative  and  historical  evidence  suggests  that 
there is little relationship between rising inequality and financial crises.3 
More  generally,  inequality  is  of  interest  to  central  banking  discussions  because  monetary 
policy  itself  has  distributional  consequences  which  in  turn  influence  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism.  For  example,  the  impact  of  changes  in  interest  rates  on  the 
consumer spending of an individual household depend crucially on that household’s overall 
financial position – whether it is a net debtor or a net creditor; and whether the interest rates 
on its assets and liabilities are fixed or variable. 
Such  differences  have  macroeconomic  implications,  as  the  economy’s  overall  response  to 
policy changes will depend on the distribution of assets, debt and income across households 
– especially in times of crisis, when economic shocks are large and unevenly distributed. For 
example,  by  boosting  –  first  –  aggregate  demand  and  –  second  –  employment,  monetary 
easing could reduce economic disparities; at the same time, if low interest rates boost the 
prices  of  financial  assets  while  punishing  savings  deposits,  they  could  lead  to  widening 
inequality. 
Insofar,  central  bankers  have  a  technical,  non-judgemental  interest  in  the  distribution  of 
income and wealth in a society. 
(NBER)  outlines 
The distributional effects of monetary policy: theory and evidence 
So  what  do  we  know  about  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  the  distribution  of  wealth, 
income and consumption? A comprehensive study published recently by the National Bureau 
of  Economic  Research 
five  potential  channels  by  which  more 
accommodative measures might affect inequality.4 
The  first  is  the  “income  composition  channel”:  while  most  households  rely  primarily  on 
earnings  from  their  work,  others  receive  larger  shares  of  their  income  from  business  and 
financial income. If more expansionary monetary policy raises profits more than wages, then 
those with claims to ownership of firms will tend to benefit disproportionately. Since the latter 
also tend to be wealthier, this channel should lead to higher inequality in response to more 
accommodative monetary policy. 
The  second  is  the  “financial  segmentation  channel”:  if  some  individuals  and  organisations 
frequently trade in financial markets and are affected by changes in the money supply before 
others,  then  an  increase  in  the  money  supply  will  redistribute  wealth  towards  those  most 
connected  to  markets.  To  the  extent  that  households  that  participate  actively  in  financial 
transactions  typically  have  higher  income,  then this  channel  also  implies  that consumption 
inequality should rise after expansionary monetary policy shocks. 
The  third  is  the  “portfolio  channel”:  if  low-income  households  tend  to  hold  relatively  more 
cash  and  fewer  financial  assets  than  high-income  households,  then  potentially  inflationary 
actions on the part of the central bank would represent a transfer from low- to high-income 
households. Again, this would tend to increase consumption inequality. 
The NBER study outlines two further channels that tend to move inequality in the opposite 
direction in response to expansionary monetary policy. The first is the “savings redistribution 
channel”:  lower  interest  rates  will  benefit  borrowers  and  hurt  savers.  To  the  extent  that 
savers are generally wealthier than borrowers, this will generate a reduction in consumption 
inequality. 
                                                
3   See Bordo, M.D., Meissner, C.M., Does Inequality Lead to a Financial Crisis?, NBER Working Papers 17896, 
2012. 
4   See  Coibion,  O.,  Gorodnichenko,  Y.,  Kueng,  L.,  Silvia  J.,  Innocent  Bystanders?  Monetary  Policy  and 
Inequality in the U.S., NBER Working Paper No. 18170, June 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  second  is  the  “earnings  heterogeneity  channel”:  earnings  from  jobs  are  the  primary 
source  of  income for most  households  and  earnings for  high-  and  low-income  households 
may respond differently to monetary policy. This could occur, for example, if unemployment 
falls  disproportionately  on  low-income  groups:  evidence  does  suggest  that  that  labour 
earnings at the bottom of the distribution are most affected by business cycle fluctuations. So 
if monetary policy reduces unemployment, it will also reduce inequality. 
In  addition,  the  income  composition  channel  could  potentially  lead  to  reduced,  rather  than 
increased,  inequality  as  a  result  of  expansionary  monetary  policy.  Because  low-income 
households receive, on average, a larger share of their income from transfers and because 
transfers tend to be countercyclical, then this component of income heterogeneity could lead 
to reduced income inequality. 
All these different channels imply that the effect of monetary policy on economic inequality is 
a  priori  ambiguous.  The  study  therefore  looks  at  US  data  from  1980  to  assess  whether 
monetary policy has contributed to changes in inequality and, if so, through which channels. 
The  researchers  find  that  contractionary  monetary  policy  shocks  have  significant  long-run 
effects on inequality. 
In particular, they note the sensitivity of inequality measures to monetary policy actions at the 
zero-bound. They conclude that nominal interest rates hitting the zero-bound in times when 
the  central  bank’s  systematic  response  to  economic  conditions  calls  for  negative  rates  is 
conceptually  similar  to  the  economy  being  subject  to  a  prolonged  period  of  contractionary 
monetary policy. 
A report last year by the McKinsey Global Institute looks specifically at the period of what it 
calls ultra-low interest rates.5 It suggests that as a result of low rates in the US, the UK and 
the  euro  area,  households  have  lost  a  combined  $630  billion  as  lower  interest  earned  on 
deposits  and  other  fixed  income  investments  has  outweighed  lower  interest  payments  on 
debt.  Younger  households,  which  tend  to  be  net  borrowers,  have  gained  while  older 
households,  which  tend  to  be  net  savers,  have  lost  at  a  time  when  many  countries  have 
introduced pension reforms affecting the benefits of pensioners 
Rising  asset  prices  prompted  by  monetary  easing  could  potentially  offset  this  effect.  But 
while  bond  prices  have  clearly  risen,  the  McKinsey  report  finds  little  evidence  that  non-
standard monetary policy has boosted equity markets. 
James Bullard, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis, has also examined the 
post-2008 experience and whether quantitative easing has exacerbated US inequality.6 It has 
been suggested that the Fed’s policy of buying US government bonds and mortgage-backed 
securities has depressed real yields on relatively safe assets and thus encouraged savers to 
move  into  riskier  assets,  such  as  equities,  raising  their  prices.  Since  only  half  of  US 
households hold equities and they tend to be the wealthiest households, this policy could be 
making the wealth distribution more unequal. 
The analysis suggests that quantitative easing has influenced equity prices, but he does not 
think that this has made the US income or wealth distribution worse. It is, he says, only as 
good or bad as it was before the crisis. 
Bullard also examines whether current US monetary policy hurts savers. He argues that Fed 
policy generally and quantitative easing in particular have influenced the real yield earned by 
savers. The question is then whether the Fed has helped or hurt the situation by pushing real 
                                                
5   See Dobbs, R., Lund, S., Koller, T. and Shwayder, A., QE and ultra-low interest rates: Distributional effects 
and risks, McKinsey Global Institute, November 2013. 
6   See Bullard, James, Income Inequality and Monetary Policy: A Framework with Answers to Three Questions, 
Speech/C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, June 26, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  yields lower. This hinges on whether credit markets have been functioning smoothly during 
the period of quantitative easing. 
If credit markets were working perfectly, then the Fed intervention to push real yields lower 
than normal was unwarranted and the low real yields were indeed punishing savers. At the 
same  time,  it  is  difficult to  argue  that  credit  markets  have  been  working  perfectly  over  the 
past five years. But as time passes, he concludes, it becomes increasingly difficult to argue 
that credit  markets  remain  in  a  state  of  disrepair,  and thereby  to  justify  continued  low  real 
rates. 
One final piece of literature on monetary policy and inequality outside the euro area lies in 
recent  research  by  Ayako  Saiki  and  Jon  Frost  at  De  Nederlandsche  Bank.7  They  have 
examined  the  impact  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  on  the  distribution  of  income  in 
Japan, a country whose long history of non-standard measures makes it particularly relevant. 
Their  results  show  that  while  aggressive  monetary  policy  finally  seems  to  be  having  the 
desired effect on the economy, this strong medicine has come with the unwanted side-effect 
of higher income inequality. 
They  suggest  a  straightforward  mechanism  via  the  portfolio  channel:  an  increase  in  the 
monetary  base  (through  purchases  of  both  safe  and  risky  assets)  tends  to  increase  asset 
prices.  Higher  asset  prices  benefit  primarily  those  on  higher  incomes,  who  hold  a  larger 
amount and share of overall savings in equities, and thus benefit from greater capital income. 
Overall,  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  unconventional  policies  have  widened  income  inequality, 
especially after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, when quantitative easing became 
more aggressive. 
The  researchers  conclude  that  their  study  holds  lessons  for  other  countries  undertaking 
unconventional  monetary  policy.  While  preventing  deflation  and  repairing  the  monetary 
transmission  mechanism  at  the  zero-bound  is  inherently  a  difficult  undertaking,  Japan’s 
experience  provides  a  cautionary  tale  on  the  potential  side-effects.  It  is  possible  that  the 
portfolio  channel  will  be  even  larger  in  the  US,  the  UK  and  many  euro  area  economies, 
where households hold a larger portion of their savings in equities and bonds. 
Household finances in the euro area 
Let me now turn to what we know about the distributional effects of monetary policy in the 
euro area. A deep understanding of how the economy responds to various shocks or policy 
changes  requires  detailed  information  on  the  structure  and  composition  of  household 
finances. 
Central banks have long been involved in the collection and analysis of such data. In 1983, 
the  Federal  Reserve  System  launched  its  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances.  Several  other 
central  banks  have  since  followed  suit.  Here  in  Europe,  the  ECB  and  the  national  central 
banks of the euro area have launched the Household Finance and Consumption Survey. 
The  data  collected  by  the  survey  are  a  wealth  of  information  on  the  finances  of  over 
62,000 households across 15 countries in the euro area. In April 2013, the ECB published 
the results of the first wave, triggering substantial research activity. 
For  example,  ECB  analysis  of  the  immediate  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  suggests  that 
between  2008  and  2013  high-income  households  experienced  the  largest  declines  in 
                                                
7   Saikia, A., Frost, J., How does Unconventional Monetary Policy Affect Inequality? Evidence from Japan, DNB 
Working Paper No. 423, May 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
wealth.8 But the impact on consumer spending by low-income households was probably also 
magnified owing to their stronger response to wealth shocks. 
In the context of concerns about inequality, the survey data can be used to assess changing 
financial  pressures  on  euro  area  households  –  as  measured,  for  example,  by  the  debt 
service-to-income ratio. That ratio can be used to gauge households’ capacity to take on new 
loans  or  service  existing  debt,  making  it  an  indicator  of  their  ability  to  cope  with  financial 
shocks. 
The debt service-to-income ratio has recently been affected by two countervailing factors, the 
magnitude of which varies across countries and households: first, a decline in interest rates; 
and second, an increase in unemployment rates, which has caused declines in income for 
some households. 
ECB  analysis  finds  that  between  2008  and  2013  although  households  with  variable  rate 
mortgages have benefited from declines in interest rates, the impact that falling rates have 
had on the debt service-to-income ratios of low-income households has been dampened by 
the  fact  that  those  poorer  households  have  been  disproportionately  affected  by  rises  in 
unemployment. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
As  I  noted  at  the  start,  the  ECB  has  a  clear  mandate  to  deliver  price  stability  –  and  that 
mandate  does  not  involve  policies  aimed  at  the  distribution  of  wealth,  income  or 
consumption. 
Nevertheless, we need to be aware that there are distributional consequences of our actions 
– and these may  well be particularly significant at times of exceptionally low  interest rates 
and non-standard measures. It seems clear that there are different effects on different parts 
of society. 
There  is  no  clear  evidence  whether  standard  monetary  policy  has  a  dampening  or 
intensifying effect on economic inequality. 
Non-conventional monetary policy however, in particular large scale asset purchases, seem 
to widen income inequality, although this is challenging to quantify. 
Still, a central bank with a clear mandate to safeguard price stability needs to act forcefully 
when push comes to shove. These distributional side-effects then need to be tolerated. But 
they clearly should not last too long. They are one more reason to recognise that the non-
standard measures we have introduced have to be temporary. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
8   See  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin,  The  financial  vulnerability  of  euro  area  households  –  evidence  from  the 
eurosystem’s household finance and consumption survey, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
