  Raghuram Rajan: Strong sustainable growth for the Indian economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  FIBAC  2015 
“Inclusive growth with disruptive innovations”, Mumbai, 24 August 2015. 
 I thank Vivek Aggarwal, Alpana Killawala, and Dr. Prachi Mishra for comments. 
We live in an increasingly uncertain world. Seven years after the financial crisis, advanced 
economies are still growing slowly, while a number of emerging economies are experiencing 
difficulty  as  the  old  export-led  growth  model  flounders.  In  this  environment,  there  is  both 
challenge  and  opportunity.  Challenge  because  the  world  will  not  provide  the  strong  and 
supportive growth environment we had in the last decade, opportunity because global capital 
is looking for investment opportunities. 
As I said late last year in my Bharat Ram lecture entitled “Make in India, Largely for India”, to 
implement the Prime Minister’s vision of producing in India at a time when trade across the 
world is falling, we will have to strengthen the domestic market so as to absorb much of the 
increased  production  until  the  global  market  recovers.  This  means  we  have  to  increase 
domestic demand, while avoiding the booms and busts that typically plague such efforts by 
emerging  markets.  My  focus  in  today’s  talk  will  be  on  what  the  RBI  is  doing  to  help  the 
Government  create  the  conditions  for  sustainable  growth.  Structural  reforms  will  help 
strengthen  this  growth  –  two  weeks  ago,  the  Government  announced  Indradhanush,  last 
week we licensed new payment banks, next month we will license new small finance banks, 
two new universal banks are starting in October, the providers of the TREDs system will be 
licensed in November, and so on, but these developments are best left to a future speech. 
Challenges in the current macroeconomic environment 
We have come a long way since the difficulties in 2012–13 as a result of actions taken by the 
Government  and  regulators.  Growth  is  stronger,  the  current  account  deficit  has  narrowed 
significantly, the fiscal deficit is on a consolidation path, and inflation has halved. However, 
three areas are still “work in progress” from RBI’s perspective. First, economic growth is still 
below  levels  that  the  country  is  capable  of.  Second,  while  consumer  price  inflation  has 
moderated, inflation expectations amongst the public are still high, creating a gap between 
the real rates that savers expect and the rates corporations think they pay. Third, stressed 
assets in the financial system continue to be high, which holds back growth and new lending, 
even while dampening bank incentives to cut base rates. 
The short term macroeconomic priorities of the Reserve Bank are therefore clear: 
• 
Help  growth  by  bringing  down  inflation  in  line  with  the  proposed  glide  path,  thus 
creating room for monetary easing; and 
Work with the Government and banks on speeding up the resolution of distressed 
projects and cleaning up bank balance sheets. 
 Let me start first with inflation: I am sure many of you are interested in what we will do next 
on policy. For that, I think the best summary is still our last policy statement, from which I 
quote,  “Significant  uncertainty  will  be  resolved  in  the  coming  months,  including  the  likely 
persistence  of  recent  inflationary  pressures,  the  full  monsoon  outturn,  as  well  as  possible 
Federal  Reserve  actions.  As  the  Reserve  Bank  awaits  greater  transmission  of  its  front-
loaded  past  actions, 
for  more 
accommodation.” Having said all I want to say on future policy, let me explain what we have 
been doing so far, and why we have been doing it. 
it  will  monitor  developments 
for  emerging 
room 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Inflation and growth 
Despite India’s known antipathy towards inflation, we have experienced an average of more 
than 9 percent inflation between 2006 and 2013. The longer we had high inflation, the more 
the  public’s  expectations  of  inflation  became  entrenched  at  high  numbers.  Because  the 
public’s  inflation  expectations  are  adaptive  –  meaning  they  change  only  after  they  see  a 
sustained  change  in  realized  inflation  –  we  required  a  long  period  of  low  inflation  before 
expectations came down. Unfortunately, our past focus on WPI inflation, which puts weight 
on internationally traded goods like commodities rather than domestic non-traded goods like 
education  and  healthcare,  meant  that  whenever  international  inflation  came  down,  the 
clamour for rate cuts increased. So we often did not take the fight to domestic sources of 
inflation. Put in technical terms, the real policy rate was below the neutral real rate for years, 
and coincided with a pick-up in CPI inflation. 
The strong disinflation, even deflation, in the world in the last few years gives us a golden 
opportunity to change. What better time than the current for an inflation prone country like 
India to bring its inflation finally in line with the world’s? With commodity prices declining and 
astute food management by the Government, part of our work is done for us, without India 
having to undergo the kind of extreme demand compression that was seen in the Volcker 
disinflation. Indeed, with real expected policy interest rates in the 1.25–1.5% range and real 
after  tax  deposit  interest  rates  barely  positive,  it  would  be  hard  to  argue  that  the 
disinflationary glide path the RBI has embarked on is extremely onerous. 
While low inflation for a while  will lower the public’s inflationary expectations and increase 
their real disposable income, in order to achieve a sustainable victory against inflation the 
public has to believe that inflation will stay low even after commodity prices start picking up in 
the future. For the public to look through future price spikes without raising wage demands, 
the  RBI  has  to  have  credibility  that  it  will  act  firmly  against  any  future  inflationary  threats. 
Credibility  comes  from  frameworks  and  institutions.  In  this  regard,  the  RBI  has  signed  a 
historic  agreement  with  the  Government,  wherein  RBI’s  mandate  is  clearly  spelled  out  in 
terms  of  an  inflation  objective  over  the  medium  term.  In  the  coming  year,  the  Finance 
Minister proposes to lay out, after consultation with RBI, the structure of a monetary policy 
committee  that  can  be  formally  and  legally  entrusted  with  policy  decisions.  These  are 
welcome steps in building the institutions we need for transparent and independent monetary 
policy. 
Responding to the inflation commentariat 
Let me address some popular misconceptions now. Modern economic theory suggests there 
is indeed a short run trade-off between inflation and growth. In layman’s terms, if the central 
bank cuts the interest rate by 100 basis points today, and banks pass it on, then demand will 
pick  up  and  we  could  get  stronger  growth  for  a  while,  especially  if  economic  players  are 
surprised.  The  stock  market  may  shoot  up  for  a  few  days.  But  if  the  economy  is  supply 
constrained, we could quickly see shortages and a sharp rise in inflation. The central bank 
may then be forced to raise interest rates substantially to offset that temporary growth. The 
boom and bust will not be good for the economy, and average growth may be lower than if 
the cut had not taken place. This is why modern economics also says there is no long run 
trade-off  between  growth  and  inflation  –  the  best  way  for  a  central  bank  to  ensure 
sustainable growth is to keep demand close to supply so that inflation is moderate.1 
                                                
1  
I  am  being  a  bit  loose  here.  The  short  run  tradeoff  works  because  economic  actors  can  be  surprised  by 
unexpected loosening, and the surprise can have positive growth effects. In the long run, the central bank 
loses its power to surprise, and the public embeds its correct forecast of how much inflation the central bank 
will  create  into  all  nominal  variables  such  as  interest  rates.  To  the  extent  that  high  inflation  is  harmful  for 
growth and welfare, a central bank that continuously tries to give short run positive surprises will entrench long 
run high inflation, which will be bad for growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Put differently, when people say “Inflation is low,  you can now turn to stimulating growth”, 
they really do not understand that these are two sides of the same coin. The RBI always sets 
the policy rate as low as it can, consistent with meeting its inflation objective. Conversely, the 
best  way  the  monetary  authority  can  support  growth  over  the  medium  term  is  to  anchor 
inflation at low levels so that policy rates can also be low. We can never abandon inflation to 
focus on growth, nor do we focus on inflation to the exclusion of growth. The extended glide 
path  over  which  we  are  bringing  inflation  in  check  appropriately  balances  inflation  and 
growth. 
The statement “Inflation is low, you can now turn to stimulating growth” also perhaps reflects 
a misunderstanding of how central banking works. Monetary policy works with a lag of 3 to 
4 quarters.  So  in  deciding  policy  today,  we  need  to  predict  how  inflation  will  look 
approximately a year ahead. Today’s inflation therefore matters only in informing us about 
future  inflation.  However,  today’s  inflation  measured  on  a  year  on  year  basis  may  be  low 
because there was an unexpected price spurt last year – the so-called base effect. So we 
need to take out base effects before we even assess the information from current inflation, 
something many observers fail to do. Also, there may be many sources of uncertainty that 
cloud the future inflationary picture and disconnect it from current inflation – the strength and 
distribution of the monsoon, the extent and persistence of low commodity prices, the effect of 
external disturbances on the exchange rate, etc. In practice, we use models to project how 
all  this  might  play  out  on  inflation,  and  we  overlay  the  models  with  the  subjective 
assessments that our internal committee and its advisors offer, to ultimately arrive at a policy 
decision. 
Our model based assessments of the inflation path are almost surely going to differ a little 
from  the  realization,  given  that  the  world  is  uncertain,  but  they  are  our  best  professional 
assessments,  and  we  set  policy  based  on  those  assessments.  As  information  comes  in, 
monetary policy is adjusted – for instance, the substantial disinflation from November 2013 
gave us confidence about the persistence of low inflation into the future, allowing us to cut 
the policy rate three times. 
What  such  an  approach  rules  out  is  what  might  best  be  described  as  “inflation  following 
policy”  that  some  populist  commentators  on  monetary  policy  advocate.  Starting  with  the 
premise that all economic forecasting, especially about the future, is impossibly imprecise, 
inflation followers advocate cutting policy rates whenever inflation is low until inflation starts 
picking up. I have never heard them say what we should do then, but I presume that they 
would advocate raising rates at that point. But because monetary policy works with long lags, 
inflation  could  surge  significantly  before  policy  starts  working.  A  policy  that  tracks  current 
inflation, rather than anticipates inflation, is inherently biased towards more volatile inflation, 
which is not in the public’s interest. 
Another  set  of  commentators  write  articles  arguing  that  monetary  policy  is  impotent  for  a 
variety of reasons, ranging from its irrelevance in taming food inflation to the small size of 
interest sensitive sectors in the economy and the lack of transmission by banks. Yet, they 
somehow always end the article by advocating rate cuts. Now why would rate cuts matter if 
monetary  policy  was  impotent  in  affecting  demand?  Perhaps  more  informative  is  a  recent 
study which suggests that the disinflation that has happened over the last year and a half 
follows  from  a  combination  of  good  food  management  by  the  Government,  good  luck 
because of external factors such as lower crude prices, and monetary policy, including the 
new framework.2 We believe this is a fair view of the disinflation so far, entirely uninfluenced 
by the fact that two of the three authors are from the RBI. 
                                                
2   “What  is  Responsible  for  India’s  Sharp  Disinflation?”,  Sajjid  Chinoy,  Pankaj  Kumar,  and  Prachi  Mishra, 
working paper, August 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Some issues in tackling inflation 
Let me turn to some other issues in inflation management. First, in picking the policy rate 
path and the pace of deflation, we have to be mindful that there are multiple players in the 
economy; consumers and producers who need to borrow, households that need to save, and 
banks that need to do both. Producers love lower interest rate, and they do not hesitate to tell 
us.  But  saving  households  balk  as  deposit  rates  are  cut,  especially  if  rates  do  not 
compensate adequately for inflation. The fall in household financial savings, the increase in 
gold purchases, and the widening of the current account deficit in recent years was partly 
caused  by  negative  real  after  tax  deposit  rates.  If  we  are  not  to  see  distortions  in  the 
economy, therefore, any policy rate path has to balance these interests – in other words, be 
a Goldilocks rate path which is neither too high nor too low. 
Of  course,  banks  stand  partially  in  between  borrowers  and  lenders,  and  to  transmit  rate 
reductions they should be able to cut both borrowing as well as lending rates. Concerns have 
been  expressed  about  Government  small  savings  schemes  that  pay  a  high  rate  to 
households,  making  banks  reluctant  to  cut  their  own  deposit  rates  for  fear  of  being  dis-
intermediated. While Government small savings rates should be readjusted more frequently 
to market rates, the growth of these schemes is small for the most part, and at least for now 
these schemes should not be an insuperable barrier to transmission. 
Second,  because  of  a  large  divergence  between  WPI  and  CPI,  some  economists  have 
argued there  is  a  difference  between  the  real rates manufacturers face and  the  real rates 
savers get. I am sympathetic to the argument, but believe the only way to tackle it is to get 
inflation of all kinds down – so long as the divergence between inflation in traded goods and 
in non-traded services is large, the problem will not go away. But I also think the concern is 
overblown.  Even  if  manufacturers  do  not  have  much  pricing  power  because  of  global 
competition, their commodity suppliers have even less. So a metal producer benefits from 
the fall in coal and ore prices, even though they may not get as high a realization on sales as 
in the past. The true measure of inflation for them is the inflation in their profits, which is likely 
greater than suggested by WPI. So the real interest rate they face is lower than that obtained 
by subtracting WPI from the nominal interest rate. 
Third, I have said in the past that the central bank is not a “cheerleader” for the economy. By 
this I did not mean that the RBI does not want to do its utmost to see the economy do well. 
Far from it! What I meant is that it is not the role of the central bank to elevate sentiments 
unduly, to deliver booster shots to the stock market so that it can soar for a while, only to 
collapse  when  reality  hits. We  do  not  have  to  look  too  far  beyond  our  borders  to  see  the 
consequences of such boosterism. Rate cuts should not be seen as goodies that the RBI 
gives  out  stingily  after  much  public  pleading.  Instead,  what  is  important  is  sustained  low 
inflation,  something  the Prime  Minister  emphasized  in  his  Independence  Day  speech,  and 
rate cuts are a natural consequence that the RBI has no hesitancy in delivering. 
Stressed assets and speedy resolution 
Let me turn to stressed assets. In dealing with stressed bank assets, RBI has been focused 
on  getting  the  underlying  real  project  back  on  track.  There  are  a  number  of  impediments 
here. The stigma as well as the provisioning (and the associated fall in profitability) attached 
to  a  loan  being  labelled  “non-performing”  makes  banks  eager  to  avoid  the  label.  In  some 
cases,  they  ignore  the  reality  that  existing  loans  will  have  to  be  written  down  significantly 
because  of  the  changed  circumstances  since  they  were  sanctioned  (which  includes 
extensive  delays,  cost  overruns,  and  over  optimistic  demand  projections).  The  Debt 
Recovery  Tribunal  system  has  not  been  speedy,  which  also  emboldens  uncooperative 
promoters and keeps them from accepting their share of the losses. 
Regulatory forbearance, where RBI makes it easy for banks to “extend and pretend”, is not a 
solution. Since no other stake-holder – such as the promoter, tariff authorities, tax authorities, 
etc. – contributes to resolution, the real project limps along becoming increasingly unviable. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Meanwhile, analysts grow increasingly suspicious of bank balance sheets and the growing 
volume of “restructured” assets. Also, some large promoters take advantage of banker fears 
about  assets  turning  non-performing  to  extract  unwarranted  concessions,  without  any 
sacrifice in the value of their stake. Regulatory forbearance therefore ensures that problems 
grow until the size of the provisioning required to deal with the problem properly becomes 
alarmingly large – which then prompts calls for yet more forbearance. Forbearance is also a 
disservice to the bank’s owners (which may include the Government) who, instead of being 
faced with a small problem early and being given the opportunity to apply corrective action, 
are  faced  with  large  problems  suddenly  when  they  cannot  be  pushed  into  the  future  any 
more. 
One  example  of  the  difficulties  stemming  from  forbearance  is  the  plight  of  state  power 
distribution  companies  (DISCOMS).  In  2012,  a  number  of  states  signed  up  to  a  financial 
restructuring  plan  (FRP)  with  banks  and  the  central  government,  based  on  which  the  RBI 
permitted  restructured  loans  to  DISCOMS  to  be  treated  as  standard.  Unfortunately,  three 
years  later,  states  have  not  undertaken  many  of  the  actions  promised  under  the  FRP, 
perhaps  because  the  urgency  to  act  was  not  there  so  long  as  banks  continued  financing 
losses. Meanwhile, debt has built up further, and the cost of power, including line losses and 
interest costs, is mounting inordinately. The central government and the RBI are taking the 
lessons of recent experience into account as they discuss remedial action with the states. 
To deal both with project paralysis as well as the unfair distribution of losses, RBI ended the 
forbearance accorded to restructured loans. Henceforth, restructured loans will be classified 
as  non-performing  loans.  However,  RBI  has  made  it  easier  to  recognize  and  deal  with 
distressed projects. In other words, while ending forbearance, we have introduced flexibility 
for those who recognize and deal with stressed assets. Consider some measures. 
First, RBI has created a database of loans over Rs. 50 million (the CRILC database), and 
has  required  banks  and  NBFCs  to  report  regularly  on  the  status  of  the  loans.  Early 
identification of distressed projects offers the best opportunity to put them back on track. So if 
a loan is identified as more than 60 days overdue, all lenders to the borrower have to come 
together in a Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF) to see how the underlying problems can be fixed. 
The  JLF  has  to  follow  strict  timelines,  failing  which  the  project  loans’  classification  will  be 
downgraded.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  timelines  are  met,  the  deterioration  in  loan 
classification is halted. Furthermore, by bringing the banks and NBFCs into one forum, RBI 
has made it easier for the promoter and the creditors to reach a consensus on actions, even 
while making it harder for the promoter to play one creditor off against another. 
Second, to deal with genuine problems of poor structuring, it has allowed bankers to stretch 
repayment profiles for performing loans to infrastructure and the core sector (the so-called 
“5/25”  rule),  provided  the  project  has  reached  commercial  take-off,  has  a  genuinely  long 
commercial life, and the value of the NPV of loans is maintained. RBI is undertaking periodic 
examination  of  randomly  selected  “5/25”  deals  to  ensure  they  are  facilitating  genuine 
adjustment  rather  than  becoming  a  back-door  means  of  postponing  principal  payments 
indefinitely.  Also,  in  cases  of  restructuring,  RBI  and  SEBI  have  together  allowed  banks  to 
write in clauses that allow banks to convert loans to equity in case the project gets stressed 
again. Not only will such Strategic Debt Restructuring give creditors some upside in return for 
reducing the project’s debt, it can also give them the control needed to redeploy the asset 
(say with a more effective promoter). 
We have discussed the experience with the JLF with banks, and we will shortly announce 
some  measures  that  should  improve  their  functioning.  The  move  by  the  Government  to 
recapitalize banks is welcome, as is the proposal to reward bankers based on progress in 
cleaning up balance sheets and generating healthy growth. The innovative proposal to create 
a fund with majority private ownership and minority Government participation to lubricate the 
process of resolution could be very helpful. RBI and Government are also discussing ways to 
revitalize Asset Reconstruction Companies so that they can play a greater role in resolving 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
distress.  The  Finance  Minister  spoke  last  week  about  accelerating  the  working  of  Debt 
Recovery  Tribunals  through  the  use  of  information  technology,  an  idea  whose  time  has 
certainly come. 
Given  the  state  of  the  world  economy,  firms  in  some  industries  are  in  deep  real  distress. 
Some firms can survive with a little help from the Government, but others are unviable. Too 
much help to unviable firms can also cause distress to spread to healthy firms. In this regard, 
the  country  needs  rapid  progress  in  the  coming  year  on  the  creation  of  the  institutions 
necessary for resolution such as the new Bankruptcy Code and the Company Law Tribunals 
that  will  administer  it  as  well  as  the  Financial  Resolution  Authority  (for  resolving  financial 
institution distress). On-going government efforts in this regard will pay rich dividends. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  My  focus  on  the  challenges  in  ensuring  sustainable  growth  should  not 
detract from the tremendous progress we have made. There is much to be optimistic about, 
including the massive investments that are starting in infrastructure, the tremendous sweep 
of information technology across every facet of Indian life, and the radical changes that are 
taking place in the financial sector. The Indian economy is full of possibilities, even as much 
of the world is mired in pessimism. Indeed, I have been arguing that the fragility of the world 
economy is precisely because it has focused on quick fixes rather than deep reform. 
At the same time, we should not delude ourselves into thinking our work is done, or postpone 
hard choices to a seemingly easier tomorrow. The question for us as a society is whether we 
have the discipline to do what is necessary at a time when global conditions are propitious – 
commodity prices look like they will stay low for a time, helping the fight against inflation, and 
there is plenty of money around the world and at home, looking for investments, including in 
distressed  assets,  that  can  help  us  clean  bank  and  corporate  balance  sheets.  As  India 
strives to regain its place in the ranks of prosperous nations, we must remember that what 
sets  poor  nations  apart  from  the  rich  is  not  people  or  resources  or  even  luck  but  good 
governance,  which  comes  from  strong  frameworks  and  strong  institutions.  A  summary 
explanation  of  the  economic  problems  of the  recent  past  is  that they  arose  because  India 
outgrew its institutions. A summary of the Government and the Reserve Bank’s measures to 
restore sustainable growth is that we are building the necessary institutions. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
