  Benoît Cœuré: How binding is the zero lower bound? 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “Removing the zero lower bound on interest rates”, organised by Imperial 
College  Business  School  /  Brevan  Howard  Centre  for  Financial  Analysis,  CEPR  and  the 
Swiss National Bank, London, 18 May 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Anton  Nakov  and  Oreste  Tristani  for  their  contribution  to  the  speech.  I  remain  solely 
responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
Summary 
The notion of an effective lower bound on policy interest rates, that is lower than zero, has 
become a concrete concern for monetary policy. While the effective lower bound for short-
term rates exists, it does not impose a binding constraint on the effectiveness of monetary 
policy.  There  are  tools  for  dealing  with  the  lower  bound  constraint,  which  at  the  ECB  go 
under  the  name  of  “non-standard  monetary  policy  measures”.  We  saw  that  the  short-term 
interest rate going below zero does not pose the difficulties for monetary policy.  
While removing the effective lower bound by abolishing cash can be envisaged, it should be 
based  on  changing  technologies  and  social  perceptions,  not  of  policy  prescriptions.  Also 
political  capital  could  be  better  spent  on structural  reforms  of  euro  area economies, which 
would raise the natural real rate of interest and thereby make the lower bound less binding. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure for me to speak to you tonight. 
The existence of an arbitrage relationship between the return on short-term nominal bonds 
and the return on cash has long been known in the academic literature. To quote John Hicks, 
“So long as rates of interest are positive, the decision to hold money rather than lend it, or 
use  it  to  pay  off  old  debts,  is  apparently  an  unprofitable  one”.1  From  a  portfolio  choice 
perspective, cash is, under normal circumstances, a strictly dominated asset, because it is 
subject to the same inflation risk as bonds but, in contrast to bonds, it yields zero return. It 
has  also  long  been  known  that  this  relationship  would  be  reversed  if  the  return  on  bonds 
were negative. In that case, an investor would be certain of earning a profit by borrowing at 
negative  rates  and  investing  the  proceedings  in  cash.  Ignoring  storage  and  transportation 
costs, there is therefore a zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates. 
In the years of relatively high inflation rates, the zero lower bound was merely a theoretical 
notion  taken  into  account  when  characterising  the  solutions  of  monetary  models.  It  has, 
however,  become  a  concrete  concern  for  monetary  policy  in  the  last  two  decades,  first  in 
Japan, then in most other developed economies. Central banks have consequently become 
interested in the formerly abstract ZLB topic. And, because storage and transportation costs 
of cash are non-negligible in reality, the notion of an “effective lower bound “of policy rates 
has emerged that is lower than zero. 
That monetary theory is thinking ahead once again and investigating options to remove this 
constraint is in my view welcome. It is therefore a pleasure to be at this conference and I am 
looking forward to learning more about all the proposals presented today. 
                                                
1   J. R. Hicks, 1935. “A Suggestion for Simplifying the Theory of Money” Economica, New Series, Vol. 2, No. 5 
(Feb., 1935), pp. 1–19 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In my remarks, however, I will argue that while the effective lower bound for short-term rates 
exists, it does not in fact impose a binding constraint on the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
There are readily available tools for dealing with the lower bound constraint that at the ECB 
go under the name of “non-standard monetary policy measures”. Moreover, even if structural 
changes in payment habits could soften the constraint on short-term policy rates imposed by 
the  effective  lower  bound,  I  consider  such  ideas  –  in  the  euro  area  at  least  –  to  be  for 
tomorrow and not for today. 
The effective lower bound is not at zero 
Let me begin however with an important question: where is the effective lower bound in the 
euro area? As you know, the ECB operates on the basis of the corridor system. We have an 
interest  rate  at  which  we  normally  provide  most  of  our  liquidity  to  monetary  and  financial 
institutions,  the  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations,  or  MRO  rate.  We  then  have  the 
marginal  lending  rate  –  a  rate  incorporating  a  spread  over  the  MRO  at  which  banks  can 
obtain overnight liquidity from our standing marginal lending facility. And we finally have the 
deposit  rate,  that  is,  the  interest  rate  on  the  deposit  facility  where  banks  can  place  their 
reserves in excess of the reserve requirement and which is fixed at a spread below the MRO 
rate. 
Since  our  September  2014  monetary  policy  decisions,  the  MRO  rate  has  been  fixed  at  5 
basis  points,  the  marginal  lending  rate  at  30  basis  points,  and  the  deposit  facility  rate  at 
minus 20 basis points. 
Under  normal  circumstances,  the  so-called  “policy  rate”  of  macroeconomic  models  would 
correspond  to  our  MRO  rate.  This  is  the  rate  that  typically  relates  to  the  rate  on  private 
interbank transactions on the overnight market, the EONIA rate. However, in an environment 
of  excess  liquidity  and  persistent  frictions  in  financial  markets,  as  we  see  today,  it  is  no 
longer  possible  to  define  our  stance  by  a  unique  “main”  policy  rate.  If  one  were  willing  to 
proxy such a rate with the EONIA, one would conclude that our policy rates stand at around 
minus 10 basis points. From this macroeconomic perspective, our effective lower bound is 
therefore slightly negative. From an operational perspective, the lower bound corresponds to 
the deposit rate, which can in theory be kept at an even more negative level because of the 
cost of storing and shipping physical currency. The key point is that, however defined, the 
lower bound has been found to be below zero. 
Equally  importantly,  we  now  also  have  evidence  that  a  large fraction  of unsecured  money 
market transactions can take place at negative rates without hampering market functioning.2 
Following the decisions of June and September 2014, the lower policy rates were transmitted 
smoothly throughout the money market. As expected, EONIA forwards curves flattened and 
shifted down, and the volatility of EONIA rates dropped. In spite of the EONIA hovering much 
of the time in negative territory, no adverse effects on market conditions have been recorded. 
On  the contrary,  negative  EONIA  rates  have  coincided  with  stable  and  even  rising  trading 
volumes, and with homogenous transmission to closely substitutable market segments. 
All  this  suggests  that  the  short-term  interest  rate  going  below  zero  does  not  pose  the 
difficulties for monetary policy that we might have imagined. So could we reduce the main 
policy rates in the euro area even further? On this point we have been very clear: the current 
constellation  of  policy  rates  is for  us the  effective  lower  bound. We  do not  intend to  lower 
short-term policy rates further. And an important reason for this is that the lower bound for 
short-term rates is, in fact, not a hard constraint on monetary policy. 
                                                
2   See  B.  Cœuré,  2014.  “Life  below  zero:  Learning  about  negative  interest  rates”,  presentation  at  the  annual 
dinner of the ECB’s Money Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 9 September, and European Central 
Bank (2015), “Euro Money Market Survey 2014”, Box 4, p. 23, 30 April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The lower bound and non-standard measures 
Monetary conditions depend not just on short-term rates, but on the entire range of market 
interest rates. Indeed, when the central bank alters short-term rates it is aiming to steer the 
medium- to long-term rates that determine investment and consumption decisions in the real 
economy. An inability to cut short-term rates even more does not therefore make monetary 
policy ineffective if other tools are available that can influence the shape of the yield curve. At 
the extreme, one could argue that the true lower bound for monetary policy is reached only 
when the entire yield curve is flat at the effective lower bound. This is where non-standard 
measures come in. 
Non-standard  measures  are  a  variant  of  standard  monetary  policy  that  utilises  different 
instruments,  intermediate  targets  and  communication  devices  to  achieve  the  same  final 
objective, namely maintaining price stability over the medium term. Following a version of the 
Tinbergen  principle,  we  can  view  non-standard  measures  as  assigning  a  large  array  of 
instruments  –  asset  purchases  at  different  maturities  –  to  a  correspondingly  large  set  of 
intermediate targets, i.e. the corresponding market interest rates. The effective lower bound 
for monetary policy should be seen in this functional space, and not along a one-dimensional 
line. Through this expanded set of instruments, we are able to exert direct influence on many 
long-term  interest  rates,  rather  than  only  control  a  very-short  term  interest  rate  on  banks’ 
reserves. 
This  view  puts  into  a  different  perspective  models  and  model-based  simulations  aiming  at 
assessing stabilisation policies when monetary policy is constrained by the lower bound. In 
standard  DSGE  simulations,  the  ZLB  is  captured  by  the  policy  rate  being  non-negative  at 
each  point  in  time  along  the  future  path  of  the  economy.  But  taking  into  account  the 
possibility for monetary policy to exert influence on longer-term interest rates would lead to a 
more  benign  assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  lower  bound  on,  say,  the  size  of  fiscal 
multipliers, or on the welfare impact of structural reforms.3 
We  have  two  main  instruments  to  flatten  the  yield  curve  across  the  full  spectrum  of 
maturities. The first is forward guidance, which works both by anchoring expectations about 
the level of future short-term rates, and by reducing the volatility around that level. However, 
forward  guidance  is  only  credible  over  the  horizon  of  visibility  of  the  monetary  policy 
committee.  If  the  central  bank  intends  to  steer  interest  rates  at  maturities  beyond  that 
horizon, it has to do so by directly targeting the term premium through private or public asset 
purchases. 
As our short-term rates have fallen towards the lower bound, and hence the signalling power 
of  rate  movements  has  decreased,  the  ECB  has  progressively  resorted  to  both  these 
instruments. We have provided and then reinforced our forward guidance and, when rates 
reached the effective lower bound in September last year, we moved to asset purchases as 
the main tool of monetary policy, starting with two programmes of purchasing private assets 
and then expanding them to include public sector bonds last January. We buy public sector 
assets with remaining maturities of two to 30 years, and the weighted average maturity of our 
portfolio  is  eight  years.  This  is  an  unprecedented  lengthening  of  the  horizon  at  which  we 
influence interest rates.4 
Both  these  instruments  have  been  effective  in  overcoming  the  lower  bound  constraint. 
Forward guidance has led to a decline in the uncertainty about future monetary policy, and 
the sensitivity of money market forward rates at various horizons to news and data surprises 
                                                
3  
In the former case, see e.g. C. L., Eichenbaum, M., and S. Rebelo, 2011. “When Is the Government Spending 
Multiplier Large?”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp. 78–121. In the latter case, see A.Ferrero 
G. Eggetson and A. Raffo, 2014, “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 61, 
January 2014, pp. 2–22. 
4   Our three-month liquidity tenders are still called “long-term refinancing operations”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  has  diminished.  It  is  also  clear  from  the  data  we  have  so  far  that  some  of  the  expected 
transmission mechanisms of large-scale assets purchases are already at work. 
For example, following the announcement of the expanded asset purchase programme on 
22 January, we saw a decline in the forward interest rates across all maturities on sovereign 
and, with a lag, on corporate bonds, showing that the portfolio rebalancing channel was in 
play. Some investors appear to have been taking profit on corporate bonds and reallocating 
investments  towards  equity  and  foreign  markets,  as  the  upside  potential  in  the  euro  area 
corporate  bond  market  is  judged  to  be  relatively  limited.  This  suggests  that  the  portfolio 
rebalancing  channel  of  our  public  sector  purchase  programme  is  playing  out  in  a  very 
different way than for US quantitative easing, which started at a time when there remained 
significant scope for domestic credit spread compression, and that it involves both domestic 
and international rebalancing. 
Interestingly,  both  measures  –  forward  guidance  and  asset  purchases  –  have  been 
reinforced by the fact that the effective lower bound has proven to be slightly negative. When 
policy interest rates reach zero, even with credible forward guidance the term structure can 
steepen as markets anticipate that future short-term rates can only rise. If however they can 
be convinced that the lower bound for short-term rates is not zero but can be made negative, 
then the probability distribution of future rate movements changes. After we introduced our 
negative  deposit  rate  last  year  we  saw  long-term  interest  rates  starting  to  flatten.  The 
probability  distribution  of  future  EONIA  rates  (with  the  forward  rate  standing  at  –15  basis 
points  at  end-2015)  indeed  includes  an  expectation  that  our  deposit  facility  rate  can  be 
lowered further. 
A  negative  deposit  rate  can  also  complement  our  asset  purchase  programme  by  inducing 
banks which are selling securities to the Eurosystem, and receiving bank reserves in return, 
to lend on those balances. It compensates the lack of capital relief for banks in a regulatory 
environment  which  treats  government  bonds  as  risk  free.  In  this  way  it  can  increase  the 
velocity  of  circulation  of  reserves  and  accelerate  the  portfolio  rebalancing  transmission 
channel. 
As you know, this combination of measures has created strong price effects in certain asset 
markets,  going  beyond  what  many  observers  initially  anticipated.  German  yields,  for 
example, were briefly negative out to around the 8-year maturity point and were below the 
deposit  rate  until  almost  the  4-year  maturity. We  have  always  stressed,  however,  that  the 
objective of our programme is to influence prices but not to impair price discovery. For this 
reason I do not see the recent reversal in the price of Bunds and other sovereign bonds as a 
cause  for  concern,  insofar  as  it  reflects  a  market  correction,  recreates  two-way  risk  in  the 
market  and  reflects  the  fact  that,  as  our  programme  takes  effect,  some  of  the  more 
pessimistic  assumptions  of  future  growth  and  inflation  trends  are  being  revised.  It  is  the 
rapidity of the reversal that worries me more. After several similar episodes, it is yet another 
incident of extreme volatility in global capital markets showing signs of reduced liquidity.5 
Against  this  background,  we  are  also  aware  of  seasonal  patterns  in  fixed-income  market 
activity with the traditional holiday period from mid-July to August characterised by notably 
lower market liquidity. The Eurosystem is taking this into account in the implementation of its 
expanded asset purchase programme by moderately frontloading its purchase activity in May 
and June, which will allow us to maintain our monthly average of €60 billion, while having to 
buy less in the holiday period. If need be, the frontloading may be complemented by some 
backloading in September when market liquidity is expected to improve again. The slightly 
                                                
5   For  a  discussion  of  the  financial  stability  consequences  of  lower  market  liquidity,  see  A.  Bailey,  2015. 
“Financial  Markets:  identifying  risks  and  appropriate  responses”,  speech  given  at  Hughes  Hall,  Cambridge 
University, 15 May. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  higher purchase volume that market analysts may observe in the coming weeks is therefore 
unrelated to the recent episode of market volatility. 
Other options for dealing with the lower bound 
The fact that non-standard measures can help to overcome the lower bound constraint does 
not mean that there might not be other, even more effective ways to deal with it. 
In this context two types of policy have been put forward: those that take the existence of the 
effective lower bound as a given and seek to improve the traction of monetary policy in that 
environment; and those which aim to remove the lower bound constraint altogether. 
As regards the first type, several options have been proposed in the literature, but most are 
unfortunately not very appealing to policy-makers. For instance, Blanchard and Ball, among 
others, suggest increasing the inflation objective, for example from 2% to 4%.6 This option, 
however, would impose permanent costs on the economy in terms of the inefficient allocation 
of resources associated with a higher inflation rate. Another important casualty would be the 
credibility of the ECB, given that economic agents would entertain the possibility of further 
changes in the objective in response to future shocks. All in all, raising the inflation target is 
“too blunt an instrument” for achieving the desired objective of stabilising the economy in a 
low interest rate environment. 
Additional proposals are even more far-reaching. They involve the use of “active” fiscal policy 
to  create  inflation,  or  to  increase  policy  interest  rates  to  coordinate  expectations  on  the 
desired  equilibrium  of  inflation  of  below  but  close  to  2%.7  But  neither  proposal  is  practical 
given our context in the euro area. Our forward guidance is based on the notion that we do 
not intend to raise rates for an extended period of time. And explicit monetary-fiscal policy 
coordination  is  neither  possible  within  our  institutional  framework  of  19  different  national 
fiscal policies, nor is it desirable given our independence from fiscal authorities. Moreover, 
the aggregate stance is broadly neutral today, and if its allocation across countries can be 
questioned,  it  would  not  be  desirable  for  it  to  become  much  more  active  given  the  high 
legacy debt and the requirements of our fiscal rules. 
As regards the second type of policy – those aimed at removing the effective lower bound on 
short-term rates – perhaps the most prominent proposal is to either to tax currency holding à 
la  Gesell  or  abolish  it  altogether,  and  hence  to  remove  the  arbitrage  between  bonds  and 
cash.8 One can indeed imagine several advantages associated with such a policy, on top of 
pushing the lower bound further into negative territory. For example, tax on cash can act like 
a  tax  on  illegal  activities  and  would  foster  greater  transparency.  In  addition,  we  could 
economise on the costs of storage and use of currency, which are not insignificant. 
There are important reasons, however, why it is difficult for policy-makers to give this option 
serious consideration. They have mainly to do with psychological and operational factors. 
The use of cash with a zero guaranteed nominal rate of return and a non-negative nominal 
interest  rate  on  deposits  is  deeply  ingrained  in  the  psyche  of  economic  agents.  Savers 
                                                
6   See O. Blanchard, G. Dell’Ariccia, and P. Mauro, 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position 
Note, February 12, 2010; and L. Ball, 2013. “The case for 4% inflation,” Voxeu. 
7   See  C.  Sims,  2014.  “Coordinating  Monetary  and  Fiscal  Policy  to  Exit  the  Zero Lower  Bound”.  Presentation 
made  at  the  European  Central  bank.  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/events/pdf/conferences/141215/slides/ 
SIMS_slides.pdf. Also, “Commentary on Policy at the Zero Lower Bound”. (2010) CEPS Working Paper No. 
201. And S. Schmitt-Grohé and M. Uribe, 2014. “Liquidity Traps: An Interest-Rate-Based Exit Strategy”, The 
Manchester School, 82, S1, September 2014, 1–14. 
8   See  W.  Buiter,  2009.  “Negative  Nominal  Interest  Rates:  Three  ways  to  overcome  the  zero  lower  bound”, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 15118, and K. Rogoff, 2014. “Costs and Benefits to Phasing Out Paper Currency”, 
presented at the NBER Macroeconomics Annual Conference, 11 April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  already  perceive  a  negative  nominal  interest  rate  on  deposits  as  an  unfair  wealth  tax  and 
extending it to cash would deepen this perception and affect even more vulnerable members 
of our society. Beyond looking for a different bank which might offer slightly better conditions, 
depositors would have no other option than to keep hold of their savings, unless there were 
to be rapid shift in attitudes towards saving in more risky types of assets such as equities. In 
addition, this would raise serious financial inclusion issues as not all people today can use 
computers or operate smartphones. 
In  short,  while  I  can  very  well  envisage  a  world  without  cash,  I  view  it  as  the  outcome  of 
changing technologies and social perceptions, not of policy prescriptions. 
Besides, I do not believe that it would be desirable to remove the zero lower bound in the 
euro area at the current juncture. I say this for three reasons. 
First, removing the lower bound would not solve all problems related to monetary policy. The 
experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis  taught  us  that  the  type  of  shocks  which  can  drive 
policy interest rates to the lower bound are also shocks which produce severe impairments to 
the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  interbank 
market freezes and prevents a smooth transmission of the policy interest rate throughout the 
banking sector and financial markets at large. In this case, any cut in the policy rate may be 
almost completely ineffective in terms of influencing the macroeconomy and prices. 
Given  the  persistent  signs  of  fragmentation  in  some  euro  area  financial  markets,  it  is 
therefore not clear that the ability to lower key ECB rates deep into negative territory would 
by itself help ensure a faster return to growth in the euro area. On the contrary, this could 
have an impact on the business model of banks and insurance companies, and impair their 
capacity to perform financial intermediation and support monetary policy transmission. And 
where fragmentation is now receding, our non-standard measures have in any event pushed 
real rates well below the long-term growth rate, creating sufficiently strong price incentives to 
invest. 
Second, we are mindful of the risks of persistently low interest rates to financial stability.9 It is 
accepted today that real rates will remain below the long-term growth rate for as long as is 
necessary in order for investment to recover. Throughout this period, private agents may be 
tempted to borrow to purchase assets of which the supply is limited or inflexible, such as real 
estate.10 We  are  prepared  to  use  our  micro-  and  macro-prudential  instruments to face the 
risks of bubbles and excessive leverage, but if the lower bound were effectively abolished, 
those risks would increase and may lead to macroeconomic instability along this dynamically 
inefficient path. 
Third, we have to reflect on why we have reached the lower bound in the euro area in the 
first place. An important issue here is the possibility that the natural real rate may have fallen 
very low or even gone negative; this could occur for various reasons such as low productivity 
or  a  slowdown  in  population  growth,  both  of  which  are  relevant  for  the  euro  area.  A 
protracted period of deleveraging in the euro area, similar to the one which occurred in Japan 
in the 1990s, could also have pushed the natural real rate down, even into negative territory, 
                                                
9   See  M.  Draghi  ,  2015.  “The  ECB’s  recent  monetary  policy  measures:  effectiveness  and  challenges”, 
Camdessus Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 14 May. 
10   See G. Claeys and Z. Darvas, 2015. “The Financial Stability Risks of Ultra-Loose Monetary Policy”, Bruegel 
policy Contribution, Issue 2015/03. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
and  potentially  for  a  long  time.11  This  is  related  to  the  so-called  “secular  stagnation” 
hypothesis.12 
This  scenario  may  also  be  consistent  with  a  gloomier  view  of  recent  bond  market 
developments  than  the  one  I  have  provided  above.  Real  forward  interest  rates  indeed 
suggest that the expected short-term real interest rate about ten years ahead is around –1%, 
while expected euro area GDP growth for the period six to ten years ahead stands at 1.4% 
(according to the Consensus Forecast). If forward markets were correct, then the fall in long-
term yields would not due to a generalised reduction in the market price of risk, and thus a 
flattening  of  term  and  risk  premia  induced  by  our  extended  asset  purchase  programme.  It 
would  be  rather  a  reflection  of  a  generalised  fall  in  real  interest  rates,  signifying  bleaker 
prospects  for  euro  area  growth.  For  monetary  policy  to  remain  “neutral”  in  such  an 
environment, a lastingly low or negative actual real rate would be needed. 
It is in response to this that some are proposing to remove the effective lower bound. But my 
question  is,  why  not  instead  focus  on  raising  the  natural  real  rate?  Why  not  introduce 
structural reforms that will raise investment demand? This would be unambiguously positive 
for  employment  and  productivity  growth  and,  as  I  have  discussed  elsewhere,  could  have 
positive effects even over a relatively short time horizon. The answer could in principle be to 
do both, but we know that in reality political capital is often scarce, and my suspicion is that 
taxing  deposits  would  use  up  much  of  the  political  capital  that  could  be  better  spent  on 
structural reforms. 
                                                
11   See G. B. Eggertsson and P. Krugman, 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-
Koo Approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford University Press, vol. 127(3), pages 1469–1513. 
12   For a detailed overview of the discussion see R. J. Gordon, 2015. “Secular Stagnation: A Supply-Side View”; 
L. H. Summers, 2015. ”Demand Side Secular Stagnation” ; B. Eichengreen, 2015, “Secular Stagnation: The 
Long View”, all published in the American Economic Review: Vol. 105 No. 5 (May 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
