Andreas Dombret: In support of coco bonds 
Op-ed  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, published in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 21 February 2015. 
 One of the key outcomes of regulatory reform in the banking industry, launched in 2008, is 
that banks need more and more capital. To illustrate this point, the new Basel III regulatory 
framework  requires  credit  institutions  to  hold  significantly  more  higher-quality  capital  than 
before. In addition, global systemically important banks need to additionally strengthen their 
capital base so that they can bear potential losses unassisted. 
The idea is to enhance banks’ resilience and avoid putting taxpayers back on the hook for 
banks’ losses in future crises. Although these reforms are good, they raise the question of 
how banks will be able to cover growing capital requirements. 
With this in mind, we should turn our attention to a different kind of capital instrument. Known 
as “contingent convertible bonds”, or “coco bonds” for short, they are bonds which convert 
automatically from debt to equity upon a specific trigger event – for instance, if an institution 
is faced with insolvency or if its tier 1 capital ratio drops below a certain threshold. In such 
cases, coco bonds increase the bank’s capital buffer. 
This  new  type  of  bond  is  attractive  to  credit  institutions  for  several  reasons.  One  is  that, 
under  certain  conditions,  coco  bonds  are  recognised  by  supervisors  as  capital.  These 
conditions  hinge  on  the  category  to  which  the  capital  is  to  be  assigned  and  reflect,  for 
instance,  subordinated  status  and  long-term  availability  of  the  capital.  The  issuing  bank’s 
discretionary scope for deciding whether or not to make coupon payments to investors is a 
further condition. Another selling point for coco bonds to banks is that interest payments on 
the bond are tax-deductible. 
Coco bonds can be attractive to institutional investors as well; owing to their particular risk, 
they promise superior returns to those on normal bonds – which accounts for much of their 
appeal to investors, particularly in the current low-interest-rate setting. 
So are coco bonds a “silver bullet” for banks? In Germany at least, their importance has been 
marginal up to now. Up until the end of last year, these bonds were issued mainly by large 
banks in Spain, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Their total volume amounted to some 
€50 billion. Only two German institutions issued coco bonds in 2014. 
Uncertainties  surrounding  the  tax  treatment  of  these  instruments  –  which  have  now  been 
cleared up – were one of the reasons why German banks were so slow to issue such bonds. 
In addition, German companies legislation has thus far not explicitly provided for mandatory 
convertible  instruments  where  the  right  to  convert  lies  with  the  issuer.  The  2014  draft  Act 
Amending  the  Companies  Act,  which  is  currently  making  its  way  through  the  legislative 
process,  will  make  it  legal  here  in  Germany,  too,  to  issue  coco  bonds,  which  would  then 
convert to equity shares. Banks’ growing need for capital could be precisely the catalyst that 
might increase the importance of coco bomds in Germany, too – which is all the more reason 
to be careful. 
Attractive  as  these  instruments  may  be  to  banks  and  investors,  we  must  remember  that 
these  are  very  complex  capital  instruments,  especially  since  they  are  governed  by  such 
disparate areas of the law as companies law, debt law, tax law and supervisory law. There is 
a  risk  that  retail  investors  in  particular,  mesmerised  by  the  relatively  high  returns  on  coco 
bonds, could lose sight of the risks involved. Banks are aware of the danger: Deutsche Bank, 
for instance, issued its coco bonds in denominations of €100,000 in order to restrict entry into 
coco  bond  business  to  institutional  and  professional  investors.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the 
sale and distribution of coco bonds to retail investors is even prohibited by law. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Now is the time for supervisors to develop a code of best practices for issuing coco bonds. 
While taking national legal systems into account, we supervisors need to strive for as much 
standardisation  as  possible  in  order  to  achieve  convergence  in  the  EU.  It  is  important, 
though, that coco bonds actually be used to absorb the losses that the issuing banks could 
potentially incur. 
This challenge has been recognised by EU lawmakers and supervisors. The key tasks facing 
supervisors now are to observe the market very closely and to press ahead with efforts to 
improve  the  legal  framework  for  coco  bonds.  Once  these  tasks  have  been  accomplished, 
coco bonds can be a useful addition to banks’ capital structure. By helping to strengthen the 
capital base, they will make an added contribution to enhancing banks’ resilience to future 
crises. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
