  Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview in Wirtschaftswoche 
Interview with Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, in Wirtschaftswoche, conducted by  Mr  Mark Fehr and Mr Malte Fischer and 
published on 2 April 2015. 
 Ms Lautenschläger, you have a unique role in the European Central Bank: not only do 
you have a say in the key ECB interest rates but, as Vice-Chair of the new banking 
supervision,  you  also  monitor  the  institutions.  Do  you  manage  to  avoid  conflicts  of 
interest between monetary policy and supervision? 
I am a purist in this regard, so I strictly separate both of my tasks in order to avoid conflicts of 
interest.  Before  contributing  to  a  discussion,  I  always  clarify  whether  I  am  speaking  as  a 
supervisor or as a monetary policy-maker. Besides, in past crises, a supervisory model with 
a separation between the central bank and supervision was not shown to be more successful 
than the model with monetary policy and supervision under one roof. 
On which issues do conflicts of interest arise? 
Different  interests could  play  a  role  in,  say,  the  emergency  loans  for  banks facing  liquidity 
problems.  From  the  banking  supervisor’s  perspective,  this  liquidity  assistance  is  initially 
welcome,  because  it gives  the  bank  time  to  resolve  problems. The monetary  policy-maker 
must ask what transactions the liquidity will be used for, or whether the bank concerned is 
solvent. 
Do you ever feel schizophrenic in your double role? 
No, I believe that I manage to separate both tasks. In each of the two roles, I focus on the 
objective  of  the  respective  task,  i.e.  first  for  monetary  stability  and  second  for  safe  banks. 
Everything that goes on between monetary policy and banking supervision passes over my 
desk. And I am aware that, in my role, I have to act as a bridge and have to broker between 
the  two  sidess.  In  the  long  run,  however,  I  see  a  separation  of  both  tasks  as  the  better 
choice. 
Are the banks in the euro area stable enough to issue sufficient credit to businesses? 
The  vast  majority  of  European  banks  have  enough  capital  and  liquidity  to  enable  them  to 
expand their lending activities. But that in itself does not suffice. If we want to see sustainable 
and  sound  credit  growth,  banks  will  have  to  take  a  positive  view  of  their  customers’ 
creditworthiness and thereby of their future prospects. And, as a rule, that is closely linked to 
the economic growth of the customers’ region, of their home country. But politicians are the 
only ones who can bring about lasting economic growth, namely by implementing structural 
reforms. 
What is your view of demands that banks should top up their capital to 30% of their 
balance sheet total, as is the case at many enterprises outside the financial sector? 
I am in favour of banks holding adequate and, above all, high-quality capital. But that has 
little to do with the demand you are referring to. I find that too sweeping; it ignores the risks 
inherent in a capital calculation that is geared to the balance sheet total rather than to the 
bank’s  risk.  Investors  want  to  see  returns  and,  unfortunately,  often  take  a  very  short-term 
view. If the capital share was too high, banks could be forced to invest in especially high-
return, and thus particularly high-risk, projects, in order to generate the required returns. In 
this way we would indeed boost the banks’ risk-bearing capacity, but also their risks. Nothing 
would have been gained. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Low interest rates alone are driving banks to enter into ever more risky commitments. 
At  the  current  level  of  interest  rates,  does  the  business  model  with  deposits  and 
credits still work at all? 
The low interest rate environment is certainly a  challenge for the banks. On top of that, in 
particular the German  banking  sector  is  marked  by  strong  competitive  and  price  pressure. 
This means that some business models will drift into a precarious situation over the medium 
and long term. 
What are you doing to counter that? 
We  must  prevent  banks  from  responding  to  the  low  interest  rates  purely  by  engaging  in 
riskier transactions or by making savings such as job cuts in risk management. We respond 
to a heightened risk on a balance sheet by requiring additional write-downs or more capital. 
Moreover, we ask banks to improve their internal controls and their risk management by, for 
example, employing more staff for these tasks. 
But banks are now more concerned with reducing headcount. 
What matters for us supervisors is that the institutions not only attract business, but that they 
adequately  monitor  the  accompanying  risks.  I  can  well  remember  times  in  which  I  left  the 
banks to choose – to either make job cuts in trading or hire more staff for risk management. 
How happy are you with the capital raising prescribed by the ECB for those banks that 
failed the stress test last autumn? 
On  the  whole,  I  am  pleased.  For  me,  it’s  not  so  much  about  the  need  for  capital  that  we 
found during the health check of more than 120 of the largest banking groups in the euro 
area. The success of the health check was that the institutions prepared themselves for this 
test,  also  by  indeed  strengthening  their  balance  sheets  by  around  €200  billion.  That  has 
brought stability; now we need to turn to the many national transitional rules, that do not have 
a positive effect on the quality of capital. 
For some weeks now the ECB has been buying large quantities of government bonds. 
However,  the  euro  area  economy  has  long  since  stabilised  and  no  longer  actually 
needs any monetary stimulus. Is the purchase programme a mistake? 
Economic prospects have indeed improved. Besides the fall in oil prices, the ECB’s previous 
monetary loosening was a contributory factor. Just think of the reductions of the key interest 
rates  and  the  additional  liquidity  injections  for  the  banks  offered  at  favourable  conditions. 
Sometimes  more  patience  is  called  for.  Especially  when  we’re  talking  about  large-scale 
purchase  programmes  for  government  bonds,  which  in  my  view  can  only  ever  be  a  last 
resort, namely because of their side-effects. 
But consumer prices in the euro area are nonetheless falling… 
...which is not yet deflation. Deflation exists when citizens expect a long-lasting fall in prices 
and  adapt  their  behaviour  accordingly,  e.g.  by  postponing  purchases  or  being  prepared  to 
work  for  lower  wages.  A  downward  spiral  then  looms  of  falling  prices,  lower  demand  and 
declining wages. There are no indications of this at present. The current slowdown in the rate 
of inflation is largely attributable to the fall in energy prices. Moreover, the crisis countries of 
the  Monetary  Union  have  introduced  essential  corrections  in  wages  and  prices  in  order  to 
improve their competitiveness. 
The  ECB’s  bond  purchase  programme  is  also  supposed  to  stimulate  bank  lending. 
How can that come about when, as is currently the case in the euro area, interest rates 
are already low? 
The programme aims at, among other things, making it better economic sense for banks to 
extend  credit.  By  putting  downward  pressure  on  the  yields  for  government  bonds,  it 
enhances  the  incentives  for  investors  to  shift  to  higher-risk  and  higher-return  investments 
and for banks to release funds for lending operations. Even before the purchase programme 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  commenced, long-term yields on the bond market in the euro area had already reached an 
extremely low level. However, experience in the United States shows that the higher the level 
of the relevant yields, the stronger the impact of government bond purchases. 
What effect do you expect in the case of the ECB? 
Given the low interest rates in the euro area, I have my doubts as to whether the economic 
effects of the purchase programme will be able to reach the desired order of magnitude… 
...and finance ministers are pleased that they can cheaply run into debt. 
That  is  a  crucial  disadvantage  of  the  purchase  programme.  I  am  absolutely  aware  of  the 
danger that the low costs of financing alleviate the pressure on governments to consolidate 
their public budgets and tackle the necessary structural reforms. Expansive monetary policy 
can  only  provide  an  impetus  for  more  growth.  The  decisive  impulses  must  come  from 
economic policies. 
Are zero per cent yields on German government bonds justified too? 
Depending  on  the  class  of  securities,  we  are  in  negative  territory  in  some  cases.  To  the 
extent  that  the  decline  in  yields  on  German  government  bonds  can  be  traced  back  to  the 
purchases by the ECB, I take a critical view. 
In Germany the low interest rates are threatening to overheat the economy. 
I  would  not  speak  of  an  overheating  of  the  economy,  of  an  excess  of economic growth  in 
Germany. The German economy may be able to absorb a higher key rate of interest but the 
same cannot necessarily be said for the euro area as a whole. A crucial point is that the ECB 
has to pursue monetary policy for the whole euro area, not just for one country. And it’s also 
essential  that  we  look  at  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  and  at  medium-term  inflation 
expectations. However, medium to long-term inflation expectations have clearly fallen; that is 
why the current low key interest rates are definitely justified. But we should not forget that we 
cannot have a low key interest rate without undesirable side-effects. We must bring interest 
rate levels back to normal as soon as possible. 
Do you understand why savers, banks and insurance firms become critical when they 
suffer from extremely low interest rates? 
I  can  well  understand  those  concerns.  A  prolonged  low  inflation  rate  environment  carries 
risks  for  banks  and  insurance  firms.  Low  interest  rates  increase  the  danger  of  riskier 
investment behaviour; overheating or price bubbles in other asset classes can easily arise. 
...especially, when an economic region as heterogeneous as the euro area is governed 
by a single interest rate. 
The more heterogeneous an economic area, the harder it is to govern with a single interest 
rate.  That  is  of  course  felt  especially  painfully  when  economic  conditions  are  tough.  We 
therefore  need  the  euro  area  Member  States  to  pursue  economic  policies  that  will  ensure 
sustainable economic growth for all. The competitiveness of each individual Member State 
must  be  strengthened  through  sound  fiscal  policy  and  structural  reforms.  And  in  places 
where  we  see  overheating  occurring,  we  must  use  targeted  macro-prudential  supervisory 
tools… 
....that is supervision of the whole financial system with targeted regulation. 
Such oversight enables us to identify the systemic risks and outliers in individual countries 
and individual markets and to counter them in some sections. 
Given such complex tasks in different countries, are we asking too much of the ECB? 
No,  the  ECB  is  not  on  the  frontline  in  macro-prudential  oversight;  in  Europe  this  involves 
many  institutions  in  all  Member  States,  which  have  a  vast  amount  of  information  and 
considerable  analytical  capacity.  In  Germany  these  are  the  Bundesbank,  the  Federal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Financial Supervisory Authority and the Federal Ministry of Finance, which all work together 
in the Financial Stability Committee. 
Do we already have a housing bubble in Germany? 
Up to now, the rise in property prices has been concentrated in the larger cities. In some of 
these there are definitely overvaluations. But have we seen excessive growth in lending too? 
Broadly  speaking,  that  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  the  case.  The  Bundesbank,  and  we 
ourselves, will certainly continue to monitor the situation closely. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
