  Erkki Liikanen: Enhancing reliability and efficiency of future payments – 
five criteria 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  European  Central 
Bank/Bank of Finland Retail Payment Conference, Helsinki, 4 June 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Traditionally  retail  payments  were  made  only  by  notes  and  coins.  Cash-based  payment 
process  required  a  great  deal  of  physical  money  transfers.  The  payment  system  was 
inefficient compared to what it is today. 
Today we use more and more debit and credit cards to pay for shopping and online banking 
services  to  pay  the  bills.  The  efficiency  of  the  system  has  increased,  but  still,  it  is  not 
exploiting the full potential of digitalization. 
Digitalization will shape the future payment landscape. But it is not necessarily the banks and 
other  established  financial  institutions  that  will  dominate  this  future.  They  are  being 
challenged by new entrants and large established companies from non-financial industries. 
In  Finland,  we  remember  how  Nokia  became  the  biggest  in  mobile  phones  after  it  had 
challenged incumbents in the industry, such as Motorola, Ericsson, Siemens and others. But 
Nokia itself was challenged by new entrants: Android from Google and iPhone from Apple. 
Therefore, the next big change in the payment industry may be more than just an evolution – 
maybe even a revolution.1 
What  is  the  role  of  central  banks  in  the  development  of  the  future  payment  methods? 
Innovation and new development should naturally come from the private sector. 
But  at  the  same  time,  retail  payment  systems  are  essential  to  efficient  functioning  of  the 
economy. When we take into account the social costs related to payment systems,2 central 
banks  can  have  an  important  role  as  a  catalyst  to  facilitate  the  socially  best  possible 
development. This is our task.3 
The five criteria for a payment system and the role of central banks 
2. 
We at the Bank of Finland have defined five criteria which should serve as guiding principles 
when assessing the present payment systems and the future developments. 
There criteria are: 1) technical efficiency, 2) accessibility and non-discrimination, 3) efficient 
and cost-based pricing, 4) operational stability with contingency plans in case of problems, 
and 5) international compatibility. 
                                                
1   This  issue  was  briefly  discussed  in  the  final  report  of  EC  Conference  titled  “Emerging  challenges  in  retail 
found  here: 
finance  and  consumer  policy”,  18.11.2014,  Brussels.  This  document  can  be 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/conferences/2014/1118-retail-finance/docs/141118-retail-finance-final-
report_en.pdf. 
2   ECB study found that social and private costs of making retail payments are close to 1% of GDP. A link to the 
study “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments: a European perspective” can be found here: 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp137.pdf?d317ce9d32d829600145bc15f9451813. 
3   One  of  the  basic  tasks  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  is  to  promote  the  smooth  operation  of  payment 
systems. And similarly the Act on the Bank of Finland states that one of the tasks of Bank of Finland is to 
participate in maintaining the reliability and efficiency of the payment system and overall financial system and 
participate in their development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
These  criteria  should  not  be  considered  as  something  that  is  imposed  upon  the  payment 
method providers; they are an essential building block of any sound business case within the 
field of payment services. 
Technical efficiency 
2.1 
The first criterion, technical efficiency, states that the payment method providers should take 
full  advantage  of  available  technical  innovations  to  make  the  payment  process  cheaper, 
faster and safer for users and providers. Digitalization and innovations are the main drivers 
for new payment solutions. 
But  also  user-friendly  interface  is  another  dimension  that  needs  to  be  taken  into  account. 
Users  are  more  likely  to  start  using  payment  methods  that  are  intuitive  and  easy  to  use. 
User-friendliness complements technical innovations. 
Adapting  new  technologies  will  at  the  start  produce  costs  for  the  provider  of  a  payment 
service but the user base and associated revenue increase over time. A significant risk for 
the payment service provider is that the specific technology might not be adapted by anyone 
else. 
As catalysts that foster discussion between relevant payment system stakeholders, central 
banks  can  alleviate  this  ‘chicken-and-egg  problem’  associated  with  the  adaptation  of  new 
technologies. Central banks can promote international open standards for the benefit of all. 
The recent times have witnessed a shift towards real-time economy. A significant amount of 
interest  has  been  expressed  regards  real-time  payments.  Some  countries  have  already 
implemented or are planning to implement 24/7/365 payment system with the funds being 
transferred  immediately  to  the  receiver’s  account.  The  call  for  pan-European  solutions  is 
ongoing.4 
Accessibility and non-discrimination 
2.2 
The second criterion defines that different types of users should have access to the payment 
infrastructure without disproportionate inconvenience or cost. 
The  most  senior  people,  for  example,  might  not  be  familiar  with  the  modern  IT  tools  and 
therefore  any  digital  payment  method  might  require  unreasonable  inconvenience  or  even 
close the access to the services. Still, financial inclusion and access to appropriate payment 
methods are extremely important as the ability to make and receive payments related to the 
necessities of life is a basic right in our society. 
Central banks together with other authorities must see to it that there are proper alternatives 
available  for  those  who  are  not  able  or  willing  to  use  those  payment  methods,  which  are 
more demanding either technically or in terms of creditworthiness of the citizen. This may be 
a problem only for a transition period. 
Accessibility and ease of use foster quick adaptation and enable the user base to achieve 
critical  mass.  Larger  user  base  also  allows  the  costs  of  the  system  to  be  borne  by  many 
instead of a few. 
Significant factors in attracting users are trust and reputation. Established companies have 
credibility whereas start-ups are fighting to get it. If users are not certain that the new system 
is secure enough, most of them might be hesitant to start using it. The new entrants could 
consider  whether  submitting  oneself  to  supervision  and  oversight  by  authorities  would 
                                                
4   Read more about this in the report titled “Financial integration in Europe”, published by the European Central 
Bank in 2015, pp. 56–58. This document can be found here: 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/financialintegrationineurope201504.en.pdf?3f4d1378095005332d61
5bb195c29846. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
significantly help a new payment service provider to gain legitimacy in the eyes of potential 
users. 
Efficient and cost-based pricing 
2.3 
The  third  criterion,  efficient  and  cost-based  pricing,  requires  that  the  pricing  of  payment 
methods is transparent and reflects the costs of producing such services. Prices relative to 
production costs give the right signals that should guide users to adopt the most cost-efficient 
payment method in any given situation. 
Competition  is  what  makes  the  pricing  effective  and  cost-based.  This  ensures  that  the 
benefits  from  technical  innovations  are  distributed  throughout  the  society.  Competition 
requires a number of independent providers. 
We rarely see a multitude of competing retail payment systems in one market at the same 
time. Economies of scale is one of the driving forces behind this. Payment methods can be 
more numerous but established and widely used methods are a rare breed also. 
Authorities play a role in making sure that level playing field can be achieved even in the 
presence of dominating payment methods, and that any dominant position in the market is 
not misused.5 
Cooperation, in relation to adaptation of new technical innovations and security measures, 
must still be allowed. This is the competition-cooperation nexus.6 Because payment methods 
form a network, cooperation in defining the payment standards and building the underlying 
infrastructure should be recognized. 
Operational stability with contingency plans in case of problems 
2.4 
The  fourth  criteria,  operational  stability,  is  critical  because  payment  systems  are  the 
backbone  of  all  economic  activity.  They  must  run  smoothly  and  reliably.  So  providers  of 
payment  methods  are  faced  with  a  trilemma  between  usability,  costs  and  security  of  the 
payment system. 
The optimum for one payment service operator is not necessarily the social optimum. The 
commercial operator may be inclined not to take operational risks fully into account. This is 
because  the  parties  which  suffer from  operational  disruptions to  payment  systems  are  not 
able to get full compensation for their damages. Interdependencies within financial markets 
mean that there are always a significant amount of externalities hidden from the sight of any 
one actor. 
In  the  digital  world,  cyber  threats  are  the  key  challenge  for  future  payment  systems.7 
Therefore, cyber security – or put that more holistically as cyber resilience – is a mandatory 
feature of all future payment systems. 
Cyber resilience means that it is not only about the technology but the attention needs to be 
put also on the processes, people and communication. This all requires a paradigm shift in 
                                                
5   This issue is discussed in a recent article “Promoting efficient retail payments in Europe”, written by Iftekhar 
Hasan, Emmi Martikainen and Tuomas Takalo and published in the Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems, 
Vol. 8, No 4, 2015, pp. 395–406. 
6   More  about  this  can  be  found  in  an  article  titled  “Competition-cooperation  nexus  in  the  European  retail 
payments market: views from a network industry perspective”, written by Kari Kemppainen and published in 
the Journal of Payments Strategy & Systems, Vol. 8, No 4, 2015, pp. 386–394. 
7   Many central banks have stressed the importance of cyber security. Bank of Finland recently published an 
article on cyber security and financial stability. This article can be found here: 
http://www.eurojatalous.fi/fi/2015/2/voisiko-kyberhyokkays-johtaa-finanssikriisiin (English version forthcoming). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
the way we think about cyber security: cyber security should not be thought to be only a cost 
center, but it needs to be perceived as a business enabler. 
It  is  relatively  more  straightforward  to  handle  cybersecurity  in  the  interbank  payment 
ecosystem, since the access points to the payment system are limited and connections can 
be made using secure dedicated networks. 
In contrast, retail payment systems may have billions of potential access nodes and utilize 
standard  internet  connections.  Security  solutions  for  these  are  different,  especially 
considering how to make sure that all end user access nodes are secure enough. 
Central  banks,  together  with  all  other  stakeholders  –  banks,  supervisors,  cybersecurity 
companies – can be active in raising awareness of cybersecurity, setting the basic security 
requirements, and enabling the flow of best practices from one payment service operator to 
another. 
Central banks are a natural catalysts for cross-border cooperation to promote cybersecurity 
of  the  whole  financial  infrastructure.  After  all,  it  is  an  international  infrastructure,  which 
requires international cooperation doing the oversight. 
International compatibility 
2.5 
Finally, the fifth criterion, international compatibility, states that common standards and rules 
governing  payment  systems  are  needed  to  promote  harmonization  and  to  ensure 
interoperability of different retail payment methods.8 
In a global economy, fragmented payment system landscape across countries will increase 
the costs for individual users and societies as whole. Technical innovations may increase the 
fragmentation, unless some common ground has been found through open standards. Either 
in terms of interfaces between systems or in terms of payment systems used. 
But  international  compatibility  is  not  only  about  the  interoperability  between  payment 
systems. It is also about the compatibility with the laws and regulations of the society around 
the payment system. Future payment systems should not be in a conflict with the laws of the 
society in any country where the payment system is operational. 
With the future payment systems emerging, international compatibility  is again an issue in 
the spotlight. SEPA was a step towards international compatibility in the field of payments. 
There  is  again  a  risk  that  future  payment  systems  will  become  fragmented  with  the 
emergence of new payment methods. It would better to set the harmonized guidelines before 
this fragmentation actually happens. 
The work done by the Euro Retail Payment Board (ERPB) and its national counterparties, 
including  the  Payments  Council  in  Finland,  should  be  highlighted  in  this  relation.9  These 
groups  bring  together  the  relevant  payment  system  stakeholders  to  consider  how  future 
payment  systems  will  change  the  whole  financial  ecosystem  –  also  at  the  European  and 
international levels. 
                                                
8  
In a recent speech Vice-President Ansip, in charge of the Digital Single Market, noted that common technical 
standards for mobile payments are needed to promote digital single market. This speech can be found here: 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–4937_en.htm. 
9   Chaired by Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, the ERPB objective is to contribute to 
and  to  facilitate  the  further development of  an  integrated, innovative and  competitive market for  euro  retail 
payments  in  the  EU.  The  ERPB  is  composed  of  members  both  from  the  supply  and  demand  side  of  the 
market. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Are the future payment systems already here? 
Where  are  we  at  the  moment  in  relation  to  these  five  standards  and  innovative  payment 
methods? Even the most novel and debated virtual currencies do not meet these standards. 
So  why  doesn’t  Bitcoin  meet  the  five  criteria?  Bitcoin  is  not  subject  to  the  most  basic 
principles  governing  payment  systems,  starting  from  the  know-your-customer  fundamental 
principle.  Continuity  of  operations  and  contingency  planning  are  problematic.  And 
fluctuations in the bitcoin value will impose additional costs to people who use bitcoins.10 
Sometimes you hear a claim that these are not problems of bitcoin, per se, but of the bitcoin 
ecosystem. To the general public, these two are the same. It seems that even Bitcoin is for 
virtual currencies what MySpace was for social networks. 
Digital purses, mobile phone apps and some other niche payment solutions exist, but all in 
all,  we  haven’t  yet  witnessed  the  emergence  of  a  true  future  payment  system.  Bits  and 
pieces of a future payment system are incorporated in different payment methods of today, 
but none such exists yet that would meet all the five criteria. This is by no coincidence. 
Banks  and  other  established  financial  institutions  are  well  entrenched  in  the  payment 
landscape.  It  might  not  be  in  their  best  interest  to  develop  new  systems  that  cannibalize 
profits from their existing investments. The new-comers are facing an uphill battle in trying to 
establish  a  bridgehead  within  the  payment  landscape.  Still,  it  seems  that  something 
fundamental has changed. 
Historically the usage of payment methods has evolved slowly over time. But digitalization 
and the emergence of new actors in the field of future payment methods are something new, 
not  seen  in  the  past.  So  far  the  speed  of  change  has  been  overestimated.  But  we  must 
remember that in the short run we often overestimate the change but underestimate it in the 
long run. This has happened with many technological breakthroughs. 
Conclusions 
To conclude, I would like to emphasize that even in the future, the five criteria for a payment 
system  remain  essential.  In  other  words,  technical  efficiency,  accessibility  and  non-
discrimination, efficient and cost-based pricing, operational stability with contingency plans in 
case  of  problems,  and  international  compatibility  are  still  important  for  developing  new 
payment systems. 
The key challenge for developers is how to solve the trilemma between usability, costs and 
security of a payment method. The competitors in this future payment race are likely to come 
from different directions and their solutions can be very different. 
Since payment methods are part of payment networks, no payment service is isolated from 
the real world and other financial transactions. The competition-cooperation nexus needs to 
be  taken  into  account  to  enable  faster  adaptation  of  innovative  solutions  without 
compromising  security,  but  also  to  maintain  and  foster  competition  between  providers  of 
such payment services. The end-user benefit and transparency are the key points here. 
Authorities need to be able to monitor the development and usage of new payment services, 
keeping  in  mind  the  proportionality  principle.  This  means  that  it  is  not  in  the  interest  of 
authorities to suppress innovation; new entrants should have a fair chance to be able to enter 
into the market. Nevertheless, safety of the payments must be ensured in all cases. 
                                                
10   In a speech titled “Euro banknotes – a means of payment recognised worldwide”, Yves Mersch, Member of 
the Executive Board of the ECB, highlighted some of the problems associated with Bitcoin. This speech can 
be found here: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp140519.en.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
The economics of payment networks are highly complex, so there is a need for continued 
research in the field. Academic papers and discussion in this conference have shed light on 
many important aspects that should be taken into account in relation to future payments. 
Conferences such as this are a welcome sign that the necessary exchange of information 
and views is going forward. Authorities, users and other stakeholders need to participate in 
the discussion about future payments. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
