  Cecilia Skingsley: Inflation-targeting after the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Ms  Cecilia  Skingsley,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Almega 
(employer and trade organisation for the Swedish service sector), Stockholm, 22 May 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Björn Andersson and Mikael Apel for their help with this speech. 
This coming Sunday is Pentecost, “the day of rejoicing”, to quote Esaias Tegnér. And it is 
certainly  easy  to  rejoice  at  the  season  and  see  green  shoots  springing  up,  the  result  as 
Tegnér writes, of “the friendly flames of the Spring-sun”, even in the economic statistics. For 
a  long  period  of  time  now  we  have  had  a  development  where  production  and  the  labour 
market  have  been  improving,  but  inflation  has  been  too  low.  This  has  also  affected 
expectations of inflation in the longer run. The Riksbank has cut the repo rate and its forecast 
for  the  future  repo  rate  to  very  low  levels  to  bring  up  inflation,  as  well  as  purchasing 
government bonds to make monetary policy even more expansionary. 
It appears as though this policy has had an effect. But we are not home and dry yet, which is 
shown,  for  instance  in  the  unexpectedly  low  inflation  outcomes  in  April.  It  takes  time  until 
inflation is back at a level around the inflation target and there is still spare capacity in the 
economy and scope to increase activity further. The risks of a setback in economic activity 
should not be underestimated either. As we Executive Board members pointed out, we are 
always  prepared  to  make  monetary  policy  even  more  expansionary  if  we  assess  that  the 
upturn in inflation is threatened. 
But even if the focus of the debate in Sweden is now of necessity on current monetary policy, 
we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  longer  perspective.  There  is  a  lively  international  debate  on 
whether,  and  if  so  how,  inflation  targeting  should  be  changed  in  the  wake  of  the  financial 
crisis and the ensuing period of a long-drawn out economic recession, very low inflation and 
very expansionary monetary policy. What do the past eight years mean for the functioning of 
the  economy  and  for  monetary  policy? Will  we  return  to  the  way  things  looked  before  the 
financial crisis? It is important that we also take time in the Swedish debate to focus on these 
fundamental  issues  so  that  the  discussions  of  our  own  monetary  policy  framework  remain 
well-informed  and  productive.  This  is  important  not  least  for  the  external  evaluation  of 
monetary  policy  in  Sweden  now  being  carried out  on  behalf  of the  Riksdag  Committee  on 
Finance. 
There are many interesting question that are worth raising. One example that is of immediate 
interest in the Swedish  debate is the question of whether monetary policy should have an 
explicit target for employment in addition to the target for inflation. This is one question that 
will be taken up in the external evaluation. 
Today I intend to take up a couple of questions that I consider relevant to both the debate in 
Sweden and the international debate. The first question is what role monetary policy should 
play with regard to promoting financial stability. This is a question that is still raised as one of 
the most important ones in the international discussions on possible changes in the inflation-
targeting framework, although in many countries this has been overshadowed by the recent 
low  inflation  figures.  A  second  question  that,  for  natural  reasons,  is  always  topical  when 
discussing whether the inflation-targeting policy needs to be modified is whether the level of 
the  central  banks’  current  inflation  targets  –  usually  around  2  per  cent  –  needs  to  be 
changed. This is also something that has been discussed quite a lot by academics and in 
various policy forums since the financial crisis. Internationally, the discussions have focused 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  on  the  question  of  whether  the  target  should  be  raised,  while  in  Sweden  the  focus  has 
instead been on whether the target has been set too high. I intend to address the arguments 
for both points of view and to give my own views on the subject. 
Should monetary policy take financial imbalances into account? 
But let me begin with the question of monetary policy and financial stability. One lesson from 
the  financial  crisis  is  that  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability  in  the 
economy. More specifically, the origin of the financial crisis showed that even in a relatively 
calm economic environment it is possible for financial imbalances and risks to build up and 
lead to disruptions spreading throughout the financial system and causing substantial costs 
to society. 
After the financial crisis there has been intensive work around the world on producing tools 
that can be used to prevent these systemic risks from arising. And a largely new policy area 
has  taken  shape;  macroprudential  policy,  which  is  responsible  for  these  tools.  In  principle 
everyone agrees that this policy area is needed and it has begun to be implemented around 
the  world  with  slightly  different 
In  Sweden,  of  course, 
Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  financial  supervisory  authority)  has  been  given  the 
responsibility for the macroprudential policy tools.1 On the other hand, the responsibility for 
the  overall  task  of  promoting  a  stable  and  smoothly-functioning  financial  system  will  be 
divided  between  Finansinspektionen,  the  Riksbank,  the  Government  and  the  Swedish 
National Debt Office. 
So macroprudential policy is intended to be the first line of defence in counteracting financial 
imbalances that can affect macroeconomic and financial stability. There is broad agreement 
on this. The issue now being discussed internationally, and on which the jury is still out, is 
how  strong  this  line  of  defence  can  be  and  whether  other  policy  areas  may  at  least 
sometimes  need  to  contribute  to  counteract  this  type  of  risk.  A  more  specific  question  is 
whether monetary policy should also take into account risks linked to financial imbalances.2 
institutional  set-ups. 
Financial stability has great significance for monetary policy 
There  is  no  doubt that financial  stability  has  considerable  significance for  monetary  policy. 
Monetary policy largely acts via the financial markets and if these function poorly, monetary 
policy will have less effect on the economy and on inflation. Problems in the banks can also 
lead to problems in granting credit in general in the economy and thus to lower demand and 
lower inflationary pressure. But the effects on unemployment, growth and other aspects of 
the economy can be substantial, even if this does not extend to a full-scale financial crisis. If 
imbalances linked to credit-granting and asset prices build up that are unsustainable in the 
long run, there is a risk that the economic downswings will be deeper and more prolonged.3 
Given the links between the areas, there are arguments in favour of monetary policy taking 
into  account  risks  linked  to  financial  imbalances.  This  is  actually  nothing  new.  Such 
arguments  were  put  forward  even  before  the  financial  crisis,  although  the  debate  then 
concerned “bubbles” on the stock market or property market. Some said that monetary policy 
should react to such sharp rises in asset prices, over and above the impact the upturns have 
on  the  prospects for  inflation  and  economic  activity.  But  the  predominant  opinion  was  that 
                                                
1   See  Ordinance  (2013:1111)  amending  Ordinance  (2009:3)  with  instructions  for  Finansinspektionen,  which 
also clarifies that “[w]ith a solution in which Finansinspektionen has the main responsibility for financial stability 
instruments,  it  is  ultimately  the  Government  that  is  responsible.”  Questions  regarding  Finansinspektionen’s 
legal mandate to introduce amortisation requirements have arisen recently, however, and it is important that 
they are resolved quickly.  
2   See, for instance, Blanchard (2015). A survey of the debate is provided by, for instance, Smets (2013).  
3   See, for instance, Schularick and Taylor (2012) and Jordà, Schularick and Taylor (2013). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  this is not something that monetary policy should do. One argument was that it is too difficult 
to  identify  bubbles  and  that  in  practice  it  may  make  things  even  worse  if  one  tries  to 
counteract  them.4  The  fact  that  the  earlier  consensus  view  is  now  up  for  discussion  is  of 
course due to the experiences from the financial crisis that show that the economic costs to 
society  of  financial  imbalances  can  be  substantial  and  that  it  is  not  so  easy  for  monetary 
policy to “clean up” afterwards when the economy has suffered. 
The inflation target is still the foundation 
There are different ways of justifying why monetary policy should take financial stability into 
account.  Different  arguments  lead  to  slightly  different  conclusions  regarding  exactly  how 
inflation-targeting should be adapted. Should, for instance, financial stability be included as a 
new objective for monetary policy, together with price stability and macroeconomic stability?5 
Or can the objectives, as before, apply to price stability and macroeconomic stability but with 
consideration  to  financial  stability  included  in  the  prospects  for  these  two  quantities  in  the 
slightly longer run?6 
Theoretically,  there  may  thus  be  some  differences  between  different  ways  of  including 
consideration  of  financial  stability  in  inflation-targeting.  In  practice,  I  do  not  think  the 
differences are so large – regardless of the underlying reason, the results are in practice that 
monetary policy is slightly adjusted to counteract potential imbalances on the financial side of 
the economy.7 It may be worth pointing this out: a monetary policy that  “leans against the 
wind” in this way does not actually scrap the inflation target and swap it for a target for asset 
prices or indebtedness. The inflation target is still the foundation. What this means is that in 
some situations monetary policy can be adapted so that it takes slightly longer for inflation to 
get back to the target that it would have done otherwise if one had not taken financial stability 
into account. 
A  necessary  condition  for  being  able  to  give  such  consideration  is  that  confidence  in  the 
inflation  target  is  firmly  rooted  and  does  not  risk  deteriorating  because  it  takes  somewhat 
longer  for  inflation  to  attain  the  target.  A  monetary  policy  that  leans  against  the  wind  thus 
assumes that inflation expectations are firmly anchored around the target. It is probably also 
easier if inflation is not too far from the target to start with, as inflation expectations are to 
some extent affected by the current rate of inflation. Also, a deviation from the inflation target 
is in itself more costly the larger the deviation is. 
Lack of practical experience 
So what is the current status of the debate? For natural reasons, an important dividing line 
here  is  the  view  of  macroprudential  policy  and  how  well  it  can  function  as  a  first  line  of 
defence. Can it efficiently manage to counteract imbalances arising, or is it doubtful whether 
it  can  do  so  alone?  This  is  essentially  an  empirical  question,  so  the  route  taken  by  the 
international debate in the coming period will to a great extent be determined by the practical 
experiences  from  macroprudential  policy  and  the  tools  at  its  disposal.  So  far,  these 
experiences are relatively limited. 
Another  important  dividing  line  in  the  debate  is  the  view  of  monetary  policy  as  a  tool  to 
counteract  financial  imbalances.  One  argument  that  is  often  put  forward  against  using 
monetary policy as such a tool is that it is far too blunt for this purpose and has limited effects 
                                                
4   The arguments for and against that were put forward in the debate are summarised in Roubini (2006) and 
Posen (2006) respectively.    
5   See, for example, Billi and Vredin (2014) and Woodford (2012). 
6   See, for instance, Sveriges Riksbank (2013). 
7  
In terms of communication, however, there may be some differences that are significant in practice.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  on  the  risks  one  wishes  to  counteract.  A  monetary  policy  that  leans  against  the  wind 
therefore  gives  little  “benefit”,  while  the  “cost”  in  the  form  of  poorer  price  stability  and 
macroeconomic stability is high. On the other side of the debate it has been pointed out that 
it is not necessarily a disadvantage that monetary policy is blunt, in the sense that it has a 
broad  impact  on  the  economy,  as  it  then  “gets  in  all  of  the  cracks”  and  is  difficult  to 
circumvent.8 
What the benefits and costs of using monetary policy to counteract financial imbalances will 
be is also an empirical question. Here, as well, the problem is that the practical experiences 
of a monetary policy that leans against the wind are still limited. 
Should the level of the inflation target be changed? 
Another question being discussed is whether the level of the central banks’ inflation targets 
should  be  changed. The  debate  since  the financial  crisis  has  primarily  concerned  whether 
the target should be raised, but most recently there have also been arguments for lowering 
the target. 
Should central banks lower their inflation targets? 
It  appears  to  be  mainly  in  the  debate  in  Sweden  that  arguments  in  favour  of  lowering  the 
target have been put forward recently.9 But they have also arisen in other countries to some 
extent.10 
A  basic  idea  appears  to  be  that  underlying  structural  trends  such  as  globalisation  and 
digitisation comprise such strong adverse winds with regard to bringing up inflation that it is 
not worth trying. Instead of aiming to bring up inflation to 2 per cent, which will be difficult and 
risks causing other problems, one should therefore lower the inflation target, the argument 
goes. 
Digitisation and globalisation can affect inflation… 
It  appears  reasonable  to  assume  that  digitisation  –  defined  as  the  digital  technological 
developments and its spread to various areas of usage in the economy – will on the whole 
have a dampening effect on inflation, as it is usually measured.11 Perhaps the most obvious 
and direct channel is price developments on certain products in the CPI’s basket of goods, 
which  is  affected  by  the  production  costs  of  these  products  showing  a falling  trend  due to 
technological  advances  making  advanced  electronic  components  increasingly  cheap.  This 
applies, for instance, to mobile phones and computers. This is a development that has been 
going on for a long time and it may well continue for some time to come.12 
                                                
8   Stein (2013). 
9   See, for instance, Mitelman (2013) and Schück (2015). 
10   For instance, there appears to be a debate in New Zealand on whether the Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s 
attempts to attain the inflation target of 2 per cent risk overheating the economy, see the New Zealand Herald 
(2015). The Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, has claimed during a hearing in the House of 
Lords  that  during  long-term  positive  supply  shocks  there  may  be  reason  to  adjust  the  inflation  target 
downwards,  but  he  emphasised  that  this  was  currently  only  hypothetical  reasoning,  see  House  of  Lords 
(2015). The Bank of Canada investigated in 2011 whether the inflation target should be lowered, partly from 
the  view  that  the  problems  with  incomplete  indexing  of  nominal  contracts  could  decline  further,  see  Côté 
(2014). However, this was dismissed on the grounds that the problems linked to the policy rate reaching its 
lower bound more often would be too severe. 
11   For a more detailed review of the effects of digitisation on inflation, see the article “Digitisation and inflation” in 
Monetary Policy Report, February 2015. 
12   Digitisation-related products have contributed for a long time to keeping down CPI inflation, but the effect has 
been relatively smaller in recent years than before.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Another  channel  has  an  impact  via  the  Internet  and  the  matching  and  interplay  between 
producers and consumers. Increased competition via e-commerce and greater opportunities 
for consumers to compare products make it more difficult for companies to raise their prices. 
A third possible channel is linked to new technology being used to replace labour. Although 
there  have  been  fears  that  “technology  will  take  away  jobs”  ever  since  the  industrial 
revolution in the 18th century, they have not been realised. However, it is not necessarily a 
law of nature that technological advances always create at least as many jobs as they take 
away. The digital technology developments have made it increasingly profitable, and to an 
increasing  degree  possible,  to  replace  human  labour  with  machinery.  It  is  probable  that 
“technological  unemployment”  resulting  from  automation  will  become  a  more  common 
phenomenon  in  the  coming  period  than  it  has  been  so  far,  although  this  is  of  course 
something  that  remains  to  be  seen.  If  this  were  to  be  the  case,  a  lot  more  groups  in  the 
economy  will  experience  downward  pressure  on  their  wages.  This  may,  in  turn,  have  a 
restraining effect on inflation. 
Globalisation, the acceleration of international trade and the integration of China and other 
developing countries into the world economy, has been an important underlying trend in the 
global  economy  and  will  probably  remain  so  in  the  coming  period.  Like  digitisation, 
globalisation affects the economy through many different channels. Perhaps the one that has 
been most in focus in the discussions on inflation is the downward pressure that results from 
industrialised nations increasingly importing cheaper goods from, for instance, China.13 This 
essentially  concerns  cutting  the  price  of  import  goods  relative  to  prices  of  domestically-
produced goods, while inflation is a change in the general price level that affects all prices. 
However,  cuts  in the  price  of  a  certain  product can  have  an  impact  on average  consumer 
prices  during  a  period  of  time,  in  the  same  way  as  when  the  developments  in  digital 
technology  make  some  products  cheaper.  From  this  perspective,  increased  imports  from 
China and other Iow-wage countries can have a directly dampening effect on inflation in the 
short and medium-terms.14 
There are probably reasons why the idea of lowering the inflation target has been put forward 
mainly in Sweden. Swedish inflation fell to low levels somewhat earlier than inflation in many 
other  countries.  Another  important  piece  of  the  puzzle  is  that  the  low  inflation  is  not 
considered to reflect a particularly poor development of the Swedish economy. It is therefore 
likely  that  one  begins  looking  for  other  explanations  for  the  low  inflation.  And  if  one  then 
decides  on  the  explanation  that  this  is  largely  a  matter  of  structural  trends  and  that  an 
inflation  rate  that  is  persistently  below  2  per  cent  is  compatible  with  a  reasonable 
development of the real economy, it appears both possible and logical to lower the target. 
This is roughly the way I believe the reasoning works. 
...but they do not determine inflation 
This method of reasoning may intuitively appear reasonable, but I think it disregards a couple 
of  important  circumstances.  Both  globalisation  and  digitisation  are  underlying  structural 
trends  that  can  have  a  dampening  effect  on  inflation.  But  even  if  this  effect  may  continue 
over  a  long  time,  it  is  essentially  temporary.  One  can  say  that  these  trends  in  principle 
function  as  prolonged  positive  supply  shocks  that  affect  the  economy  over  a  long,  but 
nevertheless limited, period of time. However, the inflation rate does not depend on this type 
of trend or shock on the long run, but on how expansionary monetary policy is, regarded as 
an average over a long period of time. Inflation is, as they say, a monetary phenomenon. Let 
us assume the hypothetical case of two countries – one that is fully digitised and the other 
                                                
13   The question of the effects of globalisation on inflation and monetary policy was discussed frequently in the 
years prior to the financial crisis. See, for example, the IMF (2006) and Mishkin (2009) for surveys.  
14   However, it is still unclear to what extent inflation in the industrialised nations was actually affected by this. 
According to empirical studies, the effects appear to be relatively limited, see for instance the IMF (2006).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  without any actual digital technology, let us say like Sweden in the middle of the last century. 
If the central banks in both countries conduct the same policy, there is no reason to assume 
that  inflation  would  systematically  be  lower  in  the  entirely  digitised  economy.  On the  other 
hand, it may very well be the case that there is downward pressure on inflation during the 
actual process when a country becomes increasingly digitised. But adjusting the level of the 
inflation  target  to  the  structural  underlying  trends  that  for  the  moment  are  influencing  the 
economy does not seem like a good idea. 
A related and equally important circumstance is that even if globalisation and digitisation can 
subdue inflation, this does not mean that they determine inflation – and transform the central 
banks  into  passive  onlookers,  without  any  opportunity  to  influence  inflation  over  time.  In 
practice,  the  central  bank  has  the  possibility  to  try  to  estimate  how  much  digitisation  and 
globalisation will dampen inflation and to compensate for this. This is what central banks with 
an  inflation  target  do  now.  It  is  not  always  an  easy  task,  I  will  admit,  as knowledge  of  the 
quantitative  effects  of  digitisation  and  globalisation  is  so  far fairly  limited.  This  also  means 
that a monetary policy that tries to compensate for the effects of these trends on inflation will 
not  always  be  right,  but  will  sometimes  compensate  too  much  and  sometimes  too  little. 
However, digitisation and globalisation are not different in this aspect from other factors that 
affect the economy and that the central bank must try to take into account. 
My point is that structural trends that put downward pressure on inflation during a period of 
time do not necessarily mean that actual inflation will be permanently lower than the national 
authorities  intend  it  to  be  on  average.  If  one  claims  this,  one  is  also  implying  that  central 
banks and governments do not have the possibility to choose the level of the inflation target, 
but that this is something determined by structural conditions in the economy. Ultimately, one 
thus also says that inflation is not a monetary phenomenon, which does not concur with what 
is widely accepted today. 
Important to maintain confidence in the target 
A slightly milder interpretation is that one did not literally mean that the inflation target should 
be lowered, but that the Riksbank, and all other participants in the Swedish economy should 
accept that inflation will continue to undershoot the target over a long time to come – despite 
the fact that it has already been below the target for several years. The main reason would 
be that the expansionary monetary policy required to bring inflation up to the target would 
also  contribute  to  a  further  increase  in  house  prices  and  household  debt.  I  have  some 
understanding for these thoughts, but I consider that they disregard a number of important 
circumstances  as  well.  I  believe  that  above  all,  one  underestimates  the  importance  of 
maintaining  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  and  the  problems  that  can  arise  if  this 
confidence is lost. 
We have lived with an inflation target of 2 per cent for more than twenty years and few would 
claim anything other than that it has been a good system with good results for the Swedish 
economy. The Riksbank is the only instance that has the express task of trying to ensure that 
the inflation target is met. Of course, the Riksbank also has the task of “promoting a safe and 
efficient  payment  system”,  which  should  be  interpreted  as  acting  to  ensure  the  financial 
system is stable and functions smoothly. But, as I have already pointed out, the latter is a 
task  that  the  Riksbank  shares  with  the  Government,  Finansinspektionen  and  the  Swedish 
National Debt Office. Finansinspektionen has the responsibility for the macroprudential policy 
tools, which comprise the first line of defence with regard to counteracting the emergence of 
financial  imbalances.  As  I  have  just  mentioned,  there  is  an  international  discussion  on 
whether  monetary  policy  may  need  to  support  macroprudential  policy  in  certain  situations. 
But I have also argued that one condition for this is that there is firmly-established confidence 
in the inflation target. It is this confidence that creates the scope for monetary policy to take 
other issues into consideration. 
Confidence in the Riksbank’s inflation target has long been fairly firmly rooted. But what has 
happened in recent years is that inflation has fallen to very low levels, instead of beginning to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  rise towards the target as the Riksbank and other analysts have expected. The period with 
an inflation rate below the target has thus gradually become longer and longer. Parallel to 
this development, the long-term inflation expectations among economic agents have fallen. 
In  other  words,  a  risk  began  to  gradually  build  up  that  the  role  of  the  inflation  target  as 
benchmark for price-setting and wage formation would begin to weaken – that the nominal 
anchor that has been an important part of the favourable developments in Sweden since the 
1990s crisis would begin to slip. 
Some say that the Riksbank should not attach any weight to this, but instead hold the repo 
rate at a higher level. However, I find it difficult to see how the Riksbank could deliberately 
ignore  the  risk  that  confidence  in  the  inflation  target,  the  linchpin  of  the  inflation-targeting 
policy,  begins  to  be  undermined  –  something  the  Riksbank  alone  has  the  explicit  task  of 
preventing – to instead continue to try to counteract financial imbalances building up; a task 
for which others share the responsibility and have more tools to manage. 
Should central banks raise their inflation targets? 
Most of the post-financial crisis debate on the level of the central banks’ inflation targets has 
been  based  on  rather  different  trains  of  thought,  as  I  mentioned  earlier.  Here  the  starting 
points has instead been that problems can arise if inflation and inflation expectations fasten 
at a too low level for too long. Many economists and debaters have therefore begun to ask 
whether the central banks’ current inflation targets should therefore be raised.15 
The  idea  behind  the  proposal  can  be  described as follows. When  an  economy  falls  into  a 
recession the central bank cuts its policy rate to boost demand and raise the too low inflation 
rate. If the recession is really deep, as during the financial crisis, the policy rate may need to 
be cut substantially. The average level of the policy rate largely depends on how high the 
inflation target is. If the inflation target is low, the average nominal policy rate is also low. This 
means that a low inflation target does not give very much scope to cut the policy rate before 
it hits its lower bound. The lower the inflation target, the more often one can thus count on 
the policy rate hitting this lower bound. Previously, it was assumed that the lower bound for 
the nominal interest rate was zero, but recently it has become clear that it is possible to have 
slightly negative policy rates. 
Less risk of hitting the “near zero lower bound” 
The higher the inflation target is, the greater the “buffer” monetary policy has if it is necessary 
to  stimulate  the  economy  –  the  nominal  “close  to  zero  rate”  corresponds  to  a  lower  real 
interest rate. When the inflation-targeting policy was introduced in the early 1990s, a target of 
2 per cent developed into something of a standard. The reason for the figure of 2 per cent 
was not that research had determined that this was the absolutely most appropriate level; it 
was  probably  more  because  this  was  the  approximate  level  of  inflation  in  most  of  the 
countries that began to introduce inflation targets and it appeared to be a reasonable figure 
in  general.  And  until  the  financial  crisis  there  was  no  real  reason  to  question  whether  an 
inflation target of 2 per cent entailed a sufficient buffer for monetary policy. 
However, since the crisis, many countries have cut their policy rates to the “near zero lower 
bound” and been forced to change over to other, more unconventional means of conducting 
monetary policy, sometimes for several years. If the inflation target had been set higher from 
the start, there would have been a greater possibility to stimulate the economy in the normal 
way, through lower real interest rates. It is possible that the effects of the crisis would then 
have been less and it would have been easier to emerge from it into a more normal situation, 
some people argue. 
                                                
15   Examples are Blanchard et al (2010), Ball (2014) and Krugman (2014). Representatives of central banks have 
also taken up this issue recently, see Rosengren (2015), for instance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Many say that the motives for a higher inflation target have recently been reinforced and are 
not merely linked to the fact that it would be easier to extricate oneself from crises. They say 
that it is not merely that the world has suffered an unusually large financial crisis and is now 
having  to  deal  with  the  repercussions.  Moreover,  there  is  an  underlying  structural 
development that has meant that large parts of the world have entered a state of so-called 
secular  stagnation.  What  this  normally  means,  expressed  simply,  is  that  the  neutral,  or 
natural interest rate – the interest rate that has neither an expansionary nor a contractionary 
effect on the economy – has fallen and become very low, perhaps even negative. It may be 
difficult for monetary policy to stimulate the economy sufficiently in this type of situation, as it 
requires that the real interest rate – the nominal interest rate minus inflation – to be lower 
than the neutral one. Achieving this becomes more difficult when the nominal interest rate is 
at  the  “near  zero  lower  bound”  and  when  inflation  is  low  and  falling,  which  keeps  the real 
interest  rate  up.16  If  the  neutral  interest  rate  is  persistently  low,  monetary  policy  will  more 
often hit the “near zero lower bound”.17 However, it is an open question whether the world is 
suffering  from  the  prolonged  but  nevertheless  transitory  after-effects  of  an  unusually 
widespread crisis or is caught in a more lasting state of secular stagnation.18 
The difference between introducing a target and changing it 
The arguments in favour of raising the inflation target may appear fairly convincing on paper. 
But there are considerable practical objections. The feeling one gets is that the starting point 
for the analysis is often: “Assume that the world had looked different than it does now – that 
is, the inflation targets had been higher”. Then, one observes, developments would probably 
have been more favourable than they actually  were. But in this case the challenge mainly 
concerns how the transition from one world to the other will be attained. Setting an inflation 
target for  the first time  is  one  thing,  but  changing  a target that  has  become  established  is 
quite different. 
If one is to change the level of an inflation target, I believe the easiest and most efficient way 
would  be  to  do  so  in  a  relatively  normal  situation  –  when  inflation  is  not  too  far  from  the 
original  target  and  the  economy  is  not  in  a crisis  or  otherwise  in  a  difficult  situation.  If, for 
example, one raises the inflation target in a situation where inflation is much higher than the 
target, there is a risk that this will be perceived as giving in and taking the easy way out and 
that one will be expected to continue doing this the next time there is a problem. There is a 
corresponding  risk  if  one  lowers  the  target  when  inflation  is  undershooting  the  target  by  a 
long way, even if there are of course limits as to how low one can set the target. Sooner or 
later expectations would probably adjust to the new target, but the adjustment period could 
prove costly. 
I  also  believe  that  it  may  be  difficult  to  raise  the  target  in  a  situation  where  inflation 
undershoots the target significantly, particularly if the central bank has cut the policy rate to 
the “near zero lower bound”, that is, the level at which may countries are now. Here there is 
rather a risk that the increase will be perceived as a more or less desperate and in the worst 
case not particularly credible measure to obtain a little additional help getting out of a difficult 
situation. Apart from the best time to change the inflation target being in a relatively normal 
situation, I would also think it would be easier if several central banks did it at the same time. 
                                                
16   For  a  definition  of  secular  stagnation  and  a  summary  of  empirical  evidence  and  policy  implications,  see 
Rawdanowicz et al (2014). 
17   See, for example, Krugman (2014). 
18   See, for example, Hamilton et al (2015) and Rogoff (2015), who say that the world is in the adjustment phase 
of  an  unusually  large  debt  cycle,  a  “debt  supercycle”.  See  also  the  debate  between  Bernanke  (2015)  and 
Summers (2015). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Financial crisis has affected the central banks’ analysis and working methods 
I  have  given  some  examples  of  questions  that  will  probably  continue  to  be  argued  in  the 
international discussion of how inflation-targeting may need to be adapted and modified. This 
type  of  fundamental  question  of  principle  is  central  to  monetary  policy  and,  given  that  the 
current  framework  for  inflation-targeting  has  worked  well  over  a  long  time,  any  changes 
should be made slowly and cautiously – and are hardly in the pipeline in the near term. Quite 
simply,  we  will  have  to  see  what  takes  shape  after  the  international  discussions.  In  the 
Swedish  debate  we  need  to  begin  by  taking  a  stance  on  the  conclusions  of  the  external 
evaluation of the Riksbank’s monetary policy that is published next year.19 
But  even  if  the  experiences  of  the  past  eight  years  have  had  limited  impact  on  monetary 
policy strategies so far, the financial crisis has nevertheless had clear effects on the work of 
the central banks. If I use the Riksbank as a starting point, for instance, the significance of 
the  financial  conditions  for  macroeconomic  developments  and  for  monetary  policy  have 
come  under  much  greater  focus  than  before,  as  have  financial  and  banking  questions  in 
general.  One  can  see  this  in  the  research  conducted  in  the  bank,  where  these  areas  are 
currently  of  central  importance.  The  changes  we  recently  made  to  our  Monetary  Policy 
Report are also marked by the need to better highlight the links between financial conditions, 
the macroeconomy and monetary policy. The low inflation in recent years has of course also 
made its mark on our internal work and we have invested considerable resources in trying to 
understand  which  factors  lie  behind  it  –  both from  a  short-term  perspective  and  in  a  more 
structural perspective. 
So, to conclude by returning to the question of whether everything will go back to the way it 
was  before  the  financial  crisis,  I  think  the  answer  depends  on  what  one  is  talking  about. 
When it comes to analysis and working methods, the answer is very clear: they need to be 
adapted to new experiences and changed conditions to remain relevant. This type of change 
can be difficult to see for outsiders, but I can assure you the changes are taking place. With 
regard to major changes in the actual inflation-targeting policy, the answer is not so clear-cut. 
This  remains  an  open question  that  spans  legislation,  research  and  all  those  working  with 
monetary policy. 
References 
Ball,  Laurence  M.  (2014),  The  Case  for  a  Long-Run  Inflation  Target  of  Four  Percent.  IMF 
Working Paper WP/14/92. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2015),  Why  are  interest  rates  so  low,  part  2:  Secular  stagnation.  Ben 
Bernanke’s blog, Brookings, 31 March. 
Billi, Roberto and Vredin, Anders (2014), Monetary policy and financial stability – a simple 
story. Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, 2014:2, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Blanchard,  Olivier  (2015),  Contours  of  Macroeconomic  Policy  in  the  Future.  Blog  post  on 
iMFdirect 2 April 2015, http://blog-imfdirect.imf.org/. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2010), Rethinking Macro Policy. 
IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03, International Monetary Fund. 
Côté,  Agathe  (2014),  Inflation  Targeting  in  the  Post-Crisis  Era.  Speech  on  18  November. 
Bank of Canada. 
                                                
19   The Riksdag Committee on Finance’s external evaluation of monetary policy in Sweden 2010–2014 will be 
completed towards the end of the year and will be processed by the Committee and the Riksdag in 2016. See 
further Riksdag Committee on Finance (2014a,b). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Swedish Ministry of Finance (2013), Ett förstärkt ramverk för finansiell stabilitet [A stronger 
framework  for  financial  stability]  (only  in  Swedish),  memorandum,  26  August.  Swedish 
Government Offices. 
Riksdag Committee on Finance (2014a), Directives for evaluating the Riksbank’s monetary 
policy 2010–2014. 
Riksdag  Committee  on  Finance  (2014b),  Committee  on  Finance  appoints  top  names  to 
evaluate the Riksbank’s monetary policy. Press release 17 June. 
Hamilton,  James,  Harris,  Ethan,  Hatzius,  Jan  and West,  Kenneth,  (2015),  The  Equilibrium 
Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future. University of California at San Diego Working 
Paper. 
House of Lords (2015), Unrevised transcript of evidence taken before The Select Committee 
on  Economic  Affairs.  Annual  evidence  session  with  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England. 
House of Lords. 
IMF  (2006),  How  has  globalization  affected  inflation?  Chapter  3  in  the  World  Economic 
Outlook 2006. 
Jordà,  Òscar,  Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor,  Alan  M.  (2013),  When  Credit  Bites  Back: 
Leverage,  Business  Cycles,  and  Crises.  Journal  of  Money,  Credit,  and  Banking  45(p2), 
pp. 3-28. 
Krugman,  P.  (2014),  Inflation  Targets  Reconsidered.  Paper  presented  at  ECB  sintra 
conference, May 2014. 
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2009),  Globalization,  Macroeconomic  Performance  and  Monetary 
Policy. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 41(1) supplement, pp. 187-196. 
Mitelman,  Henrik  (2013),  Dags  sänka  inflationsmålet.  [Time  to  lower  the  inflation  target] 
Commentary, Dagens Industri, 4 December. 
New  Zealand  Herald  (2015),  Inflation  target  risks  overheated  economy:  RZB.  Article  27 
March. 
Posen, Adam (2006), Why Central Banks Should Not Burst Bubbles. International Finance 
9 (1), pp. 109-124. 
Rawdanowicz,  Łukasz,  Bouis,  Romain,  Inaba,  Kei-Ichiro  and  Christensen,  Ane  K.  (2014), 
Secular  Stagnation:  Evidence  and  Implications  for  Economic  Policy.  OECD  Economics 
Department Working Papers No. 1169. 
Rogoff, Kenneth (2015), Debt supercycle, not secular stagnation. Column voxEU, 22 April. 
Rosengren,  Eric  S.  (2015),  Changing  Economic  Relationships:  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy  and  Simple  Monetary  Policy  Rules.  Speech  on  16  April.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Boston. 
Roubini,  Nouriel  (2006),  Why  Central  Banks  Should  Burst  Bubbles.  International  Finance 
9 (1), pp. 87-107. 
Schück, Johan (2015), 2 procents inflation är ett orealistiskt mål. [2 per cent inflation is an 
unrealistic target] Column, Dagens Nyheter, 8 May. 
Schularick,  Moritz  and  Taylor  Alan  M.  (2012),  Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy, 
Leverage  Cycles  and  Financial  Crises,  1870-2008.  American  Economic  Review  102(2), 
pp. 1029-1061. 
Smets,  Frank  (2013),  Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy:  How  Closely  Interlinked?” 
Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3. Sveriges Riksbank. 
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2013),  Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement  and  Policy 
Responses. Speech on 7 February. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Summers,  Lawrence,  (2015),  On  secular  stagnation:  Larry  Summers  responds  to  Ben 
Bernanke. Ben Bernanke’s blog, Brookings, 1 April. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2013), Financial imbalances in the monetary policy assessment. Article 
in Monetary Policy Report, July 2013. 
Woodford,  Michael  (2012),  “Inflation  targeting  and  financial  stability”,  Economic  Review, 
2012, 1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
     14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
