  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Le Monde 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Le Monde, conducted by Ms Marie Charrel, and published on 27 July 2015. 
 Can the threat of Grexit be ruled out? 
I hope so. This was the first time that the question of keeping a country in the euro area had 
clearly been asked. This question was not put to the ECB, however, but to the government 
leaders, in a highly political manner. They answered it with the agreement of 13 July. The 
message is clear: everyone wants Greece to remain a member of the monetary union. They 
are prepared to continue to show unprecedented financial solidarity towards Athens, but not 
at any price. Greece must implement reforms that will ensure economic growth and stability. 
Must there be debt relief for Greek public debt? 
That  is  no  longer  a  matter  of  debate.  Moreover,  the  European  leaders  have  shown 
willingness to discuss this topic. In truth, the question is not whether Greek debt should be 
restructured,  but  how  to  do  it  so  it  really  benefits  the  country’s  economy.  Hence  the 
importance  of  making  this  restructuring,  whatever  form  it  may  take,  conditional  on  the 
implementation of measures that will contribute to strengthening the economy and ensuring 
the sustainability of the Greek public finances. 
Will the third rescue package succeed where the first two failed? 
One of the keys to success lies in the capacity of the Greek government to make its citizens 
understand that the measures requested are not a form of punishment. These measures are 
crucial  to  both  the  development  of  the  economy  and  the  good  functioning  of  the 
administration. The programme’s reforms do not aim to impose unbridled neo-liberalism on 
Athens.  On  the  contrary,  they  aim  to  create  a  modern  and  fairer  fiscal,  social  and  legal 
framework,  and  to  build  an  efficient  state  that  is  able  to  intervene  in  the  economy  for  the 
common good, something that the Greek state has often failed to do in the past. 
The role of the ECB in the Greek crisis has been heavily criticised. Some accuse it of 
having suffocated the country’s banks, others of having helped them too much. Who 
is right? 
We are the central bank for the 19 countries of the euro area, including Greece. That is our 
mandate and we have never strayed from it. Since the end of 2014, the amount of liquidity 
injected  into  the  Greek  economy  by  the  Eurosystem  has  increased  from  €40  billion  to 
€130 billion. We have taken care that our actions are never a replacement for the political 
decision-making process. That people are turning to the central bank on issues that demand 
a  political  rather  than  technical  response  reveals  a  serious  weakness  in  the  institutional 
functioning  of  the  euro  area.  This  weakness  fuels  excessive  expectations  concerning  the 
ECB. 
What is the nature of this dysfunction? 
If proof were needed, the summit of 12 July provided an example: the 19 government leaders 
of the euro area were shut away for 17 hours to discuss the details of measures expected of 
a country that makes up less than 2% of the region’s GDP. The decision-making mechanism 
at the heart of the monetary union does not work well. It is based on an intergovernmental 
principle that is no longer appropriate. Each of the leaders considers public opinion in his or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  her own country, and his or her own country alone. As a result, the compromises reached 
are unlikely to be the best outcome for the euro area as a whole, but instead represent the 
greatest common denominator between the member countries. Further, they are the result of 
never-ending  negotiations  that  increase  uncertainty.  The  five  months  of  negotiation  on 
Greece have come at a significant economic and financial cost. There is an urgent need to 
abandon  this  intergovernmental  process  in  favour  of  a  process  of  shared  decision-making 
based on votes and democratic legitimacy. 
So, in short, you are calling for a form of economic governance at the heart of the euro 
area, which implies further transfers of sovereignty. Do member countries really want 
this? 
One  thing  is  certain:  if  this  issue  is  not  addressed,  starting  today,  the  monetary  union  will 
face the same type of crisis again and again. The Greek crisis has let the genie out of the 
bottle regarding countries leaving the euro area, and it will not be easy to put it back in again. 
How to proceed? By understanding that replacing the intergovernmental process with shared 
decision-making will not diminish the sovereignty of member countries. On the contrary, it will 
provide  more  room  for  the  political  dimension  by  ensuring  shared  responsibility  that  will 
enhance  mutual  trust.  Today  the  ECB  functions  on  the  following  principle:  the  Governing 
Council  has  a  discussion,  it  then  votes  if  necessary,  before  moving  on  to  something  else. 
And that works! Take as an example the implementation of the European fiscal framework, 
which has become complex and opaque. If there were European fiscal instruments that were 
discussed  within  a  “ministry  of  finance”  for  the  euro  area,  under  the  watchful  eye  of  the 
European  Parliament,  political  discussion  would  regain  its  clout.  That  would  give  it  some 
meaning again in the eyes of Europeans. 
What do you think of François Hollande’s proposals in the Journal du Dimanche of 
19 July concerning the creation of a tightly-knit “avant-garde” at the head of the euro 
area? 
Those proposals go towards strengthening the governance of Economic and Monetary Union 
and are consistent with the “Five Presidents’ Report” published in June, which Mario Draghi 
co-signed. The ECB needs a strong political counterpart. Otherwise, there will always be a 
temptation to hold us responsible for political decisions. That was evident during the Greek 
crisis. 
What risk is the euro area running if it doesn’t go in that direction? 
It  would  condemn  itself  to  weak  growth.  The  19  member  countries  have  considerable 
resources  in  terms  of  activity,  innovation  and  human  capital.  Pooling  these  resources,  for 
example  by  completing  the  single  market  and  having  free  movement  of  workers  and  a 
common market for capital, would provide a vital boost to growth in the euro area. But giving 
up  on  the  integration  process  would  create  a  permanent  climate  of  uncertainty  about  the 
integrity  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  which  could  only  be  detrimental  to  investment 
and employment. 
How can the European project be reinvigorated? 
Its initial goal, which was to guarantee peace, provide an anchor for democracy and promote 
prosperity, has lost its substance to a logic that is primarily economic and financial. The top 
priority  remains  growth  and  employment.  Without  that,  Europeans  will  have  difficulty 
understanding and accepting any steps towards further integration. The ECB’s actions and 
the Juncker plan both go in this direction. But at the same time, the European Union must 
look  to  the  future  and  reflect  on  the  project  that  it  wishes  to  offer  its  people.  It  needs  to 
remind  them  of  our  shared  objectives  and  values,  what  Pascal  Lamy  calls  the  “European 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  narrative”. In recent weeks many Europeans have been asking themselves: why pay for the 
Greeks?  Only  a  strong  political  project,  recalling  why  solidarity  between  the  member 
countries is essential, while reaffirming the principle of responsibility for the countries which 
share a single currency, can offer them an answer. 
What errors were made in the construction of the euro? 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  the  differences  in  competitiveness  and 
economic performance have grown. These differences are partly responsible for the crisis. 
And we haven’t reacted sufficiently. It’s a lack of collective vigilance, but also of solidarity, 
because warning a neighbour that their internal imbalances risk doing them no good, that’s 
what  solidarity  is.  In  the  same  way,  governments  can  be  inspired  by  reforms  which  have 
proven successful in other countries: why not benefit from that collective richness? 
Have the Member States, notably France, gone far enough in respect of structural 
reforms? 
The efforts undertaken are going in the right direction, but it’s no easy task. The countries of 
the euro area are facing a double challenge: preparing for the future by investing particularly 
in the digital economy, big data and the environmental transition, while managing the burden 
of the past, namely, public and private debts. Their room for manoeuvre is therefore limited, 
and the factors supporting growth in the euro area today, the favourable financing conditions, 
cheap energy and the weakness of the euro, are by nature temporary. To secure the future, 
the measures that are likely to increase productivity and labour market participation have to 
be emphasised from now on. 
The ECB started its programme for purchasing public and private debt (quantitative 
easing) in March. Is it working? 
The first months have been encouraging: contrary to what some were saying, we have had 
no difficulty finding assets to buy, indicators of the inflation expectations are showing signs of 
recovery, lending to non-financial corporations is trending upwards, the recovery trajectory is 
there to be seen and we expect inflation to move back towards 2%. But we are only at the 
start of these asset purchases, which we plan to maintain until September 2016, and in any 
case until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, in line with our objective. It 
would be quite premature to start talking about the end of this programme. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
