  Karnit Flug: Raising the retirement age for women in Israel 
Main points of remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the conference 
on raising the retirement age for women, Jerusalem, 1 July 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  briefly  address  a  number  of  facts  and  trends  that  outline  the  situation 
concerning  the  retirement  age  in  Israel  in  general,  and  for  women  in  particular.  I  will  then 
present  a  series  of  recommendations  and  conclusions  that  I  believe  should  be  discussed, 
ideally in advance. 
Expected demographic trends: 
As we know, life expectancy is increasing. If we look at the past 40 years, the life expectancy 
of women  who have reached age 65 increased from 80 years to 86  years, and for men it 
increased from 79 years to 84 years. This fact, together with the fact that the retirement age 
increased by only 2 years, means that men are expected to live an average of 17 years after 
retirement,  and  women  are  expected  to  live  an  average  of  24  years  after  retirement.  This 
raises the question of whether during employment, workers – and particularly women – save 
enough to ensure them a proper income after retirement. 
Another  way  to  look  at  the  demographic  change  is  to  examine  what  is  happening  to  the 
relationship between the working-age population and the retirement-age population. We can 
see that the trend in Israel is similar to the trend in other countries, although with somewhat 
of a lag. As of today, there are five working-age people in Israel for every person above age 
65.  In  2050,  that  ratio  is  expected  to  narrow  to  3:1.  This  change  obviously  has  serious 
consequences for the labor market, the dependency ratio, and as a direct result, the actuarial 
state of National Insurance and the old pension funds. 
An international comparison of retirement arrangements shows that in Israel, the retirement 
age for women is relatively low, and even after it rises to 64, as it is supposed to do in 2017, 
it will still be significantly lower than in most European countries, some of which are also in 
the midst of gradually raising it, and all of which except for Switzerland have set out that the 
retirement  ages  for  men  and  women  will  become  equal  in  the  future.  Like  in  Israel,  these 
countries  also  have  wage  gaps  between  men  and  women.  The  retirement  age  for  men  in 
Israel rose to 67, and is similar to the retirement age among European countries that have 
already raised the retirement age to the upper benchmark. The large gap between men and 
women  in  Israel  is  prominent,  and  it  raises  a  question  regarding  women’s  ability  to  save 
sufficiently for retirement. The longer a decision to raise the retirement age for women further 
is  delayed,  the  more  necessary  it  will  be  later  on  to  do  so  more  rapidly,  and  with  greater 
problems. 
The effect of the trends on the replacement ratio: 
In view of the trends I have so far presented, a most interesting question arises: What will 
happen to the level of pension payments at retirement? The variable that we customarily look 
at in this context is the replacement rate – what will the retiree’s income be, compared to his 
pre-retirement  wage?  A  simulation  of  the  net  replacement  rates,  including  defined 
contribution pensions and old-age pensions, provides an illustration of income at NIS 7500 a 
month.  If  we  look  at  women  who  retire  at  age  62,  whose  pension  savings  generate  an 
average  real  yield  of  4  percent  per  year,  and  who  save  17.5  percent  of  their  salaries,  the 
replacement rate will be 71 percent. In contrast, another retiree with a deduction rate of 19.5 
percent with the same yield, will have a replacement rate of 76 percent. If we look at a retiree 
at age 67 with a deduction of 19.5 percent, the replacement rate will be about 100 percent, 
which ensures the maintenance of the same lifestyle after retirement. Another possibility for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  reaching  the  same  lifestyle  upon  retirement  is  to  increase  the  monthly  deduction  so  that 
women  who  retire  at  age  62  and  want  to  reach  the  same  replacement  rate  as  those  who 
retire at 67 need to increase their monthly deductions by about 8 percent. 
How did the increase in the retirement age in 2004 affect employment and wages? 
Increasing the retirement age for women from 60 to 62 increased employment and the wage 
path for women aged 60–61 and led, immediately after the change, to an increase of about 
4.3 percentage points in the employment of salaried women aged 60–61. This is the effect 
immediately after the change. In the Bank of Israel Annual Report for 2013, we showed that 
the extended effect is even larger. The absolute majority of women (more than 80 percent) 
continued to work after the retirement age was raised, and there was no increase found in 
the unemployment rate among older women following the increase in the retirement age. In 
the  long  term,  it  is  likely  that  as  the  retirement  age  rises,  employment  rates  among  older 
women  will  also  increase.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  official  retirement  age  (age  of 
eligibility)  contributes  to  designing  labor  market  norms  in  that  it  works  as  a  signal  to  both 
workers and employers, and affects the actual retirement age, thereby contributing to their 
preparations for continued employment. As we can see from Labor Force Survey data, there 
has been a dramatic change in the labor market, which is reflected in a doubling of the rate 
of working women aged 60–64 from 25 percent in 2004 to 49 percent in 2013. 
Increasing the retirement age requires complementary policy tools in the labor market 
In  order  to  make  the  process  of  raising  the  retirement  age  for  women  successful, 
complementary policy tools must be used in the labor market, such as: 
•  Extending the period of unemployment benefits for older workers. 
• 
•  Enforcing  labor  laws,  particularly  the  prohibition  against  discrimination  based  on 
Incentives for employing older women. 
age. 
•  Allocating  resources  for  professional  training  while  focusing  on  more  demanding 
professions. 
In  summation,  increasing  the  retirement  age  is  expected  to  significantly  increase  the 
employment  rate  of  older  women,  and  the  retirement  age  should  be  increased  in  order  to 
ensure sufficient pension savings and income upon retirement. This should be accompanied 
by  complementary  measures  such  as  encouraging  the  employment  of  older  women,  for 
example  through  programs  such  as  “Experience  Required”,  which  was  launched  by  the 
Ministry of Seniors Affairs this morning. There are obviously cases where older people have 
difficulty finding work, but the data show that the unemployment rate or those who despair of 
finding a job did not increase as a result of raising the retirement age. In view of all this, the 
more  we  promote  raising  the  retirement  age,  it  will  be  possible  to  do  so  more 
gradually,  which  will  allow  employers  and  workers  to  adjust  and  prepare  for  the 
change  ahead  of  time,  and  to  ensure  proper  employment  until  retirement  and  proper 
pensions for afterwards. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
