  Yves Mersch: Introductory statement on TARGET2-Securities (T2S) 
before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON) 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Public Hearing on TARGET2-Securities (T2S) before the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs (ECON) of the European Parliament, Brussels, 16 June 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, 
dear members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  glad  to  be  here  today  to  discuss  TARGET2-Securities,  or  T2S  –  the  new  securities 
settlement engine in Europe. The European Parliament has played an essential role in this 
project and strongly supported it from the beginning. 
We  are  only  three  days  away  from  the  first  migration  weekend,  during  which  the  first 
European markets will migrate their securities settlement business to the platform. T2S will 
be live as of 22 June. Over the next two years it will come more and more into life as a total 
of 21 markets migrate to the new single platform. 
T2S is the largest market infrastructure project undertaken by the Eurosytem to date. I would 
today  like  to  emphasise  the  progress  we  have  achieved  on  our  journey  from  TARGET  in 
1999  to  T2S  today,  and  how  this  provides  a  good  example  for  further  integration  in  the 
context of the capital markets union. 
TARGET 
In 1999, with the launch of the euro, there was an immediate need for a large-value payment 
system that could process all payment flows related to monetary policy operations in euro. 
TARGET was launched on 1 January after only four years of development. Owing to the time 
constraints,  it  was  not  possible  to  develop  a  fully  integrated  system,  but  only  to  link  the 
existing systems in Europe. In order to build a truly integrated system, the TARGET2 project 
was  initiated  and  TARGET2  started  operations  in  2007.  Today  it  is  one  of  the  largest 
payment systems in the world, reaching around 56,000 banks worldwide, in addition to the 
central banks of the EU. In 2014 over 90 million payments were settled, with a turnover of 
€492 trillion. 
The  use  of  TARGET2  is  mandatory  for  the  settlement  of  all  payment  orders  related  to 
monetary policy operations in euro, and is therefore an essential component of our monetary 
policy execution. It has enabled us to create a single money market for the euro area, as all 
euro cash payments are settled in a streamlined way across Europe. 
TARGET2 is used for payments related to both monetary policy and other operations in the 
interbank market. However, the infrastructure for transferring financial assets for trading and 
collateral operations was left fragmented. While the cash side had reached a high level of 
integration, securities still had to be settled in over 30 different systems in Europe. 
T2S 
Discussions  were  therefore  initiated  with  the  market  on  how  to  integrate  the  securities 
landscape,  especially  in  a  financial  market  where  securities  are  used  more  and  more  as 
collateral to generate liquidity. The idea was put forward that the Eurosystem could provide 
settlement  services  for  securities  transactions  in  central  bank  money.  The  European 
Parliament  and  Council  were  among  the  first  to  support  this  idea.  Thanks  to  your 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  recommendation, the scope of T2S was extended and it has been built as a multicurrency 
system. 
The objective of T2S was to create an integrated infrastructure which would support capital 
markets  on  a  European  scale.  Until  now,  the  securities  landscape  in  Europe  has  been 
characterised  by  numerous  securities  settlement  systems,  divergent  laws  governing 
securities depositories and different rules for post-trade processes. This is highly inefficient, 
increases risks and leads to a significant waste of resources. T2S has started a process that 
will change this completely. T2S will in fact bring numerous benefits, including the following. 
1. 
2. 
Processing costs for cross-border transactions will decrease drastically. 
It will foster safety and financial stability by settling securities directly in central bank 
money. 
It will allow for economies of scale without requiring that securities depositories be 
merged. In the T2S model, securities depositories are the gateways through which 
market  participants  can  access  securities  in  T2S.  Securities  depositories  will 
maintain all other functions such as their notary role, asset servicing and services for 
issuers. 
Last but not least, T2S will facilitate collateral management for market participants 
as  it  will  make  it  easy  to  transfer  collateral  across  borders.  This  is  a  key  feature 
because demand for collateral has increased since the financial crisis, owing to both 
market conditions and new regulation. 
3. 
4. 
T2S governance structure and the first migration wave 
I would like to spend a few moments on the governance structure of T2S as I believe that it is 
one of the reasons for the success of the project. 
If I were to show you the T2S governance chart, you would probably describe it using the 
word “complex”. I would tend to agree that a four-level governance structure with hundreds of 
institutions involved is complex. However, it has proven its effectiveness in resolving difficult 
matters  in  a  swift  and  efficient manner, keeping  in  mind the  common goal  of  ensuring  the 
timely and successful launch of T2S. 
In the past few weeks the commitment of those forming the T2S governance structure has 
become  apparent  once  more.  You  might  have  heard  some  rumours that  the  T2S  platform 
was not stable enough to go live. However, the reality is that the platform has been declared 
stable and ready to go live both by the T2S Board in charge of steering the project and by the 
central securities depositories in the steering body (the T2S CSD Steering Group). We are 
conscious  that  T2S  will  have  an  immense  impact  on  the  financial  market  and  it  is  of  key 
importance for us that the migration goes smoothly. After assessing the status of the platform 
– its stability and readiness for production mode – I can assure you that it is ready for the 
migration and launch this coming weekend. 
However, going live requires more than just the Eurosystem being ready; we also need the 
migrating  communities  to  be  ready.  The  first  T2S  migration  wave  was  to  include  five 
securities depositories and their communities: Bank of Greece Securities Settlement System 
(BOGS), Depozitarul Central (Romania), Malta Stock Exchange, Monte Titoli (Italy) and SIX 
SIS  (Switzerland).  Four  out  of  those  five  markets,  namely  Greece,  Malta,  Romania  and 
Switzerland, have confirmed their readiness to migrate as scheduled on 22 June 2015. 
As far as the Italian market is concerned, a solution has been put forward which has eased 
the  strong  discomfort  that  has  recently  been  signalled  by  the  Italian  banks  regarding 
migration on 22 June 2015. 
Following  a  formal  request  by  Monte  Titoli,  the  Italian  securities  depository,  it  and  its 
community  will  be  given  an  extended  period  of testing  and  will  migrate only  on  31  August 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  2015. This solution will not only help the Italian market, but will also ensure that difficulties in 
one market cannot spill over to other markets and have implications for the financial market 
as a whole. 
This proposal has been discussed within the governance structure and is supported by the 
remaining securities depositories joining T2S. A detailed activity plan is now being developed 
for  the  migration  of  the  Italian  market  on  31  August  2015  and  the  possible  impact  on  the 
scheduled activities for the subsequent migration waves is being assessed. This solution for 
the migration of the Italian market is due to be  approved by the ECB’s  Governing Council 
tomorrow. 
Harmonisation agenda, CSD Regulation and capital markets union 
Let me now turn to the other initiatives surrounding T2S, namely the harmonisation agenda, 
the  CSD  Regulation  and  the  capital  markets  union  project.  In  addition  to  the  concrete 
benefits brought about by T2S, a push has been given to the European post-trade industry to 
harmonise  market  practice,  rules  and  standards.  This  is  a  market-driven  process  that  will 
enable  T2S  to  realise  its  full  potential,  in  terms  of  efficiency  and  achieving  a  level  playing 
field.  The  market  is  in  the  driving  seat,  but  the  ECB  strongly  supports  this  initiative  and 
provides the secretariat function. The objective is to create a single rulebook for post-trade 
processes, which will help contribute to financial integration in Europe. 
On the regulatory side, remarkable progress has also been made with the adoption of the 
CSD Regulation. This new piece of EU legislation complements the operational integration 
provided by T2S and gives further momentum to the post-trade harmonisation efforts. It has 
removed a number of the barriers to reaching a fully integrated market and is thus very much 
welcome. 
The  next  step  forward  will  be  the  capital  markets  union  (CMU),  for  which  we  have  high 
expectations.  If  well  designed  and  thoroughly  implemented,  CMU  could  bring  significant 
benefits  to  the  EU.  T2S  and  the  implementation  of  the  CSD  Regulation  have  already 
removed a number of the market infrastructure barriers. CMU has the potential to remove the 
remaining  ones.  Beyond  market  infrastructures,  the  aim  of  CMU  should  be  to  integrate 
financial markets in such a way that investors and issuers of financial instruments have equal 
access  to  these  markets,  under  equal  conditions.  Similarly  to  the  harmonisation  agenda 
surrounding  the  development  of  T2S,  CMU  will  require  both  market-led  efforts  towards 
greater harmonisation and legislative action to dismantle key cross-border barriers in a wide 
range of areas. This will help set the right framework conditions for these markets to develop 
and integrate. In fact, TARGET2 and T2S show that genuine integration, rather than mere 
coordination, is essential to have well-functioning markets which can fully play their role in 
supporting the economy. 
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to our discussion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
