  John Mourmouras: Low inflation in the euro area – symptom or cause? 
Speech by Professor John Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 33rd 
Meeting  of  Central  Bank  Governors’  Club  of  Central  Asia,  Black  Sea  Region  and  Balkan 
Countries (Shanghai, China), Shanghai, 21 May 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Governors, 
Dear colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Shanghai and I would like to thank the Governor of 
the People’s Bank of China, Mr. Zhou Xiaochuan, for inviting me to this high-profile meeting 
attended  by  esteemed  colleagues  of  the  central  banking  sector.  I  would  like  to  share  my 
thoughts with you on the problem of low and persistent inflation (and the appropriate policy 
responses) in the euro area, which numbers 19 Member States sharing a single currency, 
the euro. 
Introduction 
the  sustainability  of  public 
I. 
As you all know, the 2008 global crisis – mainly a crisis of credit and confidence expressed in 
both bond and equity world markets – turned into a sovereign debt crisis in the euro area in 
2010,  heightening  market  concerns  about 
finances  of 
governments in the so-called europeriphery. That, in turn, hampered the expectations of the 
private  sector,  gave  rise  to  prolonged  fiscal  consolidation,  contributed  to  an  anaemic 
recovery,  to  problems  with  the  smooth  transmission  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and 
thereby the achievement of the price stability objective. Over the course of this period, the 
ECB naturally took action against the fragmentation of the financial system in the area and 
took  measures  against  a  severe  bank  credit  squeeze  and  a  deep  economic  recession  by 
introducing  a  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  which  resulted  in  its  latest 
decision: the quantitative easing (QE) implementation, which is essentially my topic today. 
My  remarks  will  focus  on  four  areas.  First  of  all,  I  will  begin  with  a  brief  discussion  of  the 
recent inflation developments and prospects in the euro area. Secondly, I will briefly describe 
the QE practices of major central banks and, more precisely, those implemented by the Fed, 
the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan. Thirdly, I will discuss the ECB’s recent policy 
responses focusing in particular on its expanded asset purchase programme (QE). As you 
know,  QE  is  rather  a  controversial  idea.  It  has  lots  of  critics.  Opinions  diverge  across  the 
board, from “one of the most radical monetary policy experiments of modern times” to “quasi 
fiscal policy”. And of course QE’s efficacy in Europe is of global significance, if only one takes 
into account the euro area’s big share in world output – not to mention the reactions of other 
central banks (e.g. in Switzerland, Denmark, Sweden, etc.). Last but not least, I will look into 
the challenges and risks that lie ahead for the overall stance of economic policy in Europe. 
Low inflation or deflation? 
II. 
Before starting to unfold these issues, please allow me to explain why it is that we talk about 
low inflation, rather than deflation, in the euro area. In February 2013, euro area inflation fell 
below the 2% mark and has since been on a continuous downward trend for more than two 
years. According to the latest report of the ECB survey of professional forecasters (SPF), low 
inflation is expected to be quite prolonged, but gradually rise to 2%. According to Eurostat’s 
flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  zero  last  month,  –0.1%  in  March,  up 
from  –0.3%  in  February  2015  and  –0.6%  in  January  2015,  despite  the  fact  that  both 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  measures of money supply, the broad M3 and the narrow M1 have been picking up this year 
(by  4.5%  and  9.5%  year-on-year  respectively  in  the  first  quarter  of  2015).  Inflation  is 
expected  to  remain  very  low  or  slightly  negative  in  the  coming  months,  with  an  annual 
inflation projection of 0.1% on average for the year 2015, against a yearly average of 0.4% in 
2014. It is also true that in advanced economies, the inflation rate will stand at 0.4% on a 
yearly basis in 2015, according to the latest IMF forecasts, which is the lowest level in the 
last 30 years. However, inflation rates are projected to rise consistently over the short- and 
medium-term and reach 1.5% by next year. Although in the euro area, there is more than a 
50% risk of the inflation rate hovering below one percent in the short-run, the risk of deflation 
is  quite  low  at  less  than  10  percent  in  the  short  term  (in  the  next  one  to  two  years)  and 
effectively  zero  (1%  risk)  in  the  longer  term  (in  the  next  five  years),  as  shown  in  Chart  1. 
Ultimately,  the  ECB’s  mandate  is  expected  to  be  achieved,  as  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) is expected to reach 1.8% in 2017, namely its primary goal of price 
stability, i.e. maintaining the euro area inflation rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
The main factors for the relatively small probability of deflation in the euro area are three: the 
ongoing economic recovery, the effects of the euro’s depreciation and the fact that monetary 
policy plays a supporting role. In addition, we do not generally expect negative energy price 
developments  to  impact  wage  developments  significantly.  In  a  classic  deflationary  cycle, 
households  and  firms  defer  expenditures  when  monetary  policy  is  at  the  effective  lower 
bound  and  the  central  bank  cannot  steer  the  nominal  rate  down  to  compensate  for  lower 
expenditure. This does not seem to be the case in the euro area. It is worth pointing out that 
core inflation – that is, the inflation rate that strips out energy and unprocessed food prices – 
remains low, but is still on the positive side with the latest reading for March 2015 at 0.6%. 
Consequently,  using  the  term  “deflation”  for  the  euro  area  would  arguably  be  an 
overstatement, with the ECB not expecting the euro area to fall into deflation. 
However, the risks of low inflation appear to be linked to the risks of subdued growth or weak 
recovery (see also below). Quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth in the euro area was 0.3% in 
the  last  quarter  of  2014,  year-on-year  change  in  2014  was  0.9%,  while  the  ECB’s  March 
prediction for this year was at 1.5%. Euro area growth rates are still a full percentage lower 
than in the decade leading up to the crisis (2.5%), and are uneven across countries. It is true 
that  domestic  demand  in  the  euro  area  has  not  yet  reached  its  pre-2008  crisis  levels. 
Particularly, business investment remained around 15% below its pre-crisis levels, which led 
to a sharp decline in the investment-to-GDP ratio. On top of that, the growth in government 
expenditure during the last five years was just 0.18%, against 1.8% in the period before the 
crisis. 
What  is  perhaps  a more  worrying feature  is  the  fact  that  the  euro  area  stands  out  among 
large economies for the depth and likely duration of its bout of low inflation. Particularly, the 
ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  in  March  this  year  show  a  downward  revision  by 
0.8 percentage  point  to  the  inflation  forecast  for  this  year  and  a  slight  revision  by  0.2 
percentage  point  to  the  inflation  forecast  for  2016,  compared  with  the  December  2014 
Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections. Inflation is now projected to be 0.1% in 2015 
and 1.5% in 2016. The annual rate of change in core inflation has been consistently below 
1%  over the  past  year, with  the  latest  reading for  March  2015  at  0.6%,  their  lowest  levels 
since  the  start  of  the  series  in  1997.  A  low  reading for  core  inflation for such  a  prolonged 
period  of  time  indicates  that  it  is  not  only  temporary  factors  that  are  at  work:  underlying 
demand  weakness  also  plays  a  significant  role,  as  well  as  of  course  contained  wage 
pressures  and  structural  reforms  undertaken  during  the  same  period.  Empirical  evidence 
from  the  Phillips  curve  suggest  that  the  negative  output  gap  will  last  until  2019,  which  is 
projected by the IMF to stand at –2.3% in the euro area this year. Falling energy prices and 
slowing annual growth rates of wages and salaries in the euro area obviously contribute to 
persistently low inflation. All in all, the inflation problem in the euro area is quite challenging. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Low inflation is already hurting debtors in the euro area since their incomes are rising more 
slowly than what they expected when they borrowed. 
Other central banks’ QE programmes 
III. 
Allow  me  now  to  briefly  review  the  programmes  of  large-scale  asset  purchases  (LSAPs) 
implemented so far by the other major central banks, focusing mainly on their impact on the 
real economy. Fed used its balance sheet – with purchases of public and private assets – to 
provide  stimulus  to  the  economy  amidst  the  credit  crunch  of  2008. To give  you  the  whole 
picture of the size of the Fed’s balance sheet over the past several years: assets have risen 
from about 900 billion US dollars in 2006 to about 4.5 trillion US dollars today, accounting for 
25 percent of nominal GDP from 6 percent of nominal GDP in 2006 (CHART 2). 
The net expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet over this period primarily reflects these large-
scale  asset  purchase  programmes.  But  how  effective  was  the  Fed’s  policy?  After  nearly 
6 years of large-scale asset purchases, a substantial body of empirical work on their impact 
has  emerged.  According  to  the  Fed’s  own  research,  the  large-scale  purchases  have 
significantly lowered long-term Treasury yields, which translated into reduced corporate bond 
and mortgage security yields. But was this ultra-expansionary monetary policy effective for 
the overall economy’s performance in the US? Model simulations conducted at the Federal 
Reserve generally found that the securities purchase programmes have provided significant 
help  to  the  US  economy.  For  instance,  a  study  using  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  model 
(FRB/US) of the economy found that, as of 2012, the first two rounds of LSAPs may have 
raised the level of output by almost 3 percent and increased private payroll employment by 
more  than  2  million  jobs,  relative  to  what  otherwise  would  be  the  case.  In  conclusion,  as 
Stanley  Fischer, 
that 
QE programmes  coupled  with  increasingly  explicit  forward  guidance  have  reduced  the 
unemployment  rate  by  1–1.25  percentage  points  and  increased  the  inflation  rate  by  half a 
percentage point, relative to what would have occurred in the absence of these policies. 
A similar policy was conducted by the Bank of England in response to the intensification of 
the financial crisis in the autumn of 2008. The aim of the policy was to inject money into the 
British  economy  in  order  to  boost  nominal  spending  and  thus  help  achieve  the  Bank  of 
England’s  2%  inflation  target.  According  to  the reported  estimates  of  the  peak  impact,  the 
£200 billion QE programme implemented between March 2009 and January 2010 is likely to 
have  raised  the  level  of  real  GDP  by  1.5%  to  2%  relative  to  what  might  otherwise  have 
happened, and also to have increased annual CPI inflation by 0.75 to 1.5 percentage points. 
The Bank of England’s own conclusion is that the effects of its QE programme have been 
“economically significant”. 
Last but not least, the Bank of Japan’s large-scale asset purchases were primarily aimed at 
boosting money supply, asset prices and inflation expectations, while holding down interest 
rates. As regards asset prices as a result of the QE programme, stock prices are up and the 
yen/dollar exchange rate has fallen. But what about the Bank of Japan’s 2% inflation target? 
For  the  period  leading  up  to  the  2008  financial  crisis,  inflation  expectations  appeared 
modestly positive and rose significantly above their historical average. This suggests that the 
BOJ’s 2% inflation target might be gaining credibility. Lately, the Bank of Japan decided to 
expand  its  quantitative  programme  in  order  to  act  in  an  orderly  manner  against  weak 
developments in demand. Whether this decision will eventually help the rate of inflation reach 
2% remains to be seen. 
the  Fed’s  Vice  Chair,  noted 
in  his  speech 
last  February 
The main features of the ECB’S QE 
IV. 
Turning  now  to  the  euro  area,  the  question  is  how  exactly  has  the  ECB  acted  and  is  still 
continuing  to  act?  More  specifically,  what  has  been  the  ECB’s  immediate  response  to 
achieve its primary goal of price stability? Let me quickly present the ECB’s monetary policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  stance  over  the  last  eight  years,  which  saw  the  euro  area  faced  with  particularly  adverse 
circumstances: 
• 
The  main  refinancing  rate  was  gradually  cut  to  just  over  zero  (0.05%)  and  the 
deposit facility below zero, to –0.20%, its lowest level since the launch of the euro; 
The ECB’s second line of action was a policy of forward guidance and a more active 
use of its balance sheet; 
All eligible financial institutions have unlimited access to central bank liquidity at the 
main  refinancing  rate,  as  always  subject  to  adequate  collateral  with  extended 
maturity  of  liquidity  provision.  A  programme  to  provide  targeted  long-term  funding 
(TLTROs) to banks is also implemented; 
As part of special programmes, private sector securities such as covered bonds are 
purchased by both the ECB and the euro area’s National Central Banks (CBPP – 
Covered Bond Purchase Programmes 1 & 2) and asset-backed securities only by 
the ECB (ABSPP); 
The asset purchase programme was expanded to include sovereign bonds, under 
the  public  sector  purchase  programme  (PSPP),  commonly  known  as  QE,  which 
entered into effect on 9 March 2015. In this context, let me remind you that in 2010 
the  ECB  started  purchasing  securities  under  the  Securities  Markets  Programme 
(SMP,  outstanding  amount  €138  billion  from  a  maximum  amount  of  €220  billion), 
and  in  2012  initiated  the  outright  monetary  transactions  (OMT)  in  secondary 
sovereign bond markets in order to address the severe tensions in certain market 
segments  and  safeguard  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  transmission.  After  the 
ECB President’s pledge “to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro” in the period 
following  the  OMT  announcement,  tensions  in  sovereign  bond  markets  subsided, 
with  Spanish  and  Italian  ten-year  government  bond  yields  to  fall  significantly.  In 
essence,  the  ECB  reaffirmed  its  full  commitment  to  our  price  stability  mandate, 
sending  a  strong  message  to  financial  markets.  Let  me  briefly  explain  the  main 
objective  and  the  key  characteristics  of  the  ECB’s  expanded  bond-buying  toolkit. 
The explicit objective of the ECB’s programme is “a sustained adjustment in the path 
of inflation that is consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term”. 
Combined  monthly  asset  purchases  will  amount  to  €60  billion  of  private  and 
sovereign debt; 
In  total,  the  programme  will  amount  to  €1.1  trillion  in  asset  purchases  carried  out 
from March 2015 until September 2016, but the programme may be extended if its 
objectives are not achieved. 
Loss-sharing is reserved for those purchases that are carried out by the ECB or fall 
on  securities  issued  by  supranational  European  institutions,  amounting  in  total  to 
20%. The remaining 80% of all purchases – falling on purchases made by NCBs – 
will  not  be  subject  to  loss-sharing.  This  mix  corresponds  approximately  to  the 
current  allocation  of  fiscal  responsibilities  in  the  euro  area,  thereby  preserving 
needed fiscal discipline incentives for euro area governments. 
The  spectrum  of  securities  covered  by  the  QE  includes:  (i)  nominal  and  inflation-
linked  central  government  bonds,  and  (ii)  bonds  issued  by  recognised  agencies, 
international organisations and multilateral development banks, provided the issuers 
are  located  in  the  euro  area.  Of  these,  only  securities  with  a  residual  maturity 
ranging  from  two  (2)  to  thirty  (30)  years  will  be  eligible.  In  terms  of  issuer 
breakdown, the ECB intends to allocate 88% of the total purchases under the PSPP 
The key elements of the programme are the following: 
1. 
    2. 
3. 
4. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5. 
 to  government  bonds  and  recognised  agencies  and  12%  to  securities  issued  by 
international organisations and multilateral development banks. 
Also, in order to ensure proper market formation, two limits are applied in terms of 
issues and issuers, calculated in nominal values. On the one hand, the ECB won’t 
buy more than 25% of each issue. The 25% issue share limit is applied in order to 
avoid  a  blocking  minority  in  the  event  of  a  debt  restructuring  involving  collective 
action  clauses  (CACs). On  the  other  hand, the ECB  won’t  buy  more  than  33%  of 
each issuer’s debt. The 33% issuer limit applies to the combined holdings of bonds 
bought under all of the ECB’s purchase programmes and to the universe of eligible 
assets  in  the  2  to  30-year  range  of  residual  maturity.  It  is  a  means  to  safeguard 
market functioning and price formation,  as  well  as  to  mitigate  the risk  of  the  ECB 
becoming a dominant creditor of euro area governments. 
One last remark on the modalities of the programme. The ECB buys public sector bonds on 
the  secondary  market,  refraining  from  asset  purchases  on  the  primary  market  in  order  to 
remain compliant with the Lisbon Treaty’s provisions on the prohibition of monetary financing 
(Article 123). An obvious question that might arise then is the following: Is there really any 
economic distinction between buying government debt in the secondary market from buying 
it directly from the government (i.e. monetising public debt)? The answer is a clear cut “yes” 
and the crucial point is that the central bank is not being forced to create money in order to 
cover the gap between the government’s tax income and its spending commitments. 
The main channels 
V. 
But  how  will  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  work  in terms  of  boosting  inflation, 
restoring economic growth, employment in the euro area and contributing to the attainment 
of the ECB’s objective? There are a number of potential key channels through which asset 
purchases may affect spending, inflation, and borrowing costs to the real economy. 
• 
First  of  all,  a  portfolio  rebalancing  channel  can  be  identified  where  investors  are 
likely  to  redistribute  their  portfolios  by  substituting  lower  risk  assets  with  riskier 
assets such as longer-term assets, equities and possibly real estate. Bidding up the 
prices of assets bought leads to lower yields and lower borrowing costs for firms and 
households,  thus  stimulating  spending.  In  addition,  higher  asset  prices  stimulate 
spending  by  increasing  the  net  wealth  of  asset  holders.  Consequently,  an 
improvement  in  net  wealth,  combined  with  a  general  improvement  in  economic 
prospects  and  hence  future  earnings,  can  expand  the  capacity  of  firms  and 
households to borrow. This is an important channel in every single QE programme 
adopted  so  far,  with  its  effect  as  a  primary  channel  of  transmission  of  monetary 
policy programmes centred on outright purchases. 
Another  important  channel  is  the  signalling  effect  whereby  the  central  bank’s 
balance sheet expansion signals a turn towards an accommodative monetary policy 
stance over an extended horizon and pushes back the date on which a policy rate 
hike is expected. By introducing a QE programme, a central bank can send a strong 
signal  that  it  will  continue  to  be  able  to  loosen  monetary  policy  and  stimulate 
demand even when monetary policy rates hit a lower bound, which could have had 
a  strong  impact  on  private  sector’s  inflation  expectations  and  thereby  lower  real 
interest rates, boosting economic activity and inflation. 
The third channel is of course the exchange rate which is not an objective in itself, 
but 
the  ECB’s  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  The  nominal  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  has 
already fallen by 11% since last December, while the programme’s expanded and 
open-ended nature will maintain the currency at its current low levels. 
the  market  participants’  expectations  of 
reflects 
it 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   All  these  factors  are  short-term  and  this  is  consistent  with  traditional  policies  of 
central banks which are geared towards the short/medium term. However, QE by its 
very  nature  is  an  extension  of  the  intervention  horizon  of  monetary  policy  and  as 
such it can create favourable conditions for long-term investment and hence boost 
the potential growth of the euro area. For instance, the weighted average remaining 
maturity of the securities purchased as part of ECB’s QE is currently 8.5 years (on 
6 May 2015). So monetary policy in the euro area is having a more direct impact on 
long-term interest rates than ever before. 
The ECB’S QE: an early assessment 
VI. 
A number of analysts have already discounted the limited efficacy of QE in the euro area on 
the  grounds  that  banks  rather  than  capital  markets  dominate  the  provision  of  credit  there. 
They claim that, for instance, US companies raise much of their funding in the bond markets 
and  the  main  channel  through  which  QE  has  boosted  the  US  economy  is  by  lowering 
corporate  borrowing  costs.  This  effect  would  clearly  be  much  weaker  in  the  euro  area. 
Having said that, and although is still very early days, preliminary evidence (soft evidence if 
you  like)  on  the  impact  of  QE  is  really  encouraging.  The  latest  economic  data  and, 
particularly,  survey  evidence  available  up  to  March  point  to  improvements  in  economic 
activity  since  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The  so-called  indicators  (industrial  production, 
construction production, capital goods production, retail trade and car registrations) all signal 
a further rise in euro area activity and output in the first quarter of 2015. Moreover, compared 
with  the  December  2014  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  projections  for 
real  GDP  growth  in  2015  and  2016  have  been  revised  upwards  (Chart  3a),  reflecting  the 
favourable impact of significantly lower oil prices, the weaker effective exchange rate of the 
euro and the impact of the ECB’s asset purchase programme. Furthermore, credit dynamics 
also gradually improved. According to the latest data, the annual growth rate of total credit in 
the  euro  area  increased  to  0.4%  in  March,  from  0.0%  in  the  previous  month.  Among  the 
components of credit to the private sector, the annual growth rate of loans increased to 0.1% 
in March, from –0.1% in the previous month. Loan growth in the euro area averaged 5.41% 
from  1992  to  2015  with  a  record  low  of  –2.30%  in  November  2013  and  shows  the  first 
positive  signs  for  the  first  time  since  January  2014.  All  this  shows  an  improvement  in  the 
credit channel, confirming a further recovery in loan growth. According to the April 2015 ECB 
staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area,  annual  real  GDP  will  rise  by  1.5%  in 
2015,  1.9%  in  2016  and  2.1%  in  2017.  Furthermore,  model-based  estimates  indicate  that 
market-based measures of inflation expectations have reacted positively to the progressive 
expansion of our balance sheet over the last few months and have been revised upwards, as 
well  (CHART  3a).  Although  euro  area  HICP  inflation  is  at  the  same  level  as  in  2009,  the 
current level of inflation expectations is well above the historical low reached in 2009. Break-
even  inflation  rates  –  derived  from five-year  German government  bonds  –  have  overcome 
the  lows  recorded  in  early  January  (below  zero)  and  currently  stand  at  0.85%.  Having 
increased  steadily  since  mid-February,  they  suggest  that  the  decline  of  expectations  was 
largely  driven  by  temporary  factors  and  that  concerns  about  deflationary  pressures  have 
abated recently. This trend is confirmed by the evolution of inflation-linked swaps for a wide 
range  of  maturities,  from  which  a  euro  area  inflation  curve  can  be  drawn.  Market-based 
short-term inflation expectations have recovered from the troughs they reached in January. 
For  the  short  term,  inflation-linked  swap  rates  at  the  one  year-forward  one-year-ahead 
horizon stood at 0.9%. Swap rates at the three-year-forward-three year-ahead horizon would 
imply an average inflation rate of 1.5% (taken at face value). On a longer horizon, the widely 
watched five-year forward five-year-ahead indicator recovered strongly from its low point in 
January  and  at  the  time  of  writing  suggests  an  inflation  of  1.7%,  a  level  which  minimises 
concerns about a possible de-anchoring of inflation expectations. Having fluctuated around 
its long-term average of 2.3% for most of 2013, the five-year forward five-year ahead implied 
rate  declined  in  2014.  Currently  it  is  hovering  around  1.7 %,  slightly  lower  than  the  ECB’s 
SPF (2015Q1) results. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As  far  as  financial  markets  are  concerned,  the  impact  of  the  asset  purchase  programme 
accounts  for  most  of  the  fall  in  euro  area  long-term  sovereign  bond  yields  since  last 
December, as market participants anticipated the ECB’s QE programme. Government bonds 
across  a  wide  range  of  euro  area  countries  traded  at  historically  low  and  often  negative 
yields. The decline was most pronounced in the longest maturities, with yields on French and 
German  10-year  bonds  falling  by  around  60  basis  points,  while  those  on  Italian  and 
Portuguese  bonds  of  the  same  maturity  shrank  by  70  and  90  basis  points,  respectively. 
Yields on corporate euro-denominated debt have also gone done while the major European 
stock markets have risen from the end of 2014 by 17% approximately (CHART 3b). [Note: 
Charts 3a and 3b do not capture the recent bond sell-off in early May, which was in my view 
a market reaction to an overshooting of euro area sovereign bond prices following the QE’s 
formal announcement by the ECB in January of this year.] 
A  case  in  point  is  that  from  just  before  the  announcement  of  the  ECB’s  expanded  asset 
purchase programme on 22 January to the close of business the day after, German 20-year 
maturity yields fell by almost 25 basis points and Italian 20-year maturity yields fell by almost 
35 basis points. Furthermore, as we mentioned earlier, the euro depreciated by 11% since 
last December, hitting a 12-year low against the dollar (CHART 3a). 
On the other hand, the effectiveness of the ECB’s QE programme in terms of contributing to 
a  robust  recovery  in  the  euro  area  should  have  a  significant  final  impact  on  the  global 
economy and indeed in this part of the world. Such an accommodative policy that aims to 
raise ultimately consumer confidence in the euro area, obviously stimulates imports from the 
rest of the world. An illustration of this is that total EU trade with Asia reached €1.03 trillion 
last  year,  almost  double  the  value  recorded  a  decade  ago  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  EU 
accounted  for  22,4%  of  Asian  trade  in  2014,  with  most  of  EU  imports  coming  from  China 
(6.7% of total EU imports). The EU is also a major investor in the Asian continent. Only last 
March the European Commission announced over €6.5 billion in new support for countries 
and organisations in Asia for the period 2015–2020. 
Final remarks 
VII. 
From the above analysis, there is a rather straightforward answer to the question posed in 
the  title  of  my  speech,  if  the  euro  area’s  low  inflation  is  a  symptom  or  a  cause  of  weak 
recovery:  the  current  low  inflation  environment  is  rather  a  symptom  than  a  cause  of  weak 
demand. The latter is the key effect of deflation on the real economy due to the deferment of 
private spending. The important question is of course if the policy proves effective at the end, 
what  –  and  how  certain  –  would  be  the  final  impact  of  QE  on  aggregate  output  and  on 
anchoring  inflation  expectations.  Moreover,  if  the  monetary  stimulus  is  not  sufficient  to 
achieve the policy objective, what role fiscal policy could play alongside monetary policy. I 
turn to these issues right now, and these will be my closing remarks. 
Verdict on QE 
To start with the first question the truth is that we cannot identify precisely how much of an 
impact on the economy is a direct result of QE or something else. Moreover, we will probably 
never  know  exactly  the  degree  of  efficacy  of QE  for  the  simple  reason  that  we  can  never 
know with precision what would have happened in its absence. On top of that, we are living 
in  an  era  full  of  uncertainties;  the  only  certainty  is  that  there  is  no  certainty!  Often  our 
decisions  are  only  as  good  as  our  last  meeting.  However,  even  if  QE’s  other  effects  are 
uncertain,  I  expect  the  signalling  effect  and  the  resultant  boost  in  confidence  to  be  quite 
strong. 
What more should be done 
If the euro area’s low inflation persists and recovery remains weak, then priority should be 
given to complementary fiscal policy, such as changes into the composition of government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  spending towards bringing forward public investment, especially if one considers the fact that 
long-term borrowing rates are so low today. Such a policy would boost aggregate demand in 
the short run, but also it would aim to improve productivity (TFP, the main driver of long-run 
growth,  is  moving  at  negative  rates  since  2007  in  the  euro  area).  In  this  context,  the 
European  Commission’s  investment  plan  for  Europe  (also  known  as  the  Juncker  plan) 
comprising  a  package  of  measures  to  unlock  public  and  private  investments  in  the  real 
economy of at least €315 billion over the next three years (2015–2017) is undoubtedly in the 
right direction. This is quite presumably what President Draghi had in mind when he made 
the following remarks last August, speaking in another famous gathering of central bankers 
in Jackson Hole in Kansas: “It would be helpful for the overall stance of economic policy if 
fiscal policy could play a greater role alongside monetary policy, and I believe there is scope 
for this […]”. 
Of course, neither QE nor public investment should be seen as an alibi in postponing crucial, 
growth-enhancing structural changes, like for instance reforms to improve the functioning of 
product  and  labour  markets,  to  reduce  red  tape  and  increase  the  efficiency  of  public 
administration, etc. As a matter of fact, given that Europe today faces a twin recovery and 
growth challenge (namely the quest for a robust recovery in the short run through demand 
stimulus  measures  and  for  a  sustainable  growth  path  in  the  long  run  through  supply  side 
reforms) we need to use all three policies jointly, and at the same time. 
 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
