  Andreas Dombret: The German real estate market – cause for concern? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, to Haus & Grund Deutschland, Berlin, 28 January 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear President Kornemann, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It’s a great pleasure for me to speak to you today. I gladly accepted your invitation to Berlin 
given  the  important  influence  that  you  –  along  with  the  German  tenants’  association 
“Deutscher Mieterbund” – have on the German real estate market. This is the first time I have 
taken part in your panel discussion, although I did once address the annual meeting of Haus 
& Grund in Frankfurt at the invitation of Mr Conzelmann. 
I am therefore pleased to have this opportunity to explain the Bundesbank’s perspective on 
the German real estate market. Let us begin by taking a look at the economic situation in 
general – after all, economic conditions impact strongly on the real estate markets. 
German economy in good shape 
2. 
The  German  economic  situation  is  not  as  bad  as  some  might  think.  On  the  contrary,  the 
German  economy  remains  in  good  shape.  Enterprises  in  Germany  have  their  costs  under 
control, their debt is not particularly high, and they have an attractive range of products to 
offer the global markets. Moreover, German economic activity is supported by consumption. 
Unemployment is low, households are not burdened by excessive debt and real wages are 
rising appreciably owing to low inflation. 
In our December forecast we expect Germany’s real gross domestic product to rise by 1.0% 
this year and 1.6% next year. However, the price of oil has fallen sharply since we prepared 
that forecast. If oil prices persist at their current low levels, economic growth could prove to 
be  markedly  higher  this  year  and  next,  since  the  low  price  of  oil  has  the  effect  of  a  small 
stimulus package. 
At  the  same time,  we  have  for quite  a  while  now  been  witnessing  very  low  inflation  rates, 
both  in  Germany  and  throughout  the  euro  area.  And  we  can  expect  them  to  continue  for 
some time to come. This undoubtedly poses a serious challenge for monetary policymakers. 
After all, we seek to achieve for the euro area inflation rates of below but close to 2% over 
the  medium  term.  To  help  us  move  closer  to  this  target,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  last 
Thursday adopted a programme for the purchase of government bonds. 
As  you  know,  the  Bundesbank  takes  a  critical  view  of  this  government  bond  purchase 
programme. In our opinion, monetary policymakers are not under any acute pressure to act, 
as the low inflation rate is mainly attributable to falling energy prices. For the next two years, 
we are expecting inflation to pick up gradually; certainly, there is no sign of deflation. 
What is more, government bond purchases are not simply a monetary policy instrument like 
any  other  where  the  euro  area  is  concerned.  They  entail  risks  which  we  believe  are  not 
outweighed by the expected effects. At least the ECB Governing Council has agreed on a 
number of constraints to curb balance sheet risks, so that there will only be joint liability for a 
small  portion  of  the  programme.  This  will  mitigate  at  least  some  of  the  problems  which 
government bond purchases entail. 
However,  this  additional  monetary  policy  easing  could  have  undesired  side-effects.  For 
instance, the low interest rates could encourage many investors, in their search for yield, to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  turn  to  assets  they  previously  avoided  due  to  the  associated  risks.  This  makes  the 
emergence of price bubbles more likely, which could cause problems for the stability of the 
financial system. 
And  the  real  estate  market  is  one  of  those  markets  where  a  search  for  yield  can  lead  to 
exaggerations. That’s why it is worth taking a closer look at this market. 
Real estate markets – an important part of the economy 
3. 
Price bubbles are always especially problematic when the purchase of the asset is financed, 
above all, through credit. Real estate is a case in point. Residential mortgage loans account 
for 43% of all loans to the private sector in Germany. 
Property prices and lending can develop mutually reinforcing, destabilising feedback effects. 
When  prices  in  the  real  estate  market  rise,  banks  –  in  the  assumption  that  this  trend  will 
continue – may grant additional credit, fuelling price increases further. Of course, that only 
goes well until the bubble finally bursts. 
The faster and lower prices then fall, the more loans cannot be repaid. This compromises the 
banks’ profits and stability – and when the banks sneeze, the whole economy catches a cold. 
The crises affecting other countries in recent years have made this patently clear. 
Which is why we are watching the real estate market very closely indeed. And this begs the 
question:  do  we  see  a  price  bubble  in  the  German  real  estate  market?  Is  there  cause  for 
concern? 
The current situation in the real estate market – no bubble 
4. 
Three different circumstances would have to coincide for a price bubble to form in the real 
estate market. 
• 
First,  a  self-sustaining  increase  in  prices  which  leads  to  prices  that  are  no  longer 
justified by economic fundamentals 
Second, excessive growth in mortgage lending 
Third, an easing of banks’ credit standards for mortgage loans 
• 
• 
Let us then consider the threat of a price bubble by examining these three ingredients. 
The first question is: do we see an excessive increase in prices? All in all, price dynamics in 
Germany  over  the  past 20  years  have  been  moderate  compared  with  the  rest  of  the  euro 
area.  However,  we  have  seen  prices  climb  fairly  steeply  in  some  parts  of  Germany  since 
2010 – although the rise in prices did slow down slightly in 2014. 
Since  2010,  prices  have  risen  by  an  average  of  7%  per  year  in  Germany’s  seven  largest 
cities. Housing prices have increased in medium-sized towns and cities, too, although only 
by just over 5% per year. The equivalent figure for Germany as a whole is 3%. What we are 
seeing, then, are marked regional disparities with regard to price increases. 
Does  that  add  up  to  a  price  bubble?  For  Germany  as  a  whole,  the  answer  is  no.  For  the 
years 2010 onwards, we cannot identify any growing, substantial overvaluation of housing. 
The rise in prices reflects, at least in part, a catching-up process following a period of weak 
price growth that persisted for quite a number of years. 
However,  we  assume  that  residential  properties  were  probably  overpriced  by  as  much  as 
20% in large and medium-sized towns and cities up to and including 2013, while overpricing 
in  the  seven  major  cities  was  probably  even  somewhat  more  pronounced  in  2013.  Price 
dynamics in the German housing market have, however, weakened appreciably. 
To sum up: property price developments present a mixed picture, but the bottom line is that 
it’s not particularly worrying. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What  about  the  second  ingredient  for  a  property  price  bubble:  lending?  First  of  all,  it  has 
undoubtedly become easier to finance a property purchase thanks to high liquidity levels and 
low  interest  rates.  Today  it’s  possible  for  investors  to  obtain  funds  at  very  favourable 
conditions over a very long period. The weighted average interest rate for new loans over all 
maturities  is  2.3%.  Another  factor  is  the  low  returns  on  alternative  investments,  which  are 
encouraging  some  to  seek  a  crisis-proof,  ostensibly  safe  and  higher-yielding  investment  – 
turning real estate into what has been dubbed “concrete gold”. Yet investors should always 
bear in mind that higher yields are accompanied by higher risks. 
Thus,  the  volume  of  mortgage  credit  to  households  has  risen  steadily  since  2010,  albeit 
initially at a moderate pace. In November 2014, year-on-year growth was just shy of 2½%, 
and gathered pace in the last quarter in particular – in Germany even more so than in the 
euro area. 
On  the  whole,  however,  mortgage  loans  have  not  risen  excessively.  Purely  in  terms  of 
volume,  banks’  vulnerability  has  increased  only  slightly.  Which  brings  us  to  the  third 
ingredient of a price bubble: the credit standards by which mortgage loans are granted. 
Is the risk incurred by banks with new lending greater today than it was a few years ago? A 
survey of 116 selected German banks conducted by banking supervisors provides a more 
detailed picture. The survey in question focuses on 15 towns and cities where property price 
increases  were  particularly  strong  and  nine  where  they  were  about  average  in  the  period 
2009  to  2013.  The  findings  present  a  picture  of  the  impact  of  the  dynamic  price  trend  on 
lending activity. 
And here, too, we cannot see any signs of trouble brewing. On the contrary, the banks report 
that  they  did  not  ease  their  credit  standards.  Conditions  were  more  favourable  for  some 
customers due to the further decline in interest rates; the risk premiums that the banks priced 
in remained stable, however. Ultimately, credit standards for loans to households for house 
purchase  remained  unchanged  in  Germany,  while  they  were  eased  slightly  in  the  rest  of 
Europe. 
Yet this does not mean we can unreservedly sound the all-clear. This is because the special 
survey also reveals a fairly large share of loans with what we might refer to as high German 
sustainable  LTV  ratios  (Hochausläufer)  in  the  “attractive  towns  and  cities”  segment.  With 
such mortgages, the loan is greater than the mortgage lending value, that is the value the 
bank  calculates  in  respect  of  the  property  serving  as  collateral.  Loans  of  this  kind  do  not 
necessarily  give  cause  for  concern  in  each  and  every  case:  the  borrower’s  high  level  of 
available assets or income can have a risk-mitigating effect. Nevertheless, the fact that such 
loans account for a large share of all mortgages does indicate that there might be structural 
vulnerabilities in the German banking system to crises on the real estate market. 
The  German  Pfandbrief  Act  (Pfandbriefgesetz)  restricts  the  German  sustainable  loan-to-
value  ratio  (Beleihungsauslauf)  to  60%  of  the  mortgage  lending  value  for  loans  that  are 
eligible as cover for mortgage Pfandbriefe. However, it is of limited effect as only one-tenth of 
residential mortgage loans are used to collateralise German mortgage Pfandbriefe. Building 
and  loan  associations  implicitly  limit  the  German  sustainable  LTV  to  80%.  Nevertheless, 
there  is  a  lot  of  scope  for  mortgages  with  high  German  sustainable  LTV  ratios.  Banking 
supervisors will be taking a closer look at this in future. 
A look ahead – potential dangers 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we have taken a look at three criteria for property price bubbles: price 
trends, lending and credit standards. And none of these point to destabilising developments. 
But  the  ECB’s  decision  to  purchase  government  bonds  on  a  grand  scale  has  marked  the 
beginning  of a  new  era on  the  capital  markets  and  we  must  bear  this  in  mind.  Liquidity  is 
rising  and  interest  rates  are  falling.  Yet  this  means  that  there  is  also  an  increased  risk  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  asset  price  bubbles  –  not  least  on  the  real  estate  market.  The  world  has  thus  become  a 
rather more dangerous place for property investors. 
The  situation  on  the  real  estate  market  also  hinges  on  the  currently  relatively  favourable 
macroeconomic  environment.  If  macroeconomic  conditions  were  to  deteriorate  and  the 
default rates for residential mortgage loans were to rise, German banks would stand to make 
considerable losses. This is the conclusion that banking supervisors drew from the special 
survey that I mentioned earlier. 
We simulated various scenarios and found that, given an isolated shock on the real estate 
market,  banks  would  still  be  able  to  meet  regulatory  capital  requirements.  If  the  banking 
environment  were  otherwise  favourable,  banks  could  compensate  for  an  isolated  shock  of 
this nature with profits in other lines of business. 
However, an isolated shock on the real estate market is rather unlikely. Empirical studies for 
the United States and other OECD countries instead indicate that real estate markets and 
macroeconomic developments are closely interlinked. 
And  in  the  event  of  a  recession  that  extends  beyond  the  real  estate  sector  or  even  of  a 
general  financial  crisis,  cumulated  losses  could  considerably  impair  banks’  internal  capital 
adequacy.  My  colleague  on  the  Executive  Board,  Claudia  Buch,  mentioned  this  back  in 
November 2014 when we presented the Bundesbank’s latest Financial Stability Review. 
Looking further ahead, there is yet another danger looming that we must keep in mind: the 
possibility  of  an  interest  rate  reversal.  To  address  interest  rate  risk,  borrowers  are 
increasingly  opting  for  long-term  loans  with  fixed  interest  rates,  while  banks  are  able  to 
adequately hedge against risks arising from these longer interest rate lock-ins. 
Nevertheless, both investors and banks must use the current low-interest-rate environment 
responsibly. And of course we should not forget that hedging against interest rate risk comes 
at a cost to banks. As a rule, loan contracts should only be signed if borrowers can continue 
to repay them even at higher rates of interest. 
And, in light of current events, there is another danger that we should not overlook – that of 
foreign exchange risk. The discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate for the Swiss franc 
and  the  subsequent  appreciation  thereof  may  create  difficulties  for  borrowers  who  have 
taken out property loans in Swiss francs. If default rates were to rise, banks could run into 
difficulties. 
However, unlike in Austria or Poland for example, loans in Swiss francs play only a minimal 
role in Germany. According to current figures, property loans in Swiss francs account for only 
around €2 billion of the entire volume of property loans of over €1,000 billion in Germany. We 
thus see no need to be overly concerned. 
What can we do? 
6. 
Even though the risks emanating from the real estate market currently appear to be low, we 
must still be prepared for all eventualities. Financial supervisors need to be prepared in case 
a bubble should emerge on the real estate market. 
It is thus crucial that we have tools at our disposal to contain the corresponding risks. This 
means that, in the end, it will be up to the central banks to step in and spoil the fun just as the 
party is in full swing. 
Over the past few years we have begun putting together such a toolbox. We are currently 
closely examining a number of new tools to ascertain the precise effect that they would have. 
However, before we can use such tools, we need a fitting legal basis. The central body for 
systemic financial supervision in Germany, the Financial Stability Committee, is working on 
this at the moment. In the next few months, it plans to present the Federal Government with 
recommendations on establishing a legal basis for the use of these instruments. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However,  elected  politicians  are  also  currently  planning  measures  which  I  believe  are 
headed in the wrong direction from an economic perspective. The cap on rents that is to be 
introduced  in  the  near  future  aims  to  protect  tenants  in  “overstretched  housing  markets” 
against  sharp  rent  increases.  Wealth  distribution  considerations  are  clearly  the  prime 
motivation for this move. 
From  an  economic  perspective,  however,  the  measure  is  problematic  as  rising  property 
prices  are  a  sign  of  scarcity.  They  create  an  incentive  to  build  new  properties  and  thus 
increase the supply of housing. Regulatory intervention weakens this mechanism and thus 
ultimately prevents our society from having access to sufficient and affordable housing. 
From an economic perspective, I therefore do not believe that the cap on rents is a suitable 
means  of  combating  potential  excesses  on  the  real  estate  markets.  The  same  is  true  of 
political  initiatives  to  limit  the  conversion  of  rented  apartments  into  owner-occupied 
apartments. This would constitute a major intervention into property rights and would make it 
more difficult for existing tenants, who have the right of first refusal, to own property. 
Conclusion 
7. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  conclude. We  started  with  the  question:  Is  there  currently  a 
price bubble on Germany’s real estate market? For Germany as a whole, the answer is no. 
We  do  not  believe  the  current  price  increases  to  be  problematic,  lending  is  not  rising 
excessively and credit standards have not been eased. Based on these three criteria, we do 
not consider there to be a property price bubble. 
But, ladies and gentlemen, experience from other countries has shown that high liquidity and 
low interest rates create an environment which is often conducive to the formation of asset 
price bubbles. Thus the likelihood grows over time, and the ECB’s purchase of government 
bonds  will  only  fuel  this  growth  further.  There  is  no  storm  raging  now  but  the  winds  are 
picking up, and last week the work of banking supervisors became yet more challenging. 
But  as  Adam  Posen,  President  of  the  Peterson  Institute,  said  last  week  in  an  interview: 
“Germany must not take the rest of Europe hostage just to fight a bubble on its own housing 
market”.  Instead  he  advised  banking  regulators  and  supervisors  to  address  the  problem 
directly. And that is precisely what we shall do. 
However,  each  and  every  investor  is  ultimately  responsible  for  being  risk-aware  in  their 
actions. And, according to a survey by Ernst & Young, the vast majority of property investors 
expect risk appetite to grow. 
I would caution against increasingly turning to risky investments to obtain that bit more profit 
while interest rates are low. At some point, interest rates will rise again, and then the financial 
burdens stemming from property loans will not be the only thing to increase. Both borrowers 
and  lenders  have  a  duty  not  to  ignore  this  risk.  In  the  current  environment,  banks  should 
exercise particular caution when granting property loans. 
The  Bundesbank  will  fulfil  its  responsibilities.  We  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  real 
estate market, mortgage lending and the banks granting these loans and take action as soon 
as necessary. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
