  Már Guðmundsson: Iceland’s crisis and recovery – facts, comparisons, 
and the lessons learned 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Institute of 
International and European Affairs, Dublin, 27 April 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to speak here at the Institute of International and European Affairs 
in Dublin about Iceland’s crisis and recovery and some of the lessons that could be learned 
from this experience. This is not least because of our historical bonds and the affinity that I 
feel exists between our people, to which we can now add the common experience of being 
hard hit by the Great Financial Crisis. 
It is well known that Iceland was the first advanced country to experience a full-scale banking 
crisis during the autumn of 2008, when its three big cross-border banks failed. It was also the 
first advanced country to go on an IMF programme. What is probably less well known is that 
at that point, Iceland was already on its way into a recession after an unsustainable boom 
and serious overheating during 2005–2007 and a currency crisis in the first half of 2008. The 
banking collapse and the associated wealth loss and further currency depreciation made the 
recession significantly worse, of course, as did the recession that hit the global economy in 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2008.  That  autumn,  two  separate  but  interrelated  sub-stories  of  the 
recent Icelandic saga converged in a tragic grand finale. 
The first story was related to Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with macroeconomic 
management in small, open, and financially  integrated economies. This is a story that has 
played out many times around the globe, and many of its elements have been seen before in 
Iceland.  It  might  have  been  somewhat  more  extreme  this  time  around,  but  it  wasn’t 
fundamentally different. 
The second story was the rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of 
EU legislation (the European “passport”). This story was much more unique, as it involved 
the first banking crisis in Europe since the EU single market was formed in the early 1990s. 
Let me turn first to the banking story. In a few years prior to the crisis, the banking system 
had expanded  very rapidly, as  you can see from Figure 1, making it one of the biggest in 
Europe relative to GDP. Most of this expansion was cross-border, and a significant part of it 
was really off-border, having little to do with Iceland, as both financing and investment took 
place abroad. 
Towards the end, around two-thirds of the combined balance sheet of the three cross-border 
banks  was  denominated  in  foreign  currency.  On  the  liabilities  side,  the  share  of  FX-
denominated debt was actually higher, as can be seen from Figure 2, with almost half of the 
financing in the form of FX deposits and other short-term FX financing. The FX part of the 
balance sheet therefore had a significant maturity mismatch. However, there was no safety 
net of the type we have in a national setting, in the form of liquidity provision and lender-of-
last-resort (LOLR) to back it up. It was an accident waiting to happen, and happen it did, with 
a vengeance, at the peak of the international financial crisis in autumn 2008, when there was 
a wholesale run on the FX financing of internationally active banks. 
When the Icelandic authorities were dealing with the failing banks, they assumed, based on 
published CAD ratios and stress tests, that the banks were solvent. Now, however, we know 
that this was probably not truly the case, as there were hidden vulnerabilities in their capital 
positions.  Be  that  as  it may,  with  the  solvency  assumption  in  mind,  the  authorities tried  to 
build  defences  against  potential  foreign  currency  liquidity  problems  at  the  banks  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  negotiating  swap  lines  and  tapping  foreign  capital  markets  –  in  both  cases,  with  limited 
success. 
Given the lack of international co-operation, the Icelandic authorities were forced to consider 
radical  solutions.  Although  they  were  not  necessarily  articulated  in  full  at  the  time,  these 
solutions entailed several goals: to preserve a functioning domestic payment system, ring-
fence the state in the case of bank failures, limit the socialisation of private sector losses, and 
create the conditions for rebuilding a domestic banking system. 
The adopted solution was embedded in the so-called Emergency Act, which was passed by 
Parliament  on  6  October  2008.  The  Emergency  Act  saved  the  domestic  operations  of  the 
banking system by creating new banks, which involved carving domestic assets and liabilities 
out  of  the  old, failing  banks.  The  rest  –  and  the  much  larger  part  –  went  into  a  resolution 
process. 
In order to reverse the ongoing run on domestic deposits, a declaration was made that all 
deposits  in  Iceland  were  safe,  but  this  did  not  include  deposits  in  foreign  branches. 
Furthermore,  all  deposits  in  Icelandic-headquartered  banks  were  given  priority  over  other 
unsecured  claims,  including  in  foreign  branches.  As  regards  the  blanket  guarantee,  the 
distinction  made  between  domestic  deposits  and  foreign  currency  deposits  in  the  banks’ 
foreign branches added fuel to the fire of the so-called Icesave dispute about the settlement 
of  deposit  guarantees  in  the  Dutch  and  British  branches  of  one  of  the  banks.  But 
guaranteeing those deposits would never have been credible and might have bankrupted the 
Government had it been attempted. The deposits in question were in foreign currencies and 
amounted to 11½ billion euros – far in excess of Iceland’s available FX liquidity at that time, 
as  the  sovereign  was  completely  closed  off  from  foreign  capital  markets.  Furthermore,  in 
economic  terms,  given  that  these  deposits  were  used  to  a  significant  degree  to  finance 
illiquid assets outside Iceland, such a payment, if it had been possible, would have amounted 
to a net transfer of resources from Iceland to other countries – where the United Kingdom 
would have been prominent – at a time when Iceland was going through its deepest financial 
and economic crisis in the post-war period. That made no sense whatsoever! However, the 
preference  given  to  deposits  under  the  Emergency  Act  is  a  key  element  in  the  fact  that 
recoveries on the failed banks’ estates will cover deposit claims from the foreign branches in 
full. 
In international discussion, there have been a number of misconceptions about this process. 
There have been claims that Iceland allowed its banking system to collapse, with what now 
seem reasonable results, and that others should consider doing the same. The fact is that 
Iceland kept the domestic part of its banking system running throughout, and at significant 
expense; otherwise, the consequences would have been dire. Some have claimed that the 
banks were nationalised. They were not. The failed private banks are private companies in 
winding-up proceedings governed by law. The Government fully recapitalised one of the new 
banks.  The  other  two  are  private  banks  owned  primarily  by  the  estates  of  the  old  banks. 
Others have claimed that Iceland defaulted and got away with it. The opposite is true. The 
credit  of  the  sovereign  was  preserved,  and  all  debt  obligations  have  been  paid  on  time. 
Moreover, Iceland’s investment-grade credit ratings from Moody’s and S&P were preserved 
throughout  the  crisis.  This  is  why  the  sovereign  has  been  able  to  tap  international  capital 
markets twice so far since the crisis struck. 
You can see from this that the key characteristics of crisis management and bank resolution 
in Iceland were that shareholders lost all their equity, unsecured bond holders were bailed in, 
vital infrastructure elements of the domestic banking system were preserved, and deposits 
were  given  preference  over  other  unsecured  claims.  Today  this  seems  in  many  ways  a 
standard approach, but it was not universally well received at the time. 
On  the  whole,  these  measures  were  successful,  which  mitigated  the  effect  of  the  banks’ 
failure on the economy. The domestic payment system functioned more or less seamlessly 
throughout,  and  there  was  continuous  access  to  deposits  and  basic  banking  services  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Iceland. International payment flows were seriously affected, however, not least because of 
the freezing order imposed by the British authorities on Icelandic banks, but also because of 
general distrust among foreign counterparties. 
Let me now turn to the macroeconomic part of the story. I will paint with a rather broad brush 
here, both because time is limited and because the issues are somewhat better understood. 
All  the  usual  suspects were  present  during the  build-up  to  the  Icelandic  crisis:  very  strong 
capital inflows fuelling a credit and asset price boom that subsequently turned into a bubble 
at  the  same  time  as  the  economy  overheated  and  an  unsustainable  external  position 
developed, as could be seen in a double-digit current account deficit. And macroeconomic 
and prudential policies were not up to the task. Quite the contrary: there was a policy conflict 
between  monetary  policy  and  the  demand  levers  pulled  by  the  Government,  and  the risks 
inherent  in  capital  flows,  FX  balance  sheets,  and  credit  and  asset  price  booms  were  left 
under-regulated and insufficiently supervised. 
At a deeper level, the macroeconomic part of the story was related to three factors. The first 
factor centres on the complications that tend to arise with macroeconomic management as 
very  small,  open  economies  become  more  and  more  financially  integrated.  The  second 
relates to the specific conditions of abundant, cheap credit at the global level. Third, major 
policy mistakes were made in Iceland, both of the type that would be deemed to be such in 
any  book (such  as giving  an  already  overheated  economy  a  demand  stimulus),  and  those 
more closely related to the orthodoxy prevailing at the time: freely floating exchange rates, 
interest rate policy focusing mainly on low inflation in terms of goods and services, and good 
micro-supervision;  and  let  the  markets  do  the  rest.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  it  is  better 
appreciated that this view is deeply flawed. 
The imbalances in the Icelandic economy in the years leading up to the crisis were in many 
ways  enormous.  The  clearest  manifestation  is  perhaps  the  current  account  deficit  that 
averaged over 17% of GDP during the years 2005–2008. Both it and the large positive output 
gap  were  bound  to  correct  –  a  process  that  was  likely  to  be  associated  with  a  significant 
slowing  of  growth,  if  not  an  outright  recession.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland  predicted  more  or  less  consistently  from  2007  onwards  that  there  would  be  a 
recession in Iceland in 2009. This projection had nothing to do with the collapse of the banks 
but  everything  to  do  with  the  known  investment  profile  of  big  projects  in  the  energy  and 
aluminium sectors and the accumulating signs of a grossly overheated economy. This belies 
the common statement that forecasters never predict recessions! 
The shocks that hit Iceland in 2008 and the imminent correction of unsustainable balances 
shaped macroeconomic developments in Iceland in the years that followed. But so did the 
policy responses, which took two main forms. The first was the crisis management regarding 
the  failing  banks,  which  I  have  already  mentioned.  The  second  was  the  economic 
programme  developed  by  the  Icelandic  authorities  in  co-operation  with  the  IMF.  The  IMF 
programme had three key goals: stabilisation of the exchange rate, fiscal sustainability, and 
reconstruction of the financial sector. 
Comprehensive  capital  controls  were  an  important  element  in  the  programme,  but  their 
rationale  was  to  help  to  stabilise  the  exchange  rate  in  a  situation  where  the  currency  had 
fallen more than 50% in 2008, where foreign króna positions that were a legacy of carry trade 
and capital inflows amounted to around 40% of GDP, and where a large fiscal deficit that had 
to be financed in the domestic market had developed. In this situation, the capital controls 
gave monetary policy more scope to focus on the domestic economy, as is demonstrated in 
Figure 3, which compares developments in short-term real interest rates during and after the 
currency and banking crises in Korea in 1997 and Iceland in 2008. 
Iceland’s recession was deep. But it was probably not as deep as many might have thought 
when  they  entertained  the  image  of  the  total  collapse  of  an  entire  banking  sector,  plus  a 
major currency crisis. But then we should bear in mind the nature of the shocks. A significant 
part  of  the  impact  of  the  banking  collapse  was  felt  in  other  countries.  Furthermore,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  economic  shocks  disproportionally  affected  overblown  sectors  (banking  and  construction). 
Most of the export base was intact, however, and was subsequently boosted by the low real 
exchange rate. The real depreciation (see Figure 4) and the negative confidence effects of 
the crisis also contributed to lifting the saving rate and compressing imports. The resultant 
adjustment in the current account can be seen in Figure 5. The double-digit deficits in the 
years before the crisis have been replaced by sizeable surpluses from 2009 to this day. 
Iceland had significant fiscal surpluses in the years leading up to the crisis. As expected, the 
crisis had a big impact on government finances: through the direct fiscal costs of the banking 
crisis, the loss of tax revenue, and higher unemployment expenditures as the economy went 
into  recession.  This  impact  was  big  as  can  be  seen  on  Figure  6  showing  the  direct  and 
indirect impact of selected banking crises on government debt and fiscal balance. But yours 
was bigger! 
A deficit on the central government amounting to 8% of GDP opened up in 2009. It had to be 
financed domestically. Capital controls helped in that respect. To build confidence and open 
external market access, a medium-term fiscal consolidation plan was implemented as a part 
of the programme with the IMF. In 2009, automatic stabilisers were mostly allowed to do their 
work, but in 2010 a phased deficit reduction plan set in, with a primary surplus targeted for 
2012 and an overall surplus for 2014. This fiscal consolidation was sizeable in international 
comparison,  as  can  be  seen  from  Figure  7,  but  it  did  not  derail  the  recovery  that  began 
around the middle of 2010. It helped that monetary policy could be relaxed over the course of 
2010,  as  the  closure  of  loopholes  in  the  capital  controls  in  late  2009  contributed  to  the 
stabilisation of the exchange rate. 
Figure  8  and  9  show  developments  in  GDP  and  employment  during  the  recession  and 
subsequent recovery in Iceland, with predictions extending into 2017 for GDP and 2016 for 
employment.  For  comparison,  it  shows  the  distribution  of the  same for  30  other  European 
countries, with Ireland highlighted. It shows that Iceland’s recession, as well as Ireland’s, was 
deeper  than  the  median  in  Europe,  but  both  countries  have  been  doing  better  than  the 
average during the recovery, especially lately and in the forecasts. Actually, there is relatively 
little difference between Iceland and Ireland by both measures, except that Iceland seems to 
be  doing  somewhat  better  lately  in  terms  of  employment  growth.  Iceland’s  performance 
would  be  even  better  if  we  looked  at  the  unemployment  rate,  as  labour  supply  is  rather 
elastic, both internally and because of cross-border mobility. 
Iceland  lost  just  over  11%  of  output  during  the recession  that  ended  in  the  first quarter  of 
2010. It will have probably more than gained that back by the first quarter of this year. Given 
developments  in  the  supply  side  of  the  economy,  the  Central  Bank’s  assessment  is  that 
almost  all  of  the slack  in  the  economy  has  been  absorbed.  Unlike  the pre-crisis  peak,  the 
current level of output is therefore associated with a relatively well-balanced economy both 
internally  and  externally.  In  recent months,  inflation  has  been  below  the  target  because of 
international developments, and there is a current account surplus, which allows the Central 
Bank to accumulate reserves without undermining the exchange rate. 
So is Iceland out of the woods? The answer is no. The financial crisis casts a long shadow. 
Both  household  and  corporate  debt  levels  have  declined  significantly,  with  the  household 
debt-to-income ratio around the 2005 level and the corporate debt-to-GDP ratio at its lowest 
since  mid-2004.  But  there  are  significant  pockets  of  financial  fragility,  with  some  of  the 
households that bought and borrowed at the peak of the market still facing very heavy debt 
service burdens. And even though public debt is now on a declining path relative to GDP, it is 
very high in historical terms, which remains a vulnerability. 
The biggest legacy problem, though, is the capital controls. During the early stages of the 
crisis, the controls were helpful in stabilising the economy and providing the shelter needed 
to repair balance sheets and rebalance the economy. But over time – and increasingly, as 
the  economy  and  the  rest  of  the  world  recover  –  they  begin  to  turn  into  obstacles  to 
economic growth. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The problem is that there are big obstacles to speedy removal of the capital controls. First, 
we have short-term króna assets in the hands of foreign residents, so-called offshore krónur, 
which currently amount to 15% of GDP, after having been reduced by more than half since 
the capital controls were introduced (see Figure 10). But more importantly, we have domestic 
assets held by the estates of the old banks. This is a balance of payments problem, as 94% 
of the claims on these banks are foreign and only 6% domestic, whereas 41% of the assets 
are domestic, including 21% in krónur (See Figure 11). Taking into account the part of these 
assets  that  are  already  financed  in  foreign  currency,  we  get  the  result  that  unfinanced 
domestic assets that could revert to foreign residents with the unwinding of these estates will 
amount to 25% of GDP (see Figure 12). When considering the complication that this creates 
for Iceland, you should bear in mind that it is partly because the resolution of the third-largest 
bankruptcy  in  the  history  of  mankind  is  taking  place  in  one  of  the  smallest  countries  in 
Europe. 
Therefore, potential outflows amounting to 40% of GDP might seek a speedy exit if we were 
to lift the capital controls tomorrow. If our relatively large FX reserves (30% of GDP) were our 
first line of defence, they would be wiped out completely, and then the exchange rate would 
give  way,  with  potentially  serious  consequences  for  economic  and  financial  stability  in 
Iceland. We are currently working hard on solutions to this problem, and such solutions do 
exist.  From  a  logical  standpoint,  the  solution  must  take  the  form  of  either  a  significant 
reduction  before  early  exit  or  a  secure  longer-term  holding  period  before  the  controls  are 
lifted. 
I  am  coming  towards  the  end  of  my  talk  and  will  have  to  leave  discussion  of  the  lessons 
learned for the Q&A session. The list is long and includes the need to avoid policy conflicts in 
small,  open,  and  financially  integrated  economies,  to  better  regulate  FX  risk  in  domestic 
banking systems, to give up the dream of financial centres in small countries if they do not 
have  access  to  credible  and  comprehensive  international  or  regional  safety  nets,  and  to 
improve policy frameworks and tools in light of the experience that we have been through. 
In  Iceland,  this  process  has  gone  past  the  talking  stage:  frameworks  for  monetary  and 
financial stability policies have been improved, new prudential rules have been introduced, 
financial  sector  legislation  has  been  amended,  and  supervision  has  been  improved  and 
strengthened. And there is more to come. 
Thank you very much. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
