  Pedro Duarte Neves: Financial stability and macro-prudential policy 
Concluding remarks by Mr Pedro Duarte Neves, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at 
the  Conference  on  “Financial  Stability  and  Macro-prudential  Policy”,  Lisbon,  10  February 
2015. 
 Contributions to these Concluding Remarks from the Financial Stability Department of Banco de Portugal and, in 
particular, from Rita Bessone Basto are gratefully acknowledged. 
It’s up to me to close this conference and I will start by thanking all participants for making 
this  conference  a  success  in  bringing  out  such  important  issues  for  financial  stability  and 
macro-prudential  policy.  The  fruitful  and  stimulating  debates  we  had  all  day,  will  certainly 
make my task, of drawing some conclusions and policy messages, considerably easier. 
The  implementation  of macro-prudential  policy  requires  the  early  identification  of  risks  and 
their  systemic  impact,  the  definition  of  appropriate  and  correctly  calibrated  instruments  to 
mitigate  these  risks  and  a  governance  capable  of  taking  decisions  whenever  necessary, 
independently of lack of public support or of possible conflicts with other policies. There are 
challenges inherent to all these tasks and my remarks will dwell upon them. 
Identification of systemic risks 
An analysis allowing a timely identification of risks and their impact is thus a critical aspect of 
macro-prudential policy. As shown today by Marco Espinosa Vega, the complex network of 
interconnectedness in the financial system can make risks more difficult to detect but very 
easy  to  propagate  within  the  system.  In  addition,  it  is  now  clear  to  us  that  financial 
vulnerabilities  have  a  tendency  to  accumulate  during the  expansionary  phase  of the  credit 
cycle. Lower credit risk and higher valuation of collateral assets during the expansion of the 
cycle contribute to credit growth and to increase asset prices. These self-fulfilled dynamics 
can  easily  give  rise  to  excessive  leverage  and  speculative  bubbles.  Tackling  those  risks 
demands a robust analytical framework. 
These  characteristics  of  systemic  risks  also  imply  a  two  dimensioned  policy.  A  structural, 
transversal  component,  which  analyses  the  distribution  of  risks  and  interconnectedness  in 
the  system  in  order  to  mitigate  risks  in  a  given  period  of  time,  and  a  cyclical  component, 
which analyses the evolution of these risks during the expansionary phase of the cycle and 
intervenes with the purpose of providing the system with a greater capacity to absorb losses 
during the downturn (i.e. leaning against the financial cycle). 
Recently,  there  has  been  a  considerable  volume  of  research  on  the  measurement  of 
systemic risks, namely concerning the selection of a group of indicators capable of signalling 
the accumulation of risk, the estimation of the probability of occurrence of a crisis, given that 
information, and on modelling the inter-linkages between the financial system and the real 
economy, with the purpose of determining the impact of a crisis and identifying institutions of 
greater systemic importance. A significant part of this analysis is based on existent models, 
now  adapted  to  macro-prudential  purposes,  giving  rise  to  a  significant  diversity  and 
multiplicity of models. João Santos provided us with a very thorough review of some of these 
models  and  Steven  Ongena  enlightened  us  on  the  difficulties  of  mitigating  risks  stemming 
from incentives associated with too-big-to-fail institutions. 
In spite of significant progress in this area, the measurement of systemic risk continues to 
present several challenges due to the uncertainty surrounding the functioning of the financial 
system, resulting from its complexity and limited available information. Firstly, the distinction 
between  the  accumulation  of  imbalances  and  movements  caused  by  long-term  trends  or 
cyclical  fluctuations  determined  by  fundamentals  is  not  straightforward.  Indeed,  only  a 
minority of excessive credit growth events have resulted in financial crises. For the remainder 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of  the  cases,  some  are  followed  by  periods  of  below-trend  economic  growth  while  others 
have contributed to financial deepening and to long-term growth. 
Secondly,  the  fact  that  a  crisis  is  a  rare  event  implies  that  the  information  needed  to 
determine its probability of occurrence requires long time series, not always available. Also, 
given the innovation and the dynamism that characterise the financial system, very long time 
series,  even  if  existent,  would  probably  not  be  adequate  to  characterise  the  actual  inter-
linkages between the financial sector and the real economy. This implies that most models 
are  derived  from  a  probability  distribution  obtained  from  a  small  sample  (given  the  limited 
information)  and,  therefore,  may  not  be  very  representative  of  the  reality  they  intend  to 
explain. 
These  difficulties,  although  challenging  to  policy  implementation,  should  not  deter  policy 
action, as they do not preclude the effectiveness of policy instruments. 
Policy instruments 
The main goal of macro-prudential policy is to mitigate systemic risk, thereby contributing to 
financial stability. Its implementation implies the definition of a set of instruments, aimed at 
increasing  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector  and  at  reducing  the  fluctuations  of  the 
financial  cycle.  In  essence,  most  of  the  instruments  defined  for  these  purposes  are  not 
different  from  those  used  by  micro-prudential  policy.  The  main  distinction  is  the  fact  that 
macro-prudential  instruments  are  activated  as  a  function  of  the  cycle  or  structural 
characteristics of the system as a whole, and not according to the specific risk profile of a 
given institution. 
Over the recent years extensive work has been undertaken [by macro-prudential authorities, 
the  ESRB,  and  the  academia]  to  operationalise  the  instruments  for  the  implementation  of 
macro-prudential  policy.  This  includes:  identifying  a  set  of  indicators  or  risk  parameters  to 
trigger the activation of the instrument; analysing their transmission mechanism and impact 
in order to allow a more precise calibration and; identifying possible loopholes or unintended 
effects  that  could  undermine  their  efficacy.  Many  of  today’s  presentations  covered  these 
topics and I am very grateful to Carsten Detken, Javier Suarez, Gabriel Galati, Deniz Igan, 
Caterina  Mendicino  and  Ola  Melander  for  sharing  with  us  the  conclusions  of  their  work.  If 
there is an area of research with great value for policy-making theirs is definitely one. 
Despite  this  progress,  the  task  is  far  from  concluded.  The  limitations  in  systemic  risk 
measurement  also  condition 
implementation  of  macro-prudential  policy,  namely 
concerning  the  estimation  of  the  parameters  of  an  equation  linking  the  activation  of  the 
instruments  to  a  systemic  risk  measure.  This  is  particularly  relevant  for  time-varying 
instruments, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, which rely in the timely identification 
of the phase of the credit cycle. In addition, the still limited experience with macro-prudential 
instruments confers a significant degree of uncertainty to their impact. 
Furthermore, policy-making needs to take into account that the transmission mechanism of 
policy  instruments  may  not  be  static,  but  evolving  with  innovation  and  the  structure  of  the 
financial system, and that the impact of policy measures can be undermined by unintended 
effects.  These  can  emerge  from  the  interaction  and  substitutability  between  the  regulated 
and  non-regulated  sector  (i.e.  shadow  banking)  and  from  the  resulting  possibility  of 
regulatory arbitrage. 
In  addition  to  the  more  traditional  macro-prudential  instruments,  there  are  other  tools  – 
perhaps, more appropriately categorized in a middle-ground between risk analysis and policy 
tools – that can also be very useful for macro-prudential purposes. Stress tests and funding 
and capital plans can be helpful with decisions concerning the activation and calibration of 
both  micro  and  macro-prudential  policies,  to  the  extent  that  they  help  to  identify  potential 
vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system  and  provide  a  mechanism  to  address  them  pre-
emptively. 
the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Over the last 4 years, Banco de Portugal has relied in stress-tests and FCP to monitor the 
8 most significant Portuguese banking groups. These tools provide us with an assessment of 
banks’ financial projections and a framework to check whether these aggregated projections 
are consistent with a baseline scenario and can sustain adverse macroeconomic conditions. 
For  example,  FCP  provide  us  with  information  on  bank’s  business  models  and  on  their 
projections concerning credit, deposits and other relevant variables. When aggregated, these 
projections  can  be  assessed  against  overall  macroeconomic  scenarios  allowing  us  to 
evaluate: whether total credit projections are consistent with the financing needs of the real 
economy;  whether  credit  is  concentrated  on  more  vulnerable  over-priced  sectors;  whether 
projected  deposits  are  compatible  with  the  expected  evolution  of  labour  market  conditions 
and households savings. 
Both FCP and stress-tests can be more forward-looking than other policy instruments in the 
sense  that  the  imposition  of  capital requirements  would  not  depend  on  the  analysis  of  the 
past  situation  but  on  a  forward  looking  assessment  of  scenarios  that  would  occur  under 
normal or adverse conditions. They could also be a useful to identify correlated exposures, 
as institutions would be facing the same type of stress. 
Policy framework and governance 
In spite of the difficulty in detecting financial systemic risk, the absence of policy intervention 
prior to the crisis cannot solely be attributed to this. In fact, episodes of high credit growth, 
excessive  securitisation,  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  resulting  from  over-indebtedness 
were  easily  observable  in  many  countries.  However,  their  potential  systemic  impact  was 
largely overlooked in the years preceding the financial crisis. 
This situation led to the recognition that, in addition to methods to detect and mitigate risks, a 
profound reform in the financial regulatory framework and governance was needed in order 
to ensure timely and appropriate policies. Alienor Margerit gave us an excellent presentation 
of the extensive reforms that the EU framework for macro-prudential policy underwent over 
the latest years. It is clear from her presentation, as well as from Fernando Restoy’ remarks, 
that the EU regulatory framework is very specific given the needed inter-action of different 
countries in the context of a monetary union and a banking union. 
Even though the competence for macro-prudential policy remains in the  national authority, 
several mechanisms were put in place to ensure the coordination among different national 
authorities, allowing them to address cross-border issues. 
This  need  for  coordination  also  encompasses  different  regulators  at  the  national  level  in 
order to address risks that stretch across regulatory and supervisory perimeters. Exposures 
of  the  banking  sector  to  the  shadow-banking  sector  and  misconduct  (i.e.  misselling  of 
financial  products,  market  manipulation,  rule  completion  breaches  or  money  laundering) 
require  that  banking,  insurance,  market,  and  other  regulators  work  closely  together  to 
develop coordinated tools to address macro-prudential risks. This joint effort is, however, at 
an early stage, given the diversity of mandates and governance structures among regulators. 
In  addition  to  coordination  issues,  there  are  many  aspects  inherent  to  macro-prudential 
policy, which constitute a challenge to governance. 
The  preventive  nature  of  macro-prudential  policy  implies  the  activation  of  instruments  at  a 
stage  where  risks  have  not  yet  materialised.  As  this  policy  would  contribute  to  reduce 
economic  activity  at  a  time  when  risks  are  not  yet  perceptible,  public  support  for  policy 
implementation may be low. On the other hand, limiting the amplitude of the financial cycle 
during a downturn normally implies the imposition of less strict regulatory requirements at a 
time when risks are evident. This may lead markets to question the resilience of the financial 
system  and  cause  a  possible  conflict  with  the  immediate  objectives  of  micro-prudential 
policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Furthermore, the wide scope of its main objective – financial stability – and the lack of clear 
metrics  for  its  measurement  also  raise  issues  concerning  the  accountability  of  macro-
prudential  policy.  As  opposed  to  monetary  or  fiscal  policies,  the  results  for  which  the 
policymaker should be held accountable for are less clear. The efficacy of a policy measure 
in  preventing  a  crisis  cannot  be  verified  either  –  a  crisis  that  has  not  occurred  does  not 
usually leave a trace. 
Therefore, in addition to a governance ensuring independence and legitimacy of the macro-
prudential  authorities,  it  may  be  important  to  establish  a  mechanism  limiting  a  possible 
inaction  in  the  presence  of  future  vulnerabilities.  In  this  context,  following  a  ESRB 
recommendation,  several  macro-prudential  authorities,  including  Banco  de  Portugal,  have 
recently  publicized  their  “macro-prudential  toolkits”.  These  toolkits,  by  establishing  a  clear 
framework defining the goals of macro-prudential policy, the set of instruments available to 
target various types of relevant risks and the conditions for their activation (normally guided 
by a set of relevant indicators), can confer greater predictability and transparency to macro-
prudential policy. In addition, by clarifying the utilization of instruments for macro-prudential 
purposes,  they  contribute  to  avoid  potential  conflicts  with  the  micro-prudential  authority 
related to the competence to activate instruments, due to the similarity of tools between the 
two policies. 
In conclusion ... 
Although  the  challenges  with  the  implementation  of  macro-prudential  policy  are  still 
substantial and no crisis is identical to the previous one, I am confident that the regulatory 
framework is now in a much better shape to tackle systemic financial risks than it was a few 
years  ago.  As  in  many  aspects  macro-prudential  policy  is  still  a  work  in  progress, 
improvements may arise from several fronts. 
The  significant  amount  of  research  being  undertaken  to  better  identify  systemic  risks  will 
most likely bear fruits. In the meantime, the limitations concerning risk measurements can be 
reduced  by  combining  information from  different  models  or  indicators. The great  variety  of 
risk  measures  provided  by  various  models  can  capture  different  perspectives  of  existent 
risks, minimizing the relevance of each model’s shortcomings. 
Greater  experience  with  the  application  of  instruments  will  provide  more  information  about 
their transmission mechanisms and possible unintended effects. Meanwhile, regulators could 
reduce the uncertainty concerning the impact of policy measures by taking advantage of the 
existent complementarities among different instruments. 
I believe that these developments will gradually confer more robustness to macro-prudential 
policy, enhancing policy accountability and credibility. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
