  Stephen S Poloz: The way home – reading the economic signs 
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Greater 
Charlottetown  Area  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward  Island,  19  May 
2015. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. It’s always a pleasure to be here in Prince Edward Island. 
The  Confederation  Bridge  has  simplified  the  trip  since  it  first  opened.  If  you  come  to  the 
Island by car, you don’t have to navigate the waters of the Northumberland Strait. According 
to  the  Canadian  Encyclopedia,  the  shallow  waters  of  the  strait  are  susceptible  to  strong 
currents, tides and turbulence. Even the most skilled sailor can find it challenging to read the 
winds and waves, and to judge all the cross-currents. 
If only the Canadian economy had a similar bridge. We’ve been on a voyage of rebuilding 
since the Great Recession. But the trip has been longer and more complicated than previous 
recoveries  because  of  all  the  cross-currents  acting  on  the  economy.  Not  only  are  the 
headwinds of the global financial crisis still blowing, but now  we’re also  dealing with lower 
prices for oil and other key commodities, which previously were a key growth engine for us. 
The  implications  for  income  and  investment,  and  the  adjustments  they’re  causing  across 
sectors and regions, may take years to work themselves out. 
The drop in oil prices is the most recent setback for the Canadian economy, but it’s not the 
first time we’ve had a shock that’s had different effects from one region to another. That’s 
what you’d expect in a large country that’s rich in diverse commodities. 
Certainly, people working in the lobster fishery or the mussel and oyster farming sector have 
seen their share of challenging periods in the past. But companies have adjusted and made 
quality improvements that are allowing aquaculture and the fishery to strengthen as the U.S. 
economy recovers. At the same time, P.E.I.’s exports are benefiting from diversification into 
sectors such as aerospace and biotechnology, as well as expansion into emerging markets, 
particularly Asia. 
P.E.I.’s  experience  is  an  example  of  the  resilience  that  we’ve  seen  in  the  past  across 
Canada. We’re expecting to see it again as the economy continues on its way home, toward 
natural, self-sustaining, and balanced growth at full capacity. 
What I’d like to do today is talk about how the voyage is going. We don’t have a bridge, so 
the  economy  can’t  avoid  the  choppy  waters.  However,  there  are  signs  that  tell  us  we’re 
headed in the right direction. It’s important for the Bank to be transparent about the signs we 
watch, both because financial markets should make their own judgments about what we will 
do and because our monetary policy works better when Canadians understand what we’re 
doing, and why. 
The long voyage home 
We begin the story with the Great Recession of 2008–09, which saw Canadian exports fall 
further  than  in  any  recession  since  the  Second  World  War.  Policy-makers  everywhere 
reacted aggressively to the global turmoil. Here in Canada, governments boosted spending, 
and  the  Bank  of  Canada  cut  interest  rates  in  steps  until  we  reached  the  effective  lower 
bound. These moves, combined with a strong financial system, gave Canada one of the best 
post-crisis experiences among advanced economies. It’s fair to say that households did most 
of the heavy lifting to keep the economy growing, borrowing to buy houses and cars. We also 
enjoyed good growth in our energy sector with high oil prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  But  growth  that  relies  too  much  on  low  interest  rates  and  household  spending  isn’t 
sustainable.  We  kept  looking  for  signs  that  a  natural  sequence  was  taking  over  in  the 
economy: recovery in the United States and elsewhere would lead to stronger exports. This 
would  spark  increased  business  confidence,  investment  and  employment.  Ultimately,  we 
would  achieve  natural,  balanced  growth,  with  exports  representing  a  larger  share  and 
inflation sustainably at its 2 per cent target. 
Exports  began  to  recover  after  the recession  but  stalled  in  2012  and  2013,  despite strong 
U.S. growth. So, at the Bank of Canada, we did a lot of work to figure out what was going on, 
looking at how the drivers of exports were evolving, including the competitiveness of various 
sectors and the loss of productive capacity in the wake of the recession. 
We  looked  at  31  categories  of  Canada’s  non-energy  exports  and  found  that  about  half  of 
them were underperforming relative to what you’d expect, given the state of foreign demand 
and  the  exchange  rate.  We  further  broke  those  weak  categories  into  about  2,000  specific 
goods or services and discovered that about 500 of those had been shrinking since the early 
2000s, falling to almost nothing. We were able to show that much of this drop was due to 
companies in these areas ceasing to operate in Canada. So, their productive capacity has 
been permanently lost. 
But  what  about  the  other  half  of  the  non-energy  export  sector?  Those  15  categories  are 
expected  to  lead  the  recovery  in  exports,  based  on  factors  such  as  their  ties  to  U.S. 
residential and business investment and their historical sensitivity to exchange rates. The list 
includes  such  categories  as  machinery  and  equipment,  fabricated  metal  products, 
aerospace, and pharmaceuticals; in many of these, we’re seeing growth right here in P.E.I. 
That’s not to mention services, which includes tourism. 
If  you  think  back  to  last  summer,  the  economic  outlook  was  looking  pretty  positive.  The 
export  groups  that  we  predicted  would  lead  the  recovery  were  starting  to  perform  as  we 
expected. The price of Brent crude oil was over US$100 per barrel, and the global economy 
seemed set to strengthen as economic headwinds were dissipating. The U.S. economy was 
looking especially good, and this was making us more confident that the natural progression 
was taking place and we were on our way to solid, self-sustaining growth. 
Of course, we all know what happened next. The plunge in oil prices late in the year threw 
the recovery off course. It was clear that the shock would be a net negative for the Canadian 
economy and would be a downside risk for our inflation target, so we lowered our key policy 
interest rate in January. 
But while it was clear that the oil price shock represented a setback, it has been no simple 
task to figure out how far off course it is taking us, or for how long. From the data we have 
seen to date, the impact began to show up in the closing months of 2014. For example, oil rig 
counts began to fall, and this showed up in employment statistics in the oil patch, especially 
in Alberta. 
This  impact  contributed  to  weaker  growth  in  housing  and  general  consumption  spending. 
Manufacturing faltered as we moved into 2015, partly because many inputs for the oil patch 
are manufactured, but also because of bad weather and a temporary slowdown in the U.S. 
economy. When all the numbers are in, we expect that output in the Canadian economy will 
have been basically flat in the first quarter. 
Our view, as we set out in last month’s Monetary Policy Report, is that growth will rebound 
partially  in  the  second  quarter.  While  there’s  still  a  risk  that  lower  oil  prices  could  have  a 
greater  impact,  the  signs  we  have  seen  to  date  lead  us  to  believe  that  the  impact  of  the 
shock is proving to be faster than we first expected, but not larger. Meanwhile, the positive 
forces we had already identified continue to build and should be buttressed by our interest 
rate cut and the lower dollar. By the second half of the year, we expect those positive forces 
to dominate the picture and have us back on track to reach full capacity around the end of 
2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What are we basing this outlook on? For one thing, the January interest rate cut is working. 
In an atmosphere where many other central banks were also loosening policy, the reaction to 
the  cut  made  financial  conditions  in  Canada  significantly  easier.  The  cut  will  benefit 
households  with  a  mortgage,  though  this  will  be  partly  offset  by  a  reduction  of  income  for 
savers. 
Let me put this in concrete terms. Bank staff estimate that a household that has renewed a 
$100,000 mortgage would save about $250 in interest payments this year. That’s on top of 
the roughly $500 that the average household will save in gasoline costs. But the really big 
impact  is  for  companies  with  existing  export  contracts  in  U.S.  dollars,  which  would  see  a 
bump in cash of roughly $15 billion to $20 billion over the course of the year from a three-
cent drop in the Canadian dollar. They will also be in a stronger position to compete for new 
export contracts in the future. 
Of course, I must underscore how uncertain the outlook is. In recent weeks, both oil prices 
and the Canadian dollar have moved higher. We will need to carefully consider these and 
other economic and financial developments and how Canadian companies and households 
are likely to react in the months ahead. 
Now, let’s look at the categories of non-energy goods exports that we said should lead the 
recovery. As a whole, this group – which adds up to more than $185 billion – grew by almost 
15 per cent in nominal terms over the 12 months through March. Among industries present in 
P.E.I., aerospace is up by 20 per cent nationally, while machinery and equipment has risen 
by about 11 per cent. 
Here  in  P.E.I.,  exports  climbed  by  22  per  cent  last  year,  with  the  total  now  exceeding 
$1 billion.  Tourism,  another  industry  important  to  both  P.E.I.  and  Canada  as  a  whole,  also 
had a good year. Foreign tourism demand grew 4.5 per cent to reach the highest level in a 
decade.  Given  lower  gasoline  prices  and  the  level  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  we  can  expect 
further growth this year. 
What  about  the  next  steps  in  the  sequence:  the  increases  in  company  investment  and 
employment? When we spoke with executives in our most recent Business Outlook Survey, 
we heard that companies that are benefiting from stronger U.S. demand are starting to feel 
capacity pressures, and a growing share of exporters tell us that capacity constraints would 
limit  their  ability  to  meet  a  sudden  increase  in  demand.  These  constraints  suggest  that 
companies  may  need  to  step  up  investment.  To  be  sure,  there  is  some  spare  capacity 
among  the  groups  that  we  expect  to  lead  the  recovery.  However,  outside  of  the  energy 
sector, the outlook for investment is positive. 
In terms of employment, there have been some recent signs that the labour market is starting 
to  function  better.  Let  me  give  you  some  examples. We’ve  seen  long-term  unemployment 
decline and more prime-age people taking part in the labour force. Employment vacancies 
have been trending upward since early last year, suggesting that it’s getting easier to move 
jobs.  Statistics  Canada’s  Survey  of  Employment,  Payrolls  and  Hours  shows 
that 
manufacturing jobs have trended up for the past six months or so. However, the Bank’s own 
indicator shows that there’s still slack in the labour market, and we probably still haven’t seen 
the full impact of the oil price shock reflected in the employment data. 
Let me mention one other bellwether, and that’s firm creation. While part of the increase in 
business investment will be companies adding to their own capacity, another part will be the 
creation of new companies. 
Historically, growth in the population of companies tends to be weak when the economy is 
weak and stronger when the economy improves. New firms are the prime creators of new 
jobs in the economy. They are also linked with productivity growth, because new companies 
are  often  innovators  or  take  advantage  of  innovations  to  exploit  niches  and  develop  new 
products.  New  companies  tend  to  be  more  productive  than  firms  that  have  gone  out  of 
business  and  can  also  pressure  existing  companies  to  be  more  productive.  As  such,  they 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  contribute  to  the  growth  in  productivity  that  is  ultimately  key  to  improving  our  standard  of 
living. 
Recessions  are  painful  and  require  adjustments.  Companies,  and  sometimes  entire 
industries, shut down, often never to return. But after the destruction, new ones are born that 
help drive the next wave of growth. 
We  know  that  we  lost  a  lot  of  exporting  companies  during  the  recession.  Growth  in  the 
population of companies hit a low point in Canada in 2009, similar to what took place in the 
United  Kingdom  and  United  States.  After  the  recession,  the  number  of  U.K.  companies 
started  growing  sharply  in  2012  and  the  U.S.  population  took  off  in  2013.  The  Canadian 
rebound hasn’t been as quick as we’d like, but recent data have been encouraging. We will 
continue to follow these data closely. 
Of course, these aren’t the only signs we’re following. We look at a wide range of economic 
data and supplement these with various surveys. We also consult with business leaders, and 
our regional offices are invaluable in these efforts. All of this information helps us make our 
best judgment about how much slack there is in the economy or, in other words, how far we 
are from home. 
Judging inflation 
Our  judgments  about  inflation  are  truly  important  because  they  get  at  the  heart  of  our 
mandate at the Bank of Canada. It’s our job to promote the economic and financial welfare of 
Canadians, and the best way we can do that is to provide an environment of low and stable 
inflation. Why? Because low and stable inflation allows consumers and businesses to make 
decisions  about  the  future  with  greater  certainty.  Since  the  Bank  began  targeting  inflation 
almost 25 years ago, interest rates have been lower and economic growth has been stronger 
and more stable. 
We know that inflation is fundamentally driven by the amount of economic slack we have. If 
the  economy  is  operating  below  its  capacity,  that  will  put  downward  pressure  on  inflation. 
However, inflation is a noisy indicator. All sorts of things can affect it on a month-to-month 
basis.  Our  task  of  judging  the  underlying  trend  of  inflation  has  been  complicated  by  the 
events of the past year. We have the oil price shock, which is pushing inflation down, and the 
weaker  Canadian  dollar,  which  is  pushing  inflation  upward.  On  top  of  these,  a  number  of 
one-off factors have been affecting inflation. All of this has certainly made it more challenging 
to distinguish the trend from the temporary. 
Because  it  takes  up  to  two  years  for  interest  rate  movements  to  have  their  full  impact  on 
inflation,  it  wouldn’t  make  sense  to  respond  to  every  wiggle  in  the  inflation  rate.  Our 
challenge is to look through the temporary effects and aim our policy at the movements in 
inflation that are persistent. And to do that, we need to make our best judgment of what the 
underlying trend of inflation is. 
We  have  a  number  of  measures  that  we  use  to  help  us  make  this  judgment.  The  most 
familiar of these is commonly referred to as our measure of “core inflation,” which excludes 
eight of the most volatile components of the consumer price index and removes the effects of 
changes in indirect taxes. But we have several other methods, models and tools, which help 
us judge the underlying trend of inflation. 
Next year, the Bank will renew its inflation-targeting agreement with the government. As we 
have been saying for months, among the issues we are looking at in this renewal is whether 
we should continue to highlight one measure of the underlying trend of inflation, and, if so, 
whether our current measure of core inflation should continue to be the main guide. 
At the most recent reading, total CPI inflation was 1.2 per cent, well below our 2 per cent 
target. This was largely  due to the drop in gasoline prices, which  we treat as a temporary 
effect.  Total  CPI  inflation  would  be  even  lower  –  quite  close  to  zero  –  were  it  not  for 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  exchange rate effects and some one-time factors. Meanwhile, core inflation was 2.4 per cent, 
but  it  is  also  being  boosted  by  exchange  rate  effects  and  some  one-time  factors,  such  as 
meat and communications prices. 
That’s  a  lot  of  moving  parts,  and  the  impact  of  each  of  these  transitory  forces  has  to  be 
estimated; we can’t just measure them. So we have to use a lot of judgment to gauge the 
combined  impact.  Clearly,  these  estimates  are  subject  to  a  fair  degree  of  error.  But  our 
current best judgment is that the underlying trend of inflation is somewhere around 1.6 per 
cent  to  1.8  per  cent.  To  get  the  trend  moving  back  toward  2  per  cent,  it’s  essential  that 
excess capacity in the economy be used up. With growth set to accelerate over the rest of 
the year, the underlying trend should eventually converge with total CPI inflation at the 2 per 
cent target when the economy returns to full capacity. 
Here’s the bottom line on our voyage. We’re still a ways from home; we project it will take 
18 months or so to get there. That’s if growth turns out as we expect and we aren’t hit by 
other  storms  or  cross-currents  on  the  way,  whether  headwinds  or  tailwinds.  But  our  best 
judgment is that we should get home – at full capacity and with inflation sustainably at 2 per 
cent – around the end of 2016. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  with  a  few  words  about  what  home  will  look  like  when  we  do  get  there. 
While some companies disappeared during the Great Recession, never to return, others are 
emerging in new industries. At the same time, the economy of the future will be shaped by 
demographic forces that have been decades in the making. The retirement of the baby-boom 
generation  is  affecting  the  economy’s  growth  potential,  which  is  one  reason  why  interest 
rates will probably remain lower than in the past. 
Recent events make it clear that we live in an uncertain world. Navigating the waters of the 
global economy is always challenging: you never know when a sudden storm will emerge to 
blow us off course. That’s why we take a risk-management approach to monetary policy. We 
look  at  all  the  data,  derived  from  the  latest  models  and  tools,  and  supplement  these  with 
intelligence from companies and survey data. Ultimately, though, we make judgments – both 
about  the  degree  of  economic  slack  in  the  economy  and  the  implications  for  our  goal  of 
inflation control. 
By being transparent about the signs we’re watching, we are trying to help financial markets 
make  their  own  judgments  about  the  economy’s  prospects.  These  opinions  are  important 
because they serve as a useful check on our own analysis. 
It has been a long voyage, and it isn’t over yet. But you can be sure that the Bank of Canada 
will continue to  work toward bringing the economy home, at full capacity and  with inflation 
sustainably on target, so we can fulfill our mandate to support the economic welfare of all 
Canadians. 
I would like to thank Pierre St-Amant, Marc-André Gosselin and David Amirault for their help 
in preparing this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
