  Mark Carney: Three truths for finance 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Harvard  Club  UK  Southwark  Cathedral  dinner,  London, 
21 September 2015. 
 I am grateful to Ben Nelson and Iain de Weymarn for their assistance in preparing these remarks. 
“All  England  is  an  American  shrine,  full  of  rich  records  of  the  makers  of  their 
nation.”1 
None more so than glorious St Saviour’s – Southwark Cathedral – a few minutes south of the 
river from here. 
Its connection with Harvard makes it something of an American Mecca. 
For at St Saviour’s was baptised a Southwark butcher’s son who became benefactor to the 
university that would bear his name. 
John Harvard would doubtless be delighted with what has become of the 320 volumes and 
£800 he bequeathed to posterity: a college founded for the avoidance of leaving “an illiterate 
ministry to the churches, when our present ministers shall lie in the dust”. 
From that bequest sprung one of the world’s leading universities. A community dedicated to 
its motto: Veritas – truth; the pursuit of truth in the sciences, humanities, even economics. 
Truth to create a better world. 
But recall Pilate’s question that has echoed down through the centuries from the pulpits of 
Southwark Cathedral to Memorial Church, “Truth? What is truth?” 
Indeed, upon arriving at Harvard, students and visitors are confronted with a curious truth, or 
rather, three untruths. 
In Harvard Yard sits a statue of John Harvard, seated on a bronze throne, commemorating 
1638, the year of the university’s founding. 
Tour-guides relish in pointing out that, in fact: 
No-one knows what John Harvard looked like, so it is unlikely to be a great resemblance of 
him; 
The college wasn’t founded in 1638, but two years earlier; 
And it wasn’t founded by John Harvard, but by the Court of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, 
which first voted to set up the university. 
The “Statue of the Three Lies” is part of Harvard legend. 
The Three Lies in question are harmless fun. But they should remind us how deeper untruths 
can persist, embodied in monuments or sustained by conventional wisdom and mores. 
We gather this evening almost seven years to the day that the failure of Lehman Brothers 
shattered conventional wisdom and laid bare three lies about finance. 
Unlike the statue’s three lies, those falsehoods have had lasting consequences. 
                                                
1   So  wrote  F  A  Mackenzie,  a  Quebec-born  writer  and  journalist  who  was  the  Daily  Mail’s  travelling 
correspondent  in  the  Far  East  in  the  early  1900s.  See  Mackenzie,  F  A,  “American  shrines  in  Britain”, 
Chapter XLV  in  Hammerton,  J  A  (ed.)  (1926),  Wonderful  Britain:  its  highways,  byways  and  historic  places, 
Vol. 2.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Lie I: “This time is different” 
The  first  lie  is  the  four  most  expensive  words  in  the  English  language:  “This  Time  Is 
Different.”2 
This misconception is usually the product of an initial success, with early progress gradually 
building into blind faith in a new era of effortless prosperity. 
It  took  a  revolution  in  macroeconomic  policy  to  help  win  the  battles  against  the  high  and 
unstable inflation, rising unemployment and volatile growth of the 1970s and ‘80s. 
In no small part due to my predecessors, particularly Lord King, the stagflationary threats in 
the  UK  were  tamed  by  a  new  regime  for  monetary  stability  that  was  both  democratically 
accountable and highly effective. 
Clear remits. Parliamentary accountability. Sound governance. Independent, transparent and 
effective policy-making. These were the great successes of the time and their value endures 
today. 
But these innovations didn’t deliver lasting macroeconomic stability. Far from it. 
Price  stability  was  no  guarantee  of  financial  stability.  An  initially  healthy  focus  became  a 
dangerous  distraction.  Against  the  serene  backdrop  of  the  so-called  Great  Moderation,  a 
storm was brewing. 
Debt was building rapidly, with total non-financial debt in the G7 doubling to 300 per cent of 
GDP  between  Prime  Ministers  Thatcher  and  Brown.  In  the  US  and  UK,  this  was  led  by 
massive  increases  in  household  debt,  the  likes  of  which  were  last  seen  during  the  Great 
Depression. 
Several  factors  drove  this  debt  super-cycle  including  demographics  and  the  stagnation  of 
middle-class  real  wages  (itself  the  product  of  technology  and  globalisation).  In  the  US, 
households had to borrow if they wanted to increase consumption. “Let them eat cake” had 
become “let them eat credit.” 
Financial innovation made it easier to do so. And the ready supply of foreign capital from the 
global savings glut made it cheaper. 
Most importantly – and this is the lie – complacency among individuals and institutions, fed 
by a long period of macroeconomic stability and rising asset prices, made this remorseless 
borrowing seem sensible. 
After  the  reckoning,  the  ensuing  crisis  and  feeble  recovery  would  look  very  much  like  all 
others that have followed prolonged credit booms. 
Policymakers  quickly  disassociated  themselves  from  the  received  wisdoms  of  the  Great 
Moderation  and  scrambled  to  re-learn  the  lessons  of  the  Great  Depression.  That  process 
continues today as central banks contemplate current parallels with the late 1930s. 
The aftermath of the global credit crunch has been severe. Global output is now ten percent 
below  its  pre-crisis  trend,  and  with  global  nominal  growth  running  two  percentage  points 
short of its pre-crisis average, the challenge of deleveraging remains acute. 
These challenges appear more pressing as some are now questioning their faith in another 
new era – China’s glide path to global economic hegemony. China’s economic miracle over 
                                                
2   For  an  extensive  survey,  see  Reinhart,  C  and  Rogoff,  R,  (2009),  This  time  is  different:  eight  centuries  of 
financial folly, Princeton University Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the past three decades is extraordinary, and it has helped to lift billions of people around the 
world  out  of  poverty.  However,  the  Chinese  economy’s  post-crisis  performance  has  been 
bolstered by a large build-up of debt, which has more than doubled to reach almost 200% of 
GDP. 
As  had  been  the  case  in  the  advanced  world,  the  Chinese  debt  boom  owed  much  to  an 
explosion of shadow banking, which relates to the second lie of finance. 
Lie II: “Markets always clear” 
Beneath the new era thinking of the Great Moderation lay a deep-seated faith in the wisdom 
of markets. Policymakers were captured by the myth that finance can regulate and correct 
itself  spontaneously.  They  retreated  too  much  from  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  roles 
necessary to ensure stability.3 
That “markets always clear” is the second lie, one which gave rise to the complex financial 
web that inflated the debt bubble. 
In markets for goods, capital, and labour, evidence of disequilibria abounds. 
In goods markets, there is ‘sluggishness everywhere’. Left to themselves, economies can go 
for sustained periods operating above or below potential, resulting, ultimately, in excessive or 
deficient inflation. 
Yet efficient market forces ‘should’ bring about changes in prices sufficient to equate demand 
with potential, leaving inflation as a purely monetary phenomenon. 
In labour markets, there is ‘rigidity everywhere’. Rather than fluidly adjusting to equate the 
demand for labour with its supply, periods of deficient labour demand can persist, sustaining 
mass unemployment and joblessness. 
Yet efficient market forces “should” eliminate these disequilibria by having wages adjust to 
ensure full employment always and forever. 
Monetary Policy is not only a response to these rigidities; it is made effective by them. 
In  capital  markets,  there  is  ‘momentum  everywhere’.  From  bonds  to  equities  to  currencies 
and  commodities,  past  winners  seem  to  enjoy  further  winning  streaks,  while  past  losers 
persist in trailing behind.4 
Yet  efficient  market  forces  ‘should’  eliminate  these  predictable  movements  before  they 
become apparent. 
 The belief that markets always clear had two dangerous consequences.5 
First, if markets always clear, they can be assumed to be in equilibrium; or said differently “to 
be  always  right.”  If  the  received  wisdom  is  that  the  market  is  efficient,  then  bubbles  can 
neither  be  identified  nor  their  potential  causes  addressed.  Such  thinking  dominated  the 
(non)reaction to US subprime and housing booms. 
Consider  that  many  market  participants  find  it  more  profitable  to  anticipate  each  other’s 
behaviour than to divine the fundamentals. 
                                                
3   For a review of this broader phenomenon, see Padoa-Schioppa, T (2010), “Markets and government before, 
during and after the 2007-20xx crisis”, The Per Jacobsson Lecture, June. 
4   Asness, C, Moscowitz, T and Pedersen, L (2013), “Value and momentum everywhere”, Journal of Finance, 
LXVIII, No. 3, June. 
5   See  also  Turner,  A  (2010),  “Market  efficiency  and  rationality:  why  financial  markets  are  different”,  Lionel 
Robbins Memorial Lectures, London School of Economics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The game of guessing what everyone else  is guessing (everyone else is guessing…) was 
familiar  to  Keynes  who  observed  that  too  often  investors  “devote  [their]  intelligences  to 
anticipating  what  average  opinion  expects  the  average  opinion  to  be”.6  This  disconnect 
between decisions and fundamentals feeds market volatility and capital misallocation. 
Such  “beauty  contest”  dynamics  afflict  not  only  sophisticated  investors,  but  also  many 
mortgage lenders and homebuyers, particularly during a “new era”. 
If  house  prices  can  only  go  up,  it’s  possible  to  borrow  large  multiples  and  pay  off  future 
obligations with the capital gains that will almost surely follow. 
Such “rational” behaviour fuelled the credit binge that ultimately led to the global crisis. 
Second,  if  markets  always  clear,  they  should  possess  a  natural  stability.  Evidence  to  the 
contrary must be the product of market distortions or a result of incomplete markets. 
Much of financial innovation springs from the logic that the solution to market failures is to 
build new markets on old markets.7 Progress through infinite regress. 
During the Great Moderation, such thinking became an organising principle for financiers and 
policymakers.  The  latter  pursued  a  light  touch  regulatory  agenda  in  quest  for  the  perfect 
world of complete markets first described by the economists Arrow and Debreu.8 
Their world imagines self-interested, atomistic agents, coolly calculating odds over all future 
possible  states  of  the  world,  writing  and  trading  contracts  with  each  other,  all frictionlessly 
enforced, all achieving mutually beneficial – indeed socially optimal – outcomes. 
Of  course,  markets  only  clear  in  textbooks.  In  fact  people  are  irrational,  economies  are 
imperfect, and nature itself is unknowable. 
When  imperfections  exist  (which  is  always),  adding  markets  can  sometimes  make  things 
worse. 
Take  credit  derivatives,  which  were  supposed  to  complete  a  market  in  default  risk  and 
thereby improve the pricing and allocation of capital. 
Financial alchemy seemed to have distributed risk, parcelling it up and allocating it to those 
who wanted most to bear it. 
However, the system had only spread risk, contingently and opaquely, in a way that actually 
ended up increasing it. Risk ended up concentrated on the balance sheets of intermediaries 
that  were  themselves  capital  constrained.  With  the  fates  of  borrowers  and  lenders  tied 
together  via  hyper-globalised  banks  and  markets,  problems  at  the  core spread  violently  to 
the periphery. 
A truth of finance is that the riskiness of an asset depends on who owns it. When markets 
don’t always clear, the ultimate owner may be surprised to find what they do own. When that 
surprise is – or is thought to be – widespread, panic ensues. 
The impossibility of completing markets was not the only practical problem with the pre-crisis 
approach. Even if markets were perfect, nature itself is unknowable. 
Recall that the Arrow-Debreu world relies on people being able to calculate the odds of each 
and every possible scenario. 
                                                
6   Keynes, J M (1936), Chapter 12. 
7   But economists of a more nuanced persuasion pointed out as far back as the 1950s that this logic is flawed. 
See Lipsey, R and Lancaster, K (1956), “The general theory of the second best”, Review of Economic Studies, 
24(1).  
8   Arrow, K and Debreu, (1954), “Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy”, Econometrica, 22 (3). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Then they can trade contracts and insure each other against risks they are unwilling to bear. 
A moment of introspection reveals the absurdity of these assumptions as a description of the 
actual world. 
More often than not, even describing the universe of possible outcomes is beyond the means 
of the mere mortal, let alone ascribing subjective probabilities to those outcomes. 
That is genuine uncertainty, as opposed to risk, a distinction made by  Frank Knight in the 
1920s.9  And  it  means  that  market  outcomes  reflect  individual  choices  made  under  a 
pretence of knowledge. 
The swings in sentiment that result – pessimism one moment, exuberance the next – don’t 
reflect  nature’s  odds,  but  our  own  assessments of  them,  inevitably  distorted  by  Keynesian 
“animal spirits”.10 
In the end, belief in the second lie that “markets always clear” meant that policymakers didn’t 
play their proper roles in moderating those tendencies in pursuit of the collective good. 
Lie III: “Markets are moral” 
Despite these shortcomings, well-managed markets can be powerful drivers of prosperity. 
By financing firms to hire, invest and expand, they drive growth. 
By  opening  up  cross-border  trade  and  investment  they  create  new  opportunities  for 
businesses and savers. 
By  transferring  risks  to  those  most  willing  to  bear  them,  they  help  households  and 
businesses insure against the unexpected. 
But if left unattended, markets can be prone to excess and abuse. 
That  is  particularly  so  in  financial  markets,  where  means  and  ends  too  easily  become 
conflated. Value becomes abstract and relative. And the pull of the crowd can overwhelm the 
integrity of the individual. 
Lie three is that “markets are moral” – that financial capital can take for granted the social 
capital necessary for markets to fulfil their promise. 
Consider  the  example  of  fixed  income,  currencies  and  commodities  markets,  which 
historically have relied heavily on informal codes and understandings. 
That  informality  was  well  suited  to  an  earlier  age.  But  as  markets  innovated  and  grew,  it 
proved wanting. 
Markets need to retain the consent of society – a social licence – to be allowed to operate, 
innovate and grow. 
Repeated  episodes  of  misconduct  (such  as  the  Libor  and  FX  scandals)  have  called  that 
social licence into question. 
To restore it, we need to rebuild fair and effective markets. 
                                                
9   Knight, F (1921), Risk, uncertainty and profit, Signalman Publishing. 
10   In  Keynes  (1936),  Chapter  12,  he  wrote:  “Even  apart  from  the  instability  due  to  speculation,  there  is  the 
instability due to the characteristic of human nature that a large proportion of our positive activities depend on 
spontaneous optimism rather than on a mathematical expectation, whether moral or hedonistic or economic. 
Most, probably, of our decisions to do something positive, the full consequences of which will be drawn out 
over many days to come, can only be taken as a result of animal spirits – of a spontaneous urge to action 
rather  than  inaction,  and  not  as  the  outcome  of  a  weighted  average  of  quantitative  benefits  multiplied  by 
quantitative  probabilities.”  Keynes,  J  M  (1936),  The  General  Theory  of  Interest,  Employment  and  Money, 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Not markets that collapse when there is a shock from abroad. 
Not markets where transactions occur in chat rooms. 
Not markets where no one appears accountable for anything. 
Real markets are professional and open, not informal and clubby. Their participants compete 
on merit rather than collude online. 
Real markets are resilient, fair and effective. They maintain their social licence. 
But real markets don’t just happen; they depend on the quality of market infrastructure. 
Robust market infrastructure is a public good in constant danger of under-provision because 
the best markets innovate continually. This inherent risk can only be managed if all market 
actors, public and private, recognise their responsibilities for the system as a whole. 
future  complacency,  policy 
True lies 
So this time is the same. Markets don’t always clear. And we can suffer from their amorality. 
So what to do with such knowledge? And how to retain it? 
The  longer  you  are  a  central  banker,  the  more  careful  you  become  in  your  forecasts. 
“Irreducible  uncertainty”  and  “multiple  equilibria”  are  occupational  hazards;  so  if  you  must 
predict the future, you are tempted to hedge heavily and must modify constantly. 
But in two areas I’m confident: the Three Lies of John Harvard will continue to be revealed 
for years to come, and with time, the Three Lies of Finance will come to enjoy widespread 
credulity again. 
To resist their siren calls, policymakers and market participants must bind ourselves to the 
mast. That means building institutional structures that make it harder to act on the lies. 
Over the past seven years great strides have been made. 
Take “this time is different”. 
To  guard  against 
frameworks  have  been  substantially 
overhauled. The Bank of England has been given formal responsibility to maintain financial 
stability  and  has  considerable  powers  to  promote  it.  In  anticipation  of  problems,  we  have 
increased bank capital and tightened mortgage standards. We are using our monetary policy 
and macroprudential policy tools in concert, so that a low for long interest rate environment 
can promote both price and financial stability. 
Moreover, when next time proves no different, the financial intermediaries at the core of the 
system will be on a substantially stronger footing. 
Their capital requirements have already increased ten-fold and their liquid assets are up four-
fold. Their trading assets are down by a third and intra-bank exposures by two-thirds. 
Though we cannot hope to eliminate systemic risk altogether, reform is ending Too Big To 
Fail for individual institutions. The combination of eliminating the implicit public subsidy and 
increasing  capitalisation  will  reduce  distorted  pricing  by  banks  and  shift  activity  to  market 
based finance. Choice and competition – real market forces – are increasing. 
Recognising that “markets do not always clear” has spurred several initiatives. 
Reform is improving risk transfer by untangling the complex web of derivatives and creating 
simple, comparable and transparent securitisations. 
The Bank is helping to change the plumbing of markets so that they are more resilient to the 
failure of individual counterparties, and we are working to understand better the dynamics of 
market  liquidity  given  changes  to  regulation,  trading  strategies  and  the  rise  of  asset 
management. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Bank  has  also  overhauled  the  way  we  provide  liquidity  by  expanding  the  range  of 
collateral  as  well  as  the  number  and  types  of  counterparties.  And  recognising  that  the 
instability of markets may mean they occasionally seize up, the Bank now stands ready to 
act as a Market Maker of Last Resort. 
And  the  third  lie?  In  order  to  help  restore trust and fairness, financial  reform  is  re-building 
real markets. 
Earlier this year, we published the Fair and Effective Markets Review. It identified multiple 
root  causes  of  misconduct  in  FICC  markets  that  contributed  to  an  ethical  drift  and  an 
abdication of responsibility. 
A good start has been made in addressing these shortcomings including through changes to 
compensation regimes, clarifying the responsibilities of senior management and overhauling 
the structure of some markets to reduce opportunities for abuse. 
But more is needed. 
Individuals  need  to  be  held  more  to  account  for  their  actions.  Doing  so  will  require  new 
common  standards,  cast  in  clear  language,  better  training  and  higher  qualifications,  and 
ways to ensure that when employees are fired, their history is known to those who consider 
hiring them. 
Firms must take responsibility for the system by improving the understanding of acceptable 
trading  practices.  The  industry  has  already  taken  the  lead  by  establishing  a  new  FICC 
Markets Standards Board that will establish common standards of market practice that are 
well understood, widely followed and keep pace with markets. 
Regulators need to take a tough line on market abuse, including extending criminal sanctions 
to every corner of currency and fixed income markets. 
And  to  consign  the  Age  of  Irresponsibility  well  and  truly  to  history,  London,  as  the  largest 
global market, must lead the development of global standards. 
With the main building blocks of reform in place, now is the time to take stock. It’s vital that 
we – public authorities and private market participants – work together to reverse the tide of 
ethical  drift.  This  cannot  be  a  one-off  exercise;  we  need  continuous  engagement  so  that 
market infrastructure keeps pace with market innovation. 
This November, the Bank of England will hold an Open Forum at the Guildhall. 
The  programme,  published  tomorrow,  has  been  developed  not  just  by  policymakers  and 
market  participants,  but  also  representatives  of  well-known  companies,  trade  unions, 
academia, the media and civil society. 
An  online  portal  for  registration  will  open  tomorrow  morning,  with  attendance  determined 
shortly thereafter by a ballot.11 Debate on social media is already underway,12 and there will 
be live webcasts available on the day. The Open Forum is open to everyone, because the 
UK’s markets matter for everyone. 
Our goal is to discuss the prospects for market functioning, where regulations might overlap 
or conflict, and whether enough has been done to build the real markets the UK deserves. 
Markets that merit social licence and reinforce social capital. 
In the best traditions of Harvard, we should use the compass of Veritas, so that, when we too 
are  dust,  others  can  build  on  our  legacy,  as  so  many  have  on  that  of  Southwark’s  John 
Harvard. 
                                                
11   See www.boeopenforum.co.uk. 
12   See #BoEOpenForum. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
