  Christopher Kent: Adjustments in the labour market 
Address  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, to the Economic Society of Australia (Qld) Luncheon, Brisbane, 14 August 2015. 
 I thank Kathryn Davis, David Jacobs, Alexandra Rush, Martin McCarthy, Andrew van der Saag and Madeleine 
McCowage for excellent assistance in preparing these remarks. 
Introduction 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  Queensland  branch  of  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia  for 
hosting  this  event  today,  and  special  thanks  to  Michael  Knox  and  Tim  Wonhof  for  their 
assistance. 
The  Australian  economy  has  been  growing  at  a  moderate  pace  since  commodity  prices 
peaked  around  four  years  ago.  While  mining  investment  has  declined  substantially  since 
then and has further to fall, resource exports have grown strongly and are expected to do so 
for  some  time.  Fiscal  consolidation  at  state  and  federal  levels  has  weighed  somewhat  on 
growth. And the exchange rate has been relatively high compared to what one might have 
expected  given  these  circumstances.  At  the  same  time,  very  low  interest  rates  have  been 
supporting demand. 
So there have been a range of different forces affecting the economy. Overall, spare capacity 
in product and labour markets has gradually increased. The unemployment rate rose from 
around 5 per cent in 2011 to about 6¼ per cent towards the end of last year (Graph 1). Also, 
the participation rate and the ratio of employment to the working age population had fallen to 
relatively  low  levels.  But  in  the  face  of  significant  structural  change  in  the  economy,  the 
labour  market  has  been  adjusting  more  smoothly  over  the  past  year  than  we  had  been 
expecting. 
Graph 1 
  When  we  put  our  forecasts  together  earlier  this  year,  we  expected  moderate  growth  of 
economic activity for some time. The GDP growth that has been recorded suggests that we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  have been about right on this so far. We also thought this would lead to a further gradual 
increase in the unemployment rate and be accompanied by subdued growth of employment. 
But,  since  then,  the  labour  force  data  have  been  a  bit  better  than  expected.  While  the 
unemployment rate remains high, looking through the month-to-month volatility, it has been 
little changed since the latter part of last year. In addition, employment growth has picked up 
and has been running ahead of the growth in the working-age population. 
How  can  we  reconcile  better-than-expected  labour  market  outcomes  with  only  moderate 
growth in GDP? The focus of my remarks today is on four possible explanations for this: 
• 
First, recently released data revealed that population growth, and hence the growth 
of the labour force, has been a bit lower than we’d assumed. In the face of fewer 
employment  opportunities  over  recent  years,  particularly 
in  resource-related 
industries,  there  has  been  a  decline  in  the  (net)  number  of  immigrants  arriving  to 
seek work. While we’d expect the labour supply to respond to economic conditions 
in Australia relative to those overseas, the adjustment has been more pronounced 
than earlier anticipated. 
Second,  wage  growth  declined  as  spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market  increased. 
This  is  also  unsurprising,  but  the  adjustment  has  been  larger  than  suggested  by 
historical experience. This has probably encouraged more employment growth than 
otherwise and improved the cost competitiveness of Australian labour. It also acts 
as a signal to encourage adjustment in the supply of labour. 
Third,  the  composition  of  growth  may  be  playing  a  role  in  boosting  demand  for 
labour.  While  aggregate  economic  activity  has  grown  at  a  below  average  pace, 
conditions in labour-intensive parts of the economy seem to have improved. 
Finally, the key sources of data – the labour force survey and the national accounts 
– are both subject to measurement error and are often revised. It is possible that the 
current data are providing a noisy signal of what is actually happening. 
   I’ll  go  over  each  of  these  points  in  turn  and  then  come  back  to  a  discussion  of  the  likely 
implications of these developments for the economic outlook. 
Recent developments 
Changes in population growth 
As  recently  as  May,  official  data  suggested  that  the  working-age  population  had  been 
growing by about 1.7 per cent per annum, and it was expected to continue at about that rate 
in  the  foreseeable  future.  However,  the  most  recent  data  from  the  ABS  suggest  that  total 
population growth had dropped quite noticeably over the past year or so, from 1.8 per cent 
over 2012 to 1.4 per cent over 2014 (Graph 2). Estimates of the working-age population are 
expected to be revised down accordingly in coming months. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  The decline in population growth was mainly the result of a decline in net immigration. This 
appears  to  be  related  to  the  weakening  in  Australia’s  labour  market  conditions  relative  to 
those  of  other  countries.1  Of  course,  people  on  temporary  skilled-work  visas  (so-called 
“457s”) leave for home when their jobs end. But there has also been a large decline in net 
immigration from New Zealand. Labour market conditions in New Zealand tightened at the 
same time that spare capacity in the Australian labour market increased. The reconstruction 
activity  in  Christchurch  took  off  around  the  time  that  construction  in  Australia’s  resource 
sector  was  winding  down.  Indeed,  the  key  mining  states  of  Queensland  and  Western 
Australia have seen the largest declines in net immigration. It also appears that Australia’s 
intake of international students has not picked up to the extent previously anticipated.2 
The unexpected slowdown in population growth implies somewhat less rapid growth of our 
labour force than otherwise. This means that the GDP growth that we have recorded may 
have been closer to the recent growth in the economy’s productive capacity than previously 
thought.  If  so,  that  would  have  left  the  economy  with  a  little  less  spare  capacity  (a  lower 
unemployment  rate)  than  had  been  expected.  Yet  this  can  only  account  for  part  of  the 
unexpected adjustment in the labour market. Most notably, labour demand has also picked 
up. That is evident in the rise in employment relative to the population. 
                                                
1  Net immigration had been very high for a number of years and was an important means of addressing skill 
shortages.  Immigration  was  especially  significant  in  Queensland  and Western  Australia,  where  demand  for 
labour  from  the  resource  investment  boom  was  most  concentrated.  As  the  mining  investment  boom  has 
wound down, and demand for labour has weakened, these states have also seen the largest declines in net 
immigration.  For  more  detail  see  RBA  (2015),  “Box  D:  Implications  of  Lower  Population  Growth  for  the 
Australian Economy”, Statement on Monetary Policy, August, pp 44–46. 
2  This discussion is based on data from Statistics New Zealand and the Department of Education and Training. 
More detail on net immigration by visa category will be released by the Department of Immigration and Border 
Protection in due course. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The role of wage growth 
One  possible  explanation  for  the  pick-up  in  labour  demand  relates  to  the  large  decline  in 
wage  growth  over  recent  years  (Graph  3).3  The  behaviour  of  wages  during  the  current 
episode has been comparable to the experience around the 1990s recession. This is true of 
nominal wage growth and growth in the cost of the labour required to produce a unit of output 
–  so-called  unit  labour  costs.  The  decline  in  real  wage  growth  has  also  been  of  a  similar 
magnitude to the early 1990s. 
Graph 3 
While  we  would  normally  expect  wage  growth  to  decline  after  a  period  of  subdued  labour 
demand, the decline over recent years has been larger than suggested by historical experience. 
In particular, although the unemployment rate has increased by much less than during the early 
1990s recession, the decline in wage growth during the two episodes has been similar (Graph 4). 
  Graph 4 
                                                
3  This section of my talk draws extensively from Jacobs D and A Rush (2015), “Why is Wage Growth so Low?”, 
RBA Bulletin, June, pp 9–18. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  There are a number of reasons why  wage growth may have been so responsive this time 
around.4 For example: 
• 
During  the  boom  in  commodity  prices  and  mining  investment,  wage  growth 
increased noticeably and the exchange rate appreciated significantly. This left our 
wage costs in foreign currency terms quite high once commodity prices had peaked. 
The subsequent fall in commodity prices was associated with relatively low growth 
of  wages  over  recent  years  which,  alongside  some  depreciation  of  the  exchange 
rate, is helping to restore earlier levels of competitiveness.5 
Wages  may  have  become  more flexible  over  time. It may  be  that there  has  been 
some  general  shift  in  the  bargaining  power  of  labour.  Also,  those  industries  most 
exposed  to  the  declines  in  commodity  prices  and  mining  investment  have  a  high 
share of individual employment contracts. Furthermore, the relatively long span of 
the current episode means that most employment contracts have been renegotiated 
during the period of subpar economic growth over recent years. 
 Whatever  the  reason  for  the  very  low  growth  in  labour  costs,  wage  flexibility  has  assisted 
with the labour market adjustment. Changes in relative wages act as an incentive for labour 
to  move.  Strong  increases  in  wages  in  the  resource  sector  (in  both  domestic  and  foreign 
currency terms) helped to attract the labour needed to undertake the substantial increase in 
mining  investment  (including  from  overseas).  All  of  these  things  are  now  adjusting  in  the 
other  direction. The  weaker  wage growth  and  decline  in  job  opportunities  relative  to  many 
other  countries  has  probably  contributed  to  the  lower  growth  in  the  population  and  labour 
supply. In addition, low wage growth across the economy has enabled firms to employ more 
labour than would otherwise have been the case. Even so, my sense is that low wage growth 
only goes some way to explaining the recent pick-up in labour demand. 
Compositional change 
While aggregate GDP growth has been moderate, the composition of economic activity may 
have underpinned a rise in the demand for labour of late. Growth in consumption, dwelling 
investment  and  net  service  exports  have  increased  over  the  past  year  even  though  GDP 
growth has eased back a touch in year-ended terms (Graph 5). 
                                                
4  See Jacobs and Rush (2015) for a more comprehensive discussion of these points. 
5  This sort of adjustment was to be expected. For a conceptual framework see Plumb M, C Kent and J Bishop 
(2013),  “Implications  for  the  Australian  Economy  from  Strong  Growth  in  Asia”,  RBA  Research  Discussion 
Paper No 2013–03. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Graph 5 
 Surveys  of  businesses  suggest  that  for  firms  providing  services  to  households,  conditions 
increased  substantially  from  mid  2013  and  have  been  well  above  average  over  the  past 
couple  of  years  (Graph  6).  Surveyed  conditions  are  also  above  average  for  those  firms 
providing business services. Meanwhile, conditions for firms producing or distributing goods 
remain a bit below average. The surveys of business conditions by sector line up reasonably 
well with employment growth across sectors. 
 Graph 6 
 As an interesting aside, variation in business conditions and employment across sectors is 
consistent with the weakness in business investment. The service sectors, on average, have 
relatively  low  capital-to-labour  ratios  compared  to  those  producing  or  distributing  goods 
(Graph 7). So in order to satisfy increased demand for services, firms in those sectors have 
hired  more  workers  but  they  didn’t  need  to  invest  much  in  machinery  &  equipment  or 
buildings & structures (compared with firms producing goods). 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 7 
   This compositional change in demand towards more labour-intensive industries is part of a 
longer-running trend. But there is also a cyclical element to it as mining investment unwinds 
and  growth  of  dwelling  investment  and  consumption  (which  is  increasingly  dominated  by 
services) has picked up.6 Also, the decline in the exchange rate has encouraged Australians 
and foreigners to direct more of their spending to Australian tourism, education and business 
services. 
Measurement error 
It’s possible that the decline in population growth, very low wage growth and compositional 
change can explain the adjustments evident in the labour market data even though growth of 
aggregate  economic  activity  has  remained moderate.  It  is  also  possible, however,  that  the 
picture before us of recent labour market outcomes and economic conditions more generally 
are being clouded by usual measurement difficulties. 
There is naturally a degree of statistical noise in the labour force survey, as with any survey 
data,  so  it  might  be  providing  a  noisy  read  of  true  labour  market  conditions.7  While  it  is 
possible that the labour force survey is overstating the true state of demand for workers, it is 
worth  noting  that  the  separate  ABS  survey  of  businesses’  vacancies  is  broadly  consistent 
with  the  improvement  in  labour  market  demand  of  late.  Vacancies  have  picked  up  for  the 
nation as a whole since 2013, and most of the growth has been driven by New South Wales 
and Victoria, and rising vacancies in the service sector (Graph 8). Meanwhile, vacancies in 
Queensland and Western Australia, and for the goods sector, have been weak. 
                                                
6  See  Kent  C  (2014),  “Ageing  and  Australia’s  Economic  Outlook”,  Address  to  the  Leading  Age  Services 
Australia (LASA) National Congress, Adelaide, 20 October. 
7  The  labour  force series  do  not  yet  reflect  recently  released  data  showing  lower  rates  of  population growth, 
which implies that the number of people in each labour force category and their growth rates are overstated. 
However,  measures  expressed  relative  to  the  size  of  the  labour  force  or  population  (such  as  the 
unemployment rate or employment-to-population ratio) are likely to be largely unaffected by revisions that will 
flow from the new population data. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Graph 8 
   Similarly, the national accounts data might be understating the growth of economic activity 
over  the  past  year  or  so.  Some  research  by  my  colleagues  shows  how  sizeable  these 
revisions can be.8 For example, since 1998, the first estimate of year-ended GDP growth has 
been revised, on average, by ½ percentage point over subsequent years. 
While we can’t be sure of the recent past, more difficult still is to know what the future holds. 
The economic outlook 
We  have  recently  published  an  account  of  our  latest  economic  forecasts  in  the  August 
Statement on Monetary Policy.9 I won’t repeat the details of those forecasts, but I want to 
highlight the implications of the four issues I’ve just discussed. 
Changes in population growth 
The implications of lower population growth for the outlook for spare capacity depends on its 
effect on aggregate demand and aggregate supply. 
Lower  population  growth  implies  slightly  less  growth  in  aggregate  demand  for  goods  and 
services.  At  the  margin,  there  will  not  be  as  many  new  residents  spending  on  items  for 
consumption or needing housing. Nor will there be as many new workers that we’d need to 
equip with capital to do their jobs. 
Despite  the  downward  revisions  to  a  number  of  elements  of  aggregate  demand,  the 
unemployment  rate  is  forecast  to  be  a  little  lower  than  previously  anticipated.  In  part,  this 
owes  to  the  slightly  better  starting  point  for  the  unemployment  rate  than  earlier  assumed. 
Also the unemployment rate is forecast to remain little changed from levels of recent months 
over the course of the rest of this year and next. This is because the change in the growth of 
                                                
8  Bishop  J,  T  Gill  and  D  Lancaster  (2013),  “GDP  Revisions:  Measurement  and  Implications”,  RBA  Bulletin, 
June, pp 11–22. 
9  RBA (2015), ‘Economic Outlook’, Statement on Monetary Policy, August, pp 65–71. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  aggregate  demand  is  expected  to  be  broadly  matched  by  lower  growth  of  the  economy’s 
productive capacity, which in turn follows from less growth in the labour force. 
While  that  is  what  we  expect,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  about  both  the  rate  of 
population growth and its effects on spare capacity. An example might be helpful here. Lower 
immigration  may  reflect  a  fall  in  the  number  of  people  coming  to  Australia  who  have  a 
relatively high propensity to participate in the labour force, such as New Zealanders of prime 
working  age.  In  that  case,  the  implications  for  the  economy’s  productive  capacity  will  be 
larger than if lower immigration was mostly due to fewer international students. It is not clear 
whether these two groups would have the same effect on demand: both need to feed, clothe 
and house themselves, but both have different incomes and different propensities to spend 
and save. 
Another source of uncertainty affecting the outlook for supply is productivity growth. That is 
especially hard to forecast at any time. What signal can we take from recent developments? 
Not  much,  is  my  sense.  We  know  that  the  lower-than-expected  population  growth  will  (by 
itself) lead to a downward revision to employment growth. For the given growth in GDP that 
has been recorded of late, this implies that existing estimates of recent productivity growth 
are somewhat understated. In other words, they are likely to be revised a bit higher when the 
ABS  revise  employment  growth.  However,  recent  measures  of  productivity  growth  tend  to 
provide a very noisy signal of future productivity growth. So we haven’t changed our view on 
the outlook for productivity growth. We assume that it will be around its historical average. 
The role of wage growth 
What about relevance of the low growth of wages for the economic outlook? 
It is reasonable to be concerned that low wage growth might weigh on labour income thereby 
weakening the outlook for aggregate demand. But that is an incomplete description of a more 
complicated  process.  In  particular,  wages  tend  to  lag  the  business  cycle,  not  lead  it.  This 
makes  sense  for  at  least  two  reasons.  First,  many  wages  are  determined  by  fixed-term 
agreements. So they take time to adjust to changing conditions in the labour market. Second, 
even after growth of output picks up, it can take time to absorb spare capacity in the labour 
market, and hence for wage pressures to build. 
Given this, the low wage growth of recent years is perhaps best viewed as a response to the 
spare capacity that has built up in the labour market over time. If wage growth had not been 
so responsive, it is likely that employment would have been less and the unemployment rate 
higher than we’ve seen. So even though low wage growth works to constrain the growth of 
incomes  for  those  who  are  employed,  it  also  supports  incomes  by  encouraging  more 
employment than otherwise. 
Compositional change 
The  outlook  for  the  labour  market  will  also  depend  on  the  composition  of  future  labour 
demand.  When  looking  for  signs  of  a  turnaround  in  economic  activity,  attention  is  often 
focused on the tangible things that tend to be measured more easily – the goods we produce 
and consume, and the machinery, buildings and infrastructure in which we invest. Yet a large 
and increasing share of our economic activity consists of the services we provide, use and 
enjoy as well as the investment in intangible capital, including human capital. 
About half of us are now employed in the service industries. This has increased from about 
45 per cent two decades ago. But over the past three years, the additional workers employed 
in service industries have outnumbered the extra workers employed in the goods sector by a 
factor  of  five  to  one  (347  thousand  compared  to  only  73  thousand).10  Those  employed  in 
                                                
10  While  the  raw  numbers  of  employees  have  not  yet  been  revised  in  light  of  new  population  estimates  (see 
footnote 7), the relative status of each sector is not likely to change significantly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  services  require  relatively  less  capital  to  work  with  than  workers  employed  in  the  goods 
sector. And as I mentioned, while some of the recent improvement in the services sector is 
likely to be part of a longer-running trend, part of it may also be cyclical. Signals from the 
various  business  surveys,  the  ABS  labour  force  and  vacancies  data,  can  provide  a  timely 
guide as to the health of the increasingly important services sector. 
Measurement error 
This  leads  me  back  to  the  issue  of  measurement.  Output  and  productivity  in  the  services 
sector is more difficult to measure than it is for the goods sector. But with services becoming 
an increasingly large share of the economy, finding better ways to measure the contribution 
of  services  to  the  economy  in  real  terms  is  going  to  become  increasingly  important  in 
understanding our performance. The key issue is that improvements in the quality of services 
are hard to measure, but these are an important source of improvements in our economic 
wellbeing. 
Conclusions 
In summary, the economy has been adjusting to the various headwinds it has faced in recent 
years. Even though measured GDP growth has remained moderate over the past year or so, 
the unemployment rate appears to have stabilised and demand for labour has picked up. 
Flexibility in labour markets has played a role in these adjustments. One aspect of that has 
been  some  change  in  the  growth  of  the  labour  supply  via  changes  in  the  extent  of 
immigration. Another aspect of the adjustment has been the very low growth of wages, which 
has helped to support a pick-up in employment growth. 
The improvement in labour demand is consistent with the rise in consumption growth, strong 
dwelling  investment  and  an  increasing  contribution  to  GDP from  net  services  exports. It  is 
also  apparent  in  improvements  in  survey  measures  of  business  conditions,  vacancies  and 
employment in the service sectors. 
While there is uncertainty around our forecasts, including because of the usual noise in data, 
these  developments  suggest  that  there  will  be  slightly  less  spare  capacity  in  the  labour 
market  than  earlier  anticipated.  In  particular,  we  expect  the  unemployment  rate  to  be  little 
changed from recent levels over the next 18 months or so, before declining in 2017. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
