  Jens Weidmann: 2015 – an outlook for the year ahead 
Welcome speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the New 
Year  reception,  held  by  the  Chambers  of  Industry  and  Commerce  in  Ulm  and  Bodensee-
Oberschwaben, Biberach an der Riß, 15 January 2015. 
 1.  Opening remarks 
Dr Kulitz, Mr Grieshaber, ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to make my first public appearance of 2015 outside Frankfurt in the heart of 
Upper Swabia, not all that far away from my home town of Backnang, and would like to thank 
you very much for inviting me to your joint New Year reception. 
The turn of every year brings with it a number of changes – and the transition from 2014 to 
2015 is no exception here in Germany. Perhaps you have mixed feelings regarding some of 
these. 
A general statutory minimum wage of €8.50 per hour was introduced in Germany at the start 
of  the  year.  While  this  is  unlikely  to  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  labour  market  thanks  to 
buoyant economic conditions, the inherent risk in the long term – the magnitude of which will 
also  depend  on  the  framework  set  out  by  the  Minimum  Wage  Commission  –  is  that  it  will 
have a dampening effect on employment and cause structural unemployment to rise. 
The  cap  on  rents  that  is  to  be  introduced  in  the  near  future  aims  to  protect  renters  in 
“overstretched housing markets” against sharp rent increases. This regulation could likewise 
have  undesirable  adverse  side  effects  in  the  long  term  by  resulting  in  reducing  housing 
construction, particularly in big cities. 
What  is  more,  Greece  is  once  again  keeping  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  on  tenterhooks. 
Greeks will go to the polls in ten days’ time and there are fears that a new Greek government 
will not be able to stand by the commitments previously made by the country, leading to a 
resurgence in uncertainty surrounding the euro area’s economic outlook – uncertainty which 
had been thought, by some, to be a thing of the past. This also shows that it will take time to 
tackle the underlying causes of the crisis. 
The  new  year  also  brought  with  it  sweeping  changes  in  the  banking  sector,  such  as  the 
European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), which entered into force at the 
start of 2015. Banks will pay into the European Single Resolution Fund (SRF) from this year 
onwards. This fund aims to ensure, commencing in 2016, that the creditors of a struggling 
bank will be held liable for its losses, not the taxpayer. The use of taxpayers’ money as a last 
resort rather than the first line of defence in future is an important step in the right direction. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) took up its supervisory role under the aegis of the 
ECB  several  weeks  before  2014  drew  to  a  close.  European  banks  are  now  supervised 
subject to uniform, stringent standards. 
At the same time, the “lifeblood of the global economy” – as oil is sometimes known – has 
fallen significantly in price. You and I are benefiting directly from this as consumers because 
now  we  do  not  have  to  spend  as  much  on  fuel  and  heating.  But  enterprises  are  also 
benefiting from lower production costs, which they are likely to pass on, at least in part, to 
consumers and otherwise use to shore up their earnings. 
All in all, the fall in oil prices is akin to a stimulus package, which is likely to give economic 
growth  in  Germany  and  the  euro  area  an  additional  boost.  Pleasant  surprises  in  terms  of 
growth should therefore not be ruled out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  What this means for monetary policy is currently the subject of intense debate in the ECB 
Governing Council – and, as you can imagine, I would be more than happy to discuss this 
with you today. 
However,  there  is  what  is,  in  principle,  a  sensible  agreement  in  place  in  the  Governing 
Council  not to  speak  publicly  about current  monetary  policy  in  the  week  leading  up  to  our 
monetary policy meeting. Hence, I cannot touch upon this topic in my speech today, but you 
may already be familiar with my stance. 
Instead,  I  would  like  talk  this  evening  about  two  long-term  developments  for  which  key 
changes of course are ultimately already set: the growth prospects of the German economy 
and the future of the European monetary union. 
Speaking of the future, the media reported at the start of the year that the late 1980s time-
travel comedy Back to the Future Part II was set in 2015 and took the opportunity to examine 
the  extent  to  which  Hollywood’s  representation  of  the  future  back  then  compared  with 
present-day reality. 
As  expected,  reality  differs  dramatically  from  what  was  presented  on  screen.  Some 
developments, however, were predicted accurately, such as the proliferation of flat screens 
and  video  calls.  But  other  predictions  still  seem  visionary  today:  hoverboards  that  fly  over 
water  have  not  yet  been  invented  in  2015,  much  less  flying  cars.  By  contrast,  the  world’s 
largest sportswear manufacturer announced that it would be releasing self-tying shoes this 
year – an homage to the film, of course. 
Reminiscing about Back to the Future highlights the fact that making predictions is never an 
exact science. In other words, if you would permit me to tell a corny joke: “It’s hard to make 
predictions,  especially  about  the  future.”  But  this  must  not  be  allowed  to  result  in 
developments  that  are  foreseeable  in  the  long  term  being  ignored.  The  aim  is  rather  to 
address identifiable challenges at an early stage, not least when it comes to safeguarding 
Germany’s enduring economic prosperity. 
2.  Growth prospects of the German economy 
Ladies and gentlemen, in comparison with other euro-area countries, it sometimes appears 
as though the grass is greener in Germany. In point of fact, the German economy is currently 
in  good  condition:  German  enterprises  have  their  costs  under  control,  are  not  heavily 
indebted,  for  the  most  part,  and  sell  attractive  products  on  the  global  markets.  They  are 
therefore in a position to take advantage of the opportunities arising from a recovery in the 
euro area and in international trade. 
The  domestic  economy  is  also  in  good  shape.  Unemployment  is  low  –  indeed,  here  in 
Biberach, you are close to full employment – household debt is not excessive and real wages 
are rising markedly. Overall, general government debt includes virtually no new borrowing. 
Furthermore,  as  stated  earlier,  both  the  economy  and  consumers  are  benefiting  from  the 
sharp decline in oil prices, which have fallen by more than 50% in the space of six months. 
If  we  look  back  a  few  years,  we  can  see  that,  thanks  to  structural  reforms  in  the  labour 
market and the budget consolidation that was already underway, Germany was in a relatively 
good position when the financial and debt crisis hit. It was as a result of this, as well as the 
responsible actions of wage bargainers and sound corporate balance sheets, that Germany 
recovered comparatively quickly from the biggest economic downturn in post-war history. 
As  reported  by  the  Federal  Statistical  Office  this  morning,  the  German  economy  grew  by 
1.5% in real terms in 2014. However, the relative strength of the German economy at present 
should not obscure the fact that major challenges lie ahead and that this favourable position 
is not assured in the long run. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In particular, unfavourable demographic trends will dampen future growth. However, energy 
policy shifts, the impact of the globalisation and digitisation of the economy as well as debt 
levels, which are persistently high even in Germany, are also weighing on the country’s long-
term growth prospects. 
The  Bundesbank  estimates  that  potential  output,  which  is  supposed  to  reflect  long-term 
growth prospects, is currently growing by around just 1% a year and will continue to do so up 
to the end of the decade. This is truly underwhelming. In the 1990s, potential growth was still 
at 1½%, and averaged 1¼% even in the 2000s. 
Looking ahead to the distant future, Germany will be near the bottom of the league table for 
growth  by  international  standards.  Studies  conducted  by  the  OECD  show  that,  by  2060, 
Germany  will  have  grown  at  the  slowest  rate  of  all  42  countries  surveyed,  primarily  as  a 
result of the demographics-driven decline in the number of hours worked. Per capita growth 
looks  somewhat  better  because  of  the  falling  population.  However,  here  too,  Germany  is 
mired in mediocrity by European standards, according to the OECD. 
With an annual trend growth rate of just over 1% by 2060, the OECD predicts that Germany 
will grow only half as quickly as all the OECD countries together; OECD experts expect the 
annual growth of the global economy (OECD plus eight large emerging market economies) 
to be as high as 3%.1 
So there are no grounds for complacency. There will be a shift in global economic weights, 
and  safeguarding  sustainable  growth  will  remain  a  major  economic  policy  challenge.  But 
what economic policy action might be taken to improve long-term growth prospects? 
The  reflex  response  that  is  often  heard,  particularly  with  regard  to  Germany,  is  that 
investment  needs  to  be  stepped  up,  the  reasoning  being  that  use  of  state-of-the-art 
technology usually leads to greater productivity. 
But private investment has to follow an economic rationale: it cannot be prescribed by the 
state. The state’s main role is, rather, to create a suitable environment by means of astute 
policymaking. Besides, a more differentiated view is called for when discussing a supposed 
weakness in investment in Germany. 
The total real investment ratio in Germany – which is to say private and government gross 
capital formation to gross domestic product (GDP) – has indeed been markedly lower since 
the beginning of the 2000s than in the 1990s, and is lower than in the rest of the euro area. 
Yet it must be taken into consideration that the weaker investment levels in the last decade 
were  largely  the  result  of  the  end  of  the  1990s  construction  boom  following  German 
reunification. If one looks at the non-construction investment ratio, there is no longer even a 
difference between Germany and the rest of the euro area.2  
And if we look at private investment including construction, we find that the ratio for the euro 
area  excluding  Germany  has  now  returned  to  levels  close  to  the  German  ratio,  the 
construction boom having come to an abrupt end in a number of euro-area countries. Thus, it 
cannot  be  claimed,  either  by  historical  or  international  standards,  that  the  German  private 
sector  is  investing  too  little.  Besides,  it  is  not  the  case  that  investment  boosts  growth 
prospects per se. 
In  fact,  to  say  so  is  to  put  the  cart  before  the  horse.  Better  prospects  for  growth,  and 
therefore for profit, are the best incentive to invest. As I just said, economic policymakers can 
best improve the investment climate by putting favourable conditions in place. 
                                                 
1   See OECD (2013), Long-term Growth Scenarios, OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 1000. 
2   Federal Ministry of Finance (2014), Investitionsschwäche in Deutschland?, in Monatsbericht März, pp 26–33 
(March Monthly Report, German only). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  And what’s the situation as regards public investment? 
In this respect, Germany lags clearly and permanently behind the rest of the euro area. Yet 
this does not justify the generalisation that the state needs to invest more. 
But since public net investment has been negative for some time now, and depreciation is 
higher than gross capital formation, there would indeed seem to be room for improvement in 
this area. 
Infrastructure weaknesses can inhibit growth considerably. I do not subscribe to the view that 
Germany’s  infrastructure  is  decrepit,  however.  It  would  be  more  appropriate  to  speak  of 
regional shortcomings or bottlenecks. 
Nonetheless, public funds should only be invested specifically in areas in which they will pay 
off. This principle, which is a matter of course for private investment, ought to apply to public 
investment, too. 
In the long term, sensible public investment improves economic supply conditions, while in 
the  short  term  it  stimulates  demand.  However,  it  does  not  make  for  a  European  stimulus 
package,  as  some  have  called  for.  This  is  because  Germany  is  not  expected  to  generate 
significant spillover effects on the rest of the euro area by increasing investment. This notion 
is  to  be  rejected,  moreover,  on  the  grounds  that  it  does  not  comply  with  the  principle  of 
individual fiscal responsibility that underpins the Maastricht Treaty. 
The main reason for Germany’s sluggish potential growth is its declining workforce. 
If we could travel by time machine to the year 2060, we would arrive in a country in which 
considerably fewer people live and the share of old people is significantly higher. According 
to the Federal Statistical Office’s coordinated population projection, one-third of Germany’s 
population will be over 65 in 2060. 
The implications for economic output are clear. The working-age population will shrink and 
the  total  number  of  hours  that  can  be  worked  will  decrease.  This  will  dampen  aggregate 
output. 
And in the longer term, demographic change could also have an adverse impact on overall 
productivity, for example as a result of the rising fiscal costs of the ageing population and a 
potential drop in innovation. This will also depress per capita income. 
The  three  main  factors  through  which  these  dampening  macroeconomic  effects  might  be 
countered are 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Although female labour market participation in Germany is well above the OECD average, 
the  share  of  women  in  full-time  employment  is  clearly  below  the  average  for  industrial 
countries. 
To raise the number of women in work, Germany needs to further reconcile work and family 
life. Key improvements have been made over the last few years, notably by providing more 
extensive day care for small children and offering more all-day school facilities. Not only the 
state but many enterprises, too, have come to realise that young, well-qualified women return 
to  work  more  quickly  after  the  birth  of  a  child  if  they  find  good  day  care  services  for  their 
children. These enterprises have invested in in-house day care centres for this very reason. 
However, some aspects of Germany’s tax, social security and transfer system create less of 
an  incentive  to  seek  gainful  employment.  Non-contributory  inclusion  in  the  statutory  health 
insurance  scheme  and  the  childcare  supplement  are  two  such  examples.  The  political 
the number of women in work, 
the length of the working life and 
the immigration of skilled workers from abroad. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  objectives  behind  these  instruments  need  to  be  weighed  against  the  effects  they  have  on 
employment. 
Moreover, as life expectancy increases, so the statutory retirement age needs to be raised to 
curb the effects on the pension level as well as non-wage labour costs. This question has 
been addressed with the progressive increase of the standard retirement age to 67. What we 
need  is  a  longer  working  life,  but  not  only  to  ensure  we  can  afford  to  pay  pensions. 
Enterprises  here  in  the  south-west  of  Germany  know  what  a  shortage  of  skilled  labour 
means. 
Under  these  circumstances,  allowing  long-term  contributors  to  the  statutory  pension 
insurance scheme to draw a full pension at 63 is a step in the wrong direction, since it means 
that skilled workers, in particular, who are in very short supply, no longer participate in the 
labour force. 
Instead  of  setting  incentives  for  employees  to  take  early  retirement,  they  should  be 
encouraged to work longer. That is why the initiative launched by Mr Weise, the head of the 
Federal Employment Agency, is to be welcomed. 
Yet integrating more women into working life and holding on to more older employees will not 
be  nearly  enough  to  compensate  for  the  decline  in  the  potential  labour  force  due  to 
demographic  ageing.  This  makes  the  immigration  of  skilled  workers  from  abroad  both 
desirable  and  necessary  from  an  economic  policy  perspective.  It  should  be  noted  in  this 
context that immigration on a realistic scale can only mitigate the effects of the demographic 
change Germany is experiencing, but it cannot halt – far less reverse – the trend 
Thus, it is all the more important for Germany to present itself as a cosmopolitan country that 
welcomes  new  citizens  and  offers  them  equal  opportunity.  The  chambers  of  industry  and 
commerce are playing an important part in improving the integration of skilled workers from 
abroad. However, the culture of welcoming workers from abroad and of integration is also a 
matter  for  society  at  large.  Immigrants  need  to  be  more  than  just  integrated  into  the 
workplace – they need to become part of our society. 
If fewer and fewer people are going to be in work in Germany in future, it has to be ensured 
that those who do work are more productive. That, too, will help to boost potential growth. 
This  makes  it  especially  important  that  the  work  force  has  received  the  best  possible 
education and training. Studies show that investment in education for very young and pre-
school children in particular pays off in the long run. 
Besides a high level of education and training, the growth potential of an economy hinges 
crucially  on  enterprises’  capacity  to  innovate.  Especially  in  a  competitive  environment,  the 
onus  is  on  enterprises  to  step  up  their  innovativeness  and  their  ongoing  quest  to  achieve 
better and better production processes. 
In a nutshell, more competition creates growth. But in a region that boasts so many leaders 
in the world markets, this is anything but news to you. 
By the same token, positive growth stimuli would also be unleashed if market entry barriers 
were lowered – for instance, by liberalising and deregulating the self-employed professions 
or reducing the bureaucracy involved in business start-ups. 
In  the  World  Bank’s  Doing  Business  table,  Germany  takes  114th  place  in  the  “ease  of 
starting a business” category; in the Global Competitiveness Index of the World Economic 
Forum,  Germany  ranks  106th  out  of  144  countries,  alongside  the  likes  of  Ethiopia, 
Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Chad, in the category on “the number of procedures required to 
start a business”. 
Clearly, there is room for improvement there. 
However, it’s not just at the national level but also at the European level that more can be 
done to increase growth: achieving a single European market for services in the EU could 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  produce similar welfare effects to those experienced when the single market for goods was 
created two decades ago. 
The  creation  of  a  digital  single  market,  in  particular,  promises  great  benefit,  as  Europe 
continues  to  be  strongly  divided  along  national  borders  in  this  field.  At  the  same  time, 
digitalisation does not only concern the services sector but also the industrial sector – just 
think of the keyword “Internet of Things”. 
Incidentally,  the  makers  of  Back  to  the  Future  were  only  able  to  partially  foresee  the 
revolutionary changes in information and communication technology. They assumed that fax 
machines, walkie-talkies and pay phones would still play a major role in 2015. 
Important  stimuli  can  also  be  provided  at  the  transatlantic  level;  for  example,  through  the 
TTIP free trade agreement with the United States. 
The  favourable  position  of  the  German  economy  today  is  no  grounds  for  complacency. 
Policymakers, the economy and society must make considerable efforts to assure continued 
prosperity in the future. 
And in the interests of future generations, the foundations must be laid today for prosperity in 
the future. 
At  times,  it  almost  seems  as  if  economic  policymakers  agree  with  the  words  of  Groucho 
Marx: “Why should I care about posterity? What’s posterity ever done for me?”. 
Future of the European monetary union 
3. 
The medium-term growth prospects of the German economy also depend, of course, on an 
improved economic outlook in the other euro-area countries. This brings me to the second 
part of my presentation: the future of the monetary union. 
3.1   Correcting national misalignments 
The euro-area crisis began approximately five years ago. Although many people refer to it as 
the  “euro  crisis”  for  short,  it  is  not  actually  a  currency  crisis  but  elements  of  a  debt  crisis, 
banking crisis and balance of payments crisis coming together. 
The crisis started in Greece and then spread to other euro-area countries. The causes and 
problems  are  slightly  different  in  each  crisis  country;  however,  in  all  cases,  the  key  to 
overcoming the crisis lies, above all, with the affected countries themselves. 
Following the launch of the single European currency, some of the member states’ fiscal and 
economic policies failed to meet the requirements of a monetary union. 
These  countries,  which  had  significantly  higher  interest  rates  before  the  euro,  observed 
strong capital inflows following the introduction of the euro. Unfortunately, these funds flowed 
to  a  considerable  extent  into  private  or  public  consumption  or  into  an  oversized  housing 
sector. 
In  connection  with  heavily  over-estimated  growth  expectations,  a  decrease 
in 
competitiveness  caused  by  high  wage  settlements,  and  insufficient  financial  regulation, 
considerable  imbalances  built  up,  which  then  contributed  to  the  financial,  economic,  and 
later, sovereign debt crises. 
These structural problems cannot be resolved by printing money. The Eurosystem’s central 
banks have played a significant role in preventing an escalation of the crisis. However, the 
central banks cannot take the place of the necessary adjustment processes. 
It has been clear from the start that these adjustment measures require patience. After all, 
the massive imbalances have built up over an extended period of time. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Therefore, it’s more of a marathon than a sprint when it comes to the adjustment measures. 
Tenacity and perseverance are called for, particularly in the second half of the course. And 
just  as  marathon  runners  race  at  different  speeds,  the  crisis  countries  are  currently  at 
different stages in their marathon course. 
Without  a  doubt,  substantial  progress  in  adjustment  efforts  has  been  achieved  and  reform 
steps initiated. As such, most of the crisis countries have managed to lower their structural 
budget  deficits  considerably.  In  addition,  the  current  account  deficits  have  largely  been 
reduced and some countries are now running a surplus. 
Price  competitiveness  in  the  crisis  countries  has  also  improved  significantly.  Measured  in 
terms of the deflators of total sales, the competitiveness of the economy has improved by 6% 
in Portugal, 9% in Spain and 14% in Greece. 
None of the countries has crossed the finishing line yet but it is becoming increasingly clear 
that  the  efforts  are  bearing  fruit:  unemployment  seems  to  have  passed  its  peak  and  the 
economy is growing again. 
It would therefore be all the more concerning if we were to jeopardise everything that has 
been achieved so far and go backwards in terms of the progress made towards reform. I am 
thinking of Greece in particular here. Since the motif chosen by the Greeks for their €1 coin is 
the animal of wisdom, the owl, I hope it carries with it the insight that the country can only be 
helped in the long term by a consistent process of reform and consolidation. 
However, in order to overcome the euro-area crisis permanently, it is not enough to correct 
misalignments in economic and fiscal policies at the national level. 
3.2   Overcoming weaknesses in the framework of the euro area 
The crisis has also revealed weaknesses in the institutional framework of the euro area. 
This framework can be primarily traced back to the decisions of Maastricht. The objective of 
the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  to  ensure  the  single  monetary  policy  could  fulfil  its  mandate, 
without hindrance, of ensuring price stability in the euro area. The Eurosystem was given far-
reaching independence to safeguard monetary policy against political influence. 
Independence is a monetary policy privilege and in a democratic constitution, it needs to be 
counterbalanced  by  a  central  bank  mandate  with  clear  constraints.  To  assure  this 
independence, the central banks were therefore prohibited from lending to governments or 
purchasing sovereign bonds directly. 
And the Advocate-General at the European Court of Justice also made it clear yesterday that 
the practice of subjecting the ECB to legal constraints is beyond dispute. In addition to the 
ban on monetary financing of the public sector, this means the central bank is prohibited from 
engaging in economic policymaking, even if the line drawn between monetary and economic 
policy can sometimes vary in width. 
Furthermore,  the  national  government  authorities  are  obliged  to  ensure  sound  budgetary 
policy, as excessive borrowing may jeopardise the stability of the single currency. Finally, it 
was also determined that no country shall be liable for the debt of the Community or for that 
of  another  member  state.  This  was  supposed  to  emphasise  the  importance  of  national 
individual responsibility for fiscal policy. 
While a single monetary and foreign exchange policy was created, fiscal policy remained in 
the hands of the 19 individual member states. 
In  his  book  Making  the  European  Monetary  Union  the  economic  historian  Harold  James 
made  use  of  an  engineering  analogy.  He  said,  “The  monetary  union  without  a  well-
established base in fiscal regime and without a stable financial system had a very high centre 
of gravity that made for vulnerability and instability”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Supposing  the  founding  fathers  could  use  a  time  machine  to  travel  back  in  time  to  the 
Maastricht Treaty  negotiations,  would  they  do anything  differently  with  the  knowledge  they 
have today? I think so. 
For  instance,  the  original  framework  placed  too  much  emphasis  on  public  finances.  Other 
possible  macroeconomic  misalignments,  on  the  other  hand,  were  hardly  considered  in  the 
design of the regulatory framework. These include the permanent loss of competitiveness in 
today’s problem countries as a result of their excessively large current account deficits, or the 
real estate market exaggerations that contributed to a private debt and banking crisis. 
To  be  fair  though,  I  must  point  out  that  some  criticism  had  already  been  voiced  prior  to 
monetary union, which focused on the deficits in the institutional framework but which was 
not incorporated by policymakers. 
In addition, the founding fathers would probably take into account that a mutual exemption 
from liability can only be plausible if regulations for dealing with imminent insolvency and for 
preventing spillover effects to other countries are in place. 
More  attention  would  probably  also  have  been  paid  to  those  such  as  Willem  Duisenberg, 
who  later  became  President  of  the  ECB,  who  pointed  out at  the  time  that  monetary  union 
exposes  a  vulnerable  gap:  the  absence  of  a  single  European  supervisory  mechanism  for 
banks. 
Increased  interdependence  within  a  monetary  union  can  create  a  precarious  banking 
situation  by  creating  spillover  effects  to  other  countries,  which  cannot  be  adequately 
combatted by supervisory structures at the national level. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the makers of the Maastricht Treaty of course had as little ability to 
see into the future as the makers of Back to the Future. So it’s all well and good giving advice 
on how things should have been done, with the benefit of hindsight. 
However, lessons were also learnt while we tackled and analysed the crisis and extensive 
institutional reforms have already been adopted. 
First, the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact were tightened and a fiscal compact 
was agreed upon. The aim is for the fiscal rules to become more stringent and binding again 
in order to build confidence. 
Second,  a  procedure  for  identifying  macroeconomic  imbalances  at  an  early  stage  was 
established,  in  which  the  European  Commission  regularly  examines  whether,  for  example, 
destabilising  effects  are  emanating  from  private  sector  debt  or  from  the  member  states’ 
current account balances. 
Third,  a  crisis  mechanism  was  set  up  –  temporary  at  first,  then  permanent  –  which  is 
designed to serve as a “firewall”, safeguarding the stability of the financial system in the euro 
area.  Five  euro-area  member  states  were  able  to  count  on  help  from  the  other  member 
states, provided in the spirit of solidarity, and take out assistance loans in order to gain the 
time needed to get to the root of their problems. 
And  fourth,  as  already  mentioned,  a  banking  union  was  resolved,  establishing  a  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism under the aegis of the ECB and a Single Resolution Mechanism for 
ailing banks. 
The measures I have just mentioned have made the monetary union more stable in the long 
term and, in some cases, have also played a part in preventing the crisis from escalating. 
However,  this  very  bailout  policy  pursued  by  the  member  states  and  the  Eurosystem  has 
brought about a precarious situation: elements of mutual liability were essentially introduced 
for the crisis-hit countries’ debt, while fiscal policy remains a matter for national policymakers. 
That doesn’t augur well for the future. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Liability  is  a  core  element  of  our  economic  system.  That’s  something  every  entrepreneur 
knows – after all, doing business means picking up the tab if things go wrong. 
There  are  essentially  two  ways  of  putting  control  and  liability  back  on  a  more  even  keel. 
Either the monetary union is developed into a fiscal union with centralised rights to intervene 
in fiscal policy at the European level. This would also enable greater mutual liability. Or we 
turn back to the original framework as specified in the Maastricht Treaty and reinforce the 
principle of individual national responsibility. 
Which path is the right one to take is a matter for policymakers to decide. 
I believe that governments and the public at large are currently less than willing to take the 
step  towards  a  bona  fide  fiscal  union,  seeing  as  this  would  mean  ceding  a  great  deal  of 
national sovereign rights in fiscal policy matters. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it was a long-held belief, above all in Germany, that in the long run 
monetary union would, out of necessity as it were, culminate in political union. Addressing 
the  Bundestag  in  November  1991,  Helmut  Kohl  remarked  that  “the  idea  of  sustaining 
economic and monetary union over time without political union is a fallacy”. 
I  believe,  however,  that  monetary  union  can  also  function  without  political  union.  The 
Maastricht  framework,  which  was  adjusted  in  the  light  of  the  crisis,  offers  a  sensible 
foundation for this in principle. The precondition, however, is that the agreed rules are also 
complied with. I view the most recent developments with concern here. 
Calls for compliance with agreed fiscal policy rules are often rejected as meddling in national 
matters by those who, on other occasions, demand greater mutual liability. In this context, 
sound budgets are a key prerequisite for the stability of the single currency, for which every 
member state is responsible. 
The tougher fiscal rules are heading in the right direction, but they must now be implemented 
as well. Unfortunately, the rules have become significantly more complex in recent times. A 
great deal of scope for interpretation and discretion has now been opened up. 
Perhaps some of you still remember the statement that the imposition of sanctions under the 
Excessive Deficit Procedure would be “semi-automatic” in future. Recently, however, greater 
emphasis  has  been  placed  on  the  use  of  “flexibility”.  And  the  European  Commission’s 
comments this week unfortunately indicate that these tendencies are likely to become even 
stronger. 
For example, in future the Commission even plans to broaden its acceptance of investment 
and  structural  reforms  as  an  excuse  for  weaker  consolidation  efforts.  But  sound  public 
finances  are  by  no  means  at  odds  with  good  infrastructure,  structural  reforms  or  solid 
conditions for growth. Quite the opposite. 
The binding effect of the rules is likely to be further weakened, meanwhile, and sound fiscal 
policy to take an ever clearer back seat to flexibility. I fear that there is a growing sense of “if 
you don’t want to, you don’t have to”. 
Alongside the already resolved measures to toughen the regulatory framework and above all 
its systematic implementation, additional steps are needed to further reinforce the principle of 
individual national responsibility – and hence to permanently overcome European monetary 
union’s  vulnerability  to  crises.  The  principle  of  individual  national  responsibility  ultimately 
means that governments, too, must be allowed to fail financially. 
Until now, this was not possible out of concern for financial stability, because a sovereign’s 
insolvency  would  also  have  led  to  the  collapse  of  significant  banks  in  the  euro  area. 
Conversely,  governments  had  to  rescue  banks  during  the  crisis  in  order  to  avert  risks  to 
financial stability. 
One of the key lessons of the euro crisis is therefore to place euro-area banks on a more 
robust financial footing in order to sever the close links between banks and governments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  An important step towards this goal is the gradual introduction of stricter capital and liquidity 
requirements. In future, banks will have to hold more and higher-quality capital in reserve. 
This will make banks more resilient. 
During  the  crisis,  however,  banks  also  bought  government  bonds  on  a  large  scale, 
particularly those issued by their own countries, instead of granting loans to households and 
enterprises. 
To a certain extent, therefore, banks tie their own fate to that of their country. This is not least 
because  sovereigns,  as  debtors,  are  afforded  preferential  treatment  in  financial  market 
regulation. 
Banks do not have to back sovereign bonds with capital, as is required for any other loan. 
And since capital is tight, this privileged treatment creates an incentive for banks to purchase 
excessive amounts of sovereign bonds. This is especially the case since the large exposure 
limit,  according  to  which  loans  to  an  individual  borrower  may  not  exceed  25%  of  liable 
capital, does not apply in the case of loans to the government. 
In  order  to  cut  the  toxic  links  between  banks  and  sovereigns,  I  have  for  some  time  been 
calling for an end to the preferential regulatory treatment of sovereign debtors, although it is 
clear that this will not happen overnight. The year 2015 must be used to make progress in 
this area. That is why I very much welcome the fact that the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision,  working  under  the  auspices  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  –  also 
known as the bank for central banks – has now included this topic in its working programme. 
Conclusion 
4. 
With that, I now come to the end of my speech, which certainly did not exhaust the topic, but 
may have exhausted you, my listeners. 
Contrary  to  the  title  of  my  speech  today,  I  have  looked  far  beyond  the  new  year  in  some 
cases. 
It should now be clear, though, that a key part of the agenda is setting the course for the 
German economy’s growth prospects and the future of European monetary union. 
I firmly believe, however, that we will only strengthen acceptance of our single currency on a 
permanent basis if we secure our monetary union as a union for stability and re-enforce the 
liability principle. 
Thank you for listening and I wish you a happy new year. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
