  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strategic challenges ahead for banking and for 
thrift banks 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2015  annual  convention  of  the  Chamber  of  Thrift 
Banks, Makati, 7 April 2015. 
 A Growing economy and a steady banking industry 
The  Philippine  economic  story  remains  one  of  growth.  The  macroeconomy  has  had 
64 consecutive quarters of expansion which has been achieved while keeping prices stable. 
On the external front, we have been able to sustain current account surpluses for more than 
a decade due to strong structural flows from remittances and BPO receipts. As a result, our 
GIR has increased to USD 81.3 billion as of end-February 2015. 
Buoyed by investors’ confidence on the country’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals, the 
Philippines attracted a record-high of USD 6.2 billion last year in foreign direct investments. 
The success of the Philippines thankfully has not gone unnoticed. We cherish the investment 
grade status bestowed by international credit rating agencies because it opens opportunities 
for the country as an investment destination. This is one major reason why we pushed for 
what later became Republic Act 10641 and we are now seeing the strong interest of foreign 
banks to enter into our market. They serve as  potential catalyst of more investments from 
their home countries. 
Alongside the favorable macroeconomic environment has been the expansion of the banking 
industry. The numbers do change but we have seen the resources1 of the Philippine banking 
industry grow at a steady pace due to the continuous increase in deposits from the public. 
This  build  up  in  deposits  is  critical  in  two  respects.  First,  it reaffirms  the  confidence  of  the 
public  to  entrust  their  savings  into  the  banking  system  and  also  shows  the  improved 
economic  condition  of  the  population  that  eventually  translates  into  saving.  The  second 
reason is that it of course fuels the availability  of more loanable funds and we have noted 
that the increased credit exposures have been without deterioration in asset quality. 
Re-positioning thrift banking in a changed environment 
All the positive developments have certainly put us in a good position. They provide us the 
momentum to move forward but they will not necessarily guarantee further success. Markets 
are constantly in a flux and the strengths of the past need to be further enhanced to meet the 
challenges of the future. 
This is why we continuously amend and upgrade our regulatory environment. The BSP has 
always been an ardent supporter of global best practices. But we have equally been careful 
to apply the substance of the reforms and not just be bound to the form of the changes. We 
stand ready to make the difficult decisions when and where we have to, while committing to 
continuous dialogue to mold and manage the reform agenda. 
The  banking  landscape  is  itself  under  a  phase  of  major  remodelling,  the  “new  normal”  as 
many refer to it. This new normal, where newer risks are being identified and mitigated while 
older risks are being approached in a different manner, really calls for a strategic re-thinking 
                                                
1   The  total  resources  of  the  Philippine  banking  system  rose  by  11.91  percent  to  Php  11.2  trillion  as  of  end-
December 2014 from Php 9.8 trillion in 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of  what  is  possible,  what  is  likely,  and  how  these  can  be  effectively  pursued  under  more 
stringent norms of risk management, corporate governance, and consumer protection. 
From what we see, each and every bank must invest in this re-thinking process. Thrift banks, 
however,  face  the  unique  situation  of  being  confronted  with  a  question  of  both  scale  and 
scope. 
If  you  choose  to  differentiate  yourself  from  other  banks  via  scale,  this  certainly  raises  the 
intriguing question of how a thrift bank competes alongside the bigger universal/commercial 
banks or the smaller rural/cooperative banks. 
If you offer similar products and services as those of U/KBs, the conventional thinking is that 
they  would  have  the  advantage  of  scale  and  scope  economies.  Within  the  framework  of 
allocating risk capital to various risk exposures, this difference in scale and scope would be 
particularly telling. 
If you position yourselves against rural and coop banks, one expects that they would have 
the advantage of being more entrenched with the community at a scale that is aligned with 
community needs. 
Either decision has a direct bearing on your cost structure, your profitability and, therefore, 
your viability. Being smaller in markets where size (i.e., capital) and footprint (i.e., network) 
matter makes it very difficult to compete. And yet, choosing to be bigger may also not serve 
you well if you operate in those markets where grass root relationships matter most. 
Re-focusing on a niche 
All  these  notwithstanding,  there  is  a  strategic  issue  facing  thrift  banks  besides  size  of 
operation and this one is about the choice of target markets. 
If we revert to the Thrift Bank Act of 1995 , it says there that TBs are supposed to: 
“Promote economic development, and expand industrial and agricultural growth. At the same 
time,  TBs  should  place  within  easy  reach  of  the  people  the  medium  to  long-term  credit 
facilities to businesses engaged in agriculture, services, industry, and housing at reasonable 
cost.” 
Parsing  through  this  mandate,  it  talks  simply  of  lending  term  funds  to  various  economic 
sectors, whether in the agriculture, industry or services sector. One can argue that this is true 
of  any  bank,  whether  universal,  commercial,  thrift,  rural  or  coop  banks.  If  this  is  the  case 
then, the distinctive feature of thrift banking as provided by law is that of mortgage financing. 
Taking a more general view, the niche of Philippine thrift banking is consumer finance and 
MSMEs.  By  targeting  specifically  these  markets,  TBs  should  have  a  better  sense  of  the 
amount of risk capital that is needed for a projected level of risk exposure. It also allows for 
more focused consideration via specific regulatory issuances. In Circular 855, for example, 
the BSP talks of underwriting credit without being locked into specific forms of collateral. Our 
periodic  stress  tests  have  a  specific  section  on  consumer  finance  vulnerabilities  while  the 
recent  introduction  of  REST  sets  our  own  framework  on  the  credit  risks  of  real  estate 
exposures. 
Consumer protection issues – redress mechanisms, financial literacy initiatives and outright 
better disclosures – are equally relevant. Our Circular 857 provides the minimum standards 
of conduct we expect from market players while setting the framework for a periodic review 
and complaints handling. 
These are all critical as you consider your niche. But ASEAN integration is certainly another 
key consideration. 
The ASEAN Banking Integration Framework or ABIF was formally launched only a couple of 
weeks ago. This means that we now enter the phase of administering the guidelines so that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Qualified ASEAN Banks (QABs) can operate within the region in the next couple of years. 
There will be other occasions where we can fully elucidate the details and operation of ABIF. 
But  central  to  the  framework  is  the  idea  of  developing  ASEAN  for  ASEAN  for  which 
consumer finance appears to be a key facet. 
About a tenth of the world’s population resides in ASEAN. While the global life expectancy 
rates  have  increased  from  66  years  old  in  1990  to  71  years  old  in  2012,  ASEAN  has 
extended this to 73 years old on average. With 30 to 35 percent of ASEAN population at or 
younger than 15 years old, this extra 2 years becomes even more material over the next few 
decades. In addition, ASEAN saves nearly 31 percent of its GDP. This rate is 11 percentage 
points higher than the rest of the world. This extra 11% in saving is not small as it is larger 
than the GDP of many countries. 
As time moves forward, ASEAN’s young population provides a rich opportunity for increasing 
demand  for  financial  services.  The  same  population  will  require  financing  for  consumer 
requirements in housing, auto loans, credit cards and other personal needs – the very market 
that the Philippine thrift banking industry currently defines as its “space”. 
Finally, the MSME sector, which accounts for 99.6 percent of the total number enterprises in 
the country and more than one-third (or 35 percent) of our GDP and employs 65 percent of 
our workforce, is without a doubt vital to our economy. By positioning yourselves to grow this 
sector,  the  dividends  will  go  beyond  yourselves.  Growth  in  this  sector  will  have  significant 
multiplier effects in generating employment and raising the standard of living of more of our 
people.  By  positioning  to  serve  this  sector,  TBs  can  be  true  catalysts  of  broad-based  and 
sustainable inclusive growth. 
Strategic directions and final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen, I started my remarks by stating that ours remains a story of growth. I 
suggested, however, that we need to be strategic in facing the new normal of banking. Banks 
have to look carefully at the evolving environment, including the reforms, and how they can 
strategically position themselves in a changing market environment. 
The banking mindset today and five years hence are not the same as those from a decade 
ago. Banks must adopt the best practice standards, adapt to the changing market conditions, 
and adjust their strategic mindset accordingly. 
This strategic landscape of adopt-adapt-adjust is, however, not a game of absolute size but 
one of relative fit. In other words, finding your niche. 
You  asked  me  to  comment  on  the  state  of  thrift  banking  in  the  Philippines.  The  reality  of 
course is that the industry is a dichotomy. Those that are part of a banking group enjoy the 
scale that the group offers. This route offers a way to create a wider footprint and carves out 
the consumer finance business line from the U/KB parent to the TB subsidiary/affiliate. 
For the TBs that are stand-alone, you are effectively much more geared to your community 
market. The concept of a community can readily be defined more liberally in both product line 
and counterparty. But the crux is that the discipline of target market must take precedence. 
And it takes precedence by taking particular cognizance that you are typically smaller than 
the TBs which are part of a banking group. 
Ladies and gentlemen, what all this says is that the future rests with your choices. 
While we have, as a country and as a banking industry, done well, we are at that proverbial 
fork in the road where strategic decisions will have to be made. Resources have always been 
relatively scarce but our new banking framework requires of us to be more conscious of the 
unseen risk, the allocation of scarce risk capital, and remaining competitive as a corporate 
entity but with a heightened sense of governance. These are the strategic issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Eleanor  Roosevelt  once  said  that  “Great  minds  discuss  ideas;  average  minds  discuss 
events; small minds discuss people”. 
The likely “events” have crystalized before our eyes. It is now time to venture into the market 
of  strategic  ideas,  not  only  to  discuss  but  more  so  for  the  greater  minds  to  lead  the  way 
towards a better banking future. 
Thank you and good morning. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
