  Elvira Nabiullina: Recent Russian economic developments and Bank of 
Russia’s forecast 
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, in follow-up of Board of 
Directors meeting, Moscow, 13 March 2015. 
 Good afternoon! Today the Bank of Russia Board of Directors decided to reduce the key rate 
from 15.00% to 14% per annum. This decision takes into account the following main factors. 
First, the latest data on the economic situation show that the balance of risks remains shifted 
towards  the  weakening  of  the  economy  rather  than  acceleration  of  inflation.  January  data 
and  February  leading  indicators,  primarily  business  sentiment  indices,  indicate  that  the 
economic  situation  continues  to  deteriorate  and  this  trend  may  persist  until  2016  Q1. 
Seasonally adjusted unemployment fell to 5.0%. It should be taken into consideration that the 
Russian labour market traditionally adjusts, at least at the first stage, through wage rates and 
part-time employment, whose dynamics is indicative of lower demand for labour. At the same 
time, shrinkage of consumer demand will have a downward pressure on inflation. 
Second, monthly inflation slowed down considerably in February following the surge in late 
December-January. And weekly March data indicate that this process continues. The current 
high level of annual price growth is explained by the supply-side factors – decline in the ruble 
exchange rate and imposed trade restrictions. These are one-time factors, and in case there 
are no new considerable shocks their impact on monthly and quarterly inflation will decrease 
over  the  next  months.  The  annual  inflation,  which  to  a  large  extend  reflects  past  price 
dynamics,  can  keep  rising  up  to  the  middle  of  the  year.  However,  in  a  year,  i.e.  in  March 
2016, inflation will slow down to the level of about 9% amid the decrease in the monthly and 
quarterly  price  growth.  While  making  the  decisions  regarding  interest  rates,  we  take  into 
consideration not the current inflation that is essentially historical, and cannot be affected by 
our decision. We rely on inflation forecast. 
Third, we forecast gradual decrease in inflation expectations. Surveys already show evident 
signs of such a decline. In case no new shocks occur, this process will persist facilitated by 
the  slowdown  in  current  inflation. Therefore, real  interest  rates  which  should  be  calculated 
with  regard  to  the  expected  inflation  will  stay  in  the  positive  range  providing  for  anti-
inflationary nature of monetary policy. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  persistently  high  inflation  expectations,  as  well  as  risks  of  the  upward 
revision of tariffs of natural monopolies, fiscal policy easing, and possible accelerated growth 
of  nominal  wages  that  we  consider  to  be  the  main  risks  for  our  policy  and  our  inflation 
forecast. 
I would like to note that, when taking the today’s decision, the Board of Directors was guided 
by the goal to decrease inflation to 4% in 2017 and to further maintain it close to this level as 
it  was  stated  in  the  Guidelines  for  the  Single  State  Monetary  Policy.  We  have  repeatedly 
expressed  our  intention  to  reach  this  level  step  by  step  taking  into  account  the  economic 
conditions. The rate of inflation decrease will depend on further developments and changes 
in the economic situation. The attempt to reduce the inflation at any cost would obviously be 
a short-sighted strategy. 
When taking a decision on the key rate we always consider the balance of risks of inflation 
acceleration and slowdown in economic growth. This balance changed considerably at the 
turn of 2014–2015. 
For most of 2014 the balance of risks was shifted towards inflation acceleration. Economic 
slowdown was primarily of structural nature and did not have considerable impact on prices. 
Meanwhile, inflation expectations were growing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  situation  aggravated  in  2014  Q4,  because  the fall  in  oil  prices  and  the  need  to  make 
large  external  debt  payments  amid  almost  inaccessible  international  capital  markets  led  to 
considerable  ruble  depreciation.  This  in  its  turn  resulted  in  higher  inflation  expectations. 
Demand of households and businesses for cash and non-cash foreign currency surged up. It 
threatened to heavily accelerate inflation and destabilise financial sector. It was important to 
bring these processes to a halt and we decided to raise the key rate dramatically to 17% p.a. 
The rise of the key rate was followed by the increase in bank deposit rates that managed to 
stop the outflow of funds from ruble deposits and pegged down their dollarisation. 
Our foreign currency REPO and lending operations also helped normalise the situation in the 
foreign  exchange  market.  In  December-January,  we  reduced  rates  on  these  instruments, 
introduced new types of operations, and increased the frequency and allotment amount of 
foreign currency provision. In late 2014, the allotment amount of foreign exchange liquidity 
provision was about 20 billion US dollars and currently exceeds 30 billion US dollars. 
In  January  2015,  despite  persistently  low  oil  prices,  complicated geopolitical  situation,  and 
Russia’s downgraded sovereign rating, the exchange rate volatility decreased and inflation 
expectations showed the first signs of stabilisation. This means that the result we expected 
when raising the key rate has been largely achieved. At the same time, the leading indicators 
started  to  show  the  beginning  of  considerable  fall  in  aggregated  demand  and  cyclical 
economic slowdown. Therefore, as opposed to 2014, the economic situation in 2015 started 
to exercise additional anti-inflationary pressure. This enabled the Bank of Russia to reduce 
the interest rates from 17% to 15 %. 
The  consequently  published  data  for  January  2015  confirmed  out  estimates.  In  January 
2015, the economic activity started to slow down. Temporary surge in consumer demand in 
December 2014 changed into a drop. Decline in investments intensified. Both consumer and 
producer sentiments deteriorated. Inflation accelerated sharply, but this dynamics is largely 
explained by the accelerated pass-through effect of the exchange rate on prices. Therefore, 
monthly inflation started to decline in February. 
We base our monetary policy decisions not only on the information about existing economic 
trends, but primarily on the forecasts of economic situation. Detailed and revised forecast will 
be published tonight as part of the Monetary Policy Report. In my speech today I would like 
to touch upon main elements of the forecast which are of key importance from the point of 
view of the decision we took today and for understanding the logic behind our future actions. 
I  will  start  from  the  assumptions.  We  assume  the  Urals  crude  price  this  year  at  around 
50-55 US dollars per barrel. We have reasons to expect oil prices to rise to 70–75 US dollars 
per  barrel  by  2017,  but  nonetheless  remain  significantly  below  the  levels  observed  during 
several past years. 
We also assume that access of the Russian companies to the global capital markets will be 
restricted throughout whole forecast period. 
A  long  period  of  relatively  low  oil  prices  will  force  Russian  economy  to  adapt  to  the  new 
conditions. As a result, GDP is expected to decrease by 3.5%-4% in 2015 and 1%-1.6% in 
2016. Moreover, as I have already mentioned, the structural constraints of the economy will 
be supplemented by factors of cyclical nature. 
Despite  the  drop  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  the  net  export  will  make  a  positive 
contribution  to  GDP  dynamics  due  to  the  effects  of  the  ruble  depreciation  on  imports  and 
Russian exporters’ competitiveness. However, net export dynamics will not be able to fully 
offset the reduction in consumer and investment activity during two coming years. 
As  in  2009,  contraction  in  the  domestic  demand  will  primarily  influence  durable  goods, 
including  imports,  and  also  some  services  sectors.  It  should  be  noted,  that  under  existing 
circumstances,  this  effect  will  be  reinforced  by  accumulated  high  consumer  debt  level  of 
certain households. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Decline in investment activities is driven not only by reduced profits and lower accessibility of 
other  financial  resources,  but  primarily  by  high  uncertainty  with  regard  to  future  economic 
development. It is expected to be the highest in industries which have not benefited from the 
ruble depreciation and which suffer from increased debt burden. 
For reference: 
According  to  forecasts,  household  final  consumption  expenditure  will  fall  by  5.5–5,7%  and 
1,5-2% in 2015 and 2016. Fixed capital investment will decrease by an estimated 10–12% 
and 0,5-1,5% respectively. 
As  for  the  labour  market  situation,  we  do  not  expect  any  considerable  increase  in  the 
unemployment  numbers  in  comparison  with  the  existing  level.  This  is  due  to  both  the 
demographic factors and the specifics of the Russian labour market which normally adjusts 
through changes in wages and partial employment, rather than by changes in the number of 
those employed. 
For reference: 
According  to  our  estimates,  the  unemployment  will  not  exceed  6.0%-6.2%  in  two  coming 
years. 
In comparison with December, we revised the  balance of payment forecast. The expected 
fall  in  imports  saw  the  most  considerable  change  (almost  by  30%  in  2015  compared  with 
2014 instead of previous estimate of 10%). Therefore, the current account surplus estimate 
has been revised upward to 64 billion US dollars in 2015 and to 90 billion US dollars in 2016. 
The current account surplus is comparable with our estimates of external debt payments in 
2015.  According  to  the  data  from  transaction  passports,  the  repayment  value,  including 
interest payments, is estimated at 120 billion US dollars this year. But, given the refinancing 
capacity of international markets, we estimate net external debt payments totaling 65 billion 
US dollars, that is twice as less as in last year. In effect, we have already passed the peak of 
external debt payments. 
Residents  can  make  payments  either  buy  drawing  down  the  buffer  of  their  accumulated 
foreign  exchange  liquid  assets  or  from  current  revenues  from  foreign  trade.  The  Bank  of 
Russia  foreign  liquidity  refinancing  instruments  will  make  it  possible  to  fund  both  external 
debt  payments  and  cumulative  capital  outflow  estimated  as  100–110  billion  US  dollars 
without considerable impact on the ruble exchange rate. I would like to note, that this year 
peak  debt  servicing  payments  are  due  in  February  and  March,  and  payments  already 
effected did not have any significant impact on the ruble exchange rate. 
Oil  prices  remain  the  main  factor  which  can  influence  the  ruble  exchange  rate  dynamics. 
However, sustainable oil price reduction comparable to last year’s patterns does not seem 
feasible.  The  oil  market  will  remain  volatile,  with  oil  prices  changing  in  both  directions.  Oil 
price fluctuations are followed by fluctuations in the ruble exchange rate. However, one-way 
change in the ruble exchange rate has stopped. This means that the exchange rate impact 
on the inflation will gradually wear out. 
The restraining influence of low economic activity will begin to fully impact inflation dynamics 
in  the  second  half  of  2015.  By  this  time,  the  effect  of  temporary  factors,  such  as  the 
depreciation  of  the  ruble  and  foreign  trade  restrictions  that  have  led  to  acceleration  in 
consumer prices growth, will be exhausted. As we have already noted, inflation will reach its 
peak in 2015 Q2, and afterwards it is forecast to fall. In March 2016, inflation will approximate 
to 9% before falling down to 4% in the medium run. 
Such inflation dynamics will be accompanied by economic recovery. The bottom of economic 
recession  is  expected  in  2016  Q1,  later  on  the  economy  will  start  growing  on  a  quarterly 
basis. By that time the initial adjustment of the economy to the new environment will be over. 
Higher global oil prices, the economic recovery of trade partner countries, and the formation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of new sources of financing will also contribute to this growth. In 2017, economic recovery is 
expected to exceed 6%. 
We shall continue to regularly update our forecast by monitoring movements of a wide range 
of  indicators  taking  into  account  not  only  annual  inflation  dynamics,  but  also  quarterly, 
monthly  and  weekly  ones.  If  new  pro-inflationary  factors  do  not  appear  and  inflation 
decelerates according to our forecast, we shall continue cutting the key rate. 
In  conclusion,  I’d  like  to  note  that  although  the  current  economic  slowdown  is  of  both 
structural and cyclical nature, structural factors and the need to create new growth sources 
still play a major role. This means that monetary policy measures are not sufficient to solve 
all the problems facing the economy. Special efforts are needed to promote new investments 
in  the  economy,  improve  business  climate,  increase  the  mobility  of  labour  and  its  skills, 
enhance  the  efficiency  of  natural  monopolies  and  government  expenditure,  improve  state 
governance, and develop infrastructure and logistics. Only these efforts will ensure sustained 
long-term  economic  growth  based  on  increasing  productivity  and  economic  structural 
changes. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
