  Yves Mersch: Dinner speech at EUI-NOMICS 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at EUI-NOMICS, Florence, 24 April 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  crisis  in  the  euro  area  has  painfully  exposed  the  weaknesses  of  the  euro  area’s 
institutional  set-up.  A  lot  of  progress  has  since  been  achieved  in  making  its  governance 
structure more resilient. But further action and reflection are needed. 
In theory several ways of further developing this governance structure are conceivable. They 
range from loose cooperation among Member States to the creation of a federal state; from 
high levels of discretion to strictly binding rules; and from legitimacy that mainly stems from 
national  elections  to  legitimacy  at  the  European  level  that  is  strong  enough  to  speak  of  a 
political union. 
I am aware that across this wide range some ideas are politically less feasible than others. 
And it is up to those democratically legitimised to do so to decide how to adjust the Union’s 
governance structure to best meet the objectives of the EU as enshrined in our treaties. 
In my remarks today, I will focus on how the different dimensions of further developing the 
euro area’s governance structure fit together, bearing in mind that they influence each other. 
These dimensions are: 
• 
• 
• 
First, the method of governance, 
second, the source of legitimacy, and 
third, the decision-making methods. 
Getting governance right 
In 1992 Europe’s heads of state and government committed to creating a monetary union. 
Sharing  a  currency  implies  sharing  sovereignty.  It  requires  further  integration,  including 
governance structures which go beyond those of a single market which might work based on 
loose coordination among independent nation states. Striving for supranational solutions in 
those policy areas that affect the smooth functioning of a monetary union would thus have 
been the logical consequence of the Maastricht commitment. 
But  we  all  know  that  reality  often  takes  no  notice  of  logic.  And  we  have  seen  the 
consequences. 
Today, financial policy is more compatible with the requirements of a monetary union than it 
was  at  the  beginning  of  the  crisis.  We  now  have  a  European  approach  to  banking 
supervision and resolution, independent of any national bias. And the creation of a capital 
markets union will help to better integrate Europe’s financial markets. 
Obviously,  an  integrated  financial  policy  is  an  important  complement to  a  single  monetary 
policy. But economic and fiscal policies also play a crucial role in the smooth operation of a 
monetary  union.  Currently,  the  former  are  basically  dealt  with  at  the  Member  State  level, 
while  the  latter  is  characterised  by  intergovernmental  action  without  strong  supranational 
control. 
This mismatch between one single monetary policy and 19 different, sometimes diverging, 
economic  and  fiscal  policies  has  been  well  diagnosed,  but  remedying  it  has  proved  to  be 
difficult.  Decision-makers  at  times  even  deviated  from  the  community  approach  and 
circumvented the existing European treaties, as this seemed the only way forward. The fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
compact  and  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  are  prominent  examples  of  this  purely 
intergovernmental approach. 
The European project has always been characterised by differential integration and this is 
likely  to  continue.  Current  economic  and  political  circumstances  suggest  that  these 
differences will persist: some Member States will remain unwilling to share more sovereignty, 
others will want to integrate more, but are not yet able to do so and others still will be both 
able and willing to move towards a genuine economic and monetary union. In my view, such 
a  combination  of  “core”  countries,  “pre-ins”  and  “opt-outs”  can  be  sustainable,  but  it  has 
implications for the way decisions are taken and democratically legitimised. 
Enhancing democratic legitimacy 
Indeed,  the  main  challenge  I  see  in  differential  integration  is  the  question  of  democratic 
accountability. 
I assume you all agree that decisions taken at Member State level are characterised by a 
high  degree  of  input  legitimacy.  Some  may  argue  that  decisions  taken  at  European  level 
enjoy a similar degree of democratic legitimacy: European citizens have the right to choose 
who represents them in the European Parliament; and the Council draws its legitimacy from 
national governments and parliaments that are elected by the voters in the Member States. 
However, this latter chain of legitimacy in particular is rather long, and the links between a 
given sovereign act and the will of the electorate is tenuous. 
Different  degrees  of  integration  further  complicate  matters.  A  member  of  the  European 
Parliament representing a constituency that mandated a government that decided to opt out 
of the common currency might vote on matters regarding precisely this common currency. 
If  politicians  decide  to  share  more  sovereignty  at  European  level,  democratic  legitimacy 
certainly will need to be strengthened at that level too. If, however, the EU remains a political 
system sui generis with some Member States being more integrated than others, with some 
common  policy  areas  being  characterised  by 
intergovernmentalism  and  others  by 
supranational  approaches,  then  we  will  need  to  have  a  commensurately  versatile  form  of 
democratic legitimacy. The European Parliament could, for instance, assemble in a variety of 
compositions. 
Going for intergovernmental rather than federal solutions thus generates path dependencies. 
Following 
the 
implementation  of  the  UK’s  proposal  back  in  1990  of  parallel  competing  currencies  rather 
than a single currency. 
The perceived lack of input legitimacy in the current institutional set-up also implies a high 
standard of output legitimacy; that is, policy-makers need to generate outcomes that are in 
the voters’ interest. If they fail to do so, they risk putting the stability of monetary union into 
question. 
in  monetary  policy  would  have 
intergovernmental  path 
the 
led 
to 
Rules versus discretion – a question of space and time? 
A monetary union is stable as long as its members find it more beneficial to be in that union 
rather than outside it. This stability is easier to achieve if everybody plays by the same rules. 
In a monetary union, economic well-being is not simply a domestic question. Member States’ 
economies influence each other, which is why a monetary union is more attractive if all its 
members are prospering. 
Accordingly, Europe’s decision-makers have given themselves common rules to guide fiscal 
and economic policies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
These rules have repeatedly been broken. This suggests that while decision-makers favour a 
common  set  of  rules  to  generate  trust  and  credibility  among  Member  States,  they  have 
sometimes preferred more flexibility than the rules allow. 
In  essence,  we  are  facing  an  issue  of  time-inconsistent  preferences:  in  the  long  run, 
governments have an interest in strict rules that foster trust and credibility among Member 
States. In the short run, they might well prefer more discretionary decision-making that allows 
them to flexibly adapt their policies to circumstances. 
In  addition,  election  cycles  sometimes  encourage  myopic  policy  choices  that  are  not 
necessarily in the Union’s long-term interest. This is especially relevant in the EU’s multilevel 
governance  framework  with  staggered  election  cycles  at  the  various  national  and  sub-
national levels. 
I respect that governments are bound by their voters’ will. That will might well differ between 
jurisdictions in general, and between creditors and debtors in particular. 
At the same time, I see a risk that governments are making it too easy for themselves when 
they claim that they cannot make any further concessions at international level because of 
domestic political pressures. 
Survey data shows that an unquestioning belief in opinion polls is not necessarily in the long-
term interest of voters. For instance, support for the euro was very low in the Baltic countries 
prior to the changeover, but it is steadily increasing. In Lithuania net support has increased 
by 23 percentage points in just one year.1 Moreover, the European public’s initial scepticism 
about centralised supervision of the banking system has faded away: according to the latest 
Eurobarometer data2, 65% of respondents consider central supervision at EU level effective. 
This  suggests  that  if  politicians  want  Europe  to  work for  the  well-being  of  its  people,  they 
might need to pluck up courage and seek to shape opinion rather than follow it. Should that 
raise  questions  of  legitimacy,  these  would  need  to  be  addressed  by  a  supranational 
arbitrator. 
I think we can solve the issue of time-inconsistent preferences by simultaneously considering 
the  spatial  dimension  of  decision  making:  if  decisions  of  common  interest  are  taken  at 
national level, rigid rules that leave no room for interpretation are needed to create a level 
playing field. If decisions are taken at supranational level, more flexible regulation is possible 
without creating distortions. 
Supranational institutions can overcome the time inconsistency: they have credibility, as they 
are  bound  by  a  mandate;  and  they  can  react  to  changing  circumstances  as  they  have 
flexibility in the decisions they take within this mandate. 
In the EU, we already partly take advantage of this approach: the Commission has executive 
powers on competition policy and the ECB has executive powers on monetary policy and – 
since November last year – on the supervision of banks. I dare to add that in those areas 
where European institutions have been granted executive powers and a clear mandate, they 
use them reasonably well. 
When  supranational  institutions  are  assigned  conflicting  tasks,  assessments  of  their 
performance become less clear-cut. Recent decisions by the European Commission on the 
Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and on the macroeconomic imbalance procedure (MIP) are 
a case in point. 
In relation to the SGP, the Commission decided, in late February: 
                                                
1   Standard Eurobarometer 81 and 82, http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/eb_arch_en.htm. 
2   http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/eb/eb82/eb82_en.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    not to step up the excessive deficit procedure (EDP) for France and to extend the 
EDP deadline for that country by another two years, to 2017; 
not to open a debt-based EDP for Italy and Belgium; 
not  to  issue  autonomous  recommendations  for  Spain  and  Portugal,  in  contrast  to 
what the previous Commission had decided for France and Slovenia in March 2014 
under comparable circumstances. 
On the MIP, the Commission decided: 
• 
 that France, Croatia, Portugal, Italy and Bulgaria have excessive imbalances, which 
require specific monitoring and decisive policy action. 
not  to  propose  the  activation  of  an  excessive  imbalance  procedure  (EIP)  for  any 
country, but the Commission did leave the door open to activate an EIP for France 
and Croatia in May. 
These non-decisions might weaken the corrective arm of the Pact and undermine the debt 
rule. Moreover, they cast doubt on whether the governance framework can still play its role 
as anchor for confidence. One of the major lessons of the first ten years of Economic and 
Monetary Union, and reflected in the 2011 reforms was to avoid repeating the mistake of not 
implementing the framework when it affects large countries. The Commission might find itself 
increasingly  torn  between  being  a  political  actor  on  the  one  hand  and  the  guardian  of  the 
Treaties on the other. 
Conclusion 
Granting  more  executive  powers  to  the  European  level  in  the  economic  and  fiscal  realm 
might be the way forward. But it would require changing the treaties of the European Union. 
Currently, I see little political will for such a move. 
This  makes  it  even  more  important  to  strictly  apply  and  enforce  existing  rules  and 
instruments that are meant to act as anchors of confidence, such as the Stability and Growth 
Pact and the macroeconomic imbalance procedure. 
The guardian of the treaties has to perform a difficult balancing act in following its desire to 
act as a quasi-government and at the same time enforcing common rules. Striking a balance 
between  desire  and  duty  can  only  work  if  there  is  a  prospect  that  its  mandated  duty  is 
adjusted to fit its desire. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
