  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Ehime, 9 March 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Ehime Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Matsuyama Branch. 
The  Bank  thinks  that  it  is  of  overriding  importance  for  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome 
protracted  deflation  and  attain  sustainable  growth.  To  achieve  this,  the  Bank  introduced 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013 and expanded it in October 
2014.  Under  this  policy,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  making  steady  progress  toward 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. Nevertheless, some have expressed doubts, 
arguing that it will be difficult to achieve 2 percent inflation in about 2 years, or that if inflation 
is generated artificially, this would undermine people’s standard of living. Today, I would like 
to talk about recent economic developments in Japan and then explain the Bank’s monetary 
policy conduct and price developments. I hope this will also help to dispel the doubts I just 
mentioned. 
Current situation of and outlook for economic activity at home and abroad 
I.  
To  start  with,  let  me  talk  about  the  current  situation  of  Japan’s  economy.  The  decline  in 
demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  has  had  somewhat  prolonged  effects  on  the 
economy,  especially  on  sales  of  durable  consumer  goods  such  as  automobiles  and 
household  electrical  appliances  reflecting  the  large  extent  of  front-loading  of  purchases. 
However,  Japan’s  economy  has  continued  its  recent  moderate  recovery  trend,  with  a 
virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  operating  steadily  in  both  the  household  and 
corporate sectors. I will discuss the current situation of and outlook for overseas economies 
and business operations, the household sector, and the corporate sector in order. 
Overseas economies and Japan’s exports 
First, overseas economies, led by advanced economies, have been recovering on the whole, 
although performance in some parts remains lackluster. With the decline in crude oil prices 
likely to exert a positive effect, overseas economies, led mainly by advanced economies, are 
expected  to  continue  recovering  moderately,  and  positive  effects  of  the  recovery  are 
expected  to  gradually  feed  through  to  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting 
economies.  In  this  context,  it  is  worth  noting  that  in  the  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO) 
Update published in January, the IMF revised its outlook for the world economy downward 
due to the deceleration of global growth to date, but it maintains its view that global growth 
will  increase  gradually:  after  registering  3.3  percent  in  2014,  global  growth  is  expected  to 
reach 3.5 percent in 2015 and 3.7 percent in 2016 (Chart 1). Japan’s exports – after showing 
some  continued  weakness  despite  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  –  have  been  picking  up 
recently, increasing for two consecutive quarters (Chart 2). The depreciation of the yen now, 
with a delay, appears to be starting to have a positive effect on export volumes. Regarding 
the  outlook,  exports  are  expected  to  increase  moderately  against  the  background  of  the 
continued moderate recovery in overseas economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Employment and income situation and household spending 
Turning  to  the  household  sector  and  starting  with  the  employment  and  income  situation, 
labor market conditions have continued their steady improvement. The unemployment rate 
has  declined  to  around  3.5  percent,  which  is  roughly  the  same  level  as  the  structural 
unemployment  rate,  and  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  now  stands  at  1.14, 
marking  the  highest  level  since  April  1992  (Chart  3).  Against  the  background  of  this 
tightening in labor market conditions, the year-on-year rate of increase in total cash earnings 
per  employee  has  been  accelerating  moderately,  albeit  with  fluctuations  (Chart  4).  Given 
these developments in employment and wages, employee income has risen moderately. 
Against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation, 
private consumption as a whole has remained resilient, although recovery in some areas has 
been  sluggish  (Chart  5).  Housing  investment,  which  saw  large  front-loading  prior  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike,  has  started  to  bottom  out.  Meanwhile,  consumer  confidence,  which 
had become increasingly cautious since last summer, has recently bottomed out (Chart 6). 
The employment and income situation is likely to continue to improve steadily, since wages 
are expected to rise in the annual wage negotiations this spring. Amid this situation, private 
consumption  is  expected  to  remain  firm  and  housing  investment  is  projected  to  regain  its 
firmness. 
Corporate profits and developments in fixed investment 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  the  corporate  sector.  Corporate  profits  have  continued  to  improve 
thanks  partly  to  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  to  date.  Looking  at  the  Financial  Statements 
Statistics of Corporations by Industry, coupled with an increase in sales, the ratio of firms’ 
current profits to sales has recently reached around 5 percent for all industries and firms of 
all  sizes  –  a  high  level  that  exceeds  that  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  (Chart  7). 
Corporate profits are expected to continue to be on an improving trend as falling crude oil 
prices and the yen’s depreciation to date are likely to contribute to pushing up profits. 
With  corporate  profits  improving,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate 
increasing trend (Chart 8). As for the outlook, with corporate profits continuing to be on an 
improving  trend,  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  continue  following  a  moderate 
improving  trend  against  the  background  that  (a)  the  sense  among  firms  that  they  have 
excess capital has been waning, (b) firms are expected to increase labor saving investment 
due  to  the  tightening  of  labor  market  conditions,  and  (c)  with  the  depreciation  of  the  yen, 
Japanese firms appear to have started to increase the share of fixed investment at home. In 
fact, with regard to the last point, at the meeting of general managers of the Bank’s branches 
in  January  there  were  reports  of  cases  where  firms  were  increasing  their  production  and 
fixed investment at domestic bases against the backdrop of the yen’s depreciation. 
Production  decreased  for  two  consecutive  quarters  in  the  April-June  quarter  and  the  July-
September  quarter  last  year,  but  due  in  part  to  subsequent  progress  in  inventory 
adjustments, it started to increase again in the October-December quarter and continued to 
increase in January this year (Chart 9). Against the backdrop of an increase in final demand, 
production is expected to moderately increase going forward. 
Therefore,  with  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  operating  in  both  the  household 
and corporate sectors, Japan’s economy has continued its moderate recovery trend. Going 
forward, this virtuous cycle is likely to continue operating with the fall in crude oil prices to 
date and the government’s economic stimulus working as boosting factors, and thus Japan’s 
economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend. In terms of the Bank’s Policy 
Board members’ forecasts released in the January interim assessment of the October 2014 
Outlook  Report  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report),  the  real 
GDP  growth  rate  was  projected  to  be  minus  0.5  percent  in  fiscal  2014,  but  2.1  percent  in 
fiscal 2015, and 1.6 percent in fiscal 2016 – in other words, it was expected to grow above 
the potential growth rate, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower (Chart 10). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Japan’s price developments and monetary policy 
II.  
I will next talk about the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy and the price situation in Japan. 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  Bank,  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about 2 years, introduced QQE 
in April 2013 and expanded it at the end of October 2014. 
Aim of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
Let  me  summarize  the  transmission  mechanism  of  QQE.  The  starting  point  of  the 
mechanism  is  converting  people’s  deflationary  mindset  and  thereby  raising  inflation 
expectations through the strong commitment by the Bank to achieve the 2 percent target. At 
the  same  time,  the  Bank  has  been  exerting  downward  pressure  on  nominal  interest  rates 
through its massive purchases of JGBs in order to encourage a decline in real interest rates 
and stimulate private demand such as business fixed investment. The idea is that, together 
with the increase in inflation expectations, this will lead to an increase in inflation rates. 
This  might  give  rise  to  the  question  why  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  stimulate  aggregate 
demand but also to raise inflation expectations. The reason is that the price stability that the 
Bank ultimately aims at is not one that is achieved temporarily but one that is achieved on a 
sustainable basis. If aggregate demand is stimulated, inflation may rise to temporarily reach 
2 percent, but will not be sustained in a stable manner as long as people make decisions or 
engage in economic activity on the basis of low inflation. By contrast, if medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations  rise  to  2  percent,  that  is,  people  make  decisions  and  engage  in 
economic  activity  based  on  the  assumption  of  2  percent  inflation,  the  inflation  rate  will 
gravitate to 2 percent even if it fluctuates due to business cycles and changes in commodity 
prices. That is, over the cycle, prices will hover at around 2 percent on average. To this end, 
in order to sustain the price stability target of 2 percent in a stable manner, it is necessary for 
inflation expectations to rise to 2 percent and be anchored at that level. 
Expansion of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing 
Based on this aim, QQE has been producing its intended effects and the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  increased  from  minus  0.5  percent  immediately 
before  the  introduction  of  QQE  to  a  range  of  1.0–1.5  percent  through  summer  last  year 
(Chart 11). Meanwhile, people’s inflation expectations also increased on the whole and there 
was steady progress in dispelling the deflationary mindset (Chart 12). 
However, since summer last year, due mainly to the substantial decline in crude oil prices as 
well as somewhat weak developments in demand after the consumption tax hike, the year-
on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  has  slowed  (Chart  11).  If  this  situation  had  continued, 
there  was  a  risk  that  conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset,  which  has  so  far  been 
progressing  steadily,  might  be  delayed.  If  this  risk  had  manifested  itself,  this  would  have 
interfered  with  the  transmission  mechanism  of  QQE,  which  starts  with  the  rise  in  inflation 
expectations.  To  preempt  the  manifestation  of  such  risk  and  to  maintain  the  improving 
momentum of expectation formation, the Bank expanded QQE in October. 
Let me explain in more detail. In the short term, falling crude oil prices will lower inflation, but 
in  the  longer  term,  they  will  have  a  positive  effect  on  economic  activity  in  an  oil-importing 
country like Japan and hence push up prices. The reason is that the fall in energy prices will 
lead to a rise in corporate profits and households’ purchasing power; that is, Japan’s terms of 
trade  improve.  Given  that  Japan’s  crude  oil  imports  in  fiscal  2013  amounted  to  almost 
15 trillion  yen,  a  back-of-the-envelope  calculation  shows  that  with  the  decline  in  crude  oil 
prices  from  about  100  dollars  per  barrel  up  until  last  summer  to  the  recent  level  of  about 
50 dollars per barrel, the oil price decline represents an increase in annual income to Japan’s 
economy of more than 7 trillion yen. This is why, from a longer-term perspective, falling oil 
prices will have a positive effect on economic activity and will push up prices. Thus, other 
things being equal, the fall in crude oil prices will initially lead to a decline in the inflation rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  but the inflation rate will then start to rise once the impact of falling oil prices on the year-on-
year rate of change in prices dissipates. 
Therefore, if falling oil prices lower inflation but inflation expectations remain unaffected and 
inflation  keeps  heading  toward  2  percent  as  a  trend,  there  is  no  need  to  respond  through 
monetary policy. On the other hand, if falling crude oil prices do affect medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations and it is judged difficult to achieve 2 percent inflation in the future, a 
monetary  policy  response  will  be  necessary.  As  I  mentioned,  the  Bank  did  not  embark  on 
additional easing as an automatic response to falling crude oil prices; rather, with the year-
on-year rate of increase in the CPI being sluggish due mainly to falling oil prices, the Bank 
carried out additional easing to preempt the manifestation of any risk that the conversion of 
the deflationary mindset might be delayed and the underlying trend in inflation be adversely 
affected. 
Assessing the underlying trend in inflation 
In  conducting  monetary  policy,  it  is  critical  to  accurately  assess  the  underlying  trend  in 
inflation.  So,  how  should  developments  in  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  be  assessed? 
While  inflation  reflects  temporary  fluctuations  such  as  those  in  commodity  prices,  the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation  is  determined  by  the  output  gap  and  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations.  Therefore,  in  order  to  assess  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation,  it  is 
critical  to  evaluate  these  two  factors.  Medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are 
reflected not only in market-based indicators, such as the break-even inflation rate gauged 
from  inflation-indexed  bonds,  or  in  data  from  various  surveys  of  firms,  households,  and 
economists.  Instead,  since  the  term  “inflation  expectations”  refers  to  the  inflation  rate 
expected  by  the  general  public  –  and  hence  expectations  underlying  people’s  decision-
making  and  economic  activity  –  inflation  expectations  are  reflected  in  everyday  economic 
activities such as firms’ price-setting behavior, wage negotiations between management and 
labor, and households’ consumption patterns. Looking at wages, base pay increased for the 
first time in a long time in last year’s annual spring wage negotiations between management 
and labor based on the assumption that general prices would increase. In addition, instead of 
simply  searching  for  low-priced  goods,  consumers  have  started  to  purchase  somewhat 
higher-priced  goods  provided  that  the  quality  matches  the  price,  and  firms’  price-setting 
stance has changed accordingly. These developments provide evidence of a rise in inflation 
expectations,  indicating  that  there  has  been  steady  progress  in  changing  the  deflationary 
mindset. 
In  examining  price  indicators,  it  is  necessary  to  monitor  not  a  single  index  but  various 
indicators  to  assess  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation.  The  Bank  has  been  examining 
indicators such as the headline CPI, the CPI less fresh food (the so-called core CPI), the CPI 
less food and energy (the so-called core-core CPI), the trimmed mean CPI, which excludes 
highly volatile items, and the ratio of the number of items that registered a price increase to 
that  of  items  that  registered  a  price  decrease.  The  Bank  even  analyzes  developments  in 
each CPI item component as necessary. In presenting the projections for prices, the Bank 
uses  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  as  an  indicator  that  tends  to  represent  the  underlying 
trend  in  inflation  adequately  under  normal  circumstances.  However,  this  index  includes 
energy prices and thus will temporarily decline when, as currently the case, crude oil prices 
have been declining substantially, so that it becomes difficult to assess the underlying trend 
in inflation using only this index. Therefore, in the January interim assessment, in addition to 
the forecasts for the CPI (excluding fresh food), the Bank showed the estimated contribution 
of energy items to the index. 
Future price developments and monetary policy 
Based on what I have explained so far, let me talk about the outlook for prices. The year-on-
year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food), after 0.9 percent in fiscal 2014, in the 
January interim assessment of the Outlook Report is projected to be only 1.0 percent in fiscal 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  2015  due  to  the  effects  of  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  to  date  (Chart  10). 
Nevertheless,  we  are  of  the  view  that  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  will  rise  steadily. 
Specifically,  the  output  gap,  which  determines  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation,  is  likely  to 
continue  improving  as  Japan’s  economy  continues  to  grow  above  potential  as  a  trend.  In 
addition, inflation expectations will also likely rise steadily. In fact, at the annual spring wage 
negotiations between management and labor this year, labor unions have requested larger 
wage  increases  than  those  of  last  year  and  firms’  management  has  generally  taken  a 
positive stance toward such an increase. Since work patterns have become more diverse, an 
increase  in  wages  can  take  various  forms  such  as  an  increase  in  base  pay,  bonuses,  or 
various  allowances,  but  whatever  form  it  takes,  the  transformation  of  people’s  deflationary 
mindset is likely to make further progress if total wages actually rise. In addition, on a year-
on-year basis, the effect of the decline in crude oil prices falls away after a year. Therefore, 
while the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) is likely to be small in 
the first half of fiscal 2015 due to effects of the decline in crude oil prices to date, assuming 
that crude oil prices will rise moderately from their current level, it is expected to accelerate in 
the second half of fiscal 2015 as the effect of the fall in crude oil prices dissipates, and is 
expected to reach around 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015. Subsequently, for fiscal 2016 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  is  projected  to  reach 
2.2 percent as the economy continues to grow above the potential growth rate and the output 
gap  improves  in  positive  territory.  Since  crude  oil  prices  have  recently  been  fluctuating 
substantially,  the  2  percent  inflation  rate,  depending  on  developments  in  crude  oil  prices, 
may  be  achieved  somewhat  sooner  or  later  than  envisaged.  That  said,  however,  let  me 
reiterate that in our view, what matters is the underlying trend in inflation. 
Going forward, the Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. Of course, 
the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  as  necessary  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  at  the 
earliest possible time, if there are changes in the underlying trend in inflation. 
Regional economies after the 2 percent target has been achieved 
As explained, the Bank believes that the price stability target of 2 percent can be achieved 
through continuing with QQE. On the other hand, some have argued that QQE may lead only 
to higher inflation, which would undermine people’s standard of living. Therefore, let me talk 
about why it is necessary to aim at 2 percent. 
Under  deflation,  the  real  value  of  cash  and  deposits  increases  simply  by  holding  them. 
Therefore, hoarding cash and deposits becomes a better investment than actual investment. 
In  Japan,  as  a  result  of  protracted  deflation,  firms’  investment  in  business  facilities  and  in 
research  and  development  remained  restrained,  which  deprived  the  economy  of  potential 
growth and led to a loss of vitality. Such subdued business fixed investment is one reason 
that Japan’s potential growth rate has been on a declining trend (Chart 13). However, in an 
economy in which prices rise steadily at a rate of 2 percent, the situation changes drastically. 
That is, since the real value of cash and deposits will erode over time, firms need to make 
effective  use  of  their  funds  in  hand  in  the  form  of  investing  in  business  facilities  and  in 
research and development as well as recruiting and developing human resources. Proactive 
behavior such as venturing into new business areas will also increase. Such developments 
will enhance firms’ competitiveness and productivity, and consequently result in restoring the 
vitality  of  Japan’s  economy  as  well  as  raising  the  growth  potential. Japan’s  economy  as  a 
whole  will  likely  expand  accompanied  by  a  virtuous  cycle  among  income,  spending,  and 
production. What the Bank is aiming at is not to reach a state in which only prices rise, but 
one  in  which  the  economy  expands  with  corporate  profits  and  wages  rising,  and  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent is achieved. 
At present, Japan’s economy is still in the process of overcoming protracted deflation. The 
gains  from  the  improving  economic  situation  differ  substantially  between  large  and  small 
firms and between urban and regional areas rather than being evenly spread. Going forward, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  as the economy as a whole continues to grow with the virtuous cycle continuing to operate, 
corporate  profits  and  employee  income  are  likely  to  improve  further  and  the  gains  of  the 
economic recovery are expected to spread. 
Of  course,  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  in  itself  will  not  solve  the 
challenges regional economies face and raise their growth. Population decline and aging are 
progressing  more  rapidly  in  regional  than  in  urban  economies,  necessitating  medium-  to 
long-term  initiatives  to  raise  growth  in  the  regions.  Economic  growth  is  determined  by  the 
growth  rate  of  the  population  and  the  growth  rate  of  per  capita  value  added.  As  for  the 
population growth rate, there were only eight prefectures, among them Tokyo and Aichi, in 
which  the  population  increased  in  the  year  to  October  2013.  In  addition,  regional  areas 
relatively have a higher population share of those aged 65 or older and a lower working-age 
population  share  –  those  aged  15–64  –  than  urban  areas.  Wages  reflect  value  added  per 
worker, and there are only five prefectures – all in metropolitan areas – in which wages are 
above the national average: Tokyo, Kanagawa, Aichi, Kyoto, and Osaka. 
It is not going to be easy to stem the population decline and achieve a population increase in 
regional areas while the population of Japan as a whole continues to fall. This means that it 
is  necessary  to  first  raise  the  productivity  of  firms  located  in  the  regions  and  enhance  the 
value added that they produce. In fact, regional areas could take a number of initiatives to 
enhance value added in ways that differ from those of metropolitan areas, such as combining 
primary, secondary, and tertiary industries into “a sixth industry,” product branding, and using 
local history, culture, and the natural environment to promote tourism. Rising productivity will 
enable firms to raise wages, which in turn could lead to a virtuous cycle encouraging people 
to stay in or move to regional areas, since regional areas in fact offer many attractions, such 
as  allowing  people  to  live  close  to  their  workplace  and  to  live  in  an  environment  that 
facilitates raising children. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  in  an  economy  in  which  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  is 
sustained in a stable manner, it is advantageous to make effective use of cash and deposits 
for investment or human resource development rather than hoarding them. The Bank would 
like to reach this point as soon as possible and support firms’ initiatives. In addition, the Bank 
decided in January to extend the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the 
Foundations  for  Economic  Growth  and  the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Stimulate  Bank 
Lending  by  one  year  and  to  increase  the  maximum  amount  of  funds  for  the  former. 
Concurrently,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  a  new  framework  for  enabling  financial 
institutions that do not have a current account at the Bank and thus were not eligible, such as 
credit cooperatives and agricultural cooperative associations, to use these fund-provisioning 
facilities  through  their  central  organizations.  I  hope  that  these  facilities  will  be  used 
extensively for the development of regional economies. 
Conclusion 
In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Ehime Prefecture. 
Looking at the current state of the economy of Ehime Prefecture, while private consumption 
has been somewhat slow to pick up, overall, a virtuous cycle from income to spending has 
been  operating  just  as  in  Japan  as  a  whole,  with  production  at  a  high  level  and  the 
employment and income situation improving steadily. 
In  addition,  partly  due  to  falling  crude  oil  prices,  corporate  profits  have  generally  been 
favorable. However, as I mentioned earlier, the gains from the economic recovery have been 
unevenly  distributed  in  terms  of  industries  and  firm  size.  Specifically,  reflecting  the 
depreciation  of  the  yen,  there  have  been  significant  improvements  in  orders  and  profits  in 
shipbuilding, maritime industries, and other manufacturing industries with a global presence, 
whereas  improvements  in  business  sentiment  have  remained  moderate  in  the  pulp  and 
paper  industry  as  well  as  among  many  nonmanufacturing  small  firms  due  mainly  to  the 
increase in input prices. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  There are also various initiatives to boost Ehime’s economy. There have been encouraging 
examples. The “Imabari towel” product branding is famous for its considerable success and 
the industry has made a remarkable comeback. Recently, shipbuilding firms have built new 
large-scale  docks,  and  some  firms  in  the  region  have  enhanced  their  production  and 
research and development bases in the region. In addition, firms have also been active in 
expanding sales channels through cooperating with administration and financial institutions. 
The united efforts by related parties will substantially contribute to raising the productivity of 
the regional economy. 
In the tourism sector, there were ambitious initiatives last year incorporating cycling and the 
arts into existing tourism resources to enhance the profile and attractiveness of the region, 
such as “Setouchi Shimanowa 2014” in areas around the Shimanami Kaido bicycle path and 
“Dogo  Onsen  Art”  in  Dogo  Onsen.  In  addition,  Shikoku  region  was  featured  in  the  web 
version of the well-known Michelin Green Guide, boosting the region’s international profile. 
While  tourists  from  abroad  tend  to  concentrate  on  metropolitan  areas,  Hokkaido,  and 
Okinawa, promoting the region’s attractions not only to domestic but also to overseas tourists 
has the potential to substantially boost the regional economy. 
Furthermore, the regional revitalization plan of Saijo City was the only plan in Shikoku region 
to be designated as a model of vitalization of the local economy. Regarding the vitalization of 
the local economy, the government asked prefectures and municipalities to establish during 
fiscal 2015 their own long-term vision to overcome population decline and formulate regional 
versions of the government’s comprehensive strategy for vitalizing local economies. Ehime 
Prefecture, with a population that is declining and aging faster than Japan’s population as a 
whole, will also need to implement comprehensive policy measures to raise the value added 
of  regional  industries  in  order  to  increase  the  productivity  of  the  regional  economy  and  to 
attract those in their prime of life or raising children to the prefecture. 
I believe that specific initiatives will be considered through further cooperation between the 
administration  and  the  private  sector,  and  the  Bank’s  Matsuyama  Branch  will  conduct 
analyses  of  the  regional  economy  so  as  to  contribute  to  such  examination  as  much  as 
possible. 
In closing, I wish all the best for the further development of the regional economy. 
Thank you. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
