  Malcolm Edey: Opening statement to the Senate Economics References 
Committee Inquiry into matters relating to credit card interest rates 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Malcolm  Edey,  Assistant  Governor  (Financial  System)  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Senate  Economics  References  Committee  Inquiry  into 
matters relating to credit card interest rates, Sydney, 27 August 2015. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to appear today. 
I know the Committee is interested in a number of different aspects of credit card pricing and 
regulation, and we’ve tried to address those aspects that come within our field of expertise 
and responsibility in our submission. 
As we explain in the submission, credit cards have both a payment and a credit function. The 
regulatory powers and mandate of the Reserve Bank Payments System Board (the Board) 
relate  to  the  payment  function.  The  Board  has  a  mandate  to  use  its  powers  to  promote 
efficiency  and  competition  in  payment  systems,  consistent  with  overall  stability  of  the 
financial system. To that end, the Board has for a number of years regulated card payment 
systems  by  setting  standards  in  relation  to  such  matters  as  interchange  fees,  surcharging 
and access. 
As you know, the Board is currently undertaking a comprehensive review of those aspects of 
card payments regulation. I’ll be happy to answer any questions you might have today about 
how that review is proceeding. 
I  know  the  Committee  is  also  very  interested  in  the  credit  function,  and  particularly  the 
interest rates on credit cards. That is not something that we regulate, but we have set out in 
our submission an overview of some of the key facts. 
If I may, I’ll just make a few high-level observations about that before we go to questions. 
Credit card products vary a lot in the interest rates that they charge. Some of those rates are 
very high. They’re higher than I think can be easily explained. 
Interest rates of the order of 20 per cent on credit cards are not uncommon. The average 
rate  for  borrowers  who  incur  interest  on  credit  cards  is  currently  about  17  per  cent.  After 
deducting banks’ cost of funds and the cost of credit losses, that would equate to an interest 
rate margin of more than 10 percentage points. 
My advice if you’re in that situation is to shop around. Despite the prevalence of high-rate 
cards, this is a market where there is some significant competition. There are a lot of card 
products  that  offer  lower  rates  and  special  deals  for  balance  transfers.  In  many  cases, 
cardholders should be able to lower their interest rates by taking advantage of those offers, if 
they are willing to shop around. 
That  of  course  raises  questions  about  why  more  cardholders  don’t  take  advantage  of  the 
lower rates that are on offer, whether there are obstacles to competition and whether there 
might be some role for regulatory action. 
Some cardholders might be unable to switch, for example if they have poor credit histories. 
That is something that can be looked into, along with the related question of whether there 
are  unreasonable  obstacles  to  switching.  Other  cardholders  might  not  be  aware  of  the 
options available, or might have other reasons for not pursuing them. We discuss some of 
those issues in our submission. 
The  answers  to  these  questions  are  not  necessarily  straightforward,  and  I  think  these  are 
areas where the financial regulators can usefully do further work. When I appeared at this 
Committee in June I indicated that the Bank would consult with other regulators in this area, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
and  we  have  begun  doing  that. We  will  be  continuing  those  discussions  at  a  more  senior 
level at the next meeting of the Council of Financial Regulators in September. 
I  don’t  want  to  pre-empt  what  might  come  out  of  those  discussions,  but  some  of  the 
questions that might be considered are: whether there is a case for improved disclosure in 
this area; whether there is a need for stronger risk assessment requirements for credit card 
lending;  and  to  what  extent  any  actions  in  these  areas  would  fall  within  the  regulators’ 
existing powers and mandates. 
With that, my colleagues and I are happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
