Stephen S Poloz: Lessons new and old – reinventing central banking 
Inaugural address by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, for the Western 
University President’s Lecture, London, Ontario, 24 February 2015. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted to be back at Western, and honoured to be asked by President Chakma to 
give the inaugural address in the President’s Lecture Series. 
While preparing for today, I did a little reminiscing, and I was struck by how prophetic some 
of the lessons I learned here back in the late 1970s have turned out to be. 
Many of us came to Western at that time to learn from the high-profile duo of David Laidler 
and Michael Parkin. I can remember David Laidler telling me, “Steve, monetary targets will 
help keep us out of trouble, but if we do get into trouble, they might not get us out.” And then 
there was Michael Parkin, who later was my thesis adviser, who said, “Steve, there are lots 
of  monetary  policy  rules  that  deliver  the  same  inflation  outcome,  but  each  will  have  very 
different consequences for the economy.” 
Well,  those  words  ring  very  true  35  years  later,  particularly  given  our  experience  over  the 
past  decade.  While  central  banks  were  diligently  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation,  we 
witnessed the emergence of massive imbalances, an unprecedented expansion in leverage, 
a global financial crisis and a synchronized downturn in the world economy. Today, as we try 
to apply the lessons learned, we find ourselves weighing a wide range of consequences in 
charting the future course of monetary policy. 
Thanks  to  some  deft  policy-making,  the  global  economy  avoided,  barely,  a  second  Great 
Depression.  That  said,  the  Great  Recession  has  been  very  painful.  Indeed,  more  than  six 
years after the crisis, emergency monetary policies remain in place in many economies. In 
short, we are still a long way from home and the headwinds are strong. 
The experience of the past decade makes a pretty strong case that central banking needs to 
be reinvented. Keeping inflation on track certainly was not sufficient to keep us out of trouble. 
Some would even argue that the tranquility fostered by successful inflation targeting helped 
to spawn the crisis by leading investors and financial intermediaries to take excessive risks. 
At the very least, it seems to me that we need to take account of a wider range of economic 
and financial consequences while targeting low inflation. 
An evolution of central banking is already under way, supported by recent experience and 
new research. Today, I hope to inspire economists here and elsewhere to join these efforts. 
The lessons of history 
It is worth thinking back to how central banks operated under the gold standard in the 19th 
and  early  20th  centuries.  At  that  time,  keeping  the  financial  system  stable  –  preventing 
banking panics – was the primary objective. Under most circumstances, currency could be 
converted into gold, so the price of gold served as a nominal anchor – a type of inflation rule 
– for the economy. 
Central  banks  provided  an  elastic  supply  of  money,  expanding  or  shrinking  that  supply  to 
meet demand and maintain the fixed gold price. The aim was to avoid the wide swings in 
liquidity and interest rates that often heralded banking crises. The central bank of that era 
also supported financial stability by acting as the lender of last resort, thereby preventing a 
liquidity shortage in one bank from becoming a full-blown panic. 
The Bank of Canada – which, by the way, will celebrate its 80th anniversary in a couple of 
weeks  –  was  established  during  the  Great  Depression  with  these  objectives  in  mind, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
although  there  was  a  hint  of  a  more  ambitious  set  of  objectives,  given  the  state  of  the 
economy  at  the  time.  The  Bank  of  Canada  Act  instructed  the  Bank  to  regulate  credit  and 
currency in the best interests of the economic life of the nation and to protect the external 
value of the currency, but was largely silent about how to accomplish these tasks. 
In  the  event,  the gold  standard  proved  to  be too  rigid  a framework for monetary  policy.  In 
1944,  the  Bretton  Woods  Conference  gave  the  world  a  system  of  pegged  but  adjustable 
exchange rates, replacing the gold standard with a U.S.-dollar standard, which in turn was 
pegged to gold, at US$35 per ounce. 
This  system  also  proved  unsatisfactory  in  several  respects.  There  is  no  need  to  go  into 
detail, but the stresses of the early 1970s proved too much, and the Bretton Woods system 
collapsed,  launching  an  era  of  high  global  inflation  and  a  search  for  a  new  framework  for 
monetary policy formulation. 
A number of central banks, including the Bank of Canada, then adopted monetary targets as 
a means of getting inflation under control. Slow the growth of money and you slow the rate of 
inflation with minimal consequences for economic growth was how the theory went. 
This was the state of play when I came to Western in 1978, and there was solid academic 
support for that policy framework. But by the time I arrived at the Bank of Canada in 1981, 
there  was  growing  disenchantment  with  monetary  targeting,  as  the  link  with  inflation  was 
proving  to  be  unreliable.  For  practical  reasons,  the  target  had  to  be  abandoned.  But  as 
former  Governor  Gerald  Bouey  famously  put  it  in  1983:  “We  did  not  abandon  M1,  M1 
abandoned us.” 
The search for a better monetary policy framework continued through the rest of the 1980s, 
both in central banks and in academia. The questions were very fundamental: What is the 
optimal monetary policy? What is the best anchor for that policy? And should central bankers 
be bound by rules for policy, or should they be afforded some discretion? If so, how much? 
As  you  all  know,  a  consensus  emerged  that  central  banks  should  pursue  inflation  targets 
directly, rather than targeting an intermediate variable such as the money supply. In 1991, 
the Bank of Canada became the second central bank (after New Zealand) to adopt inflation 
targeting. And over the next 10 years, many other major central banks joined the inflation-
targeting club. 
At  the  time,  it  was  hard  to  argue  with  the  results.  Inflation  targeting  was  seen  as  a  key 
contributor to the “Great Moderation” – a period of about 15 years of steady economic growth 
and  low  and  stable  inflation  in  most  advanced  economies.  In  Canada,  and  elsewhere, 
consumers  and  businesses  could  make  longer-term  financial  plans  with  more  confidence. 
Interest  rates  were  lower,  and  economic  cycles  were  more  moderate.  Unemployment  was 
lower and less variable than in the past. 
This  success  contributed  to  the  widespread  belief  that  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation 
was the best, indeed the only, contribution that a central bank could make to the economy’s 
performance. Countries with dual central bank mandates – low inflation and strong growth or 
low unemployment – could rely on the “divine coincidence” that stable inflation would emerge 
only when the economy was operating at full capacity. 
And  what  about  the  issue  of  financial  stability?  Central  banks  would  remain  available  as 
lenders of last resort, the purpose for which they were originally created, but financial stability 
issues  were  seen  primarily  as  the  responsibility  of  regulators  and,  perhaps,  a  problem  for 
emerging-market economies with banking systems that weren’t fully developed. 
This policy consensus began to wobble as financial stability concerns grew during the mid-
2000s,  and  by  2007  it  had  fallen  apart.  Confidence  that  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable 
would keep us out of trouble had bred complacency, and complacency bred calamity. We all 
know the rest of the story. So far, the crisis has cost the global economy over US$10 trillion 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
in lost output, and we are discovering just how ineffective our policies can be in getting us out 
of trouble, once in. 
Crisis and response – early lessons 
There is no need to document all the monetary actions that have been deployed since 2008. 
Suffice to say that, with interest rates at all-time lows, in some cases even less than zero, 
and  massive  expansions  of  some  central  bank  balance  sheets,  monetary  policy  is  still 
pushing  flat  out  –  and  yet  still  we  see  a  lacklustre  outcome  for  the  world.  Obviously,  the 
headwinds we face are powerful ones, and they are dissipating only gradually. Although we 
are  not  out  of  the  woods  yet,  it  is  nevertheless  the  right  time  to  be  thinking  about  what 
monetary policy should look like once we are. 
The first lesson of the crisis is that low and stable inflation is a necessary, but not sufficient, 
condition for financial stability. The low nominal interest rates that came with low and stable 
inflation  led  investors  to  increase  leverage  and  risk  tolerance  in  a  desire  to  boost  their 
returns, and similarly encouraged consumers to ramp up borrowing. We learned that these 
vulnerabilities  can  build  up  over  time,  raising  the  risk  of  a  crisis  even  while  the  economy 
looks to be safe and sound. 
The second lesson is that, while imbalances can make an economy vulnerable, debt-fuelled 
imbalances are particularly hazardous. That’s because when there is a shock – such as the 
financial  crisis  –  it  can  take  a  very  long  time  for  balance  sheets  to  be  repaired,  and  the 
economy simply does not recover in the usual way. The massive price tag for cleaning up the 
crisis has demonstrated the value of preventing these imbalances from building up in the first 
place. 
The third lesson is that maintaining a low and stable inflation rate is a two-edged sword. Yes, 
there  are  the  expected  benefits  in  terms  of  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  economy  and 
financial markets. But there is a downside, too: the low equilibrium level for nominal interest 
rates  means  that  central  banks  have  very  little  room  to  manoeuvre  when  there  is  a  large 
negative shock, such as the one we encountered in 2008. Being constrained by the effective 
lower bound for interest rates has clearly prolonged the global economy’s adjustment. 
A fourth lesson is that policy-makers cannot safeguard domestic financial stability simply by 
focusing  on  the  safety  of  their  domestic  banking  system.  Policy-makers  didn’t  fully 
understand  the  risks  associated  with  new  forms  of  financial  intermediation  –  complex 
instruments 
they  didn’t  comprehend  how 
interconnected  the  global  financial  system  had  become,  and  how  easily  shocks  can  be 
amplified and transmitted. 
Responses  to  some  of  these  lessons  are  already  being  put  into  practice,  and  there  is 
considerable supporting research, both at the Bank and in academia. 
At the regulatory level, the G-20 countries recognized the need to make the world’s financial 
system  safer.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  was  given  the  task  of  coordinating  the 
development of minimum global standards around capital, liquidity and resolvability, as well 
as for market infrastructure, to reduce the risk and severity of any future financial crisis. By 
and large, the FSB has delivered and countries have begun to implement the new standards. 
On  the  monetary  policy  front,  central  banks  must,  at  the  very  least,  understand  emerging 
financial  stability  risks  when  conducting  monetary  policy.  All  central  banks  have  upgraded 
their capacity in this area. The Bank of Canada now takes a more structured approach to our 
analysis in our semi-annual Financial System Review. 
Specifically, we use more and better data to assist our financial system monitoring, backed 
by deeper conversations and models where appropriate, to make more informed judgments 
about financial stability risks. We’ve added other potential sources of vulnerability, such as 
the balance sheets of households, companies and banks, to our macroeconomic models. 
like  collateralized  debt  obligations.  And 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
We’re also making progress toward a better understanding of how monetary policy actions 
influence  risk  taking.  For  example,  when  a  central  bank  cuts  interest  rates  to  cushion  the 
economy from a shock, the hope is that people will borrow more at that lower interest rate 
and spend more money. What this means is that financial imbalances are a necessary by-
product of monetary policy action, especially if the action is prolonged, so these additional 
adjustment dynamics must be fully taken into account when conducting policy. 
Clearly, though, incorporating financial stability into our monetary policy framework remains a 
work in progress. As a practitioner, it still feels to me like we are adding various rooms onto a 
house we love, rather than creating a new, elegant and coherent structure. We need to make 
sure there’s enough flexibility and clarity about the role of financial stability in our monetary 
policy  framework.  We  need  to  better  understand  how  macroprudential  policies  –  such  as 
mortgage  insurance  rules  –  that  are  aimed  at  promoting  financial  stability  interact  with 
monetary policy. 
Above all, our experience of these past few years reminds us that, as economists, there is a 
great deal that we just do not know. Our models are simple abstractions, and the notion of 
uncertainty  that  we  build  into  them  is  usually  of  the  benign,  white-noise  type  that  policy-
makers can generally ignore. I would argue, rather, that the uncertainty that central bankers 
face is truly fundamental – Knightian in nature and scope – and we run the risk of making 
major policy errors if we simply assume that uncertainty away. This necessarily transforms 
monetary policy-making from something akin to reverse engineering into an exercise in risk 
management. 
Known unknowns 
So, let me now touch on some of the “known unknowns” that are on my mind, speaking as a 
practitioner of monetary policy – ideas for further research, if you will. 
First,  there  is  the  globalization  of  production,  by  which  I  mean  the  optimal  geographic 
distribution  of  production  chains  by  companies. We  see research  and  development  in  one 
country, manufacturing of components in several other countries, and final assembly in yet 
another. 
This phenomenon is well documented, but its effect on some of the things we hold dear is 
not  well  understood.  For  example,  there  is  evidence  that  fluctuations  in  global  inflation 
account for  a  large  and  growing  share  of  the  variation  in  inflation  in  individual  economies. 
How does this affect our ability to target domestic inflation? And how does the international 
rearrangement  of  manufacturing  processes  affect  the  way  that  monetary  policy  influences 
the domestic economy? 
Second,  there  has  traditionally  been  a  reasonably  well-understood  role  for  exchange  rate 
fluctuations in monetary policy actions, and in the equilibration of the economy in response to 
shocks. Canada, in particular, remains committed to a flexible exchange rate regime. But a 
growing share of global output is now produced in economies with fixed or heavily managed 
exchange rates; plus, as I said, companies have spread their supply chains across multiple 
countries with multiple exchange rates. How does all this affect the transmission of monetary 
policy actions to the economy? 
Third, there are interesting questions around the impact of changing income distribution on 
the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Globally, we are in the midst of two dramatic 
waves: a demographic wave, as large numbers of workers in their peak earning years retire; 
and  a  technological  wave,  which  is  producing  structural  adjustments  in  labour  markets, 
especially  in  the  middle  of  the  income  distribution.  How  do  these  forces  affect  the 
responsiveness of the economy to monetary policy, and our ability to maintain low and stable 
inflation? 
Fourth,  our  macroeconomic  models  are  based  on  the  so-called  “representative  firm”  that 
reacts to policy changes by, for example, borrowing, hiring and investing more when interest 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
rates  are  lowered,  and  less  when  they  are  raised.  But  we  know  that  smaller firms  behave 
very differently from large firms, and the credit channels they deal with are not the same at 
all.  In  our  current  situation,  where  so  many  firms  have  simply  disappeared,  we  need  to 
understand these processes well, because our ultimate recovery will depend on a rebuilding 
process involving high levels of new firm creation. 
These are just some of the things on my mind, and they arise just as the Bank prepares to 
renew  its  inflation-targeting  agreement  with  the  government,  which  is  scheduled  for  2016. 
The technical issues directly related to that agreement were laid out in a speech in Calgary in 
November by my colleague, Deputy Governor Agathe Côté, which I recommend to you. But it 
should be clear that the lessons of the recent crisis are colouring the research agenda. 
As  Agathe  Côté  said  in  her  speech,  nothing  is  broken,  and  the  bar  for  changes  to  the 
inflation-targeting agreement will be high. In spite of the financial stability issues I have raised 
today, inflation targeting has served us well, and we remain committed to the concept. As I 
said at the beginning of my remarks, however, there are lots of monetary policy rules with the 
same  inflation  outcome,  each  with  different  implications  for  the  economy,  and  we  need  to 
understand these better within an agreed inflation-targeting regime. 
We have learned that the interest rates associated with 2 per cent inflation leave very little 
room  to  manoeuvre  in response  to  large shocks.  Furthermore,  we  know  that  the  so-called 
neutral real interest rate will be  lower in future, for demographic reasons in particular, and 
this will reduce our manoeuvring room even more. Together, this could mean a greater risk in 
the future of hitting the effective lower bound for interest rates for any given inflation target. 
We will need to consider the risks of any changes to the current flexible inflation-targeting 
regime,  including  any  possible  side  effects  on  policy  credibility,  before  we  make  any 
decisions. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a few thoughts on our current situation. Since the onset of the crisis, 
central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  have  been  reworking  the  way  they  balance 
risks  to financial  stability  and  inflation  with  their policies.  In  a  discussion  paper  last  year, I 
tried to detail how we apply this risk-management framework, using the experience of 2013 
and  the  first  half  of  2014  as  an  illustration.  But  the  events  of  the  last  six  months  have 
illustrated these points even more vividly. 
The Bank has been setting policy with a view to balancing the risks facing both the outlook 
for returning inflation sustainably to its target, and the risks to financial stability such as those 
posed  by  the  indebtedness  of  Canadian  households.  The  sudden  drop  in  global  oil  prices 
has increased both risks. The oil-price shock is an important setback in our progress toward 
full capacity, full employment and stable inflation because it is a net negative for economic 
growth. And because lower oil prices mean lower Canadian income, the shock will worsen 
the debt-to-income ratio of Canadian households, thereby increasing financial stability risks. 
Our  decision  to  lower  the  policy  interest  rate  last  month  was  intended  to  take  out  some 
insurance against both sets of risks. It gives us greater confidence that we can get back to 
full capacity and stable inflation by the end of 2016, instead of sometime in 2017, and it will 
cushion  the  decline  in  income  and  employment,  as  well  as  the  rise  in  the  debt-to-income 
ratio, that lower oil prices will bring. 
Using the term “insurance” underscores that we are in a very uncertain setting, and what we 
are trying to do is to manage the risks we face, not eliminate them – we are not in a position 
to  engineer  the  perfect  outcome.  The  negative  effects  of  lower  oil  prices  hit  the  economy 
right away, and the various positives – more exports because of a stronger U.S. economy 
and a lower dollar, and more consumption spending as households spend less on fuel – will 
arrive only gradually, and are of uncertain size. Plus, the oil price shock itself is of uncertain 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
size. So, the downside risk insurance from the interest rate cut buys us some time to see 
how the economy actually responds. 
As  you  can  tell,  it’s  an  exciting  time  to  be  a  central  banker.  Monetary  policy-making  is 
evolving  in  real  time  and,  as  I  have  argued,  is  deserving  of  true  reinvention.  We  need  to 
develop  a  monetary  policy  framework  that  integrates  inflation  risks  and  financial  stability 
risks, both statically and dynamically, and captures much more accurately the uncertainties 
we face – in short, a true synthesis that takes full account of the lessons of the past, both 
new and old. Let’s get to it. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
