  Andreas Dombret: What can capital markets deliver? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  ILF  (Institute  for  Law  and  Finance)  Conference  on  “The  European 
Capital  Markets  Union,  a  viable  concept  and  a  real  goal?”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  18  March 
2015. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this year’s ILF conference. The topics of this 
conference are very well chosen, and I am therefore grateful for the opportunity to speak at 
today’s  event  and  to  share  my  thoughts  on  the  European  capital  markets  union.  But  let’s 
begin by taking a step back. 
As some of you will know, I spent ten years of my life working for JP Morgan. The legend 
goes that one day, old John Pierpont Morgan was approached by a young man who asked 
about the secret of the stock market. John Pierpont Morgan looked at the young man and 
replied: “it fluctuates”. 
In my view, that is an important thing to know about the inner nature of capital markets, but it 
is  certainly  not  all  there  is  to  know.  My  short  intervention  today  will  therefore  address  a 
different question: what can capital markets deliver? 
Given  the  current  discussions  about  a  European  capital  markets  union,  it  seems  that  we 
expect quite a lot from capital markets. Let’s take a closer look and discuss whether these 
expectations are justified. 
2.   Diversification – strengthening capital markets 
In essence, the European capital markets union has two objectives. The first objective is to 
increase the share of capital markets in the funding mix of the real economy. The second 
objective is to integrate capital markets more closely across borders. 
Some  people  relate  the  first  objective  to  the  question  of  whether  a  capital  markets-based 
financial system is superior to a bank-based financial system. Well, to sum up the empirical 
evidence: it is impossible to tell. 
There  is  certainly  some  evidence  indicating  that  capital  markets-based  financing  might 
increase  pro-cyclicality.1  Nevertheless,  the  recent  crisis  shed  light  on  these  issues  from 
another angle. A system in which the real economy relies on a single source of funding will 
most certainly run into trouble when that source dries up – regardless of whether it is bank 
funding or capital market funding. 
Therefore, it is not a question of “either/or”. The objective of the European capital markets 
union is not to abandon bank-based funding but to supplement it with capital markets-based 
funding. And in Europe above all places there is ample room to do so. The European stock 
market  is  only  60%  the  size  of  the  US  stock  market  when  measured  in  relation  to  GDP. 
                                                
1   Adrian,  T;  Shin,  H  S  (2010),  Liquidity  and  Leverage.  In:  Journal  of  Financial  Intermediation,  Vol  19  (3), 
pp 418–437.  Leroy,  A  (2014),  Credit  Procyclicality  and  Financial  Structure  in  the  EU”.  Available  at  SSRN: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2568112 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2568112. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Likewise, the European market for venture capital is 20% the size of the US market, and for 
securitisation the percentage is even lower.2 
In  the  end,  it  comes  down  to  the  uncontested  argument  of  diversification.  Increasing  the 
share of capital markets will improve and broaden access to funding particularly for small and 
medium-sized  enterprises.  At  the  same  time,  it  will  improve  the  matching  of  investors  to 
financial  risk,  thereby  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  As  a  result,  the 
financial system will be able to better support sustainable economic growth. 
Integration – forming a single capital market 
3.  
The second objective of the European capital markets union is to improve the integration of 
capital markets in the entire European Union. What is it that integrated capital markets can 
deliver?  One  of  the  main  arguments  is  that  they  can  improve  private  risk  sharing.  The 
technical question is: to what degree does a shock to the economy affect consumption? 
Empirical studies for the United States show that integrated capital markets cushion around 
40%  of  the  cyclical  fluctuations  among  the  US  federal  states.  A  share  of  around  25%  is 
smoothed via the credit markets, while fiscal policy cushions 10–20% of shocks. Altogether, 
around  80%  of  a  given  economic  shock  is  absorbed  before  it  can  affect  consumption3 
Studies for Canada yield similar results.4  
In Europe, the picture looks different. Here, it is mainly credit markets that cushion economic 
shocks – and they are not very effective in doing so. Altogether, only around 40% of a given 
shock is absorbed before it can affect consumption.5 Increasing the share of capital markets 
and integrating them across borders would therefore help improve risk sharing in Europe and 
reduce the volatility of consumption. 
4.   How to get there 
Increasing the share of capital markets in the funding mix of the real economy can contribute 
to economic growth. At the same time, integrating capital markets across borders can help 
improve  private  risk  sharing  within  Europe.  The  Bundesbank  therefore  believes  that  the 
European capital markets union is a goal worth pursuing. 
But how do we get there? The argument for a capital markets union is straightforward, while 
its implementation is much less so. The capital markets union is a complex undertaking that 
touches upon many different areas. Consequently, the European Commission’s green paper 
on this subject6 includes a wide variety of suggestions and steps to be taken. 
With regard to the objective of increasing the share of capital markets, we should focus on 
equity markets. Against this backdrop, let me emphasise the issue of taxes. Currently, tax 
treatment  still  favours  debt  financing  over  equity  financing.  Removing  this  bias  in  taxation 
would  encourage  companies  to  strengthen  their  equity  base  and  thus  turn  more  towards 
equity capital markets in their search for sources of funds. 
                                                
2   Bank of England (2015), A European Capital Markets Union: Implications for Growth and Stability. Financial 
Stability Paper No 33, February 2015. 
3   Asdrubali  P;  Sørensen,  B  E;  Yosha,  O  (1996),  “Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing:  US  1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1081–1110. 
4   Balli, F S; Kalemli-Ozcan, S; Sorensen, B E (2012), Risk Sharing Through Capital Gains. In: Canadian Journal 
of Economics, Vol 45(2), pp 472–492. 
5   Afonso,  A;  Furceri,  D  (2007),  Business  Cycle  Synchronization  and  Insurance  Mechanisms  in  the  EU.  ECB 
Working Paper No 844, December 2007. 
6   European Commission (2015), Building a Capital Markets Union – Green Paper. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In terms of the objective of integrating capital markets across Europe, there are some areas 
where standardisation could give us some early gains. 
The market for high-quality securitisation is one of these areas. So far, a number of policy 
initiatives  have  been  launched  to  restart  European  securitisation  markets,  including  an 
initiative by the European Commission to develop a framework for simple, transparent and 
standardised securitisation. 
Other areas for early action include private placements, crowd-funding or the harmonisation 
of  prospectuses.  With  a  view  to  the  long-run,  it  might  also  be  beneficial  to  further  the 
development of funded pensions in order to enlarge and deepen European capital markets. 
Another long-term objective could be to harmonise insolvency laws across Europe. 
In any case, we should not exclusively focus on the institutional and legal framework in our 
efforts to create a European capital markets union. There might also be soft factors at play, 
such as cultural preferences for certain forms of funding or the level of financial education. 
We also should address these issues in order to achieve our objective. 
5.   Conclusion 
Ultimately,  the  path  towards  a  European  capital  markets  union  will  be  long  and  arduous. 
There will certainly be resistance, and there will be difficulties. Therefore, we should remain 
realistic about what can be achieved. 
Nevertheless, we embarked on the path of financial integration by adopting a single currency 
in 1999. And we must not stop there but deepen integration in order to make the European 
monetary  union  work.  In  November  2014,  we  took  a  major  step  by  establishing  a  single 
European mechanism for banking supervision; now, we should consider taking another key 
step by forming a European capital markets union – one that not only includes the euro area 
but extends to the entire European Union. 
I would therefore like to conclude with a quote that is attributed to Robert Kennedy, although 
he allegedly borrowed it from his brother John F Kennedy, who – according to his advisor 
Ted Sorensen – borrowed it from someone else. In any case, the quote goes like this: “Some 
see things as they are and say “why?”. Others dream of things that never were and say “why 
not?”. With regard to the European capital markets union, I suggest we should join the latter 
group. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
