  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Regional integration and global integration – is there a 
conflict? 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum Kuala Lumpur Debate, 
Kuala Lumpur, 20 March 2015. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  inaugural  Kuala  Lumpur  Debates,  which  is 
being held on the side of the 19th ASEAN Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
Meetings. It is envisaged for this to be the first in a series of KL Debates intended to serve as 
a  strategic  forum  for  policy  makers,  industry  players  as  well  as  members  of  the  public  to 
constructively discuss the key issues confronting the economies of our region and thus to 
facilitate  greater  understanding  as  we  work  towards  building  stronger  foundations  for 
sustainable growth. 
The  motion  that  is  put  forward  for  debate  today  is  “Regional  integration  and  global 
integration: is there a conflict”. The debate format is chosen to allow both points of view to be 
heard,  thereby  ensuring  a  balanced  discussion  and  evaluation  of  the  issues.  This  topic  is 
highly relevant to ASEAN as there have been various views on ASEAN integration and what 
it means for the rest of the world. 
East Asia in particular has become more integrated than ever before as manifested by the 
size of intra-regional trade, which now accounts for about half of the region’s total trade in 
2014,  and  the  increase  in  intra-regional  investment  flows  (foreign  direct  investment  for 
ASEAN-10  for  example  rose  more  than  50  percent  to  17%  in  2013  from  11%  in  2003). 
Regional cooperation such as the harmonisation of rules, liberalisation and deregulation in 
various  economic  sectors,  enhancing  regional  safety  nets,  has  also  intensified  since  the 
Asian financial crisis. The increase in the network of dialogue has also brought the region 
closer together. These trends have coincided  with Asia’s increasing significance, influence 
and integration in the world economy, with the region contributing to more than half of global 
growth since 2008. There is hence a growing international interest to better understand the 
region and the implications of the greater regional integration in Asia within the context of the 
global economy. 
I  believe  we  have  an  eminent  and  well  qualified  panel  of  speakers  to  provide  us  their 
perspectives on this topic. I hope you enjoy  listening to their views. I am certainly looking 
forward to it. 
On that note, I wish to thank OMFIF for co-hosting this debate with Bank Negara Malaysia. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
