  Carolyn Wilkins: Minding the labour gap 
Remarks  by  Ms  Carolyn  Wilkins,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the 
Ottawa Economics Association, Ottawa, Ontario, 10 February 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Stephen Murchison and Eric Santor for their help in preparing this speech. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation. It’s a real pleasure to be here with my colleagues in Ottawa. As 
economists and policymakers, we are keenly aware of the continuing challenges facing the 
global economy. Even though Canada has had its share of setbacks over the last few years, 
we  are  fortunate  to  have  been  on  a  relatively  steady  growth  path,  with  low  and  stable 
inflation. At least part of the credit has to go to sound economic and financial policies, as well 
as the prudent behaviour of our financial institutions. 
The U.S economy has been gathering strength and we have seen growth in Canada become 
more broadly based. But the Canadian economy is still operating below its potential, and the 
sharp drop in oil prices is a setback. That is why the Bank of Canada lowered the policy rate 
a couple of weeks ago. 
What I’d like to do today is walk you through the Bank’s assessment of how much room the 
economy has to grow and why we’re minding the labour gap. I’ll then talk about how lower oil 
prices will affect this picture, both domestically and globally. And finally, I’ll explain what all of 
this means for monetary policy. 
The divine coincidence 
You won’t be surprised when I say, as a central banker, that my objective is to achieve low, 
stable and predictable inflation. And so my interest in assessing the capacity of the Canadian 
economy is related to that goal. 
Of  course,  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target  is  a  means  –  it’s  not  the  end.  It  is  the  best 
contribution monetary policy can make to the economic and financial well-being of Canada. 
And achieving the inflation target is consistent with closing the output gap and attaining full 
employment  in  a  typical  business  cycle.  Among  economists,  this  is  known  as  the  “divine 
coincidence.”1  
This business cycle has been far from typical. It spans a particularly destructive recession. 
Companies  discarded  unneeded  capital  and  eliminated  jobs.  Many  closed  their  doors  for 
good. We know that a large number of firms in Canada simply disappeared, and with them, 
so  did  significant  physical  capital.  But  people  are  not  like  capital  –  the  workforce  is  still 
available to be productively employed. 
It is critical that we consider the labour market for two reasons. First, we want to correctly 
gauge  underlying  inflation  pressures  in  Canada.  Understanding  the  degree  of  slack  in  the 
economy  helps  us  avoid  making  policy  decisions  that  could  trigger  inflationary  or 
disinflationary pressures. Second, we don’t want to inadvertently stifle the rebuilding phase of 
an economy that will need to adjust to a lower price of oil. Right now, measures of economic 
                                                
1   Divine  coincidence  refers  to  a  situation  in  which  aggregate  demand,  long-run  supply  equilibrium  and  price 
stability  are  complementary  objectives.  See  O.  Blanchard  and  J.  Galí,  “Real Wage  Rigidities  and  the  New 
Keynesian Model,” Working Paper No 05–14, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 2005. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  slack that focus exclusively on the labour market show greater unused capacity than broader 
measures do.2  
The space between the gaps 
The Bank relies on a  wide range of indicators to assess the degree of underlying inflation 
pressures. This is because there is uncertainty around any single one. Our indicators range 
from simple capacity utilization measures to results from the Business Outlook Survey and 
more  complex  statistical  analyses.3  And  we  continue  to  build  our  tools  to  measure  output 
gaps. 
Right  now,  simple  measures  of  capacity  utilization  are  actually  somewhat  above  historical 
averages (Chart  1).  Firms  have  been  telling  us  that they  are  producing  more  with  existing 
capacity  rather than  investing  in  new  productive  capital. Growth  over  the  last few  quarters 
has been mainly fuelled by a pickup in labour productivity. It has not been due to a material 
improvement in employment (Chart 2). In fact, employment growth last year was less than 
what would be consistent with growth in the economy’s potential.4  
You can get a better sense of how important this is when you take a structural approach to 
measuring the output gap. We used a growth-accounting framework to help us estimate the 
output gap and the labour market gap.5 For those who are interested in learning more, we 
just posted a paper on this on our website.6  
What  this  method  tells  us  is  quite  important.  Excess  capacity  in  the  labour  market,  the 
“labour gap,” was about 1 1/2 per cent at the end of last year, which is the equivalent to a 
shortfall  of  about  270,000  jobs.7  That’s  roughly  twice  the  size  of  the  Bank’s  overall 
assessment  of  the  output  gap.  The  beauty  of  this  measure  is  that  it  accounts  for 
demographic  changes,  and  so  we  can  get  a  better  read  on  what  is  cyclical  and  what  is 
structural.  Prime-age  and  young  workers  are  those  who  remain  underemployed,  while  the 
contribution of older workers to the labour gap is close to zero (Chart 3). 
Another measure we use is the labour market indicator (LMI), which we started publishing on 
a regular basis this year. This indicator shows that the overall labour market has more room 
                                                
2  
In the parlance of the 1960s and 1970s, we are seeing a divergence from Okun’s Law, which holds there is a 
negative  statistical  relationship  between  growth  and  unemployment.  Okun’s  Law  is  named  for  economist 
Arthur  Okun  who,  in  the  early  1960s,  showed  that  in  the  United  States,  unemployment  tended  to  fall  by 
1 percentage point for every three percentage point rise in GDP. 
3   T. Macklem, “Information and Analysis for Monetary Policy: Coming to a Decision,” Bank of Canada Review 
(Summer 2002): 11–18. 
4   Monthly net job creation was about 10,000 in 2014, roughly 3,500 lower than what would be consistent with 
growth in potential. 
5   The integrated framework (IF) is based on the growth-accounting framework that decomposes potential GDP 
into contributions coming from trend labour input (hours worked) and trend labour productivity (output per hour 
worked). On the trend labour input side, the IF uses an empirical model that largely depends on demographic 
developments, as well as other factors such as school enrolment and disincentives linked with employment 
insurance. On the trend labour productivity side, the approach links the capital stock with investment to identify 
trend  capital  deepening  and  uses  a  combination  of  filters  and  detailed  analysis  of  variables  such  as 
investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  and  research  and  development  to  estimate  trend  total  factor 
productivity. 
6   L. Pichette, P. St-Amant, B. Tomlin and K. Anoma, “Measuring Potential Output at the Bank of Canada: The 
Extended Multivariate Filter and the Integrated Framework,” Discussion Paper No. 2015–1, Bank of Canada, 
January 2015. 
7   The estimate of 270,000 jobs corresponds to approximately 1.5 per cent of the Bank’s structural estimate of 
trend employment in 2014Q4. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
for improvement than the headline unemployment rate would suggest.8 The unemployment 
rate is currently close to its post-recession low  of about 6 1/2 per cent,  while the LMI has 
fluctuated in a narrow range around 7 1/2 per cent since the end of 2011 (Chart 4). 
There are a number of factors that explain this difference. Average hours worked remain low, 
and more than one in four people who have part-time jobs would prefer to work full-time.9 At 
the same time, the participation rate of prime-age workers – the core of our labour market – 
actually fell substantially in 2014. And average unemployment duration is lingering close to 
its post-crisis peak, at about 21 weeks. That is a long time to be unemployed. You might be 
starting to lose your skills, you’re adjusting your lifestyle, and you may even be thinking about 
dropping out of the labour force. That is valuable capacity at risk. 
It’s  not  surprising,  then,  that  wage  increases  remain  subdued  despite  strong  productivity 
growth.  Consequently,  there  are  currently  no  inflation  pressures  coming  from  the  labour 
market overall. 
Some of the prolonged weakness in labour markets is to be expected. The quality of jobs 
erodes  in  a  downturn.10  Finding  a  job  is  harder.  The  process  of  matching  workers  to  jobs 
deteriorates  rapidly  and  is  slow  to  improve.  Firms  wait  for  greater  certainty  about  the 
recovery before they hire, and workers hesitate to leap to new jobs when they feel insecure. 
The pace of improvement in this matching process depends on the duration and the strength 
of the expansion.11 The pace of growth is something that monetary policy influences directly. 
Setting the right monetary conditions, in the context of our inflation targeting regime, is the 
best thing we can do for the labour market. 
Oil matters 
The recent drop in oil prices matters a lot for how the recovery continues to unfold. Canada is 
a  net  exporter  of  energy,  and  so  the  price  of  oil  has  implications  for  both  the  speed  and 
distribution of growth. 
Oil prices are down by about 50 per cent since last June, and that has caused a significant 
drop  in  our  terms  of  trade  –  the  price  of  what  we  export  relative  to  the  price  of  what  we 
import.12  The  fall  in  oil  revenues  will  be  large  and  is  occurring  already.  Overall  domestic 
demand will weaken as the impact of this decline spreads through the Canadian economy 
via channels such as wealth, income, and interprovincial trade. If oil prices were to average 
                                                
8   The LMI looks much deeper into the labour market than the unemployment rate by combining eight indicators 
of labour market health: underutilization rate, unemployment rate, long-term unemployment, separation rate, 
participation rate (prime-age), wage growth, average hours worked, and job-finding rate. The LMI is scaled to 
be  comparable  with  the  unemployment  rate,  and  thus  provide  a  simple  benchmark  against  which  to  judge 
whether the unemployment rate is evolving in a manner consistent with broader labour market conditions. See 
K. Zmitrowicz and M. Khan, “Beyond the Unemployment Rate: Assessing Canadian and U.S. Labour Markets 
Since the Recession,” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 2014): 42–53. 
Increases in involuntary part-time work were observed across age groups and accounted for virtually all of the 
increase  in  the  share  of  part-time  employment.  For  additional  details  on  the  evolution  of  labour  force 
participation rates and part-time employment across age groups and regions, see C. Cheung, D. Granovsky 
and G. Velasco, “Changing Labour Market Participation Since the Great Recession: A Regional Perspective,” 
Discussion Paper No. 2015–2, Bank of Canada, February 2015. 
9  
10   L. B. Kahn and E. McEntarfer, “Employment Cyclicality and Firm Quality,” NBER Working Paper No. 20698, 
November 2014. 
11   P. Diamond and A. Sahin, “Shifts in the Beveridge Curve,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 
No. 687, August 2014. 
12   T.  Lane,  “Drilling  Down  –  Understanding  Oil  Prices  and  Their  Economic  Impact”  (speech  to  Madison 
International Trade Association, Madison, Wisconsin, 13 January 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  $60 per barrel and monetary policy did not respond, gross domestic income would be about 
4 1/2 per cent lower by the end of 2016.13 That would affect incomes of Canadians. 
While  some  regions  will  clearly  bear  more  of  the  brunt  than  others,  the  impact  will  be  felt 
across  the  country.  Nearly  one-third  of  the  goods  and  services  purchased  by  the  Alberta 
energy industry are drawn from other provinces – and so are the workers.14 Lower incomes 
would also lead to an increase in household imbalances. We laid all this out in our January 
Monetary Policy Report. 
Many  of  the  negative  effects  of  lower  oil  prices  on  growth  happen  swiftly.  Energy-related 
firms are already paring back investment and hiring intentions. We expect capital investment 
in  the  oil  and  gas  sector  to  fall  by  about  30  per  cent  in  2015.  This  is  huge  given  the 
importance of investment in this sector for overall growth. Current spot prices are below full-
cycle break-even cost estimates for most oil sands projects, which can typically range from 
$60  to  $100  per  barrel.  So  unless  firms  cut  costs  and  become  more  efficient,  continuing 
production will not make good business sense. 
Fortunately, there will be some offsets, although these will take longer to materialize and are 
uncertain. The stronger U.S. economy and a weaker Canadian dollar will cushion the impact 
of lower oil prices, and so we expect some further improvements in the non-energy export 
sector.  Our  Business  Outlook  Survey  shows  manufacturers  are  more  positive  about 
investment intentions and employment. This is important for provinces such as Ontario and 
Quebec that have supply-chain links to the energy sector. 
If low oil prices persist, they will spur a significant reallocation of workers across sectors and 
regions.15 We’ve seen this happen in previous oil price cycles, as energy-intensive regions 
gear  up  and  then  gear  down.  This  affects  labour  market  conditions  across  the  country. 
Because oil prices were so strong up until mid-last year, there is currently no slack (and there 
was  even  a  little  excess  demand)  in  provinces  west  of  Ontario.  All  of  the  current  slack  in 
labour markets is in provinces east of Manitoba (Chart 5). 
This will change as the economy adjusts. A relatively hot spot in the Canadian economy is 
now cooling. How quickly the adjustments happen depends on the timing of contracts and 
firms’  expectations  of  the  depth  and  duration  of  oil-price  weakness.  We’re  already  seeing 
signs  that  the  stream  of  workers  commuting  to  Alberta  from  other  parts  of  the  country  is 
slowing. Fly-in-fly-out contract workers, many of whom are from Atlantic Canada, may be the 
first to feel the effects.16  
Inflation easing globally 
Oil prices are also affecting the global economy in ways that matter to Canada. First, lower 
prices offer a much-needed boost to global growth. Second, they are pushing down global 
inflation. 
I’ll start with the positive effect on global growth. It couldn’t have come at a better time, given 
the excess capacity we see in many countries, especially in advanced economies.17 Global 
                                                
13   The impact on income is relative to a scenario in which the price of Brent crude remains at US$110. See Bank 
of Canada Monetary Policy Report (January 2015): 25–26. 
14   “Fuel for Thought: The Economic Benefits of Oil Sands Investment for Canada’s Regions,” Conference Board 
of Canada Report, October 2012. 
15   P. Antunes and K. Beckman, “Regional Shake Up: The Impact of Lower Oil Prices on Canada’s Economy,” 
The Conference Board of Canada, 20 January 2015. 
16   The  Conference  Board  estimates  that  about  $375  million  in  income  from  fly-in-fly-out  workers  accrued  to 
Atlantic Canadians in 2014. See P. Antunes and K. Beckman, “Regional Shake Up: The Impact of Lower Oil 
Prices on Canada’s Economy,” The Conference Board of Canada, 20 January 2015. 
17   We estimate that the excess supply is about 1.0 to 2.0 per cent at the global level. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  labour  gaps  are  significant. 
In  some  places,  we  are  seeing 
labour  market  conditions  are  not  any  better,  with  unemployment  rates  often  above  10  per 
cent.  So, 
long-term 
unemployment, involuntary part-time work, and other indicators of hysteretic effects in labour 
markets.18  
It’s no surprise, then, that real wage growth has stagnated. The share of income that is going 
to labour has been falling, continuing a trend that started three decades ago (Chart 6). The 
decline implies that more income is going to those with a higher savings rate. So they aren’t 
spending  the  income.  Fortunately,  lower  oil  prices  are  providing  some  offset  by  putting 
money back in people’s wallets. Overall, lower oil prices will boost global economic growth, 
particularly in the United States and China, Canada’s major trading partners. 
So, we’ve talked about growth. Let’s turn now to the effect that the drop in oil prices is having 
on  inflation.  Lower  headline  inflation  increases  the  risk  that  inflation  expectations  become 
unanchored, particularly in the euro area, where inflation forecasts have been revised down 
(Chart  7).  Clearly, monetary  policy  actions  taken  by  the  European  Central  Bank  and  other 
central banks around the globe will help to anchor inflation expectations. 
Canada  has  a  very  open  economy,  so  the  boost  in  world  growth  is  good  for  us.  Global 
inflation or disinflation trends matter, too. Our work shows that up to a quarter of the variance 
in  core  inflation  in  Canada  can  be  explained  by  a  common  global  factor.  That  is, 
developments that affect inflation at the global level can have an impact on inflation here at 
home. 
Fuel in the tank 
Now, let me turn to what this means for monetary policy. In the days leading up to our policy 
decision on 21 January, we considered the implications of the fall in oil prices and whether 
our policy rate of 1 per cent was still appropriate. Monetary policy was already stimulative. 
Yet our initial projections suggested that if oil prices were to settle around $60 per barrel, and 
we did not change the policy path  we had anticipated last October, it would take until late 
2017  for  the  output  gap  to  close. We  thought  that  was  an  unreasonably  long  time  frame, 
especially coming on the heels of successive delays in closing the output gap and achieving 
full employment. 
The  oil-price  shock  increased  the  downside  risks  to  inflation,  particularly  given  the 
uncertainty  about  the  strength  and  timing  of  the  offsets  coming  from  the  stronger  U.S. 
economy and a weaker Canadian dollar. That, in and of itself, warranted a response. Lower 
oil  prices  also  increased  the  risks  to  financial  stability  because  they  could  trigger  the 
household vulnerabilities that we had warned about in our Financial System Review. 
In  order  to  meet  our  inflation  target  over  a  reasonable  time  frame,  while  insuring  against 
financial  stability  risks,  we  lowered  the  policy  rate.  What  we  expect  to  achieve  extends 
beyond  the  25-basis-point  cut  itself.  Our  policy  action  has  eased  monetary  conditions  by 
affecting the full  range of  asset  prices. This  is  the  normal  transmission of  monetary  policy 
and will support the sectoral adjustment needed to strengthen investment and growth. It will 
also  support  financial  stability  by  helping  offset  the  reduction  in  incomes  and  the  risk  of 
higher and more persistent unemployment. 
                                                
18   A  variable  is  said  to  exhibit  hysteresis  if  there  is  no  tendency  for  it  to  revert  to  some  mean  value  after  a 
disturbance  causes  it  to  change.  The  variable  remains  permanently  at  that  new  value  until  another  shock 
disturbs  it.  For  evidence  of  hysteretic  effects  in  the  United  States,  see  D.  Reifschneider,  W.  Wascher  and 
D. Wilcox, “Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of 
Monetary  Policy,”  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2013–77,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  With this new starting point, we reduced our growth expectations for the first half of 2015 to 
1 1/2  per  cent.  We  expect  the  economy  to  then  rebound  in  the  second  half  of  the  year, 
reaching its full capacity around the end of 2016 – a little later than expected in October. 
Weaker oil prices will pull down the inflation profile, more than offsetting the direct effect on 
prices that we are seeing from a lower Canadian dollar. We expect headline inflation to fall 
temporarily below 1 per cent this year and move back up to target next year. 
The  labour  market  will  recover  as  the  output  gap  closes  and  the  divine  coincidence  that  I 
talked about earlier will eventually be re-established. This happens as output increases, firm 
creation and business investment picks up, and capacity is rebuilt. As this occurs, the signals 
coming from the labour market gap and output gap will become more consistent. 
Of course,  there  is  a risk that  additional  capacity  won’t  be  added  fast  enough to keep the 
output gap from temporarily going positive. An economy pushing up against the limits of its 
capacity  may  be  just  what  is required to  signal  the  need for  additional  investments  and to 
draw workers back into the labour force. There is uncertainty about how much potential can 
be  rebuilt,  and  we  need  to  take  this  into  account  in  our  risk-management  approach  to 
monetary policy. 
Our  inflation-targeting  framework  gives  us  flexibility  on  the  timing  to  achieve  the  inflation 
target while also taking into account other important dimensions of the economy – such as 
financial stability and the economy’s potential.19 Stifling the rebuilding phase of the recovery 
could mean lost economic opportunity. That being said, if potential output growth turns out to 
be lower than we think, we have the tools to bring inflation back to target. 
Conclusion 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Canadian  economy  has  room  to  grow.  The  stronger 
U.S. economy,  a  lower  dollar  and  our  monetary  policy  response  will  work  to  keep  the 
recovery  in  Canada  on  track  and  to  get  inflation  sustainably  back  to  target.  There  will  be 
some adjustments across the country as non-energy exporters take on the mantle of growth. 
As this happens, Canadian firms and workers will need to demonstrate the impressive ability 
to  adjust  that  we  have  seen  in  the  past.  Monetary  policy  is  contributing  to  this  effort  by 
providing  an  environment  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  while  supporting  the  adjustments 
needed to return the economy to sustained and balanced growth. We’ll get there and it will 
be a very good thing for Canada. 
                                                
19   M.  Carney,  “A  Monetary  Policy  Framework  for  All  Seasons”  (speech  to  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Forum,  New 
York, New York, 24 February 2012). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
