  Denton Rarawa: Financial inclusion in Solomon Islands 
Remarks  by  Mr  Denton  Rarawa,  Governor  of  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands,  on  the 
occasion of the presentation of the G2P study findings, Honiara, 10 December 2014. 
 Salutation: 
DFAT Representatives, 
Other  distinguished  Guests  –  reps  from  Government  Ministries,  Commercial  bank  reps, 
Telecommunication companies, and other financial institutions, 
NFIT members and CBSI, 
Members of the media, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good morning. Let me thank you for taking the time to be here with us. Today’s event is to 
present to stakeholders the findings of the Government to Persons (G2P) study conducted 
by  the  CBSI  (Financial  Inclusion  team)  and  the  United  Nations  Pacific  Financial  Inclusion 
Programme (PFIP) with funding assistance from the Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade, 
Government of Australia. 
Financial inclusion in Solomon Islands 
Before  we  listen  to  the  findings,  let  me  briefly  explain  what  financial  inclusion  means  for 
Solomon Islands and how we are driving this agenda in this country. 
Financial Inclusion is an important agenda in Solomon Islands and is driven by the National 
Financial Inclusion Task Force (NFIT) and the CBSI. We will hear a progress update during 
the session today but let me briefly explain what it means for Solomon Islands. When we talk 
about  financial  inclusion  we  consider  4  dimensions  of:  (1)  access  to  financial  services, 
(2) usage of financial services, (3) quality of financial services, and (4) the impact financial 
service has on the lives of an individual. 
The  NFIT  has  identified  key  areas  and  has  outlined  strategies  and  action  plans  in  our 
endeavour to address the financial inclusion agenda in this country. One key area that was 
identified was the provision and availability of data, particularly demand side data or market 
information.  This  is  very  crucial  for  evidence-based  policies  and  market  decisions  by  the 
private sector. 
So  far  few  surveys  have  been  conducted  by  CBSI  in  partnership  with  PFIP,  such  as  the 
Financial  Competency  Survey  on  low  income  households,  the  Market  Vendor  Survey  and 
now  the  G2P  survey.  Next  will  be  the  Financial  Inclusion  Market  Demand  Side  Survey. 
These surveys and those yet to come are aimed at providing better information to both policy 
makers and the private sector in the area of financial inclusion. 
G2P aims to improve delivery of bulk payment type transactions. 
G2P aims at addressing efficiency of bulk payments by the Government particularly through 
the use of digital financial services. 
I was told that around 16,000 Government employees are stationed in the rural locations of 
Solomon  Islands.  The  majority  of  them  are  teachers,  nurses  and  Police  officers.  Some  of 
these  people  travel  in  high  seas,  walk  or  paddle  long  distances  to  get  access  to  their 
fortnightly pay. Some even regularly travel to Honiara and join the queues at the Treasury or 
at the commercial bank tellers to collect their house rentals and other dues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  With the recent successful introduction of mobile financial services by the commercial banks 
and strong up-take by the public, and delivery of Person to Person (P2P) type transactions 
using mobile phones and EFPTOS machines, the next question is: is there a business case 
for Government to People (G2P) type transactions in Solomon Islands? We will be able to 
hear answers to this question during the presentation this morning. 
I am sure that the study has uncovered interesting findings and I encourage us to make use 
of these findings. I hope this will generate lively discussions and new ideas around improving 
mobile and branchless banking transactions and more importantly providing people in remote 
rural  areas  opportunities  to  access  their  bank  accounts  in  a  convenient  and  cost  effective 
manner. I am confident that stakeholders will find the study findings useful and will be able to 
use the results and analysis in their own respective areas of work. 
I encourage you to provide your valuable feedback and comments to us on the G2P report 
so that we can look at various options to improve financial services not only to the core G2P 
recipients but to the general public as well. 
Before I take my seat, let me thank the following in making it possible to complete this study 
and making it available: 
1.  
The Australian Government, especially the Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade 
(DFAT),  for  the  funding  assistance  thru  the  UN  Pacific  Islands  Financial  Inclusion 
Program (PFIP). 
The PFIP for their role in providing guidance and advice and support to the study. 
The M/s Pi Strategy Consulting firm from Bangladesh, the technical service provider 
for undertaking and completing the G2P study. 
The  National  Financial  Inclusion  Unit  of  CBSI,  members  of  the  National  Financial 
Inclusion Task Force, and the field enumerators, for their hard work which made the 
G2P study possible and successfully completed. 
2.  
3.  
4.  
Finally let me thank all of you invited stakeholders who are here to attend this presentation 
this morning. THANK YOU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
