  Daniel Mminele: Ten years of inclusion of the South African rand in the 
CLS 
Remarks by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Continuous Linked Settlement (CLS) Reception to mark ten years of inclusion of the South 
African rand in the CLS, Johannesburg, 17 March 2015. 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is an honour for me to make a few remarks on this occasion of the CLS Reception to mark 
ten years of settlement of the rand in the CLS system. 
I am particularly pleased that the CLS delegation to mark this key milestone is led by none 
other than the Chairman of the CLS Board, Mr Kenneth Harvey. We welcome you and your 
colleagues to South Africa, and thank you for coming all the way. 
The  CLS  is  one  of  those  mission-critical  systems  that  can  be  compared  to  the  plumbing 
system of a building. Just as most of us never think about the plumbing of a building and take 
for granted that it is there and works, the CLS also runs very much in the background of the 
foreign-exchange market. It is only when there is a leak or a pipe bursts that we realise how 
important  plumbing  is.  In  the  context  of  the  CLS,  if  a  big  pipe  bursts  and  cannot  be  fixed 
quickly,  this  can  result  in  major  disruptions  to  the  foreign-exchange  market,  with  potential 
rapid spill-over effects to the rest of the financial system, which at worst could bring about 
financial instability on a global scale. 
As many of you will know, the CLS plays a fundamental role in the foreign-exchange market, 
where  it  operates  the  largest  multi-currency  cash  settlement  system  to mitigate  settlement 
risk for the foreign-exchange transactions of its members and their customers. In its offering, 
the  CLS  mitigates  settlement  risk  through  the  provision  of  its  unique  payment-versus-
payment settlement service which has direct links to the real-time gross settlement (RTGS) 
systems  of  the  currencies  it  settles.  In  addition  to  mitigating  settlement  risk,  the  CLS  also 
contributes to streamlining and standardising foreign-exchange operations, helping to reduce 
costs. 
A  foreign-exchange  settlement  usually  requires  potentially  large  cash  funding  liquidity  to 
settle the obligations of settlement members. These values are materially reduced in the CLS 
system through the multilateral netting of the obligations between member banks to deliver 
best-in-class  liquidity  management.  As  regulatory  requirements  for  larger  liquidity  buffers 
increase, the benefits from multilateral netting at an industry level have become increasingly 
important. 
Before I briefly share with you how our participation in the CLS has grown over the years, 
allow me to go down memory lane for a short while. 
Foreign-exchange settlement risk – being the risk that originates from a situation where, in a 
foreign-exchange  trade,  one  party  has  irrevocably  paid  a  currency  and  the  counterparty 
subsequently fails to meet its side of the deal by not delivering the other currency on time – 
captured  the  attention  of  regulators  as  a  major  source  of  systemic  risk  following  the 
spectacular  collapse  of  Bankhaus  Herstatt  in  Germany  in  1974.  The  creation  of  the  CLS 
goes back to regulatory concerns around the collapse of Bankhaus Herstatt. 
In March 1996, the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) at the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS) published the so-called Allsopp Report titled Settlement risk 
in  foreign-exchange  transactions  –  a  strategy  for  addressing  foreign-exchange  settlement 
risk.  This  report  called  for  action  from  the  private  sector  to  address  settlement  risk  in  the 
foreign-exchange market. The response of the private sector led to the establishment of the 
CLS  and  the  launch  of  the  CLS  system  with  39  members  and  seven  currencies:  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Australian dollar, Canadian dollar, euro, Japanese yen, Swiss franc, UK pound sterling, and 
US dollar in September 2002. 
Since then, the system has evolved to the current state where foreign-exchange transactions 
in 17 currencies are settled with a peak volume to date of over 2 million transactions per day 
and a peak value of more than US$10 trillion per day. In its evolution, the CLS added four 
more currencies in September 2003: the Danish krone, Norwegian krone, Singapore dollar, 
and  Swedish  krona.  In  December  2004,  a  further  four  currencies  were  added  to  the 
settlement  service,  namely  the  Hong  Kong  dollar,  Korean  won,  New  Zealand  dollar,  and 
South African rand. The currencies of Israel and Mexico were implemented on the system in 
2008. 
Joining  the  CLS  in  2004  was  a  major  achievement  for  South  Africa  given  the  stringent 
eligibility criteria. In briefing Parliament at the time about the risk management, liquidity, and 
efficiency  benefits  of  the  CLS  system,  then  Minister  of  Finance,  Mr  Trevor  Manuel,  put  it 
rather  succinctly,  and  I  quote:  “The  inclusion  (…)  demonstrates  that  the  South  African 
payment  system  provides  for  global  best  practice,  and  would  foster  domestic  and 
international  investor  confidence  in  the  integrity  and  robustness  of  the  national  payment 
system.” 
Back  in  December  2004,  our  central  bank  joined  the  CLS  Cooperative  Oversight 
arrangement  led  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  as  the  regulator  of  the  CLS 
Bank, in order to ensure that, in the settlement of the rand in the CLS system, our domestic 
policy objectives continued to be met. 
We  also  joined  the  CLS  Operators  Forum,  also  led  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York, to ensure the coordination of relevant actions by all real-time gross settlement system 
operators that are linked to the CLS system. In all these cooperative arrangements, there is 
an appreciation of regular interaction as well as frank and constructive engagement with CLS 
management and executives. 
Before I conclude, let me share some information on our participation in the CLS system. In 
2004,  when  we  joined  the  system,  two  of  our  banks,  namely  Absa  and  Standard  Bank, 
became settlement members. These banks had obtained direct access to the CLS system in 
terms  of  submitting  their  foreign-exchange  trades.  Absa  has,  however,  since  become  a 
member  of the  Barclays  Group  and  its membership  has  thus  been terminated.  It  is  now  a 
submitting  branch  of  Barclays  in  the  CLS  system.  At  the  time,  we  had  six  Rand  Nostro 
service  providers,  namely  Absa,  Calyon,  CITI,  FirstRand  Bank,  Nedbank,  and  Standard 
Bank. These banks provide services to CLS members in terms of either receiving rands that 
are purchased and settled through the CLS system or funding rands that are sold and settled 
through  the  CLS  system.  In  terms  of  rand  settlement  members,  they  are  in  a  position  to 
receive and fund rands for their own account. 
As  far  as  rand  settlement  in  the  CLS  system  is  concerned,  during  2005,  an  average  of 
R83 billion worth of rand trades were settled in the CLS system on a daily basis. To settle 
these  trades,  the  average  daily  liquidity  requirement  that  needed  to  be  paid  into  the  CLS 
system through the SAMOS system amounted to only R6,2 billion. This resulted in a liquidity 
efficiency of 7,5 per cent. By 2009, the average values of rand trades that were settled in the 
CLS system on a daily basis had grown to R163 billion. To settle these trades, the average 
daily liquidity requirement that needed to be paid into the CLS system through the SAMOS 
system  amounted  to  only  R9  billion.  This  resulted  in  a  liquidity  efficiency  of  5,5  per  cent. 
More recently, during 2014, the average values of rand trades that were settled in the CLS 
system on a daily basis amounted to R411 billion. To settle these trades, the average daily 
liquidity requirement that needed to be paid into the CLS system through the SAMOS system 
amounted to only R8.7 billion. This resulted in a liquidity efficiency of 2,1 per cent. 
Thus, in the ten years of South African participation in the CLS, the average daily value of 
transactions settled has increased fivefold, with only a 40 per cent increase in pay-in values. 
From  these  statistics  it  is  evident  that  while  our  market  is  benefiting  from  the  risk 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  management mechanism provided by the CLS system, there are also huge benefits that we 
gain from the liquidity efficiency. 
Among the many things highlighted by the global financial crisis was the realisation that there 
are  certain  critical,  systemically  important  systems  in  the  international  payment  and 
settlement  environment  which  deserve  special  attention  going  forward.  The  CLS  is  one  of 
them,  and  in  this  vein  we  in  South  Africa  remain  committed  to  building  on  our  good 
relationship with the CLS and other fellow regulators as well as relevant international bodies, 
such as the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), to ensure the we 
continue  to  strengthen  the  system  further  so  as  to  reduce  the  potential  for  systemic 
disruption and financial instability. 
As  you  may  be  aware,  we  are  also  actively  engaged  in  implementing  cross-  border 
settlement arrangements and systems within the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC), and our experiences from working with the CLS are proving quite useful. 
To our stakeholders in the South African national payment system, the CLS Group, and, last 
but not least, my colleagues at the South African Reserve Bank and other regulators, all the 
best for the next ten years and more! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
