  R Gandhi: Corporate debt market: what needs to be done – a 
reaffirmation 
Inaugural address by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
“CARE Ratings Debt Market Summit – 2015”, Mumbai, 23 March 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Anupam Sonal is gratefully acknowledged. 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen! 
2. 
I would like to thank CARE Ratings for taking this initiative of holding this Summit on 
the corporate debt market. As I can see, the seminar is quite exhaustive in content and we 
will be having some excellent speakers representing various segments of the industry and 
hence it will be very interesting to hear their views. As a regulator, we in the Reserve Bank 
do  have  our  own  approach  to  the  development  of  any  market,  but  to  hear  the  market 
participants is always important for us as it is only when we debate the issues that we can 
come  to  a  workable  solution.  I  am  sure  that  we  will  have  a  lot  to  pick  up  from  these 
deliberations that take place here today. 
Corporate Bond Market in India – Current status 
3. 
Indian Corporate Debt market has seen some growth in recent years, both in terms 
of number of issues and amount. The outstanding issues which  were at 12,155 as at end 
March  2011  increased  to  18,664  by  end  Dec  2014.  During  the  same  period,  the  amount 
outstanding increased from ₹ 8,895 billion to ₹ 16,485 billion. While the types issued included 
fixed rate bonds, floating rate bonds, structured notes and other types, the fixed rate bonds 
were  predominant  both  in  number  and  value.  Another  characteristic  of  the  issuances  was 
that almost all issuances were by financial sector entities. Yet another peculiar feature of our 
Corporate Bond market is that private placements are the norm. The public issuances which 
were ₹ 94.51 billion in 2010–11 increased to ₹ 423.83 billion in 2013–14, though it fell back 
to  ₹  90.49  billion  in  the  current  year  till  Feb  2015.  The  private  placements  were 
₹ 2187.85 billion  in  2010–11,  ₹  2612.82  billion  in  2011–12,  ₹  3614.62  billion  in  2012–13, 
₹ 2760.54 billion  in  2013–14  and  ₹  2692.45  billion  in  the  current  year  till  Dec  2014.  The 
secondary  market  trading  was  ₹  6053  billion  in  2010–11,  ₹  5938  billion  in  2011–12, 
₹ 7386 billion in 2012–13, ₹ 9708 billion in 2013–14 and ₹ 10043 billion in the current year till 
Feb 2015. 
4. 
Though the above mentioned figures do indicate a healthy growth in number and 
volume of corporate bond market activity, in comparison with government bonds market, the 
corporate  bond  market  is  dwarfed.  A  comparative  position  of  the  governments  bonds  and 
corporate bonds as on March 2013 as a proportion of GDP among the major Asian countries 
in the Table (page 2), reflects India at a very low position vis a vis some of the major Asian 
countries. 
Indian Corporate Debt Market – An Enigma 
5. 
Thus corporate debt market in India has been quite an enigma. We keep talking of 
the issues that are in the way of its progress and the solutions that could address them. Yet, 
there has been limited movement in this area despite several attempts and there is some 
kind of gravity keeping us down. We had the R H Patil Committee Report on corporate bonds 
and securitization of 2005 which has served as a reference point for all of us. However, the 
progress in the growth of the corporate debt segment has not been too satisfactory and there 
is  evidently  a  pressing  requirement  to  revisit  this  subject.  There  have  been  several 
suggestions made – some have been implemented with mixed success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  6. 
Yet,  as  noted  earlier,  the  debt  market  remains  confined  largely  to  financial 
institutions, and corporates are not much in the picture. Even within this limited perimeter, 
public issues are less frequent and the preference has been for private placement of debt 
paper. This is the starting point of the puzzle which we need to analyze. 
7. 
Another part of the puzzle relates to our own achievement. We did experience close 
to double digit GDP growth in FY08 and our investment ratio was 38.1% in that year- with 
financing  issues  not  coming  in  the  way.  On  the  face  of  it  one  may  tend  to  conclude 
erroneously that there is no need to get too worried about the absence of development in 
corporate debt market. After all, have we not got investment rate of 38.1%? The reason why 
the problem does not appear to be magnified is because we are working at well below our 
potential. We are not realizing that the paucity in long term resources can severely come in 
the way of investment. Therefore, the question to be asked is as to for how long can we carry 
on with this situation. 
We  do  have  fairly  large  numbers  that  are  required  for  financing  both  industrial 
8. 
growth of 8–10% in the next five  years and funds required for infrastructure development. 
Presently  as  industrial  growth  is  in  the  phase  of  stagnation  and  infrastructure  well  below 
satisfactory levels due to a varied set of factors around policy action, the demand for funds 
has  not  really  reached  the  expected  levels.  Evidently  this  should  not  give  rise  to 
complacency  and  we  should  work  in  this  period  in  building  structures  for  growing  our 
corporate debt market. 
Need to develop the Corporate Debt Market 
9. 
The government has its own limitations when chipping in as the fiscal responsibility 
targets  leave  little  scope  for  finding  funds.  Though  the  commercial  banks  do  cater  to  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
investment needs of corporate and infrastructure sectors, they are also reaching their own 
limitations. We have gotten support from FDI and external borrowings, but they have their 
own pace and size. External borrowings are a good way out when global interest rates are 
low.  But,  the  repercussions  on  our  external  debt  are  significant,  and  while  we  have  been 
permitting  ECBs  into  various  sectors, the  external  debt  levels  have  been  rising  which  has 
servicing  implications.  Intuitively  we  can  see  that  the  capital  market  has  to  become 
progressively more relevant in this process of garnering long term funds. 
10. 
Economists contend that the absence of an adequately sized corporate debt market 
leads to an oversized banking system in any economy. It also results in a large portion of the 
lending market being excessively regulated, without being subjected to free market forces. 
Such an imbalance is not desirable, because this becomes the perfect breeding ground for 
crony capitalism, sloppy lending by banks and careless investments by corporates. Financing 
of  resources  through  corporate  bonds  rather  than  bank  finance  instills  a  greater  sense  of 
credit  discipline  among  the  borrowers  as  the  default  events  are  captured  immediately  and 
placed in the public domain. The disclosure requirements act as a big disincentive for default 
or  delayed  payment.  It  has  been  observed  that  borrowers  take  the  regulatory  norm  of 
90 days  period for  a  default  to  be  recognised  as  a  Non-Performing  Asset  as  a  leeway  for 
withholding the payment till the 89th day from the due date. On the other hand, even a single 
day default by an issuer of corporate bond will be recognised as default in the market and the 
information of default will be publicly available. Further, such information / risk will also be 
reflected in external credit ratings and traded credit derivatives on a real time basis. Pricing 
of credit also gets diluted in bank financing as credit facilities are extended not only on the 
basis of credit worthiness of the borrower but also the relationship between the banks and 
their borrowers. Financing through corporate bonds might remove such distortions to a large 
extent as investors will demand higher coupon for issues with lower credit worthiness, while 
borrowers  with  strong  fundamentals  and  sound  business  get  rewarded  by  lower  cost  of 
financing.  Thus  there  are  many  advantages  of  an  efficient,  well  developed  and  liquid 
corporate debt market. 
11. 
The  importance  of  a  developed  debt  market  viz.,  the  corporate  debt  market for a 
country like India, which has an huge and ever growing capital funding requirement is widely 
acknowledged and although various measures on the regulatory and policy front have been 
introduced  in  recent  times,  concerted  efforts  from  all  market  participants  is  required  to 
develop and grow the largely untapped potential of the country’s corporate debt markets. 
Expert Committees 
12. 
In India, progressively, a number of Committees and Groups were set up by RBI to 
study  the  bank  financing  /  funding  patterns  vis  a  vis  the  corporate  funding  requirements. 
Prominent  among  them  were  the  Tandon  Committee,  Chore  Committee,  etc.  The 
committees uniformly recommended that corporate reliance on bank finance for short term 
recurring expenses need to be brought down. Chore Committee specifically recommended 
the need for reducing the over-dependence of the medium and large borrowers – both in the 
public and private sectors on bank finance. 
13. 
More  recently,  a  High  Level  Expert  Committee  on  Corporate  Bonds  was  set  up 
under the chairmanship of Shri R. H Patil which submitted its report in December 2005 and 
made several recommendations including the need for rationalisation of stamp duty structure 
and issuance costs, tax deducted at source, encouraging securitization, repos and CDS in 
corporate bonds, enhancing issuer and investor base, simplifying issuance procedures, etc. 
14. 
In the year 2009, the Committee for Financial Sector Reforms (CFSR) (Chairman: 
Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan) also looked into the issues inhibiting the corporate debt market and 
made  several  recommendations  on  similar  lines.  Some  of  the  highlights  were  to  bring  all 
trading related regulation within the purview of SEBI, improve coordination between various 
concerned  agencies  where  multiple  regulators  share  concern,  set  up  a  working  group  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
financial  sector  reforms  with  Finance  Minister  as  Chairman, 
the  Committee,  had 
recommended  the  sequencing  approach  for  corporate  finance,  which  entails  developing  a 
number of missing markets as well as complementary development of other sectors in the 
economy for a healthy development of the corporate bond market. 
Current issues 
15. 
There  are  some  key  issues  that  the  corporate  debt  market  faces.  They  need  be 
tackled to facilitate improvement and growth of this segment. Foremost among these are as 
follows: 
a) 
The  abysmal  liquidity  and  the  consequent  lack  of  depth  in  the  corporate  debt 
markets.  The  absence  of  a  liquid  corporate  bond  market  acts  as  a  deterrent  to 
investor participation. Trading in Indian bond markets are characterized by trading in 
certain maturities and tendency of investors to ‘buy and hold’ instruments, both of 
which inhibit liquidity. Here the role of institutional investors such as pension funds, 
provident  funds  and  insurance  companies  must  be  reassessed.  They  do  need  to 
take  some  more  initiative  and  be  aggressive  in  actively  managing  their  portfolios. 
Their investment horizon should not be confined to AA and above only. This will add 
a lot of buoyancy to the market. 
Low investor base – The investor base in the corporate debt market is confined to 
banks,  insurance  companies,  PFs,  pension  funds  and  primary  dealers.  Retail 
participation remains low due to absence of knowledge and understanding of bonds 
as  an  asset  class.  It  is  imperative  to  consider  innovative  ways  for  expanding  the 
investor  base.  The  fund  management  industry  can  contribute  significantly  in 
attracting the retail investor to corporate debt. 
Preference of public debt – The huge supply of government papers in the country is 
one of the major impediments to growth of the corporate bond markets. Government 
borrowing and thereby the supply of government papers are seen to grow unabated 
year on year. We have seen that the government is progressively trying to rein in the 
deficit  at  the  absolute  level  which  will  put  less  pressure  on  the  market.  Also  the 
move of the Reserve Bank to gradually lower the SLR which can also be positive for 
the corporate bond market. 
Limited instruments and products – There is need for a wide array of instruments 
and products to be available in the markets that would meet the diverse needs of its 
participants.  There  is  lack  of  these  in  the  Indian  context  which  in  turn  inhibits 
development of these markets. CDS and IRFs have been some of the instrument 
that have come in of late and it is expected that these will grow. Of late, there has 
been  some  element  of  buoyancy  in  the  IRF  market  which  is  a  good  sign. 
Securitization  of  the  corporate  debt  instruments  would  provide  a  big  fillip  to  the 
market as it would improve risk transference and diversification and provide liquidity 
to the issuers. 
Market Infrastructure also finds mention as a factor affecting corporate bond market 
trading and thereby transparency and vibrancy in the market. Infrastructure facilities 
such as screen based automated order matching, central clearing and settlement, 
negotiated dealing system, etc. on the lines available to the government securities 
market would certainly facilitate and encourage secondary market trading, enhance 
market transparency and liquidity as well as develop scientific risk pricing. We need 
to improve the credit rating mechanism for corporate bonds and encourage market 
for lower grade ratings which inhibits the market. 
Ease  of  issuances  –  Bond  issuance  is  viewed  as  being  costly  and  cumbersome 
compared with bank lending. For it to be attractive to the issuers to approach the 
corporate  debt market, the  ease  and  cost  of  issuance  has to  improve. The  listing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
4 
  g) 
 
 
and  disclosure  requirements  and  procedures  have  to  be  simple  and  less 
complicated.  The  size,  scale  and  tenure  of  issues  must  improve  and  need  to  be 
made more attractive by encouraging public offers instead of the current preference 
for  private  placements.  It  is  expected  that  consolidation  of  bond  issues  through 
reissuance/s would improve liquidity and encourage secondary market transactions. 
However,  care  would  need  to  be  taken  to  prevent  excessive  batching  of 
redemptions and consequent liquidity stress. 
Market  making  –  The  growth  and  development  of  any  market  is  dependent  on 
market makers who can provide both buy and sell quotes. Although prevalent in the 
government  securities  markets,  they  are  lacking  in  the  corporate  bond  segment. 
Market makers not only assume risk, they add diversity to the markets. Therefore, 
we need to develop a class of underwriters and market makers in corporate debt 
bonds on the lines of Primary Dealers in the government securities market. 
Policy Initiatives 
16. 
What  are  we  doing  to  tackle  these  issues  affecting  the  corporate  bond  market? 
Several measures are being undertaken at the policy  level to address these. Some of the 
recent initiatives by Government, the Reserve Bank, SEBI and other agencies in the direction 
of developing the corporate debt market are as follows: 
a) 
Trade  reporting  platform: For improving transparency, reporting platforms for OTC 
trades  in  corporate  bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  Certificates  of  Deposits,  Non-
Convertible Debentures and securitized debt has been set up. Till recently, reporting 
of trades in corporate bonds was done at three different places (FIMMDA’s FTRAC, 
reporting  platform  of  NSE  and  BSE).  Though  multiple  reporting  platforms  were 
available, majority of trades were reported on FIMMDA platform and cleared through 
one  of  the  clearing  houses  of  the  stock  exchanges.  The  reporting  of  secondary 
market trades in corporate bonds and securitised debt by RBI regulated entities has 
been shifted to stock exchanges with effect from April 1, 2014. 
Pooling  account:  Clearing houses of the stock exchanges have been permitted to 
have a pooling fund account with RBI to facilitate DvP-I based settlement of trades 
in corporate bonds. 
Repo  in  corporate  bond:  In  2010,  repos  in  corporate  bonds  were  permitted  to 
regulated and other RBI permitted entities. Guidelines were further relaxed in terms 
of  reduction  of  minimum  haircut  requirements  and  expanding  the  list  of  eligible 
collateral  by  permitting  short  term  instruments  like  CP,  CD  and  NCDs  of  original 
maturity less than 1 year. Scheduled Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) have also 
been permitted to participate in the repo market subject to adherence to conditions 
prescribed. 
Credit Default Swaps (CDS) on corporate bonds: CDS on corporate bonds has been 
permitted to facilitate hedging of credit risk associated with holding corporate bonds. 
Based  on  market  feedback,  short  term  instruments  like  CP,  CD  &  NCDs  and 
unlisted but rated corporate bonds have also been permitted as eligible reference 
obligations. 
Encouraging participation of banks and PDs in corporate bonds: 
i. 
In  July  2014,  banks  have  been  permitted  to  issue  long-term  bonds  with  a 
minimum  maturity  of  seven  years  to  raise  resources  for  lending  to  (a)  long 
term projects in infrastructure sub-sectors, and (b) affordable housing. These 
bonds  have  been  exempted  from  computation  of  net  demand  and  time 
liabilities  (NDTL)  as  well  as  Adjusted  Net  Bank  Credit  (ANBC)  and  are 
therefore  not  been  subjected  to  CRR  /  SLR  or  priority  sector  lending 
requirements. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 f) 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
 
 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  issued  the  instructions  asking  banks  to  consider 
raising Tier II capital through public issuance to retail investors. 
In order to encourage active participation of standalone PDs in corporate debt, 
investment  norms  have  been  relaxed  by  allowing  them  to  invest  funds 
borrowed  from  call  money  market  subject  to  certain  limits,  enhancing 
investment limit in Tier II bonds of other PDs / banks / FIs from 5% to 10% of 
NOF  and  increasing  the  Inter  Corporate  Deposit  (ICD)  borrowing  limit  from 
75% to 150% of NOF. 
Banks and standalone PDs have been allowed to become direct members of 
stock exchanges for undertaking proprietary trades in corporate bonds. 
Credit enhancement by banks – As per a recent policy announcement made, it 
is proposed to permit banks to offer partial credit enhancement to corporate 
bonds  by  way  of  providing  funded  and  un-funded  credit  facilities  for 
infrastructure projects but not by way of guarantee. The final instructions are 
expected to be issued shortly. 
Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs): 
i. 
investment 
investment 
limits:  FPI 
Rationalisation  of 
limits  have  been 
rationalised,  whereby  existing  limits  and  subdivisions  have  been  merged  in 
two broad categories – government securities and corporate bonds. The sub-
limits  for  FPIs  in  Government  securities  ($10  billion)  and  dated  securities 
($15 billion) and other categories have been merged to retain the overall cap 
of $25 billion. In case of corporate bonds, the ceiling of $1 billion for qualified 
foreign investors (QFIs), $25 billion for FPIs and $25 billion for FPIs in long-
term infra bonds, have been merged – retaining the overall cap for corporate 
bonds at $51 billion. 
Rationalization of allocation of debt limits: Method for allocation of debt limits 
in corporate bond market through auction has been changed. As per revised 
scheme, FIIs can now invest in Corporate Debt without purchasing debt limits 
till  the  overall  investment  reaches  90%  after  which  the  auction  mechanism 
would  be  initiated  for  allocation  of  the  remaining  limits.  Consequent  to  the 
changes,  the  restrictions  on  re-investment  by  FPIs,  shall  no  longer  apply  in 
respect  of  limits  held  /  investments  made  by  FIIs  in  the  Corporate  Debt 
category, till the limits are available on tap. 
ii. 
iii.  Withholding tax rate: The rate of withholding tax on interest payments on the 
borrowings  of  Infrastructure  Debt  Funds  (IDF),  investments made  by  a  non-
resident in rupee denominated long-term infrastructure bonds and interest on 
FIIs’ investment made in bonds issued by Indian companies and Government 
securities have been reduced from 20 per cent to 5 per cent. 
iv.  New Foreign Portfolio Investor (FPI) Regulations: Recently, SEBI has notified 
new  FPI  regulations  to  put  in  place  an  easier  registration  process  and 
operating framework for  overseas  entities  seeking  to  invest  in  Indian  capital 
markets.  The  new  regulations  replace  the  existing  SEBI  regulations  for  FIIs 
and  the  new  class  of  investors,  FPIs,  would  encompass  all  FIIs,  their  sub-
accounts and QFIs. 
v.  The Budget for 2015–16 has proposed to extend the period of applicability of 
reduced rate of tax at 5% in respect of income of foreign investors (FIIs and 
QFIs)  from  corporate  bonds  and  government  securities,  from  31.5.2015  to 
30.06.2017. 
Credit enhancement by IIFCL: It has been mentioned in the Union Budget 2013–14 
g) 
that IIFCL will provide partial credit guarantee to enhance ratings of bond issues, enabling 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
channelization of long-term funds for infrastructure projects. IIFCL is presently undertaking 
pilot transactions under its Credit Enhancement initiative. 
h) 
Introduction  of  Rupee  linked  offshore  bonds  by  International  Finance  Corporation 
(IFC): With an objective to signal confidence in the Indian economy and encourage inflows of 
USD  in  India,  IFC  was  permitted  to  float  a  rupee  linked  bond  overseas  for  an  amount  of 
USD 1 billion. IFC received very good response and the limit has been fully utilized by IFC. 
i) 
Domestic Issuance of bonds by IFC: Approval has also been given to IFC to issue 
bonds  in  India  worth  ₹  15000  crore  for  infrastructure  financing.  This  will  also  facilitate 
development of benchmark yield for long term corporate bonds. 
Way forward 
17. 
Going forward, we expect a special impetus to the growth of corporate debt market 
in our guidance to the banks to issue long term bonds to support infrastructure and housing 
projects. Further, in order to meet the capital requirements under the Basel III Framework, 
banks  will  tap  the  market  with  their  Additional  Tier  1  bonds,  besides  Tier  2  bonds.  These 
developments can usher in emergence of quasi government yield curve, which can serve as 
benchmark  for  corporate  issuances.  When  the  Basel  3  Framework  relating  to  Large 
Exposure norms take effect, and as banks reach their limits in supporting direct lending to 
the corporate sector, corporates be nudged to resort to market borrowing. On top of this, the 
expected  robust  economic  growth  will  also  compel  the  corporate  sector  to  approach  the 
market.  Keeping  all  these  in  perspective,  we  need  to  ready  ourselves  with  the  following 
measures to usher in a vibrant corporate debt market: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
regulatory and administrative reforms to institutionalize debt markets, 
involvement of market-makers who can provide two-way bid-ask quotes, 
enhancement of investor base, 
increasing the efficiency of these markets through better reporting, settlement 
and clearing platforms, 
emphasis on the reduction of information asymmetry. 
Conclusion 
18. To conclude, the debt markets is undoubtedly a very essential segment of the country’s 
financial markets and vibrancy in these markets is imperative to meeting the massive funding 
requirements  of  the  country.  I  am  confident  that  this  Conference  proceedings  and 
discussions will lead to specific suggestions for action and provide clarity on issues. 
19. I thank you all of you for your time and attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
