  Guy Debelle: Liquidity 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the 27th Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, 16 December 
2014. 
 Thanks to Jon Cheshire and Sean Dowling for assistance. 
Today I will talk about the imminent arrival of the revised liquidity regime for the Australian 
financial sector. I will recap some of its features, particularly how they relate to the Reserve 
Bank, and discuss some of the impact that it is having on market pricing. 
An important aspect of the Basel III liquidity standard, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), 
comes into effect in under one month’s time at the beginning of 2015. The LCR requires that 
banks  hold  sufficient  ‘high  quality  liquid  assets’  (HQLA)  to  withstand  a  30-day  period  of 
stress.  The  amount  of  HQLA  a  bank  needs  to  hold  is  determined  by  the  composition  and 
maturity  structure  of  its  balance  sheet.  The  more  liabilities  that  run  off  within  that  30-day 
window,  the  more  HQLA  that  needs  to  be  held.  At  the  same  time,  particular  types  of 
investors or depositors are assumed to be less stable than others (in terms of their likelihood 
of withdrawing funds), which also results in a greater need for liquid assets. 
As  has  been  known  for  some  time,  the  Australian  financial  system  does  not  have  an 
especially large stock of HQLA.1 The only instruments that have been deemed to meet the 
Basel  standard  of  liquidity  are  debt  issued  by  the  Commonwealth  and  state  governments 
(CGS  and  semis)  along  with  cash  balances  at  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  banking  system’s 
overall liquidity needs are greatly in excess of what could reasonably be held in those assets. 
To  put  some  numbers  on  this,  APRA  has  determined  that  for  next  year,  the  Australian 
banking system’s liquidity needs amount to $450 billion. The total stock of CGS and semis on 
issue  currently  amounts  to  around  $600  billion.  If  the  banks  were  to  attempt  to  meet  their 
liquidity  needs  solely  by  holding  only  CGS  and  semis,  a  number  of  problems  would  arise. 
Firstly, any attempt would likely be in vain, because there are a large number of other entities 
which are required to or want to hold CGS and semis too. Second, in the process of trying to 
do this, the liquidity of the market for these securities would be seriously compromised. This 
would be completely self-defeating as the overall aim is to have the banks hold more liquid 
assets. 
To address these circumstances, an important component of the liquidity regime in Australia 
is the committed liquidity facility (CLF) where, on the payment of a 15 basis point fee, banks 
will  be  able  to  obtain  a  commitment  from  the  Reserve  Bank  to  provide  liquidity  against  a 
broad range of assets under repurchase agreement.2 
APRA  has  recently  determined  that  the  total  CLF  requirements  of  the  Australian  banking 
system  for  2015  amount  to  around  $275  billion.3  This  amount  was  determined  by  first 
assessing that the amount of CGS and semis that could reasonably be held by banks without 
unduly  affecting  market  functioning  was  $175  billion.  The  Reserve  Bank  provided  this 
                                                 
1   See APRA (2014), ‘Implementation of the Basel III Liquidity Framework in Australia’, Media Release No 14.03, 
30 January, available at <http://www.apra.gov.au/MediaReleases/Pages/14_03.aspx>; and Debelle G (2012), 
“Regulatory  Reforms  and  their  Implications  for  Financial  Markets,  Funding  Costs  and  Monetary  Policy”, 
Address to the Financial Services Institute of Australia, 18 September. 
2   Domestic Market Operations – The Committed Liquidity Facility. 
3   See APRA (2014), “APRA Finalises Implementation of Liquidity Coverage Ratio in Australia”, Media Release 
No 14.22. Available at <http://www.apra.gov.au/MediaReleases/Pages/14_22.aspx>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  assessment to APRA. The CLF amount is then simply the difference between this and the 
overall liquidity needs of the system. 
The banks that require a CLF from the Reserve Bank sign a deed of agreement with us and 
pay  their  fee  before  the  end  of  this  year.  Then  from  the  beginning  of  next  year,  the 
arrangement comes into effect. 
I  have  talked  before  about  some  of  the  impact  on  pricing  in  various  markets  of  the  new 
liquidity regime.4 We have attempted to limit the impact on the price of CGS and semis, but 
necessarily,  because  the  banks  are  holding  more  of  these  securities  than  previously 
(Graph 1), the price is higher (and the yield lower) than would otherwise be the case. 
Graph 1 
 Overall, the impact of the LCR on market pricing is relatively small. The larger changes have 
been around deposit pricing and the terms and conditions of deposits, which I will come to 
shortly, but there have been some other effects which are worth commenting on. 
Firstly,  a  less  discussed  aspect  of  the  liquidity  standard  is  the  requirement  for  a 
demonstrated internal liquidity transfer pricing model for banks. This has required banks to 
fully reflect the liquidity cost in the price of the various services they offer customers. This 
has resulted in a change in the price and/or terms and conditions of a number of facilities. 
One noteworthy example is a line of credit where, in the past, banks often did not factor into 
the price they charged for this facility, the potential draw on liquidity this entailed, particularly 
in a stressed situation. On the other hand, longer fixed-term deposits are more attractive to 
banks and consequently have been repriced upwards (see below). 
A second impact which has been evident more recently is a widening in the spread between 
bank  bills  and  OIS  (Graph  2).  In  the  depths  of  the  crisis,  such  a  widening  was  often  an 
indicator of stress in the financial situation. But that does not appear to be the case currently 
as other indicators of bank creditworthiness are little changed, including spreads on longer 
term borrowing and CDS premia. 
                                                 
4   Debelle  G  (2012),  “Regulatory  Reforms  and  their  Implications  for  Financial  Markets,  Funding  Costs  and 
Monetary Policy”, Address to the Financial Services Institute of Australia, 18 September. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  Instead, our assessment is that in large part, this reflects the new liquidity regime combined 
with some other dynamics in the market. The graph shows that the widening has been most 
pronounced at the longer bank bill maturities, and indeed is quite small for a one month bank 
bill. This is because issuing a one month bill has little attraction to a bank: its liquidity cost is 
relatively high as its maturity is likely to occur within the  30-day liquidity window. Hence a 
bank would need to hold HQLA of similar size to the amount of funding the bank bill raised. 
Instead,  there  is  a  greater  incentive  to  issue  at  longer  maturities  and  so  the  spread  on 
6-month bills has widened by more as there has been greater supply of such paper. 
Over  the  past  two  months,  the  original  term  to  maturity  of  bank  bills  and  certificate  of 
deposits  on  issue  has  changed  noticeably,  with  the  stock  of  6-month  bills  increasing  by 
$7.3 billion  (11  per  cent)  and  12-month  bills  by  $1.4  billion  (43  per  cent).  In  contrast,  the 
stock of outstanding bills with an original tenor shorter than five months has declined by a 
total of $9.7 billion (8½ per cent). 
At  the  same  time,  the  cost  of  Australian  dollars  in  the  forward  FX  market  has  been  quite 
elevated. This high price in the forwards market has been due to a number of factors including 
the tendency of hedge funds to fund their Australian dollar shorts in this market, as well as an 
increase in the use of this market by foreign bank branches to fund Australian dollar lending. 
Historically,  Australian  banks  have  tended  to  raise  a  significant  share  of  their  short-term 
funding in foreign markets, mostly in US dollars, and then swap them back into Australian 
dollars  to  fund  their  Australian  dollar-denominated  asset  base.  They  would  swap  these 
foreign currency funds when the cost was sufficiently attractive, leaving it in foreign currency 
in the interim. Under the new liquidity regime, the cost of short-term foreign currency funding 
is higher, so this is less attractive. Combined with a higher swap cost, the all-in cost of short-
term offshore funding is higher and hence domestic issuance is relatively more attractive. As 
a result we have seen more of it, which has contributed to the widening in the spread to OIS. 
Finally, I will return to the impact of the LCR on deposit pricing. Graph 3 shows the evolution 
of the funding mix of Australian banks over the past decade. The rise in the share of deposit 
funding from 2008 is readily apparent, as is the decline in the share of short-term and long-
term  wholesale  funding.  The  growth  in  deposits  is  now  of  a  similar  pace  to  that  in  bank 
lending, having been considerably faster over recent years. As a result, the deposit share of 
funding has levelled off. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Graph 3 
  The  increase  in  deposit  funding  was  in  part  a  result  of  the  increased  returns  on  offer,  as 
banks actively sought this outcome by offering higher interest rates. (It also reflected a shift 
on the part of investors for the perceived safety of a bank deposit.) The interest rate on both 
at-call  and  term  deposits  rose  markedly  compared  with  money  market  rates  of  equivalent 
maturity  (Graph  4).  As  you  can  see  from  the  graph,  this  process  of  paying  higher  deposit 
rates has largely run its course. 
Graph 4 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Within this overall repricing, there have been some changes in the mix of deposit rates and 
products as a result of the introduction of the LCR. As I mentioned earlier, banks have an 
incentive to reduce the amount of liabilities that roll off in less than 30 days. Deposits which 
are deemed to be subject to high run-off rates and those which are callable within 30 days 
will be more expensive for banks. Banks are therefore working towards converting many of 
these  less  stable  deposits  into  a  more  stable  deposit  base.  For  example,  retail  and  SME 
deposits are deemed to be ‘stickier’ than institutional deposits. Part of this transition is being 
induced by price signals: interest rates offered on new or existing deposit products which are 
deemed to be more stable are rising relative to interest rates on products deemed to be less 
stable. 
These  types  of  changes  appear  to  have  accelerated  recently  as  we  draw  closer  to  the 
implementation of the LCR and probably still have some way to run. To date, we have seen 
only a few banks offer notice of withdrawal accounts to customers. These accounts require 
the  depositor  to  provide  the  bank  with  31  days  or  more  notice  of  a  withdrawal  (obviously 
31 days is one day longer than the 30-day liquidity stress period). Interest rates offered on 
these accounts are among the higher rates offered in the deposit market. It may be that we 
see  a  broader  move  to  these  types  of  accounts  or  changes  in  terms  and  conditions  on 
existing accounts through the course of next year. 
We  have  also  seen  a  fall  in  the  growth  of  term  deposits  relative  to  transaction  and  at-call 
deposits over the past few years. In fact term deposits as a share of banks’ funding has been 
falling  while  transaction  and  at-call  deposits  have  been  growing  strongly.  Part  of  this  is 
because a flattening of the yield curve has made investors less inclined to invest in longer 
term deposits. But in part it is because under the LCR, some transactional and operational 
deposits are subject to lower run-off rates than deposits that are largely attracted by higher 
interest  rates.  Indeed,  there  has  been  some  indication  that  banks  have  been  transitioning 
depositors into deposit products treated more favourably under the LCR. 
But banks are not limited to just changing their deposit offerings. We could see them look for 
more  opportunities  to  package  retail  deposits  with  other  products  as  the  deposits  of 
customers  that  also  have  other  relationships with  the  bank  are  deemed  to  be more  stable 
under the LCR. 
So to conclude, the full implementation of the new liquidity regime in Australia is imminent. 
From  the  beginning  of  next  year,  banks  in  Australia  will  be  fully  subject  to  the  Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio. This has already had an impact on the pricing and nature of a number of 
financial products, as well as the structure of bank liabilities. While the bulk of the impact may 
be  behind  us,  there  are  still  a  number  of  changes  in  the  pipeline,  particularly  around 
deposits. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
