  Andreas Dombret: Regulatory reform in Europe – mission 
accomplished? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Institute of International Bankers (IIB) Annual Conference, Washington 
DC, 2 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  granting  me  this  opportunity  to  speak  at  the  IIB  Annual  Conference.  It  is  a 
pleasure to be here. 
In my speech today, I want to answer the question whether the mission of regulatory reform 
in Europe has been accomplished. Allow me to begin with a quote from the movie “Mission 
Impossible”: “Every search for a hero must begin with something which every hero requires, 
a villain”. 
For the topic of regulatory reform, I want to paraphrase that quote as follows: “Every search 
for a solution must begin with something which every solution requires, a problem”. We all 
know  that  the  problem  in  the  banking  system  was  the  financial  crisis  and  in  my  view,  the 
solution is regulatory reform. 
Let us therefore take a closer look at what has been done in post-crisis reforms in Europe 
and beyond. 
The first mission: regulatory reform 
2. 
One of the main lessons from the financial crisis was that the rules of the banking system 
were  insufficient.  We  saw  excessive  risk-taking,  insufficient  loss  absorbing  capacities  and 
banks that were “too big to fail” – just to name some of the problems that led to the crisis. 
Over the last seven years since the collapse of Lehman Brothers, significant progress has 
been made on the regulatory agenda. The most important regulatory measure was the Basel 
III  framework,  which  introduced  stricter  capital  requirements  and  new  liquidity  rules.  In 
Europe, we have done  a lot of work to implement these requirements – first and foremost 
with the CRD IV and CRR. These rules safeguard harmonised implementation of the Basel 
III framework throughout all member states. 
On a side note, the latest Basel III monitoring exercise is due to be published tomorrow. I am 
certain it will confirm the impression that most large internationally active banks already meet 
the  fully  implemented  capital  requirements.  I  am  also  quite  optimistic  that,  on  average,  all 
internationally  active  German  banks  will  fulfil  the  Basel  III  requirements  with  regard  to  the 
CET1 ratio. We should furthermore see that German banks have significantly improved their 
leverage  ratios.  In  international  comparison,  there  is  still  room  for  further  improvements, 
however. But still, banks’ loss absorbing capacity is far better than it was prior to the financial 
crisis. 
When  Basel  III  is  fully  implemented  in  2019,  regulatory  capital  requirements  will  be 
significantly higher and tougher than under Basel II, and I am sure that the financial system 
will be more stable than before. But are higher capital and liquidity requirements enough? 
Some missions almost accomplished … 
2.1 
Certainly  not.  And  therefore,  besides  the  Basel  III  regime,  many  other  regulatory  projects 
have  been  tackled  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis.  Let  me  mention  three  of  the  most 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  current  ones:  regulation  to  solve  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem,  regulation  of  sovereign 
exposures and efforts in regulating the shadow banking system. 
We all know that one problem of the crisis was that banks were perceived as being “too-big-
to-fail”. The consequence was the perception that whenever a “too-big-to-fail” bank runs into 
trouble, the government might be compelled to bail it out in order to prevent a financial crisis. 
This means that these banks were implicitly insured – contrary to all market-based economic 
principles. 
So, the decisive point is that banks must be able to fail without dragging the entire financial 
system down with them. What we need, therefore, are effective resolution mechanisms for 
banks. And the regulators are working on that problem. 
At the global level, the G20 have just agreed to a proposal that global systemically important 
banks will have to fulfil in future regarding their capital structure. In particular, these banks 
will  need  to  ensure  a  minimum  amount  of  total  loss-absorbing  capacity,  TLAC  for  short, 
which  may  be  as  high  as  20%  including the minimum  capital requirements  and the G-SIB 
buffer. This will make global banks more resilient, and it will allow for their orderly resolution. 
Work on TLAC is making good progress. Last November, the FSB published a consultative 
document  on  TLAC.  At  the  moment,  impact  assessment  studies  are  being  conducted  in 
order  to  gauge  the  effect  of  TLAC  on  global  systemically  important  banks.  I  am  quite 
optimistic that we can finalise the requirements by the end of 2015. 
It goes without saying that the final rule must not be less stringent than what the G20 leaders 
agreed  upon  in  Brisbane.  We  need  a  binding  international  minimum  standard  of  at  least  
16–20% of risk-weighted assets. 
At the same time, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) is working on requirements for cross-
border  resolution.  When  this  framework,  consisting  of  TLAC  and  cross-border  resolution 
mechanisms, is in place, the problem of “too-big-to-fail” will be tackled effectively. 
… others have just been launched 
2.2 
A second problem that eventually arose during the European sovereign debt crisis was the 
close nexus between states and banks. Under the current regime, banks usually do not need 
to hold capital against the risks of loans to sovereigns – unlike other loans. This regime is 
based  on  the  assumption  that  loans  to  governments  are  risk-free  because  states  cannot 
default. And therefore, it is not necessary to establish capital buffers. 
All those who had trouble following that line of argument saw their doubts confirmed by the 
sovereign debt crisis in Europe. We obviously need to rethink the assumption that loans to 
governments are risk-free. 
Consequently, it appears urgently necessary to change the rules. If banks were required to 
hold capital against the risks of their government bond portfolios, that would make them more 
resilient  to fiscal  distress.  At  the  same  time,  banks  would  have  less  incentive  to  buy  large 
volumes of government bonds. 
And  this  brings  us  to  the  second  issue:  capital  alone  is  insufficient.  A  crucial  tool  of  risk 
management  is  diversification.  A  cap  on  loans  to  an  individual  sovereign  should  therefore 
also be introduced. 
A large exposure regime of this kind was already introduced for loans to the private sector 
some time ago. Large exposure caps prevent banks from becoming overexposed to a single 
borrower.  This  makes  them  less  vulnerable  to  the  default  of  that  borrower  –  and  this  is 
needed not just for private borrowers but for government borrowers as well. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  started  its  work  on  sovereign  bonds  last 
December. I believe the following points are crucial and need to be addressed within the next 
few months. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     First, the zero-weighting of sovereign exposures should be replaced by an adequate 
underlying with equity. 
Second, regulation of large exposures should also apply to sovereign bonds. 
Third,  we  need  enhanced  disclosure  requirements  for  risk  positions  in  sovereign 
portfolios. 
And  fourth  –  and  this  is  of  crucial  importance  for  me  –  regulation  of  sovereign 
exposures must be consistent throughout all credit institutions and all sectors of the 
financial system. 
… and others again seem to be really hard to accomplish 
2.3 
When speaking about the regulatory reform, we have to bear one important thing in mind: all 
the  reforms  I  just  mentioned  only  reach  the  regulated  banking  sector.  And  tightening 
regulation for banks might set off a trend to shift activities out of the regulated banking sector 
into the unregulated shadow banking sector. This development is something regulators have 
to watch closely. 
Without any doubt, shadow banks can become a source of systemic risk, especially  when 
they are highly interconnected with the regular banking system. It is therefore of the utmost 
importance to monitor shadow banks’ activities and try to regulate them adequately. At their 
2014  Brisbane  summit,  the  G20  agreed  on  a  new  roadmap  for  regulating  the  shadow 
banking sector. Work is being conducted simultaneously by the FSB, the Basel Committee 
and IOSCO. 
But the ambitious reform agenda is far from completed. In my view, a key task on the way 
towards transforming shadow banking into resilient market-based financing is now to identify 
areas  where  additional  FSB 
recommendations  are  needed  and  where  existing 
recommendations  should  be  made  more  precise.  We  have  to  bring  forward  this  reform 
agenda with all our efforts. 
Let  me  conclude  the  discussion  of  regulatory  reform  with  something  that  seems  very 
important  to  me.  Each  of  the  regulatory  projects  I  have  discussed  calls  for  international 
cooperation.  If  we  do  not  coordinate  our  approaches  towards  regulation,  we  will  create  a 
fragmented financial system with vast opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. 
When  all  is  said  and  done,  we  all  pursue  the  same  objective:  a  stable  financial  system  – 
certainly at the national level, but it is equally important at the global level. As European and 
US  regulators,  we  therefore  must  work  together  in  an  effort  to  avoid  any  form  of 
fragmentation of the regulatory space. The issue of derivatives oversight is just one example 
of where international cooperation is essential. 
The second mission: supervisory integration in Europe 
3. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  discussed  some  of  the  regulatory  answers  to  the  financial 
crisis. But regulation is only one answer to the crisis. The crisis has also shown that banking 
supervision  failed  to  keep  pace  with  the  increasingly  international  developments  in  the 
banking  sector.  Instead,  it  remained  confined  within  national  borders.  In  Europe,  the 
response to this observation has been a leap in integration. 
This leap in integration is mainly characterised by the establishment of the European banking 
union, which will comprise of a single supervisory mechanism, a single resolution mechanism 
and harmonised deposit insurance. 
The single supervisory mechanism, the first pillar so far, went to work on 4 November 2014. 
On that date, the ECB assumed responsibility for supervising the 120 largest banks in the 
euro  area  –  with  the  accession  of  Lithuania, the  number  of  supervised  banks  has  risen to 
123.  These  123  banks  account  for  more  than  85%  of  the  aggregate  balance  sheet  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  euro area’s banking sector, making the ECB one of the biggest banking supervisors in the 
world. 
Taking banking supervision from the national level to the European level has three specific 
benefits. 
First, it introduces more harmonised supervision standards. Under the SSM, European banks 
will be supervised according to the same high standards. These standards will be developed 
by sharing experiences  across borders and cherry-picking the best practices from national 
approaches to banking supervision. 
The  second  point  is  that  the  SSM  will  effectively  supervise  banks  in  a  truly  cross-border 
manner. Although home-host collaborations and supervisory colleges for international banks 
have  existed  for  some  time,  they  are  no  substitute  for  genuine  cross-border  supervision. 
European  supervision  will  provide  precisely  this  because  only  one  supervisor  is  in  charge 
and is really in possession of the full picture. This is essential today because large banks are 
usually internationally active. 
Third,  transferring  banking  supervision  from  the  national  to  the  European  level  will  put 
greater distance between supervisors and the banks they supervise and therefore minimise 
any  home  bias.  Therefore,  European  banking  supervision  will  reduce  the  likelihood  of 
national  supervisors  affording  preferential  treatment  to  “their”  banks,  thus  contributing  to 
prudential transparency. 
Despite all the advantages that European banking supervision offers, you may be under the 
impression that Europe has entered into uncharted territory by transferring responsibility for 
banking  supervision  to  the  ECB,  an  institution  with  no  previous  experience  in  supervising 
banks at all. Be assured that this is not the case. 
National  supervisors  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  supervision  within  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism.  Responsibility  for  supervision  lies  with  so-called  joint  supervisory 
teams.  These  teams  are  headed  by  ECB  staff,  but  mainly  consist  of  national  supervisors. 
And  I  must  say  that  our  experience  during  the  first  months  of  the  SSM  has  been  quite 
positive. 
As I pointed out earlier, establishing the Single Supervisory Mechanism is only the first pillar 
of  the  European  banking  union.  Banking  supervision  cannot  and  should  not  prevent 
individual  banks  from  failing  –  either  at  the  national  level  or  at  the  European  level.  The 
possibility of failure is an essential element of a well-functioning market economy. 
Nonetheless, one lesson we learned from the financial crisis is that the failure of very large or 
interconnected  banks  could  lead  to  a  systemic  crisis.  Thus,  as  I  have  already  mentioned, 
solving  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  is  crucial  in  order  to  make  the  financial  system  more 
stable and save taxpayers’ money. 
And this is where banking supervision has to be flanked by other measures and where the 
second pillar of the European banking union – the Single Resolution Mechanism – comes in. 
From  2016  onwards,  European  banking  supervision  will  be  supplemented  by  a  European 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism for  banks.  From then  on, the  banking  union  will  rest  on  two 
pillars and provide a stable framework for European financial markets. 
 Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me return to the beginning of my speech. With regard to regulatory 
reform we might ask: mission accomplished or mission impossible? At the end of the day, the 
most probable answer is: a bit of both. Regulatory reform will never be completed because 
the financial system is evolving constantly and regulation has to keep pace. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  I  identified  the  crisis  as  being  the  problem  in  the  banking 
system and regulatory reform as the solution. To be sure, there are many people in this world 
whose profession it is to invent problems in order to sell expensive solutions. 
As far as financial regulation is concerned, the problem at hand is real: a financial crisis that 
brought the financial system to the brink of collapse and imposed huge economic and social 
costs on many people. It is rather obvious that regulators did not invent the problem, and, 
equally important, the solution we propose is not expensive when measured correctly. 
I do not deny that stricter regulation translates into higher costs for banks. However, when 
measured against the burden that financial crises place on society, these costs seem to be 
justified. 
But regulation and supervision are only one side of the coin. If we want the banking system 
to become a safer place, banks managers’ behaviour will also play an important role. What 
we need is a change of culture. The times of “greed is good” should be long gone. We should 
see  the  financial  system  for  what  it  actually  is:  a  service  provider  for  the  real  economy. 
Subscribing to this notion of finance will probably be the most important step towards a more 
stable banking system. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
