  S S Mundra: Role of Audit Committees in financial conglomerates 
Special address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at ICICI 
Bank, Mumbai, 13 January 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ms. Chanda Kochhar, MD & CEO, ICICI Bank; members of the Audit Committee of 
the Boards of ICICI Bank subsidiaries & other senior officials from ICICI Bank Group! It is, 
indeed, a pleasure and privilege for me to be here today and to interact with the members of 
the Audit Committee of the bank as well as those of the subsidiary companies. I understand 
that  this  is  the  fifth  such  occasion  when  this  kind  of  a  meeting  has  been  organized  and  I 
congratulate the management of ICICI Bank for conceptualizing this process. 
2.  
I  understand  that  ICICI  Bank  has  thirty-four  subsidiaries/associates.  From  the 
perspective of the Top Management of the parent bank, it is important that the subsidiaries 
are run in a professional manner and the respective Audit Committees have a very significant 
role in ensuring that. 
3.  
In my address today, I intend to speak on the expectations of the regulators from the 
Audit  Committees  and  highlight  emerging  trends  in  the  regulatory/supervisory  domain  that 
should engage the minds of the Audit Committees of the Financial Conglomerates in future. 
However,  before  doing  so,  I  wish  to  spend  a  couple  of  minutes  on  the  evolution  of  Audit 
Committees. 
4.  
Muscovy Company was the first joint stock company dating back to the year 1555 
and its Charter provided for four ‘Sad, Discreet and Honest’ members of the Board. ‘Sad’ in 
today’s context is seen as being in an unhappy state of mind. Back in the 16th century, sad 
also  meant  “Sated”  or  “Satisfied”.  Discreet  and  Honest,  of  course,  don’t  need  any  further 
elaboration. 
5.  
We  all  know  that  in  addition  to  the  Management,  companies  also  need  a 
governance framework primarily with a view to preserving the shareholder value. There are 
some  major  landmarks  that  defined  the  role  of  Audit  Committees  in  augmenting  the 
Governance aspects in companies. The Treadway Commission Report of 1987 in the USA, 
the Cadbury Committee Report of 1992 in the UK and the Kumarmangalam Birla Committee 
Report  of  2000  in  India  emphasized  on  the  need  for  a  certain  minimum  number  of 
independent  directors  on  the  Audit  Committees,  expecting  them  to  be  “Sad,  Discreet  and 
Honest”. 
Audit Committees, essentially, perform the role of conscience-keepers & prudential 
6.  
accountants and in a way, are expected to guide the management to drive the institution’s 
operations along the desired course. The main responsibility entrusted to them is to ensure 
adherence to all regulatory guidelines, legal statutes and directions and most importantly, to 
ensure integrity of accounts so that the balance sheet of the entity presents a true and fair 
picture of the financial performance of the entity. 
7.  
The importance of Corporate Governance in ensuring sound financial reporting and 
in deterring frauds has gained growing recognition in recent years and the presence of an 
efficient and independent Audit Committee is considered a central cog in this wheel. In India, 
the constitution of an Audit Committee has generally been prescribed as a part of Corporate 
Governance mechanism to be followed by the “listed” corporations, under clause 49 of the 
Listing Agreement, and by certain “public” corporations under the Companies Act, 1956. For 
the banking companies, the requirements date back to April 1994 when the banks were first 
advised by RBI to constitute an Audit Committee of their Board. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    Role of Audit Committees in the banks 
8.  
As  you  would  appreciate,  the  role  of  the  Audit  Committees  in  banks  has  been 
expanding ever since and at the last count, the calendar of reviews required to be put up to 
the  Audit  Committee  of  the  Board  (ACB)  at  various  periodicity  had  25  items.  It  not  only 
signifies  the  importance  of  the  ACBs  but  also  highlights  the  confidence  that  the  banking 
sector regulator reposes in the committee. Some of these reviews include: 
 
Review  of  compliance  with  observations  made  in  the  Annual  Financial  Inspection 
conducted by RBI 
Review of Audit Plan 
Review  of  information  on  violations  by  various  functionaries  in  the  exercise  of 
discretionary powers 
Review of KYC/AML compliance 
Review of compliance to regulatory requirement of Regulators in Host Countries in 
respect of overseas branches 
Review of Fraud cases 
 
9.  
Let me take this opportunity to emphasize a few of these areas for sharper focus by 
the ACBs in view of their importance- both from a bank-specific as well as from a systemic 
viewpoint. 
(a)  
KYC/AML:  The  violations  relating  to  KYC/AML  compliance  probably  constitute  a 
significant share of the regulatory penalties levied on banks in recent times. The host country 
regulators  have  been  particularly  harsh  on  overseas  banks.  In  December  2012  alone,  two 
London-based banks, HSBC Group and Standard Chartered Bank, agreed to pay financial 
penalties  for  violations  of  U.S.  laws  related  to  anti-money-laundering  practices  and 
suspicious activity reporting in excess of $2 bn. 
Reacting to the growing instances of regulatory penalties levied on financial institutions, Anat 
Admati,  of  Stanford  University  quipped,  “The  fines  can  be  viewed  as  a  ‘cost  of  doing 
business’,”  “They  don’t  get  at  the  heart  of  the  problem  and  aren’t  effective  to  change 
behaviour, because the strong incentives for individuals within the banks to keep engaging in 
the same practices remain in place.” 
In India too, in the recent past we have had similar instances of penalties being levied on 
banks for KYC/AML violations. I am not sure whether as bankers, we would like to agree with 
what  Admati  had  to  say,  but  the  recurrence  of  similar  incidents  tends  to  support  her 
observations. I believe that the absence of an appropriate punitive mechanism in the banks 
for  lapses  has  also  contributed  to  their  recurrence.  Therefore,  our  expectations  from  the 
ACBs would be to closely focus on reasons for such regulatory penalties/sanctions and seek 
a root–cause analysis for preventing recurrence. Maybe some banks have such a process in 
place. But unfortunately, the process stops at analysis without the outcome of such analysis 
being used to fix accountability and for bringing about further improvements in the existing 
systems and processes. 
For groups having sizeable overseas presence, I would like to sound a note of caution. One 
must not feel too excited with the  pace of growth in revenue or bottom line in a particular 
overseas  jurisdiction,  rather  one  needs  to  exercise  greater  caution  in  such  situations.  The 
basic tenets of finance “higher the risk, higher the returns” has not yet outlived its relevance 
and as finance professionals, we must continue to respect it. 
(b)  
RBI Inspections: As you are aware, the approach of the RBI’s supervisory process 
has  undergone  a  change  and  it  now  follows  a  risk-focused  approach.  The  risk-based 
supervision  is  based  on  a  model  which  has  various  dimensions  to  it  in  terms  of  risk 
assessment,  risk  measurement  and  risk  aggregation.  The  RBS  process  is  quite  data 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  intensive and the bank managements need to realize that the supervisory evaluation of the 
banks’ performance is a function of the quality of data/ information. The point I want to make 
here is whether the ACB should also not have an oversight on this aspect as well rather than 
confining itself  to  reviewing  the  compliance  given  by  the  bank  to  the  supervisor’s  findings. 
Even in the matters of compliance, some ACBs are found lacking in proper monitoring. Had it 
not  been  so,  many  observations  or  rather,  similar  kind  of  observations  would  not  be 
appearing  in  successive  supervisory  reports.  I  would  like  the  ACBs  to  appreciate  that  RBI 
findings are based, in many cases, on a sample check. But the banks’ compliance should not 
be limited to the instances highlighted. The objective should be to rectify the systems and 
processes across the bank so that there is no recurrence. The emphasis should be on the 
nature of deficiency and not on the rectification of the number of deficiencies identified by the 
supervisor.  A  crucial  underpinning  of  the  risk-based  approach  is  a  focus  on  systems  and 
processes  in  banks.  It  would  be  important  for  the  Top  Management  of  banks,  and  more 
specifically, the ACB members to internalize these aspects quickly and to develop a deeper 
understanding of the entire RBS process. 
(c)  
Frauds: This is another area which needs increased focus and greater sensitivity 
from  the  ACB  members.  Everyone  acknowledges  the  importance  of  putting  in  place 
appropriate systems and processes as the first and foremost requirement for preventing such 
incidents. The systems and processes may be in place. But do they really work? We tend not 
to  look  at  it  until  and  unless  something  serious  happens. How  fast  is  the  dissemination  of 
information within the bank? How quickly internal communications reach the staff manning 
the front office in the branches? An evaluation of this may not shore up a bank’s bottom-line 
but would definitely save it a lot of embarrassment. In our recently concluded scrutiny into 
fixed deposit related frauds in some banks, it emerged that even the caution advices issued 
by  RBI  in  respect  of  certain  individuals  had  not  percolated  down  to  the  branch  officials 
quickly enough to enable appropriate preventive measures. Does ACB have a role here? I 
would say that ACBs should take upon themselves to monitor the trend of frauds, assimilate 
key learnings and ensure that mitigation measures are put in place by the management. 
(d)  
Review  of  quarterly/annual  results:  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  one  of  the  key 
expectations of all stakeholders, including the regulators, from the ACB is that they ensure 
the  integrity  of  accounting  system.  In  respect  of  banks,  the  ACBs  are  expected  to  take  a 
close  look  into  the  asset  quality,  instances  of  restructuring  of  advances,  provisioning  held, 
etc.  During  RBI  inspections,  our  inspectors  sometimes  report  significant  divergences  with 
regard  to  asset  classifications  and  provisions  held,  which  have  substantial  implications  for 
the financials of banks. The point I am trying to make is that if the RBI inspectors are able to 
identify  these  divergences  in  the  limited  time-frame  that  they  are  on-site,  why  the  banks’ 
auditors  are  not  able  to  do  so.  I  am  not  sure  how  many  ACBs  actually  ask  their  statutory 
auditors and internal auditors the reasons for their inability to identify such instances? Is it a 
question of efficiency of the auditors or is there a much deeper issue – something to do with 
the  transparency  of  the  process  itself?  For  a  fair  representation  of  accounts,  it  is  also 
imperative that adequate provisions for post-retirement benefits like pension, gratuity, leave 
encashment, etc. (wherever applicable) are held. It is important that the ACB asks the right 
questions to the management about various underlying assumptions that go into computation 
of  the  required  provisions  such  as  life  expectancy,  discount  rate,  expected  return  on 
investments, etc. I urge the ACBs to ask uncomfortable questions. Going forward, under a 
full-fledged RBS process, RBI’s dependence on auditors is only going to increase and a very 
competent ACB will provide a great deal of supervisory comfort to us. 
Role of Audit Committees in Group companies 
10. 
As a financial conglomerate, ICICI Group pursues diverse business interests which 
subject it to the regulations of various domestic and overseas regulators. Some of the critical 
roles  that  the  Audit  Committee  of  the  Boards  are  expected  to  play  in  terms  of  SEBI’s 
Corporate Governance guidelines include: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
     Reviewing the annual financial statements and Auditor’s Reports before submission 
to  the  Board  for  approval,  with  particular  reference  to  major  accounting  entries 
involving estimates based on the exercise of judgment by management (similar to 
what I had mentioned in the previous point) 
Reviewing  the  statement  of  uses  /  application  of  funds  raised  through  an  issue 
(public issue, rights issue, preferential issue, etc.) 
Scrutiny of inter-corporate loans and investments 
Reviewing the adequacy of internal audit function 
Reviewing the functioning of the Whistle Blower mechanism; 
Approval of appointment of CFO 
Review of the appointment, removal and terms of remuneration of the Chief Internal 
Auditor 
The Corporate Governance guidelines of IRDA also envisage a similar role for the ACBs of 
the insurance entities. 
11.  
All  Financial  Conglomerates  (FCs)  tend  to  have  complex  group  structures  with 
significant interconnectedness amongst the group entities. Such complexity generally masks 
the inherent risks and interconnectedness. The domestic financial system regulators in India 
have put in place a system of monitoring designated financial conglomerates that focuses on 
assessment  of  inter-group  and  intra-group  linkages  and  evaluation  of  the  systemic  risk 
emanating from the interconnectedness of the FCs. Certain key issues that emanated from 
the last such meeting with a few FCs, included issues around non-adherence to arm’s length 
relationships  amongst  group  entities;  lack  of  group-wide  risk  management  and  group-wide 
exposure framework; lack of group-wide compliance framework, etc. My own sense is that 
the Audit Committees must be apprised about the outcome of these meetings and they must 
seek  necessary  intervention  of  the  management  to  mitigate  the  concerns  raised  by  the 
regulators. A related thought I had on the subject was whether there should be a system of 
having  a  periodical  meeting  of  various  audit  committees  to  deliberate  specifically  on 
interconnectedness issues. 
Emerging regulatory/Supervisory issues 
12.  
Let me now touch upon some of the evolving global regulatory/supervisory issues 
which Audit Committees would do well to be aware of and seek the management to brief and 
keep them updated thereon. 
TLAC 
a)  
The global standard setting bodies have been conscious of the adverse impact of the failure 
of Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs) and consequently, in order to improve the 
loss-absorbing capacity of such entities in resolution, the FSB has proposed a single specific 
minimum  Pillar  1  ‘total  loss-absorbing  capacity  (TLAC)’  requirement  to  be  set  within  the 
range of 16–20 per cent of RWAs. The objective of the TLAC requirements is to ensure that 
G-SIBs have adequate loss absorbing and recapitalisation capacity necessary to ensure that 
in  and  immediately  following  a  resolution,  critical  functions  can  be  continued  without  tax 
payers’ funds or financial stability being put at risk. 
While the TLAC requirements are not applicable to any Indian bank at present, there may be 
risk of spill over impact on emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) due to the 
adverse  impact  of  the  TLAC  proposal  on  G-SIBs.  Further,  the  possibility  of  extending  the 
total  loss  absorbency  requirements  to  entities  designated  as  D-SIBs  in  the  respective 
jurisdictions cannot be ruled out and the banking groups which can potentially be designated 
as a D-SIB in India (based on the framework rolled out by RBI last year) need to prepare 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  themselves for such eventuality. It is contextual to point out that similar framework for G-SIIs 
(Global-Systemically  Important  Insurers)  and  NBNI  G-SIFIs  (Non-Bank  Non-Insurer  Global 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions)  are  also  at  advanced  stages  of  discussion  at 
the  FSB  level  and  some  other  entities  in  India  could  also  be  identified  as  systemically 
important  insurers  or  systemically  important  non-bank  non-insurance  institutions  in  the 
domestic  context  and  could  be  subjected  to  more  stringent  solvency  and  liquidity 
requirements,  going  forward.  Audit  Committees  needs  to  ensure  that  their  respective 
institutions keep track of global/ domestic developments in this sphere and plan to meet the 
regulatory expectations, as they evolve. 
Advanced approaches of Basel Capital Accord 
b)  
A Working Paper1 published by the Basel Consultative Group recently has cautioned that the 
banks  in  EMDEs  and  small  economies  could  move  to  the  IRB  approaches  without  being 
ready  and  respond  to  higher  capital  requirements  by  not  revealing  and  recognising  all 
potential risks associated with their balance sheets. The higher requirements may create an 
incentive  for  banks  to  use  the  advanced  risk  measurement  techniques  under  Basel  II  to 
achieve  lower  implicit  risk  weights  with  the  same  balance  sheets,  and  put  pressure  on 
supervisors to approve such practices even if a bank is not ready (eg. by citing reputational 
concerns).  This  could  put  somewhat  arbitrary/  artificial  cushions  against  expected  and 
unexpected  losses  and  in  the  process,  reduce  consistency  and  comparability  across 
institutions due to excessive variation in risk measurement without better management of the 
underlying risks. Hence, Audit Committees need to satisfy themselves that such migrations, 
when they happen, are based on sound principles. 
D-SIBs 
c)  
As I alluded to earlier, the possible designation of few banking groups as D-SIBs in India may 
be viewed by the market as an admission of the bank attaining a “Too-big-to-fail” status. In 
this context, the regulator is likely to ask the bank to work on a comprehensive recovery and 
resolution  plan.  Audit  Committees  would  do  well  to  understand  the  implications  for  the 
banking group in attaining the D-SIB status and oversee the formulation of a robust ‘recovery 
and resolution plan’ for the group. 
Supervisory college 
d)  
Overtime,  some  of  the  Indian  banks  have  substantially  expanded  their  operations  in 
overseas  jurisdictions.  This  growing  integration  with  international  financial  markets  and 
substantial  overseas  presence  of  India  incorporated  banks  has  necessitated  entering  into 
closer  co-operation  with  the  host  country  supervisors.  The  overseas  supervisors  are  also 
focused on the overall bank’s financial health, risk management systems and RBI’s approach 
to supervision of the bank. Towards this end and with an underlying objective of improving 
the  effectiveness  of  our  cross-border  and  cross-sector  supervision,  RBI  has  set  up 
supervisory  colleges for  six  banking  groups.  The  ACBs  of  these  banking  groups  would  do 
well to remain informed on the concerns raised by various overseas supervisors and other 
sectoral  regulators  during  these  supervisory  colleges  and  lead  the  bank’s  initiatives  in 
responding to supervisory concerns. 
e)  
Some other important regulatory and supervisory measures introduced/likely to be 
introduced  for  bank/banking  groups  in  India  include  capital  and  provision  requirements  for 
banks’ exposures to entities with unhedged foreign currency exposure, capital requirement 
for  bank  exposures  to  Central  Counterparties,  provision  for  countercyclical  buffer,  liquidity 
coverage  ratio  and  leverage  ratio.  ACBs  should  make  themselves  more  conversant  with 
                                                 
1   Working paper No. 27 (Impact and implementation challenges of the Basel framework for emerging market, 
developing and small economies). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  these regulatory requirements and seek to be regularly updated on steps taken by the bank 
to comply with these requirements. Additionally, the Audit Committees need to oversee the 
evolution of the institution’s audit and control functions in line with changes in the regulatory 
landscape. 
Mutual fund industry 
13.  
An analysis of portfolio holdings in equity of the top ten AMCs in India along with 
their top ten holdings in equity stocks shows that the portfolio holdings of AMCs comprise 
quite a few common stocks indicating preference towards a select group of stocks. Although 
there  are  regulations  limiting  the  exposure  of  AMCs/  schemes  to  particular  scrip,  a 
significantly high degree of concentration by the mutual fund sector may have implications for 
stability of the securities market as well as on the performance of the individual AMCs too. I 
would urge the concerned Audit Committee to make it a part of their review process. 
IFRS implementation challenges 
14.  
Another  area  which  needs  close  attention  from  the  ACB  is  the  impending 
implementation  of  the  much  delayed  migration  to  IFRS.  As  you  may  be  aware,  Hon’ble 
Finance  Minister  in  his  Budget  speech  of  July  2014,  announced  the  migration  to  IFRS 
converged  Indian  Accounting  Standards  (Ind  AS)  for  corporate  on  a  voluntarily  basis  from 
FY 2015–16 and mandatorily from FY 2016–17. Also, IASB has finalised IFRS 9 and made it 
mandatory from January 2018. This has paved the way for migration of banks to Ind AS from 
FY 2018–19 onwards. 
15.  
There  are  several  implementation  challenges  that  are  envisaged  in  this  regard. 
While there is work required to be done for the regulators for aligning the Indian Accounting 
Standards that the banks follow at present with the IFRS, on their part, the banks would need 
to surmount several obstacles. The biggest challenge would be around the IT systems used 
by banks. Proposed impairment calculations under IFRS, accounting for interest income on 
Effective Interest Rate basis and presence of multiple systems for operations and accounting 
of different portfolios would mean that IT systems would have to be upgraded/realigned for 
IFRS  migration.  There  would  also  be  challenges  for  banks  around  converging  policies  for 
financial accounting and tax accounting for preparation of financial statements. 
16.  
Shortage  of  skilled  accounting  staff  with  proficiency  in  IFRS  is  a  pronounced 
deficiency which not only the banks but also the corporate would have to face. The problem 
is  likely  to  be  more  acute  for  the  banks  as  they  would  also  need  to  have  trained  staff  in 
various  departments  like  credit,  and  treasury,  etc.  For  a  group  like  ICICI  with  sizeable 
overseas presence, it is essential that you press forward quickly and be ready in the right 
earnest to meet these challenges. The ACBs would have a very crucial and proactive role to 
play in this regard. 
New Companies Act 
17.  
Section 177 of the New Companies Act makes it mandatory for all listed companies 
and certain unlisted public companies to have an Audit Committee comprising of minimum 
three directors with majority being independent directors. I trust the Group has taken note of 
the requirements and is doing the needful in this regard. 
Holding company structure 
18.  
As you are aware, there have been certain discussions around the holding company 
structure  for  the  banks  while  considering  the  license  for  new  banks.  In  this  context,  Audit 
Committees may also like to be sensitive towards the tax or regulatory implications for the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  bank  in  moving  towards  a  holding  company  structure  from  the  present  bank-subsidiary 
model. 
Conclusion 
19.  
In  sum,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  the  Audit  Committees  have  a  very  crucial 
mandate and shoulder high levels of expectations from all stakeholders. As regulators, we 
repose immense faith in their professionalism and therefore expect that the Audit Committee 
possess  a  collective  balance  of  skills  and  expert  knowledge  with  relevant  experience  in 
financial  reporting,  accounting  and  auditing  and  discharges  its  duties  efficiently  as  per  its 
mandate  and  scope.  The  changing  regulatory  landscape  and  the  emphasis  on  risk 
management  and  control  functions  makes  the  role  of  the  Audit  Committee  all  the  more 
important today and in the coming days. I am sure the ICICI group, with its major presence in 
the Indian banking system, is aware of this and is working towards meeting the expectations 
that the various stakeholders have from the Audit Committees. 
I wish you successful deliberations. 
Thank you! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
