  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Börsen-Zeitung, conducted by Mr Mark Schrörs, and published on 15 August 2015. 
 Mr Cœuré, the last two bailout programmes have failed to get Greece back on its feet. 
What  makes  you  think  that  this  time  everything  will  be  different  and  this  third 
programme will turn Greece into a “thriving economy”, to use the expression recently 
employed by Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank (ECB)? 
First of all, you have to remember where we started in 2010. Back then, the Greek economy 
was enormously imbalanced and inefficient. It was – and remains – clear that the process of 
getting Greece back on its feet will be long and hard. However, we should also not forget that 
at the end of last year Greece was gradually recovering. Positive growth was being forecast 
for 2015, and the banks had been able to obtain capital from the markets in 2014. 
But then Alexis Tsipras’ leftist government came to power. 
This year has seen a lot of trust destroyed, and reforms have been reversed. That has been 
a  real  setback.  But  Greece  can  build  on  what  it  has  achieved  under  the  first  two 
programmes,  and  the  new  memorandum  of  understanding  has  everything  it  needs  to give 
the  Greek  economy  considerable  support.  I  would  like  to  stress  two  things  in  this  regard. 
First, we have the right mix as regards fiscal measures. Ambitious medium-term budgetary 
objectives have been set, without the economy being strangled in the short term. Second, 
there is a strong focus on structural reforms. Looking back, one could say that if there had 
been more focus on structural measures – such as the reform and opening-up of markets, 
improved tax collection and the fight against interest groups – from the start, that would have 
reduced the burden that adjustment placed on the most vulnerable in society and speeded 
up Greece’s recovery. 
So, the first two programmes were poorly constructed? 
No, I would not say that. The information we had back then was completely different. Now 
that  Greece  has  accepted  these  reforms,  it  is  important  that  they  are  implemented  in  full. 
This is not a short-term solution aimed at obtaining money to cover the next few weeks. It 
should be seen as what it is: a three-year programme aimed at getting the country back on 
track and reaping the full benefits of the euro area recovery. 
But  isn’t  that  precisely  the  problem?  The  Greek  people  clearly  voted  “no”  in  the 
referendum, and Tsipras openly says that he does not believe in the programme. 
What counts is the agreement that has been reached and the Greek parliament’s adoption of 
the  relevant  laws.  And  I  am  grateful for the good  spirit  and  cooperation  of the  new  Greek 
Finance Minister. 
Up to €25 billion is planned for the recapitalisation of the Greek banks. Will that be 
enough? And would the ECB be in favour of all that money being handed over right at 
the outset as one large initial payment? 
We  believe  that  the  recapitalisation  of  the  Greek  banks  should  take  place  as  soon  as 
possible. The banks’ ability to grant credit is an important precondition for growth. However, 
first we need detailed information about the situation. For that reason, banking supervisors at 
the  ECB  have  started  a  new  asset  quality  review  and  stress  test  for  Greece’s  four  major 
banks. Those credit institutions were adequately capitalised, but they are now operating in an 
extremely difficult economic environment, and non-performing loans are likely to increase in 
the next few years. It is quite clear, therefore, that the banks will require more capital. How 
much remains to be seen. The banking supervisors will need a few weeks to conclude their 
assessment. For that reason, the recapitalisation should not take place immediately. But it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  should  happen  before  the  end  of  the  year,  taking  into  account  the  existing  resolution  and 
competition frameworks. It is also important, though, that we do not just put more money into 
these banks. We need to ensure that this achieves the desired objective. 
What do you mean by that? 
We  need  to  place  the  Greek  banking  system  on  a  sound  footing.  That  also  entails 
considerable changes to the system’s governance structure, and the banks need to clean up 
their balance sheets. The problem of those non-performing loans needs to be solved in an 
efficient  manner,  which  will  involve,  among  other  things,  an  efficient  insolvency  framework 
and, where necessary, the sale of such loans to investors other than banks. Only then will we 
be able to ensure that the money we put into the banks is not lost. 
Once this third programme has been agreed, can the capital controls be lifted? 
That is not for the ECB to decide. It is a matter for the Greek government. As long as there is 
uncertainty regarding the future of Greece’s banks, the government in Athens should tread 
very carefully. I do not see scope for substantially relaxing Greece’s capital controls until it is 
clear how and when the banks will be recapitalised. 
Will  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  immediately  reapply  the  waiver  –  i.e.  the 
exemption under which the bonds of a country with a poor credit rating are accepted 
as  collateral  if  the  country  is  in  a  programme  –  once  Greece’s  third  programme  is 
agreed? That would be an enormous help to Greece. 
The Governing Council has not yet discussed that. 
But it is not automatic? 
In order for a country to benefit from the waiver, a programme needs to be in place, and that 
programme needs to be functioning well. Once we have reached that point, we will discuss it 
in the Governing Council. 
But  does  the  Governing  Council  not  need  to  wait  for  the  initial  assessment  by  the 
creditors,  which  is  scheduled  for  October?  That  is  also  relevant  as  regards  the 
question  of  when  Greece  could  benefit  from  the  ECB’s  bond  purchase  –  i.e. 
quantitative easing (QE) – programme. 
We could potentially act earlier. Greece’s new programme contains a large number of “prior 
actions”. The question for the Governing Council will be whether these preliminary measures 
are sufficient to meet our criteria. 
This is the first time that the potential for a country to leave the euro area has been 
publicly discussed. Is the euro area now just a fixed exchange rate system? 
It is crucial for the stability of the euro area that there is no doubt that participation in the euro is 
irreversible.  Now  there  is  such  doubt.  The  discussion  about  Grexit  has  undoubtedly  caused 
instability  in  this  respect.  It  is  like  a  fine  hairline  crack  that  can  lead  to  a  major  fracture. 
Consequently, it has to be repaired now. This is particularly important for us as a central bank. 
We do not decide  who  belongs in the euro area. That is a political decision. But the ECB’s 
working assumption is that a country’s participation in the euro is irreversible. This is also how 
we have dealt with Greece and why the provision of liquidity to Greece could be sustained. 
And this repair should take place by means of more integration? 
Yes,  absolutely.  The  right  response  now  is  to  strengthen  the  euro  area.  This  requires  a 
series of measures, with two aims. First, a greater sense of responsibility is needed at the 
national level. Greece is undoubtedly an extreme example, but it is also a useful warning of 
what happens to confidence when a country departs significantly from the consensus and the 
agreed  rules.  This  kind  of  thing  must  never  happen  again.  Second,  we  need  more  risk 
sharing, meaning solidarity for countries which have experienced shocks. 
And more solidarity means transfer payments between euro area countries? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  No, euro area solidarity does not mean permanent transfers. It is about supporting a country 
which is in difficulty, but only temporarily, and it is conditional on efforts being made to return 
to balance. The euro area is based on the principle that it is not a transfer union. One can 
dream of a completely different model – a federal state with transfers which are legitimised 
by a common political institution – but that is not the system we have today, and I do not see 
any political will to change that. 
The  debate  about  Greece  has  revealed  fundamentally  different  economic  ideas  and 
political cultures in the euro area countries. Will these centrifugal forces break up the 
euro area some day? 
We have to be careful here, as that can quickly become a self-fulfilling prophecy. The more 
you talk about it, the more people think nationalistically again and stop trusting Europe – and 
when people do not trust Europe, Europe becomes part of the problem instead of being part 
of the solution. Europe has always thrived on the diversity of its models, ideas and cultures. 
We  need  to  prevent  economic  divergence  from  becoming  so  large  that  it  threatens  the 
survival  of  the  euro  area.  But  diversity  as  such  is  not  a  bad  thing;  it  also  promotes  best 
practices and competition. 
Let’s talk about monetary policy. Some economists are already speculating that the 
renewed drop in oil prices could ensure that the inflation rate, which was 0.2% in July, 
falls  below  0%  again.  Longer-term  inflation  expectations  have  also  fallen  again 
slightly. Are you starting to get worried again? 
We do  not  wake  up every  morning  and  look  at the  economic  indicators  in  order  to  decide 
whether  to  raise  or  lower  interest  rates  or  whether  to  stop  or  expand  QE.  We  have  a 
medium-term perspective. We have oriented our monetary policy stance – with low and even 
negative interest rates and forward guidance, together with bond purchases – towards a long 
time  horizon.  Hence,  we  have  said  that  those  purchases  can  run  until  at  least  September 
2016, or later if necessary. There was a good reason for this long-term focus, namely that 
the economic recovery is still weak and is only gradually strengthening. 
So, at the moment you do not see any need to act? 
Our monetary policy decisions are gradually finding their way into the provision of credit and 
the real economy, even if only slowly. We therefore want to keep a steady hand. We would 
only see ourselves forced to act if there was a fundamental change in the economic situation 
or the monetary stance was materially altered because of developments in the markets – for 
example, in the event of a sharp increase in long-term bond yields. So far, I am not worried 
by what I am seeing. 
So, renewed worries about deflation are exaggerated? 
There is nothing in the data that supports such an assessment. 
In the United States, the first interest rate rise is on the horizon. Would this make the 
ECB’s  job  easier,  for  example  because  the  euro  would  lose  value  against  the  US 
dollar,  or  more  difficult  because  rising  US  bond  yields  have  often  pushed  up  their 
European counterparts in the past? 
If the Federal Reserve comes to the conclusion that it can raise interest rates, that means 
that  the  US  economy  is  strong.  That  would  be  good  news  for  the  global  economy,  and 
therefore also good news for the euro area. It will be crucial that global financial markets are 
resilient enough to deal with this change in monetary policy. 
And, are they resilient enough? Or should we be worried that the first US interest rate 
rise since June 2006 will cause chaos in the markets? 
We  have  been  living  with  very  low  interest  rates  for  a  very  long  time.  The  challenge  is  to 
ensure that market participants recognise that the future regime will be more like it normally 
was in the past – with higher interest rates. There is a risk that some have forgotten what that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  looks like. That also applies to us in Europe. It is extremely important that our unconventional 
monetary policy does not damage financial markets. 
But that is exactly what many market participants are accusing central bankers of – 
especially  the  ECB.  They  are  accusing  them  of  overriding  market  mechanisms  and 
ousting private investors. 
It is clear to me that these unconventional measures have to be of a temporary nature. If they 
became a permanent phenomenon, that would have much more significant implications for 
market  structures  and  the  profitability  of  financial  intermediaries.  Then  I  would  be  worried. 
But  I  am  convinced  that  this  regime  will  be  temporary,  and  that  is  because  our  purchase 
programme is already bearing fruit. 
At the moment, market participants are focusing almost exclusively on what central 
bankers have to say. Is that not dangerous, and does that not lead to more volatility? 
Central banks have always influenced the markets – that is how monetary policy works. At 
the moment, however, there is exceptional nervousness worldwide. The prospective change 
in monetary policy in the United States and the United Kingdom is contributing to this, as are 
worries about China and emerging economies and major geopolitical risks. At the same time, 
market participants are making important changes to their business models and adapting to 
new regulation. This uncertainty and volatility cannot mean that we stop doing our job. We 
must nevertheless be extremely careful. In an environment of great uncertainty, we as the 
ECB should look beyond short-term volatility and stay calm. 
Concern about a hard landing for the Chinese economy has recently been growing. 
How concerned about this are you? 
The depreciation of the renminbi can be seen as a symptom of a slowdown in the Chinese 
economy, at least in the export sector. That is a reminder of the major global uncertainty that 
we  face.  Here  in the  euro  area,  we  should  see this  as  a  warning  about  the  importance of 
strong domestic demand. Strong exports are a sign of competitiveness, and as such they are 
a good thing, but it would be unreasonable to base the long-term growth model for the euro 
area on exports alone. That would make us totally dependent on global growth, particularly 
growth  in  emerging  market  economies.  Euro  area  countries  must  strengthen  domestic 
demand, and above all private investment, in order to make themselves more resilient. 
What is your assessment of the Chinese central bank’s decision to change the way in 
which the renminbi is pegged to the US dollar, which has led to a strong devaluation 
and stoked fears of an increased currency war? 
Fundamentally,  it  means  a  step  towards  an  exchange  rate  system  which  is  more  strongly 
determined by the markets. That is generally a good thing; it strengthens the resilience of the 
global economy and is in line with the G20’s recommendations. Within this framework, I trust 
the Chinese authorities not to use the exchange rate as a policy instrument. That would go 
against the recommendations of the G20. 
Would the ECB welcome the renminbi being part of the currency basket for the IMF’s 
Special Drawing Rights? 
Fundamentally,  I  am  convinced  that  it  will  happen  anyway  in  time  because  China’s  global 
significance continues to grow. But there is no reason to jump the gun at this point. There are 
IMF criteria for inclusion and they have to be met. This should not be a political decision. 
To come back to the ECB: there is a global discussion about central banks’ mandates, 
for  example  whether  financial  stability  should  become  an  explicit  target,  and  about 
inflation targets, i.e. whether 2% is still appropriate. Do you see a need for the ECB to 
rethink its operational framework? 
Here in the euro area, we are slowly fighting our way out of the crisis. Now is definitely not 
the right time to be having these discussions. We have fared well with our narrow mandate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We are mindful of financial stability considerations, but our primary mandate remains price 
stability.  As  regards  the  figure  of  2%,  there  is  not  much  point  in  thinking  about  this  when 
inflation is at 0.2%. We should concentrate first of all on bringing inflation back towards 2%. 
But that is precisely the point. Some people in Germany believe that price stability is 
not 2% inflation, but rather 0% inflation. 
Price stability does not mean 0% inflation. When inflation is measured at 0%, the actual rate 
of  inflation  is  less  than  0%,  as  there  is  a  tendency  to  overestimate the  rate  of  inflation  by 
underestimating  the  underlying  adjustments  in  the  quality  of  goods  and  services.  And  just 
think:  if  we  reduce  our  inflation  objective  when  inflation  stands  at  0.2%,  how  are  we  to 
prevent  it  from  being  raised  the  next  time  it  stands  at  3.5%?  Our  inflation  objective  has 
served us well, and the medium-term orientation gives us sufficient flexibility. 
There are also repeated discussions as to whether the ECB should act as a guarantor 
in the financing of euro area governments – similar to what the Federal Reserve does 
in the United States. What do you think of that? 
If “guarantor” means that the ECB fosters trust in the irreversibility of the euro and ensures 
stability,  that  is  already  part  of  our  mandate.  If  it  means  that  we  become  a  lender  of  last 
resort for governments, the answer is a clear “no”. The monetary financing of governments is 
prohibited  by  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union,  and  that  gives  us 
important protection. Some people in Europe would like to amend that part of the Treaty, but 
that would be very dangerous. 
Back in May, you attracted a lot of attention when you indicated at a non-public event 
involving  hedge  fund  managers  that  the  ECB  would  frontload  some  QE  purchases 
before the summer, with the speech not being published until 12 hours later. President 
Draghi  announced  that  the  rules  governing  such  appearances  would  be  changed. 
What lessons need to be learned from that? 
As the ECB has stated publicly, the discussion that was triggered was primarily a result of 
several misunderstandings relating to the substance and the news content of the speech, as 
well  as  an  internal  procedural  error  regarding  the  timing  of  its  publication.  But  I  have  also 
drawn my own personal lessons from the incident. 
What are they? 
For  me,  the  key  lesson  from  this  episode  is  what  the  reaction  said  about  people’s 
expectations  of  us  at  the  ECB.  The  discussions  about  it  have  clearly  shown  that  central 
banks must be above any suspicion that they are too close to market participants. That is 
true  of  central  banks  generally,  and  even  more  so  when  they  are  also  responsible  for 
banking supervision, as in the case of the ECB. As for me personally, I will no longer speak 
at events organised by banks. I did that in the past, there are no problems with that from a 
legal perspective and indeed, it is useful to learn from market participants. But we must be 
careful that people do not get the wrong impression. 
Central bankers at the Federal Reserve publish their diaries of events. Could the ECB 
follow suit? There is also the question of how transparent a central bank can actually be. 
Societies are increasingly demanding more transparency from public institutions such as the 
ECB. In time, I believe there will be more to come in that regard. We have responded to that 
by  publishing,  for  example,  summaries  of  our  monetary  policy  discussions.  I  was  fully  in 
favour  of  indicating  how  individual  members  of  the  Governing  Council  had  voted,  and  I 
remain  convinced  that  it  will  happen  someday.  I  would  have  absolutely  nothing  against 
publishing details of our diaries of meetings with external parties, as some public institutions 
already do. However, while being transparent and accountable, we must also be careful that 
we  do  not  lose  access  to  market  participants.  Part  of  my  job  involves  understanding  their 
views and explaining our actions to them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
