  Vítor Constâncio: Assessing the new phase of unconventional monetary 
policy at the European Central Bank 
Panel remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, University of Mannheim, 25 August 
2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be also found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  policy  panel  and  to  share  the  stage  with  such 
distinguished fellow participants. 
My  plan  today  is  to  present  some  key  features  of  the  monetary  policy  measures  recently 
implemented by the ECB. As you all know, in January this year the ECB launched the most 
recent  addition  to  its  suite  of  tools  –  the  public  sector  purchase  programme  (PSPP), 
popularly referred to as quantitative easing. Together with a programme of targeted liquidity 
provision  and  a  programme  of  private  sector  asset  purchases,  the  PSPP  marked  a  new 
phase of the ECB’s unconventional monetary policy. Previous non-standard measures were 
mainly aimed at redressing impairments in the monetary policy transmission mechanism and 
fostering  a  regular  pass-through  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Their  implications  for  the 
ECB’s  balance  sheet  were  accommodated  in  a  merely  passive  way  to  satisfy  the  liquidity 
demand  created  by  banks.  In  contrast,  with  the  new  measures  implemented  since  June 
2014, the Governing Council is more actively steering the size of the ECB’s balance sheet 
towards  much  higher  levels  in  order  to  avoid  the  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  low 
inflation in a situation where policy rates have reached their effective lower bound. 
General considerations underlying the new phase of unconventional monetary policy 
The launch of the new phase of non-standard measures in June 2014 must be viewed in the 
context  of  the  decline  in  inflation  rates  since  the  second  half  of  2013,  which  was 
accompanied  by  persistently  fragile  euro  area  growth  prospects,  even  after  the  sovereign 
debt crisis abated over the course of 2012. The economy was still in recession for most of 
2013 and annual GDP growth figures only became positive in late 2013, leaving significant 
economic slack. A weak recovery took hold over the course of 2014 with growth rates around 
and  below  1%,  but  the outlook  deteriorated  again  during the  autumn,  with  inflation  turning 
negative later that year. The 2015 GDP growth forecasts for the euro area in the ECB staff 
macroeconomic  projections  had  declined  from  1.7%  in  June  to  1%  by  December.  At  the 
same time, and in contrast to previous developments, weak growth was accompanied by a 
prolonged period of declining inflation, which went from 3% at the end of 2011 to –0.2% in 
December 2014. Credit supply conditions in the euro area remained tight, despite signs of 
improvement, as indicated by the responses to bank lending surveys. These developments 
were  particularly  worrying  because  they  were  accompanied  by  a  decline  in  longer-term 
inflation expectations. 
This combination of very low growth in both output and prices was clearly suggestive of a 
shortfall  in  aggregate  demand  and  called for further  easing  of the  monetary  policy  stance. 
Key  ECB  interest  rates  reached  their  lower  bound  –  with  a  negative  rate  for  the  deposit 
facility  –  and  further  unconventional  measures  were  deployed,  drawing  in  part  on  the 
experience  of  other  central  banks.  Besides  lowering  key  interest  rates  in  June  and 
September  2014,  which  took  the  deposit  facility  rate  into  negative  territory,  the  Governing 
Council has implemented the following set of unconventional monetary policy measures over 
the past year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In June 2014, as part of a set of credit easing measures, the Governing Council announced 
the introduction of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), offering medium-
term credit at fixed rates to banks that are willing to extend credit to the private sector. 
In  September  and  October  2014  the  Governing  Council  initiated  a  programme  of  outright 
purchases  of  private  sector  assets,  in  particular  of  covered  bonds  and  asset-backed 
securities. 
In January 2015 the Governing Council expanded the purchase programme to include public 
sector  assets. The  Governing  Council  explicitly  committed to  purchasing  a  total  amount  of 
EUR  60  billion  every  month  from  March  2015  until  at  least  until  September  2016. 
Furthermore, the Governing Council has kept the programme open-ended by committing to 
keep it in place until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent 
with our medium-term inflation objective. The programme aims to maintain market neutrality 
by purchasing assets across the whole maturity spectrum between two  and 30 years. The 
purchases are allocated across countries according to the ECB’s capital key and any losses 
emanating from the programmes would be shared between the national central banks and 
the ECB in an 80%/20% ratio. 
The effects of the measures have to be assessed jointly and taking into consideration that 
some of the measures started to produce results before the decisions were actually taken. 
This  is  particularly  true  of  the  PSPP,  which  was  adopted  in  January;  a  survey  of  market 
participants conducted in October 2014 showed that over 50% were already anticipating that 
such a programme would shortly be adopted. 
The  distinguishing  feature  of  the  new  phase  of  our  unconventional  monetary  policy  is  the 
switch to a more active steering of the ECB’s balance sheet. 
Figure 1 
It is important to emphasise the nature of this new phase. Our intention is not to expand our 
monetary base in the expectation that, through the workings of a stable multiplier, this will 
result in an increase in monetary aggregates, which will in turn cause an upward movement 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   in inflation by whatever means conceived by the traditional quantitative approach. Our main 
reason for adopting a large-scale asset purchase programme was to harness several new 
channels  for  the  transmission  of  an  expansionary  monetary  policy.  The  expansion  in  the 
monetary  base  and  total  balance  sheet  is  rather  a  consequence  of  these  new  types  of 
monetary stimulus. Recent experience shows abundantly that those traditional relationships 
are not working well in the new realities of the financial system (see Figure 2). 
Figure 2 
 The  first  channel  through  which  these  new  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  are 
expected to stimulate aggregate demand is by signalling the ECB’s commitment to maintain 
an accommodative monetary policy stance.1 The TLTROs are a particularly clear example of 
this signalling channel. With their pre-specified interest rate and their maturity extending over 
many years, these operations provided information on the likely path of future interest rates. 
In the case of asset purchase programmes, the signalling channel operates more indirectly, 
through the expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. 
The second channel results in part from the first, and relates to the direct impact on medium-
term inflation expectations that a LSAP programme implies. It is expected that when forming 
expectations  about  future  inflation,  market  players  factor  in  the  effect  of  this  non-standard 
policy measure. 
Non-standard  measures  can  also  stimulate  activity  through  a  third  channel,  specifically  by 
lowering the effective cost and availability of credit to the non-financial private sector. Again, 
the TLTRO programme does this, providing explicit incentives for banks to extend their credit 
supply.  The  effectiveness  of  this  programme  was  reinforced  by  the  conclusion  of  our 
comprehensive assessment of the quality of banks’ balance sheets in autumn 2014, which 
provided strong incentives for banks to speed up the repair of their balance sheets. 
                                                
1  See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Bhattarai, Eggertsson and Gafarov (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  fourth  channel  of  transmission  of  the  new  unconventional  monetary  policy,  which  is 
specific  to  the  asset  purchase  programmes,  operates  through  portfolio  rebalancing.  By 
means  of  its  purchase  programmes,  the  ECB  exchanges  longer-term  and  relatively  less 
liquid assets for very short-term and highly liquid central bank money. This mitigates liquidity 
and  duration  risks  in  private  sector  portfolios  and,  given  liquidity  and  Value  at  Risk 
constraints,  reduces  the  required  compensation  for  holding  risky  and  illiquid  assets.2  As  a 
result,  the  programmes  encourage  portfolio  rebalancing  and  support  asset  prices.  The 
ensuing improvement in the balance sheet position of investors and banks eases leverage 
constraints  and  allows  banks  to  extend  more  credit  at  lower  costs  to  the  private  sector.3 
Better  financing  conditions  improve  growth  prospects,  increase  profitability  and  mitigate 
default  probabilities  in  the  non-financial  sector.  These  positive  feedback  effects  further 
improve  the  condition  of  the  balance  sheets  of  investors  and  banks,  and  increase  their 
willingness to extend new credit in a self-reinforcing positive spiral. 
Evaluating the new phase of unconventional monetary policy 
In  order  to  correctly  assess  the  effects  of  our  policies,  we  should  use  what  would  have 
happened had we not adopted these measures as a benchmark for comparison. Of course, 
this is virtually impossible to do since there are no sufficiently reliable and complete models 
to construct the counterfactual world. We can only analyse how the variables related to the 
transmission channels or the end results have evolved since we started the new policy. This 
is what I will do below. 
                                                
2  See Del Negro, Eggertsson, Ferrero and Kiyotaki (2011) and Vayanos and Vila (2009). 
3  See Curdia and Woodford (2011) and Gertler and Karadi (2013). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 3 
  Figure 3 shows the evolution of lending rates in the euro area. It shows that the sequence of 
interest rate cuts implemented by the Governing Council between mid-2012 and mid-2014 
was not transmitted to the effective borrowing costs faced by firms. By June 2014 we had cut 
the  main  refinancing  operation  (MRO)  rate  by  95  basis  points,  bringing  it  to  0.05%,  down 
from 1% in June 2012. However, the decline in lending rates for loans in most countries was 
much  smaller,  with  the  median  lending  rate  applied  to  small-sized  loans  in  the  median 
country having declined by not more than 30 basis points. Since June 2014 the transmission 
of  policy  rates  to  lending  rates  has  improved  considerably,  with  declines  in  lending  rates 
becoming more pronounced as well as more widely distributed across euro area countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 Figure 4 
  Our  quarterly  bank  lending  survey  confirms  the  improvements  in  broader  credit  conditions 
since  the  introduction  of  our  new  non-standard  measures.  The  survey,  addressed  to  the 
senior loan officers of a representative sample of euro area banks, provides information on 
financing conditions in euro area credit markets and on banks’ lending policies. The left-hand 
chart in Figure 4 shows that banks have consistently eased their credit standards for loans to 
non-financial corporations over the past year. The easing of credit standards stems, notably, 
from  the  lower  cost  of  funds  and  balance  sheet  constraints,  as  well  as  from  greater 
competition  among  banks.  Both  developments  were  clearly  objectives  of  our  measures,  in 
particular  of  the  TLTROs.  The  right-hand  chart  in  Figure  4  shows  net  credit  demand 
conditions  and  their  contributing  factors.  Easier  access  to  credit  has  been  coupled  with  a 
consistent increase in firms’ demand for loans. The general level of interest rates, according 
to the survey respondents, is contributing most to the recovery in loan demand. 
As I have already mentioned, an important transmission channel for asset purchases relates 
to the fact that different assets are imperfect substitutes. Consequently, interventions by the 
central bank that affect the supply of various assets available to private investors influence 
the prices of many other assets, including investment grade bonds, equities, real estate and 
foreign  assets,  with  consequences  for  the  exchange  rate.  Figure  5  shows  the  increase  in 
equity and bond prices (the latter illustrated by investment grade corporate bond yields). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 5 
  The  ongoing  deterioration  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  was  a  major  factor  in  the 
extension of our purchase programme in January this year. Figure 6 shows the evolution of 
these  expectations  over  the  past  decade  and  since  2012.  Euro  area  longer-term  inflation 
expectations  (both  market-based  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  survey-based)  had  been  falling 
since early 2013, reaching an all-time low by early 2015. 
Figure 6 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
  Expectations of inflation five years ahead, as expressed in the ECB Survey of Professional 
Forecasters, fell from 1.98% in the first quarter of 2013 to 1.77% in the first quarter of 2015. 
The  five-year  inflation-linked  swap  rate  five  years  ahead  fell  from  2.4%  to  1.5%  over  the 
same period. Since January 2015 this declining trend has been reversed. Both market-based 
and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have recovered from their 
lows.  While  broadly  similar  dynamics  in  market-based  measures  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations have been observed in other countries, the decline in the euro area somewhat 
preceded them and was more prolonged. 
I will now turn briefly to macro developments, both in terms of inflation and economic growth. 
Figure 7 
 Since last April headline inflation has turned positive but remains very low, affected by the 
renewed decline in oil prices. Core inflation, excluding food and energy, continues however 
to firm, reflecting the ongoing economic recovery  which is evolving in accordance with our 
baseline scenario. The latest round of our staff macroeconomic projections indicates that by 
2017  inflation  will  be  below,  but  close  to,  2%  and  that  GDP  growth  will  also  be  hovering 
around 1.9%. 
We do not deny that there are risks and shortcomings associated with the type of policies 
that we have been forced to adopt in view of our mandate to safeguard price stability in a 
symmetric way. Very briefly I will refer to several of these: 
Medium-term inflation risks are very low and central banks have enough instruments to deal 
with them. 
The exit strategy may involve the possibility of losses for the central bank. However, as Ben 
Bernanke  has  said,  this  is  a  possibility  that,  measured  against  the  gains  from  a  stronger 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy  and  the  previous  contributions  to  government  budgets,  is  “not  a  true  social 
economic risk”.4 
Financial  stability  risks,  stemming  from  search  for  yield  and  higher  leverage,  are  real,  but 
monetary policy cannot be inhibited in the pursuit of its priority goals. Those risks must be 
addressed  by  macroprudential  policies  of  a  regulatory  and  administrative  nature,  and  the 
policy toolkit available to central banks in this respect should be enlarged for that purpose. 
Potential laxity of credit risk management by financial institutions in a climate of low rates. 
Supervision,  appropriate  risk  management  governance  and  the  regulation  of  provisions 
should deal with this problem 
Wealth  effects  and  increased  inequality.  The  stronger  economy  and  lower  unemployment 
that result from the LSAPs mitigate but do not eliminate this possible side effect. 
Sometimes the criticism directed at our policies implicitly attributes responsibility for the low 
interest-rate  environment  to  central  bank  policies.  But  the  truth  is  precisely  the  opposite: 
central banks are simply reacting to and trying to correct a situation that they did not create. 
Indeed, medium and long-term market interest rates are mostly influenced by investors and 
market players, as the recent so-called “bund tantrum” illustrates. More importantly though, it 
should be pointed out that for a few decades now we have been witnessing a sort of secular 
trend  towards  lower  real  interest  rates.  This  trend  is  related  to  secular  stagnation  in 
advanced  economies,  resulting  from  a  continuous  deceleration  of  total  productivity  growth 
and  an  increase  in  planned  savings  accompanied  by  less  buoyant  investment  prospects. 
Monetary policy short-term rates are low because of those developments, not the other way 
around. At the same time, our monetary policy has to be accommodative precisely in order to 
normalise  inflation  and  growth  rates,  thereby  opening  up  the  possibility  of  higher  interest 
rates. Furthermore, in the present short-term conditions, with no fiscal room for manoeuvre, it 
is monetary policy that has the capacity to create the hope that this normalisation will protect 
savers in the future and improve net margins for banks. 
Regarding  the  risks  associated  with  the  search  for  yield  and  rich  asset  valuations,  it  is 
important  to  highlight  that  there  are  currently  no  signs  of  a  general  situation  of  asset 
overvaluation  in  the  euro  area.  Figure  8  shows  that  in  spite  of  the  increase  since  the 
beginning of the year, equity prices are still fairly valued, with a Schiller cyclically adjusted 
price-earnings ratio of 14, as against 26 in the United States. Likewise, real estate prices can 
also be shown to be broadly in line with fundamentals. 
                                                
4 
in  Wessel,  D.  (ed.)  Central  Banking  after  the  Great  Recession:  Lessons  Learned  and  Challenges  Ahead, 
Brookings Institution, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Figure 8 
  Corporate  bond  valuations  are  assessed  as  fairly  valued  or  as  only  slightly  overpriced, 
depending on the model used though, as illustrated in Figure 9. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Figure 9 
  Naturally,  the  heterogeneity  of  the  euro  area  means  that  averages  disguise  different 
situations in member countries. In this respect, there are a few examples of higher pressure 
on  housing  or  equity  prices.  The  new  competences  of  the  ECB  in  the  area  of 
macroprudential policy ensure that, besides the initiative of national authorities themselves, a 
general  assessment  of  developments  in  all  euro  area  countries  is  made.  Accordingly,  the 
ECB could decide to use its own powers to trigger a tightening of macroprudential tools and 
to  exert  its  coordinating  role  in  relation  to  possible  spillovers  of  the  measures  taken  in 
particular  countries.  Macroprudential  policy  is  active  in  the  euro  area,  with  dozens  of 
macroprudential  measures  having  been  adopted  in  several  countries,  as  Figure  10 
illustrates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 Figure 10 
  Conclusions 
Our new non-standard measures have successfully improved financial and credit conditions 
in the euro area and contributed to supporting the normalisation of price stability, as well as 
the  ongoing  economic  recovery.  I  am  confident  that  full  implementation  of  the  private  and 
public sector asset purchase programmes, as announced, will lead to a sustained return of 
inflation rates towards levels consistent with our definition of price stability, underpinning the 
firm  anchoring  of  medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  As  always,  the  Governing 
Council  stands  ready  to  use  all  the  instruments  available  within  its  mandate  to  respond to 
any material change to the outlook for price stability. 
References 
Bhattarai,  S.,  Eggertsson,  G.B.  and  Gafarov,  B.,  “Time  Consistency  and  the  Duration  of 
Government  Debt:  A  Signalling  Theory  of  Quantitative  Easing”,  unpublished  manuscript, 
2014. 
Curdia,  V.  and  Woodford,  M.,  “The  Central  Bank  Balance  Sheet  as  an  Instrument  of 
Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 2011. 
Del  Negro,  M.,  Eggertsson,  G.B.,  Ferrero,  A.  and  Kiyotaki,  N.,  “The  Great  Escape?  A 
Quantitative Evaluation of the Fed’s Liquidity Facilities”, FRB NY Staff Report 520, 2011. 
Eggertsson, G. and Woodford, M., “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary 
Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2002. 
Gertler, M. and Karadi, P., “QE1 vs. 2 vs. 3: A Framework for Analyzing Large-Scale Asset 
Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool”, International Journal of Central Banking, 2013. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Vayanos,  D.  and  Vila,  J.L.,  “A  Preferred-Habitat  Model  of  the  Term  Structure  of  Interest 
Rates”, NBER Working Paper 15487, 2009. 
Wessel,  D.  (ed.),  Central  Banking  after  the  Great  Recession:  Lessons  Learned  and 
Challenges Ahead, Brookings Institution, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
