  Minouche Shafik: Interpreting the yield curve – warning or opportunity? 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England,  at  the  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers  Annual  Conference,  Manchester, 
22 May 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
The views in this speech are my own, and not those of the Bank of England or the Monetary PoIicy Committee. I 
would  like  to  thank  Ben  Broadbent,  Ronnie  Driver,  Kristin  Forbes,  Grellan  McGrath,  Martin  Weale  and  Chris 
Young for their comments. 
It is a pleasure to be here. I would like to talk today about long term borrowing rates – a topic 
that I am sure is often on the mind of a corporate treasurer. I have been thinking about this 
issue since I joined the Monetary  Policy  Committee (MPC), as not only  are long yields an 
important input to current financial conditions, but – carefully interpreted – they can offer an 
insight  on  future  developments  too.  I  have  been  waiting  to  find  a  group  who  might  be  as 
intrigued by it as I am, so I jumped at the chance to speak to the Association of Corporate 
Treasurers. 
The yield on nominal 20-year UK government debt peaked at around 17% in 1974. After that 
long  term  yields  began  a  period  of  decline  which  continued  right  up  to  the  mid  2000s 
(Chart 1). The move was part of a global trend which reflected large macroeconomic forces, 
including: an increasing share of the global population being of prime working age; the rise of 
global  inequality;  the  adoption  of  inflation  targeting  over  the  course  of  the  1990s;  and  the 
global imbalances that emerged in the early 2000s in which a glut of savings from emerging 
economies  flowed  to  advanced  economies.1  Pension  reforms  in  the  UK  –  also  over  the 
course  of  the  2000s  –  created  a  further  incentive  to  invest  in  long-dated  bonds  to  better 
match defined-benefit liabilities. 
Of course since then we have had the global financial crisis and its aftermath, during which 
long yields declined further, reaching new lows in the first months of this year. More recently 
we have seen some quite sharp moves higher. But on any historical comparison long term 
interest rates are still at exceptionally low levels. How should we interpret them? 
A  starting  point  is  the  pure  expectations  hypothesis,  which  says  that  the  long  term  yield 
should reflect the market’s expectation of the average short term yield over that period. If that 
is true, then it suggests that Bank Rate is expected to average 2½% over the next 20 years 
(about half of its pre-crisis average of 5%). From that it would be easy to infer that financial 
markets are expecting either very low investment and growth, or very low inflation, or both.  
As  Chart  2  shows,  long-dated  corporate  borrowing  rates  have  followed  much  of  the 
downward move in government bond yields over recent years. Whether you believe this is 
reflective  of  the  prospect  of  gloomy  days  to  come  or  the  result  of  some  other  factors  will 
determine whether you – as corporate treasurers – view very long low yields as a warning or 
an opportunity.  
In the rest of my remarks I will cover four possible explanations for the current level of long 
yields:  
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
lower inflation expectations;  
the balance of savings and investment intentions;  
diminished potential output growth; and  
                                                
1   Bernanke (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  reduced term premia 
(iv)  
I  will  argue  that  it  would  be  overly  pessimistic  to  believe  that  the  headwinds  currently 
affecting the nominal and real economy will persist for decades to come. But I will also argue 
that  there  are  other  influences  on  long  yields  affecting  saving  and  investment  decisions 
(including the persistent-but-not-permanent effects of a balance sheet recession, and greater 
weight being attached to downside risks) and on term premia (including the impact of central 
bank asset purchases).  
Inflation expectations 
2.  
Let me start with inflation expectations. Because some of the decline in nominal yields over 
recent years coincided with a marked and unexpected decline in headline inflation in the UK, 
a  natural  question  to  ask  is  whether  or  not  this  was  caused  by  a  shift  lower  in  inflation 
expectations.  Indeed  as  a  monetary  policy  maker,  that  is  perhaps  the  most  important 
question to ask. 
Judging  by  the  behaviour  of  measures  of  inflation  expectations  derived  from  index-linked 
gilts, markets are attaching a low probability to the idea that the current weakness in inflation 
will prove permanent.  
Market-implied  measures  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been  remarkably  stable 
over the period in which inflation has declined (Chart 3).  
That is consistent with the MPC’s view that the majority of the decline in inflation over the 
period  since  the  middle  of  2013  can  be  accounted  for  by  factors  that  are  unlikely  to  have 
permanent effects on inflation. There has been a 44% decline in the price of oil from its peak, 
and a 17% appreciation of sterling since early 2013, and such phenomena can be expected 
to  have  large  –  but  not  permanent  –  effects  on  prices  of  consumer  goods.  The  most 
important determinant of inflation at the horizon the MPC is concerned with is domestically 
generated  inflation.  And  measures  of  domestically  generated  inflation  (such  as  unit  wage 
costs, Chart 4) have stayed relatively stable during the period in which headline inflation was 
declining.  
But what is a little puzzling is that, given the growth of the economy in recent years and the 
associated decline in economic slack, measures of domestically generated inflation have not 
picked  up  as  quickly  as  we  would  otherwise  have  expected.  For  example,  although 
unemployment has moved more than three quarters of the way from its peak back towards 
what we might consider its equilibrium rate, unit wage cost growth is still just over one third of 
its pre-crisis rate.2  
There are a multitude of possible explanations for this. But one I put weight on is that, in light 
of six years of very weak wage growth, workers are not quite confident enough to demand 
the kinds of wage increases which would have been the norm in the years prior to the crisis.  
Were the recovery in wage growth not to materialise and inflation to linger far below the 2% 
target  for  longer  than  currently  embodied  in  the  MPC’s  forecast,  it  would  be  a  very 
undesirable outcome. It would prolong the headwind from deleveraging that I will come on to 
discuss,  and  potentially  result  in  higher  real  interest  rates  than  would  otherwise  be 
appropriate. And the MPC has underlined its commitment to avoiding such an outcome.3 
However, recent data have been more encouraging. And as workers become more confident 
over the coming years, I would expect wage growth to continue to pick up. There is already 
                                                
2   Unit wage costs defined as whole economy AWE relative to GDP per worker. Latest value of 1.1%, compared 
to 2004-2007 average of 2.9%. 
3   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/cpiletter130515.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  anecdotal  evidence  that  the  tightening  labour  market  has  made  recruitment  and  retention 
concerns  a  source  of  upward  pressure  on  labour  costs.  So  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that 
once a significant minority of firms has offered a return to pay growth that is more normal by 
historical standards, we can expect the majority to follow. 
The balance of savings and investment intentions 
3.  
Let me turn to the balance of savings and investment. 
Although many believe that the MPC sets interest rates, that is only strictly true for short term 
rates,  and  even  then  only  the  rates  applicable  in  our  monetary  and  liquidity  insurance 
operations. Long term interest rates are set by the economy, and must ultimately equilibrate 
the desire to save and the desire to invest. Much of the decline in interest rates over the 30 
years prior to the crisis represented large global forces – as evidenced by the tendency of 
international bond yields to co-move.4 Demographic effects, for example, saw the proportion 
of  the  global  population  in  prime  working  age  increase  from  50%  to  58%.5  Those  in  the 
workforce tend to save more than those outside it, particularly over a period of increasing life 
expectancy.  The  rise  of  inequality  has  also  had  an  impact  through  its  tendency  to  skew 
income toward those more likely to save.6 Needless to say, the development of these trends 
over the coming decades will continue to play an important role in the determination of long 
term interest rates.  
But it is the further decline in interest rates since the crisis7 that I am focussed on today, and 
it suggests a further shift towards a desire to save rather than invest over that period, driven 
by forces other than those long-running trends. 
There are (at least) three interpretations of this further shift:  
• 
The  first  is  that  market  participants  (ultimately  representing  the  interest  of  savers 
and investors) believe that the cyclical forces which currently warrant very low levels 
of Bank Rate will persist for decades to come. Put another way, that we are entering 
a period of secular stagnation or chronic demand deficiency.8 
The second is that what we are witnessing is typical of a “balance sheet recession”.9 
As we know, recessions that are preceded by a large build-up of credit tend to be 
followed by more severe and prolonged downturns.10 One reason is that economic 
actors tend to focus on reducing debt levels to the detriment of projects that would 
otherwise be expected to have a positive net present value. In such a situation the 
interest rate required to clear the market for savings and investment can be very low 
indeed.  
The third interpretation is that financial market participants do not have a particularly 
gloomy central expectation for the path of the economy over the coming decades, 
                                                  
4   Rey (2013). 
5   Source: United Nations http://esa.un.org/wpp/excel-data/population.htm. 
6   Dynan et al (2000) find a strong positive relationship between savings rates and lifetime income. 
7   As documented in King and Low (2014). 
8   See Summers (2014) and Wolf (2014). 
9   The hypothesis that weak post-Crisis growth represents a debt super-cycle which will ultimately come to an 
end is set out in Rogoff (2015). 
10   IMF (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  but they do attach significantly more weight to the downside risks than they did prior 
to the crisis.11  
This would reduce long yields in two ways: by making firms less confident about the 
future payoff from their investment projects, thus requiring a lower level of interest 
rates to  incentivise  them  to  invest;  and  by  making  savers  demand  a higher  credit 
premium to lend to the private sector, thus driving a wedge between risk free rates 
and other interest rates in the economy.12  
My own view is that most of the headwinds that have buffeted the global economy over the 
period  since  2008-09  do  bear  the  hallmarks  of  a  balance  sheet  recession  in  which  the 
impetus to reduce debt is the force driving agents behaviour: first by financial institutions who 
reduced the supply of credit to the real economy; then by the businesses and households 
who simultaneously became more pessimistic about the outlook and reassessed their need 
to  maintain  their  own  stock  of  liquidity.  When  public  sector  balance  sheets  reached  their 
limits,  it  was  the  turn  of  deleveraging  at  a  national  level  through  fiscal  consolidation,  a 
process which is likely to continue for some time to come in the UK and euro area.  
It  would  be  overly  pessimistic  to  have  as  one’s  central  case  that  the  headwinds  currently 
affecting the economy will persist for decades to come. Although they will be persistent, they 
will not be permanent. Indeed there are now nascent signs that some of these headwinds 
have already begun to ease. For example, against a backdrop of improved confidence in the 
recovery  (Chart  5),  firms  have  slowly  but  surely  been  increasing  the  amount  they  invest 
relative to the amount they save (Chart 6). And household saving has also declined from its 
very elevated precautionary levels. 
But that is not to say that it is imprudent of financial markets to attach weight to the downside 
risks – they are real. Indeed, reducing the probability of those risks materialising has been a 
driving factor in the MPC’s decision to maintain Bank Rate at its historically low level of 0.5% 
for  6  years,  and  the  committee’s  guidance  that  when  Bank  Rate  does  begin  to  rise,  it  is 
expected to do so more gradually than in previous cycles, and is expected to remain below 
average historical levels for some time to come. 
Diminished potential output growth  
4.  
Let me turn next to potential output growth. When one thinks about the distant future – that 
is, the period beyond the influence of the current set of cyclical factors – one tends to think 
that interest rates will tend toward a level that reflects the rate of return on investment, and 
hence the potential output growth of the economy.  
Potential output growth matters a great deal for monetary and macroprudential policy. In the 
long  run  it  determines  the  rate at  which  the  economy  can  grow  without generating  above-
target inflation, and it determines the rate of income growth in the medium term, and hence 
the sustainable level of debt today.  
During the financial crisis, we rediscovered the fact that recessions accompanied by financial 
crises tend to be followed by a sustained fall in the level of potential output.13 The only silver 
lining  was  that  although  the  level  of  potential  output  tended  to  be  permanently  lower,  the 
growth rate could be expected to recover.  
However,  if  the  current  yield  curve  can  be  interpreted  as  an  indicator  of  financial  market 
participants’ expectations of the return on investment in the long term, it suggests they are 
                                                
11   Barro (2006) shows that the potential for rare economic disasters can explain low risk-free rates 
12   This can be broadly defined to include the higher cost of financial intermediation 
13   IMF (2009) 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  sceptical that potential output growth can even return to pre-crisis norms. For example, the 
10-year  real  rate  beginning  in  10-years’  time  implied  by  current  government  bond  yields 
is -¾%. The comparable number over 2000-2006 was +1⅔%. And even during the height of 
the financial and euro area crises over 2008-2012 it was +¾%. (Chart 7) 
In  the  long  term,  the  most  important  determinant  of  potential  output  growth  is  productivity 
growth,  which  is  in  turn  determined  by  the  rate  at  which  new  ideas  are  generated  and 
implemented. And given the very disappointing productivity performance of the UK over the 
past 7 years, it would perhaps be understandable were financial markets to have lost hope 
that  productivity  growth  would  ever  return.  Perhaps  they  agree  with  those  who  argue  that 
recent innovations cannot contribute as much to productivity growth as historical ones such 
as the electric light bulb, the internal combustion engine and indoor plumbing once did.14 
Human history has had many periods in which pessimism about innovation and technological 
progress has been proven wrong, dating at least back to Malthus. There is much by way of 
exciting innovation that has yet to be fully exploited.15 3D printing is transforming the R&D 
process by vastly increasing the capability to produce prototypes. Advanced robots are being 
developed  that  will  allow  increased  precision  and  safety  in  their  use,  thus  increasing  our 
ability to automate many routine activities. Firms are learning how to harness the power of 
Big Data, which will allow them to personalise their products better and reduce waste.16 
The Bank of England is playing its part to in the wider effort to ensure that productivity growth 
can  resume,  by  taking  steps  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  will  be  well  placed  to 
facilitate  the  implementation  of  these  ideas,  and  the  allocation  of  resources  across  the 
economy more generally. For example, much of the work of the Financial Policy Committee 
(FPC) in the years since the financial crisis has been focussed on ensuring that the banking 
system is resilient and well-capitalised. And the FPC is pursuing a medium-term objective to 
ensure that there are diverse and resilient sources of market-based finance to complement 
the  banking  sector.  This  is  borne  out  in  the  improvement  in  the  availability  of  credit  to 
companies  such  as  yours,  which  our  agents  tell  us  has  been  easing  across  the  board 
(Chart 8). 
The combination of an impressive stream of ideas, and a financial system stable enough to 
facilitate their implementation means I am reasonably confident that productivity growth will 
return  at  some  point.  Moreover,  I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  resumption  in 
productivity growth to come over the next year or so as the continued narrowing of slack in 
the labour market raises the incentive to increase output by increasing output per worker. But 
–  as  many  a  forecaster  of  productivity  has  learned  –  picking  exact  inflection  points  for 
macroeconomic variables can be difficult, so the degree of uncertainty around the timing of 
this is high.  
Term premia 
5.  
Thus far the explanations I have covered have ranged from transient, to cyclical to structural. 
Let me turn now to the unobservable. 
Economists refer to the factors which move the yield curve in addition to the expected path of 
rates  as  “term  premia”  –  the  (positive  or  negative)  compensation  that  investors  require  to 
invest in a longer dated security in addition to the returns that could be expected from rolling 
over short term investments.  
                                                
14   As  outlined  in  Gordon  (2012).  Gordon  (2014)  emphasises  that  this  slowdown  in  innovation  will  be  one 
contributing  factor  to  a  generalised  slowdown  in  growth  that  is  also  driven  by  demography,  educational 
attainment, inequality and a public sector debt overhang. 
15   See Mokyr (2014) for the optimists’ case 
16   See McKinsey (2013) for an outline of the potential of these and other technologies  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Because  they  are  by  their  nature  unobservable,  term  premia  must  be  estimated.  Chart  9 
shows  one  estimate  of  the  effect  of  term  premia  on  UK  government  bond  yields  over  the 
period  since  August  of  last  year,  using  a  technique  based  on  that  of  Adrian,  Crump  and 
Moench  (2013).  More  information  about  how  these  estimates  are  arrived  at  will  soon  be 
available on the Bank’s forthcoming staff blog, but the main message is that over this period 
term premia were a big driver of the move lower in yields.  
There  are  several  potential  practical  developments  that  one  could  attach  to  declining  UK 
term premia. One that has featured heavily in our market intelligence gathering is spillovers 
from international monetary policy actions.17 In August of last year, financial markets began 
to anticipate that the European Central Bank (ECB) would embark on a programme of asset 
purchases, and it has subsequently announced that it intends to expand its balance sheet by 
€1trn  over  the  coming  18  months.  Of  course  this  action  is  not  exogenous  –  it  is  itself  a 
reflection of the headwinds facing the euro area economy. Between the ECB and the Bank of 
Japan (which is continuing its programme of Qualitative and Quantitative Easing announced 
in early 2013), central banks will purchase the equivalent of around $125bn worth of assets 
per month between now and September 2016 (Chart 10). You could say that the quantitative 
easing baton has been passed from the UK and US to the ECB and BoJ. 
That these large flows (or the anticipation of them) would have spillover effects on borrowing 
rates in the UK should not be a surprise.  The ECB and the BoJ purchases will be equivalent 
in  value  to  all  of  the  net  issuance  by  advanced  economy  governments  over  the  next  18 
months. And given that UK government bonds and other government bonds are (to varying 
degrees) substitutes, it is natural to expect their prices to co-move – in much the same way 
that  if  the  ECB  were  to  buy  $1trn  of  Eurozone  butter  we  might  expect  the  price  of  British 
margarine to increase.  
By much the same logic, it is plausible that the recent move higher in both Eurozone and gilt 
yields is an unwinding of some of the initial price effects that followed the commencement of 
ECB quantitative easing.  
Conclusion 
6.  
Long term yields have always been the product of big global macroeconomic forces. Their 
structural decline in the thirty years prior to the crisis, for example, reflected the adoption of 
inflation targeting by many countries, global demographic trends, and the imbalances of the 
early  2000s  in  which  a  “glut”  of  savings  flowed  from  emerging  economies  to  advanced 
economies. 
Large forces have also played a role in the aftermath of the financial crisis, a period during 
which  long  yields  have  declined  further.  It  seems  likely  that  this move  has  been  driven  by 
factors  including  a  persistent-but-not-permanent  drag  from  deleveraging,  increased  weight 
being attached to downside risks, and the ongoing impact of quantitative easing programmes 
across the globe. These are legitimate reasons for long yields to be low, but should not be 
mistaken for a gloomy prognosis of long-term growth and inflation prospects in the UK.  
That is not to say that we should ignore the potential signal from long yields. There is a risk 
that the nominal and real effects of the financial crisis prove more persistent than this central 
case, and monetary policy has an important role to play in reducing the probability of such an 
outcome. Indeed, doing so has been my primary motivation in not voting for an increase in 
Bank Rate over my first 10 months on the MPC. But it seems to me most likely that: first, the 
factors currently pulling down on headline inflation will not do so permanently; second, the 
headwinds currently affecting demand in the economy will continue to gradually ease over 
                                                
17 
information 
 
more 
For 
intelligence 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/marketintelligence/charter.pdf 
market 
Bank’s 
the 
on 
6 
 programme, 
see:
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  coming  years  (facilitated  by  accommodative  monetary  policy);  and  third,  a  return  to 
productivity growth will facilitate potential output growth over the long term.  
So while we on the MPC should heed some of the warning implied by low yields, you should 
seek out the potential opportunities they offer. 
References 
Barro  R  (2006)  Rare  disasters  and  asset  markets  in  the  twentieth  century,  The  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 121 (3). 
Bernanke B (2005) The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit, Sandridge 
Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond VA. 
Dynan KE, Skinner J and Zeldes, SP (2000) Do the rich save more? NBER working paper 
No. 7906. 
International Monetary Fund (2009) What is the damage? Medium term output dynamics 
after financial crises, World Economic Outlook, October, Chapter 4. 
King  M  and  Low  D  (2014)  Measuring  the  “world”  real  interest  rate,  NBER  working  paper 
No. 19887. 
Koo R (2014) Escape from balance sheet recession and the QE trap, Wiley. 
Malik  S  and  Meldrum  A  (2014)  Evaluating  the  robustness  of  UK  term  structure 
decompositions using linear regression methods, Bank of England working paper No. 518. 
McKinsey (2013) Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life, business and the 
global economy, https://shar.es/1rwoVu. 
Mokyr, 
http://on.wsj.com/1w66q1z. 
Rey  (2013)  Rey,  Hélène  (2013)  Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  the  Global  Financial  Cycle  and 
Monetary Policy Independence, Proceedings - Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Rogoff  (2015)  Debt  supercycle,  not  secular  stagnation,  http://www.voxeu.org/article/debt-
supercycle-not-secular-stagnation#. 
Summers L (2014) US Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis and the Zero 
Lower  Bound,  Business  Economics,  Vol.  49  No.2,  National  Association  for  Business 
Economics. 
Wolf, M (2014) Radical cures for unusual economic ills, http://on.ft.com/1FoHqn1 
 
(2014)  What 
are  missing, 
gloomsayers 
economic 
today’s 
J 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Chart 1: Nominal gilt yields began a long period of decline in the 1970s 
 Long-term UK gilt yields
Per cent
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Source: Barclays Equity Gilt Study 2015, Bloomberg and Bank Calculations. 
From 1899 to 1961 the gilt yield is annual observations based on the prices of undated British funds. From 1962 to 1991 it is 
annual observations based on a portfolio of stocks chosen to represent as closely as possible a 20-year security. From 1992 to 
present it is daily observations of the Bloomberg benchmark 20 year gilt. 
 Chart 2: Investment Grade corporate yields have also moved lower in recent years 
 Per cent
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
Source: Merrill Lynch 
Chart shows the nominal yield on the average UK corporate bond with a maturity of more than 18 months. The average 
maturity is typically 10-12 years. 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Chart 3: Market implied measures of long-term inflation expectations have been stable  
 
Per cent
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013
20-year average (RPI) inflation rate implied by
comparing the yield on nominal and index-linked gilts
Headline CPI inflation
 Source: ONS and Bank calculations 
 Chart 4: Unit wage cost growth has not returned to pre-crisis rates 
 
Unit wage costs
Year on year 
growth (%)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
 1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Unit wage cost defined as whole 
economy AWE divided GDP per worker 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Chart 5: Companies’ investment intentions are above average 
 
Differences from averages since 2000 
(number of standard deviations)
3
 CBI
BCC
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
Source: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC   
and Bank Calculations 
 2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
 Chart 6: Corporates are increasing the amount that they invest relative to the amount 
that they save 
 £ millions
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
-5000
-10000
-15000
-20000
1998
1993
Private Non Financial Corporates Financial
Balance
2003
2008
2013
Source: ONS 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1988
 10 
   Chart 7: The 10 year real rate beginning in 10 years is very low by historical standards 
 
Per cent
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
2015
 2011
1991
1995
1999
2003
2007
Source: Bank of England 
 
Chart 8: The availability of credit to firms has improved 
 
2011
Dec
Oct
2012
2013
2014
2015
Aug
Dec
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Small
Medium
Large
Overall
These cells indicate Bank’s agents’ national assessments of corporate credit availability.  The greater the intensity of red, the 
tighter credit availability; the greater the intensity of green, the looser credit availability.  Yellow indicates normal conditions. 
Includes bank and non-bank credit. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Chart 9: Term premia have been a significant driver of the decline in yields 
 Change in expected policy rates
Change in term premia
Change in nominal interest rates
UK
Source: Bank calculations 
Basis 
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
-60
-70
-80
-90
 Chart shows estimates of contribution to change in 10-year government bond yields between end July 2014 and end April 
2015. Derived using the model described in Malik, S and Meldrum A (2014) 
 Chart 10: Central banks will purchase around $125bn per month (on average)until 
September 2016. 
 Monthly flow of G4 Central Bank Asset Purchases 
(6-month moving average, $bn)
250
200
150
100
50
0
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Euro Area
Japan
US
UK
Total
 Sources: BoE, Federal Reserve, Bank of Japan, ECB, DataStream 
Asset purchases have been converted to US$ using  
$1.5 per pound, $1.15 per euro, and 120 yen per $. 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
