  Geoff Bascand: Central bank performance, financial management and 
institutional design 
Speech  by  Mr  Geoff  Bascand,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Operations  of  the  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  National  Asset-Liability  Management  Europe  Conference, 
London, 12 March 2015. 
Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
A central bank’s performance needs to be assessed on how well it meets its statutory policy 
mandate.  But  policy  outcomes  are  only  one  measure  of  performance  and  institutional 
credibility. Central banks incur substantial financial risk and are an important part of overall 
public  sector  finances.  Maintaining  the  privilege  of  operational  independence  requires  a 
record  of  successful  policy  outcomes  and  sound  and  prudent  financial  management. 
Therefore, financial arrangements and performance expectations are important components 
of overall central bank institutional design. 
These  issues  are  even  more  important  today.  In  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  many 
governments  became  guarantors  of  last  resort,  and  undertook  investments  that  were  well 
beyond  their  traditional  risk  habitat.  Central  banks  were  asked  to  do  much  more  –  either 
through  pursuing  multiple  targets,  directing  credit  flows,  or  by  adopting  unconventional 
monetary  policies.  Some  central  banks’  balance  sheets  have  expanded  enormously  (see 
Figure 1). Central bank capital has been more at risk from some of these activities, and we 
have seen reinvestment by governments to build capital levels in some central banks. 
This  paper  sets  out  some  broad  financial  and  institutional  design  considerations  and 
illustrates  these  with  reference  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand’s  (RBNZ’s)  financial 
arrangements, balance sheet structure, and risk management. It explains their rationale and 
discusses some avenues we are exploring for future enhancements. 
Diversity of responsibilities and financial arrangements 
Monetary policy responsibilities are common to all central banks, albeit with widely varying 
operational  approaches  and  performance  targets.  A  mandate  for  financial  stability  is 
common, but the form and extent of these responsibilities can vary significantly. Lender-of-
last-resort  responsibility  (emergency  liquidity  to  the  banking  system)  is  inherent,  but  the 
responsibilities  of  central  banks  vis  a  vis  finance  ministries,  regarding  the  resolution  of 
institutions in financial difficulties or the provision of broader support to the financial system, 
vary widely. Prudential policy and oversight may or may not be a function of the central bank. 
Some central banks manage the country’s foreign reserves and others do not (see Figure 2). 
The  diverse  nature  of  these  responsibilities  flows  through  into  a  wide  variety  of  financial 
arrangements.  Financial  risks  and  results  are  sensitive  to  the  operational  and  policy 
responsibilities of the central bank. 
Historically,  central  banks  have  been  considered  profitable  through  their  responsibility  for 
money  issuance.  However,  even  here  there  are  differing  degrees  of  financial  control  or 
independence  over  seigniorage  revenues.  Seigniorage  revenues  have  become  both  more 
predictable and constrained as a result of price stability goals. At the same time, increased 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  policy  mandates  and  portfolio  exposures  taken  on  by  central  banks  can  overwhelm  these 
revenue streams through valuation changes1. 
Does financial performance matter? 
Generally  speaking,  the  performance  of  central  banks  is  judged  by  the  public  and 
government  in  terms  of  its  policy  mandate.  Financial  performance  tends  to  be  in  the 
background when the impact and performance of the central bank is debated. But they are 
not  completely  separable.  Occasional  and  moderate  financial  loss  is  unlikely  to  seriously 
impair  a  central  bank’s  operations.  But  sustained  loss  and  diminution  of  equity,  or  a  very 
large, even if exceptional, negative income (P&L) impact on public finances is likely to erode 
the institution’s credibility and policy freedom. 
Governments  are  beneficial  owners2  of  central  banks,  and  conceptually  the  central  bank’s 
cash flows and the equity investment in the central bank can be consolidated into broader 
whole-of-government  finances.  This  is  the  case  in  New  Zealand.  Conceptually,  a  central 
bank’s net asset position is part of the public sector’s balance sheet, irrespective of whether 
a consolidated balance sheet is prepared. For example, policy decisions that influence the 
size  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  (e.g.  through  accumulation  of  assets,  or 
commitments  in  the  nature  of  contingent  obligations,  such  as  guarantees  to  a  distressed 
institution)  expose  the  central  bank’s  equity  to  risk,  and  therefore  the  value  of  the 
government’s ownership interest in the central bank. 
Sound  management  of  the  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  is  also  important  to  maintain  the 
central  bank’s  standing  and  credibility  as  a  regulator  and  supervisor  (if  it  has  these 
responsibilities). The financial risks of central banks should be managed in a business-like 
way similar to our expectations of commercial banks. Failure to do so may result in a central 
bank’s operational discretion being fettered by institutional rules, removal of decision-making 
authority,  or  in  extreme  circumstances  by  intervention  in  the  management  of  the  central 
bank. 
At the same time, there needs to be recognition by all stakeholders of the significant financial 
risks that central banks take. They manage what are often among the largest foreign asset 
portfolios  in  the  economy,  and  can  have  extensive  credit  exposure  to  individual  financial 
intermediaries. I turn now to how the RBNZ seeks to manage these risks. 
New Zealand’s institutional arrangements are designed to limit the very large financial risk 
that the central bank could incur from its foreign exchange operations, and also to avoid the 
bank  acquiring  substantial  contingent  liabilities  on  behalf  of  the  government  (“the  Crown”) 
through its liquidity and lender-of-last-resort operations. Nevertheless, there is still material 
financial  risk  inherent  in  the  bank’s  operation  that  is  managed  through  the  bank’s  capital 
holdings,  reserves/asset  management,  and  best-practice  risk  management.  The  following 
sections describe how these arrangements and practices are managed at the RBNZ. 
RBNZ institutional and financial arrangements 
The  New  Zealand  institutional  framework  is  designed  to  balance  policy  and  operational 
independence  with  accountability 
financial  performance.  Financial 
accountability  and  other  expectations  (e.g.  reporting  to  Parliament)  were  strengthened  in 
1989 when the RBNZ was given greater policy independence. 
for  policy  and 
                                                
1   A 2 percentage point rise in the US interest rate on excess reserves would eliminate the Federal Reserve’s 
profit and equity capital within a year. 
2   (using BIS term p7) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Act  1989  established  the  central  bank  as  a  body 
corporate  whose  primary  function  is  to  formulate  and  implement  monetary  policy  for  the 
purposes of achieving and maintaining price stability. The RBNZ (which I will also refer to as 
“the  Bank”)  is  also  mandated  to  promote  the  soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  financial 
system.  The  Bank  is  owned  by  the  Crown  and  capital  is  provided  by  the  government,  to 
whom dividends are returned. The Act grants the Bank the right to deal in foreign exchange, 
issue currency, and act as lender of last resort if it deems it necessary3. These arrangements 
and powers underpin the Bank’s financial strength and its risk exposure. Income is assured 
through the authority to invest proceeds from the sale of currency and bank capital, and may 
be  earned  (or  lost)  through  trading  or  investment  in  debt  securities,  money  market 
instruments, derivatives, and foreign exchange. 
New Zealand has a floating exchange rate, and prescribed limits on foreign reserve holdings 
contain the Crown’s risk exposure. By law, the Minister of Finance sets limits (a range) on 
the foreign reserve holdings of the Bank, and the Bank then manages them to achieve policy, 
liquidity  and  risk-return  objectives.  A  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  the  Minister 
provides further guidance to the Bank on foreign exchange operations4. Even though with a 
pure  floating  rate  currency,  foreign  exchange  reserves  conceptually  may  not  be  required, 
foreign reserves are held in the event that the Bank may be required to intervene in foreign 
exchange  markets,  for  example  where  there  is  disorder  in  the  currency  markets  or  the 
currency  is  materially  out  of  line  with  fair  value.  Foreign  exchange  intervention  has  been 
infrequent. 
Liquidity provision to troubled banks and lender of last resort functions are at the discretion of 
the Bank, including the terms and cost of borrowing. In the GFC, liquidity was provided by 
the RBNZ at the cost of the Official Cash Rate (OCR) and with interest rates falling, the Bank 
made  positive  returns  from  its  lending.  Ostensibly,  the  Bank  incurs  credit  risk  in  these 
circumstances,  mitigated  through  collateralisation.  However,  the  major  cost  of  financial 
stability  support  does  not  fall  upon  the  Bank,  but  instead  upon  the  fiscal  authority  (the 
Treasury).  Whilst  the  Bank  has  responsibility  as  prudential  supervisor  to  recommend  the 
appropriate action if a financial institution fails, critical decisions on statutory management, 
capital injections or guarantee schemes are ultimately for the Minister of Finance to make, 
and would be expected to take the form of fiscal measures. 
Accountability is accomplished through public and parliamentary reporting requirements and 
monitoring via the Bank’s Board as agent of the Minister of Finance and on financial matters 
by  the  Treasury.  The  Bank  must  publish  a  Statement  of  Intent  on  its  strategic  and 
performance objectives for the coming three years, and publish an audited Annual Report for 
the previous year that includes information on policy, operational and financial performance. 
The SOI and the Annual Report are both tabled in Parliament and subject to the scrutiny of 
Parliament’s Finance and Expenditure Select Committee. 
The Bank observes the accounting standards imposed by the External Reporting Board (a 
statutory  body).  From  this  financial  year,  the  Bank  is  required  to  apply  New  Zealand 
Equivalents  to  International  Public  Sector  Accounting  Standards  (NZ-IPSAS)  rather  than 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS).  The  change  in  financial  reporting 
framework will not have a significant impact on the Bank’s financial reporting, although NZ-
IPSAS and IFRS could diverge over time. 
                                                
3   The Bank also has responsibilities for the operation of payments and settlements systems that earn income 
and incur mostly operational risks, with financial risks defrayed in various ways. 
4   The MoU establishes that the primary purpose of reserves management and intervention activity is: Extreme 
disorder in foreign exchange markets – to ensure continued functioning of foreign exchange markets, in rare 
crisis circumstances. The secondary purpose is: Exchange rate overshooting – to lean against (on a modest 
scale) extreme cyclical peaks and troughs in the exchange rate that are judged inconsistent with economic 
fundamentals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  five-year 
funding  agreement 
is  a  key  mechanism 
The final piece of the RBNZ’s operating framework is the funding agreement. The RBNZ Act 
requires the Minister of Finance and the Governor to enter into a five-year funding agreement 
that  specifies  the  amount  of  the  Bank’s  income  that  may  be  applied  in  any  year  towards 
meeting  the  operating  expenses  incurred  by  the  Bank  in  carrying  out  its  functions.  The 
Funding Agreement must be ratified by Parliament, prior to the commencement of its funding 
period. 
The 
that  reinforces  operational 
independence.  The  Bank  does  not  have  to  seek  an  annual  funding  allocation  from 
Parliament in the same way that government departments do, and its operating budget is not 
subject to annual variation in net income. On the other hand, the process of negotiating a 
five-year  agreement  is  intensive  in  terms  of  establishing  value  for  money,  agreeing  on 
strategic priorities for the Bank, and forecasting future demands on the Bank. Variations to 
the  funding  agreement  within  the  five-year  window  are  feasible,  for  example  if  the  Bank 
acquires new functions, as it did in the last funding period for supervision of insurance and 
anti-money laundering. 
The  RBNZ’s  capital  expenditure  is  within  the  discretion  of  the  Bank’s  management,  but  is 
controlled in part through the moderating impact on depreciation expense from the limit on 
total operating expenses in the funding agreement. Higher depreciation resulting from higher 
fixed  investment  would,  therefore,  imply  lower  expenditure  on  other  items,  such  as 
personnel.  Capital  expenditure  is  also  constrained  by  the  Bank’s  equity  and  dividend 
requirements,  which  are  explained  below.  Large,  unwarranted  (and  low  yielding)  capital 
expenditure could infringe upon these principles. 
By  way of illustration, with the Bank introducing new banknotes in 2015, significant capital 
expenditure  was  required  that  could  be  financed  within  the  balance  sheet  from  cash  and 
working  capital.  However,  the  operating  expense  incurred from  issuing new  notes  and  the 
obsolescence  of 
than  could  be 
accommodated  within  the  funding  agreement,  requiring  the  Bank  to  seek  the  Minister  of 
Finance’s  approval  for  additional  expenditure. In  practice,  the  expenses span  two  different 
funding agreements, requiring more complex negotiations than normal. 
New Zealand’s institutional arrangements are now 25 years old and have proven robust to a 
number  of  tests,  including  significant  volatility  in  exchange  rates  with  material  foreign 
exchange gains  and  losses,  negative  P&L  results,  expansion  of functions,  and changes  in 
government  administration.  They  work  well  because  they  are  transparent  and  the  Bank 
works  closely  with  the  Treasury  to  share  analysis  and  information;  because  they  have 
evolved in response to new mandates (e.g. through MOUs on foreign reserves and foreign 
exchange intervention, most recently in 2007, and on the level of Crown equity in the Bank, 
most  recently  adjusted  in  2013);  and  because  of  strong  performance  standards  (e.g. 
benchmarking the Bank’s reporting and capital adequacy against best international practice). 
the  existing  series  was  projected 
to  be  greater 
How do we assess financial performance? 
Our  financial  strategy  is  primarily  guided  by  our  need  to  fulfil  our  functions,  rather  than 
financial results. This doesn’t mean we are indifferent to expected return or actual financial 
outcomes,  but rather  that  we  generally  take  a  conservative  approach  to  risk to  ensure  we 
have  the  capacity  to  carry  out  our  statutory  functions.  Our  financial  strategy  entails 
considered decisions on asset allocation and investment strategy, with greater weight on risk 
diversification and liquidity than on return; maintaining adequate capital for the risks we face; 
and measuring our investment performance against relevant benchmarks. 
Excluding exceptional circumstances, our objectives for reserves and liquidity management 
are to manage our financial performance as efficiently as possible, out-perform what other 
similar portfolios would achieve, and deliver a positive return on equity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Risk management and capital adequacy 
From  the  balance  sheet  perspective,  financial  risks  arise  from  the  Bank’s  key  investment 
portfolios of domestic (NZD) securities that support monetary policy operations and foreign 
reserve assets that can be used to finance market intervention, with the latter much greater 
in size and variability. Figure 3 depicts a stylised picture of the RBNZ balance sheet. 
While  central  bank  balance  sheets  and  financial  performance  can  be  very  volatile,  in 
constructing our balance sheet, we have taken strategic decisions that impose some limits 
on  the  potential  volatility  in  reported  financial  performance.  The  balance  sheet  is  partially 
immunised from major foreign exchange risk, and we have taken a conservative approach to 
credit  and  interest  rate  risk  in  foreign  reserve  activities.  We  also  manage  operational  risk 
closely and are alert to the potential cost of operational errors. 
Asset holdings and the scale of the RBNZ’s balance sheet are primarily determined by: the 
amount of foreign reserves  RBNZ  holds  to  maintain  its foreign  exchange (FX)  intervention 
capacity;  trading  banks  demand  for  liquid  assets,  primarily  to  facilitate  daily  interbank 
payments; Treasury’s management of the Crown Settlement (cash) Account with the RBNZ; 
and the public’s demand for notes and coins. 
Financial risks arise from: 
• 
The  RBNZ’s  open  FX  position  and  associated  foreign  exchange  risk,  which  is 
mitigated  by  limits  on  the  position  and  holdings  of  a  diversified  basket  of  reserve 
currencies; 
Interest rate risk arising from domestic market operations and from foreign reserves 
management, mitigated through duration and risk limits; 
Credit  risk  arising from foreign  currency  assets, which  is  mitigated  by  investing  in 
high grade debt instruments; and 
Credit  risk  arising  from  derivative  transactions,  which  is  mitigated  by  holding  high 
quality collateral. 
   Investment policies control market and credit risk exposure through hedging policies, liquidity 
and investment ratings requirements, and counterparty credit limits. 
Perhaps  the  most  significant  of  these  is  the  restriction  on  unhedged  foreign  reserves.  By 
agreement with the Minister of Finance, the open FX position is limited to a specified range, 
a subset of the total foreign reserves limit, with the remaining foreign reserve assets hedged 
from  an  FX  perspective.  New  Zealand  differs  from  many  countries  in  this  respect.  The 
majority of foreign currency assets are funded through long-term foreign exchange swaps, 
and  therefore  hedged  from  foreign  exchange  risks  or  through  long-term  foreign  currency 
borrowings  (which  have  been  originated  by  the  Treasury  and  on-lent  to  RBNZ).  Reserves 
and portfolio management is expanded upon below. 
Credit  risk  is  mitigated  by  investing  foreign  assets  in  high-quality  sovereigns,  near-
sovereigns, and international agencies. In terms of domestic lending, credit risk is mitigated 
by lending on a collateralised basis with banks providing RBNZ high-quality collateral, and 
the Bank applying discounts, with daily monitoring of collateral values and collateral calls to 
ensure the value of collateral is appropriate for the amount lent. 
The  Bank  has  several  sources  of  interest  rate  risk  that  are  mostly  controlled  through  risk 
caps and duration limits. On hedged foreign reserves, some interest rate risk arises through 
mis-match of duration of assets and liabilities. Reported earnings are subject to volatility from 
mark-to-market  value  of  long-term  liabilities.  Another  source  of  interest  rate  risk  is  due  to 
changes in New Zealand’s short-term interest rates. Essentially, through FX swaps, RBNZ is 
investing at short-term interest rates, and variations in these rates from forecast levels impact 
earnings. The interest rate risk on unhedged foreign reserves is managed through strategic 
decisions and periodic review of asset allocation (i.e. our duration target for foreign currency 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  reserve  portfolios  is  managed  strategically  through  the  business  cycle).  The  RBNZ  also 
incurs  interest  rate  risk  from  its  holdings  of  government  bonds,  but  in  this  case  there  is  a 
corresponding impact within the Treasury, and this has no net impact on the Crown’s overall 
balance. 
Capital adequacy 
Notwithstanding a conservative financial strategy and investment policies that limit financial 
risk,  the  Bank’s  income  and  balance  sheet  remain  subject  to  some  volatility.  In  order  to 
manage  this  variation  in  annual  financial  performance  and  avoid  the  credibility  risks 
associated  with  low  levels  of  equity,  the  Bank  has  adopted  a  policy  for  holding  a  prudent 
level of capital and developed a framework for determining the appropriate level of capital. 
The RBNZ chooses to hold capital in line with both normal commercial practice and standard 
public  sector  arrangements  in  New  Zealand.  The  Bank  is  not  subject  to  regulatory  capital 
requirements  and  thus  determines  its  capital  adequacy  in  agreement  with  its  owner  (the 
government),  reflecting  its  balance  sheet  and  business  risks.  Having  capital  is  explicit 
recognition by the government that income from the Bank’s business will be volatile, and a 
buffer is required to absorb that volatility. It also supports the credibility of the central bank as 
regulator  and  supervisor  of  financial  institutions.  Assessment  of  the  potential  financial 
consequences of the risks facing the Bank determines the appropriate amount of capital the 
Bank should hold. 
Also  relevant  is  the  dividend  policy.  The  Act  requires  the  Bank  to  recommend  an  annual 
dividend  to  be  paid  in  line  with  the  principles  set  out  in  the  Bank’s  annual  SOI,  and  the 
Minister of Finance decides upon the final dividend figure. The dividend principles state that 
the  Bank  should  maintain  sufficient  equity  for  the  financial  risks  it  faces,  and  that  excess 
equity  should  be  returned  to  the  Crown.  They  are  also  tempered  by  the  requirement  that 
unrealised gains on investments should be retained until they are realised in New Zealand 
dollars.  Thus  surplus  capital  is  returned  as  dividends,  while  the  onus  is  on  the  Bank  to 
determine the appropriate amount to be held to maintain sound capital adequacy. 
The Bank consults closely with the Treasury on these matters, with the intention of coming to 
an  agreed  recommendation  that  is  submitted  to  the  Minister  for  decision.  If  ultimately  the 
Bank  disagrees  with  the  Minister’s  determination  of  the  appropriate  dividend,  the  Bank  is 
required  to  publish  its  recommendation.  In  2014,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  Note  to  its 
financial  accounts  setting  out  the  Bank’s  approach  to  determining  required  capital,  its 
dividend recommendation, and the basis of calculating the recommended dividend. 
The  Bank’s  capital  adequacy  framework5  evaluates  credit,  market  and  operational  risks 
associated  with  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet,  investment  policy,  and  operations.  It  considers 
possible correlations between these risks, and establishes the necessary capital to meet the 
possible loss associated with each of these risks, given its risk likelihood (see Figure 4). 
As  noted,  we  aim  to  run  capital  modelling  methods  that  align  with  best  practice,  and  can 
choose models that address our balance sheet risks. As a result we are focused on evolving 
our modelling of market, credit and operational risk, and are less concerned about liquidity 
elements (as we invest heavily in high-quality liquid assets). 
Market risk is the possible loss of value of an asset or liability due to variation in exchange 
rates,  interest  rates,  credit  spreads  or  basis  spreads.  Market  risk  capital  is  the  largest 
component  of  the  Bank’s  required capital. The Bank  uses  value-at-risk (VaR  and  stressed 
                                                
5   This section draws on Fraser (2013) “The Reserve Bank’s capital adequacy framework”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  VaR) models to assess market risk capital, and has set the target probability of (total) loss at 
1 in 10006. Our models currently capture October 2008 to April 2013 as the stressed period. 
The second component of required capital is for coverage of credit risk. The Bank evaluates 
credit  risk  using  the  Basel  II  credit  VaR  approach,  drawing  on  historical  data  including 
consideration  of  sovereign  and  bank  default  probabilities  during  various  periods  of  stress. 
Updating  to  various  Basel  III  credit  risk  modelling  techniques  is  a  future  development 
objective. 
As noted earlier, if a deep financial crisis arises, the Bank may incur credit risk through its 
lender-of-last-resort  responsibilities,  albeit  lending  is  not  expected  to  be  contemplated 
without  appropriate  collateral  arrangements.  This  risk  is  not  incorporated  in  our  economic 
capital modelling. 
The final, minor, element of our capital adequacy requirement is the buffer held for potential 
operational risks such as misconduct, property loss, systems failures, contractual disputes, 
etc.  Perhaps  the  largest  operational  risks  arise  from  the  Bank’s  responsibilities  as  the 
operator  of  New  Zealand’s  interbank  payment  and  settlement  system,  and  as  the  current 
owner and operator of the securities settlement system. 
The Bank has a number of controls to minimise the likelihood and impact of operational risks, 
including  a  highly  developed  enterprise  risk  management  framework,  formal  operational 
investment  policies  and  limits,  an  active  (internal  and  external)  audit  programme,  and  a 
proactive problem management (incident reporting) regime. 
Portfolio management 
The Bank manages its foreign reserves in two separate pools, an un-hedged pool (exposed 
to changes in interest rates and FX rates) and a hedged pool. The primary purpose for both 
pools of reserves is to maintain crisis intervention capability. The un-hedged pool of reserves 
serves  a  secondary  purpose  of  allowing  the  Bank  to  lean  against  (on  a  modest  scale) 
extreme  cyclical  peaks and  troughs  in the  exchange  rate that  are judged  inconsistent  with 
economic  fundamentals.  In  contrast  to  most  central  banks,  a  large  portion  (currently 
75 percent) of the Bank’s foreign reserves is in the hedged pool (100 percent prior to 2007) 
which helps to keep the return on foreign reserves relatively stable across time. 
For foreign reserves to be effective in meeting their purpose they need to be allocated across 
a diversified set of instruments that will maintain deep liquidity in both normal times and times 
of crisis or stress. The allocation of hedged and un-hedged reserves is collectively described 
as  the  Strategic  Asset  Allocation  (SAA)  and  is  set  by  the  Bank’s  Assets  and  Liabilities 
Committee. The SAA has a large influence on the Bank’s financial risk profile, given foreign 
reserves  comprise  a  large  part  of  the  Bank’s  balance  sheet.  I  will  now  describe  the 
characteristics of each pool of reserves in more detail and the SAA as it applies to hedged 
and un-hedged reserves. 
The  first  pool  of  reserves,  hedged  reserves,  is  what  distinguishes  the  Bank’s  approach  to 
reserves  management  from  most  other  central  banks.  The  Bank  borrows  foreign  currency 
(through  long-dated  cross  currency  basis  swaps  and  also  foreign  currency  loans  from  the 
New  Zealand  Treasury)  to  fund  investments  primarily  in  US,  European,  and  Japanese 
sovereign debt markets. Borrowing in foreign currency reduces currency risk, but it generates 
refinancing risk. The Bank manages this refinancing risk by borrowing for long maturities (up 
to 15 years) and ensuring that maturities are staggered as much as possible. The duration of 
borrowing  is  matched  to  the  duration  of  investments  to  reduce  interest  rate  risk  (i.e.  if 
borrowing  is  on  a  three-month  floating  basis,  investments  are  matched  to  mature  in  three 
                                                
6   Or more precisely, the confidence level on the potential loss calculations is 99.9 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  months). This structure allows the Bank to maintain a stable return and low risk profile on its 
hedged reserves through time, whilst maintaining effective intervention capability. This stable 
return and low risk profile is in contrast to un-hedged reserves, which I will describe shortly. 
The SAA for hedged reserves is presented in Figure 5. Allocation weights are defined such 
that  reserve  managers  can  adjust  the  allocation  dynamically  (using  FX  swaps  and  cross 
currency  basis  swaps)  to  take  advantage  of  favourable  (funding)  spreads  across  time. 
Performance  is  carefully  measured,  but  it  is  not  compared  to  a  benchmark  (given  the 
complexity of benchmarking long-dated borrowing that is transacted on an irregular basis). 
The  second  pool,  un-hedged  reserves,  is  invested  in  sovereign  debt  markets  with  deep 
liquidity  and  across  currencies  with  high  FX  turnover.  These  reserves  are  funded  by  the 
Bank’s New Zealand dollar liabilities so are exposed to changes in New Zealand dollar FX 
rates against each of the six currencies. The position has a high carry cost (due to the high 
cost of New Zealand dollar funding relative to the return on reserve investments) and returns 
are volatile given exposure to FX rates (and interest rates to a lesser extent). These reserves 
are expected to perform well in times of crisis or stress, both in terms of return and providing 
the most effective intervention capability. Within the limits set by the Minister of Finance, un-
hedged reserves can be increased or decreased in size allowing the Bank to lean against 
extreme  cyclical  peaks and  troughs  in the  exchange  rate that  are judged  inconsistent  with 
economic fundamentals. 
The SAA for un-hedged reserves is presented in Figure 6. In determining the SAA we first 
specify  the  most  appropriate  reserve  markets  (country  allocations)  for  unhedged  reserves, 
given that allocations are applied to sovereign debt. Currently, the SAA is limited to six highly 
traded currencies – a more diversified position than was the case in 2008 (Figure 7). Then 
we specify the duration target for each of those markets individually. At this time we have 
constrained  the  instruments  to  be  2-year  government  bonds,  the  shortest  duration  assets 
that meet our liquidity criteria. 
The  process  of  determining  the  SAA  for  un-hedged  reserves  is  about  selecting  a  portfolio 
that balances diversification and liquidity requirements against return or yield under “normal” 
market conditions. To ensure that un-hedged reserves are effective in meeting their purpose 
we  constrain  the  investment  universe  and  the  potential  allocation  outcomes  by  strict 
diversification,  liquidity  and  credit  minima  and  maxima.  Our  allocation  minimums  and 
maximums 
the  remaining 
unconstrained  30  percent  using  a  Markowitz  model.  For  example,  the  Australian  dollar 
allocation is capped due to the correlation of New Zealand and Australian currencies and our 
inter-related banking sector. While a greater unhedged allocation to Australian assets would 
provide good yield enhancement, it may not provide a source of effective reserves assets in 
a crisis due to high and positive correlation aspects. 
With the aim of keeping our reserves managers active in foreign reserve markets, the Bank 
allows reserve managers to deviate from the SAA in terms of FX and interest rate position 
(within  limits).  We  measure  their  performance  in  doing  so  against  a  custom  (un-hedged 
reserves) benchmark that is set to our SAA. Performance measurement comes in the form of 
risk-adjusted return measures, namely Information Ratios (reported for trailing two and five 
year periods) and the Sharpe Ratio. 
In addition to the hedged and un-hedged reserves described, the Bank has foreign currency 
investments in BIS Investment Pool funds (ABF and CNY). The CNY investment was entered 
into in 2014 to diversify the Bank’s foreign reserves and the ABF investments in 2003 and 
2005 to promote development of bond markets in the Asia region. We also have US dollar 
investments (often in USD denominated European quasi government paper) as part of our 
domestic  markets  operations.  These  investments  are  classified  as  foreign  reserves 
(according  to  IMF  Official  Reserve  Asset  measurement)  but  they  do  not  contribute  to  the 
Bank’s intervention capability as they are funded by short-dated FX swaps. 
force  70  percent  of  our  allocation,  before  we  optimise 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Despite the potential for improved returns, the Bank has resisted investing in equities or gold, 
as some central banks do. Our investment policy anticipates a periodic review of the SAA 
and risk-return decisions may be re-assessed in future. 
Future developments 
The Bank is continually seeking ways to enhance its financial management. In recent years, 
we  have  improved  our  economic  capital  modelling,  reviewed  and  simplified  our  portfolio 
management  and  strategic  asset  allocation,  increased  transparency,  and  strengthened  our 
performance reporting. There is scope to improve further. In particular, with enhancements to 
our risk modelling and pricing, we can potentially be more dynamic in our allocation decisions 
and  improve  expected  financial  returns  without  incurring  significant  additional  risk. We  are 
currently assessing our technology base with aspirations to better manage risks and pricing 
issues related to OTC derivatives (including bringing risk adjusted pricing and risk adjusted 
performance  on  to  reserve  managers  desktop  on  a  pre-trade  basis).  Together,  these 
initiatives should help improve our performance and risk management culture. 
Maintaining  our  conservative  liquidity  profile  (driven  by  intervention  capacity)  has  an 
opportunity  cost,  and  so  we  must  be  at  least  as  good  as  other  market  participants  at 
motivating and focusing our portfolio managers – by aligning incentives and trading activity to 
draw out these fractional returns (versus our benchmark). 
Concluding thoughts 
There is a strong link between the financial performance of a central bank and its ongoing 
ability to fulfil its objectives. The credibility of the institution and its operational freedom are 
contingent  upon  prudent  financial  management.  Sound  financial  management  can  never 
ensure the success of a central bank; that will depend on its policy actions and outcomes. 
But poor financial management can certainly lead to failure. 
Central banking cannot be expected to produce smooth income growth. Constraints on asset 
allocation that arise from central bank’s responsibilities and the volatility inherent in foreign 
exchange  and  interest  rate  markets  prevent  that.  Developing  a  shared  understanding  with 
the finance ministry  of  the financial  risks  that the  central  bank  and  public  sector  ultimately 
faces is vital. Central banks must build an open and cooperative relationship with the finance 
ministry  and  legislature,  seeking  clarity  around  responsibility  for  quasi-fiscal  activities  and 
returns. 
The RBNZ’s institutional and financial design is driven by our overall purpose of maintaining 
price  stability  and  promoting  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system,  and  is 
enabled by an operating mandate set out in our empowering legislation. The legislation sets 
the  parameters  for  what  we  do,  while  institutional  arrangements  with  the  finance  minister 
prescribe  limits  within  which  the  Bank  manages  foreign  reserves,  thereby  limiting  the 
Crown’s fiscal exposure. 
The  Bank  has  established  investment  policies  and  operating  frameworks  that  manage 
financial  risks.  Our  approach  to  reserve  management,  with  the  bulk  of  reserves  hedged 
against foreign exchange risk, is a key strategic risk management decision. Thereafter, our 
SAA modelling and diversification are geared towards balancing risk and return. The Bank’s 
equity  position  and  dividend  policy  provide  a  buffer  against  adverse  events,  while  also 
providing  performance  incentives  through  their  disclosure,  external  scrutiny  and  the 
expectation of maintaining a consistent level of equity over time. 
There is a strong link between the level of capital invested by the government in the Bank 
and the level of risk taken. The RBNZ and the government have an open dialogue on these 
linkages,  in  terms  of  risk  management,  pre-positioning  capital  and  determining  dividend 
recommendations.  The  Bank  believes  that  with  application  of  industry  best  practice  in  risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  and position optimisation, it can enhance financial performance while maintaining credibility 
and reputation through prudent capital and risk management. 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
