  Claudia Buch: Finance and growth – guidelines for financial sector 
reform 
Speech  by  Prof  Claudia  Buch,  Deputy  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Frankfurt Finance Summit 2015: “The Last Word”, Frankfurt am Main, 17 March 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It is my pleasure to share a few thoughts with you at the end of this year’s Frankfurt Finance 
Summit.  Given  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead,  the  Summit’s  key  question:  “How  to  foster 
growth in a new regulatory framework?” could not be more timely. 
At  the  moment,  economies  worldwide  are  still  struggling  with  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
financial  crisis.  The  average  loss  of  potential  output  resulting  from  the  financial  crisis  has 
been estimated at 8.4%. And these output effects can be very persistent. Crises reduce an 
economy’s capital stock – and the catch-up process via investment takes time. Constrained 
credit supply in times of financial crisis can lead to inefficient capital allocation. Investment in 
innovations is postponed.This shrinks potential output and productivity, thereby slowing down 
long-run growth. 
In order to weaken the negative effects of financial crises on growth, many new regulations 
have been designed. In Europe, the Banking Union and, more recently, the Capital Markets 
Union  feature  prominently.  At  an  international  level,  the  regulation  of  globally  significant 
financial  institutions  has  been  at  the  core.  Overall,  these  reforms  are  headed  in  the  right 
direction. Yet concerns are being raised that the regulatory system is becoming too complex 
and  thus  less  transparent.  This  makes  it  necessary  to  focus  on  the  key  principles  of 
regulatory reform. 
In the next 15 minutes, I would like to step back and ask 
• 
• 
What is the relationship between finance and economic growth? 
And  is  there  a  “double  dividend”  in  the  sense  that  financial  systems  which  are 
conducive to growth are also more stable? 
To  answer  these  questions,  we  can  draw  on  a  large  body  of  empirical  (and  theoretical) 
evidence that can give us guidance for financial sector reform. 
Let  me  start  with  the  evidence  we  have  on  the  link  between  financial  development  and 
growth. 
1.   Financial development and growth 
In  the  1990s,  there  was  a  widespread  consensus  that  financial  development  fosters 
economic  growth.  Developed  financial  sectors  stimulate  entrepreneurship,  innovation, 
investment,  and  productivity.  Many  of  these  beneficial  features  of  financial  markets  arise 
through  equity  finance.  Through  venture  capital  finance, for  instance,  new  start-ups  obtain 
not only financial resources but also management expertise. Yet, in much of the academic 
and  policy  debates,  “financial  development”  has  been  associated  with  the  share  of  credit 
intermediated through the banking system. And empirical research in fact supported the view 
that countries with larger banking systems also grow faster. 
However,  the  financial  crisis  raised  a  critical  question.  Is  there  a  turning  point  after  which 
additional  financial  sector  growth  no  longer  spurs,  but  perhaps  even  hinders  economic 
growth? Or put differently: is more bank credit a bit like water in that there can be too much 
of a good thing? Water is certainly needed for life, but when there is too much water, there 
can also be a fatal water overdose which can lead to water intoxication. And if the financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sector can grow beyond the limit that is good for economic health, what are the implications 
for the reform agenda? 
Recent empirical evidence indeed shows that the link between finance and growth is non-
linear.  In  middle-income  countries,  financial  sector  development  has  positive  effects  on 
economic  growth.  In  high-income  countries,  additional  growth  in  the  financial  sector  may 
even have negative effects on growth. 
Hence,  there  is  no  “optimal”  size  of  the  financial  sector.  This  is  important  for  us  as 
policymakers. It shows that we should aim at providing the right institutional framework and 
incentives for the financial sector. The goal should be to prevent excessive leverage and risk 
taking. 
But  before  discussing  regulatory  implications,  let  me  shed  some  light  on  the  mechanisms 
that are at work. In 2009, Paul Krugman coined the term “boring banking” to describe banks 
focusing on their core business – taking household deposits and being conservative in giving 
out  corporate  loans.  Banks  fulfilled  their  role  of  financing  entrepreneurship  and  firm  entry, 
leading  to  positive  firm  dynamics  and  innovation.  This  raises  the  question  why,  at  some 
point, the banking sector fails to support economic growth. 
A first explanation is related to the structure of banks’ activities. In banking sectors that grow 
fast, business tends to shift towards non-interest income generating activities. Banks tend to 
rely  on  wholesale  instead  of  deposit  funding.  Banks  no  longer  fulfil  their  traditional  role  of 
taking  deposits  and  providing  credit  to  the  real  economy.  When  market  sentiment  shifts, 
banks with a high share of wholesale funding are affected most and have to cut back credit 
to a greater extent. 
A  second  explanation  distinguishes  between  household  and  corporate  credit.  In  general, 
corporate credit is more closely aligned with the financing of investment and innovation. Yet, 
as countries develop and reach the productivity frontier, it becomes more difficult to stimulate 
growth further. Often, bank credit then shifts from the corporate to the household sector, with 
negative implications for growth. 
A third explanation is based on the structure of employment in the financial sector. In the US, 
the financial sector was a relatively high-skill and high-wage industry at the beginning of the 
20th century as well as in the past 30 years. In the interim period, thefinancial sector lost its 
high human capital position and its wage premium relative to the rest of the private sector. 
This  raises  the  question  whether  a  highly  developed  financial  sector  attracts  high-skilled 
labour – and whether such labour might be employed more efficiently in other sectors of the 
economy. 
All these factors – changes in the structure of bank funding, in bank assets, and in the skill 
composition of bankers – help explain why the financial sector may at some point become 
detached  from  the  real  economy.  These  explanations  would  remain  incomplete,  however, 
without  stressing  the  role  of  regulations  and  the  role  of  the  public  safety  net.  Regulations 
which encourage high leverage and public sector safety nets that subsidise risk taking leave 
the financial sector vulnerable to shocks. Systemic financial crises, which impose large costs 
on society, are the result. 
In short: financial systems that are built on equity rather than debt are inherently more stable. 
A related question is: which balance between bank-based and market-based finance is most 
conducive to growth? This question is not new. In the early 1990s, for instance, the Eastern 
European  countries  had  to  decide  whether  to  opt  for  a  bank-based  or  a  market-based 
financial  system.  Both  systems  indeed  have  advantages,  depending  on  the  stage  of 
economic development and the stage of the business cycle. 
As  countries  develop,  the  growth-enhancing  effects  of  banking  sector  development 
decreases  while  the  beneficial  effects  of  capital  markets  become  more  important.  As  for 
individual firms, there is a “pecking order of finance”: at early stages of development, internal 
funds  and  external  working  capital  loans  dominate.  As  firms  (or  markets)  mature,  external 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  funds raised through bond and equity markets become more important. Also, while market-
based  systems  help  alleviating  recessions  after  financial  crises,  bank-based  systems  are 
more effective in smoothing the impact of “normal” business cycle fluctuations. 
2.   Financial structure and financial stability 
The structure of finance is important not only when discussing the implications of finance for 
growth. Rather, the structure of finance also has important implications for the stability of the 
financial  system.  The  higher  the  share  of  debt  finance,  the  larger  “financial  accelerator” 
effects  can  be  –  seemingly  small  shocks  can  have  large  and  systemic  implications. 
Economic fluctuations magnify and threaten the stability of the entire financial system. The 
channel of transmission can run through consumption or investment. 
• 
High  levels  of  household  debt  affect  output  stability  through  the  adjustment  of 
consumption.  Evidence  for  the  US  shows  that  households  with  high  levels  of  real 
estate  debt  cut  back  consumption  in  response  to  shocks  to  asset  prices,  thus 
amplifying the cycle. 
Firms  with  high  levels  of  debt  cannot  smooth  investment  when  an  adverse  shock 
hits. 
High levels of public sector debt can be destabilising. As well Government spending 
cannot cushion the effects of financial crises when public debt levels are already too 
high. 
  These  effects  are  further  magnified  if  households,  firms,  and  governments  have  borrowed 
from a banking sector which is insufficiently capitalised. Adverse shocks then set into motion 
a  downward  spirals  of  asset  valuations  and  prices  that  ultimately  threaten  the  solvency  of 
financial institutions. 
The destabilising effects of debt arise from its contractual features. Standard debt contracts 
are  insensitive  to  the  borrower’s  situation.  After  risks  have  materialised  an  adjustment  to 
shocks can occur only through new lending or through haircuts on existing loans. In contrast, 
the value of equity adjusts if the situation of the borrower changes so that equity provides a 
risk  sharing  mechanism.  In  other  words,  equity  as  a  claim  on  real  assets  has  stabilising 
features compared to debt as a claim on nominal assets. 
The stabilising features of equity contracts have also been visible during the European debt 
crisis.  In  Europe,  debt  finance  has  been  more  prone  to  capital  flight  than  equity  finance. 
Furthermore,  diversified  cross-border  equity  holdings  help  detach  consumption  from 
business  cycle  fluctuations.  Cross-border  equity  allows  more  effective  cross-border  risk 
sharing  and  consumption  smoothing.  Increased  reliance  on  equity  finance  would  be 
particularly beneficial in the European Monetary Union, where exchange rates cannot adjust 
to cope with regional macroeconomic shocks. 
3.   What are the policy implications? 
Financial systems which rely more on equity rather than debt finance can be conducive to 
growth, and they tend to be more resilient to shocks. This suggests that there might indeed 
be  a  “double  dividend”  –  financial  sector  reforms  that  contribute  to  financial  stability  also 
promote growth. 
Viewed in this light, there are a couple of takeaways for policymakers and regulators. 
The  first  is  that  a  more  developed  financial  system  is  the  basis  for  economic  growth. 
However, our reform efforts should not be aimed at the mere size and growth of the financial 
sector.  Instead,  we  must  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  fulfils  its  intermediation  role  and 
processes  information  efficiently.  Microprudential  regulations  that  improve  banks’  risk 
assessment  and  ensure  the  application  of  common  rules  are  crucial  in  this  regard.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Banking  Union  is  a  key  step  forward,  because  it  specifically  aims  at  establishing  common 
supervisory standards in Europe. 
Second,  macroprudential  policy  is  a  necessary  complement  to  microprudential  regulation. 
There  might  be  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system  that  microprudential 
supervision  cannot  detect.  For  instance,  increasing  household  debt might  threaten  stability 
through its impact on consumption – while individual banks may remain sound. 
Third,  post-crisis  private  sector  deleveraging  was  much  lower  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the 
US.  This  could  partly  explain  the  slower  economic  recovery  in  Europe.  Reducing  debt  to 
levels  which do not threaten stability requires efficient mechanisms to deal  with distressed 
financial  institutions.  Bank  recovery  and  resolution  regimes  provide  important  tools  to 
restructure banks’ balance sheets. This is where the second pillar of the Banking Union – the 
Single Resolution Mechanism – plays a key role. Through the bail-in tool it facilitates, most 
importantly, increased private sector risk sharing. 
Fourth,  the  Banking  Union  needs  to  be  complemented  by  reforms  that  strengthen  the 
development and integration of equity markets. 
The Capital Markets Union offers a great opportunity. Many initiatives that are currently being 
discussed aim at integrating European markets for debt instruments, such as securitisations 
or  covered  bonds.  The  Capital  Markets  Union  can  indeed  contribute  to  an  improved 
functioning  of  debt  markets.  To  facilitate  debt  restructuring,  reforms  of  insolvency  regimes 
are needed in some countries. The goal should be to allow for quick recovery or liquidation in 
a predictable and transparent manner. 
Yet,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  ought  to  put  more  emphasis  on  the  development  and 
integration of European equity markets. Improving access to venture capital, and the sharing 
of information on local markets can be important in this regard. The Capital Markets Union 
should  also  be  taken  as  an  opportunity  to  remove  the  preferential  tax  treatment  of  debt 
versus  equity.  These  measures  would  strengthen  banks’  and  firms’  loss-absorbing  equity 
buffers and stabilise growth in Europe. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
