  Mario Draghi: Accounts and accountability 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Euro50 Group 
Roundtable on “Monetary Policy in Times of Turbulence”, Frankfurt am Main, 31 March 2015. 
 Dear Edmond, dear members of the Euro50 group, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you this evening. It is a great pleasure to be here. 
Our  monetary  policy  meeting  in  January  this  year  was  marked  by  two  innovations.  The 
Governing Council decided to expand its asset purchase programme to include public sector 
securities. And for the first time, a summary of that meeting’s deliberations was published. 
These decisions had the appearance of watershed moments – we had never before made 
purchasing  government  bonds  a  central  tool  of  monetary  policy,1  nor  had  we  provided 
accounts  of  our  monetary  policy  meetings.  But  both  decisions  were  in  fact  the  logical 
extension of our monetary and communication policies over several years, and in particular 
when our interest rates reached the effective lower bound. 
With  interest  rates  at the  lower  bound,  both  the  tools  and  the  communication  of  monetary 
policy  have  to  change.  Asset  purchases  become  the  logical  next  step  to  expand  the 
monetary  policy  stance;  and  enhancing  transparency  becomes  the  logical  way  to  steer 
expectations and ensure accountability in an unprecedented new environment. 
In other words, what took place in January was not a revolution but an evolution. And what I 
would like to talk about this evening is how our policy has evolved in particular in terms of 
transparency and accountability, with a special focus on the publication of our accounts. 
Transparency as a source of accountability and effectiveness 
The  ECB  has  a  primary  objective  of maintaining  price  stability  which  is  given  to  us  by  the 
Treaty.  Achieving  that  objective  requires  independence.  Independence  in  turn  requires 
accountability. And accountability requires transparency. 
Central banks no longer subscribe to the dictum attributed to Montagu Norman, Governor of 
the Bank of England from the 1920s to the 1940s: “never excuse, never explain”. We are not 
only accountable for achieving our mandate ex post, but we have an obligation to explain the 
decisions we are taking in real time to deliver price stability over the medium-term. For this a 
high degree of transparency is essential. 
And  transparency  also  has  a  second  key  benefit.  To  the  extent  that  it  facilitates  a  better 
understanding  of  monetary  policy,  it  reinforces  the  transmission  of  our  policy  signals.  A 
monetary policy strategy that is well communicated and well understood by markets and the 
public at large can support credibility and harness market expectations, which in turn makes 
it easier for us to attain our objective. 
The more complex the environment in which monetary policy operates, the more important 
both these dimensions of transparency – accountability and effectiveness – become. 
First,  while  policy  decisions  are  never  mechanical,  in  complex  circumstances  there  is 
inevitably a greater role for judgement. This in turn means that there is a greater obligation to 
explain to the public why one course of action was chosen over another. 
                                                
1   The Securities Markets Programme was aimed at addressing specific frictions in financial markets that were 
hampering the transmission of standard monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Second,  complex  circumstances  increase  uncertainty  about  how  our  monetary  policy 
strategy  is  applied,  which  makes  it  harder  for  the  central  bank  to  steer  expectations.  So, 
more transparency and more active communication on our “reaction function” is needed. 
Of course, the environment the ECB has faced in recent years has been anything but simple. 
Our approach to transparency has therefore naturally had to evolve. 
This began with the forward guidance we introduced in mid-2013. As central banks reach the 
effective  lower  bound,  and  so  can  no  longer  use  changes  in  short-term  rates  as  a  policy 
signal,  communicating  directly  about  the  future  path  of  rates  and  their  response  to  a 
changing economy becomes more important. By introducing forward guidance we were able 
to increase our influence over the shape of the yield curve and, in doing so, partly shelter 
euro area money markets from developments elsewhere in the world, notably the US. 
Through  2014  we  continued  to  enhance  our  transparency  by  conveying  our  “reaction 
function” in broad terms – i.e. how we would respond to specific scenarios materialising over 
time.  In  particular,  in  a  speech  in  Amsterdam  in  April  last  year  I  set  out  a  number  of 
contingencies  and  their  corresponding  monetary  policy  responses.  The  monetary  policy 
measures  taken  through  the  year  were  fully  consistent  with  the  roadmap  laid  out  then, 
culminating in the decision in January to expand our asset purchase programme. 
This  episode  provides  a  clear  example  of  the  importance  of  transparency  in  establishing 
credible expectations and thus increasing the impact of monetary policy. 
Anticipation of further easing measures had started to set in from the summer of 2014, in line 
with a progressive deterioration in the price outlook and the contingency plans we had laid 
out. Long-term nominal interest rates declined by around 100 bps from then until our January 
decision,  precisely  because  we  had  communicated  our  reaction  function  and  markets 
understood it. This is one reason why  we have  already been seeing positive effects, even 
though large-scale purchases of government securities only began in March this year. 
To clarify our reaction function going forward, in my remarks at the European Parliament last 
week  I  discussed  the  conditions  that  will  determine  the  duration  and  intensity  of  our 
expanded asset purchase programme, above and beyond our expressed intention to carry 
out our purchases until end-September 2016. 
I stressed that the Governing Council will take a holistic perspective when assessing the path 
of inflation. We will evaluate the likelihood for inflation not only to converge to levels that are 
closer to 2%, but also to stabilise around those levels with sufficient confidence thereafter. 
When doing this assessment, the Governing Council will follow its monetary policy strategy 
and  concentrate  on  inflation  trends,  looking  through  any  surprise  in  measured  inflation  (in 
either  direction)  if  judged  to  be  transient  and  with  no  implications  for  the  medium-term 
outlook for price stability. 
This remains in line with our tradition of conveying the Governing Council’s assessment in 
qualitative terms, also in the case of our forward guidance, rather than in quantitative terms, 
e.g. using numerical thresholds. 
Opening up our monetary policy meetings 
Perhaps the greatest innovation in our transparency and communication, however, has been 
the decision to publish an account of our monetary policy meetings – an issue that has been 
debated since the ECB was founded in 1999. 
This is not to say that we have been opaque about our deliberations in the past. The ECB 
was  a  pioneer  in  establishing,  from  day  one,  monthly  press  conferences  immediately 
following  the  Governing  Council  meeting,  where  the  President  and  Vice-President  face 
questions in real-time. The Federal Reserve only adopted this practice in April 2011 and at 
quarterly frequency. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However,  we  have  taken  the  view  that  with  transparency  “more  is  not  always  better”. 
Especially in the early days of the ECB, when our credibility and the collegial nature of our 
decisions still had to be established, we put a premium on speaking to the public with one 
voice. Our concern was that published minutes or accounts could have compromised this – 
and I do not think this was unfounded. 
At the time, even slight differences in messages between Members of the Governing Council 
were  criticised  by  commentators  as  a  “cacophony”,  while  differences  of  opinion  within  the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Bank of England, with its external members, were 
often praised as reflecting the richness of its discussion! 
The point is that context matters. It is not enough just to communicate; the conditions also 
have to be in place for that communication to be well understood. In the view of the Council 
those conditions were not present then. 
So what has changed now? 
The  main  contextual  change  is  that  since  late  2008  we  have  been,  like  all  major  central 
banks, increasingly resorting to unconventional measures to meet our mandate. Compared 
with conventional monetary policy (i.e. interest rates), these measures are less easy for the 
market to anticipate and their effects are less well understood. 
This is because, first, unconventional measures can take many different forms and operate 
through different transmission channels. And second, there is no historical or statistical track 
record  from  which  the  market  could  deduce  our  policy  reaction  to  a  given  set  of 
circumstances. 
Moreover, while monetary policy always has side effects, the unprecedented nature of some 
unconventional  measures  makes  those  effects  more  uncertain.  For  example,  there  are 
questions  about  possible  trade-offs  with  financial  stability  and  –  uniquely  for  the  ECB  – 
potential distributional effects across countries. All this required more explanation. 
So we decided that we needed to be more open with the public about how we reached our 
decisions. And, to better influence expectations, we needed to provide clearer guidance to 
the market about the rationale and impact of our measures and the factors that influence our 
decisions  going  forward.  In  other  words,  with  the  account  we  wanted  to  support  both 
dimensions of transparency: accountability and effectiveness. 
At  the  same  time,  we  felt  that  the  passage  of  time  had  put  the  Governing  Council  in  a 
position  where  differences  of  views  could  be  communicated  without  compromising  the 
credibility  and  singleness  of  our  monetary  policy.  Such  differences  are  quite  normal  and 
should exist in any meaningful and diverse committee. And in any event, Council members 
can  and  do  communicate  their  views  individually  through  speeches  and  interviews.  In  our 
judgement there is no longer a reason to fear that reasonable debate will be confused with 
unhealthy division and unnecessary discord. 
Still,  transparency  also  has  limits.  Effective  communication  requires  clarity  and  structure 
rather than merely the release of maximum information. As Einstein reminded us, one should 
“make things as simple as possible, but no simpler”, and the same applies to transparency: 
as much as possible, but no more. In particular, transparency must not come at the expense 
of clarity of communication and quality of decision-making. 
In keeping with this, we have combined the move to publishing accounts with a decrease in 
the frequency of our monetary policy meetings. This enables a more thorough analysis of the 
medium-term implications of the flow of incoming data between meetings. And it is also more 
aligned with the schedule of economic projections prepared by the Eurosystem staff. 
A lower frequency of meetings will not affect our ability to respond to new information in a 
timely  manner.  And  it  will  in  fact  increase  the  value  of  information  generated  by  each 
discussion, thereby ensuring that our communication contains more signal and less noise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The specific features of our accounts 
In  general  terms,  our  accounts  are  similar  to  established  practice  at  other  major  central 
banks.  They  are  intended  to  provide  a  richer  summary  and  convey  the  flavour  of  the 
discussion  among  Governing  Council  members.  But  we  have  also  made  some  specific 
decisions about the way we present our accounts that stand us out from other central banks. 
Here  there  are  three  issues  in  particular  that  I  want  to  focus  on:  why  we  do  not  attribute 
positions to individual Council members; why we publish accounts instead of minutes; and 
why we do not provide vote tallies. 
First,  the  explanation  for  non-attribution  lies  in  the  specific  institutional  setting  of  the  euro 
area  and  the  unique  communication  challenges  in  a  multi-country  monetary  union.  This 
implies  that  in  reporting  on  our  monetary  policy  deliberations  the  independence  of  the 
members of the Governing Council must not be put at risk. They act in a personal capacity in 
the interest of the euro area, rather than as representatives of their countries of origin. 
There is an argument that, in this context, attributing positions could actually be helpful, as it 
would  act  as  an  antidote  against  Governing  Council  members  being  overly  influenced  by 
national considerations. But our concern was the opposite: that any attribution of names to 
policy  positions  could  all  too  easily  be  misconstrued  or  misinterpreted  through  a  national 
prism. 
We also felt that insulating members from such national scrutiny would be more conducive to 
maintaining an open and frank exchange of views, which is essential for the effectiveness of 
our  collegiate  decision-making. With  similar  reasoning  the Warsh  review  commissioned  by 
the Bank of England recommended for the MPC to preserve a “safe space” for discussions of 
a more explorative nature. 
The inaugural edition of our monetary policy accounts was well-received. In the words of one 
observer, it clearly showed that the Governing Council had a thorough, serious and “sincere” 
exchange of views. And as those who have read the accounts will have seen, this way of 
presenting  our  discussions  does  not  hide  the  different  assessments  and  judgements  of 
members on the course of action being proposed. 
Still,  while  we  see  differences  of  views  within  the  Governing  Council  as  part  of  a  healthy 
decision-making  process,  it  is  also  very  important  to  us  to  preserve  the  collegiality  of  its 
deliberations.  This  is  why  we  have  chosen  to  publish  accounts  of  our  monetary  policy 
discussions rather than minutes. 
Decision-making by committee reflects more than the sum of the pre-established views of its 
individual members. Views during the discussion can be “fluid” – which is after all exactly the 
purpose  of  discussing.  Moreover,  once  a  decision  is  made,  what  matters  is  the  shared 
commitment  of  the  Governing  Council,  in  its  entirety,  to  fully  implement  all  decisions  that 
have been taken. We did not want the publication of the accounts to detract in any way from 
these two crucial aspects of collegial decision-making. 
In our view, providing a fair and balanced summary of the main arguments put forward was 
the  best  way  to  achieve  this.  And  indeed,  from  this  perspective  our  first  attempt  was 
successful. As the account of the January discussion shows, the final decision taken in the 
light of the discussion slightly modified the initial proposal under consideration. The Council 
decided to accelerate and frontload the impact of asset purchases by increasing the monthly 
asset purchase volume to EUR 60 bn, from the EUR 50 bn considered initially. 
You  will  have  noted  that  the  language  we  use  reflects  our  collegiate,  consensus-oriented 
mode of discussion and decision-making. This includes qualifiers such as “broadly agreed” 
and  “widely  shared”  which  convey  in  broad  terms  the  balance  of  opinion  behind  the 
assessment  and  arguments  put  forward.  There  is  however  no  information  to  be  extracted 
from the particular form of words used. The language should not in any way be construed in 
quantitative terms or linked mechanically to our policy decisions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally, why do we not provide a vote tally? 
In  line  with  our  collegial  approach,  the  Governing  Council  has  an  established  tradition  of 
taking monetary policy decisions by consensus, without recourse to formal voting and without 
qualifying the decisions in any particular way. There are of course occasions when forging a 
consensus is not possible, and then the Council can take decisions by majority, be it small or 
large,  as  was  the  case  with  the  January  decisions.  Nevertheless,  not  publishing  a  voting 
record  allows  members  to  support  the  decision  of  the  committee,  even  if  they  may  have 
personally preferred a different course of action. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Enhancing transparency is a logical step for central banks facing an increasingly uncertain 
environment. In different ways all major central banks have moved in this direction during the 
crisis, be it through forward guidance on their policy or enhancing communication with the 
public. And this is in my view a thoroughly welcome development. The days of central banks 
acting as opaque and secretive institutions should be consigned to the past. 
More transparency benefits central banks by making them more accountable and effective. 
And in our case it also helps deal with the particular challenges of setting monetary policy in 
a multi-country monetary union. 
Throughout the crisis citizens in some parts of the euro area have been calling on the ECB to 
do more, while elsewhere we have been called to do less. This is inevitable in a monetary 
union. But I trust that by publishing our account we can help the public to understand how all 
viewpoints are reflected and respected in our decisions, and how in the end we strive to take 
the decision that best serves the euro area as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
