  Carl-Ludwig Thiele: Cash payments from the Bundesbank’s perspective 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  ESTA  conference  2015  “An  evolving  cash  market”,  Berlin, 
1 June 2015. 
 Mr Lebeaux 
Dr Olschok 
ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to  talk  to  you  at  this  year’s  ESTA 
conference  about  the  topic  of  cash  and  cash  payments  from  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s 
perspective. But before I move on to that, let me first say a few words on monetary policy 
and the sovereign debt crisis. 
Monetary policy and sovereign debt crisis 
1. 
As you are all aware, the Eurosystem is committed to its objective of ensuring price stability. 
For some time now, the inflation rate has fallen short of its target of below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term. This is largely due to the sharp decline in oil prices. In March, the 
inflation rate in the euro area was, at –0.1%, again slightly negative, and in April euro-area 
inflation  stood  at  0.0%.  In  order  to  restore  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  the 
Eurosystem  is  pursuing  a  highly  expansionary  monetary  policy,  which  has  led  to  negative 
interest on commercial banks’ credit balances held with central banks. 
In light of the very low interest rates in the euro area, many consumers are concerned and 
are  asking  themselves  what  this  will  mean  for  them.  Generally  speaking,  however, 
households have not yet been affected by negative deposit rates. That is why we have not 
seen  large-scale  portfolio  shifts  into  cash  holdings  as  a  way  of  avoiding  negative  interest 
rates.  However,  should  banks  decide  to  pass  the  negative  interest  rates  on  to  private 
customers  after  all,  they  could  react  by  stepping  up  their  cash  holdings.  The  Bundesbank 
rejects any calls for restrictions on cash holdings, which have been voiced by some in light of 
this situation. 
In addition to its interest rate policy, the ECB Governing Council has decided to increase the 
expansiveness  of  monetary  policy  once  again  by  means  of  extensive  government  bond 
purchases in order to tackle the risks that arise when  inflation is too low for too long. The 
longer the period of extremely low inflation rates continues, the greater the risk of second-
round effects – in other words, falling wages – which  would then exert  further deflationary 
pressure. And the longer monetary policy continues to miss its target, the more likely it is that 
its  credibility  will  be  called  into  question.  Against  this  background,  the  ECB  Governing 
Council was without a doubt confronted with a difficult situation. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  Bundesbank  takes  a  sceptical  view  of  the  government  bond 
purchases.  After  all,  the  low  level  of  inflation  in the  euro  area  is primarily  the  result  of the 
drop in energy prices. Lower energy prices can only be expected to dampen inflation rates 
temporarily.  They  are  also  clearly  boosting  growth  in  the  euro  area  because  its  member 
states are net importers of oil on balance. The risk of a deflationary spiral driven by falling 
prices and wages, which the Bundesbank and other institutions already considered to be low 
even  before  the  start  of  the  purchase  programme,  is  now  even  lower.  However,  the  risks 
associated with the purchase programme and those which result from the increasing fusion 
of  the  boundaries  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  together  with  potential  risks  to 
financial stability that could result from a very loose monetary policy are, in our view, higher. 
This could result in the urgently needed consolidation of public finances in the crisis countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  being  put  on  the  back  burner.  The  associated  danger  of  monetary  policymakers  being 
pressured into maintaining the expansionary course for longer than necessary should not be 
underestimated. 
Cash cycle and recycling 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
You can see that monetary policy in the euro area is in somewhat of a predicament. Against 
this backdrop, the Bundesbank’s cash department also has to address the subject of “crises 
and  crisis  prevention”.  For  us,  it  is  important  that  we  are  able  to  react  to  external  shocks 
independently. To do so, we need an infrastructure and a level of involvement in the cash 
cycle which gives us the necessary degree of flexibility to respond accordingly. That is why 
we  do  not  promote  an  unlimited  amount  of  cash  recycling  outside  of  the  Bundesbank. 
Rather, the Bundesbank always ensures that it assumes an adequate level of involvement in 
the  cash  cycle.  The  processing  of  15  billion  banknotes  per  year,  as  is  formulated  in  our 
strategy, and the corresponding branch network, which will comprise a total of 31 branches 
in future in line with a decision by the Executive Board, are indispensable in order to ensure 
a functioning provision in the event of crises and emergencies. 
However, the cash cycle not only faces challenges from external shocks. The creation of the 
Eurosystem alone has inevitably led to the commingling of different cultures and customs in 
the  national  cash  cycles.  In  addition  to  this,  increasing  automation  in  the  form  of  cash 
recycling devices and the progressive transfer of transport and processing tasks to cash-in-
transit companies have contributed to changes in cash payment transactions. This has been 
in pursuit of the aim of achieving ever more efficient cash management processes. 
Striving towards greater efficiency sometimes clashes with the aim of increased quality and 
security,  which  come  at  a  price.  This  intention  was,  for  instance,  pursued  with  the  EU 
regulation on coins from 2010. This regulation was, however, also criticised, in particular with 
regard  to  its  partially  impractical  stipulations.  However,  market  participants  themselves  did 
not  make  use  of  the  long  transitional  periods  –  which  ended  on  31  December  2014  –  to 
overcome the difficulties they had in meeting the requirements. 
The  Bundesbank  will  address  the  concerns  and  reservations  of  market  players  to  the 
European Commission and will continue to seek to ensure that conditions concerning private 
coin recycling are easier to implement in practice. Yet, everyone must be aware that should 
adjustments  be made  by  the  Commission,  these  cannot  be  put  in  place  overnight.  It goes 
without saying that the Bundesbank will implement the legislators’ wishes. In connection with 
this, I would like to draw your attention to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s online training portal 
for coins and banknotes. With this platform, we offer cash handlers a pragmatic instrument to 
help them to comply in a legally sound manner with their obligation to employ “trained staff” 
only. 
The  Bundesbank  therefore  takes  its  mandate  on  cash  payment  transactions  in  Germany 
seriously and assists other cash handlers in fulfilling their tasks. If all participants in the cash 
cycle  are  continuously  prepared  to  rise  to  new  challenges,  cash  payment  transactions  will 
continue to function securely, efficiently and smoothly for the good of all economic agents. 
Third study on “Payment behaviour in Germany” 
3. 
To ensure that the Bundesbank is able to assume an appropriate level of involvement in the 
cash cycle and react flexibly, it is important to watch market developments very closely. The 
cash  cycle  and  payment  behaviour  are  changing  in  many  ways,  for  example  through  new 
business models and new behavioural patterns of the parties involved. In order to help shape 
these  changes  and  to  be  able  to  react  to  them,  we  require  information  on  current 
developments. Our study on payment behaviour in Germany, which was published recently 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for the third time, is an example of one of the ways in  which the Bundesbank obtains this 
information. I would now like to present to you the main findings of our study. 
On balance, cash is still the number one means of payment at the point of sale. Cash is used 
for  almost  80%  of  all  transactions,  although  the  trend  has  declined  slightly  since  the  last 
study in 2011. The share of cash by value has remained constant and, at 53%, accounts for 
more than half of the amounts spent. This is especially true of smaller amounts. Amounts of 
€50 upwards are mostly paid on a cashless basis. The average amount of cash that people 
carry on them has also remained unchanged since the previous study at €103. This apparent 
inertia  may  seem  unspectacular  at  first  glance,  yet  it  implies  that  citizens  have  relatively 
stable preferences with regard to the payment instruments that they use. 
But even though consumers in Germany show only little willingness to experiment, changes 
in payment behaviour are certainly taking place, in small steps. Today, virtually every adult 
owns a girocard, which is now used to pay for around 30% of turnover at the point of sale; in 
2011,  this  figure  was  around  28%.  The  girocard  has  replaced  cash  as  the  most  popular 
payment instrument for payment amounts between €50 and €100. Internet payment methods 
such  as  PayPal  are  also  being  used  more  frequently  as  consumers  are  buying  more  and 
more goods and services online. According to our study on payment behaviour, nearly two-
thirds  of  respondents  have  made  purchases  online.  E-commerce  transactions  already 
account for around a tenth of retail turnover in Germany. Thus, changes in purchasing habits 
are automatically reflected in payment behaviour, since using cash to pay for internet orders 
is hardly possible. 
Mobile  and  contactless  payment  methods,  too,  are  becoming  increasingly  well  known,  yet 
are  still  seldom  used.  Particularly  the  young  members  of  society  are  open  to  mobile  and 
contactless  payment  methods.  The  smartphone  has  become  a  constant  companion  for 
young people. It therefore stands to reason that it should also be used to make payments. 
There is, however, still a lack of possibilities for use nationwide. For example, only around 
ten per cent of terminals in German retail outlets are able to accept contactless payments by 
card  or  smartphone.  On  the  other  hand,  many  people  do  not  see  a  need  for  or  have 
subjective security concerns regarding new kinds of payment methods that they are not yet 
familiar with. 
The  perceived  level  of  security  in  particular  is  a  key  criterion  when  deciding for  or  against 
certain  payment  instruments.  This  was  already  evident  in  our  first  study  on  payment 
behaviour. Counterfeits, skimming, phishing, credit card fraud – these are just some of the 
buzzwords  associated  with  the  security  of  payment  transactions  which  are  relevant  for 
consumers.  As  regards  counterfeits,  the  Bundesbank  offers  training  sessions,  information 
material  and  study  programmes,  for  example,  free  of  charge,  with  the  aim  of  combating 
counterfeits. Both the Bundesbank’s active involvement in the cash cycle and the issuing of 
new banknote series also serve this objective, among others. 
Moreover,  when  we  introduced  the  new  €5  and  €10  banknotes,  we  found  that  the  old 
banknotes that were still circulating were quickly replaced by the new notes. Nevertheless, it 
should be noted that the loss arising from counterfeits – which amounted to €3.3 million in 
Germany in 2014 – is only a fraction of the loss which results from card fraud. 
Alongside  possibilities  for  use  and  security,  cost  evidently  also  plays  an  important  role  in 
payment transactions. As we are all aware, payment transactions are not available for free. 
The costs  are  a  somewhat  complicated  business.  Charges for  one  party  mean  income for 
another.  Hence,  the  interests  of  the  different  parties  involved  in  payment  transactions 
constantly  diverge.  The  end  consumers  ultimately  have  to  bear  the  costs  of  payment 
transactions,  since  the  other  parties  take  these  into  account  in  their  price  calculation  and 
pass them on to the customer. It is extremely difficult to quantify whether notes and coins or 
cashless payment instruments are cheaper from a macroeconomic perspective. Research on 
this has, to date, not arrived at a clear conclusion. The only thing that is certain is that the 
willingness of consumers to pay for payment services is extremely low. New services on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  payment  services  market  must  either  be  very  competitively  priced  for  users  or  provide  an 
additional benefit compared to existing services in order for them to become established. In 
addition,  from  a  retail  perspective,  cash,  in  particular,  which  is  often  perceived  as  being 
expensive, is among the cheaper payment instruments. 
Yet cash is not only positive in terms of cost aspects; consumers regard cash highly because 
they can keep a check on how much they are spending, it’s easy to use, and they can remain 
anonymous.  That  is  why  cash  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  the  portfolio  of 
payment instruments in future. 
Nevertheless, we expect the share of cash payments at the point of sale to slip below the 
50% mark  over  the  medium  term, given  that  cashless  payment  instruments  are  slowly  but 
steadily gaining ground. This not only applies to mobile and contactless methods as well as 
internet payment methods, but also to regular debit card payments. 
So how does the future of payments look? In my opinion, diverse and multifaceted. In the 
past, paying in cash was virtually the only option, and cash is still going strong even today. 
The volume of euro banknotes in circulation, which increases by around 5% a year and has 
been in excess of €1 trillion since the end of 2014, clearly demonstrates this. But nowadays, 
there is also a wealth of cards – ranging from prepaid cards to contactless cards. Moreover, 
smartphone and e-mail-based methods offer new channels to existing payment procedures. 
Everyone should be able to pay as he or she wishes; the Bundesbank takes a neutral stance 
and leaves citizens to decide how they would like to pay. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
