  Patrick Honohan: The new micro-prudential regime for banks 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Oireachtas  (National  Parliament)  Joint  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and 
Reform, Dublin, 28 May 2015. 
 focused  on 
introductory  remarks 
three  main  areas,  namely  (i) 
It is just six months since I had the last opportunity to engage with the Committee. On that 
occasion,  my 
the 
macroprudential  measures  on  which  the  Bank  had  just  published  a  consultation  paper; 
(ii) the  transfer  of  ultimate  responsibility  for  the  micro-prudential  supervision  of  the  main 
banks to  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  of the  ECB,  which  had  just  taken  effect;  and 
(iii) the  level  of  mortgage  interest  rates,  which  was  already  attracting  increasing  attention 
from the Bank given its consumer protection mission. 
In the intervening period we have, as members of the committee are well aware, concluded 
the  macroprudential  consultation  and  introduced  the  calibrated  loan-to-value  and  loan-to-
income  restrictions  for  mortgage  lending.  We  continue  to  monitor  the  impact  and 
effectiveness of these and are not dissatisfied with subsequent developments in that market. 
The  new  micro-prudential  regime  for  banks  is  settling-in  well.  The  transition  has  been 
smooth, exemplified by the results of the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment of the banks at 
entry,  which  confirmed  the  merits  of  the  asset  quality  review  previously  conducted  by  the 
Bank. The modest  additional  capital  requirement for  PTSB,  triggered  by  the  higher  capital 
standard set for the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment, was raised in the private market. 
The concerns I expressed around the standard variable rate in November foreshadowed a 
wider public focus on this issue, reflecting the widening spread between Irish mortgage rates 
and  those  in  many  other  parts of the  euro  area. The  Bank  has conducted  a  good  deal of 
research on the topic (some of which previously published) and a summary of some of this 
was included in the document which was prepared at the request of the Minister for Finance 
and published last week. 
Since the crisis, banks’ SVR rates have moved higher than previously relative to the banks’ 
cost  of  funds  and  arguably  higher  than  a  fair-minded  customer  might  have  reasonably 
expected.  This  development  was  manifest  in  a  number  of  Eurozone  countries  but  the 
divergence has become particularly large in Ireland. Is this compliant with the contract that 
the  customers  signed?  Is  it  consistent  with  good  business  practice  for  the  long-term 
relationship? Is it good for the overall recovery of the economy on which the banks depend 
for their long-term success? 
Admittedly, it is essential for the survival of banks that they achieve a sufficient return on the 
investment of funds, including equity (much of it owned by the Government, by the way). If 
not,  they  will  not  be  able  to  achieve  and  maintain  the  growing  requirement  for  capital 
adequacy  in  the  years  ahead.  The  profitability  goal  has  to  take  account  of  long-term 
considerations,  and  of  the  risks  involved  in  lending,  especially  the  actual  and  prospective 
losses on non-performing mortgage loans. 
Nonetheless,  personally,  I  would  welcome  a  reduction  in  bank  SVR  rates  in  current 
circumstances as a benefit to the economy at large. Were it not for the firm conviction that 
the  introduction  of  administrative  control  on  interest  rates  in  Ireland  would  be  bad  for  the 
country as a  whole in the medium term – notably because of its stultifying effect on bank 
efficiency and its chilling effect on the entry of other banks – there could be a case for some 
government intervention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The SVR contract 
The SVR type of contract was the mainstay of Irish mortgage lending for decades. It had the 
advantage of being adjustable in response to changing conditions, and as such insulated the 
lender from sharp rise in the cost of funding.1 As such, it avoided the devastating squeeze on 
profitability which led to the insolvency of a large part of the US Savings and Loans industry 
in the 1980s. But the wording of most SVR contracts meant that borrowers are vulnerable, 
not  only  to  changing funding  costs,  but  to  many  other  types  of  influence  which  the  lender 
judges to warrant a change in rates. The SVR was increasingly replaced for new lending by 
the tracker mortgage, especially in the boom. This much more tightly defined interest rate 
contract protected the borrower against any interest rate changes other than those occurring 
to the ECB policy rate (which is a rate at which the ECB lends a small amount of the funds 
required by euro area banks and which is adjusted to help ensure that the ECB meets its 
monetary policy objectives, principally with regard to euro area inflation). Whereas, pre-crisis, 
the  Irish  banks  were  easily  able  to  secure  deposit  and  bond  funding  at  close  to  the  ECB 
policy  rate,  their  ability  to  do  so  since  the  crisis  has  been  constrained  (though  recently 
improving). Because of this (and because the spreads they set above the ECB rate were too 
low  to  cover  the  loan  losses  that  were  to  come),  the  tracker  contract  has  been  extremely 
costly  for  the  State  and  the  other  shareholders  of  the  banks.  For  this  reason,  the  banks 
stopped offering tracker mortgages. 
A  different/new  contractual  arrangement that  linked  the floating  rate  on  new  mortgages  to 
actual funding costs of the banks could be designed in such a way as to achieve the original 
aims of the tracker without retaining the vulnerability of the ECB policy-rate linked tracker. (Of 
course the spread would have to cover the costs and risks of lending.) But such contracts are 
not currently offered. 
Given the wording of the SVR contract, I assume that borrowers agreed to SVR terms largely 
because  they  trusted  the  banks  to  behave  in  a  fair  manner  with  regard  to  interest  rate 
adjustments. And for decades it seems that this trust was, by and large, not misplaced. Is 
this still the case? There is clearly justification for some of the increase that has occurred in 
the spread, which was too low in the past. Relevant factors include: the persistent drag on 
their viability from the combination of a large tracker book and the fact that funding costs are 
much  higher  than  the  ECB  policy  rate;  the  dramatic  increase  in  non-performing  mortgage 
loans and the need there has been to make large provisions against loan losses; and the 
sharply increased capital requirements on banks have all threatened the viability of mortgage 
lending for the banks. In a general way, defenders of the banks can point to these factors as 
providing  some  justification  for  higher  spreads  on  SVRs.  Still,  such  arguments  are  rather 
open-ended, and, in the absence of a transparent, clear and quantified policy on the part of 
the banks, can be seen as excuses for charging whatever the market will bear rather than 
being a fair application of the contract consistent with a borrower’s reasonable expectation. 
Under these circumstances, the SVR borrower’s main protection is competition: the fact that, 
by setting its SVR rate too high, any bank stands to lose business (whether new business or 
switchers)  to  competitors.  Whereas  this  protection  was  effective  pre-crisis,  the  level  of 
competition  currently  is  too  low.  Ensuring  that  official  policy  does  not  inadvertently  deter 
competition  and  entry  of  banks  to  the  market  is  thus  vital  for  the  long-term  health  of  the 
economy. 
The Central Bank wrote to each of the banks in February to ask for a clear statement of each 
bank’s pricing  behaviour  around  SVRs. In their responses,  none  of the banks  have  so far 
provided what I would regard as a clear and quantified statement of their policy with respect 
to adjustments of the SVR interest rate. 
                                                
1   As such, it avoided the devastating squeeze on profitability which led to the insolvency of a large part of the 
US Savings and Loans industry in the 1980s. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In my opinion, good business practice of the banks would demand that they make upward 
adjustments to SVR rates only following clear and objective changes in prevailing business 
conditions (not only funding costs); good business practice would also call on them to lower 
SVR rates when the same conditions move in the opposite direction. To regain the trust of 
their customers, I believe that the banks should move to publishing a clear and quantified 
statement of their SVR interest rate policy. Since they do not seem to have such a policy, 
they will need to develop one. If necessary, drawing on its legislative powers for consumer 
protection, the Central Bank will codify such a requirement formally, but this should not be 
necessary. 
Broader considerations 
While  insisting  on  transparency  may  seem  to  be  an  insufficient  official  response  to  the 
manner  in  which  the  spread  of  SVR  rates  has  drifted  up,  I  would  insist  on  my  words  of 
caution  against  the  enacting  of  legislation  that  would  provide  for  officially-administered 
lending rates. Nothing could be more likely to curtail and discourage entry of new competitors 
into Irish  banking, and without the possibility of such entry, I cannot see that banking can 
recover the operational efficiency and competitive pricing that is essential for Ireland in the 
long run. For the sake of modestly lower SVRs for a few quarters, a much larger and quasi-
permanent albeit somewhat invisible loss would be incurred by the customers of the banking 
system in Ireland. Well-capitalised banks operating more competitively will, in the end, offer 
lower rates and better service. 
Besides, close administrative control of interest rates would not be easily compatible with the 
principle  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free  competition  which  has  underpinned  the 
considerable increase in national prosperity over the past half century in Ireland (and which 
of course is enshrined in the European Union Treaty). This is not a matter to be taken lightly 
or opportunistically for what would clearly be at best a transitory advantage. 
The  health  and  ability  of  the  banks  to  contribute  to  the  needed  services  to  the  economy 
certainly requires them to operate on a profitable basis.2 Also, they are required by the terms 
of the business plans which they agreed in order to receive the sanction of the European 
Commission DGCOMP for the State Aid they received, to reach a net interest margin of 2 per 
cent. Given they are constrained by contracts on the trackers, there is only a limited range of 
options for achieving this. Only then can they build and hold sufficient capital to be compliant 
with  international  regulations,  to  be  fully  financially  autonomous  and  not  dependent  on  an 
implicit backstop of the State, to have the resilience to deal with future shocks and to serve 
customers properly. Their recent return to profitability is modest and significantly dependent 
on provision write-backs rather than normal business profitability. 
The  crisis  continues  to  have  serious  legacy  issues  that  cannot  be  resolved  easily  or 
painlessly. To mention just one example, ensuring that borrowers whose loans have been 
sold to unregulated firms do continue to obtain the consumer protections that they previously 
had is a concern which the Bank has been to the fore in advocating. I am glad to see this 
reflected in legislation (on which the Bank has actively advised) currently being enacted by 
the Oireachtas. 
Without detracting from the importance of appropriate pricing on the SVR loans, I should not 
conclude  without  emphasising  that  delays  and  uncertainties  surrounding  the  resolution  of 
non-performing loans remains a much more acute problem. The latter problem is of course 
one which we have discussed in this Committee repeatedly and on which progress remains 
damagingly slow. 
                                                
2   Also, they are required by the terms of the business plans which they agreed in order to receive the sanction 
of the European Commission DGCOMP for the State Aid they received, to reach a net interest margin of 2 per 
cent.  Given  they  are  constrained  by  contracts  on  the  trackers,  there  is  only  a  limited  range  of  options  for 
achieving this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
