  
 
Sir K Dwight Venner: Innovation, entrepreneurship and economic growth 
in the Caribbean 
Speech  by  Sir  K  Dwight  Venner,  Governor  of  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank,  at  the 
High  Level  Science,  Technology  and  Innovation  Conference:  “Strengthening  and  Utilizing 
S&T in the Caribbean”, Grenada, 26–28 March 2015. 
 Entrepreneurship, innovation, and private sector development as a necessary 
condition for sustainable growth and socioeconomic transformation in the Eastern 
Caribbean Currency Union 
The ECCU has reached a turning point in its economic history as it seeks to recover from the 
severe  impact  of  the  Global  Recession  on  the  economies  of  its  member  countries.  This 
presentation will address the critical role of entrepreneurship, innovation and private sector 
development  in  providing  the  fundamental  underpinning  for  moving  these  economies, 
societies and polities to higher levels of advancement in this century. 
The ECCU comprises eight (8) of the nine (9) countries of the OECS, the other country being 
the British Virgin Islands which uses the US dollar as its currency. These islands have some 
fundamental  structural  issues  which  have  proven  to  be  major  constraints  on  their 
development. The countries and their economies are extremely small, open and vulnerable 
to external shocks and natural disasters. The combined estimated population of the islands is 
627,800  with  a  physical  size  of  1124  square  miles.  The  Gross  Domestic  Product  is 
approximately 16.2 billion, with per capita GDP of $25,745. 
With respect to openness, the ratio of exports and imports to GDP is over one hundred per 
cent, with the countries importing most of their consumer, intermediate and capital goods and 
exporting a very limited range of goods, being mainly dependent on the tourism industry. 
The vulnerability of the countries is vividly illustrated by the havoc caused by tropical storms 
which  have  occurred  with  a fair  degree  of  regularity  over  the  years, resulting  in  significant 
losses of national output and new expenditures for replacing essential infrastructure such as 
buildings, both residential and commercial, roads and bridges. 
The close relationship with our main trading partners the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Canada  and  the  European  Union,  has  resulted  in  the  business  cycles  of  those  countries 
having a marked impact on our economic and financial systems. 
Another major structural factor is the seasonality of our main productive sectors, tourism and 
agriculture, which has caused economic activity to be limited to less than a full calendar year 
with a significant underutilization of resources. 
Because of the abovementioned factors, the state, the private sector and the financial sector 
are  unable  to  derive  substantial  economies  of  scale  and  scope  in  public  administration, 
production, distribution and marketing. The current situation is one in which the public sector 
or  the  state  can  be  described  as  over-stretched,  given  the  demands  for  public  goods  and 
services in the context of narrow economic and tax bases. 
The private sector is constrained by small and undiversified markets and follows the historic 
trend  of  being  engaged  mainly  in  distribution,  wholesale,  retail,  professional  services  and 
construction. Activity  in the formal segment is to a large extent focused on non-tradeables 
with  a  much  smaller  per  cent  being  in  tradeables.  This  structure  is  not  conducive  to 
facilitating growth as it is anchored in consumption activities. 
There are two factors which encourage this pattern. First, our geographic location is in close 
proximity  to  the  largest  mass  consumption  society  in  the  world,  which  shapes  our  own 
consumption  patterns.  This  demonstration  effect  is  transmitted  through  the  media,  mainly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Failed states 
Barebones survival 
Moderate growth, and 
Socioeconomic transformation. 
television, our friends and relatives in the US and frequent visits to that country. The second 
factor  is the  presence  of  a  liberal  democratic  political  system  with  a  competitive  multiparty 
system in which many promises are made in order to be elected. 
The financial system which is dominated by foreign and local commercial banks is aligned to 
this  private  sector  structure  by  both  history  and  practice.  It  is  Anglo  Saxon  in  orientation 
which means that the banks lend for short term purposes and do not venture into the more 
risky projects necessary for growth and development. 
The  current  economic  system  can  be  described  by  what  we  term  the  Input-Consumption- 
Default model. Input describes the approach to investment which concentrates on the upfront 
investment  but  not  the  final  output.  The  facts  are  that,  despite  high  levels  of  public  and 
private investments, output and growth levels remain low and not related to the inputs. This 
is as a result of the lack of coordination of these investments, that is, they occur in silos and 
with limited multiplier effects, because of the choice of projects, and massive inefficiencies 
leading to wasteful cost over-runs. Lack of coordination of policies, programmes and projects 
is also a major cause of lagging economic growth. This occurs within government, between 
government  and  the  private  sector,  and  between  the  countries  in  the  OECS/ECCU.  The 
Default  element  is  related  to  the  use  of  policies  which  are  traditional  and  have  not  been 
changed for a long time, policies which have been thrust upon us by external agencies, such 
as  the  international  financial  institutions  and  donor  countries,  and  the  imitation  of  policies 
which may not be appropriate to our particular environment. 
The challenge for us is: How do we break out of the current low output/high debt scenario 
and choose between the four outcomes which could confront us in the future? These are: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
To achieve the preferred outcome, which is socioeconomic transformation, requires a rate of 
growth ranging between 5 and 7 per cent which is not attainable with the current economic 
policies  and  the  existing  economic  resource  base.  Socioeconomic  transformation  requires 
the  creation  of  a  dynamic  private  sector  which  is  export  oriented  and  internationally 
competitive.  This  will  require  an  efficient  and  effective  state  and  a  transformed  financial 
sector as supporting and complementary institutions. Of major importance however  will be 
what  we  refer  to  at  the  ECCB  as  the  seven  great  modernizations  which  represent  the 
fundamental platform for achieving our goals. The seven are as follows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
The first three require a significant engineering input and specialization in the hard sciences. 
A  cadre  of  engineers  will  be  required  to  investigate  and  develop  projects  to  enhance  the 
infrastructure  in  these  areas.  The  second  three  are  the  essential  knowledge  based  areas 
where human capital is critical to increase productivity through innovation. The final one, that 
is governance, is the over-arching platform which coordinates and guides, establishing the 
institutional framework for making and executing policies with regard to the first six. 
Energy 
Transportation 
The Environment 
Education and Skills Training 
Research and Development 
ICT and 
Governance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For the OECS/ECCU countries, the new Treaty of Basseterre is the legal framework under 
which governance and policy making will be organized. This, under the present constitutional 
arrangements, will form what can be termed a dual system of government and governance, 
incorporating and coordinating the policies, programmes and projects which will facilitate the 
development of the member countries. The creation of a single financial and economic space 
will provide a more conducive domain for our development. 
The  more  specific  challenges  relate  to  the  nurturing  of  entrepreneurship  and  the 
development of an innovative outward looking private sector which is a medium to long term 
project, but must be started immediately. The beginning of this project involves the updating 
of the work done in Saint Lucia with the census of the private sector and continuing this work 
in  all  of  the  OECS  countries.  This  would  be  the  starting  point  for  a  diagnostic  process  to 
identify  the  structure  of  the  private  sector  in  each  country,  the  activities  in  which  they  are 
engaged,  the  difficulties  they  have  as  a  private  sector  generally,  and  the  specific 
impediments to operating in the export sector. This would also involve the use of the “Doing 
Business Survey” carried out by The World Bank and a more targeted survey with the OECS 
environment as its base. 
The  next  step  would  be  to  identify  actual  and  potential  sources  for  entrepreneurs  in  the 
OECS domain. The following are being suggested: 
1.  
The transformation of some of the traditional trading firms by providing incentives for 
them to enter the export sector; 
Citizens of the OECS in various diasporas involved in business ventures who may 
be enticed back to their countries, or more appropriately, to the single economic and 
financial  space.  They  need  not  move  completely,  but  have  a  branch  of  their 
business in the space as an outpost of the original business. There is a publication 
entitled  the  “New  Argonauts”  by  AnnaLee  Saxenian  which  chronicles  such 
operations  by  entrepreneurs  in  the  United  States  from  Ireland,  India,  Israel,  the 
Peoples Republic of China, the Republic of China on Taiwan and South Korea. 
Middle level professionals who have good networks, local and regional knowledge, 
and business acumen who could be incentivized into becoming entrepreneurs. Two 
forms  of  organisation  are  available  to  them,  namely,  production  cooperatives  and 
investment clubs. These are critical in small societies which require joint activities to 
establish the critical mass necessary to ensure success. 
Another  potential  source  would  be  the  excess  workers  in  the  public  and  banking 
sectors  who  have  the  regulatory  and  organizational  skills  to  participate  in 
entrepreneurial  projects.  The key factor  would  be  the  use  of  separation packages 
which provide funding, training in business development and management, a menu 
of projects carefully developed to identify the areas in which we have a comparative 
advantage  which  can  be  leveraged  into  a  competitive  advantage,  and  the 
establishment of clusters of export- oriented activities which have the critical mass to 
attract complementary and supporting functions which are commercially viable, such 
as research facilities. 
Finally, a robust investment in encouraging young people in primary and secondary 
schools  and  recent  school  leavers  to  become  entrepreneurs  through  targeted 
programs.  Examples  of  these  could  be  the  widespread  establishment  of  Science 
Clubs, Savings Clubs, 4 H Clubs, and the Junior Achievement Programme. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
A very important exercise would be the identification of focal points in each country where 
scientific  activities  are  being  conducted.  Organizations  such  as  Ministries  of  Agriculture, 
Education, Health and Public Works are all heavily involved in scientific activities, though not 
in  research.  Bureaus  of  standards  and  other  laboratories  do  exist  which  test  products  for 
domestic consumption and to meet export standards. Air and Seaport authorities also have 
heavy equipment which requires sophisticated mechanical and engineering skills to maintain. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In the educational system our Community Colleges must be identified as thought leaders in 
spurring an interest in scientific activities which facilitate the creation of a new scientifically 
oriented class of entrepreneurs. 
The challenge for us is to create a coordinating platform within each country and across the 
Economic Union to incorporate scientific research activities of the applied type allied to our 
production nodes, in order to focus on creating an innovative private sector which operates 
exclusively  in  the  export  sector.  This  will  require  an  institutional  framework  which  can  be 
provided  by  the  Economic  Union  and  a  central  data  base  which  can  be  subject  to  open 
access. The public sector, private sector and the financial sector should be full participants in 
this effort as they have the capacity and vested interest in the outcome. 
The  public  sector  would  have  to  commit,  in  a  focused  and  practical  way,  to  the 
encouragement  of  an  export-oriented  entrepreneurial  class  and  reorient  its  educational 
policies to this objective. The financial sector must be transformed to be able to finance and 
develop the kinds of financial products which would facilitate this new economic paradigm. 
The private sector will need to reconstruct itself to be the driving force in this initiative. It is for 
this  reason  that  an  OECS  Business  Council  has  been  established  to  unite  the  various 
organizations,  for  example,  Chambers  of  Commerce,  Employers  Federation,  Tourism, 
Agriculture, Small Business and Manufacturers Associations in each country and across the 
Economic Union. 
The private sector in the OECS differs markedly from its counterparts in the wider Caribbean. 
The  very  size  of  each  country  is  a  constraint  on  private  sector  development,  hence  the 
importance  of  operating  within  the  wider  space  of  the  Economic  Union.  The  supporting 
institutional infrastructure such as for example, a local campus, very large firms which can 
provide  leadership,  such  as  a  Grace  Kennedy  in  Jamaica,  an  AnsaMcal  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago  and  a  Goddards  in  Barbados,  and  support  services  and  access  to  international 
arrangements are not available. This has its impact on the development of private firms and 
enterprises  in  the  OECS  in  their  ability  to  access  project  support.  Most  of  these  projects 
assume  that  the  OECS  private  sector  is  on  par  with  the  rest  of  the  region  and  so,  in  the 
competition for resources, they come off second best. 
There are a number of issues which set the OECS apart with respect to interventions that 
involve  the  state,  the  private  sector  and  external  institutions  and  organisations.  The  first 
concerns  the  banana  industry  in  the  Windward  Islands  which  brought  about  a  virtual 
socioeconomic revolution in those islands. The banana industry came about after the demise 
of  sugar  and  was  established  in  large  part  by  five  critical  decisions  taken  by  the  British 
government: 
1. 
That  the  industry  should  involve  production  in  all  four  islands  to  achieve  critical 
mass; 
The  establishment  of  a  research  center  to  select  the  most  appropriate  strain  of 
bananas and to treat with the pathology of a crop which is very susceptible to plant 
diseases; 
The shipping company Van Geest was contracted to transport the crop; 
Marks and Spencers was contracted to market it in the UK; 
The British government provided a protected market. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Small  farmers  thrived  in  this  arrangement  and  valuable  supply  chains  were  established 
between the UK and the Windward Islands. 
In the case of telecoms, an intervention by The World Bank led to the liberalisation of this 
sector  which  experienced  significant  growth.  The  World  Bank  also  made  a  critical 
intervention  in  the  cruise  ship  industry  with  respect  to  charges  for  disposal  of  solid  waste 
which  has  had  an  impact  on  the  environment  within  our  coastal  waters.  Direct  foreign 
investment  has  been  of  great  importance  but  it  has  not  been  noted  for  the  transfer  of 
2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  technology and management skills. This intervention must be more programmed to have a 
significant  developmental  impact  which  would  require  the  state  and  the  domestic  private 
sector  working  in  tandem  to  ensure  that  there  is  transfer  of  technology  and  substantial 
spillover effects from foreign investment. 
Two issues of interest to policy makers would be a study of the influence of the exchange 
rate and the wage levels on the potential for export competitiveness, and the impact on our 
economies of missing out on the development of secondary activities such as manufacturing. 
This latter has important path dependent implications. The natural sequence of development 
moves  from  primary  to  secondary  to  tertiary  economic  activities.  We  have  passed  from 
primary to tertiary and may have missed the advantages and externalities of the secondary 
stage. This was the stage at which the change in production methods between agriculture 
and industry became differentiated with major innovations based on science and technology 
becoming dominant. The establishment of educational institutions which catered to the new 
production technologies became a critical element of the new economies. Measurement and 
precision became a part of the production process. 
The  absence  of  an  industrial  revolution  in  our  countries  may  have  precluded  a  different 
trajectory  in  our  economic  growth.  Since  we  have  moved  to  basically  service  economies 
based on tourism, the question then becomes: Can tourism fill the gap that industry should 
have filled? What, for example, are the scientific requirements of the tourism industry which 
could  provide  higher  levels  of  productivity  and  lower  costs  to  make  the  industry 
internationally competitive? In addition, since the tourism industry is international in scope, 
what  innovations  and  applications  developed  for  our  industry  can  be  sold  to  other 
destinations? The role of tourism in terms of linkages, both backward and forward, as well as 
its possibilities as a launching pad for exporting goods and services to the source countries, 
is one that should be seriously explored. 
The  possibilities  for  research  and  innovation  lie  in  several  areas,  for  example,  alternative 
energy sources, the environment, transportation, information technology applications aimed 
at  select  niches  and  areas  of  the  industry,  such  as  culinary  arts  and  floral  designs.  The 
construction  sector  and  the  related  professions  such  as  architecture  could  benefit 
tremendously  from  innovations  which  are  tested  in  our  environment  and  which  could  have 
possibilities in other countries with a similar climate and topography. 
All of these issues fit in with a more relevant model which is the Aggregation-Coordination- 
Productivity  model,  which  in  a  sense  speaks  for  itself.  The  critical  element  would  be  the 
representational organisation of the private sector and the bringing together of producers into 
clusters to achieve critical mass. Coordination is required at the level of industries and the 
public sector within countries and between countries to chart a course which has definitive 
goals and targets. The use of science and technology is also critical to produce innovations 
in  production  and  management  and  a  dynamic  private  sector  which  is  internationally 
competitive. All of this will not happen by osmosis and will require a vision of the future, the 
acquisition  of  administrative  and  technical  capacity  to  implement  and  a  mental  shift  in  our 
approach to running our governments and our industries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
