  Benoît Cœuré: Lamfalussy was right – independence and 
interdependence in a monetary union 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Lamfalussy Lecture Conference, organised by Magyar Nemzeti Bank (the central bank 
of Hungary), Budapest, 2 February 2015. 
 framework: 
interdependence 
requires  strong 
Summary 
Decision-makers  in  different  policy  areas  act  independently  and  are  at  the  same  time 
interdependent.  Managing 
“monetary 
dominance” is the framework in the euro area in which the central bank acts in independence 
and fiscal policies are constrained in the SGP. 
The crisis in Europe has shown that policy interactions can be more subtle and involve also 
financial  and  structural  policies.  Monetary  policy  becomes  more  effective  in  impacting  the 
real  economy  if  other  policies  act  in  support.  If  not,  it  has  less  impact  and  expansionary 
policy has to last longer. 
An example for interdependence between monetary and financial policies (micro level) is if 
supervisors show too much forbearance to undercapitalized banks, central bank funding may 
end up being used to fill the gap. Fiscal policies can also become overburdened if they need 
to smoothen the economic cycle and at the same time stabilize the banking sector. Banking 
union  has  been  there  one  answer  to  the  crisis.  European  supervision  helps  align  the 
governance of the financial sector with the aims of monetary policy. And the resolution leg 
creates rules that limit the link between fiscal policies and the banking sector; bail-in replaces 
bail-out by governments and taxpayers. 
The interaction between structural reforms and fiscal policies is clear: if product and labour 
markets are resilient and flexible, there is less need for fiscal intervention. Constantly refining 
fiscal rules while leaving structural policies at the national level makes little sense. If fiscal 
policies  are  to  be  freed  from  structural  dominance,  strong  framework  for  both  is  needed. 
Today structural reforms are their own reward. Tomorrow sovereignty over structural reforms 
should be shared between countries, allowing for symmetric risk sharing. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me begin by reiterating my appreciation for receiving the award in honour of Alexandre 
Lamfalussy, and my pleasure to be here in Budapest today. 
What  I  want  to  talk  about  this  morning  is  a  theme  in  which  Lamfalussy  himself  took  great 
interest,  which  is  the  interaction  between  policies  in  the  euro  area.  In  fact,  in  the  Delors 
Committee,  where  he  was  an  independent  expert,  Lamfalussy  was  one  of  the  foremost 
proponents of the view that policy interactions in a monetary union had to be governed by a 
proper framework, and not just left up to ad hoc coordination and market discipline.1 
My  main  argument  today  is  that  Lamfalussy  was  right  –  and  in  more  ways  than  even 
recognised. A monetary union creates complex interactions which have to be governed by a 
strong  and  comprehensive  framework.  Many  of  these  interactions  we  have  only  really 
                                                 
1   James, H. (2012), Making the European Monetary Union, p. 248. See also Maes, I. (2011), “The evolution of 
Alexandre  Lamfalussy’s  thought  on  the  international  and  European  monetary  system”,  National  Bank  of 
Belgium, Working Paper Research, No. 217. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  understood thanks to the crisis. And in crucial areas, such as structural policies, we have still 
not adequately responded. 
is 
that  managing 
interdependence 
requires  a  strong 
Independence and interdependence between policies 
In  any  polity  there  is  always  a  tension  between  economic  policies.  On  the  one  hand, 
decision-makers in different policy areas act independently. But on the other, they inevitably 
have to take into account what the others are doing – they are interdependent. This is an 
inherent struggle which, if left to itself, can produce outcomes that no party really wants. 
For  example,  central  bank  independence  is  a  necessary  condition  for  monetary  policy  to 
focus on its core price stability mandate. It is an essential feature of Europe’s constitutional 
order and puts the onus on governments not to intervene in the policy-making, management 
and  budget  of  central  banks,  including  in  those  countries  which  have  not  yet  adopted  the 
euro, such as here, in Hungary. 
But independence is not a sufficient condition to ensure that monetary policy calls the shots, 
as  we  know  from  literature  on  monetary  and  fiscal  dominance.2  Essentially  what  this 
literature  finds  is  that  if  fiscal  policy  is  not  constrained  by  a  rule  which  ensures  the 
sustainability  of  debt,  the  central  bank  is  ultimately  forced  into  inflationary  policies.  At  the 
same  time,  inflation  can  make  output  stabilisation  through  fiscal  policy  less  effective,  as 
workers’ expectations adapt and prices rise faster than incomes. So all parties lose out. 
The  conclusion 
framework. 
Policymakers  must  decide  which  aims  they  want  to  prioritise  and  construct  a  set  of  rules 
which promotes that and sets incentives right. 
In  the  euro  area,  we  consciously  built  our  framework  around  “monetary  dominance”  – 
ensuring  that  the  central  bank  could  pursue  price  stability  unconstrained  by  fiscal 
considerations.  We  did  this  by  giving  full  independence  to  the  central  bank,  while 
constraining fiscal policies through the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, and now of the 
Fiscal Compact. 
One can debate the details of this framework, but on its own terms it succeeded: in no cases 
have fiscal policies caused the central bank to lose its price stability focus. 
Take  the  example  of  the  ECB’s  recent  decision  to  extend  its  asset  purchase  programme. 
This  has  been  taken  in  full  independence  to  achieve  our  medium-term  price  stability 
mandate. And in our decision, we have taken into account the specificities of the euro area, 
meaning that we operate in an environment of decentralised national fiscal authorities, and 
the ECB has no mandate to engage in large scale pooling of fiscal risks. 
But  we  have  also  learned  from  the  crisis  that  policy  interdependence  has  different 
dimensions. There are more subtle interactions between policies than our framework initially 
acknowledged.  And  these  involve  not  just  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  but  financial  and 
structural policies as well. 
What is at issue is not the classic idea about one policy causing another to lose focus on its 
mandate. It is ex post coordination failure, where some policies miss their mandate, causing 
others  to  do  more  precisely  to  be  faithful  to  their  own  –  what  one  might  call  “weak 
dominance”. 
For example, if financial supervisors do not encourage a fast and efficient clean-up of bank 
balance  sheets,  central  banks’  interest  rate  cuts  are  less  likely  to  be  passed  on  to 
                                                 
2   The classic reference is Sargent, T., and N. Wallace (1981), “Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”, Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  5.  See  also  the  discussion  in  Leeper,  E.  (1991), 
“Equilibria  under  “active”  and  “passive”  monetary  and  fiscal  policies”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  27, 
p. 129–147. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  entrepreneurs. And this is exactly what we saw in the euro area until the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism was decided. And if at the same time governments do not make it easier to open 
a new business, those entrepreneurs are less likely to ask for a loan and take advantage of 
those low financing costs. And this is also what we have seen. 
In  short,  monetary  policy  becomes  more  effective  in  impacting  the  real  economy  if  other 
policies  act  in  a  supportive  way;  and  if  they  do  not,  it  has  less  impact  and  expansionary 
policy has to last longer to fulfill the mandate. 
So, “weak dominance” is essentially about whether policies complement or compensate for 
each  other.  And  what  determines  this  is  the  framework  –  whether  it  is  strong  enough  to 
ensure the right policies dominate, and whether comprehensive enough to achieve that along 
all the relevant dimensions of policy interaction. 
While  such  a  framework  is  important  in  any  country,  it  is  even  more  important  in  a  multi-
country  union.  In  a  single  country  coordination  and  policy  adjustments  involve  a  single 
treasury  and  economics  ministry.  But  in  a  monetary  union  there  are  multiple  different 
policymakers and policies to align. A strong framework that constrains discretion is therefore 
indispensable. 
Fiscal dominance 
Though there is much that can be said about how fiscal dominance in this context, I have 
discussed this elsewhere.3 The risk of “weak” fiscal dominance was actually recognised by 
Lamfalussy.  He  noted  that  the  lack  of  an  appropriate  aggregate  fiscal  stance  for  the  euro 
area could lead to monetary policy having to bear too much of the adjustment burden: 
“The combination of a small Community budget with large …. national budgets leads to the 
conclusion  that,  in  the  absence  of  fiscal  coordination,  the  global  fiscal  policy  of  the  EMU 
would be the accidental outcome of decisions taken by Member States. ... As a result, the 
only global macroeconomic tool available within the EMU would be the common monetary 
policy implemented by the European central banking system.”4 
There is much to learn from this comment. But in the remainder of my remarks I would like to 
focus on two other areas where we learned important lessons from the crisis for our future 
framework: financial policies and structural policies. 
Financial dominance 
For financial policies – that is, the governance of the banking sector – we saw clearly during 
the  crisis  how  a  weak  framework  can  allow  weak  forms  of  dominance  to  take  hold.  Both 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  can  have  their  choices  constrained  by  so-called  “financial 
dominance”.5 
For monetary policy, the problem stems mostly from inadequate supervision. 
At the micro level, if supervisors show too much forbearance to undercapitalised banks, they 
can end up effectively shifting the burden onto monetary policy – as when those banks lose 
access to market funding, or have to pay higher risk premia, they turn to central bank funding 
                                                 
3   See speech by Cœuré, B. on “Outright Monetary Transactions, one year on”, Berlin, 2 September 2013. 
4   Lamfalussy, A. (1989), Macro-coordination of fiscal policies in an economic and monetary union in Europe, 
Collection of Papers. Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union, Luxembourg, 1989, January, 
p. 101. 
5   Financial dominance is not a new concept. An early reference is Fraga, A., I. Goldfajn, and A. Minella (2003), 
“Inflation  Targeting  in  Emerging  Market  Economies”,  Banco  Central  do  Brasil  Working  Paper  Series,  76, 
section 4.2.2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  to fill the gap. Monetary policy has limited discretion here as it cannot independently judge 
the solvency of its counterparties – and remember, we have 2194. 
At  the  macro  level,  if  supervisory  policies  allow  banks  to  grow  too  rapidly,  and  then 
deleverage too slowly, it can also push the central bank into doing more.6 Since monetary 
transmission becomes impaired, the monetary “impulse” has to be strengthened compensate 
for  the  diminished  “outpulse”  coming  out  of  banks.  Many  of  our  non-standard  measures 
during the crisis, such as our Long-Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs), have essentially 
performed this function. 
Moreover, weak micro-supervision and the resulting high level of non-performing loans can 
also  trigger  conflicts  with  other  policy  areas.  For  example,  when  bad  banks  or  asset 
management  companies  are  set  up  to  deal  with  legacy  asset  problems,  as  happened  for 
example in Slovenia and Spain, it is essential that the line between the duties of fiscal and 
monetary authorities is not blurred. 
Central banking is about providing liquidity for solvent institutions, not about providing capital 
for insolvent ones. Thus, the capitalisation of asset management companies in any country 
should preferably be shouldered by the private sector, and if this is not possible, by the fiscal 
authority. 
We  have  also  seen  in  the  euro  area,  however,  that  fiscal  policies  can  face  their  own 
dominance problem related to financial policies. This stems less from supervision than from 
inadequate resolution frameworks. 
The  key  issue  is  that  if  national  fiscal  policies  are  expected  both  to  stabilise  the  business 
cycle  and  to  bail-out  the  banking  sector,  incurred  and  contingent  liabilities  become 
unsustainable  in  a  banking  crisis.  In  the  euro  area  the  total  commitment  to  bank  rescue 
packages  amounted  to  26%  of  2008  GDP.  Thus,  fiscal  policy  can  quickly  become 
overburdened as well. 
And here again, a too weak financial framework can trigger conflicts in other areas. If fiscal 
policy  is  forced  to  contract  when  it  is  needed  to  smooth  the  cycle,  then  obviously  this  will 
reduce  aggregate  demand.  And  insofar  as  this  affects  price  stability,  it  has  to  be 
compensated  for  by  the  central  bank.  Monetary  policy  has  the  duty  to  respond  to  fulfil  its 
mandate – as the ECB is doing today. 
The lesson is that dominance is always a multidimensional problem. There is a triangle of 
monetary, fiscal and financial policies that requires a strong coordination framework. And the 
Banking Union has gone a long way to providing this. 
To begin with, the move to European supervision helps align the governance of the financial 
sector with the aims of monetary policy – or put differently, it reasserts monetary dominance.7 
The  European  supervisor  has  stronger  incentives  to  uncover  weak  banks,  which  helps 
reduce  the  risk  of  financing  so-called  “zombie  banks”.  And  it  is  also  able  to  use 
macroprudential policies to temper swings in the leverage cycle – for example through the 
release  of  countercyclical  capital  buffers.  This  means  that  monetary  policy  transmission 
should be more immune from disruption, and interest policy should not be overburdened over 
the cycle with the objective to avoid and then eliminate asset price bubbles. 
At the same time, the resolution leg of Banking Union – the Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive and the Single Resolution Mechanism – creates a set of rules that will in principle 
provide separation between fiscal policies and the banking sector. 
                                                 
6   See for example Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov (2013), “The I Theory of Money”, mimeo. 
7   See speech by Cœuré, B. on “Monetary Policy and Banking Supervision”, Frankfurt, 7 February 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Bail-in of private creditors will replace bail-out by governments and taxpayers. And this will in 
turn mean that the public sector has lower contingent liabilities towards banks, creating more 
space for fiscal policies to act counter-cyclically alongside monetary policy in a downturn. 
Structural dominance 
Nevertheless, the loss of fiscal space that many countries have experienced during the crisis 
– and the knock-on effects for monetary policy – cannot solely be explained by bank bailouts. 
As has long been recognised, going back to the literature on optimal currency areas8, there is 
also an important interaction in a monetary union between fiscal and structural policies at the 
national level. 
If an economy has resilient product and labour markets and adjusts more quickly to shocks, 
there  is  less  need  for  expansionary  fiscal  policies.  But  if  inefficiencies  are  high  and  the 
economy adjusts more slowly, fiscal policies need to be more expansionary, and for longer, 
and this can in turn generate spillovers on other participating economies and on the single 
monetary policy. 
To  give  an  example  of  this  interaction,  Ireland  and  Spain  were  two  countries  that 
experienced relatively similar shocks emanating from the financial and construction sectors. 
Both saw their primary deficits deteriorate by around 13pp of GDP between 2007 and 2009. 
However,  by  2012  Ireland  had  reduced  that  deficit  by  more  than  7pp  of  GDP,  whereas  in 
Spain the primary deficit was less than 2pp lower. 
This  certainly  reflected  stronger  consolidation  efforts  in  Ireland  as  part  of  its  adjustment 
programme.  But  it  also  reflected  the  faster  adjustment  in  prices  and  wages  in  the  Irish 
economy, which helped unemployment to begin stabilising in late 2010, while in Spain it rose 
until early 2013. 
Of course many other factors were at play as well, but the point is that economic flexibility 
matters for the size and duration of deficits. And what this implies is that, if structural reforms 
do not happen, there can be a form of “structural dominance” over fiscal policies. When a 
shock hits fiscal policies are forced to do all the heavy lifting to stabilise the economy and, 
over time, fiscal space becomes progressively exhausted. 
Indeed, this is one explanation for why the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) rules have not 
been as effective as we hoped. There is a correlation between the ease with which countries 
comply  with  the  rules  and  their  progress  on  structural  reforms.  Effectively,  through  lack  of 
reforms some countries have put themselves in a position of excessive deficit dependence, 
which then makes the difficulty and costs of meeting their obligations higher. 
The  conclusion,  therefore,  is  that  constantly  tinkering  with  our  common  fiscal  rules  while 
leaving governance of structural policies entirely at the national level makes little sense. If 
fiscal  policies  are  to  be  freed  from  structural  dominance,  then  we  need  an  equally  strong 
framework in both domains. And it is fair to say in the EU context that the Macroeconomic 
Imbalance  Procedure  (MIP)  has  less  teeth  and  has  not  benefited  from  the  same  level  of 
ownership and political attention than the Stability and Growth Pact. 
We  could  also  envisage  some  complementarities  between  the  two.  For  example,  it  does 
make  sense  to  take  into  account  structural  reforms  when  assessing  compliance  with  the 
SGP,  as  the  Commission  now  intends  to  do.9  This  is  because  structural  reforms  not  only 
                                                 
8   For a review see McKinnon, R. (2001), “Optimum Currency Areas and the European Experience”, mimeo. 
9   See  European  Commission  (2015),  “Making  the  best  use  of  the  flexibility  within  the  existing  rules  of  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact”,  communication  to  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council,  the  European  Central 
Bank,  the  Economic  and  Social  Committee,  the  Committee  of  the  Regions  and  the  European  Investment 
Bank, COM(2015) 12, 13 January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  reduce the amount of fiscal space needed for effective stabilisation, but they also increase 
future fiscal space via higher potential output and hence higher government revenues. 
However, not all structural reforms are associated with fiscal costs, such as notably product 
market reforms. And some, like some social security reforms, may actually imply short-term 
fiscal  gains.  But  most  importantly,  because  we  do  not  yet  have  a  credible  framework,  we 
should only take into account reforms once they are implemented, not when they are simply 
announced – and seek an independent assessment of their cost and GDP impact. 
These are all reasons for countries to press ahead with building a stronger framework. But 
above all, in the current situation, structural reforms are their own reward. 
You  may  recall  the  not-so-old  debate  about  introducing  reform  contracts  with  financial 
incentives.  Well,  those  incentives  are  already  there!  I  have  discussed  elsewhere  how 
structural reforms make monetary policy more effective in a given country and how they help 
regain  fiscal  space.10  Countries  that  reform  now  thus  effectively  receive,  in  return,  a  more 
expansionary monetary policy and a less contractionary fiscal policy. 
Indeed, our recent decision to expand our asset purchases, together with energy prices and 
an exchange rate more favourable to growth, have opened a unique window of opportunity 
for euro area governments to act together, remove structural obstacles to growth, and pull 
our economy out of the low growth, low confidence trap. 
In saying this, I am of course aware that structural reforms can have mixed effects on growth 
and inflation, and in certain situations can impact negatively on both in the short-term.11 But 
empirical  evidence  is  mixed12  and  the  balance  of  effects  depends  crucially  on  designing 
reform packages well.13 And indeed, many of the reforms that are on the table today – such 
as improving the business environment – have little disinflationary effects but can provide a 
strong boost to investment demand.14 
Looking further ahead, stronger governance of structural reforms is also in the enlightened 
self-interest of all countries that want to see a deepening of our monetary union. 
It is now fairly clear that, in the long-term, a Union based on no risk-sharing will be vulnerable 
economically.  Yet  we  also  know  that  permanent  transfers  between  countries  cannot  work 
politically. 
The  only  way  to  resolve  this  paradox  is  if,  behind  the  “veil  of  ignorance”,  risk-sharing  is 
symmetric  between  countries.  This  is  only  possible  if  all  countries  share  sovereignty  over 
structural  reforms  so  that  they  have  equivalent  growth  prospects  and  shock  absorption 
capacity. And this will in turn be made even easier if deeper cross-border market integration, 
starting with an effective Capital Markets Union, reduces in the first place the need to share 
risk through public balance sheets. 
                                                 
10   For  more  on  how  supply-side  policies  can  empower  demand-side  policies  see  speech  by  Cœuré,  B.  on 
“Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, Riga, 17 October 2014. 
11   For  an  illustration  see  Eggertsson,  G.,  A.  Ferrero,  and  A.  Raffo  (2014),  “Can  Structural  Reforms  Help 
Europe?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 61. 
12   Bouis, R., et al. (2012) find only weak evidence that reforms entail short-term losses in aggregate output or 
employment:  see  Bouis,  R.,  et  al.  (2012),  “The  Short-Term  Effects  of  Structural  Reforms:  An  Empirical 
Analysis”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 949. 
13   For more on this point, in particular the importance of getting the pace and composition of reforms right, see 
speech by Cœuré, B., Riga (Op. cit.). 
14   A similar argument is made in Fernández-Villaverde, J. (2013), “Discussion of “Can Structural Reforms Help 
Europe?”  by  Gauti  Eggertsson,  Andrea  Ferrero,  and  Andrea  Raffo”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics.  Lane 
(2013) also emphasises the importance of calibration and timing in the reform package: see Lane, P. (2013), 
“Growth  and  Adjustment  Challenges  for  the  Euro  Area”,  The  Economic  and  Social  Review,  Vol.  44,  No.  2, 
Summer. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Conclusion 
This brings me to my conclusion. 
Alexandre  Lamfalussy  had  great  faith  in  the  power  of  the  EU  institutional  framework  to 
enforce policy coordination and deliver a socially optimal outcome for the monetary union.15 
This, the crisis has shown, was overly optimistic. It is clear that the euro area needs stronger 
rules  to  regulate  the  many  different  forms  of  policy  dominance  that  emerge  due  to 
interdependence. 
That said, if over time those rules lead to more convergence, and more convergence leads to 
more common institutions with more common powers, then it may be that we need less rules 
down the road. This is not because complexity is less, but because a single central bank, a 
single treasury and a single economy ministry can manage it more effectively. 
In other words, rules are a means to an end, which is a monetary union that creates jobs and 
growth  in  an  environment  of  price  stability.  And  until  we  decisively  deepen  our  monetary 
union, they are the only way to achieve it. 
 
                                                 
15   Lamfalussy  believed  in  particular  that  this  would  help  address  asymmetric  adjustment  within  the  monetary 
union: “If surplus countries can be persuaded to expand their home demand at the same time as the deficit 
countries deflate their own economy, the balance can be restored without undue damage to the rate of growth 
of the Community as a whole. We do not know what will be the degree of success achieved by the Community 
authorities in their co-ordinating activity; but it is certain that the existence of an administrative machinery and 
of an institutional framework (already successful in other fields) will improve the ability of the area to deal with 
such problems.” See Lamfalussy, A. (1963), The United Kingdom and the Six. An Essay on Economic Growth 
in Western Europe, London: Macmillan, p. 131. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
