  
 
Christian Noyer: Monetary and financial research – its impact on policies 
and society 
Opening  and  closing  speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and 
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the 
Conference for the 20th anniversary of the Bank of France Foundation, Paris, 14 September 
2015. 
 Opening speech 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I will now switch to English, given the international audience and speakers that we are quite 
lucky to have today. I would first of all like to express the great pleasure I have to open this 
conference for the twentieth anniversary of the Banque de France Foundation for Monetary, 
banking and financial economic research. 
I welcome the prominent speakers who made us the honor of joining us today – Yann Algan 
from Sciences Po in Paris and Luigi Zingales from the University of Chicago Booth School of 
Business – and all our chairs and discussants who also are renowned  economists in their 
respective fields. 
A few words about the topic of this conference now. The idea of this conference is to take a 
step back and some time to reflect on monetary and financial research in general, and its 
impact  on  policies  and  society. We  will  thus  evoke  the  role  of  economics  and  economists 
within our society. 
The  two  provocative  papers  discussed  today  provide  a  very  nice  opportunity  for  such  a 
discussion.  They  both  point  out  several  concerns  about  economic  research  and  finance. 
They highlight the tendencies of economists to be self-referential and analyze how the social 
perception of the finance industry is largely negative nowadays, and the more so since the 
financial  crisis.  In  that  respect,  the  paper  focuses  on  the  United  States,  but  there  is  little 
doubt that France probably is no exception to that rule either. 
After  the  2007–2008  crisis,  some  first  steps  have  been  taken  to  change  incentives  in  the 
financial industry. And even more should be done in that direction in the coming years. At the 
same  time,  economists  should  also  adopt  a  more  critical  view  on  the  financial  industry 
practices and judge them as impartially as possible. 
But what can we say about economists themselves? Are they really too self-referential and 
do they tend to overestimate their role in society? On a personal note – as a policymaker and 
central banker – I do believe it is possible that central bank governors may pay the cost of 
the  so-called  “superiority”  of  economists  (for  instance  when  they  are  too  sure  of  their 
econometric models). 
How will we proceed in this conference today? In-depth discussion of papers will be left to 
participants. However, I would like to mention the potential role that the Foundation can play 
to help address some important issues. 
First,  economic  analysis 
to  sharpen  policy  makers’ 
understanding of the world. At the same time, policy makers should continuously challenge 
the alleged “superiority” of economists with the complexity of the real world. 
Second, actions need to be taken to get academia more involved in policymaking, to bring 
the discipline of theory-based analyses to the policy debates. That implies a better access to 
governmental  data  for  academic  researchers,  to  enable  them  to  conduct  independent  and 
is  definitely  needed 
in  order 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  rigorous  research  and  expose  their  results  to  policymakers  and  the  general  public,  who 
should listen to them in return. 
Well,  I  hope  this  is  no  wishful  thinking  and  I  will  now  leave  the  floor  to  our  distinguished 
speakers. Thank you. 
 Closing speech 
To close today’s conference, I would like to come back to the Foundation and its role. I will 
focus  on  a  brief  historical  overview  of  the  Foundation  for  Monetary,  banking  and  financial 
economic research. A lot has been achieved since 1995, as you know. What was our goal? 
To promote excellence in academic research in the field of monetary policy and finance. 
And did we achieve it so far? 
Well,  over  three  hundred  conferences  and  seminars  have  been  sponsored.  The  research 
grant  program  has  also  awarded  81  grants  for  about  2.4  million  euros  in  total.  While  it  is 
difficult to identify the potential outcome of projects at an early stage, the program has been 
rewarded  by  excellent  outcomes.  Most  papers  were  published  in  the  best  international 
research journals. 
Yet  not  just  academic  successes  were  achieved.  Some  papers  were  also  financed  by  the 
Foundation  and  later  became  hot  policy  topics,  sometimes  with  very  good  insight.  For 
instance,  I  think  of  a  paper  by  Freixas,  Parigi  and  Rochet  on  “Systemic  Risk,  Interbank 
Relationships and Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank” published in 2000 in the Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking (JMCB). In 2000, that is eight years before the crisis. And yet the 
paper already underlined the importance of interbank relationships in the spread of risk. 
Some trends and evolutions in research in economics and in the work of central banks over 
the  last  twenty  years  were  also  identified  and  discussed.  Obviously  globalization  and 
international  links  have  played  an  ever  more  important  role  in  monetary  and  financial 
economics (including with the creation of the euro for instance). There were also changes in 
economic research, as more attention was progressively given to actual policy-making. One 
of the leading examples is perhaps the so-called Taylor rule, which was created to describe 
the  actual  behavior  of  central  bankers.  This  allowed  a  much  richer  interaction  between 
academia and policy makers. 
Changes also affected policy-making, with more attention paid to academic debates. These 
even influenced the very structure of central banks. Research units were put into place and 
developed  in  most  major  central  banks,  including  the  Banque  de  France,  which  also 
implemented an External Evaluation of Research (EER). Central bankers indeed realized the 
importance of conducting their own research activities to support policy making. Heavier use 
of theoretical findings and data-based analysis was made, in order for central banks to better 
articulate their policy actions. 
Also, economic research outside central banks – which is not driven by direct “daily” topics – 
proved  ultimately  valuable  for  policy  too.  For  example,  some  ideas  developed  in  Krugman 
(1998) and Eggertson & Woodford (2003) on policy at the Zero Lower Bound, inspired by the 
economic  stagnation  in  Japan,  entered  the  United  States  and  Euro  Area  policy  debates 
years after their publication. 
The  Banque  de  France  Foundation  has  accompanied  all  these  significant  trends.  By 
fostering  research  conducted  by  international  teams.  By  sponsoring  research  unrelated  to 
immediate  Banque  de  France  needs,  but  which  would  ultimately  prove  beneficial  for  our 
policies. In that respect, I do expect that the Foundation will still play an important role in the 
next  decade  in  promoting  excellence  in  research  in  the  field  of  monetary  and  financial 
economics.  I  also  hope  –  and  this  will  be  my  conclusion  –  that  this  is  no  wishful  thinking 
either. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Once  again,  let  me  thank  all  the  participants,  speakers,  discussants  and  chairs  that  have 
joined us today for such fruitful talks and congratulate the young researchers who received a 
well-deserved prize for their work. A special thanks also to all the actors of the Foundation, 
whose constant help and dedication to their missions are precious and appreciated. Now is 
time to have lunch and I believe a buffet has been prepared. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
