Mario Draghi: Unveiling of the new €20 banknote 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB’s unveiling 
of the new €20 banknote, Frankfurt am Main, 24 February 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome to the unveiling of the new €20 banknote. Before I put my signature on the new 
note, allow me to say a few words about the importance of euro banknotes. 
In  total,  there  are  now  17.5  billion  euro  banknotes  in  circulation;  the  total  value  of  these 
banknotes reached €1,000 billion for the first time in December 2014. The euro notes that we 
use every day are the most tangible symbols of European integration. The introduction of a 
new  banknote  serves  as  a  reminder  that  this  integration  is  an  ongoing  process.  Euro 
banknotes touch the lives of every one of us. As such, they bring us all closer together. As 
you saw in the video highlighting the new security features, the inclusion of the mythological 
figure Europa, who gave her name to our continent, shows how Europe draws on its shared 
history. 
Introducing  a  new  banknote  isn’t  just  change  for  the  sake  of  change.  Every  central  bank 
needs to upgrade its banknotes periodically to benefit from advances in banknote technology 
and to maintain their integrity. The new note includes a feature which you won’t have seen 
before. It is called the “portrait window” and is a real innovation in banknote technology. It is 
the outcome of the Eurosystem’s work to ensure that the euro notes continue to be resilient 
against counterfeiting. This will reinforce the trust that the 338 million citizens across the euro 
area place in their banknotes. 
The new €20 notes will enter into circulation on 25 November this year. By the date of the 
launch, the Eurosystem will have printed more than 4.3 billion such banknotes. 
The  €20  note  is  important  because  it  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  used  denominations 
across the euro area. It is widely distributed via ATMs, it is accepted by many vending and 
ticketing machines, and it is often checked for authenticity by retailers using small devices at 
their counters. 
To  further  support  the  producers  and  owners  of  banknote  handling  machines  and 
authentication devices, the Eurosystem is putting in place a number of measures. One major 
step is to make new €20 banknotes available for testing purposes – as was done with the 
new €10 – more than nine months ahead of the launch. This should allow sufficient time for 
the machines to be adapted by 25 November. 
In  addition,  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  will  conduct  an  information  campaign 
addressing everyone who handles banknotes so that they will be able to recognise the new 
note and its security features. 
The new €20 note is the third denomination in the Europa series that is gradually replacing 
the original euro banknotes introduced in 2002. It will be followed, over time, by new versions 
of the €50, €100, €200 and €500 notes. 
Thank you for your attention. I now have the pleasure of signing the new €20 banknote. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
