  Yves Mersch: Interview in La Vanguardia 
Interview  with  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, in La Vanguardia, conducted by Ms Beatriz Navarro and published on 7 May 2015. 
 Tsipras’  reluctance  to  sign  has  surprised  many.  Is  an  agreement  with  Greece 
possible? 
Few times have I seen Europe so united, with the exception of one country, on the necessity 
to abide by the rules. Those countries would not like to see all the achievements of the past, 
the efforts made, come to nought now that they are beginning to see the benefits. 
Isn’t Tsipras right in calling for a change in policy? EU and IMF reports concede that 
the impact of the bailout on unemployment, GDP, etc. was greater than expected. 
In  some  sectors  of  the  Greek  economy  the  magnitude  of  the  effort  seems  larger  than 
elsewhere.  However,  in  the  Baltic  States  the  adjustment  has  been,  at  the  very  least,  the 
same as in Greece. But the more you stray from the correct path (and this country strayed 
the  furthest),  the  harder  it  is  to  return.  If  the  pressure  had  not  come  from  the  institutions, 
markets would have asserted even more pressure on countries to adjust. And if you can’t get 
financing yourself and you rely on the money of taxpayers in other countries, you need to 
show that your citizens are also playing their part. That reality has been easier to accept in 
some countries than in others. 
Is  Tsipras  the  good  cop  and  Varoufakis  the  bad  cop?  What  do  you  make  of  the 
changes in the negotiating team? 
I only know that both were elected on the same electoral platform. It’s a matter of forms and 
substance, and sometimes the substance is more readily accepted if the forms are improved. 
Would  it  be  a  good  idea,  as  being  mooted  by  Tsipras,  to  hold  a  referendum  on  the 
bailout measures? 
As a central banker, it’s not for me to give advice to a prime minister on how to manage his 
democracy. 
Papandreou tried and was prevented … Looking back, would it have helped in 2011? 
There are also those who say that, had we looked closer at the statistics a number of years 
back, we would have saved ourselves all these discussions … How far back in time do you 
go?  The  best  way  of  sharing  sovereignty  among  European  countries  is  by  sticking  to  the 
rules. 
In  2011,  when  asked  about  the  consequences  of  a  “Grexit”,  you  said  it  would  be 
“chaos”. Do you still believe this to be the case? 
At  this  moment  I  don’t  wish  to  engage  in  speculations.  The  clock  has  ticked  forward  but 
perhaps we can still achieve a positive outcome. 
Many people believe that the euro area could now withstand such a shock. 
My main working hypothesis is not the worst outcome. 
Compromise  solutions  have  been  mentioned,  such  as  issuing  a  parallel  currency, 
IOUs … 
All  these  measures  can  be  found  in  the  non-standard  toolbox  that  any  government  might 
consider when it runs out of other options. But they all come at a high price. Whether they 
are needed or not is something that only the Greek Government can decide. 
Would capital controls in Greece help to stabilise the situation? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
That  is  one  of  the  many  measures  I  was  referring  to.  The  Treaty  says  that  there  is  free 
movement  of  capital,  but  exceptional  measures  can  be  authorised.  In  Cyprus  these 
measures were considered necessary, but it’s difficult to speak generally. In an extraordinary 
situation,  each  country  has  to  call  on  exceptional  measures  as  the  case  requires.  Talking 
about them beforehand could have negative effects on the markets. 
Can Greece default within the euro area? 
I  don’t  want  to  theorise  concerning  the  destiny  of  Greece.  If  you  take  a  look  at  other 
examples, there have been defaults in the United States and other monetary unions, with no 
political consequences. What matters is European countries’ perception of political cohesion 
and  their  willingness  to  remain  together.  The  more  the  euro  area  is  seen  as  a  mere 
cooperation between sovereign states, the less you can  imagine it making the extra effort 
necessary to remain united. And the more you believe the euro is more than a single market, 
the more you will believe that we are willing to defend it with all possible means. The political 
will to save the euro has been severely underestimated by the markets. 
The  ECB  holds  the  key  to  the  Greek  crisis.  If  it  withdrew  the  emergency  liquidity 
assistance from the country’s banking sector, the situation would totally change. 
It’s untrue that we are the main player in the crisis. Moreover, emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA) is a national competence subject to a non-objection by the Governing Council with a 
two-thirds majority. Countries are not a door with a single key. There are several keys and 
the ECB has only one of them, a very small one, and it is always used in accordance with the 
house rules, which hang on the door. When you go in, you know what is expected of you. 
The quantitative easing programme has had an immediate effect on bonds, shares … 
Some fear that a bubble is forming, that risks are not being assessed correctly when 
granting loans … 
There is an element of truth about everything that is said regarding a measure which is as 
unconventional as this one. But sometimes you have to take risks and use such measures, 
which  may  have  unfortunate  consequences.  There  are,  however,  tools  to  address  those 
(banking  supervision,  resolution,  taxes  …)  and  the  European  architecture  is  also  being 
strengthened  further.  QE  has  been  an  appropriate  response  to  an  extraordinarily  risky 
situation that we had not seen for several generations. 
How do you see the situation in Spain? Its growth forecasts are among the highest in 
the  EU,  but  does  it  serve  as  an  example  when  levels  of  unemployment  and 
indebtedness are so high? 
There are many models: Ireland is one, and Spain too… Employment is a lagging indicator. 
Moreover,  unemployment  figures,  especially  youth  unemployment,  have  already  fallen  to 
levels below those at the time that the bank bailout was requested. Indeed, they are above 
2008  levels,  but  I can  still  recall  the  levels  of  20  years  ago,  so  it’s  all  relative.  They  have 
always been higher than in the rest of the EU, even during the boom years. But I believe the 
mentality  in  Spain  has  changed.  The  ability  to  acknowledge  the  reality  and  to  adapt  to  it 
shows  that  it  is  a  mature  democracy.  That  is  the  type  of  mortar  we  need  for  a  monetary 
union. 
Spain  feels  particularly  underrepresented  in  the  EU  since  you  took,  in  2012,  the 
rotating  seat  on  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  which  it  had  occupied  since  the 
institution’s creation. Do you think that, given its demographic and economic weight, 
the situation should be corrected? 
Passports should play a minor role in European representation, especially in supranational 
institutions  like  the  ECB.  Quotas  are  inappropriate.  When  we  enter  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council  meeting  room,  we  leave  our  passports  in  the  cloakroom.  The  only  conditions  laid 
down by the Treaty are competence and reputation. That’s quite different however in inter-
governmental institutions where appointments are the result of allocation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  De Guindos in the Eurogroup? 
The ECB does not vote. Where I do agree is that making the presidency of the Eurogroup a 
permanent position could strengthen the institutional architecture of the euro area. 
How would the hypothetical independence of Catalonia affect its relationship with the 
ECB? 
At the ECB we act according to regulations, and the treaties. We would adhere firmly to the 
legal provisions and we would not do anything that is not legal. 
What conditions would need to be met in order to gain a seat at the ECB? 
Whether this is political fiction or not, I don’t know. But the ECB only acts on the basis of 
facts, not hypotheses. If the number of countries in the euro area were to increase then we 
would  respect  that,  but  there  would  be  no  shortcuts  unless  they  are  provided  for  by  the 
Treaty. 
The European Commission has launched an investigation into the use of deferred tax 
assets (DTA) in the banking sector in Spain and various other countries. The ECB was 
very critical about DTAs when it had to be evaluated during the banking stress tests. 
There are four countries that resorted to using these measures widely and the legislation that 
they adopted varies from one country to the next. I believe that we must look at each case 
separately and in context. Personally I dislike the idea of resorting to attempts to create the 
impression that a balance sheet’s loss absorption capacity is greater than it is in reality. But 
in certain cases I believe that some tax claims can be of a higher value and more liquid than 
in others. In other countries, doubts about the situation in the public sector may be greater 
and  the  question  arises  as  to  whether  or  not  tax  claims  are  actually  liquid  or  have  the 
capacity to absorb losses in real time. Because if you want them to be accepted as liquid 
assets, they must be immediately available. And call me old-fashioned, but I think that hard 
cash is the best form of capital. 
Where does Spain sit on the spectrum that you have described? 
The  European  Commission  will  comment  on  that  from  the  perspective  of  public  aid  in  its 
evaluation. In our Comprehensive Assessment last year we were not very enthusiastic about 
it (DTAs) but in the end we accepted it on legal grounds. But the most important thing for me 
is to have a level playing field and, as such, any legal clarification that arises as a result of 
the European Commission’s assessment will be welcome. 
The Spanish government states that this was designed in collaboration with the EU 
institutions, given that we were under the financial assistance programme for banks, 
and it appears to be rather calm. 
That’s what I said, we have to look at how things were done, under what circumstances and 
what its real liquidity is; it will depend on government liquidity, tax revenue etc… And there 
are  very  different  tax  arrangements  involved.  In  some  countries  there  are  tax  claims,  in 
others there are assets… these are two different “animals”. There are things that may have 
been good in certain situations, but when that situation passes the question is whether or not 
the  instrument  should  become  permanent.  It  is  similar  with  our  unconventional  monetary 
policy measures: when the crisis is over, there will be those that say why not carry on with 
the measures because buying government bonds is a really good thing… And they would 
like it to become a permanent instrument, but this would go against our initial intention. The 
same applies to these instruments that were devised during the crisis and thought of as part 
of the programme, but were not, in my understanding, designed to be permanent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
