  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
16 July 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. 
Regarding  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  the  asset  purchase  programmes 
continue  to  proceed  smoothly.  As  explained  on  previous  occasions,  our  monthly  asset 
purchases  of  €60  billion  are  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of  September  2016  and,  in  any 
case, until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our 
aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. When carrying 
out  its  assessment,  the  Governing  Council  will  follow  its  monetary  policy  strategy  and 
concentrate on trends in inflation and the medium-term outlook for price stability. 
All in all, the information that has become available since the Governing Council meeting in 
early June has been broadly in line with our expectations. Recent developments in financial 
markets, which partly reflect greater uncertainty, have not changed the Governing Council’s 
assessment of a broadening of the euro area’s economic recovery and a gradual increase in 
inflation  rates  over  the  coming  years.  The  ECB’s  monetary  policy  stance  remains 
accommodative  and  market-based  inflation  expectations  have,  on  balance,  stabilised  or 
recovered  further  since  our  meeting  in  early  June.  The  latest  information  also  remains 
consistent with a continued pass-through of our monetary policy measures to the cost and 
availability of credit for firms and households. Our measures thereby continue to contribute to 
economic growth, a reduction in economic slack, and money and credit expansion. The full 
implementation of all our monetary policy measures will lead to a sustained return of inflation 
rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term, and will underpin the firm 
anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. 
Looking ahead, we will continue to closely monitor the situation in financial markets, as well 
as  the  potential  implications  for  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  for  the  outlook  for  price 
stability. If any factors were to lead to an unwarranted tightening of monetary policy, or if the 
outlook for price stability were to materially change, the Governing Council would respond to 
such a situation by using all the instruments available within its mandate. 
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  of  the  available  information  in  greater  detail,  starting 
with the economic analysis. Euro area quarterly real GDP growth was confirmed at 0.4% in 
the  first  quarter  of  2015,  supported  by  contributions  from  private  consumption  and 
investment.  The  latest  survey  data,  available  up  to  June,  remain  consistent  with  a 
continuation of the moderate growth trend in the second quarter. Looking ahead, we expect 
the economic recovery to broaden further. Domestic demand should be further supported by 
our monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on financial conditions, as well as 
by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, the recent 
decline in oil prices should provide additional support for households’ real disposable income 
and corporate profitability and, therefore, private consumption and investment. Furthermore, 
demand for euro area exports should benefit from improvements in price competitiveness. 
However, the ongoing slowdown in emerging market economies continues to weigh on the 
global outlook and economic growth in the euro area is likely to continue to be dampened by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of 
implementation of structural reforms. 
The downside risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro area have generally been 
contained as a result of our monetary policy decisions, as well as oil price and exchange rate 
developments. 
Inflation bottomed out at the beginning of the year and has moved back into positive territory 
in recent months. According to Eurostat, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.2% in June 
2015, slightly down from 0.3% in May. On the basis of the information available and current 
oil futures prices, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain low in the months ahead and to 
rise towards the end of the year, also on account of base effects associated with the fall in oil 
prices in late 2014. Supported by the expected economic recovery, the impact of the lower 
euro exchange rate and the assumption embedded in oil futures markets of somewhat higher 
oil prices in the years ahead, inflation rates are expected to pick up further during 2016 and 
2017. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments over the medium term. In this context, we will focus in particular on the pass-
through of our monetary policy measures, as well as on geopolitical, energy and exchange 
rate developments. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm robust growth in broad money (M3). 
The annual growth rate of M3 was 5.0% in May 2015, compared with 5.3% in April. Annual 
growth  in  M3  continues  to  be  strongly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the 
narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 11.2% in May. 
Loan  dynamics  continued  to  improve. The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) increased to 0.1% in May, up from  
–0.1% in April, continuing its gradual recovery from a trough of –3.2% in February 2014. This 
is consistent with the positive evidence from the bank lending survey for the second quarter 
of 2015. Banks reported a continued net easing of credit standards on loans to enterprises 
which  was  stronger  than  expected  in  the  previous  survey  round.  Net demand for  loans  to 
enterprises  increased  further,  supported  by  demand  for  credit  related  to  fixed  investment. 
Fragmentation in terms of credit demand in individual countries decreased and the targeted 
longer-term  refinancing  operations  helped  to  improve  the  terms  and  conditions  for  credit 
supply.  Despite  these  improvements,  the  dynamics  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations 
remain  subdued.  They  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle, 
credit risk, credit supply factors, and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial 
sector  balance  sheets.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan 
sales  and  securitisation)  increased  to  1.4%  in  May  2015,  after  1.3%  in  April.  Overall,  the 
monetary policy measures we have put in place since June 2014 provide clear support for 
improvements  both  in  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households  and  in  credit  flows 
across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the need to maintain a steady monetary policy course, 
firmly 
full 
implementation of all our monetary policy measures will provide the necessary support to the 
economic recovery in the euro area and lead to a sustained return of inflation rates towards 
levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance contributes to supporting economic activity. However, in order to reap 
the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute 
decisively. Given continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in 
the  euro  area,  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery  should  be  supported  by  effective  structural 
policies.  In  particular,  in  order  to  increase  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity, both the implementation of product and labour market reforms and actions to 
the  Governing  Council’s  monetary  policy  decisions.  The 
implementing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
improve the business environment for firms need to gain momentum in several countries. A 
swift  and  effective  implementation  of  these  reforms,  in  an  environment  of  accommodative 
monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but 
will also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes. Fiscal policies should support 
the economic recovery while remaining in compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. Full 
and consistent implementation of the Pact is key for confidence in our fiscal framework. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
