  Daniel Mminele: The monetary policy outlook for South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
J  P  Morgan  Investor  Seminar  at  the  2015  International  Monetary  Fund/World  Bank  Group 
Spring Meetings, Washington DC, 19 April 2015. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
Let me start by thanking J P Morgan for the opportunity to share some thoughts on South 
Africa’s monetary policy outlook. 
As  you  are  aware,  heightened  uncertainty  is  one  of  the  defining  characteristics  of  the 
monetary policy environment in many emerging-market economies (EMEs). However, while 
uncertainty is at the heart of monetary policy formulation, it is the escalation in the level of 
uncertainty  that  presents  the  major  challenge  for  monetary  policy  formulation  in  many 
countries in the current environment. 
Recent  global  economic  developments  have  put  a  spotlight  on  the  extent  of  these 
uncertainties.  Take,  for  example,  the  developments  in  oil  prices  –  are  they  transitory  or 
permanent? How about the path of US interest rate normalisation? Will it happen in June or 
in September? Will it happen at all this year? These uncertainties have rendered the conduct 
of  monetary  policy  increasingly  complex,  given  that  economic  forecasts  could  vary 
significantly depending on which assumptions are used. 
Let me begin by briefly outlining the recent economic developments in South Africa. This will 
provide  the  context  to  discuss  the  monetary  policy  outlook  and  challenges  facing  South 
African policy makers in the short to medium term. Much as they have a significant bearing 
on developments in South Africa, I will not dwell too much on global economic developments, 
since these have received much attention here in Washington D.C. following the publication 
of the IMF’s April 2015  World Economic Outlook and Global Financial  Stability Report last 
Tuesday. 
Recent economic developments in South Africa 
In  line  with  developments  in  many  other  EMEs,  policy  formulation  remains  challenging  in 
South  Africa.  The  key  the  challenge  is  the  difficulty  in  lifting  economic  growth.  Electricity 
constraints  –  which  are  expected  to  persist  for  some  time  –  have  compounded  other 
structural  bottlenecks  (such  as  inadequate  education  and  skills,  low  level  of  investment, 
competitiveness and productivity challenges) and these remain the most critical impediments 
to the growth outlook. As a result, there has been a downward revision of short-term potential 
output to between 2,0 and 2,5 per cent from the pre-crisis levels of 3,5 to 4,0 per cent. The 
growth rate for 2014 was 1,5 per cent and, based on the most recent South African Reserve 
Bank  forecast,  which  has  downside  risks  attached  to  it,  an  increase  to  2,2  per  cent  is 
projected for 2015. This is far from the levels of around 4,0 to 5,0 per cent needed to arrest 
the large unemployment problem in South Africa. 
The  year-on-year  inflation  rate,  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  (or  CPI)  for  all 
urban  areas,  registered  4,4  and  3,9  per  cent  in  January  and  February  2015  respectively, 
which  is  well  within  the  inflation  target  range  of  3  to  6  per  cent.  This  improved  trend  in 
inflation was, however, mainly due to lower petrol prices. 
Recent  oil  price  and  exchange  rate  developments  have  dampened  the  inflation  outlook. 
Moreover, core inflation, which excludes food, electricity and petrol prices, remained near the 
upper end of the inflation target range, measuring 5,8 per cent in both January and February 
2015. This is an indication that underlying inflationary pressures persist. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  Bank’s  inflation  forecast  released  at  the  time  of  the  most  recent  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  (MPC)  meeting  last  month,  indicated  that  inflation  was  projected  to  average 
4,8 per cent in 2015, an upward revision from the forecast of 3,8 per cent in January 2015. 
Additionally, inflation expectations, as reflected in the Bureau for Economic Research survey 
conducted  during  the  first  quarter  of  2015,  showed  that  all  respondents  expect  inflation  to 
return to levels around the upper end of the target range in the next two years. 
The rand/dollar exchange rate has exhibited significant volatility lately, which was in line with 
developments in some of the other emerging-market currencies. Since the beginning of this 
year to the end of March, the Rand depreciated by about 5,0 per cent against the US dollar, 
and traded in a wide band between R11,54 and R12,52. This weakening of the rand against 
the US dollar has, however, not resulted in depreciation on a trade-weighted basis as a result 
of  it  having  appreciated  against  the  euro  by  7,3  per  cent  since  January  2015.  Given  the 
Euro’s larger weight of around 30 per cent when compared with 13,7 per cent for the US$, 
the nominal effective exchange rate has been relatively stable since the beginning of 2014. 
The current-account deficit registered 5,4 per cent of gross domestic product on an annual 
basis in 2014 compared to 5,8 per cent for 2013. More recently, the current-account deficit 
shrank from  5,8  per cent  of GDP  in  the  third quarter  of  2014 to  5,1  per  cent  in  the fourth 
quarter.  It  remains  uncertain  whether  this  improvement  represented  normalisation  from 
earlier strikes affecting exports, and thus would be temporary, or whether this will be the start 
of  a  more  sustained  compression.  While  the  current-account  deficit  has  been  comfortably 
financed so far, the global capital flow environment remains challenging, particularly against 
the backdrop of uncertainties surrounding the tightening of US monetary policy. The flexible 
exchange-rate  system  has  so  far  been  able  to  cushion  some  of  the  adverse  effects  and 
should  continue  to  do  so,  assuming  an  orderly  and  continued  well-communicated 
normalisation of US monetary policy. 
The domestic monetary policy outlook for 2015 
Notwithstanding monetary policy tightening in 2014 which saw the repo rate increasing by a 
cumulative  75  basis  points,  monetary  policy  remains  relatively  accommodative  and 
appropriately takes into account the weak state of the domestic economy. At our most recent 
meeting  of  the  MPC  in  March  interest  rates  were  kept  unchanged,  with  the  committee, 
however,  noting  that  the  near-term  inflation  outlook  had  deteriorated,  as  it  is  subjected  to 
upward pressure from the partial reversal of the recent petrol price declines, emerging upside 
pressures on food prices because of drought conditions, and the high risk of further electricity 
tariff  increases.  This  underscores  that  the  timing  of  future  interest  rate  increases  would 
depend on the evolution of domestic and external factors and our understanding thereof. 
Let me now discuss some of the domestic and global factors that will have a bearing on the 
domestic  outlook  and  policy  response  going  forward.  On  the  international  front,  I  will 
concentrate  on  the  three  developments  that  have  been  receiving  increasing  attention  in 
policy circles, namely developments in the price of oil, divergent monetary policy in advanced 
economies, and the impact of a stronger US dollar. 
Oil price developments 
As  you  are  aware,  there  has  been  a  significant  decline  in  the  price  of  Brent  crude  oil, 
reaching a low of around US$45 per barrel in January 2015. While this oil price decline was 
expected,  the  extent  and  speed  of  the  decline  caught  many  market  analysts  and 
policymakers by surprise. As the IMF has pointed out, both demand and supply factors are 
responsible for the decline. While the role that speculation played in driving down prices is 
uncertain, the appreciation of the US dollar has also contributed to lower commodity prices in 
general. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Lower  oil  prices  have  had  some  direct  positive  impacts  on  the  South  African  economy 
through reductions in the oil import bill. While overall net positive, there are also negatives to 
the decline in the oil price. A number of our export partners in Africa, such as Angola and 
Nigeria (which are oil-exporting countries), have been severely affected by the decline in oil 
prices. Reduced export revenues and growth in these economies will adversely affect their 
trade with South Africa. 
Added  to  this  has  been  the  generally  weak  global  growth  outlook,  particularly  in  some  of 
South Africa’s major trading partners, including the eurozone and China, which also offsets 
the positive impact arising from the decline in oil prices. Furthermore, a lower oil price may 
strengthen  disinflationary  pressures  in  places  like  the  eurozone  and  Japan,  further 
weakening their growth prospects1 with adverse implications for countries like South Africa 
which are reliant on these export markets, although we are encouraged by the most recent 
assessment of the outlook for the eurozone and Japan as contained in the April 2015 WEO. 
On balance, for an oil-importing country like South Africa, the positives of an oil price decline 
outweigh the negatives. However, we cannot afford to be complacent. In South Africa, the 
risk  to  the  inflation  outlook  is  tilted  to  the  upside  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  Firstly,  oil  price 
developments  are  uncertain.  Secondly,  while  expectations  of  US  monetary  policy 
normalisation appear to have been moved out, any surprises to the contrary could increase 
the already high volatility in financial markets, and particularly in foreign-exchange markets. 
Finally, the current decline in inflation rates as a result of the recent oil price movements, in 
effect, means that inflation outcomes in a year’s time will be subject to strong adverse base 
effects. 
The  policy  challenge  is  to  ascertain  the  future  path  of  oil  price  developments  –  this  is  a 
formidable  task!  It  is  uncertain  whether  the  lower  price  levels  that  we  are  currently 
experiencing are transitory or permanent. Put differently, could oil prices increase again as 
quickly as they went down? While there seems to be consensus that we would not return to 
the most recent peaks, unfortunately, these questions do not lend themselves to easy and 
clear answers. 
According  to  IMF’s  World  Economic  Outlook  Update,  January  2015,  despite  substantial 
uncertainty about the evolution of supply and demand factors, futures markets suggest that 
oil prices will rebound but remain below the level of recent years. Experience to date does, 
however, show that futures prices have been poor predictors of spot prices on the oil market. 
It  is  clear  that  although  policymakers  have  been  given  some  reprieve  as  a  result  of  the 
decline in oil prices, we know very  little about their drivers and their sustainability, and  we 
therefore remain vulnerable to a disorderly correction or reversal in these prices. 
In the South African context, the exchange rate is also an important factor influencing the net 
impact of oil prices on its economy. Rand depreciation has offset some of the benefits of the 
decline  in  international  oil  prices.  Thus,  oil  price  developments  and  uncertainty  regarding 
their  future  path  will  continue  to  pose  a  major  challenge  to  monetary  policy  formulation  in 
South Africa. 
Monetary policy divergence in major advanced economies 
Asynchronous monetary policy developments in the major advanced and emerging markets 
will characterise the monetary policy landscape in 2015. The Federal Reserve is expected to 
gradually  start  hiking  rates  in  the  near  term  given  the  robust  recovery  in  the  US,  and  the 
Bank of England is also expected to start tightening policy. In both cases there is increased 
uncertainty as to when the hiking would start. 
                                                
1  World Bank, Global Economic Prospects, January 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The implication for South Africa is that rising global interest rates are among the factors that 
increase  interest  rate  differentials,  potentially  leading  to  capital  outflows  which  would  put 
downward pressure on the value of the currency, at least in the short term; this would most 
likely generate some inflationary pressures. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  €1,1  trillion  stimulus  package  currently  being  implemented  by  the 
European Central Bank and further large-scale asset purchases announced by the Bank of 
Japan in November 2014 suggest that the euro area and Japan are likely to maintain highly 
accommodative policies given their generally weak growth performance. To the extent that 
the  ECB’s  quantitative  easing  is  successful  in  stimulating  growth,  this  will  affect  South 
Africa’s exports positively. However, as Europe and Japan start to grow, we will face another 
bout of spill over from their normalisation, although for South Africa the extent of the impact 
is likely to be less pronounced than that brought about by US policy normalisation. 
Policy divergence in major economies creates uncertainty for us as we attempt to understand 
the spill over effects and how best to respond to these new developments. At a global level, 
there is broad consensus on the need for some level of policy coordination to mitigate these 
uncertainties. However, the evidence to date shows that this is in many respects “easier said 
than done”. Containing adverse spill over effects of domestic policy actions remains a major 
challenge at the global level. 
US dollar appreciation 
Since October 2014, the dollar has appreciated by more than 5 per cent in effective terms. 
While  this  appreciation  remains  modest  from  a  historical  perspective,  signs  point  to  the 
possibility of further appreciation in the future for a variety of reasons. 
Firstly,  history  suggests that  a  drop  in  oil  prices is  often  accompanied  by  a  rise  in  the  US 
dollar. Secondly, the stronger dollar could reflect the relative strength of the US economy and 
the  expected  rate  hikes.  Thirdly,  geopolitical  risks  have  promoted  a  return  to  “safe  haven 
assets” and US Treasury bonds in particular. Lastly, the expansion of dollar credit outside the 
US since the crisis could add to the appreciating pressures in the future. 
The  impact  of  a  stronger  dollar  on  emerging  economies  is  not  as  clear-cut  as  one  may 
expect.  Other  factors  being  constant,  a  stronger  dollar  implies  the  depreciation  of  other 
currencies.  To  the  extent  that  the  dollar  strength  is  a  result  of  stronger  US  growth,  other 
countries’ exports – and thus growth – would benefit from increased demand from the US 
and from a more competitive domestic currency. South Africa’s benefit from this channel is, 
however,  likely  to  be  somewhat  limited given  the  US  share  of  our  exports:  8,2  per  cent  in 
2013 compared to 20,5 per cent for the euro area. 
Then  there  is  the  issue  of  the  impact  of rand  depreciation  on  inflation outcomes. There  is 
evidence that the pass-through of exchange-rate depreciation to inflation may have declined 
in recent times, but the adverse impact of currency depreciation on inflation outcomes cannot 
be ignored, especially if the depreciation occurs over an extended period. Additionally, over 
the  past  year,  South  African  long-term  bond  yields  have  been  declining,  even  as  the  rand 
continued to weaken against the US dollar. For example, while off its late-January lows, the 
yield on the R186 bond is still about 130 basis points below early-2014 levels. The current 
yields  are  nevertheless  still  substantially  higher  than  the  levels  that  prevailed  prior  to  the 
“taper tantrum”.  
In addition, it is important to note that while the rand has depreciated against the dollar, it has 
appreciated  against  the  yen  and  the  euro.  The  South  African  economy  would  face  new 
challenges  should  a  strong  dollar  persist  and  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy  in  the  US 
materialise  while  growth  in  the  euro  area  remained  weak.  Rising  interest  rates  in  the  US 
would have an adverse impact on borrowing costs, while a weaker euro would limit external 
demand for South African exports, Europe being a major trading partner for the country. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Other domestic concerns 
Monetary  policy  will  also  be  influenced  by  various  domestic  factors  in  South  Africa  going 
forward. I will focus my attention on two of these challenges, namely the current-account and 
fiscal deficits. 
South Africa’s “twin deficit” 
South  Africa’s  “twin  deficit”  remains  a  source  of  vulnerability.  The  persistence  of  these 
deficits – in the face of global monetary normalisation and weak domestic growth prospects – 
poses a serious challenge to both monetary and fiscal policies. 
In  addressing  the  fiscal  deficit,  the  2015  Budget  announced  in  February  entails  a  fiscal 
package  which  reduces  the  expenditure  ceiling  and  raises  tax  revenue  over  the  next  two 
years. Policymakers are aware that stabilising debt at a sustainable level, while necessary 
and inevitable, will be challenging in the face of subdued economic growth outcomes. 
The  high  current-account  deficit  is  another  source  of  vulnerability.  Since  the  global  crisis, 
weak domestic growth and the sustained depreciation of the rand have failed to significantly 
narrow the deficit. In addition to better external demand, reducing the level of this deficit by, 
among others, addressing export competitiveness is a challenge that South Africa needs to 
address. As pointed out earlier, the fall in oil prices has and will provide some benefits to the 
trade and current account, but this will be partly offset by lower commodity prices which have 
accompanied the decline in oil prices. 
In  the  context  of  the  large  external  financing  requirement  serving  as  a  “pull”  and 
extraordinarily loose monetary policy in many advanced economies serving as a “push”, non-
resident  demand  for  bonds  and  equities  has  been  financing  most  of  the  current-account 
deficit. However, as evidenced by the “taper tantrum” in May 2013, our large financing need 
as  well  as  reliance  on  portfolio  flows  make  South  Africa  vulnerable  to  changing  risk 
sentiments in the market at a time when the weak growth outlook, geopolitical risk factors, 
and  a  stronger  dollar  may  negatively  affect  capital  flows  to  EMEs.  So  far  in  2015,  non-
residents have remained net sellers of bonds, but net buyers of local equities. This is broadly 
in line with the trend in other emerging markets. 
Mitigating  these  risks  is  South  Africa’s  limited  exposure  to  foreign-denominated  debts  and 
our free-floating exchange-rate regime. Moreover, to the extent that a portion of the current-
account deficit is attributable to infrastructure and investment programmes, these are likely to 
generate a positive rate of return for the South African economy in the medium to long term. 
Conclusion 
The list of challenges I have focused on is not exhaustive. Nonetheless, from this brief and 
selective review, it is apparent that South Africa’s economic policy environment, like that of 
many other emerging markets, will be challenging. Clearly, South Africa’s immediate priority 
is to strengthen the growth momentum. Unfortunately, the role of monetary policy is limited in 
this  regard  as  monetary  policy  cannot  address  structural  deficiencies  in  the  economy  and 
influence  long-term  growth.  While  monetary  policy  should  and  will  play  its  role  within  the 
confines of its mandate, a concerted effort is needed by all role players in agreeing and then 
effectively  coordinating  and  implementing  the  necessary  structural  reforms,  including 
addressing the electricity challenges facing the country. This requires a strong, constructive, 
and  thus  effective  partnership  between  Government,  business,  labour  and  civil  society 
organisations. 
The  MPC  is  of  the  view  that  inflation  risks  are  skewed  to  the  upside.  Having  indicated 
previously that, while not on a pre-set course and being data-dependent, interest rates will 
have to normalise over time, earlier this year we felt that short-term dynamics allowed for a 
pause on the interest rate normalisation path. There is now reduced flexibility in this regard 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  and the recent deterioration in the inflation outlook will require the MPC to carefully assess 
when it will be appropriate to adjust the policy rate further. 
The  forecast  horizon  is  fraught  with  uncertainties,  which  calls  for  heightened  vigilance, 
decisive policy action, and clear communication. It requires us to sharpen our analytical tools 
to  better  understand,  and  strengthen  our  capacity  for  forecasting,  policy  analysis  and 
implementation. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
