  William C Dudley: The global implications of diverging monetary policy 
settings in advanced economies 
Panel remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Sixth  High  Level  Conference  on  the  International 
Monetary  System:  Monetary  Policy  Challenges  in  a  Changing  World,  Zurich,  Switzerland, 
12 May 2015. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in today’s conference. In keeping with 
this session’s mandate, I will focus my remarks on the global implications of U.S. monetary 
policy  normalization  –  paying  particular  attention  to  the  potential  implications for  emerging 
market  economies  (EMEs).  I  put  the  focus  here  because  these  economies  were  greatly 
affected  in  2013  during  the  so-called  “taper  tantrum”  and  many  of  these  economies  have 
been under stress from the weakness in global commodity prices. As always, what I have to 
say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve. 
But  before  I  get  to  the  implications  for  EMEs  and  what  the  Fed  should  do  or  not  do  to 
mitigate the impact, a few words on the timing of normalization. To be as direct as possible: I 
don’t  know  when  this  will  occur.  The  timing  of  lift-off  will  depend  on  how  the  economic 
outlook evolves. Since the economic outlook is uncertain, this means the timing of liftoff must 
also be uncertain. 
At the same time, though, I can be clear about what conditions are needed for normalization 
to begin. If the improvement in the U.S. labor market continues and the FOMC is “reasonably 
confident” that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium-term, then 
it would be appropriate to begin to normalize interest rates. 
Because the conditions necessary for liftoff are well-specified, market participants should be 
able  to  think  right  along  with  policymakers,  adjusting  their  views  about  the  prospects  for 
normalization in response to the incoming data. This implies that liftoff should not be a big 
surprise when it finally occurs, which should help mitigate the degree of market turbulence 
engendered by lift-off. 
Nevertheless, I think it would be naïve not to expect some impact. After more than six years 
at the zero lower bound, lift-off will signal a regime shift even though policy would only be 
slightly  less  accommodative  after  lift-off  than  it  is  before.  I  expect  that  this  will  have 
implications  for  global  capital  flows,  foreign  exchange  valuation  and  financial  asset  prices 
even if it is mostly anticipated when it occurs. 
Which leads to the key question I want to address in the remainder of my remarks: What 
should the Federal Reserve do to minimize the impact? 
Like other central banks, our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus. Our monetary 
policy actions, though, often have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy 
and financial markets, and we need to always keep this in mind. 
From one perspective, the unconventional nature of monetary policy around the world adds 
little that is fundamentally new to the challenges that face EMEs. Today’s monetary policies 
simply represent a way of easing that was necessitated by hitting the zero lower bound here 
and  elsewhere.  Central  bankers  have  managed  differences  across  countries  in  cyclical 
positions and policy stances many times in the past. This time should not be fundamentally 
different. 
But,  from  another  perspective,  we  have  less  experience  operating  with  unconventional 
monetary policy, we have been in this regime for a long time and this creates more potential 
uncertainties.  These  uncertainties  put  a  premium  on  clear  communication  among  central 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
bankers  as  well  as  between  central  bankers  and  market  participants.  In  my  view,  an 
important  fact  is  that  the  large  scale  asset  purchase  programs  undertaken  in  the  United 
States and elsewhere have dramatically shrunk the size of bond risk premia globally. This 
new  set  of  monetary  policies  affects  financial  asset  prices  in  a  different  way  compared  to 
changes in short-term interest rates, and we should be humble regarding what we claim to 
understand about this distinction. 
Looking ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on those vulnerabilities that 
they might have ignored prior to the taper tantrum in 2013. The greater premium on strong 
fundamentals,  policy  coherence  and  predictability  will  likely  remain.  Although  we  will 
undoubtedly experience further bumps in the road. I think we can remain generally optimistic 
about  the  prospects  for  adjustment.  But  for  this  to  occur,  it  will  be  important  for  market 
participants  to  appropriately  discriminate  across  countries,  rather  than  treating  EMEs  as  a 
single group. 
The good news is that many EMEs generally appear to be better equipped today to handle 
the Fed’s prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were during 
past tightening  cycles. This  reflects  the fundamental  reforms that  EMEs  have  put  in  place 
over  the  past  15  years,  as  well  as  the  hard  lessons  learned  from  past  periods  of  market 
stress. Among the positives are: 
• 
The  absence  of  pegged  exchange  rate  regimes  that  often  came  undone  violently 
during periods of acute stress; 
Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; 
Larger foreign exchange reserve cushions; 
Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now 
generally low to moderate inflation rates; 
Generally improved fiscal discipline; and 
Better  capitalized  banking  systems,  supported  by  strengthened  regulatory  and 
supervisory frameworks. 
  Of course, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains to further 
strengthen  institutional  structures  in  some  countries.  In  particular,  vulnerabilities  remain  in 
several important EMEs, and some have been hit by the sharp adverse turn in their terms of 
trade due to the recent fall in global commodity prices. Still, the fundamental improvements 
I’ve cited leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the 
cycle when the external environment becomes more difficult. 
The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to 
do  more  to  internalize  those  impacts,  or  even  further,  to  internationally  coordinate 
policymaking. As I’ve already noted, we are mindful of the global effects of Fed policy, given 
the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the 
global reserve currency. Accordingly, we seek to conduct monetary policy transparently and 
based on clear principles. Promoting growth and stability in the U.S., I believe, is the most 
important contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. 
There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, 
creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think it’s important to consider carefully 
the  counterfactual. Would  countries  beyond  our borders really  have  been  better  off  with  a 
weaker U.S. economy – an economy that might have required exceptional monetary policy 
accommodation for a much longer period of time? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. 
monetary  policy  has  helped  support  our  dual  objectives  of  maximum  employment  in  the 
context  of  price  stability,  and  whether  this  support  is  consistent  with  a  healthy  global 
economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
While  explicit  coordination  looks  neither  feasible  nor  desirable,  there  may  be  more  that 
central banks in general, and the Fed in particular, could do to be better global stewards. As 
an example, I would emphasize the importance of effective Fed communication. It is clear, in 
retrospect, that our attempts in the spring of 2013 to provide guidance about the potential 
timing  and  pace  of  tapering  confused  market  participants.  Market  participants  seemed  to 
conflate  the  prospective  tapering  of  asset  purchases  with  monetary  policy  tightening,  and 
pulled  forward  their  expectations  about  the  likely  timing  of  liftoff  and  raised  their  expected 
paths for policy rates. Lately, we seem to have done better: the tapering down of the Fed’s 
asset  purchase  program  went  smoothly  and  market  participants  now  seem  to  share  the 
assessment embodied in the FOMC’s March Summary of Economic Projections that lift-off is 
likely to begin sometime later this year. 
As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and 
improve  our  communications.  This  includes  regular  press  conferences  by  the  Fed  chair 
following FOMC meetings; the publishing of growth, inflation and short-term rate forecasts of 
FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC  will 
look  at  to  assess  progress  toward  our  mandate.  We  also  have  explained  in  considerable 
detail what tools we will use and how we will likely use them to ensure to ensure a smooth 
lift-off. 
A  second  area  we  have  focused  on  is  doing  a  better  job  safeguarding  financial  stability. 
Simply  put,  we  failed  to  act  both  early  enough  and  decisively  enough  to  stem  the  credit 
excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone 
in this shortcoming, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should 
have  done  better.  We’ve  taken  important  steps  through  new  legislative  mandates  and  a 
broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. In particular, systemically 
important  banking  organizations  must  now  hold  amounts  of  capital  and  liquidity  that  are 
better aligned with their risk profiles. Other changes have also been implemented, such as 
central  clearing  of  standardized  OTC  derivatives  contracts,  that  should  make  the  global 
financial system more resilient and robust. 
Although this effort remains very much a work in progress, I think it will enable us to avoid 
repeating the mistakes of the past decade, and enable us to take a more proactive stance 
toward mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. 
Since  the  recent  financial  crisis,  central  banks  worldwide  have  been  engaged  in  a  broad 
rethinking of how to better fulfill their mandates. 
Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often 
emanate  from  getting  policy  wrong  domestically.  Recession  or  instability  at  home  is  often 
quickly exported abroad. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes all our jobs at 
home  easier.  This  illustrates  the  externalities  in  the  work  we  all  do,  with  more  effective 
fulfillment of our domestic mandates helping to bring us collectively to a better place. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
