  Vítor Constâncio: Financial integration and macro-prudential policy 
Speech by  Mr Vítor  Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the joint 
conference,  organised  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  European  Central  Bank 
“European Financial Integration and Stability”, Frankfurt am Main, 27 April 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  financial  and  sovereign  crises  have  markedly  changed  our  understanding  of  financial 
interactions  in  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  We  have  experienced  how  quickly 
apparent  integration  among  Member  States  can  unravel  and  how  it  can  pose  a  threat  to 
economic activity, job creation and price stability. 
The degree of retrenchment was particularly seen in the cross-border financing of banks and 
sovereigns. At the height of the crisis, banks which relied on cross-border wholesale markets 
saw  their  funding  dry  up  and  sovereign  debt  holdings  retrenched  behind  national  borders. 
The implications for the real economy were highly damaging. Not only cross-border financing 
for investments dried up, but lending to the domestic real economy broke down. Without fully 
developed  cross-border  capital  markets,  and  with  fiscal  policy  unable  to  provide  full 
insurance, the euro area was left without risk-sharing arrangements. 
The free flow of capital should not be restrained beforehand, even though it does permit the 
fast  unravelling  in  times  of  crisis.  After  all,  free  capital  flow  is  a  pre-condition  for  financial 
integration. Instead, the conclusion is rather to promote initiatives that enhance risk-sharing 
across member states, such as the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union, and at the 
same time improve the  overall regulatory and policy framework to reduce the incidence of 
crises. 
With  the  experience  of  this  financial  and  sovereign  crisis,  we  have  improved  our 
understanding  of  financial  interlinkages,  our  datasets  and  ultimately  also  improved  the 
regulatory and policy framework. In addition, an important change to the framework was the 
operational  start  of  the  SSM  on  4  November  2014,  when  macro-prudential  responsibilities 
were also attributed to the ECB. 
In the following section I will dwell on the importance of these macro-prudential powers for 
promoting  financial  integration.  I  will  share  first-hand  experience  in  the  implementation  of 
macro-prudential  measures  and  give  my  views  on  the  requisites  for  a  genuine  Capital 
Markets Union. I will finally conclude by outlining a path for strengthening the overall macro-
prudential framework. 
Financial integration and macro-prudential policies 
Macro-prudential policy is geared to promote financial stability through two key mechanisms: 
first,  by  raising  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  systemic  shocks  and,  second,  by 
curbing the financial cycle to reduce the build-up of imbalances and excessive risk-taking. 
The current framework already effectively addresses a number of risks emerging at national 
level. Yet, it is biased in selecting instruments to counter vulnerabilities at the national level 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
while  having  a  tendency  to  disregard  cross-border  implications1  such  as  leakages,  which 
may weaken the overall macro-prudential stance.2 
Un-coordinated and potentially inconsistent macro-prudential policies in euro area countries 
are particularly prone to negative spillovers and would counteract the intended objective to 
promote financial stability. For the EU, negative spillovers from national measures imply that 
the aggregate macro-prudential stance is weaker than the sum of the individual measures. 
Ultimately, it implies that financial integration based exclusively on national financial policies 
cannot ensure financial stability. This is because the joint pursuit of financial integration and 
stability exceeds the remit of national policies. The crisis has also demonstrated how national 
boundaries  are  of  limited  relevance  to  regulate  the  activities  and  resolution  of  banks  in  a 
monetary union. 
A  first  response  to  ensure  financial  stability  and  promote  financial  integration  is  the  co-
ordination  of  macro-prudential  policies.  This  is  especially  relevant  for  Europe  given  the 
important interconnections and dependencies of the different national economies and their 
financial  systems.3  Let  me  therefore  illustrate  how  the  ECB  operates  within  the  European 
macro-prudential framework. 
The ECB in the European macro-prudential framework 
The  ECB  and  national authorities have  a  series  of  macro-prudential  instruments  available. 
Some of these tools in the CRR/CRDIV, like the Systemic Risk Buffer and measures under 
Article 458 have been available for more than a year now, while others, such as the O-SII or 
G-SII4 buffers, will gradually become available over the next years. 
However,  not  all  macro-prudential  tools  have  been  harmonised  at  EU  level.  National 
authorities – also within the SSM – have retained direct responsibilities for some instruments, 
especially for borrower-based measures in the real estate sector, such as caps on loan-to-
value ratios (LTVs) and debt-service-to-income ratios (DSTIs).5  
The  national  focus  bears  the  risk  that  these  measures,  which  have  been  found  in  recent 
research to be quite effective6 are applied, neglecting their cross-border spillovers. In fact, if 
                                                 
1   See  Section  2  of  the  ESRB  “Flagship  Report  on  Macro-prudential  Policy  in  the  Banking  Sector”,  2014. 
https://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/140303_flagship_report.pdf. 
2   For a discussion of and research about cross-border spillovers in macro-prudential policy, see for example, 
ECB (2014), Results from the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs), Frankfurt am Main, June, pp. 42f, 
as  well  as  Aiyar,  S.,  C.  Calomiris  ,  J.  Hooley  ,  E.  Korniyenko,  and  T.  Wieladek  (2014),  “The  international 
transmission  of  bank  capital  requirements:  Evidence  from  the  UK”,  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  113, 
pp. 368–382. 
3   Hartmann,  P.  (2014),  “Real-estate  markets  and  macro-prudential  policy”,  Journal  of  Money  Credit  and 
Banking, 47(1), pp. 69–80, makes the case for a European macro-prudential co-ordination mechanism in the 
context of real-estate markets. 
4   Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity 
of credit institution and the prudential supervision of credit institution and investment firms, amending Directive 
2002/87/EC  and  repealing  Directives  2006/48/EC  and  2006/49/EC,  OJ  L  176,  27.6.2013,  p.  338  and 
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential 
requirements  for  credit  institutions  and  investment  firms  and  amending  Regulation  (EU)  No  648/2012, 
OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1. 
5   According to an unpublished survey by the European Systemic Risk Board summarised in Hartmann (2014), 
op. cit., p. 77, however, not all countries have the legislation or regulations in place for actively using LTVs or 
DSTIs. Moreover, even less allocate them to prudential authorities. 
6   See,  for  example,  Claessens,  S.,  S.R.  Ghosh  and  R.  Mihet  (2014),  “Macro-prudential  policies  to  mitigate 
financial system vulnerabilities”, IMF Working Paper, WP/14/155, August. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
borrower-based measures curtail the demand for loans in one country, cross-border banks 
will adjust their lending to other countries.7 
The  ECB,  besides  having  the  competence  to  top-up  the  measures  taken  at  national  level 
foreseen  in  the  CRD  IV/CRR,  also  has  the  role  of  ensuring  a  consistent  implementation 
within  the  euro  area  accounting  for  potential  spillovers.  This  implies  fostering  a  common 
understanding  of  risks, a  joint  development  of  analytical  tools  and,  ultimately,  a  consistent 
application  of  macro-prudential  policies.  For  this  purpose,  the  ECB  directly  interacts  with 
national central banks and supervisors of each SSM country. 
At the technical level, it is the ECB’s Financial Stability Committee with its analysis and policy 
group that provides the platform for these interactions. The experience so far has led to a 
better  understanding  of  data  availability  across  countries,  a  more  consistent  use  of  early 
warning  indicators  and  to  more  harmonised  modelling  approaches  across  euro  area 
countries. 
But advances are not limited to the assessments of risks and policy measures. We have also 
developed  the  decision-making  process  to  adequately  take  into  account  macro-prudential 
considerations  through  internal  procedures  and  to  ensure  that  the  intentions  for  policy 
measures are adequately shared early on among the institutions involved. 
A consistent macro-prudential approach provides the platform for financial integration whilst 
the co-ordinating role of the ECB facilitates and ensures a consistent implementation. 
The new ECB powers and financial integration 
The ultimate purpose of a consistent implementation is to ensure that a high level of financial 
integration in the monetary union does not pose a threat to financial stability. By taming the 
financial cycle and by curtailing excessive risk-taking we reduce the misallocation of capital 
and  bring  the  financial  system  to  perform  its  main  function:  the  efficient  and  prudent 
intermediation from savers to investors – including cross-border intermediation. 
Evidence  indicates  that  cross-border  flows  are  highly  pro-cyclical.8  They  thus  make  an 
important contribution to the build-up of imbalances also in local markets, such as the real 
estate.9  By  taming  the  financial  cycle,  macro-prudential  policy  reduces  the  short-term  and 
volatile financing. It fosters instead sustainable financial integration in the monetary union in 
order to withstand common and asymmetric shocks. 
To be fully capable to influence the financial cycle, a robust regulatory and macro-prudential 
framework  requires  that  national  supervisors  recognise  or  reciprocate  the  regulatory  and 
policy  measures  of  the  other  countries.  If  reciprocity  is  applied  only  selectively,  the  level 
playing field is at risk and regulatory arbitrage will generate unintended negative spillovers. I 
imagine that a wide range of macro-prudential measures would benefit from automatic and 
mandatory  reciprocity.  Within  the  euro  area,  we  have  up  until  now  only  seen  a  single 
reciprocity arrangement on a voluntary basis. This was the application of higher risk weights 
for Belgian mortgage lending by Dutch authorities. 
I understand that a framework for analysing cross-country spillovers and the application of 
reciprocity is currently also being developed in an Expert Group within the ESRB chaired by 
the European Commission. I am looking forward to specific recommendations that safeguard 
                                                 
7   For empirical evidence see Ongena, S., A. Popov and G.F. Udell (2013), “When the cat’s away the mice will 
play: does regulation at home affect bank risk taking abroad?”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 108(3), 
pp. 727–750. 
8   See  “Banks  and  cross-border  capital  flows:  Policy  challenges  and  regulatory  responses”  (2012)  by  the 
Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform. 
9   See P. Gete (2014), “Housing Markets and Current Account Dynamics”, mimeo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
the  Single  Market  and  simultaneously  provide  for  a  lenient  and  transparent  application  of 
reciprocity to promote financial stability in Europe. 
Capital Markets Union 
Let me now turn to the next key project in the financial field, namely the creation of a Capital 
Markets Union (CMU). But firstly, I would like to focus on risk-sharing in the EU based on a 
survey on estimates of risk sharing effects in the US and latest estimates for Europe. 
Income  and  consumption  smoothing  between  countries,  also  known  as  risk-sharing,  can 
increase welfare by making income growth in a country less sensitive to output growth in that 
country.  For  countries  in  a  monetary  union,  risk-sharing  is  particularly  important  because 
monetary policy is unable to address asymmetric shocks, whereby some countries are in a 
recession  and  others  are  booming.  It  is  understood  that  the  high  degree  of  effective  risk-
sharing in the United States is essential in making the U.S. a successful monetary union.10 
There  are  three  main  mechanisms  whereby  risk-sharing  can  take  place  between  member 
states in a political and economic area. First, countries can share risk via cross-ownership of 
productive assets, a mechanism facilitated by developed capital markets. Second, a system 
of taxes and transfers can serve as a vehicle for further income smoothing. Third, member 
states can smooth consumption by adjusting their asset portfolios, for example, by lending 
and borrowing in international credit markets. 
The United States have traditionally been characterised by a very high degree of income and 
consumption smoothing across states that has only been increasing over time. The available 
evidence suggests that about 75% of income shocks in individual states are smoothed, with 
13% smoothed by the federal tax-transfer and grant system, 39% smoothed by insurance or 
cross-ownership of productive assets, and 23% smoothed by borrowing or lending. In other 
words, 62% of state-specific shocks in the U.S. are smoothed through market transactions, 
almost five times the contribution of the federal government to income smoothing.11 
With comparatively less developed financial markets and more rigid labour markets, with low 
mobility of labour, and an absent federal system of taxes and transfers similar to that in the 
United  States,  pre-euro  Europe  exhibited  much  lower  levels  of  risk-sharing.  The  existing 
literature estimated that only between 40% and 43% of country-specific GDP shocks were 
smoothed  among  European  countries  before  1998,  with  roughly  half  of  this  smoothing 
achieved through national government budget deficits and half achieved by corporate saving 
patterns.12 These low levels of risk-sharing contrasted with very high levels within individual 
European  countries;  for  example,  in  pre-unification  Germany,  91%  of  shocks  to per  capita 
state gross product was smoothed, with the bulk (54%) smoothed through the federal tax-
transfer and grant system.13 
It was believed that the creation of the common currency might in itself enhance income and 
consumption smoothing, by reducing the costs of trading and information gathering, thereby 
                                                 
10   Sala-i-Martin, X., and J. Sachs (1992), “Fiscal federalism and optimum currency areas: Evidence for Europe 
from the United States”, in: M. Canzoneri, P. Masson, and V. Grilli, eds., Establishing a Central Bank: Issues 
in Europe and Lessons from the U.S., Cambridge University Press: London. 
11   Sorensen, B., and O. Yosha (1998), “International risk sharing and European monetary unification”, Journal of 
International Economics 45, pp. 211 – 238; Afonso, A., and D. Furceri (2008), “EMU enlargement stabilization 
costs and insurance mechanisms”, Journal of International Money and Finance 27, pp. 169 – 187. 
12   Hepp,  R.,  and  J.  von  Hagen  (2013),  “Interstate  risk  sharing  in  Germany:  1970  –  1991”,  Oxford  Economic 
Papers 65, pp. 1 – 24. 
13   Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., and O. Yosha (2005), “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary 
union:  Updated  evidence  and  policy  implications  for  Europe”,  in:  H.  Huizinga  and  L.  Jonung  (eds.),  The 
Internationalization of Asset Ownership in Europe, Cambridge University Press: New York. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
leading to higher cross-ownership of financial assets. Larger holdings of foreign assets are 
associated  with  more  international  risk  sharing14  and  so  is  the  integration  of  banking 
markets.15  It  was  also  believed  that  the  euro  would  improve  risk-sharing  by  promoting 
financial integration among EU member states.16 
Indeed,  risk-sharing  among  euro  area  member  states  seems  to  have  increased  after  the 
introduction of the euro. Available estimates suggest that in 2008–2009, 57% of shocks to 
state  gross  product  per  capita  were  smoothed.17  In  terms  of  the  mechanisms  responsible, 
smoothing resulting from international cross-ownership of assets increased in the EMU after 
being  negligible  in  the  past,  but  remained  at  low  levels.  Conversely,  smoothing  of 
consumption through government counter-cyclical saving declined sharply for the groups of 
EMU  countries,  but  remained  at  high  levels.18  However,  in  2010  risk-sharing  declined 
significantly in most EU countries and essentially collapsed in countries under fiscal stress.19 
The  overall  evidence  suggests  that  savings  during  booms  and  spending  during  busts 
remains  the  primary  mechanism  by  which  European  countries  achieve  the  smoothing  of 
income shocks. The contribution of credit markets and of capital markets is still limited, and it 
tends to further decline during recessions. For countries with a history of large public deficits 
including  in  good  times,  and  with  a  legacy  of  high  public  debt,  the  constraints  on  fiscal 
deficits  imposed  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  clearly  limit  governments’  capacity  to 
smoothen large shocks via borrowing. Therefore, some have advocated the introduction of a 
supranational  fiscal  risk-sharing  mechanism  at  the  euro  area  level  which  would  provide 
greater international insurance through a common stabilisation fund. A recent proposal was 
made  in  an  IMF  working  paper.20  In  the  same  vein,  a  similar  idea  was  mentioned  in  the 
previous “Four Presidents’ Report”, to create an additional budget for the EMU countries to 
possibly be used as an unemployment support mechanism. 
Another  approach,  and  one  that  is  currently  high  on  the  policy  makers’  agenda,  is  the 
promotion  of  more  integrated  and  deeper  capital  markets  in  Europe.  CMU  is  a  welcome 
initiative as it has the potential to reinforce the internal market for capital, complement the 
Banking Union, strengthen the Economic and Monetary Union and thus, support the smooth 
and homogeneous transmission of monetary policy. CMU is essentially about regulatory and 
non-regulatory actions to remove internal barriers to a Single Market for capital (including the 
harmonisation  of  key  legal  acts  and  policies  related  to  financial  products).  Through 
developing  and  integrating  the  EU  financial  markets,  CMU  entails  a  strong  potential  to 
support growth and competitiveness in the long run. 
While the EC Green Paper has set the right overall objectives of CMU and identified useful 
priorities  for  early  action,  CMU  should  be  ambitious  in  order  to  achieve  greater  capital 
markets  development  and  deeper  financial  integration.  In  our  view,  a  genuine  CMU  would 
                                                 
14   Sorensen, B., Y.-T. Wu, O. Yosha and Y. Zhu (2007), “Home bias and international risk sharing: Twin puzzles 
separated at birth”, Journal of International Money and Finance 26, pp. 587 – 605. 
15   Demyanyk,  Y.,  C.  Ostergaard  and  B.  Sorensen  (2007),  “U.S.  banking  deregulation,  small  businesses,  and 
interstate insurance of personal income”, Journal of Finance 62, pp. 2763 – 2801. 
16   Balli, F., and B. Sorensen (2007), “Risk sharing among OECD and EU countries: The role of capital gains, 
capital income, transfers, and savings”, MPRA Working Paper 10223. 
17   Balli, F., and B. Sorensen (2007), “Risk sharing among OECD and EU countries: The role of capital gains, 
capital income, transfers, and savings”, MPRA Working Paper 10223. 
18   Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.,  E.  Luttini  and  B.  Sorensen  (2014),  “Debt  crises  and  risk  sharing:  The  role  of  markets 
versus sovereigns”, NBER Working Paper 19914. 
19   Furceri,  D.,  and  A.  Zdzienicka  (2013),  “The  euro  area  crisis:  Need  for  a  supranational  risk  sharing 
mechanisms?”, IMF Working Paper 13/198. 
20   Furceri,  D.,  and  A.  Zdzienicka  (2013),  “The  euro  area  crisis:  Need  for  a  supranational  risk  sharing 
mechanisms?”, IMF Working Paper 13/198. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
mean achieving a high level of financial integration in order to complete the Single Market in 
this  area.  Full  integration  is  reached  if  all  market  participants,  with  the  same  relevant 
characteristics:  (i)  face  a  single  set  of  rules  when  they  decide  to  deal  with  financial 
instruments and/or services; (ii) have equal access to a set of financial instruments and/or 
services; and (iii) are equally treated when they are active in the market. This level-playing 
field  would  contribute  to  stimulate  cross-border  risk-taking  between  EU  Member  States.  In 
the last two decades, European financial markets have increased their role in financing the 
economy  and  became  more  integrated  in  terms  of  cross-border  holdings  of  financial 
instruments. However, the crisis impacted this tendency. In fact, the crisis revealed that part 
of this integration was driven by debt-based wholesale banking flows which were prone to 
sudden reversals in the face of shocks. 
In this context, let me make the following three points: first, the main benefits of CMU, entail 
the development of risk capital and the creation of a market based risk-sharing mechanism 
across countries as well as the promotion of access to new sources of financing. Both these 
goals require a truly integrated European equity market which is of crucial importance in the 
CMU  project.  Notably,  an  increased  role  for  venture  capital  initiatives  would  depend  on  a 
mature  equity  market  that  could  provide  significant  returns  in  successful  IPOs,  offsetting 
losses in failing risky projects. 
Second, these benefits of CMU will only materialise if the Commission strives towards a high 
level  of  integration  with  its  CMU  agenda.  This  requires  a  high  degree  of  ambition  and 
decisive  legislative  action  to  create  the  conditions  for  capital  markets  to  develop  and 
integrate.  These  actions  are  often  in  politically  controversial  fields  such  as  in  the  areas  of 
financial product taxation and insolvency laws. 
Third,  despite  positive  effects  on  financial  stability  stemming  from  greater  financial 
diversification and market-based finance, more  integration can also entail financial stability 
risks.  It  can  exacerbate  the  size  and  speed  of  contagion.  In  addition,  the  ‘push’  towards 
market-based financing may lead to the build-up of risks in this part of the economy, typically 
less regulated and lacking information. 
This  brings  me  back  to  the  importance  of  an  effective  macro-prudential  supervision  and 
regulation, i.e. one that considers all systemically important financial entities and activities. 
Improving the macro-prudential framework 
In  order  to  make  CMU  a  success  with  stronger  capital  markets  and  deeper  cross-border 
financial integration in bank- and market-based financing, we need to further strengthen the 
European  macro-prudential  framework.  The  current  framework  focuses  on  the  banking 
sector. 
With  regard  to  the  bank-based  tools,  our  experience  at  the  Financial  Stability  Committee 
revealed  that  even  the  instruments  in  the  CRR/CRDIV  framework  are  not  homogeneously 
implemented at the EU level.21 
Some  of  the  shortcomings  can  be  addressed  through  the  continuous  exchange  between 
national  authorities  and  the  ECB,  but  other  aspects  require  legal  changes  in  the  SSM 
Regulation  and 
involve 
complementing the toolkit available at the European level with additional instruments. Limits 
to the loan-to-value (LTV) or debt service-to-income (DTI) ratios – currently under national 
legal  changes  also 
framework.  These 
the  CRR/CRDIV 
in 
                                                 
21   For example, the relative sequencing of capital requirements between Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 measures is not 
always consistently reflected in the legal texts. In some cases such as for Art 133 CRD IV, Art 458 CRR, the 
sequencing  of  the  measures  implies  the  requirement  to  consider  the  implementation  of  Pillar  2  ahead  of 
Pillar 1 measures. Some overlaps also exist between instruments, especially between the systemic risk buffer 
and the one for other systemically important institutions (O-SII). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
legislation – do have cross-border implications and their effectiveness would be strengthened 
if  made  available  to  the  ECB.  If  applied  incoherently,  they  can  distort  the  Single  Market, 
obstruct financial integration and weaken financial stability. 
Progress  on  these  issues  will  be  made  once  the  European  Commission  Report  on  the 
revision of the macro-prudential regulatory framework for consultation is available. 
However,  to  safeguard  financial  stability  in  a  financially  integrated  monetary  union,  the 
instruments for the banking sector are not enough. In fact, as I explained, CMU will ease the 
flow  of  capital  among  euro  area  countries.  Providing  macro-prudential  authorities  with  the 
tools to deal with systemic risks in market-based entities and activities is therefore of utmost 
importance. 
Currently,  the  ECB  can  only  indirectly  limit  some  of  the  risks  from  the  non-bank  sector  by 
imposing certain macro-prudential tools on banks. 
I see the need for strengthening and extending the perimeter of macro-prudential policies in 
two broad ways to increase resilience, reduce contagion between banks and non-banks and 
promote financial integration. 
First,  it  is  necessary  to  intensify  the  supervision  of  systemically  important  non-bank 
institutions. We  need  to  curtail  risks  from  these  systemic  players  and  raise  their  resilience 
through  the  financial  cycle.  A  first  step  in  this  direction  is  the  work  done  by  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  that  develops  a  common  methodology  to  identify  systemically 
significant non-bank and non-insurers.22 The FSB is currently also working on the systemic 
risks in the asset management industry. 
Macro-prudential  policy  needs  to  monitor  and  eventually  counter  these  systemic  risks  by 
extending  its  toolkit.  Specifically,  additional  liquidity  requirements,  guided  stress  tests, 
minimum and time-varying load, and redemption fees should be part of the macro-prudential 
toolbox.23  Also,  well  defined  limits  to  leverage,  especially  synthetic  leverage  built-up  with 
derivatives, should also be introduced. 
Other measures concern activities or instruments used in the market- based financial sector. 
In  particular,  I  have  in mind  minimum  and  countercyclical haircuts  for Securities  Financing 
Transactions  (SFT).  Countercyclical  haircuts  would  limit  volatility  and  leverage  in  financial 
markets more effectively than the minimum haircut requirements recently recommended by 
the  FSB.24  These  countercyclical  requirements  could  be  complemented  by  countercyclical 
margin requirements applied to Central Counterparties. Another important FSB workstream 
focuses on re-hypothecation and re-use of securities in the repo market. These create chains 
of inside liquidity that enhance the “illusion of liquidity”, which tend to disappear in times of 
stress. 
I would encourage further work in order to understand the effects of these tools and how best 
to apply them in practice. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude.  Financial  markets  play  a  crucial  role  in  promoting  risk-sharing  in  a 
monetary union with strict budgetary rules and with conventional monetary policy unable to 
                                                 
22   Assessment  Methodologies  for  Identifying  Non-Bank  Non-Insurer  Global  Systemically  Important  Financial 
Institutions, FSB-IOSCO Consultative Document, 2015. 
23   Fecht, F. and M. Wedow (2014), “The dark and the bright side of liquidity risks: Evidence from the open-ended 
real estate funds in Germany” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 23, pp. 376–399. 
24   See Brumm, J., M. Grill, F. Kubler and K. Schmedders, (2015) “Margin Regulation and Volatility”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
address  asymmetric  shocks.  Furthering  financial  integration,  namely  with  an  ambitiously 
implemented  Capital  Markets  Union,  would  facilitate  capital  flows  across  sectors  and 
countries,  ultimately  improving  risk-sharing  across  countries.  But  reaping  the  benefits  from 
integration  without  raising  financial  stability  concerns  requires  adjustments  to  the  macro-
prudential toolkit. 
The current bank-centred framework has its limits. Improvements require a more harmonised 
legal framework involving the review of the CRR/CRDIV framework and an extension of the 
toolkit  to  the  non-banking  sector  and  to  market-based  instruments.  This  will  be  a  gradual 
process, but we need to address it already now while designing the Capital Markets Union, in 
order to ensure a successful and sustainable financial integration in Europe. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
