  Lesetja Kganyago: Africa is rising – seizing the opportunity 
Address  by  Mr  Lesetja  Kganyago,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the 
SWIFT Regional Conference, Cape Town, 5 May 2015. 
 Chairperson, distinguished delegates, ladies and gentlemen; 
It is an honour for me to welcome you all to Cape Town, South Africa on this occasion of the 
SWIFT Regional Conference. 
“Africa is rising – Seizing the Opportunity” this is the theme for this year’s conference. I think 
that  you  will  agree  that  this  theme  is  appropriate,  as  Africa  is  blessed  with  abundant 
resources and although we face several challenges, these are far outweighed by the many 
opportunities that the continent offers. 
We acknowledge that taking advantage of these opportunities require strong political will and 
pan-African cooperation, however, the numerous regional integration initiatives taking place 
all over the continent are testimony that this is indeed possible. 
This is the 22nd SWIFT African Regional Conference (ARC) and the delegates include policy 
makers,  industry  leaders  and  the  broader  financial  community  from  across  the  African 
continent. The typical African Regional Conference attracts up to 500 delegates from around 
40 countries, and is a unique forum for networking, education, discussion, and debate – all 
within a collaborative environment. 
I believe that discussions in the next three day will focus, inter alia, on how intra- Africa trade 
and  economic  growth  can  be  boosted,  a  look  at  how  the  African  securities  markets  are 
evolving  and  the  growth  plans  of  African  corporates  as  they  expand  across  the  continent. 
The conference will also focus on leveraging the role of technology innovations in Africa to 
benefit the financial industry and support sustainable growth objectives of the continent. 
From the payment system environment, we are aware that intra-Africa payments have in the 
past mostly been facilitated through correspondent banking arrangements, as has been the 
standard for cross border payments globally. In practice, intra-Africa payments are effected 
through  correspondent  banking  relationships  with  banking  partners  normally  located  within 
the  USA  or  in  Europe.  Most  of  these  correspondent  banking  arrangements  are  still  used 
extensively  today,  but  are  proving  to  be  inadequate  and  inefficient.  Across  the  continent, 
several regions have launched initiatives to facilitate more efficient transacting mechanisms 
within their respective regions. The advantage of these initiatives is that transacting parties 
now have more control over their payments, within the region. 
Concerns  have  been  raised  about  the  general  reduction  in  correspondent  banking 
relationships,  and  related  financial  services  globally.  The  drivers  of  the  reduction  in 
correspondent banking relationships are not clear, but we surmise that regulations relating to 
AML/CFT  and  the  increase  in  the  number  of  cross-border  money  remittance  or  transfer 
companies could be contributing factors to this declining trend. 
In the case of the money remittance companies, it can be argued that global banks may have 
concerns  about  the  high  risks  of  uncertainty  in  facilitating  transactions  with  unknown/non-
vetted clients, especially those in EMDE’s1, in terms of the AML/CFT2 rules. This raises the 
potential for fines and reputational risks for these banks and therefore reduces the appetite 
for  exposure  to  specific  jurisdictions  by  banks  participating  in  this  environment.  There  are 
                                                
1  Emerging Markets and Developing Economies (EMDEs). 
2  AML – anti money laundering; CFT – counter terrorist financing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the promotion of trade integration in the region; 
trade and financial facilitation; 
harmonisation of legislation and statistics; and 
payment systems and macroeconomic convergence. 
also potential downsides to decreased cross-border transactions. For example, it is a well-
known  fact  that  money  remittances  attract  high  costs,  and  it  is  therefore  likely  that  small 
companies would be more affected by the reduction in global correspondent activity. In both 
instances,  it  would  be  the  poor  and  smaller  commercial  entities  that  would  be  most 
vulnerable if correspondent banking activities are not replaced by more efficient and reliable 
alternatives. 
Regional solutions, implemented in the payment system environment, will go a long way to 
address  constraints  that  may  be  introduced  by  the  reduction  of  correspondent  banking 
services, as well as to bring overall efficiencies in the execution of intra-regional cross border 
payments. 
I would now like to share with you developments relating to three of these regional initiatives 
as examples. In 2000, five countries of West Africa (Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and 
Sierra Leone) established the West African Monetary Zone (WAMZ). At the same time they 
also set-up the West African Monetary Institute (WAMI). Liberia joined in 2010. The objective 
of the countries was to establish the West African Monetary Zone (WAMZ) as a monetary 
and  customs  union  with  a  common  currency.  Initially  they  proposed  to  introduce  a  Single 
Currency in 2003, but subsequently agreed to launch the new single currency in 2015. As 
these countries are represented at this conference, you will benefit from updates on progress 
made with this initiative. 
The main objectives of WAMZ were agreed as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The WAMI  was  established  as  the  main  body  responsible  of  the  creation  of  the  Common 
West African Central Bank and the Single Currency of the WAMZ. 
In  east  Africa,  the  East  African  Community  (EAC)  has  been  established  as  a  regional 
intergovernmental  organisation  of  the  Republics  of  Burundi,  Kenya,  Rwanda,  the  United 
Republic  of  Tanzania,  and  the  Republic  of  Uganda.  The  vision  of  the  EAC  is  to  foster  a 
prosperous, competitive, secure, stable and politically united East Africa. Their mission is to 
widen and deepen economic, political, social and cultural integration in order to improve the 
quality of life of the people of East Africa through increased competitiveness, value added 
production, trade and investments. 
The Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community was signed on 30 November 
1999  and  come  into  force  on  7  July  2000.  The  Republic  of  Rwanda  and  the  Republic  of 
Burundi became full members of the community with effect from 1 July 2007. 
From a payment system perspective, the region has achieved the goal of implementing an 
integrated  payment  infrastructure  to  facilitate  the  ease  of  flow  of  payments  among  the 
participating  member  counties  known  as  the  East  Africa  Payment  System  (EAPS).  The 
EAPS is a secure, effective and efficient funds transfer system that enhances efficiency and 
safety of payments and settlement within the EAC region. The systems operates on a real 
time gross settlement basis by utilising the linkage between the various partner states’ Real 
Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  systems  using  SWIFT  (Society  for  Worldwide  Interbank 
Financial Telecommunication) messaging network for safe and secure delivery of payment 
and settlement messages to each other. The EAPS also facilitates cross border transactions 
that is essential for boosting intra-regional trade among the East African countries. Some of 
the benefits of EAPS: 
• 
real time funds transfers, safe and efficient transfer of large value payments 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   finality and irrevocability of payments 
increased  accessibility  as  EAPS  is  available  in  all  the  commercial  banks’  branch 
networks, and 
same-day settlement. 
• 
This initiative is indeed a success that is worth celebrating. 
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) was established as a development 
coordinating conference (SADCC) in 1980 and transformed into a development community in 
1992.  It  is  an  inter-governmental  organisation  whose  goal  is  to  promote  sustainable  and 
equitable  economic  growth  and  socio-economic  development  through  efficient  productive 
systems,  deeper  co-operation  and  integration,  good  governance  and  durable  peace  and 
security  among  fifteen  Southern  African  member-states.  In  the  process  of  driving  its 
development  objectives,  the  region  adopted  a  Regional  Indicative  Strategic  Development 
Plan. In support of this plan, central banks within the region working in collaboration with the 
banking  community  launched  a  payment  system  integration  project  that  culminated  in  the 
implementation of the SADC Integrated Regional Electronic Settlement System (SIRESS). 
According to the latest data, the implementation of the SIRESS system has resulted in 43 per 
cent of eligible intra-SADC cross-border South African Rand payments for the participating 
nine  countries  being  settled  through  accounts  that  regional  banks  hold  on  the  SIRESS 
system,  instead  of  via  the  normal  cross-border  correspondent  banking  system.  At  this 
relatively  ‘early’  stage  of  SIRESS  (implemented  July  2013),  the  high  percentage  of  cross-
border  transactions  being  settled  via  the  SIRESS  system  in  real  time  is  significant,  and  it 
could in future have an even more significant impact on correspondent banking activity within 
the SADC region. I take great pride in being able to share with you that SIRESS has reached 
the ZAR 1 trillion settlement mark in the last week of April 2015. 
We  also  recognise  that  the  emergence  of  regional  solutions  such  as  SIRESS,  requires 
regional authorities to resolve possible concerns that may arise from regulatory requirements 
within their business process flows to ensure that matters such as AML/CFT and exchange 
controls, where they exist, are taken care of. 
It is my hope that the development of these initiatives will lay a solid foundation for facilitating 
trade and investment in Africa. Leveraging of current infrastructure, efficient securities market 
solutions  and  future  infrastructure  solutions  may  contribute  to  facilitating  the  ease  of 
investment  in  the  continent.  The  regional  initiatives  are  also  paving  the  way  for  the 
achievement of the integration agenda of the whole continent and I hope that in undertaking 
the  separate  regional  initiatives,  open  standards  are  adopted  to  facilitate  the  ultimate 
integration of these regional infrastructures. What Africa needs is to get the various regional 
systems to interact with each other so that settlement can take place seamlessly across the 
region. 
I also note that with the aim of leveraging the hands-on experience with projects in Africa, 
one session in this conference will look at the rapid growth of the regional payment systems 
and  how  lessons  learnt  from  these  projects  could  be  replicated  in  other  regions.  The 
regulatory session should explore how, taking a proactive stance in coping with new financial 
regulations, moving quickly to adopt global best practice in the various fields of compliance 
and addressing of issues relating to regulatory capital requirements can lead to competitive 
advantages. 
It is also with interest that I gather that for the first time, the 2015 ARC will host an African 
round of the SWIFT Innotribe start-up challenge. Innotribe is a laudable initiative that offers 
an opportunity for bringing innovative ideas to the fore and fostering discussions that would 
enable  practical  solutions  to  emerge  out  of  those  ideas.  The  start-up  challenge  will  bring 
together young African financial technology companies from across the continent, introducing 
them to venture capitalists and investors. The winners will proceed and compete in the grand 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  finale at the Sibos 2015 conference scheduled later this year in Singapore. Our continent will 
surely reap benefits from these initiatives and I encourage you to ensure that you are part of 
the growing ARC community in 2015, and that your industry discussion will be fruitful. 
It is clear from the programme that the organisers have put together a full and well thought 
out programme. I hope you will benefit from this 22nd ARC and in this spirit I wish you well 
as you share experiences and meet new colleagues. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
