  
 
Ardo Hansson: European and domestic economic challenges for Estonia 
in 2014 
Speech by Mr Ardo Hansson, Governor of the Bank of Estonia (Eesti Pank), to the Riigikogu 
(the  unicameral  Parliament  of  Estonia),  at  the  presentation  of  Bank  of  Estonia’s  Annual 
Report 2014, Tallinn, 26 May 2015. 
 Honourable President of the Riigikogu, Distinguished Members of the Riigikogu 
I am here today to give you a summary of the year 2014 at Eesti Pank. I will speak on the 
economy in the euro area and on monetary policy, and I will discuss the Estonian economy 
and the work of the central bank last year. 
The euro-area economy, monetary policy and fiscal policy 
In 2014 the economy of the euro area as a whole grew, but the situation varied a lot between 
different countries and overall growth was slower than had been forecast. Data from the start 
of this year suggest that economic activity in the euro area is staging a modest recovery. 
The competitiveness of the euro area has improved during the recovery from the crisis, but 
again  the  situation  varies  between  countries.  There  are  countries  that  have  successfully 
introduced reforms, but there are also those where reforms have stopped or even gone into 
reverse. 
• 
Here I must emphasise that long-term economic growth can only be built on reforms 
that raise economic competitiveness. 
The  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  are  able  to  offer  support  to  economies  in  the 
short term, but there is a price to this, and such support can only be for a limited 
time.  Central  banks  are  not  omnipotent  and  the  responsibility  for  making  reforms 
and  explaining  the  need  for  reforms  must  fall  squarely  on  the  shoulders  of 
governments and parliaments. 
 Monetary policy in the euro area had an eventful 2014. Inflation in the euro area was falling 
last year and the expectations for inflation among market participants were on the downside, 
which  led  the  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  to  maintain  their  accommodative  stance  on 
monetary policy. The accommodative monetary policy has three main elements: 
• 
The Governing Council of the European Central Bank took the decision to cut the 
interest  rates  at  which  commercial  banks  can  borrow  from  the  euro-area  central 
banks to their lowest levels ever under monetary union. 
Targeted long-term loans were offered to the commercial banks in the euro area. It 
is important that low interest rates be passed on to the real economy and that good 
business projects be able to get funding from banks on reasonable terms. 
Purchases of assets held by the private sector started and large-scale purchases of 
sovereign bonds were started in March this year. 
It  is  no  secret  that  I  am  no  supporter  of  the  plan  to  purchase government  bonds. 
Although the first small signs of success are apparent, we must still remain vigilant 
about  the  accompanying  risks.  Above  all  there  is  the  moral  hazard  that  would 
emerge were some government to lose its appetite for reform. The falls in interest 
rates  provoked  by  the  massive  purchases  of  bonds  will  lower  interest  rates 
temporarily on government borrowing and this must not be used as an argument for 
pushing vital but painful reforms to some point far off in the future. Interest rates are 
only favourable for a short time and will support governments while they are making 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  changes. If governments were to ignore the budget rules agreed in Europe and were 
to start to increase their debts further, the measures taken by central banks would 
be of very little help. 
The  other main  task  occupying  central  banks  alongside monetary  policy  last  year  was  the 
launch of single banking supervision. Starting supervision and carrying out a thorough and 
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  assets  of  European  banks  needed  a  lot  of  work  from 
central banks and financial supervision authorities. The successful conclusion of this work let 
us say with confidence that the biggest and most significant banks in a range of countries in 
Europe  are  now  assessed  and  supervised  on  the  same  terms.  In  Estonia,  Swedbank  and 
SEB Pank have come under single supervision. 
The Estonian economy 
Looking more closely at the Estonian economy, it can be seen that the growth in Estonia in 
2014 came primarily from the domestic market. 
• 
Domestic consumption was lifted by rising employment, falling unemployment, and 
strong wage growth and a simultaneous fall in prices. The economy grew faster in 
2014 than in 2013, but it should be remembered that no return to the growth rates 
seen in the boom years of the last decade is to be expected. 
It may be hard to get used to the idea of lower growth rates, but economic truths 
cannot  be  denied.  The  Estonian  economy  and  Estonian  demographics  are  in  a 
different  phase  of  development  now,  and  long-term  sustainable  growth  is  notably 
lower at 3–4%. 
 than 
in  wages 
faster  growth 
Consumer price inflation in Estonia fell below zero in June 2014 for the first time since the 
crisis. Four years ago prices fell across a wide range of goods and services, but last year the 
fall in prices was mainly caused by cheaper energy and food. Eesti Pank is not forecasting 
any  rise  in  prices  this  year,  but  rising  wages  will  put  upward  pressure  on  the  prices  of 
domestic goods and services. 
One  reason  for  the  rapidly  rising  labour  costs  has  been  the  decline  in  the  working  age 
population,  but 
the 
competitiveness of the Estonian economy in the longer term. Companies are for now able to 
cover the rapidly rising labour costs from their profit buffers, but in the longer perspective this 
will  inevitably  cease  to  be  possible.  Reduced  profits  threaten  the  ability  of  companies  to 
invest in higher productivity and in the human capital needed for more complex and higher-
value work. I have often said, and it bears repeating again today, that the key challenge in 
the development of the Estonian economy is how more complex work than hitherto can be 
accomplished with a smaller workforce. 
The rapid rises in wage income and household consumption boosted tax revenues in 2014, 
which in turn improved the state finances and helped lift the state budget to a small surplus in 
2014.  Going  forward  it  is  important  that  the  government  stick  to  the  target  agreed  in  the 
budget strategy of maintaining a nominal budget balance and building up its reserves. 
• 
in  productivity  could  endanger 
Here I should note that the purchases of bonds by central banks and the resulting 
fall in interest rates have encouraged the belief or the conviction that there is a free 
lunch to be had and Estonia is denying itself a feed because the Estonian state does 
not issue bonds. We all know full well that there is no such thing as a free lunch. 
Even  were  the  central  bank  to  purchase  one  quarter  of  the  bonds  issued  by  the 
state,  those  bonds  would  still  constitute  a  debt  that  would  have  to  be  paid  back 
eventually. 
Financing  new  investment  through  state  bonds  could  well  prove  inefficient  and 
harmful for the Estonian economy as a whole, even if the investments are in good 
projects. The low unemployment and rapid wage rises that we see at the moment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
    would  cause  a  large  part  of  the  extra  money  gained  from  the  emission  of  state 
bonds to be lost, as infrastructure projects would cost much more than before. Large 
state construction projects that can only be temporary in nature would  also cause 
economic and social problems in Estonia, because once the large projects finish, a 
great number of those working on them would find themselves unemployed, having 
left jobs in other sectors. 
It must be understood that Estonia already profits from the purchases of bonds by 
the  central  banks  of  the  euro  area.  Financial  markets  act  as  a  series  of 
communicating  vessels,  so  that  when  interest  rates  in  one  area  fall,  the  effect  is 
passed  on  to  other  areas.  The  lower  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  mean  that 
Estonian  companies  and  households  can  borrow  more  cheaply,  and  were  it 
necessary  the  Estonian  state  could  also  borrow  more  cheaply.  If  easier  financing 
conditions  spur  on  the  European  economy,  Estonian  exporters  will  be  among  the 
winners,  and  this  is  the  goal  towards  which  the  bond  purchase  programme  is 
striving. 
In summarising the Estonian economy I should say our economy has grown at a satisfactory 
speed overall, as there is no little uncertainty in the global economy and there are protracted 
problems with growth in several of Estonia’s export markets. 
• 
The  tensions  in  geopolitical  relations  last  year,  including  the  trade  sanctions 
between  the  European  Union  and  Russia,  have  left  a  mark  on  the  Estonian 
economy, though fortunately not a deep one. 
Estonian exporters deserve recognition for the flexibility they have shown in finding 
new  markets.  Exports  have  managed  to  increase  even  as  prices  have  been 
generally falling in foreign markets, while local production costs have been driven up 
by rapidly rising wages. That the market share for Estonian goods and services in 
the trade with partner countries has increased shows that Estonian export items are 
competitive in international markets. 
 The work of Eesti Pank 
The Eesti Pank Act has given us a wide range of responsibilities. Our first responsibility is to 
keep inflation low and stable, setting a joint monetary policy together with the other central 
banks of the euro area and implementing it in Estonia. Secondly we must keep the financial 
system here stable, as strong and functioning banks are vital for economic growth. 
On top of this we supply the country with high-quality cash, produce timely and authoritative 
statistics,  manage  and  invest  the  state  foreign  reserves,  and  act  as  advisor  to  the 
government. Last year we succeeded in all of this. 
Last year the previous Riigikogu issued the central bank with a clearer mandate than ever 
before  for  macroprudential  supervision  in  Estonia,  and  we  have  started  to  act  on  this 
mandate. Macroprudential supervision aims to increase the resilience of the banks and the 
rest of the financial system to systemic problems and to restrain the accumulation of major 
risks. 
• 
The  first  measure  introduced  by  Eesti  Pank  was  the  requirement  for  commercial 
banks  to  hold  a  2%  systemic  risk  buffer.  The  systemic  risk  buffer  is  needed  to 
manage  the  banking  risks  that  are  specific  to  a  small  and  open  economy.  The 
introduction of the buffer did not imply any major changes for the banks operating in 
Estonia,  as  their  capitalisation  levels  were  already  above  that  required.  The 
measure  was  a  precautionary  step  by  the  central  bank  to  guard  against  possible 
risks in the future. 
The second step was taken three months ago when requirements for housing loans 
were  applied  to  the  commercial  banks  by  the  central  bank  with  the  aim  of  pre-
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  empting  possible  credit  booms  in  the  future.  The  requirements  do  not  have  any 
noticeable effect on the loan market as things stand, as the banks are in any case 
currently  acting  conservatively.  Both  of  these  measures  are  precautionary  steps 
taken  against  any  significant  future  increase  in  the  risks  in  the  real  estate  market 
should competing banks start to take on excessive risk. 
The crisis management measures taken by the central banks of the euro area in recent years 
have been successful, but they have come at a price. Both the balance sheets of the central 
banks and the associated risks have increased many times over in consequence. However, 
the ratio of Eesti Pank’s increased equity to the assets used for monetary policy remains one 
of  the  lowest  of  any  of the  central  banks  of  the euro  area. The comparison  with  the  other 
central banks of the euro area is important, as the balance of risks to capital of the central 
banks of the euro area as a whole is considered when joint monetary policy decisions are 
made. 
This makes  it  very  important  that the  Supervisory  Board  of  Eesti  Pank  decided  to  transfer 
three quarters of the 17 million euros that the bank made in profit last year to strengthening 
the capital of Eesti Pank. One quarter of last year’s profit, or 4.3 million euros went to the 
state  budget,  and  since  1992  Eesti  Pank  has  allocated  a  total  of  133  million  euros  to  the 
state budget. 
It may  be  asked  what  exactly  the  central  bank’s  reserves  are for, given  that the  Riigikogu 
bears  the  responsibility  of  last  resort  for  capitalising  Eesti  Pank?  History  has  shown  that 
central banks fall into difficulties at times when there is a general economic or financial crisis. 
I  want  to  make  every  effort  to  see  that  Eesti  Pank  has  no  need  to  come  to  the  Riigikogu 
asking for capital at a time of such crisis. It is to avoid precisely this that the central bank 
builds up reserves and I am glad that the Eesti Pank Supervisory Board shares this opinion. 
For the central bank to be financially independent, it needs to maintain and invest its assets. 
The current situation in the financial markets, where interest rates on sovereign bonds have 
fallen  to  very  low  levels,  poses  new  challenges  for  the  central  bank  as  a  long-term 
conservative investor. Eesti Pank has reacted to changes in the operating environment and 
has spread its risks by adding further asset classes to the investment portfolio and investing 
money in the sovereign bond markets of more countries than before. 
• 
Eesti  Pank’s  return  on  its  investment  was  several  times  higher  in  2014  than  the 
target  set  at the start  of  the  year,  and reached 22.8  million  euros.  Falling  interest 
rates throughout the year made investments in bonds profitable and the increasing 
share  portfolio  of  Eesti  Pank  meant  that  we  earned  significant  income  from 
investments in shares. 
As well as earning income, Eesti Pank is careful to keep control over its spending and to use 
its money efficiently. For this reason we have put the Maardu manor site up for sale, as we 
do not need it in carrying out the main functions of a central bank. We would have done this 
earlier, but first it was necessary to complete the process of registering the manor house and 
the land it stands on. 
It is worth noting under cost efficiencies that Eesti Pank has added technical support for the 
Fiscal Council to its list of responsibilities together with the macroprudential supervision and 
increased requirements for compiling financial statistics. Despite this, the number of people 
employed  at  the  bank  is  roughly  the  same  as  a  year  ago,  and  Eesti  Pank  remains  the 
smallest central bank by staff size in the European Union. Eesti Pank’s operating expenses 
fell last year to 17 million euros from the 17.4 million of a year before. 
Although  the  central  bank’s  duty  is  to  keep  inflation  low  and  not  to  chase  every  possible 
source of higher revenues, it is good to be able to note that we ended last year comfortably 
in profit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
In conclusion I would like to emphasise again that it is important for stable development in 
Estonia  and  for  improved  public  well-being  that  we  remain  ready  to  adapt  to  a  changing 
economic climate, to react rationally to changes, and yet to maintain the conservative stance 
on monetary issues that has served us well so far. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
