  Haruhiko Kuroda: Welcome to the “2 Percent” Club 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  meeting  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 25 December 2014. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  address  such  a  distinguished  gathering  of 
business leaders in Japan today. 
There is only one week left this year. This year, Japan’s economy has continued to recover 
moderately  as  a  trend,  albeit  with  fluctuations  due  to  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand 
prior to the consumption tax hike and the subsequent decline. Corporate profits have been 
improving significantly, and, as a whole, have maintained a favorable level around the peak 
before the global financial crisis (Chart 1). On the back of those, firms have become active 
on  making  business  fixed  investment  and  on  employment.  The  active  job  openings-to-
applicants ratio was 1.10 times, marking the highest level in 22 years – that is, since 1992 – 
and the unemployment rate has declined to around 3.5 percent, which is roughly the same 
level  as  the  structural  unemployment  rate  (Chart  2).  Reflecting  such  tightening  in  labor 
market conditions, wages have been increasing moderately. 
On  the  price front,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI,  all 
items  less  fresh  food),  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike,  has  been 
around 1¼ percent since the end of last year (Chart 3). The underlying price developments 
have continued to improve, and inflation expectations have been rising on the whole from a 
somewhat  longer-term  perspective.  Since  the  summer,  somewhat  weak  developments  in 
demand following the consumption tax hike and a substantial decline in crude oil prices have 
exerted downward pressure on prices. In that situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the  CPI  has  been  slowing,  and  the  rate  was  0.9  percent  in  October.  To  preempt  the 
manifestation of a risk that conversion of the deflationary mindset might be delayed and to 
maintain the improving momentum of expectation formation, the Bank of Japan decided at 
the end of October to expand quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). 
Japan’s economy is steadily en route to overcoming prolonged deflation and to achieving the 
price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  However,  it  is  true  that  not  a  few  have  voiced  that  they 
cannot benefit from the economic recovery. In particular, we have been hearing that “those 
who are benefitting from the QQE seem to be only large firms and wealthy households that 
hold  financial  assets,  thus  the  benefits  do  not  seem  to  be  spreading  through  the  whole 
economy” and “even if deflation is overcome, making a living might actually become difficult 
unless wages rise in accordance with a price increase.” 
Japan’s economy is currently in the process of transition from a shrinking equilibrium under 
deflation to an expanding equilibrium under the 2 percent inflation. In the process in which 
such a major change occurs at a relatively high speed, it is inevitable that its effects arise 
differently  depending  on  the  sector,  the  firm  size,  and  the  income  bracket.  Even  so,  it  is 
without question that Japan’s economy is heading for the better. I believe that none of those 
unsatisfied with the current economic situation thinks that the situation during the deflationary 
period was better. 
Today, I will elaborate as clearly as possible on what the economic state the Bank of Japan 
aims at would be like in comparison with the deflationary state. On that basis, I will explain 
how far we have proceeded and what challenges are left to be dealt with, going forward. I 
should say that overcoming deflation and achieving the price stability target of 2 percent will 
benefit not only some firms and financial asset holders, but also a wide range of sectors and 
a variety of people. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What does the deflationary economy look like? 
I. 
In Japan, deflation – a situation in which prices keep declining – continued for 15 years since 
the latter half of the 1990s. In that situation, firms and households behave on the assumption 
that  prices  will  not  increase,  or  that  prices  will  fall  moderately.  As  a  result,  their  spending 
behavior has become passive. 
Since  firms  could  not  expect  an  increase  in  sales,  the  top  priority  of  management  was  to 
ensure profits and stabilize firms’ financial conditions by cost reduction – such as reducing 
the number of employees, wages, or expenses for materials – and by compressing business 
fixed investment as much as possible. However, cost reduction or investment reduction was 
nothing but equivalent to a decline in demand for goods and services of other firms, and as a 
result, the corporate sector as a whole could not increase profits. 
Firms’ cost reduction resulted in a decline in wages for households. Households were able to 
avert  facing  a  surge  in  unemployment  against  the  background  of  a  tradition  in  Japan  that 
people  prioritize  job  security,  but  had  to  change  their  employment  status  from  regular 
employment  to  non-regular  employment  or  accept  declines  in  wages  (Chart  4).  In  that 
situation, the practice of an annual rise  in base  pay  was  lost. Salary increases every  year 
were taken for granted among salarymen (corporate employees) through the first half of the 
1990s,  but  younger  people  in  their  thirties  or  below  have  never  experienced  such  an 
increase.  Many  households  tried  to  restrain  consumption  as  they  could  not  expect  an 
increase  in  income  in  the  future.  As  the  view  that  prices  of  goods  gradually  decline  takes 
hold, there is an increasing tendency to postpone consumption. Against the background of 
those  firms’  and  households’  spending  behavior,  a  vicious  cycle  of  a  decline  in  prices,  a 
decrease in sales and profits, a restraint in wages, a slump in consumption, and a decline in 
prices continued. 
Although such a phenomenon under deflation can be analyzed from various aspects, from 
the perspective of macroeconomic policy, it can be understood as follows. The key is that 
monetary  conditions  did  not  become  sufficiently  accommodative  since  low  inflation 
expectations took hold, coupled with an actual price decline, and thereby real interest rates 
remained high. As you understand, under deflation, although nominal interest rates in Japan 
have long been at a low level, firms must not have been willing to make fixed investment by 
borrowing  money. When firms  were forecasting that general  prices  or  sales  prices  of  their 
own products would decline, firms’ burden of paying interest rates remained large because, 
whatever low the nominal interest rates might become, the real interest rates would become 
higher than the nominal interest rates (Chart 5). By contrast, real rates of return on cash and 
deposits increased when prices were on a declining trend, since nominal interest rates of the 
deposits  could  not  become  negative  (Chart  6).  Under  such  circumstances,  accumulating 
retained earnings mainly by cost reduction and hoarding them in cash and deposits became 
relatively  more  advantageous  for  firms  as  a  form  of  “investment”  than  taking  risks  and 
making fixed investment. That was a rational behavior in a deflationary environment. In fact, 
cash and deposits held by firms increased substantially from 185 trillion yen in fiscal 1995 to 
243 trillion yen in fiscal 2013. 
If expected real rates of return on fixed investment had been sufficiently high, extremely low 
nominal interest rates could have been still attractive for businesses. However, in Japan, with 
the  potential  growth  rate  declining  rapidly  since  the  middle  of  the  1990s,  firms’  growth 
expectations declined substantially (Chart 5). In economic terms, the natural rate of interest, 
which  is  the  real  interest  rate  neutral  to  economic  activity,  declined.  Standard  economic 
theory implies that the degree of monetary accommodation is determined by to what extent 
real  interest  rates  are  lower  than  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  In  Japan,  real  interest  rates 
remained high due to deflation expectations while the natural rate of interest declined due to 
a  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate.  As  a  result,  despite  the  low  nominal  interest  rates, 
monetary  accommodation  remained  insufficient  and  could  not  sufficiently  stimulate  the 
economy.  Firms’  unwillingness  to  invest  despite  low  interest  rates  represented  such  a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  situation.  The  breakthrough  to  that  is  either  decreasing  real  interest  rates  by  increasing 
inflation  expectations  or  raising  firms’  expected  returns  and  the  natural  rate  of  interest  by 
enhancing the growth potential. Japan is now tackling both of them. The former corresponds 
to the QQE that the Bank has been pursuing and the latter corresponds to what firms have 
been tackling under the government’s growth strategy. 
II. 
Achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and transforming Japan’s 
economy 
Next, let me talk about the QQE. The mechanism of the QQE starts from showing the Bank’s 
strong and clear commitment to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest 
possible time, and converting people’s deflationary mindset. Concurrently, the Bank has put 
downward  pressure  on  the  entire  yield  curve  including  longer-ends  through  its  massive 
purchases  of  Japanese government  bonds (JGBs)  and  has  lowered  nominal  interest rates 
further.  As  a  result,  real  interest  rates  have  declined,  which  has  generated  a  situation  in 
which you must come to recognize that financial conditions are accommodative in not only 
nominal terms but also real terms. In such financial conditions, coupled  with the effects of 
other policies, private demand has increased, the output gap has improved, and actual prices 
have increased. If firms and households experience actual price increases, they will come to 
realize  that  prices  will  increase  and  thus  inflation  expectations  are  expected  to  increase 
further. 
In the economy, in which the price stability target of 2 percent is achieved by pursuing this 
mechanism, the rational behavior of firms and households should not be to hoard cash and 
deposits, but to invest and consume. In a situation in which prices rise moderately, the real 
return on cash hoardings is negative. If firms accumulate retained earnings gained by cost 
reductions and hold them simply in cash and deposits, the value of those firms is impaired. It 
is  imperative  for  firms  to  undertake  strategic  initiatives  such  as  improving  their  production 
system,  carrying  out  research  and  development,  or  securing  and  developing  human 
resources.  Capital  management  policies  such  as  those  related  to  dividend  payments  or 
share buybacks are also important. In short, the economy will revert to a normal economic 
environment in which a priority for business management is to explore the opportunities for 
investing and gaining profits that would exceed the costs of capital, and thereby to generate 
a firm-specific value-added. Such behavioral change for Japanese firms to become proactive 
will also lead to an increase in the growth rate of Japan’s economy from a medium- to long-
term perspective. 
We have often heard a question why the inflation that the Bank aims to achieve is 2 percent, 
although it appears to be understood that deflation should be overcome. In a nutshell, most 
advanced  economies  regard  as  price  stability  the  situation  in  which  price  indices  annually 
rise  by  about  2  percent  on  average  (Chart  7).  Let  me  ask  you  a  question.  What  was  the 
average of the year-on-year rates of change in the CPI during the 15-year deflation period 
(fiscal  1998–2012)?  The  answer  is  merely  minus  0.3  percent.  Many  people  may  feel  that 
prices  of  goods  and  services  should  have  declined  more  substantially.  Although  I  am  not 
going  into  a  detailed  discussion  in  the  interest  of  time,  the  CPI  has  an  upward  bias  and 
indicates inflation higher than the true inflation rate. Given that fact, people tend to recognize 
being in a considerably deflationary environment when the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the CPI has been around zero. By the same token, on the contrary to the common belief, the 
situation in which the CPI records a 2-percent increase on a year-on-year basis in a stable 
manner  is  not  at  all  a  situation  in  which  prices  are  rising  substantially.  Rather,  in  such  a 
situation, people would recognize that prices are more or less flat on the whole or that prices 
are rising very moderately. 
On the exchange rate front, given that the annual inflation of around 2 percent was achieved 
in  other  major  countries  in  accordance  with  global  standards  while  Japan  continued  to 
experience  a  deflationary  situation,  the  yen  continued  to  appreciate  in  nominal  terms 
(Chart 8). It is in sharp contrast to the fact that, in the United Kingdom and Canada, where 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  moderate price increases continue in the same degree as in the United States, the levels of 
the  purchasing  power  parity  –  which  reflects  the  difference  of  price  increases  between  a 
country and another – remain almost constant and the exchange rates against the U.S. dollar 
remain  around  those  levels.  There  is  another  view  that  the  trend  of  the  yen  appreciation 
consistent with the difference in inflation rates between Japan and other countries is not a 
problem for firms, since firms’ competitiveness is, in theory, affected by the real exchange 
rates which take into account the difference in inflation rates. However, since what matters 
for businesses in terms of difference in costs between Japan and abroad is not differences in 
general prices, it would be close to firms’ recognition that even such an appreciation of the 
yen in nominal terms leads to difficulties in making business plans. If 2 percent inflation is 
achieved in Japan as in trading partners going forward, at least a risk of the appreciation of 
the  yen  brought  about  by  the  differences  in  inflation  rates  between  Japan  and  abroad  will 
become smaller. Under those circumstances, firms can make global investment plans from a 
viewpoint  of  the  optimal  allocation  of  management  resources  on  the  assumption  that  the 
exchange rates remain stable to some extent. 
Emerging from the deflationary economy 
III. 
Where are we in the process of the transition – from a shrinking equilibrium under deflation to 
an  expanding  equilibrium  under  the  2  percent  inflation?  Let  me  summarize  the  current 
situation of Japan’s economy again. 
In the  corporate  sector, profits  have  been  improving,  and firms’  positive  stance  on making 
fixed investment has been maintained in spite of a decline in demand after the consumption 
tax hike. Business plans, shown in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises 
in  Japan)  released  last  week,  indicate  that  fixed  investment  is  planned  to  be  increased 
steadily, with an upward revision in profits in a wide range of firms regardless of sector or 
size. Other survey results show that, as the excessive appreciation of the yen was corrected, 
there  have  been  some  developments  that  firms  put  more  emphasis  on  domestic  business 
fixed  investment  (Chart  9).  In  the  household  sector,  nominal  wages  have  been  rising 
reflecting  the  tightening  in  labor  market  conditions.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in 
nominal wages in the first half of fiscal 2014 was 1.1 percent, and it is roughly the same level 
as  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  for  the  same  period  excluding  the  direct 
effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike,  which  was  1.3  percent.  Nevertheless,  an  increasing 
number of people argue that wage increases have failed to keep pace with inflation and the 
year-on-year rate of change in real wages has been negative. Such argument is based on 
the calculation using the CPI inflation including the consumption tax hike as a deflator of real 
wages. However, the effects of the consumption tax hike on the year-on-year rate of increase 
in  prices  will  disappear  in  April  2015.  Based  on  that,  it  is  more  reasonable  to  assess 
underlying developments in real wages by excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike. 
Since, on an aggregated basis, wages have been increasing and the number of employees 
has been rising, employee income has continued to increase at the pace around 2.0 percent 
on a year-on-year basis. Reflecting the steady improvement in the employment and income 
situation,  private  consumption  has  remained  resilient  as  a  trend,  and  the  effects  of  the 
decline in demand following the front-loaded increase have been waning on the whole. Stock 
prices have increased substantially, exerting positive effects on firms’ fixed investment and 
households’ spending behavior. 
Conversion of the deflationary mindset has been progressing steadily, which has influenced 
firms’ wage setting and pricing strategy. At annual wage negotiations between management 
and  labor  this  spring,  an  increase  in  wages  was  demanded  taking  into  account  actual 
inflation,  and  the  practice  of  rises  in  base  pay  returned  for  the  first  time  in  more  than  a 
decade.  Firms’  price-setting  strategy  has  been  shifting  from  a  low-price  strategy  under 
deflation to that of raising sales prices while increasing value added. Moreover, some labor 
unions  have  decided  to  demand  an  about  2  percent  increase  in  base  pay  for  wage 
negotiations toward spring 2015. That is a landmark event in that the Bank’s price stability 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  target  is  taken  into  consideration  in  labor-management  wage  negotiations.  The  Bank  will 
continue to pay close attention to the progress in the negotiations with strong interest. 
In this economic and price situation, the Bank decided to expand the QQE at its Monetary 
Policy  Meeting  held  on  October  31  (Chart  10).  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  that  it  will 
accelerate  the  pace  of  increase  in  the  monetary  base  from  “an  annual  pace  of  about  
60–70 trillion yen” to “an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.” The annual pace of increase in 
the amount outstanding of the Bank’s holdings of JGBs will be raised by about 30 trillion yen 
to  “about  80  trillion  yen”  and  as  for  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment trusts (J-REITs), the increases in the amount outstanding of the Bank’s holdings 
will be tripled. Let me reiterate the background to the expansion. The year-on-year rate of 
increase  in  the  CPI  slowed  after  its  peak  in  April  this  year.  The  background  to  this  is 
somewhat  weak  developments  in  demand  following  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  the 
substantial decline in crude oil prices since the summer. To avoid any misunderstanding, let 
me be clear that the additional easing was not a response to the decline in crude oil prices 
itself.  Japan,  a  commodity-importing  country,  gains  a  large  advantage  from  the  decline  in 
crude oil prices, especially when the decline is caused mainly by supply-side factors such as 
developments in oil-producing countries as it is this time. On the price front, while the decline 
in crude oil prices put downward pressure in the short term, it will lead to an improvement in 
the  output  gap  and  to  an  increase  in  underlying  prices  from  a  somewhat  longer-term 
perspective. 
The reason for deciding on the additional easing despite this is that the Bank judged that we 
are still in the midst of converting the deflationary mindset and there is a risk that a slowdown 
in the actual rate of increase in the CPI might delay this conversion. Two engines have so far 
brought the conversion of the deflationary mindset. The first is the Bank’s strong commitment 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time and in a stable 
manner, and the second is the actual inflation that has been realized under the commitment. 
Although the decline in crude oil prices is desirable over time, if a pause in the actual price 
increase becomes protracted, the latter engine may be  weakened. If this raises doubts on 
the achievement of 2 percent inflation, there may be a risk that the mechanism of the QQE 
as a whole will be weakened. Therefore, the Bank decided to pursue monetary easing more 
powerfully  under  the  QQE,  and  to  reiterate  its  unwavering  resolution  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time through its “action.” 
Looking at responses in financial markets, it appears that the Bank’s resolution to achieve 
the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time has been well understood. I 
believe  that  many  of  you  also  understand  it  very  well.  I  strongly  expect  that  there  will  be 
positive effects of the expansion of the QQE on wage negotiations next spring and on firms’ 
price setting. If it is the case, conversion of the deflationary mindset under the QQE will keep 
going  forward.  That  is  the  intended  effect  of  the  expansion  of  the  QQE.  Under  those 
circumstances, the positive effects of the decline in crude oil prices will become clear. With 
the  conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset  progressing,  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  will 
gradually push up economic activity and the trend inflation, and the actual inflation rate will 
also increase as the short-term downward pressure on prices will dissipate. 
As I have mentioned earlier, the Bank aims to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in 
a stable manner. In the economy in which the Bank’s aim is achieved, firms and households 
make decisions and take action based on the assumption of moderate inflation of 2 percent. 
We will pay close attention to how the conversion of the deflationary mindset will progress 
from  such  viewpoint  in  assessing  developments  in  crude  oil  prices  and  their  effects  on 
inflation expectations. 
The Bank’s stance of monetary policy has been consistent since the introduction of the QQE. 
The Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, 
as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  upside and downside risks to economic activity  and prices, and make adjustments without 
hesitation if necessary to achieve the price stability target. 
Concluding remarks 
Before ending my speech, I will talk about what next year will be like as today is almost the 
end of the year. Firms can expect that corporate profits will be favorable on the back of the 
decline  in  commodity  prices  and  the  depreciation  of  the  yen.  Households  can  expect  that 
nominal wages will increase. Real wages are also expected to recover since the inflation rate 
is  likely  to  be  at  around  the  current  level  for  the  time  being  and  the  increase  in  prices 
attributable to the consumption tax hike will disappear in April 2015 on a year-on-year basis, 
although the year-on-year rate of increase in prices is affected by the future developments in 
crude  oil  prices.  There  seems  to  be  a  tailwind  to  Japan’s  economy.  In  this  situation,  the 
challenge for next year is, as Chairman Sakakibara often mentions, that firms should change 
by taking advantage of such a favorable environment, so that the next virtuous cycle in the 
economy will be firmly in place. 
The “pie” that the entire economy can share is getting bigger. At this stage in which we are in 
the midst of the transition process, however, the pieces of the “pie” are unevenly distributed 
in favor of globally operating firms or financial asset holders. The fact is that profits of small- 
and medium-sized enterprises and household income are also becoming larger, compared 
with those during the period of deflation, and many people are gaining some benefits, but the 
size of benefits that firms and households gain  differs, depending on the firm size, sector, 
and household income bracket. The issue is not simply a distribution of the “pie.” Whether 
the next virtuous cycle can be generated depends critically on how the “pie” is shared. If the 
spending propensity of economic entities which got a large piece of the “pie” is low, the next 
cycle will not operate. In this context, firms making high profits should use them to generate 
the next virtuous cycle. 
What I emphasize here is that firms’ using of profits in that manner not only has a positive 
impact  on  Japan’s  economy,  but  also  benefits  themselves.  Under  the  current  financial 
conditions, for those who think that the price stability target of 2 percent will be achieved, real 
interest  rates  are  extremely  low  and  the  expected  return  on  fixed  investment  must  be 
favorable. By contrast, for those who believe deflation will be here to stay, real interest rates 
remain high and their spending behavior will be restrained. After overcoming deflation, since 
those in the latter camp will become eager to spend, the competition for securing the labor 
force,  for  example,  will  become  intensified.  In  addition,  as  a  matter  of  course,  financial 
conditions will be sooner or later neutral to the economy as 2 percent inflation is achieved in 
a stable manner. 
In sum, the favorable financial conditions in the transitional period will not be forever. This is 
a  great  chance,  on  a  first-come-first-served  basis.  The  environment  surrounding  firms  is 
totally  different  between  the  economy  in  a  shrinking  equilibrium  under  deflation  and  the 
economy  in  an  expanding  equilibrium  under  the  2  percent  inflation.  The  rule  book  for 
business  will  be  rewritten.  As  widely  believed,  Charles  Darwin,  who  claimed  the  theory  of 
evolution, said “it is not the strongest of the species that survives, but the one that is the most 
adaptable  to  change.”  Firms  that  are  able  to  get  ahead  of  a  change  in  the  environment 
promptly and to adapt to the economy in an expanding equilibrium will become the winners 
of the competition and enjoy prosperity in the new era. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I sincerely wish you a Happy New Year. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
