  William C Dudley: Student loans and household finance 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank of  New  York,  at  the  Convening  on  Student  Loan  Data  Conference, 
New York City, 4 March 2015. 
 Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing these remarks. 
Good  morning.  I’m  happy  to  welcome  you  to  the  New  York  Fed  for  this  workshop  that  is 
intended to increase our understanding of student debt and how it affects individuals, their 
families and the economy. I am delighted to see such widespread and growing interest in this 
important  topic.  Making  continued  progress  on  understanding  these  issues  will  depend 
critically  on  efforts  to  identify  and  address  existing  data  gaps  that  hamper  its  study.  I  am 
particularly  happy  to  welcome  Deputy  Secretary  Sarah  Bloom  Raskin,  who  has  spoken 
frequently  and  eloquently  in  the  past  about  the  need  for  improvements  in  student  loan 
servicing and debt collection, the macroeconomic consequences of increased student debt, 
and the need for better data and analysis. I look forward to her remarks today. 
Before I make some specific comments on student debt, let me take a step back and say a 
few words on household finance more generally. As always, what I say represents my own 
views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal 
Reserve System.1 
There are several reasons the New York Fed has increased its focus on household finance. 
First, the financial crisis made it obvious that an ability to understand and anticipate what is 
happening in the household sector is essential to gauging the strength and resiliency of the 
U.S.  economy.  Second,  our  policy  actions  are  intended  to  change  the  incentives  facing 
households,  so  it  is  important  to  be  able  to  gauge  how  our  policies  are  transmitted  into 
household  financial  decisions.  Good  information  on  household  borrowing,  for  example, 
allows us to see how monetary policy affects outcomes such as auto loan originations. Third, 
better household finance research helps support our community outreach and development 
missions. 
A major challenge to achieving these goals is that household finances have traditionally been 
poorly documented. We have lots of information about corporate sector debt and equity, but 
comparable  basic  facts  about  the  household  sector  are  much  harder  to  come  by.  For 
example,  the  lack  of  timely,  comprehensive  data  made  it  more  difficult  to  understand  how 
vulnerable the household sector’s financial position had become by 2007. 
I’m happy to say that we’ve made progress in beginning to close this data gap. At the New 
York Fed, we’ve been able to develop products that support a much better understanding of 
the household sector’s borrowing behavior, ranging from loan-level mortgage information to 
credit  card  utilization  and  borrowing  limits.  This  has  greatly  improved  our  knowledge  of 
household debt burdens, new borrowing activity, debt repayment as well as delinquencies. 
We’ve  made  a  point  of  passing  along  these  insights  to  the  public  through  our  Quarterly 
Report  on  Household  Debt  and  Credit,  various  blog  posts  and  interactive  online  maps  of 
mortgage delinquencies. It has required a substantial commitment of resources to obtain the 
data and extract the information from them, but I’m convinced that it’s been the right course 
of action. 
Which brings me to the subject of today’s workshop: student loans. 
As  you  know,  student  debt  is  an  increasingly  important form  of  credit both for  households 
and for the economy. In 2010, aggregate outstanding student loan balances surpassed credit 
card  indebtedness,  and  in  2013  eclipsed  a  trillion  dollars.  During  the  historic  household 
deleveraging  that took  place  between  2008  and 2013,  student  debt  bucked  the  trend,  and 
was the only form of household credit that continued to increase each year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  There  are  many  reasons  for  this  growth,  some  of  which  are  well-documented  –  including 
increasing  numbers  of  individuals  who  are  pursuing  post-secondary  education,  increasing 
durations in school and higher tuitions. A less well-known contributor to the growing student 
debt balances was highlighted recently by a team of New York Fed economists.1 Using credit 
bureau data that track the quarterly balance and payment status of student loans, they have 
shown that the overall rate of repayment of outstanding student loans is very low, with many 
borrowers being delinquent on their loans. 
Now,  it’s  probably  fair  to  say  that  each  form  of  household  debt  has  distinctive  features.  A 
researcher  must  understand  these  differences  in  order  to  understand  the  role  that  a 
particular kind of debt plays in household decision-making. But student debt is perhaps the 
most distinctive form. Let me explain what I mean. 
Unlike virtually all other forms of credit, student loans are generally not underwritten: they are 
frequently  offered  to  young  borrowers  who  have  little  or  no  credit  history  and  little  to  no 
current income. The amount of credit extended, on average, runs in the tens of thousands of 
dollars.  These  loans  are  also  not  collateralized,  nor  are  the  interest  rates  risk-based. 
However, lenders (now primarily the taxpayers), are given additional security in that student 
loans, unlike other forms of debt, are not dischargeable in bankruptcy. This also means that 
delinquent student loans tend to remain on a borrower’s credit record long after the borrower 
has stopped making payments, thus leading to very high measured rates of delinquency. In 
addition,  many  special  programs  exist  to  allow  borrowers  to  postpone  repayment  on  their 
student loans to an extent not available for other kinds of household lending. New York Fed 
economists  have  shown  that  for  the  2009  cohort  of  graduates,  only  17  percent  of  their 
original  debt  had  been  paid  down  after  five  years.1  More  than  20  percent  of  high-balance 
student borrowers owe more now than when they graduated in 2009. For the 2005 cohort of 
graduates, only 38 percent of their original student debt had been paid down, on average, 
nearly ten years after graduation. 
These  loans  are  used  to  finance  human  capital  investment  projects  with  returns  that  are 
highly uncertain. It’s true that virtually every study finds that the returns on college degrees 
are high, on average, relative to their cost. But some people who take out student loans don’t 
end up with these high average returns. The net returns for some may, in fact, be negative. 
For example, many who have pursued vocational training may be less remunerated in the 
market. Similarly, some students attend certain for-profit universities with track records that 
indicate  that  their  graduates  have  lower  lifetime  earnings  than  other  types  of  educational 
institutions. While others drop out before receiving a degree – just 59 percent of the 2006 
cohort  had  received  their  four-year  degree  by  2012.  Of  course,  uncertain  returns  are  a 
feature of most investments, but for other loan types this uncertainty is generally managed 
more effectively through credit underwriting, collateralization and risk-based interest rates. 
We  are  fairly  confident  in  the  aggregate  statistics  –  over  a  trillion  dollars  in  loan  balances 
outstanding, 43 million borrowers and the highest delinquency rates of any form of household 
debt.  But  we  know  a  lot  less  about  the  precise  causes  and  consequences  of  the 
heterogeneity  in  the  net  returns  to  educational  investments  that  I  just  described. What  we 
know  so far,  based  on very  imperfect  data,  suggests that  this  heterogeneity  is  likely  to  be 
very  important.  We  have  gained  an  increasing  understanding  that  how  we  finance  post-
secondary  education  has  significant  effects  on  a  variety  of  critical  economic  outcomes, 
including economic growth and  inequality. For  example, our research suggests that higher 
student debt and delinquencies reduce household formation and depress homeownership. 
But  there  are  many  important  questions  still  left  unanswered.  What  is  the  relationship 
between  the  amount  and  type  of  educational  investment  that  people  make  and  their 
outcomes?  What  attributes  are  associated  with  borrowers  who  are  more  successful  at 
                                                
1   Payback Time? Measuring Progress on Student Debt Repayment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  repaying their student loans? Are there particular types of degrees that are associated with 
better  performance  with  respect  to  student  debt  repayment  or  with  better  living  standards 
earlier in life? What are the best interventions to help borrowers avoid the consequences of 
delinquency and default, and to limit any default costs to taxpayers? Do borrowers who use 
programs like income-based repayment eventually succeed in paying off their debts? How do 
income-based  repayment  programs  affect  important  decisions  such  as  labor  supply, 
consumption and household formation? 
These are important questions for the nation, as the human capital of our citizens is far and 
away our most important asset, and student loans are an important mechanism for financing 
needed investments in that asset. But it is very hard to answer these questions with existing 
data.  We  need  to  link  information  on  borrower  decisions  about  the  kind  and  amount  of 
education they receive to long-run outcomes for them and for the overall economy. 
So  I  commend  to  you  the  work  before  you  –  finding  new  ways  to  get  the  information  that 
policymakers need to answer important questions about how we finance higher education. I 
look forward to your insights and recommendations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
