  Andrew Gracie: Cyber in context 
Speech by Mr Andrew Gracie, Executive Director of Resolution of the Bank of England, at 
the UK Financial Services Cyber Security Summit, London, 2 July 2015. 
 It is the prerogative of the keynote speaker to take an Olympian view. I am not sure what the 
gods on Olympus would have made of cyber. Indeed from the goings on in Greek mythology, 
it could well have been that they were cyber perpetrators rather than protectors. So perhaps 
it is fitting that there are hacks now like ZEUS that carry their names. 
But my Olympian view will try and put the work that we are doing as authorities and with the 
sector in context. The sector’s role is important. After all, it is the responsibility of firms first 
and  foremost  to  ensure  that  they  are  resilient  to  cyber  attack.  From  an  authorities 
perspective,  cyber  is  somewhat  different,  but  it  relates  to  the  same  underlying  goals  that 
drive  our  policy  interventions  elsewhere  in  relation  to  operational  resilience.  I  want  to 
describe this relationship before turning to the specific steps that we have taken in the UK 
over the last two years under the aegis of the Financial Policy Committee (FPC). 
Cyber is relevant to many of the functions of the Bank of England as a financial authority. We 
are  responsible  as  prudential  supervisor  for  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks,  large 
investment  firms,  insurers  and  financial  market  infrastructure.  As  the  financial  stability 
authority we are also responsible for monitoring stability at the level of the sector as a whole. 
While we have multiple policy hats the common denominator in this space is ensuring that 
the  sector  has  adequate  operational  resilience  –  that  is that firms  can  continue  to  provide 
critical services that are important for their own integrity and the functioning of the sector. If a 
firm’s operations are interrupted, we want to be sure that they can be recovered quickly and 
reliably especially where they are systemically important. 
Three observations at this point: 
a) 
First  to  stress  our  accent  on  financial  stability.  Our  efforts  target  first  those  firms 
where operational failures may result in disruption to the provision of vital financial 
services to the real economy or in dislocation to the rest of the sector. That does not 
mean the failures in customer facing applications do not matter. It is just that, where 
no  immediate  systemic  dislocation  results  from  such  an  outage,  any  consumer 
detriment  will  be  a  concern  for  our  colleagues  at  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority 
(FCA) more than it is for us. 
Second,  operational  resilience  is  different  from  operational  risk.  In  operational 
resilience  we  are  describing  a  policy  outcome  we  want  to  deliver  in  terms  of  the 
system  functioning.  This  may  be  a  by-product  of  effective  operational  risk 
management.  But  the  operational  risk  regime  in  Basel  III1  is  designed  to  address 
another  potential  cause  of  financial  failure  in  firms  and  to  ensure  that  banks  are 
adequately  capitalised  against  these  risks.  It  does  not  target  the  continued 
availability of services and resilience directly. 
The third observation is that at the level of the sector our risk appetite has targeted 
limited disruption in firms that are critical for system functioning. For example FMIs 
supervised by the Bank as systemically important, set their standard of availability 
above  99%.  And  where  firms  suffer  outage  we  expect  them  to  have  business 
continuity  arrangements  that  allow  them  to  recover  immediately  or  within  hours. 
Firms  as  a  result  have  established  primary  and  secondary  sites,  at  a  suitable 
b) 
c) 
                                                
1   This refers to the capital regime only. Additional guidance on operational resilience can be found in the Basel core principles 
(http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs195.pdf). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
distance from each other, with data mirrored between the two. At the sector level as 
authorities  we  have  concentrated  on  ensuring  that  in  the  event  of  a  significant 
disruption  to  one  or  more  firms  we  can  share  information  and  coordinate  actions 
across  firms  in  the  UK  market  to  minimise  the  impact  of  system  stability  and  to 
speed  full  recovery.  These  arrangements,  including  senior  level  groups  for 
coordination  in  and  out  of  crisis  –  Cross  Market  Business  Continuity  Group 
(CMBCG) and Cross Market Operational Resilience Group (CMORG) respectively, 
are tested periodically to work through how the system would function in the face of 
particular types of shock or the loss of key systems. By definition, crisis events are 
unpredictable  but  regular  exercising  helps  to  establish  common  reflexes  that  will 
manage the consequences of a major operational disruption, including aspects that 
may not have been foreseen. 
Having set out the context and described our interest in operational resilience, let me turn 
now  to  cyber.  It  is  one  shock  among  many  that  could  result  in  operational  disruption.  But 
cyber  has  specific  characteristics  that  differentiate  it  from  other  threats  to  operational 
resilience. 
First  it  is  not  a  game  against  nature.  There  are  groups  out  there  that  are  motivated  to 
attack the sector. For most, the motivation is economic; that accounts for the rise in fraud. 
But there are actors out there, sometimes state-sponsored, who may be motivated to bring 
systems down and cause harm to the sector. 
Second  it  is  adaptive  and  changing.  Attackers  do  not  stand  still.  Attack  types  are 
constantly evolving and readily scalable. In the cyber arms race, costs are stacked in favour 
of  the  attacker,  not  the  defender.  Organisations  cannot  rely  on  building  a  hard  perimeter. 
They  too  need  to  develop  defensive  capability  that  is  adaptive  and  invest  in  threat 
intelligence to understand potential attackers and attack types. 
Third detection is not easy. Compromise of networks or attacks themselves will not always 
be obvious. Diagnosis may take time. By contrast physical threats to operational resilience – 
bombs, fires, floods – are immediately apparent. And apparent too to the rest of the sector. 
Fourth  capacity  to  recover  may  be  threatened.  Standard  approaches  to  achieving 
continuity – operating with common systems environments between primary and secondary 
sites and mirroring data between the two, could, in the face of a successful cyber attack, be 
vulnerable to complete loss of applications or destruction of data, disrupting a firm’s capacity 
to operate and leaving the timeframe and route to recovery uncertain. 
Hence the FPC recommendation in 2013 that relevant authorities should undertake work to 
test and improve resilience to cyber attack of the firms at the heart of the financial system2. 
You will have seen from the FSR published yesterday3 that interest in and awareness of this 
risk  continues  to  grow.  This  is  why  it  is  so  vital  that  firms  –  and  authorities  –  take  the 
necessary action to address their cyber vulnerabilities. 
In  response  to  the  FPC’s  2013  recommendation  our  work  has  been  mostly  diagnostic, 
concentrating on assessing the vulnerability of the UK financial sector to cyber attack. Our 
focus has been twofold: a cross-sector review of current risk management processes via a 
detailed  firm  self-assessment  questionnaire  and  bespoke  voluntary  vulnerability  testing, 
known as CBEST4. The conclusions we have drawn from this work can be broken down into 
three core areas: 
1. 
Defensive capabilities 
                                                
2   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/records/fpc/pdf/2013/record1307.pdf. 
3   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/fsr/2015/jul.aspx. 
4   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/fsc/Pages/cbest.aspx. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2. 
3. 
Recovery capabilities 
Effective governance 
 Defensive capabilities 
1. 
Yesterday’s Financial Stability Report (FSR) describes defensive capabilities as capabilities 
that “enable firms to identify and withstand attack.” This is important from a financial stability 
point of view not only for those firms that, as part of the cyber programme, we have identified 
as ‘core’ to the sector, but also relevant to their suppliers and other firms they trade with. It 
implies a level of resilience that goes beyond basic cyber hygiene but aims instead to ensure 
that firms are in a position to manage Advanced Persistent Threats (APT). While not wanting 
to  go  into  too  much  detail  on  the  cyber  work  programme5,  three  key  themes  are  relevant 
here. 
• 
in  place  so 
that  all  staff  understand  cyber  risk  and 
The  first  is  that  cyber  is  not  just  about  technology.  People  matter.  More  often 
than  not  attackers  may  seek  to  exploit  potential  weaknesses  in  personnel,  to 
establish a bridgehead for attacks. It is therefore essential that firms have the right 
arrangements 
their 
responsibilities for information assurance. 
The  second  is  that  cyber  requires  investment.  In  people  and  in  systems. 
Underinvestment  in  cyber  defences  may  mean  that  firms  are  behind  the  game  in 
terms of their ability to respond to crystallised threats. For example, they could risk 
misdiagnosing a cyber attack as an internal IT failure rather than a deliberate attack. 
The third is the importance of regular vulnerability testing. We launched CBEST, 
a  controlled,  bespoke,  voluntary  cyber  security  testing  framework  which  aims  to 
bring  to  bear  the  best  available  intelligence  on  potential  threats  to  test  directly  a 
firm’s ability to protect, detect and respond to cyber attacks. 
  Recovery capabilities 
2. 
But  even  with  improved  ex  ante  resilience,  no  network  is  impenetrable.  Hence  why  firms’ 
recovery capabilities are equally important. We still need firms to work to be able to resume 
vital services quickly and reliably in the event of operational disruption. We are keen to see 
firms adapt their approaches to business continuity planning to take account of cyber. One 
possibility  raised  in  the  FSR  is  seeking  more  segregation  between  primary  and  backup 
systems. 
Effective governance 
3. 
I mentioned earlier it is for firms in the first place to be responsible for their cyber resilience. 
I’ve also noted that cyber is about people as much as it is about technology. And let me be 
clear,  the  responsibility  for  understanding  this  risk  extends  beyond  technology  specialists; 
firms’  boards  need  to  view  cyber  risk  as  a  core  strategic  issue  and  be  in  a  position  to 
challenge senior management in all business areas on the adequacy of their arrangements 
to deliver cyber resilience. 
Going forward 
So this is where we’ve got to on cyber. But now it’s clear we need to place cyber on a more 
permanent footing. This is why the FPC has replaced its existing cyber recommendation with 
                                                
5   For more detail see http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech792.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
a recommendation targeted at completing the current set of CBEST tests and making them a 
regular part of supervision. The FPC has now recommended that the Bank, PRA and FCA 
“work with firms at the core of the UK financial system to ensure that they complete CBEST 
tests and adopt individual cyber resilience action plans. The Bank, PRA and FCA should also 
establish  arrangements  for  CBEST  tests  to  become  one  component  of  regular  cyber 
resilience assessment within the UK financial system.” 
In response, following on from the FPC’s recommendation, the Bank will therefore: 
• 
• 
Seek to embed CBEST within our supervisory framework; 
Undertake a broad, joint work programme with the FCA and HMT to enable the FPC 
to  consider  whether  additional  action  is  needed  to  address  cyber  risk.  Both  to 
improve ex ante cyber resilience in firms and ex post responsiveness; and 
Ensure the framework for cyber resilience is both alive to the special features that 
cyber  possesses  but  is  also  joined-up  with  our  approach  to  deliver  operational 
resilience of the sector more generally. 
 And of course with all of this, we know that cyber knows no borders. Hence the importance of 
continued cooperation with our international counterparts. 
At the beginning of this speech, I set out the Olympian view of the threat cyber poses and its 
broader context i.e. cyber matters because the operational resilience of the sector matters to 
financial stability. 
On the ground however, we still have a lot of work to do, hence the importance of a new FPC 
recommendation  and  ensuring  that  cyber  has  a  permanent  footing  in  management  of  the 
sector’s operational resilience. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
