  Kikuo Iwata: Financial education in Japan – challenges presented by the 
aging population and declining birthrate 
Special  address  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  ADBI-
Japan-OECD High-Level Global Symposium, Tokyo, 23 January 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I am Kikuo Iwata from the Bank of Japan. I am most 
pleased to have all of you here in Tokyo, to discuss financial education. I believe that sharing 
the insight and knowledge gained by some countries will benefit participants from other ones. 
I would like to thank the organizers and all involved. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  serves  as  the  secretariat  of the  Central  Council  for Financial  Services 
Information, which promotes financial education in Japan. As a member of the council, I feel 
that financial education has become increasingly important worldwide, particularly after the 
recent  global  financial  crisis.  I  also  think  that  country-specific  factors  and  historical 
background have had considerable influence. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about financial  literacy  in  Japan,  including  the  current  situation, 
challenges, and issues in promoting financial education. The country has been undergoing 
demographic changes, particularly of the aging population and declining birthrate. Indeed, it 
is aging more rapidly than most countries. I hope that our experience with addressing these 
financial literacy matters will offer you some insight. 
Need for financial literacy arising from demographic changes 
I. 
An  aging  population  and  declining  birthrate  represent  the  greatest  social  and  economic 
issues in Japan. The average life expectancy is 80 years for men and 86 years for women, 
and the population’s longevity is one of the highest in the world. Over the past six decades, 
life expectancy has increased by more than 20 years for both men and  women. While we 
should  welcome  the  increase,  maintaining  one’s  living  standard  over  a  longer  retirement 
period has become a crucial issue. In addition, with the declining birthrate, the proportion of 
people  aged  65  years  and  older  is  expected  to  rise  to  nearly  30  percent  by  2020. 
Considering  the  large  burden  borne  by  the  working-age  generations,  the  role  of  public 
pensions will become smaller. 
In other words, each individual’s efforts to achieve financial independence in their retirement 
period  have  become  more  important.  Encouraging  elderly  people  to  work  longer  is  one 
important  factor,  but  so  is  improving  financial  literacy.  Starting  lifetime  planning  while  still 
young and reserving assets for retirement will help. 
II. 
Changes in financial behavior and challenges presented by the aging 
population and declining birthrate 
The  need  for  improved  financial  literacy  is  gradually  taking  hold  in  Japan.  In  the  council’s 
survey, we ask about the “purpose of holding financial assets.” The reply chosen most often 
had  long  been  “preparation  for  illness  and  unexpected  emergency.”  But  in  2013,  this 
changed for the first time in its 60-year history to “funds for life during my retirement period.” 
This is symbolic for Japan, which has a well-developed public pension system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The financial behavior of Japanese people has changed accordingly. Households’ financial 
assets1 have increased by around 20 percent over the last decade; that is, the period before 
and after the global financial crisis. Notably, the amount held by people aged 60 years and 
older has reached 25 million yen per household. This is almost the same level as the “target 
amount  of  funds  you  regard  as  necessary”  in  the  survey.  Financial  assets  are  being 
accumulated to ensure a stable living standard over an individual’s retirement period. 
However, there are worrisome signs that financial literacy associated with lifetime planning 
has been undermined. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  households’  financial  assets  have  been  growing.  However,  at  the 
same  time,  the  number  of  households  that  do  not  have  such  assets  has  been  increasing 
recently. This trend has been observed in a wide range of income groups, including the high-
income group. The backgrounds to this are varied, and problems related to financial literacy 
represent  one  of  the  factors.  One  example  is  a  weaker  awareness  of  the  importance  of 
lifetime planning. 
There  are  various  concerns  regarding  children  as  well.  In  this  affluent  society  that  is 
undergoing demographic changes and rapid progress in technology, children could lose their 
sense of the value of money. For example, we have the so-called “six pocket problem.” This 
refers to a phenomenon in which a child is indulged with money given by the parents and 
grandparents of both the father and mother. Another is the “invisible money problem”; that is, 
a situation in which a child does not feel that they actually paid a price for something, given 
the increasing use of electronic money. In both cases, children have fewer opportunities to 
realize, through the first-hand experience of using physical money, that there are limits to the 
money we can spend. 
We must keep up with these developments, as lifestyles and values have become diverse 
and everyday life is more dependent on and convenient with technology. However, we still 
need to understand that there are limits to the goods we can own and  the money we can 
spend, so as to make sure that we make appropriate choices on daily consumption, financial 
transactions,  and  lifetime  planning.  We  need  to  be  aware  of  significant  financial  literacy 
factors – namely, the scarcity of money and resources as well as lifetime planning. Creating 
such awareness through financial education is challenging, but we cannot avoid this task. 
Another  issue  that  warrants  attention  is  the  rapid  increase  in  financial  fraud  targeted  at 
elderly people. I feel very sorry for the victims of such crimes. At the same time, the increase 
in financial fraud suggests that we need to strengthen the financial literacy of elderly people. 
The victims of financial fraud might have been caught off-guard. If they had had a little more 
financial literacy, they might not have been deceived. On the basis of our survey, we deem 
that elderly people generally have more confidence in their own financial literacy compared 
to other age groups. But in fact, they tend to have insufficient literacy. We should close the 
gap between high confidence and low literacy. 
We need to check and control daily payments, manage portfolios in line with lifetime plans, 
and  always  confirm  the  points  to  check  when  concluding  a  contract.  Enhancing  financial 
literacy in this way will be effective in guarding against financial fraud and, at the same time, 
for developing efficient asset formation. 
Initiatives taken in Japan 
III. 
In  2013,  Japan’s  Financial  Services  Agency  compiled  a  report  that  showed  the  future 
direction  of  financial  education,  drawing  on  the  experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  It 
proposed  to  emphasize  literacy  for  financial  behavior  and  focus  on  the  basics  of  financial 
                                                
1   The financial assets here are financial instruments, including bank deposits and postal savings, that are held 
for investment or reserved for future use. Funds held for business purposes and daily use are excluded. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  literacy to make it easier to learn. Based on this report, our council has been working to set 
standards and specify the contents of financial education by age group, and has formulated 
the Financial Literacy Map.2 
The council  also  provides  easy-to-understand teaching materials,  pamphlets,  and  DVDs  in 
cooperation with financial industry groups and other relevant organizations. In particular, we 
have pamphlets for middle-aged and elderly people, who must consider how to maintain their 
living standard over their retirement period as an immediate, practical issue. In cooperation 
with relevant organizations, the council also gives lectures to university students that place 
emphasis  on  fostering  decision-making  ability.  Through  these  activities,  it  has  been 
promoting more effective financial education for working-age generations to prepare them for 
later years. 
In fiscal 2005, our council launched a campaign that aims to improve financial education at 
schools. It has developed the contents of such financial education by age group. The council 
also  provides  various  teaching  materials,  including  practical  teaching  cases  for  school 
children. 
Indeed,  to  promote  financial  education  activities  more  effectively,  it  is  important  to  provide 
necessary  information  to  people  who  are  not  interested  in  lifetime  planning.  It  is  also 
necessary to devise ways of encouraging them to take appropriate actions so as to maintain 
lifetime  financial  independence.  These  are  difficult  tasks,  but  it  is  vital  to  make  people 
understand,  through  easy-to-understand  and  accessible  means,  that  financial  literacy 
reduces risks in their future lives. It is also essential to communicate to the public in a more 
effective manner by using behavioral economics insights. 
Conclusion 
The Bank of Japan will continue to promote financial education through the activities of the 
council. We will maintain close cooperation with the Financial Services Agency and relevant 
organizations.  Through  our  efforts,  we  hope  that  Japanese  people  can  continue  to  live 
stable, affluent lives despite the aging population and declining birthrate. 
I would like to conclude my speech by expressing our commitment to stronger cooperation 
with  those  of  you  who  have  gathered  here  today  from  the  OECD  and  various  countries 
around the world. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                
2   Available only in Japanese. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
