  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 3 June 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. 
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, the asset purchase programmes are 
proceeding well. As explained on previous occasions, our asset purchases of €60 billion per 
month are intended to run until the end of September 2016 and, in any case, until we see a 
sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  that  is  consistent  with  our  aim  of  achieving 
inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  When  carrying  out  its 
assessment, the Governing Council will follow its monetary policy strategy and concentrate 
on trends in inflation, looking through fluctuations in measured inflation in either direction if 
judged  to  be  transient  and  to  have  no  implication  for  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price 
stability. 
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  contributed  to  a  broad-based  easing  in  financial 
conditions, a recovery in inflation expectations and more favourable borrowing conditions for 
firms and households. The effects of these measures are working their way through to the 
economy  and  are  contributing  to  economic  growth,  a  reduction  in  economic  slack,  and 
money and credit expansion. The full implementation of all our monetary policy measures will 
provide  the  necessary  support  to  the  euro  area  economy,  lead  to  a  sustained  return  of 
inflation rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term, and underpin the 
firm anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
In the first quarter of 2015, real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, after 
0.3%  in  the  last  quarter  of  2014.  In  recent  quarters,  domestic  demand  and,  particularly, 
private consumption were the main drivers behind the ongoing recovery. The latest survey 
data to May remain consistent with a continuation of the modest growth trend in the second 
quarter.  Looking  ahead,  we  expect  the  economic  recovery  to  broaden.  Domestic  demand 
should be further supported by our monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on 
financial conditions, as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural 
reforms. Moreover, the low  level of the price of oil should continue to support households’ 
real  disposable  income  and  corporate  profitability  and,  therefore,  private  consumption  and 
investment. Furthermore, demand for euro area exports should benefit from improvements in 
price competitiveness. However, economic growth in the euro area is likely to continue to be 
dampened  by  the  necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  a  number  of  sectors  and  the 
sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. 
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.5% in 2015, 
1.9% in 2016 and 2.0% in 2017. Compared with the March 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections, the projections for real GDP growth over the projection horizon remain virtually 
unchanged. 
While remaining on the downside, the risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro 
area have become more balanced on account of our monetary policy decisions and oil price 
and exchange rate developments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Inflation bottomed out at the beginning of the year. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, 
euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.3% in May 2015, up from 0.0% in April and compared 
with  –0.6%  in  January.  On  the  basis  of  the  information  available  and  current  oil  futures 
prices,  annual  HICP  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  low  in  the  months  ahead  and  to  rise 
towards the end of the year, also on account of base effects associated with the fall in oil 
prices in late 2014. Supported by the expected economic recovery, the impact of the lower 
euro exchange rate and the assumption embedded in oil futures markets of somewhat higher 
oil prices in the years ahead, inflation rates are expected to pick up further during 2016 and 
2017. 
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.3% in 2015, 1.5% in 
2016  and  1.8%  in  2017.  In  comparison  with  the  March  2015  ECB  staff  macroeconomic 
projections,  the  inflation  projections  have  been  revised  upwards  for  2015  and  remain 
unchanged for 2016 and 2017. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments over the medium term. In this context, we will focus in particular on the pass-
through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures,  as  well  as  on  geopolitical,  exchange  rate  and 
energy price developments. We acknowledge that the staff projections are conditional on the 
full implementation of all our monetary policy measures in place. We also take into account 
that  the  degree  of  forecast  uncertainty  tends  to  increase  with  the  length  of  the  projection 
horizon. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm the increase in underlying growth in 
broad money (M3). The annual growth rate of M3 increased to 5.3% in April 2015, up from 
4.6%  in  March.  Annual  growth  in  M3  continues  to  be  supported  by  its  most  liquid 
components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 10.5% in 
April. 
Loan  dynamics  gradually  improved  further.  The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  non-
financial  corporations  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  was  –0.1%  in  April,  after  
–0.2% in March, continuing its gradual recovery from a trough of –3.2% in February 2014. 
Despite  these  improvements,  the  dynamics  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  remain 
subdued. They continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, 
credit  supply  factors,  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector 
balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  increased  further  to  1.3%  in  April  2015,  after  1.1%  in  March. The  monetary 
policy measures we have put in place  will support further improvements both in borrowing 
costs for firms and households and in credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the need to maintain a steady monetary policy course, 
firmly 
full 
implementation of all our monetary policy measures will provide the necessary support to the 
economic recovery in the euro area and lead to a sustained return of inflation rates towards 
levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance contributes to supporting economic activity. However, in order to reap 
the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute 
decisively. Given continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in 
the  euro  area,  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery  should  be  supported  by  effective  structural 
policies.  In  particular,  in  order  to  increase  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity, both the implementation of product and labour market reforms and actions to 
improve the business environment for firms need to gain momentum in several countries. A 
swift  and  effective  implementation  of  these  reforms,  in  an  environment  of  accommodative 
monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in the euro area but 
the  Governing  Council’s  monetary  policy  decisions.  The 
implementing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  will also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes. Therefore, it will encourage both 
households to expand consumption and firms to increase investment today, thus reinforcing 
the current cyclical economic recovery. As concerns fiscal developments, reflecting mainly 
the  cyclical  recovery  and  the  low  level  of  interest  rates,  the  aggregate  euro  area  general 
government deficit ratio is projected to decline gradually from 2.1% of GDP this year to 1.5% 
in 2017. The general government debt ratio is projected to decline gradually from 91.5% of 
GDP this year to 88.4% in 2017. Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery while 
remaining 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Full  and  consistent 
implementation of the Pact is key for confidence in our fiscal framework. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
in  compliance  with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
