  Linah K Mohohlo: Liquidity conditions in Botswana banks 
Speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, at the press briefing on 
banks’ liquidity condition, Gaborone, 26 March 2015. 
 I welcome you to this press briefing, the purpose of which is to provide clarity on liquidity at 
commercial  banks.  This  is  in  response  to  some  recent  articles  in  the  local  media  which 
suggest  that,  among  others,  banks  in  Botswana  are  in  financial  difficulties  and  their 
customers face a “credit crunch”. 
The Bank of Botswana welcomes informed reporting of topical banking/financial issues and, 
in this spirit, has endeavoured to provide timely and informative responses to questionnaires 
received  on  the  matter.  As  you  will  be  aware,  I  took  advantage  of  the  National  Business 
Conference  in  Maun  in  November  last  year  and  addressed  the  issue  of  commercial  bank 
liquidity in some detail. Given continued interest on the subject, we have considered that a 
further engagement with the media is advisable. 
I  will  share  with  you  salient  points  on  this  important  matter  and  respond  to  questions 
thereafter. 
I would like to underscore an important fact, and that is, the banking sector in Botswana is 
sound and profitable. Profitability has of course declined as expenses increased faster than 
income, and the situation varies from bank to bank. In the 12 months period to January 2015, 
the aggregate industry balance sheet grew healthily by 11 percent, with deposits growing by 
7 percent and credit growing by 13 percent. A tightening of bank liquidity has been evident. 
What is key is that all banks continue to comply with the necessary requirements such as the 
statutory liquid asset requirements. Recent economic and market developments have had no 
adverse  impact  on  levels  of  capital  in  the  banking  industry,  with  the  aggregate  Capital 
Adequacy  Ratio  at  19  percent  as  at  January  2015,  and  above  the  prudential  limit  of 
15 percent. 
In the past five years, excess liquidity in the banking system, as represented by outstanding 
Bank of Botswana Certificates (BoBCs), has declined from P17.7 billion as at end-2010 to 
P4.6 billion in February 2015. The main cause was the Bank of Botswana’s phased reduction 
of the excess money that is continuously mopped by way of auctioning of BoBCs. The cap 
for this excess money is currently P5 billion and it was put in place to encourage productive 
lending by banks as well as to moderate the cost of mopping up excess liquidity. 
In turn, this resulted in a period of rapid credit growth by commercial banks, compared to a 
slower  increase  in  deposits;  thus  resulting  in  a  sharp  increase  in  the  intermediation  ratio, 
which is simply a ratio of bank loans to deposits. This ratio increased from 53.1 percent at 
the  end  of  2010 to  87.6  percent  in  a  period  of four  years  to  the end  of 2014.  In  essence, 
funds  previously  held  in  BoBCs  have  been  diverted  to  loans  by  banks  and  more  than 
doubled – growing by 104.3 percent, from P22.1 billion in December 2010 to P45.2 billion in 
January 2015. These funds have been effectively absorbed by the economy, to the benefit of 
businesses  and  households.  Deposits  increased  at  a  slower  pace  of  31.7  percent  from 
P40.4 billion to P53.2 billion in the same four-year period. The slower growth in deposits is 
possibly due to, among others, sluggish growth in incomes, inadequate financial inclusion, 
more  streamlined  procedures  for  government  funding  of  parastatals  and  very  low  interest 
rates paid by banks on deposits. 
As funds available for lending become exhausted, it is inevitable that credit expansion would 
slow  down.  However,  credit  has  continued  to  grow  at  a  robust  pace,  as  evidenced  by  the 
January  2015  annual  growth  rate  of  13  percent,  which  is  higher  than  nominal  economic 
growth.  In  situations  of  tighter  liquidity,  banks  tend  to  tighten  lending  criteria,  while  taking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  measures  to  boost  deposits.  Even  then,  current  developments  do  not  suggest  that  new 
lending will cease completely, as growth in deposits remains positive. 
It  is  indeed  imperative  that  banks  undertake  measures  to  attract  deposits,  and  focus  on 
productive  use  of  more  limited  funds  available  for  lending.  More  emphasis  on  deposit 
mobilisation and improved financial inclusion would be steps in the right direction towards a 
more mature banking sector. 
There  are  also  complementary  measures  that  the  Bank  of  Botswana  stands  ready  to 
undertake in support of banks as they review their operations in an environment of reduced 
liquidity.  These  include  a  reduction  of  the  Primary  Reserve  Requirement  and  enhanced 
access to Bank of Botswana lending facilities. It is with this in mind that I wish to take this 
opportunity to inform you and, through you, all stakeholders that the Bank of Botswana has 
decided to reduce the Primary Reserve Requirement for banks from the current 10 percent to 
5 percent, with effect from April 1, 2015. This will release a total of P2.3 billion to augment 
the banks’ loanable funds. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
