  Norman T L Chan: Who would mortgage their children? 
Text of the DIGBY Memorial Lecture by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong 
Kong Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 10 April 2015. 
 Dr David Li, Professor CH Leong, Professor Paul Tam, Professor Gabriel Leung, Professor 
CM Lo, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to be invited to deliver this year’s Digby Memorial Lecture. When 
Professor Lo came to me with the invitation, I have thought long and hard on what this very 
distinguished  audience  from  the  medical  community  would  want  to  hear  from  the  Chief 
Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority.  I  hope  my  remarks  today  would  help 
stimulate  and  provoke  a  more  informed  discussion  in  our  society  on  where  we  want  our 
future generations to go. Instead of talking about monetary economics, which may not be of 
interest to most people, I have chosen a topic that is relevant to all of us, who have become 
accustomed to prosperity and good lives in a way that our parents and grandparents could 
never have dreamt of. 
“1942”: Children sold by parents 
2. Last year I saw a movie called “1942”. The movie was based on what happened during the 
great famine that occurred in the Henan Province （河南省） and the surrounding areas in 
China around 1942. The famine was apparently so devastating that millions of people were 
facing  starvation  and  many  of  them  fled  their  homes  as  there  was  nothing  to  eat.  In  the 
movie,  several  millions  of  refugees  fled  their  villages  and  towns  to  go  to  Xi’an（西安）, 
where  they  hoped  they  could  find  food  and  help,  but  most  of  them  did  not  make  it  and 
perished during the long journey. In desperation, many parents sold their children for a tiny 
sum  of  money  or  just  a  bowl  of  rice  in  order  to  survive  a  few  more  days.  The  movie 
presented graphically a shocking story, a tragedy of the very harsh reality and unspeakable 
human sufferings endured by our parents’ generation not that long ago. 
3.  Well,  this  very  depressing  and  horrible  scene  was  only  a  movie.  We  now  live  in  a 
comfortable world in which food is abundant and there is no shortage of daily necessities. 
Most of us take good lives for granted. The ugly and unpleasant scenes of parents selling 
their children as depicted in the movie “1942” were something of the past and do not seem to 
have any relevance in modern times. Is it so? 
4. For those of us who are parents, we are absolutely convinced and determined that we will 
do our utmost to protect our children. We will give them nothing but the best that we can 
afford so that they have a good life and a bright future. All of us here would find it unthinkable 
why  any  parents  would  want  to  give  away  or  mortgage  their  children.  So,  why  should  I 
choose this subject for tonight’s theme? Let me explain why the subject is a very timely and 
relevant topic. 
War and peace: Rising government debts in developed countries since 1980s 
5.  During  World  War  II,  naturally  most  governments  borrowed  huge  amounts  of  debts  to 
finance the warfare. As a result, the public debts shot up and the ratio of public debt to GDP 
rose to very high levels. In the industrial nations (e.g. US, UK, France, Germany and Japan), 
the average government debt increased to a peak level of over 200% of GDP in 1946. Huge 
government borrowings had crowded out the private sector and in any case most industries 
not  related  to  military  supplies  production  did  not  have  the  opportunity  to  expand  their 
business anyway. After the War, industrial nations began to pay down their public debts as 
they embarked on the journeys of reconstruction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
6. After two decades of hard work and economic growth, the ratios of government debt to 
GDP  of  the  industrial  nations  came  down  to  below  30%  in  the  1970s  while  private  sector 
debts grew steadily to around 85% of GDP. The total debt, public and private combined, was 
amounting to 110% of GDP at that time. 
7.  A  brief  word  about  debt. When  one  borrows  money,  whether  to fund  investments  or to 
finance  consumption,  it  could  bring  about  many  beneficial  effects.  For  example,  student 
loans could assist many young people without the necessary means to take up education or 
training that would benefit their whole lives. Business loans could help entrepreneurs, large 
or  small,  to  build  or  expand  their  operations  that  could  eventually  benefit  not  only  the 
shareholders but also the workers and the consumers as a whole. An instalment loan could 
help  us  buy  a  property  or  consumer  goods  that  would  otherwise  be  inaccessible  or 
unaffordable.  While  debt  can  bring  about  many  attractive  benefits,  it  has  just  one  major 
drawback. That is, debt is a liability that needs to be paid back, with interests, sometime in 
the  future.  This  means  that  someone  who  borrows  money  needs  to  use  his  or  her  future 
income to pay for interest and principal at some future time. This being the case, a prudent 
person or enterprise must take due care in ensuring that there is sufficient future income to 
meet the future payment liability arising from the debt obligation. 
Global financial crisis: More government debts 
8. Earlier I referred to the fact that the industrial nations’ total debt stabilised at around 115% 
of  GDP  in  the  1970s.  Now,  let  us  see  what  had  happened  in  these  countries  since  then. 
During the last three decades, both the private sectors and governments in the developed 
countries  repeatedly  borrow  money  at  a  rate  much  faster  than  their  economic  or  income 
growth.  As  a  result,  the  average  ratio  of  total  debt  to  GDP  of  the  developed  economies 
increased to about 290% before the eruption of the Global Financial Crisis in 2008. After the 
Global Financial Crisis, there is some reduction in the private sector debt in some countries, 
notably in the US. However, the levels of government debts have continued to rise. Before 
the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  the  US  federal  debt  was  US$9.2  trillion.  In  7  years’  time,  the 
federal debt increased by almost 100% to US$18.2 trillion. This is equivalent to an increase 
from 63% of GDP to 103% of GDP. In the euro-area, the level of public debt was 100% of 
GDP prior to the eruption of the European Sovereign Debt crisis in 2011, and it went up by 
another 2.7 trillion Euros and reached 120% of GDP in Q3 2014. In Japan, the situation is 
even  worse.  Public  debt  to  GDP  ratio  went  up  steadily  in  the  last  twenty  years  and  now 
reaches a stunning level of about 260%. Together with private-sector debt, the total debt of 
Japan adds up to about 480% of GDP, the highest in the developed world. So we don’t have 
a pretty picture in the developed world as a whole. 
9. Such rapid growth of public debt in major advanced economies reflects the lack of fiscal 
discipline and unrestrained spending behaviour of their governments. Except for Germany, 
most European governments have never been able to record fiscal surplus in any year since 
the early 1980s, with average annual fiscal deficits amounting to about 3–8% of GDP. In the 
US, the federal government still persistently registers fiscal deficits (averaging 3.2% of GDP 
per  annum  since  1980s)  only  except  for  the  second  term  of  the  Clinton  presidency  in  
1997–2001.  Incurring  persistent  fiscal  deficit  means  that  the  governments  have  to 
continuously raise additional debt to finance their spending. 
Quantitative easing: Lessening of pain of excessive debts? 
10.  This  ballooning  government  debt  raises  concerns  about  long-term  fiscal  sustainability. 
For now, the situation seems manageable as central banks in these economies are pursuing 
quantitative  easing  (QE)  policies  to  artificially  suppress  government  bond  yields.  The 
aggressive  asset  purchases  by  major  central  banks  have  now  suppressed  bond  yields  to 
extremely  low  levels,  where  shorter-term  government  bond  yields  in  some  European 
economies like Germany, Austria, Denmark and Switzerland have already turned negative. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Negative government bond yield means that lenders are paying borrowers for the privilege of 
holding their debt, which is clearly not making any sense. I doubt how long such an unusual 
phenomenon could last, but in any case, I’m certain that such distortions will definitely come 
with  unintended  consequences.  At  least,  one  side-effect  I  can  already  observe  is  that  QE 
penalises  prudent  savers  and  pensioners  very  badly.  In  Japan,  for  example,  QE  helps 
reduce the financing cost of public debt at the expense of eroding the purchasing power of 
JGB holders, with many of which being retirees and pension funds, by paying them negative 
real yield. 
Sovereign debt crisis: Mishaps that belong only to EMEs? 
11. There is this question: why has the developed world ended up where it is now? We know 
how  a  household  or  company  would  suffer  under  the  pressure  of  excessive  debt. 
Households  or  companies  troubled  by  significant  debt  overhang  have  to  curtail  their 
spending or investment, which has huge negative effects. In the end, they have to go into 
bankruptcy  if  they  cannot  repay  their  debts  when  due.  But there  is  a  lot  of misconception 
when it comes to a country owing excessive debt. It is true that a country cannot technically 
go bankrupt in the same way as a person or company. However, it does not mean that a 
country  cannot  go  into  default  if  it  borrows  more  than  it  can  pay  back.  Even  if  a  heavily 
indebted country manages to survive a debt crisis with debt restructuring, just like Mexico in 
the 1980s and more recently Greece, the debt overhang will still impede its economic growth 
and inflict huge costs and pain on its people in the form of rising unemployment and sharp 
drop in living standards. So how can one explain the common trend in the last 30 years of 
the developed world spending beyond their means and incurring debts to levels that clearly 
cannot be repaid by the current generation of people? One answer that I can think of is that, 
until quite recently, many people in the developed world had taken prosperity for granted and 
regarded good life as their right. So they wanted to keep on consuming and spending beyond 
the levels that could be supported by the growth of their economies or income. Many people 
in the developed world thought, rather mistakenly, sovereign debt crisis should be the kind of 
mishaps  that  can  only  occur  in  the  developing  economies.  At  the  same  time,  the  capital 
market  seemed  to  be  willing  to  support  this  belief  as  investors  were  happily  buying 
government bonds of the developed countries at very low interest rates. With what happened 
in the US and Europe in the last five years, we have come to realise that prosperity and good 
life have to be earned, through hard work and productivity growth, just like what their parents, 
grandparents  and  /  great  grandparents  in  the  western  world  great  grandparents  in  the 
western world did in the past. There is now little doubt that prosperity and good life built on 
the basis of rising indebtedness is unsustainable and is bound to collapse some time, just 
like sand castles. 
Trap of excessive indebtedness: Easy to get into and hard to get out 
12. There is another pertinent question on why so many countries do not seem to be able or 
willing to get out of the trap of high indebtedness or excessive leverage. For one, it is far too 
tempting  to  spend,  consume  now  and  worry  about  payment  later.  That  explains  why,  in 
addition to public debts, household debts have risen to very high levels all over the world. But 
there is a limit, largely determined by market forces, on how much debt an individual or a firm 
can incur. Lenders, whether banks, finance companies or bond investors, would look at the 
creditworthiness of the borrowers and demand high interest rates to cover the credit risks or 
simply refuse to lend any more if the repayment ability of the borrower is in doubt. Moreover, 
a person with a reasonable mind would need to consider the risk of facing the unpleasant 
consequence of bankruptcy if he fails to repay his debts on time. The same applies to the 
owners  or  managers  of  companies.  However,  it  is  quite  different  when  it  comes  to 
government debts. 
13. In times of war, the government has no choice but to borrow from every possible source 
to finance the warfare as it is a question of survival of the nation. We all understand this and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
so did the peoples of the countries at war. However, the developed countries have not been 
at war with each other for a long time since 1945 and why did their governments keep on 
piling up public debts to unsustainable levels? There are many complicated reasons as well 
some rather simple reasons. Let me go straight to the simple reasons today. If a government 
borrows money to finance productive investments in physical infrastructure, such as ports, 
airports, roads, bridges and power plants, or to finance the development of human capital, 
such  as  education,  research  and  training,  then  these  investments  should  bear  fruit  in  the 
future  by  raising  the  productivity  and  competitiveness  of  the  economy  concerned.  In  that 
case,  the  repayment  of  the  money  borrowed  should  not  be  problematic  in  the  future. 
However,  if  the  government  borrows  to  finance  consumption,  wasteful  investments  and 
excessive welfare, then over time the economy will find it hard to repay the debts. 
14. It is difficult for anyone to be overly optimistic on the prospects of an early resolution of 
the leverage trap in the developed world. Leveraging brings about enjoyment and pleasure, 
as it supports domestic consumption and demand, for as long as the capital market is willing 
to finance the borrowings at reasonably low interest rates. Deleveraging brings the opposite 
outcome, which is very, very painful. Deleveraging could result in economic recession, fall in 
asset prices, rise in unemployment, drop in personal, corporate and government income etc. 
in the short run. None of these is pleasant and it is not surprising at all to see the very strong 
pushback  by  the  people  in  the  crisis-hit  countries  in  Europe  on  measures  that  attempt  to 
redress the fiscal sustainability problem. 
Excessive government debt and “collective irresponsibility” syndrome 
15. There is also another simple but important reason why people as well as the politicians 
elected  by  them  would  want  to  continue  to  spend  beyond  their  means  even  though  they 
realise that they could not afford to repay the debts in their lifetime. This is what I would like 
to call the “collective irresponsibility” syndrome. A father or mother will do almost anything to 
protect their children. Some would be prepared to sacrifice their happiness and even lives for 
their children. It is only in great desperation, such as the great famine in China depicted in 
the movie “1942”, that we would witness children being sold by their starving parents. But 
that  was  a  very  extraordinary  and  tragic  situation.  We  can  hardly  say  that  the  developed 
world is now in that desperate situation. There is an interesting point here: when a parent 
mortgages his child, he is accountable for this brutal and inhumane act. 
However, when a voter elects politicians who promise continued and unsustainable spending 
he is just one of many, many voters. The vote is cast in anonymity and the voters have no 
direct accountability for how they vote and for the consequences of such voting decisions. 
The voters may also think or hope that, even if the national debts can only be paid back by 
the  next  generation,  it  would  be  someone  else’s  children,  not  their  own,  who  will  have  to 
shoulder 
that  cultivates  “collective 
irresponsibility”, the temptation of “spend now and not having to repay” mind-set can easily 
overwhelm  common  sense 
fiscal 
consequences in the medium to longer run. 
favour  of  populist  policies  with  unsustainable 
influence  of  anonymity 
the  burden.  Under 
the 
in 
How to get out of a government debt crisis: Painful deleveraging and resolute 
structural reforms 
16. It seems clear enough even to people without training in economics that the solution to a 
crisis caused by excessive level of government debts is not through borrowing more money 
and piling up more debts. The solution must be through deleveraging over time in the overly 
indebted sectors. At the national level, three things must be done at the same time. First, the 
government  must  implement  a  credible  fiscal  consolidation  programme  to  reduce  public 
spending  and  increase  revenues.  Second,  the  government  should,  within  the  reduced 
budget, strive to allocate resources to infrastructural and other productive investments that 
could facilitate the return of healthy economic growth in the medium to long term. Third, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 that  would  raise 
 
 
government must pursue structural reforms that would enhance the flexibility and capacity of 
the 
the  productivity  and 
labour,  product  and  services  markets 
competitiveness of the economy and its workers. 
17. Of course, I appreciate that these three things are very hard to implement. However, I 
don’t think there is any short cut or easy way out. The adjustments after any financial crisis 
triggered by excessive debt are by nature very painful. Speaking about pain, let me remind 
you of the pain that Hong Kong endured the last time we made the mistake of getting into a 
big property bubble and excessive leverage in the 1990s. After the bursting of the property 
bubble in 1997, Hong Kong’s GDP shrank by around 9% in just over a year. Housing prices 
dropped by 66% from October 1997 to July 2003. Unemployment rate shot up from 2.1% in 
1997 to 8.5% in June 2003, which is the highest level since Hong Kong started to compile 
unemployment statistics. Prices in Hong Kong, as measured by the Consumer Price Index, 
went down by a staggering 16%, which was a very sharp fall within a fairly short time span of 
5  years. This  was  a  really  difficult  and  painful  period for  Hong  Kong  and  most  of  us  here 
would  probably  not  want  Hong  Kong  to  repeat  this  experience  ever  again.  Looking  back, 
Hong Kong proved to be highly resilient and tenacious during this very difficult period. Hong 
Kong people endured the pain and did not give up. Hong Kong also undertook many reforms 
and adjustments that have helped put our economy and financial system in a much stronger 
position  to  withstand  future  shocks  and  turbulence,  which  actually  came  following  the 
eruption of the Global Financial Crisis in 2008 and of the European Sovereign Debt Crisis in 
2011. 
18. I think, and hope, that the developed world may before long come to appreciate that the 
time for reckoning is just round the corner. They will probably realise that debts borrowed by 
developed countries are still debts and must be repaid one way or the other in the future. 
Moreover, excessive debt or leverage would drag down the economy sooner or later, just in 
the same way it did to the developing economies. It is natural that most people would prefer 
to get out of the indebtedness trap without the pain that would be inflicted on them when the 
economy undertakes the necessary fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. So it is not 
surprising that people would like to think that if they can find someone who is very clever to 
lead  the  government  or  to  be  in  charge  of  the  central  bank,  then  somehow  good  life  can 
return and business is back to normal once again without the painful adjustments. No one 
can rule out the possibility of finding a very clever person who can save the world without 
pain, but I suspect that it would probably not be a bad idea, and hopefully not too late, to start 
studying  and  learning  from  the  Hong  Kong  recovery  story  after  the  eruption  of  the  Asian 
Financial Crisis. 
(EMEs)  have  had  a  wealth  of  experience 
Conclusion: Don’t mortgage our children 
19. Ladies and Gentlemen, while I have talked a lot about the predicament of the developed 
world, it is not my intention to suggest that the developing world is all home and dry. Many 
Emerging  Market  Economies 
the 
mismanagement in their macroeconomic, fiscal and monetary policies, and all of them had 
paid a heavy price for their past mistakes. The fact that the latest series of crises erupted in 
the  developed  world  does  not  mean  EMEs  are  immune  from  the  spillover  effects.  More 
fundamentally, the Emerging Market Economies, including Hong Kong where household debt 
to GDP ratio saw a record high, must learn from the latest mistakes of the developed world 
and take extra care in not getting into the mind-set or habit of spending beyond our means, 
whether  at  the  household,  corporate  or  government  level.  Hong  Kong  should  in  particular 
guard against the temptation of “collective irresponsibility” by pushing for or condoning public 
policies that entail spending that cannot be sustained in the medium to longer run, or else we 
would be mortgaging the future of our children and grandchildren. This again is easier said 
than  done,  and  requires  considerable  wisdom  of  Hong  Kong  people  and  the  courage  and 
skills  of  our  leaders  to  resist  increasing  pressure  and  temptations  for  unrestrained  public 
spending.  Hong  Kong’s  population  is  aging,  and  aging  fast.  At  present,  the  elderly 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
dependency ratio of Hong Kong is 5:1. This means that Hong Kong now has 5 persons within 
the age group of 15–64 supporting each person over the age of 65. However, in over two 
decades’ time, the ratio will deteriorate significantly to 2:1, which means that there will only 
be 2 persons in the age group of 15–64 supporting one elderly person. The Government has 
already made it clear that, while we are having budget surpluses, structural budget deficits 
will occur within a decade mainly due to changing demographic structure. 
20. Ladies and Gentlemen, I have just made a long speech and now I would like to leave you 
with several key takeaways. First, it is very easy for governments to fall into the trap of going 
down the path of fiscal unsustainability as a result of the collective irresponsibility syndrome 
as well as population aging. Second, it is very, very hard and immensely painful to try to get 
out of a government debt crisis. Third, more likely than not, it is the next generation and the 
next and the next that will have to shoulder the costs and to suffer the pains for excessive 
spending and stock piling of debts by the current generation. If we don’t want to mortgage 
the future of our children and grandchildren, try not to leave with them a pile of debts as in 
the case of many developed countries. How can we do this : we must take great care in not 
demanding or condoning policies that would undermine the long-established fiscal prudence 
and discipline of our Government. 
To  push my  point further,  not  only  we  should  not  spend  now  and  ask our  children  to  pay 
later, I would argue that our generation, like our parents and grandparents before us, must 
seek  to  protect  our  children  and  grandchildren  by  standing  ready  to  make  sacrifices  from 
time to time for the benefit of a better Hong Kong in the future. 
21. 
Thank you for having me this evening and thank you for your patience. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
