Agustín Carstens: Award of the Order of the Aztec Eagle to Richard W 
Fisher 
Remarks by Mr Agustín Carstens, Governor of the Bank of Mexico, during the ceremony to 
grant the Mexican Award of the Order of the Aztec Eagle (Orden del Águila Azteca), in the 
category of Badge, to Richard W Fisher, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, Mexico City, 17 February 2015. 
 Good evening. 
• 
• 
 Secretary of Foreign Affairs, José Antonio Meade Kuribreña, 
Dear friend and fellow central banker, President and Chief Executive Officer of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Richard Fisher, 
Honorable  guests  gathered  here  tonight  to  celebrate  the  well-deserved  award 
granted by the Government of Mexico to Richard Fisher, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
• 
The  agreement  of  last  December,  by  means  of  which  President  Peña  Nieto  granted  the 
Mexican Award of the Order of the Aztec Eagle to Richard Fisher, is very clear with respect 
to why he was considered for such high honor: 
His  tireless  defense  and  promotion  of  free  trade  between  Mexico  and  the  U.S.;  his 
determined  backing,  in  different  forums,  of  opportunities  derived  from  Mexican  economic 
policies; and his continuous efforts in strengthening the trade and financial links between our 
countries, both for the benefit of the Mexican and American people. 
Richard has also been a permanent advocate of price stability as a necessary, although not 
sufficient,  condition  to  foster  economic  growth  and  well-being.  And,  we  recognize  his 
generous willingness to exchange experiences in central banking matters and to find timely 
solutions  to  the  new  binational  challenges,  such  as  in  correspondent  banking  and  in 
regulation and supervision of financial institutions. 
Richard Fisher’s close connection and undeniable affection for Mexico is deeply valued. His 
positive attitude towards Mexico is clearly evidenced by his constant presence in the country, 
where he lived during his childhood and studied elementary school. Richard recalled back in 
2006,  as  he  delivered  a  speech  in  Monterrey,  that  his  mother  used  to  say  that  when  he 
turned  18  years  old  he  knew  more  about  Miguel  Hidalgo  and  Benito  Juárez  than  about 
Abraham Lincoln and George Washington. 
I would like to add to all of these merits, two additional virtues that Richard has and that, due 
to  personal  reasons,  make  him  an  even  more  valuable  individual.  First,  that  during  his 
childhood,  he  played  baseball  in  the  Little  Leagues  of  Mexico.  An  experience  which, 
according to those knowledgeable in the field, as myself, forges great personalities. 
Second, and more substantive, is Richard’s fondness for speaking and writing in a clear and 
refreshing way. In particular, he has been a permanent advocate for central banks, starting 
with the US Federal Reserve System, to use a simple and straightforward language so that 
the public at large understands and values central banks’ actions and objectives. Much is to 
be  learned  by  all  central  banks  worldwide  in  this  regard,  since  a  timely  and  transparent 
communication with society has become an essential tool of monetary policy. 
Just last week, in a lively speech at the “The Economic Club” in New York, Richard Fisher 
made a strong recommendation to his colleagues at the Federal Reserve: “…we at the Fed 
need to learn to speak English, rather than ‘Fedspeak’ ”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Let me present to you one example of Richard’s straight talk, extracted from an interview in 
2013  with  the  Financial  Times:  “Markets  tend  to  test  things.  We  haven’t  forgotten  what 
happened to the Bank of England [on Black Wednesday]. I don’t think anyone can break the 
Fed . . . But I do believe that big money does organize itself somewhat like feral hogs. If they 
detect a weakness or a bad scent, they’ll go after it”. 
Caution  must  characterize  a  central  bank  when  making  forecasts,  projections  and 
statements.  It  should  also  be  taken  into  account  that  monetary  policy  decisions  in  central 
banks such as Banco de Mexico or the Federal Reserve System are taken jointly by people 
who tend to be, as is expected of them, very cautious in terms of preserving and expressing 
their views. Therefore, the apparent ambiguity of the language used by central banks is often 
a reflection of a variety of opinions and points of view that were exchanged before reaching a 
decision, and that in some way or another are, to put it very informally, “mushed together” in 
a communiqué or a report. 
Nevertheless,  these  considerations  do  not  exempt  central  banks  and  their  speakers  from 
using  a  clear,  transparent  and  even  sometimes  “folksy”  language,  as  the  use  of  the  term 
“feral hogs”, a very Texan expression, that Dick so effectively used in his FT interview. Let 
me  quote  Richard  again:  “We  central  bankers  deal  with  uncertainty,  but  we  are  obliged 
before  society  to  a  rigorous  and  disciplined  handling  of  clarity  in  order  to  give  as  many 
certainties  as  possible.”  This  phrase  is  a  gem  of  a  message  that  should  apply  forever  in 
central banking. Quite a legacy from our honored guest. 
In closing, we all here at Banco de México enthusiastically join President Enrique Peña Nieto 
in  thanking  Richard  for  all  that  he  has  done  for  Mexico  and  to  enhance  Mexico  –  US 
relationships, which I am sure he will continue to do. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
