  Njuguna Ndung’u: Sustainable finance initiatives across the Kenyan 
financial sector 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Technical  Experts  Convening  on  Long-Term  Sustainable  Finance  in  Kenya,  Nairobi, 
11 February 2015. 
 Dr. Achim Steiner, Executive Director, UNEP; 
Mr. Manuel Moses, Regional Head, IFC Africa; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  convening  together  with  my  co-host,  Dr  Achim 
Steiner. My thanks go to Dr. Steiner and Mr. Manuel Moses for putting together this forum. 
Our meeting today follows yesterday’s convening with Chief Executive Officers and leaders 
of regulatory agencies from the financial sector. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  was  impressed  at  the  level  of  enthusiasm  and  ownership  of 
sustainable finance by the CEOs at yesterday’s convening. We should also be proud of the 
already  budding  sustainable  finance  initiatives  across  the  Kenyan  financial  sector  ranging 
from banking, insurance, capital markets, retirement benefits and asset management. These 
initiatives will be shared with you in the course of today. My key takeaway from yesterday’s 
convening  is  that  there  is  high  level  support  at  CEO  level  for  sustainable  finance  in  the 
institutions represented here today. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen: Wearing  my  dual  hats  as  a  central  banker  and  regulator,  let  me 
underscore that sustainability lies at the heart of our decision making. As a central bank, we 
take  the  view  that  we  need  to  go  beyond  our  traditional  mandate  of  price  and  financial 
stability. In emerging economies such as Kenya, it is imperative that Central Banks also act 
as market development agents. In this role, Central Banks support development of financial 
infrastructure,  strong  institutions  and  a  conducive  policy  environment.  It  is  this  underlying 
philosophy that has guided us in execution of our mandates that I will now turn to. 
First, stability of domestic prices creates an environment of certainty. The market formulates 
long term solutions based on this certainty. When there is uncertainty, the market develops a 
waiting option and slows down economic activity. A waiting option is not sustainable. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Second,  we  can  only  talk  about  financial  sustainability  when  the 
financial  markets  are  accessible.  Financial  inclusion  will  lead  to financial  development  and 
open discussions about policies for financial sustainability. 
Several initiatives in Kenya for financial inclusion include: 
• 
introduction of mobile phone financial services, 
introduction of the Agency Banking Model and Currency Centres to lower the cost of 
• 
doing business for banks, 
target 
licensing  of  microfinance  banks,  which 
expanding institutional branch network countrywide, 
allowing  banks  to  introduce  Shariah  compliant  (or  participatory)  banking  products, 
and 
the  Credit  Information  Sharing  mechanism  to  build  Information  Capital  to  solve 
information asymmetry problems in the financial sector. But also a mechanism that 
lower-income  segments,  and 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  can  develop  templates  for  ratings  either  for  individuals  or  projects  –  where 
sustainability can be an indicator. 
The  evidence  so  far  indicates  that  these  reforms  and  initiatives  have  had  an  appreciable 
impact in expanding financial access. According to Geospatial Surveys conducted in 2013, 
Kenya  was  ranked  ahead  of  peer  countries,  Tanzania,  Uganda  and  Nigeria.  Most 
fundamentally, 76.7% of Kenyans live within 5 kilometres of a financial services touch point 
compared to 47.3%, 42.7% and 35.1% for Nigeria, Uganda and Tanzania respectively. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Third, the CBK mandate of financial stability where the overarching 
goal  is  to  promote  existence  of  strong  banks.  Without  strong  banks,  we  cannot  talk  about 
long  term  and  sustainable  finance.  In  this  regard,  CBK  has  adopted  a  flexible  risk 
management  framework  for  the  banking  sector,  which  can  accommodate,  among  other 
areas, the management of environmental and societal concerns. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Fourth, since 2009, the Kenya Government through the CBK as its 
fiscal agent has issued 7 long-term infrastructure bonds. Proceeds have been used to fund 
sustainable  infrastructural  solutions  including  clean  and  renewable  energy  plants,  like  the 
geo-thermal power generation. The deployment of these funds towards eco-friendly projects 
serves  as  a  benchmark  for  private  sector  institutions  in  their  project  appraisal  and 
implementation decisions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  It  is  not  in  doubt  that  there  is  a  case  for  sustainable  finance  in 
Kenya.  Kenya  has  ambitious  plans  to  transition  to  a  green  economy.  This  comes  with 
tremendous  financing  opportunities  for  both  domestic  and  foreign  financiers.  For  instance, 
the  substantial  financing  required  in  scaling  up  Kenya’s  renewable  energy  output  requires 
imaginative  solutions.  The  banking  sector  alone  cannot  meet  these  needs  and  other 
emerging opportunities as Kenya goes green. We must therefore seek solutions that straddle 
the banking, insurance, pension funds and capital markets spheres. 
As  we  design  a  roadmap  this  morning,  we  should  take  cognisance  of  the  enormous 
opportunities that sustainable finance offers. Working in silos as is the case currently will not 
scale  up  sustainable  finance.  We  should  therefore  come  up  with  a  holistic  roadmap  that 
incorporates  the  financial  sector  players,  regulators,  development  partners  and  the 
Government. Let us also formulate clear deliverables, performance indicators and a roadmap 
that will facilitate Kenya’s aspiration of being a green economy. 
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I look forward to fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
