  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 15 April 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, we decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. 
As regards non-standard monetary policy measures, on 9 March we started purchasing 
euro-denominated  public  sector  securities  as  part  of  our  expanded  asset  purchase 
programme, which also comprises purchases of asset-backed securities and covered bonds. 
Purchases are intended to run until the end of September 2016 and, in any case, until we 
see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our aim of achieving 
inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  When  carrying  out  its 
assessment, the Governing Council will follow its monetary policy strategy and concentrate 
on trends in inflation, looking through unexpected outcomes in measured inflation in either 
direction if judged to be transient and to have no implication for the medium-term outlook for 
price stability. 
The  implementation  of  our  asset  purchase  programmes  is  proceeding  smoothly,  with 
volumes in line with the announced figure of €60 billion of securities per month. In addition, 
there is clear evidence that the monetary policy measures we have put in place are effective. 
Financial market conditions and the cost of external finance for the private sector have eased 
considerably over the past months and borrowing conditions for firms and households have 
improved notably, with a pick-up in the demand for credit. 
Looking ahead, our focus will be on the full implementation of our monetary policy measures. 
Through  these  measures,  we  will  contribute  to  a  further  improvement  in  the  economic 
outlook, a reduction in economic slack and a recovery in money and credit growth. Together, 
such developments will lead to a sustained return of inflation towards a level below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term and will underpin the firm anchoring of medium to long-term 
inflation expectations. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  rose  by  0.3%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  last  quarter  of  2014. 
Domestic demand, especially private consumption, continued to be the main driver behind 
the  ongoing  recovery.  The  latest  economic  indicators,  including  survey  data  up  to  March, 
suggest that the euro area economy has gained further momentum since the end of 2014. 
Looking  ahead,  we  expect  the  economic  recovery  to  broaden  and  strengthen  gradually. 
Domestic  demand  should  be  further  supported  by  ongoing  improvements  in  financial 
conditions, as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. 
Moreover,  the  lower  level  of  the  price  of  oil  should  continue  to  support  households’  real 
disposable  income  and  corporate  profitability  and,  therefore,  private  consumption  and 
investment. Furthermore, demand for euro area exports should benefit from improvements in 
price competitiveness. However, the euro area recovery is likely to continue to be dampened 
by the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of 
implementation of structural reforms. 
While remaining on the downside, the risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro 
area have become more balanced on account of the recent monetary policy decisions, the 
fall in oil prices and the lower euro exchange rate. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was –0.1% in March 
2015,  up  from  –0.3%  in  February  and  –0.6%  in  January.  This  pattern  largely  reflects  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  increase  in  oil  prices  in  euro  terms  since  mid-January.  On  the  basis  of  the  information 
available and current oil futures prices, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain very low 
or still negative in the months ahead. Supported by the favourable impact of our monetary 
policy measures on aggregate demand, the impact of the lower euro exchange rate and the 
assumption of base effects and somewhat higher oil prices in the years ahead, inflation rates 
are expected to increase later in 2015 and to pick up further during 2016 and 2017. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  monitor  closely  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments over the medium term. In this context, we will focus in particular on the pass-
through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures,  as  well  as  on  geopolitical,  exchange  rate  and 
energy price developments. 
Turning to  the monetary analysis,  recent  data  confirm the gradual  increase  in  underlying 
growth in broad money (M3). The annual growth rate of M3 increased to 4.0% in February 
2015, up from 3.7% in January. Annual growth in M3 continues to be supported by its most 
liquid  components,  with  the  narrow  monetary  aggregate  M1  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of 
9.1% in February. 
Loan dynamics also gradually improved further. The annual rate of change of loans to non-
financial  corporations  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  was  –0.4%  in  February, 
after –0.9% in January, continuing its gradual recovery from a trough of –3.2% in February 
2014.  In  this  respect,  the  April  2015  bank  lending  survey  confirms  that  improvements  in 
lending conditions support a further recovery in loan growth, in particular for firms. Despite 
these  improvements,  the  dynamics  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  remain  subdued 
and  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged  relationship  with  the  business  cycle,  credit  risk,  credit 
supply  factors  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance 
sheets.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and 
securitisation)  increased  further  to  1.0%  in  February  2015,  after  0.9%  in  January.  The 
monetary policy measures we have put in place should support further improvements both in 
borrowing costs for firms and households and in credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirms the need to implement firmly the Governing Council’s 
recent decisions. The full implementation of all our monetary policy measures will provide the 
necessary support to the euro area recovery and bring inflation rates towards levels below, 
but close to, 2% in the medium term. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance contributes to supporting economic activity. However, in order to reap 
the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute 
decisively. Given continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in 
the  euro  area,  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery  should  be  supported  by  effective  supply-side 
measures.  In  particular,  in  order  to  increase  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity, both the implementation of product and labour market reforms and actions to 
improve the business environment for firms need to gain momentum in several countries. A 
swift and effective implementation of these reforms will not only  lead to higher sustainable 
growth in the euro area but will also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and 
encourage both households to expand consumption and firms to increase investment today, 
thus reinforcing the current economic recovery. Fiscal policies should support the economic 
recovery  while  remaining  in  compliance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Full  and 
consistent implementation of the Pact is key for confidence in our fiscal framework. In view of 
the necessity to step up structural reform efforts in a number of countries, it is also important 
that the macroeconomic imbalance procedure is implemented effectively in order to address 
the excessive imbalances as identified in individual Member States. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
