Harun R Khan: Emerging trends in the global financial landscape – 
India’s challenges and opportunities 
Based on the inaugural address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at the Third International Conference on Emerging Trends in The Global Financial 
Landscape organised by the Symbiosis Centre for Management Studies, Pune, 23 February 
2015. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri. R Subramanian & Shri. Surajit Bose of the Reserve Bank of 
India. 
1.  Good  morning  Symbiosis.  Dr.  Rajani  Gupte,  Vice  Chancellor,  Symbiosis  International 
University, Dr. Bhama Venkataramani, Director, Symbiosis Centre for Management Studies, 
Mr. Y.M Deosthalee, Chairman & MD, L&T Finance Holdings Ltd., Mr. Alexander K. Sattler, 
Financial  Counsellor  &  Representative  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  members  of  faculty, 
students, distinguished invitees and friends from media. It is a pleasure to be in your midst 
and  inaugurate  the  Third  International  Conference  on  Emerging  Trends  in  The  Global 
Financial Landscape. Last seven years have been quite eventful and interesting for all and 
especially  for  the  policy  makers  across  economies.  Crisis  after  crisis  have  tested  existing 
policies, forced reorientation of many policies and led to adoption of unconventional policies. 
In  short,  the  intensity  of  global  financial  crisis  of  the  recent  past  has  been  such  that  the 
financial landscapes have undergone tectonic shifts. Against this background, I would begin 
with a brief review of the key developments that shape our global outlook at this point of time 
and the impact of such changes on India. I would briefly highlight the impact of major crises 
in  the  past  vicennium  and  then  touch  upon  the  various  dimensions  of  India’s  increasing 
linkages  with  the  global  financial  landscape  besides  current  state  of  external  sector 
vulnerability. Finally, before summing up, I would briefly cover the issues related to foreign 
exchange  reserves  which  act  as  the  first  line  of  defence  when  faced  with  external  sector 
vulnerabilities and volatilities. 
A.  
Global outlook 
Developed economies 
2. The IMF has projected1 global growth in 2015–16 at 3.5 and 3.7 per cent. The projections 
are  0.3  per  cent  lower  than  what  was  projected  in  its World  Economic Outlook  in October 
2014.  The  revisions  reflect  a  reassessment  of  growth  prospects  in  China,  Russia,  the 
Eurozone, Japan and some oil exporting countries. World trade volume and consumer prices 
in  advanced  economies  are  also  projected  to  decline.  The  World  Bank,  in  its  Global 
Economic Prospects Report, January 2015, has reduced global growth projection for 2015 
from 3.4 per cent to 3.0 per cent. Japan has come out of a technical recession but is still 
quite some distance away from the Bank of Japan’s target of 2 per cent inflation. The Bank of 
Canada  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  have  announced  rate  cuts  in  view  of  weak 
growth.  Global  growth,  therefore,  continues  to  be  in  a  sluggish  phase,  which  has  been 
characterized as “secular stagnation” by Larry Summers.2 The US offers the best prospects 
in  the  developed  world  but  Eurozone  continues  to  be  a  matter  of  concern  even  as  the 
European Central Bank embarks on quantitative easing (QE) programme to fight deflation. 
Greece continues to trigger fears of a renewed Eurozone crisis though the European Finance 
Ministers appear to have reached an agreement to extend Greece’s financial rescue plan for 
                                                
1  
2   U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound: Larry Summers. 
IMF World Economic Outlook Update, January 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
another  four  months.  The  possibility  of  a  Grexit,  however  remote,  may  induce  a  chain  of 
events which markets may not be prepared for. Ukraine and the Middle East are sources of 
geopolitical risks. Given the prospects in the US economy, the US dollar has strengthened 
against  most  currencies  and,  in  particular,  against  the  Euro,  Canadian  Dollar,  Australian 
Dollar and the Japanese Yen. With a stronger US dollar and low oil prices, what is of interest 
is the policy course the US Federal Reserve is likely to pursue – when it will take the first 
step in a cycle of rate rise and, subsequently, at what pace will it tighten monetary conditions. 
Emerging market & developing economies 
3. The recent update on the IMF World Economic Outlook projects that growth in Emerging 
Markets & Developing Economies (EMDEs) to remain broadly stable at 4.3 per cent in 2015 
and  to  increase  to  4.7  per  cent  in  2016  –  a  weaker  pace  than  forecast  in  October  2014. 
Projection for growth of Indian economy was marginally revised downward from 6.4 per cent 
to 6.3 per cent. The World Bank, in its Global Economic Prospects Report (January 2015) 
has also cut down the growth projection of EMDEs from 5.2 per cent to 4.8 per cent for the 
year  2015.  This  is  mainly  attributed  to  lower  growth  in  China,  a  much  weaker  outlook  in 
Russia  and  downward  revisions  to  potential  growth  in  commodity  exporting  countries. 
Deceleration in growth in China has been well known. To an extent, slower growth is policy 
induced  by  the  Chinese  authorities  as  they  aim  to  reduce  vulnerabilities  from  rapid  credit 
growth  and  make  a  transition  from  an  investment-led  economic  model.  What  needs  to  be 
seen  is  whether  China  makes  a  soft  landing  and  what  are  the  implications  for  the  rest  of 
Asia. Any policy move by China to ease monetary policy  will have ripple effect across the 
Asian region. As regards capital flows to the EMDEs, the Institute of International Finance 
(IIF)  expects  2015  could  be  another  stressful  year  for  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets. 
Total EMDE inflows are projected to decline further, after a substantial drop last year, as the 
Federal  Reserve  starts  to  raise  the  policy  rates  and  the  EMDE  growth  remains  lackluster. 
Flows  during  the  year  are  again  likely  to  be  volatile,  as  markets  are  affected  by  shifting 
expectations  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  policy  trajectory,  oil  market  uncertainty  and  political 
risks.  Country  differentiation,  a  subject  eloquently  brought  out  in  Ruchir  Sharma’s  book 
“Breakout Nations: In Pursuit of the Next Economic Miracles”, will continue to remain a key 
theme  for  2015.  While  many  large  EMDEs  with  well-known  vulnerabilities  have  sought  to 
strengthen their macro policy frameworks, and benefit from lower oil prices, analysis of past 
Federal  Reserve  tightening  cycles  suggests  risks  of  heightened  incidence  of  EMDE  crises 
during the year ahead. There are fears that EMDE markets may be catapulted into currency, 
sovereign or banking crisis as years in which the Federal Reserve has tightened monetary 
policy  usually  have  seen  more  market  turmoil.  While  the  EMDE  capital  flows  could  be 
affected,  the  key  question  is  how  sensitive  are  these  to  US  rate  rise.  According  to  IIF’s 
estimates a 0.5 per cent rise in rates, all other things being equal, will sap flows in EMDE by 
about 10 per cent or US$ 30 billion. This year could, however, be different as the European 
Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  are  both  following  ultra-accommodative  monetary 
policies. This should soften the blow of a US rate rise. 
4. What is of concern is the market’s discounting of the Federal Reserve’s own predictions 
for future rate rises. The disparity between what the Federal Reserve predicts about the path 
of rate rise and what the market expects it to do has been well known. A quicker and steeper 
than  expected  rate  rise  cycle  in  the  US  would  have  an  impact  on  EMDE  capital  flows. 
Throughout the past year, the VIX3 has been averaging about 14.2, its lowest since 2006. 
The long term average has been 19.6. Any rise in the VIX could trigger a capital outflow from 
the EMDE. 
                                                
3   VIX is a ticker symbol for the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index, a popular measure of 
the implied volatility of S&P 500 index options. It represents one measure of the market’s expectation of stock 
market volatility over the next 30 day period. The idea of a volatility index, and financial instruments based on 
such an index, was first developed and described by Prof. Menachem Brenner and Prof. Dan Galai in 1986. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Outlook on oil prices 
5.  The  sharp  decline  in  global  oil  prices  has  been  well  documented  in  the  financial  press. 
While the drop in prices was over 50 per cent since mid-2014, recent weeks have seen an 
uptick in prices. The up move of about 20 per cent has also been somewhat unexpected at a 
time when many analysts were expecting oil prices to fall further. The international oil price 
movement  has  been  the  subject  of  market  speculation  as  well  as  academic  research.  Oil 
prices, as you are aware, reflect not only basic economic forces of demand and supply but 
also geo-political developments, technological advances in renewal energy, climate change 
and adoption of energy efficient technology. 
6.  Changes  in  production  and  consumption  seem  to  fall  short  of  a  fully  satisfactory 
explanation  of  the  abrupt  collapse  in  oil  prices.  While  oil  production  has  been  close  to 
expectations,  consumption  has  been  only  a  little  less  than  earlier  forecast.  Most  analysts 
seem to agree that daily demand for oil is short of average daily production of a little over 
94 million  barrels  per  day  by  just  about  1.5  million  barrels.  The  Bank  for  International 
Settlement (BIS), in a recent note4 has said that the steepness of the price decline and very 
large day-to-day price changes are reminiscent of a financial asset. The Organization of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) decision not to cut production, no doubt, has been a 
key factor in the fall in international crude price. But, as the BIS study shows, other factors 
could have exacerbated the fall in oil prices. One important factor could be the substantial 
increase  in  debt  borne  by  the  oil  sector  in  recent  years.  Given  high  debt  issued  by  oil 
producers, in expectation of high future oil prices, an unanticipated fall in oil price weakens 
the balance sheet of oil producers who are impelled to sell forward more of their production. 
Further, debt service commitments may induce producers to maintain production levels and 
delay  production  cuts,  thereby  keeping  supply  at  a  level  higher  than  what  demand  may 
justify.  It  has  also  been  noticed  that  swap  dealers  may  have  become  less  inclined  to  sell 
protection  to  oil  producers  during  times  of  heightened  volatility  and  balance  sheet  stress. 
More study is of course needed to understand the oil price dynamics and its interactions with 
financial markets and macro-economic factors. 
7. Oil producing countries, facing an oil shock of a different kind, are also beginning to review 
their national budgets which depend on oil revenue. The impact across countries has been 
asymmetric – most Gulf nations and Norway have built sufficient reserves in their sovereign 
wealth funds (SWFs). But some other high cost producers could be at risk if price continues 
to fall. In  recent  weeks,  the  trend  seems to  have  reversed  and,  ironically,  market  analysts 
seem to welcome the move as the oil price equilibrium appears to be somewhat restored. 
India and the global financial landscape 
B.  
8. With that background, let me turn to the Indian context: Where is India placed in the global 
financial landscape? India is perhaps the only major economy where growth prospects have 
not been revised downwards. When its peers in the BRICS group seem to be following with 
China on a slowdown trajectory, Brazil staring at stagflation, Russia reeling under recession 
and  South  Africa  facing  declining  growth,  India  is  emerging  as  the  leading  light  of  the 
EMDEs. Political stability combined with strong commitment to fiscal and monetary discipline 
and economic reforms promise rapid growth. Given our advantages of demographic dividend 
and a large entrepreneurial class, India should be the destination for global capital if we take 
steps to address structural bottlenecks and enhance productivity of the economy. 
                                                
4   Note available at https://www.bis.org/statistics/gli/glibox_feb15.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The journey so far 
9. Till the early 1980s, India’s trade regime was autarkic with very high nominal import tariffs 
and  also  non-tariff  barriers.  From  the  late  1980s,  the  government  began  dismantling  the 
import licensing system and simplifying the tariff structure moving towards a more open trade 
regime.  The  crisis  year  1990–91  was  a  watershed  year  in  Indian  economic  history:  India 
faced an external payment crisis. Fundamental changes were carried out in industrial, trade, 
banking and exchange rate policies. 
increasing 
Current account 
10.  Being  a  developing  and  energy  deficient  country,  India’s  current  account  position  has 
always been in deficit barring for a brief period in the beginning of the last decade. India’s 
export  performance  has  progressed  commendably:  exports  have  gone  up 
from 
US$ 18.1 billion in 1990–91 to US$ 314 billion in 2013–2014. The composition of exports has 
shifted  from  labour  intensive  products  (e.g.,  textiles)  to  capital  intensive  goods  (e.g., 
engineering).  India’s  trading  partners  have  also  changed  with  greater  share  of  emerging 
markets.  Export  of  services  has  also  seen  phenomenal  growth 
from 
US$ 4.6 billion  in  1990–91  to  US$  151.5  billion  in  2013–14.  Concomitantly,  merchandise 
imports also rose as India’s economy grew and progressively got integrated with the global 
economy. Imports rose to US$ 450 billion in 2013–14 from US$ 24 billion in 1990–91. While 
there  has  been  rise  in  energy  related  imports,  such  as,  oil  and  coal,  import  of  precious 
metals, particularly, gold also increased in the recent years. Notably, apart from the rise in 
domestic consumption, sharp increase in oil imports was partly due to rising POL exports as 
well.  Overall,  merchandise  trade  persistently  remained  in  deficit.  Invisibles,  on  the  other 
hand, have been a support with private transfers/remittances being steady and consistent. 
India remains the largest recipient of officially recorded remittances in the world and received 
about  US$ 70 billion  in  2013,  covering  about  15  per  cent  of  imports.  As  a  result,  current 
account deficit (CAD) generally remained range bound barring 2011–12 and 2012–13 when 
it shot up to 4.2 per cent and 4.8 per cent of the GDP respectively. From second quarter of 
2013–14, CAD has steadily declined and has been well within the sustainable range. Looking 
at the recent trends, CAD increased to US$ 10.1 billion (2.1 per cent of GDP) in Q2 of 2014–
15 from US$ 7.8 billion (1.7 per cent of GDP) in the preceding quarter and US$ 5.2 billion 
(1.2 per cent of GDP) in Q2 of 2013–14. The increase in CAD was primarily on account of 
higher  trade  deficit  contributed  by  both  a  deceleration  in  export  growth  and  increase  in 
imports. With the steep fall in international oil prices, CAD during the current year as a whole, 
however, is expected to be less than last year’s figure of 1.7 per cent of GDP. 
Capital account 
11.  India  depends  upon  capital  flows  to  bridge  the  CAD.  Foreign  Direct  Inflows  (FDI)  and 
portfolio investments constitute a major share of the flows. Debt flows, External Commercial 
Borrowings,  in  particular,  have  gone  up  substantially  but,  as  a  share  of total  capital flows, 
debt flows have declined from 80 per cent in 1990–91 to about 30 per cent in 2011–12. Total 
capital  flows  reached  a  peak  of  US$  107  billion  in  2007–08  but  collapsed  to  about 
US$ 7.2 billion in 2008–09 indicating volatile nature of such capital flows. In the current fiscal 
year so far, India has witnessed a net inflow of about US$ 25 billion in the form of FDI and 
about US$ 36 billion as portfolio flows as against about US$ 21 billion and (-) US$ one billion 
respectively in the corresponding period of the last year. During 2014–15, capital flows would 
be more than adequate to finance CAD. 
Impact of falling oil prices 
12.  The  oil  price  fall  has  definitely  been  a  boon  to  EMDE,  especially  countries  like  India 
which are energy import dependent. It acts like a fiscal stimulus and world consumption is 
expected  to  get  a  boost  as  consumers  spend  less  on  energy.  The  oil  price  decline  is 
beneficial  to  India,  as  it  results  in  lower  inflation  and  gives  comfort  in  budget  and  fiscal 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
management. Crude oil import in 2013-14 was US$ 165 billion, about 36 per cent of the total 
import  bill.  In  April-November  2014,  it  was  US$  90.3  billion,  about  28.3  per  cent  of  total 
import.  According  to  some  estimates,  a  US$  10  a  barrel  fall  in  oil  prices  will  reduce  the 
country’s import bill and, hence, the CAD by US$ 10 billion or 0.48 per cent of GDP. Another 
estimate indicates that 10 per cent reduction in crude oil prices will reduce Consumer Price 
Index-based inflation by around 20 basis points (bps) and bring about a 30 bps rise in GDP 
growth. 
13. This provides an ideal setting to bring the current account back to health on a sustained 
basis and as also work on fiscal consolidation. This is too valuable an opportunity for us to 
miss.  The  oil  price  decline  beyond  the  US$  70–75  level  has,  however,  given  rise  to 
unexpected  consequences.  Is  the  fall  in  oil  prices  unambiguously  good  for  the  world 
economy? Oil producers have been cutting back on future investments. This implies cutting 
back  on  jobs  in  the  oil  and  gas  industry  as  well  as  support  services.  Energy  stocks  have 
suffered  losses.  The  fall  in  oil  price  seems  to  be  the  single  most  factor  important  behind 
falling inflation in most economies. The fear of deflation grips central banks as consumption 
could decline and real burden of debt will go up if inflation were to turn negative or remain 
low for a long period of time. For India, the negative could be in terms of lower remittances 
and capital flows from the affected countries. 
Major crises in the past vicennium 
C.  
14. The major crisis faced by India in the past are Asian Financial Crisis in 1997, LTCM & 
Russian  default  in  1998,  Dotcom  Crisis  in  2000,  Subprime  Crisis  in  2007,  European 
Sovereign Debt Crisis in 2011 and Fed Reserve announcement of tapering in 2013. Talking 
of  the  crises,  Dr.  D  Subbarao,  former  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India5  had  said  “…  in 
matters of economics and finance, history repeats itself, not because it is an inherent trait of 
history,  but  because  we  don’t  learn  from  history  and  let  the  repeat  occur.”  Hence,  it  is 
imperative  for  EMDEs  like  India  to  internalize  past  crises  and  take  effective  steps  to 
safeguard against future shocks. 
Impact of crises on India 
15.  These  crises  impact  India  in  various  ways.  Firstly,  increased  volatility  in  the  exchange 
rate and equity markets could lead to depletion of foreign exchange reserves, weakness in 
the  economy,  increasing  threat  of  rating  downgrades,  diminishing  investor  confidence  and 
volatility in capital flows. Second, Balance of Payment (BoP) parameters come under stress 
due to moderation in growth of major trading partners and commodity price volatility impacts 
macro-economic  parameters,  such  as,  inflation  and  fiscal  deficit.  Third,  corporates  are 
unable  to  raise foreign capital  which  imports financial  problems from  off-shore to  on-shore 
and  unhedged  foreign  currency  exposures  translate  into  on-balance  sheet  concerns 
impacting  the  credit  worthiness  of  the  corporates.  Fourth,  financial  institutions  experience 
difficulties in accessing international financial markets. Fifth, monetary policies of developed 
countries tend to impact macro-economic parameters of the country, e.g., recent experience 
of announcement of tapering of asset purchase of the Federal Reserve. On May 22, 2013, 
Chairman Ben Bernanke first spoke of the possibility of the tapering of Fed’s purchases of 
securities. This and subsequent statements collectively known as ‘tapering talk’, had a sharp 
negative impact on the emerging markets. Around the period, domestic concerns pertaining 
to  high  CAD,  moderation  in  growth,  high  fiscal  deficit,  high  inflation  and  policy  uncertainty 
were some of the major concerns for foreign investors. 
                                                
5   Remarks by Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao at the release of Reserve Bank of India’s History Volume IV by the then 
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh in New Delhi on August 17, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
16. The impact of announcement of tapering and domestic concerns was evident in the form 
of tightening of liquidity and higher volatility in all market segments along with sharp decline 
in stock prices. For example, during the period May 22, 2013 & August 30, 2013, the Indian 
Rupee depreciated 15.5 per cent against the US Dollar, as against depreciation of 6.04 per 
cent of Russian Rouble, 6.88 per cent of South African Rand and 14.08 per cent of Brazilian 
Real. Equity markets declined with Sensex declining from closing of 20,062 on May 22, 2013 
to 18,620 on August 30, 2013. Portfolio capital inflows which were buoyant till the third week 
of May 2013 began retreating as US yield hardened and yield spread narrowed significantly. 
Policy measures taken to curb volatilities 
17. Reserve Bank had stepped in to curb excessive volatility in the foreign exchange market 
and  responded  by  increasing  the  short  term  interest  rates  and  by  tightening  the  Rupee 
liquidity  in  the  system.  Special  swap  window  was  opened  for  public  sector  oil  marketing 
companies for meeting crude oil related dollar demand. Banks mobilized about US$ 34 billion 
under  FCNR  (B)  scheme  and  Offshore  Foreign  Currency  Borrowings  for  augmenting  the 
foreign exchange reserves of the country. To ease pressures on rising CAD and discourage 
import of gold, quantitative and other restrictions were placed on gold imports in consultation 
with the Government of India. To further encourage longer term foreign currency inflows, the 
external  commercial  borrowing  mechanism  was  rationalized  &  liberalized  and  limits  for 
foreign investment in G-Sec were streamlined and increased coupled with relaxation in FDI 
caps in some sectors. 
The seven coupling channels 
D.  
18.  It  is  relevant  to  note  that  the  Indian  economy  is  now  more  interlinked  with  the  world 
economy  than  before;  global  developments  have  considerable  influence  on  different 
segments  of  domestic  economy  through  various  channels.  With  growing  globalization  and 
integration  with  global  economies,  the  spillover  impacts  can  be  felt  through  the  following 
seven  channels  (or  the  7Cs)  –  Commerce,  Capital  Flows,  Commodity  prices,  Confidence, 
Carry Trades, Contamination and Central Banks’ action & communication channels. 
Commerce channel 
19.  For  India,  with  its  persistent  CAD  problem  lower  and  sustainable  level  of  CAD  is  very 
important having far reaching implications on the policy making processes and also on the 
way  international  institutions  and  investors  view  us.  The  earnings  from  export  do  provide 
cushion in the balance of payments, aids in flexibility to import goods that are critical for our 
development  besides  positive  spillover  effects  on  the  domestic  economy  in  terms  of 
improvements in quality and productivity. 
20. Export sector faces a number of challenges, notable amongst them, are uncertain global 
demand. The challenge is to search for new markets and new products for existing markets. 
Whether our newly found export destination countries would remain insulated from the global 
financial  crisis?  India’s  trade  performance  had  improved  significantly  in  2013–14  led  by  a 
modest growth  in  exports  and  compression  in  imports. While  exports grew  on  the  back  of 
stronger global demand and a more competitive Rupee in 2013–14, contraction in imports 
was driven by decline in gold and non-oil non-gold imports. Exports have grown by 2.44 per 
cent for the period April-January 2014–15 to US$ 265.03 billion from US$ 258.72 billion last 
year. Over the same period, imports have grown by 2.17 per cent from US$ 375.25 billion to 
US$ 383.41 billion. The trade deficit is marginally higher during April-January 2014–15 over 
the previous year. 
21.  With  the  slump  in  international  crude  prices  taking  its  toll  on  exports  of  petroleum 
products, and non-oil export growth also decelerating sharply, merchandise exports shrank in 
Q3  of  2014–15  after  two  consecutive  quarters  of  growth.  Export  performance  has  been 
hamstrung  by  weak  global  demand  conditions  and  the  persisting  fall  in  unit  value 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
realisations. The real appreciation of the Rupee may also have had some effect. The fall in 
international crude prices translated into a sizable saving on account of POL imports, despite 
a  pick-up  in  import  volumes  in Q3. Gold  imports  also  moderated,  coming  off the  seasonal 
cum  pent-up  demand  spurt  in  September-November.  On  the  other  hand,  non-oil  non-gold 
import  growth  remained  firm  and  in  positive  territory,  extending  a  run  that  began  in  May. 
Although  overall  imports  declined  in  December,  they  recorded  an  expansion  for  Q3  as  a 
whole on the back of the earlier rise in gold and non-oil non-gold items. As a consequence, 
the trade deficit widened in Q3 relative to the preceding quarter. The estimate of the CAD for 
2014–15  is  currently  placed  at  lower  than  previous  year’s  figure.  The  CAD  has  been 
comfortably financed by net capital inflows, mainly in the form of buoyant portfolio flows but 
also supported by foreign direct investment inflows and external commercial borrowings. 
Capital flow channel 
22.  Economies  in  emerging  markets  have  been  integrating  with  the  global  economy  at  a 
rapid pace. Integration is driven by current and capital account flows. Investors of capital are 
loyal  only  to  assets  and  markets  that  promise  the  highest  risk  adjusted  return.  There  is 
always a tendency to retrace quickly when the risk-reward equation changes. Despite a high 
domestic  savings  rate,  India  needs  to  import  capital  from  abroad  to  support  the  second 
highest  growth  rate  in  the  world.  The  current  account  has  been  opened  though  gradually 
over the last two and half decades. A more calibrated approach has been adopted towards 
fuller  capital  account  convertibility  and  for  promoting  capital  inflows.  Foreign  direct 
investments are permitted with an exception of a few sectoral caps in most of the sectors. 
Portfolio  investments  in G-sec  and  corporate  bonds  are  subjected to macro  ceilings  which 
are subjected to modulation with evolving scenario. In debt flows, certain restrictions remain 
including  the  overall  quantum  of  external  commercial  borrowings,  cost  ceilings,  end-use 
restriction with focus on capex except a small window for general corporate purposes. As far 
as financing of CAD is concerned, net capital inflows are expected to be more than adequate 
in 2014–15. 
Commodity price channel 
23.  Many  EMDEs  are  dependent  on  import  of  commodities  critical  for  their  economic 
development. The prices of these commodities are often characterized by huge volatilities. In 
the  Indian  context,  the  largest  contributor  to  CAD  is  oil  imports  and  price  of  petroleum 
products is an important factor to reckon with as also its inflationary impact. As our economy 
grows, reliance on petroleum products has increased significantly and the increased demand 
has to be met by higher imports. Last fiscal, India imported about US$ 150 billion worth of 
crude  which  constitutes  about  75  per  cent  of  the  total  annual  crude  consumption.  Thus, 
spillover impact of price volatility of commodity like oil has huge impact on EMDEs like India. 
Confidence channel 
24. The impact of uncertainties of global financial conditions is evident through confidence 
channel. The first market segment in India to be affected is the equity market. Of all markets 
in India, equity is most accessible to foreign capital. For example, as per one estimate, as of 
December  2014,  foreign  portfolio  investors  (FPIs)  held  23  per  cent  of  the  market 
capitalization and 47 per cent of the floating stock in the equity segment. Despite limits on 
investments  FPIs  have  also  shown  keen  interest  in  taking  exposure  in  debt  securities  for 
higher returns. This could prove to be a major source of vulnerability. Global risk aversion 
triggered  by  the  European  debt  crisis  caused  a  large  correction  and  rapid  outflows  from 
Indian equity, and more recently debt markets as was evident in the aftermath of taper talk in 
2013.  When  international  investors  seek  safe  havens,  the  exchange  rate  markets  are  the 
next  market  to  be  impacted.  Equity  and  debt  market  correction  is  compounded  by  capital 
outflows  through  demand  for  foreign  currency.  A  downward  spiral  can  ensue;  thus, 
threatening overall financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
25. Transmission of impact of global crisis is accentuated with domestic vulnerabilities. The 
impact  of  May  2013  announcement  of  the  Fed  Reserve  was  more  pronounced  due  to 
domestic vulnerabilities. The CAD had increased from about one per cent of GDP in 2006 to 
nearly five per cent in 2013, real exchange rate had appreciated, fiscal deficit and inflation 
had  gone  up.  The  economy  had  slowed  down  although  the  level  of  foreign  reserves  was 
considered comfortable. 
26. The confidence channel is also influenced by the credit rating action and outlook. Any 
adverse  move  by  international  credit  rating  agencies  affects  the  borrowing  costs  of  the 
corporates.  It  also  affects  capital  flows  and  the  exchange  rate.  Any  resultant  reversal  in 
capital flows would lead to fall in asset prices and volatility. 
Carry trade channel 
27.  The  “carry  trade”  is  the  most  popular  trading  strategy  in  currency  markets.  Traders 
borrow in currencies with low interest rates and invest in currencies with high interest rates 
profiting  from  the  margin.  Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  carry  trades  in  Yen  and 
commodity  currencies  were  common.  In  the  recent  past,  with  accommodative  monetary 
policies and near zero interest environments in developed economies, currencies of EMEs 
have emerged as avenues of carry trade. The problem with currency carry trades is that they 
are  inherently  unstable.  The  initial  buying  of  the  high  yielding  currency  has  the  perverse 
effect  of  pushing  the  currency  higher,  giving  the  impression  of  unidirectional  bias  and 
complicating  policy  for  the  country  as  the  overvalued  exchange  rate  dents  the  country’s 
export competitiveness. In the event of unwinding of carry trades, which is generally sudden 
and vicious as, the leveraged positions head for the exit at the same time causing reversal of 
flows and depreciation of domestic currency. In the recent past, Reserve Bank had noticed 
trends of volatile FPI flows in the short-term debt market which were impacting the foreign 
exchange  markets  as  well.  In  view  of  volatile  FPI  flows  in  the  short  term  government 
securities  market,  the  Reserve  Bank  restricted  FPI  investments  in  dated  government 
securities earlier and corporate bonds recently to securities having residual maturity of three 
year or above. The objective was two-fold (a) containing the interest rate and exchange rate 
volatility and (b) developing the debt market by attracting long-term stable investments. 
Contamination channel 
28.  In  2013,  the  Rupee  had  experienced  huge  quantum  of  volatility  primarily  due  to  the 
external factors and fall in the risk appetite of the external investors. Following indications of 
QE  tapering  by  the  Federal  Reserve  on  May  22,  2013  and  growing  concerns  about  high 
CAD,  exchange  rate  depreciated  sharply  by  about  15  per  cent  to  Rs  63.75  in  September 
2013 over March 2013, touching an all-time low of Rs. 68.85 against dollar as on August 28, 
2013. Subsequent policy actions undertaken both by the Reserve Bank and the Government, 
however, augured well for Rupee stabilization as it gradually appreciated to Rs 60.10 by end-
March 2014. For Q2 2014–15 as a whole the Rupee depreciated against the US dollar albeit 
with some appreciating bias during the second week of August to first week of September 
2014.  During  periods  of  higher  volatility,  Indian  firms  get  affected  by  such  sharp  currency 
movements  by  way  of  transaction,  translation  and  economic  exposures  with  serious 
implications for their bottom line and future business capabilities. 
29.  Large  scale  reliance  on  borrowings  abroad  in  foreign  currency  by  Indian  corporates 
entails  huge  interest  rate  and  exchange  rate  risks.  The  not-so-happy  experience  of 
redemption  of  foreign  currency  convertible  bonds  (FCCBs)  highlights  the  risk  for  the 
corporates  in  issuing  such  foreign  currency  bonds  on  the  uncertain  premise  of  ever 
increasing equity prices. Large unhedged forex exposure of corporate is not only a potential 
threat to the balance sheets of the corporates but also to financial stability. Reserve Bank 
has  been  highlighting  the  need  for  sound  risk  management  culture  of  our  corporates. 
Reserve  Bank  has  have  been  cautioning  participants  from  taking  too  many  bets  in  one 
direction.  It  is  essential  for  the  banks  to  rigorously  evaluate  unhedged  exposures  of  the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
clients by adequately pricing in the risk premia. In the last few years, Indian corporates have 
gone for establishment/acquisition of overseas companies, often at the cost of their capability 
to meet the domestic business needs and without proper assessment of the risk-return trade-
off.  When  global  situation  turned  stressful,  the  viability  of  these  overseas  entities  impact 
domestic balance sheets. As a result, there have been disinvestments at large losses. 
though 
Central banks’ actions & communication channel 
30. Central bank actions in the developed economies have an impact on emerging markets. 
These spillovers have been the subject of debates in academic and policy forums. Monetary 
policy  actions  pass  through  interest  rate,  exchange  rate,  capital  flow  and  the  asset  price 
channels. The large scale asset purchase programme of the Federal Reserve depressed the 
yields  on  US  fixed  income  securities  and  the  value  of  the  US  dollar  until  recently.  QE 
announcements by the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank may also have similar 
consequences 
the  magnitude  could  be  different.  The  Swedish  Riksbank’s 
announcement  of  a  negative  repo  rate  and  its  decision  to  purchase  SEK  10  billion  of 
government bonds and the sudden move of the Swiss National Bank to abandon the EUR-
CHF floor had sent the financial markets into a tizzy. As the interest rate differential between 
the developed economies and the emerging markets widens, more capital flows into EMDEs 
in  search  of  yield.  But  when  easy  monetary  policy  is  sought  to  be  reversed,  emerging 
markets face a “sudden stop” or even a reversal in capital flows as witnessed in the summer 
of 2013. EMDEs need to be prepared for a rapid rise or fall in asset prices and exchange rate 
volatility arising from policy action of dominant economies. True, every central bank is bound 
by its own mandate for domestic policy imperatives but there are unintended spillovers that 
impact  other  economies,  which  Governor  Rajan  has  been  highlighting  in  different 
international fora. Fortunately, the spillover effect is beginning to be recognized now. In its 
latest monetary policy statement, the Federal Reserve has stated that their assessment of 
economic conditions will take into account a wide range of information, including international 
developments. The President of the European Central Bank, too, acknowledged this when 
he said that the European Central Bank was keeping an eye on risks stemming from volatility 
in emerging markets. 
31. Post 2008 global financial crisis, central banks have sought to enhance transparency in 
their policy thinking and action through communication. ‘Forward Guidance’ is now a part of 
monetary  policy  tools  of  many  central  banks.  There  has  been  a  sea  change  in  the  way 
central banks view the role of communications in monetary policy (Paul Jenkins, 2001).6 The 
challenge in central bank communication lies in how best they communicate in a language 
that provides clarity and not further confusion to the public discourse. The Federal Reserve, 
in its last couple of meetings of 2014, had indicated that it would be “patient” before raising 
the interest rates. This was seen as a way of preparing the markets for gradual reversal of 
low-interest rate and accommodative cycle and prevent sudden-shocks in the markets. The 
markets are, however, divided in their interpretation of the term “patient” and its qualification 
or  elimination  in  the  minutes  of  the  next  meeting.  In  other  words,  forward  guidance  is 
emerging as a challenge for the central banks viz-a-viz the markets as has been experienced 
by the Bank of England and now possibly, by the Federal Reserve. Thus, the communication 
of policy stance by the Central Banks of the advanced economies can be a cause of market 
volatilities and may have spillover impact on EMDEs like India. 
India’s external sector vulnerabilities 
E.  
32.  Let  me  now  briefly  touch  upon  India’s  external  sector  vulnerabilities  now  vis-à-vis  the 
1990–91 when the BoP crisis led to paradigm shift in our macro-economic policy framework. 
                                                
6   Communicating  Canadian  monetary  policy:  towards  greater  transparency:  Paul  Jenkins,  Deputy  Governor, 
Bank of Canada, May 2001. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Between 1990–91 and now, trade deficit has deteriorated peaking at 4.8 at end-March 2013 
but  has  recovered  sharply  to  1.7  as  at  end-March  2014;  expectation  is  that  for  the  year 
ending March 2015 similar range of lower CAD. Invisibles have been very steady and have 
lent support to the current account. Capital flows have not only financed CAD but have also 
added to our reserves. India’s net IIP is (-) US$ 346 billion, up from (-) US$ 313 billion last 
year.  Commercial  debt  is  a  dominant  share  of  external  debt  as  Official  Development 
Assistance  (ODA)  has  declined  in  recent  years.  The  debt  service  ratio  (repayments  and 
interest as a proportion to current receipts) has also gone up from 5.9 per cent in March 2013 
to  7.5  per  cent  in  September  2014.  Though  some  vulnerability  parameters  show  some 
deterioration, we are much better placed now than in 1990–91 (Table). The external sector 
is,  thus,  in  much  better  shape,  and  the  country  better  cushioned  against  external  shocks, 
than what it was in 1990–91. 
 
Table: India’s external vulnerability indicators (as at end March)  
Indicators  
1991  2001  2011  2014  2014* 
1. External Debt to GDP ratio (%) 
2. Ratio of Short-term to Total Debt 
(original maturity) (%) 
3. Ratio of Short-term to Total Debt 
(residual maturity) (%) 
4. Ratio of Concessional Debt to Total 
Debt (%) 
5. Ratio of Reserves to Total Debt (%) 
6. Ratio of Short-term Debt to 
Reserves (%) 
7. Ratio of Short-term Debt (residual 
maturity) to Reserves (%) 
8. Reserves Cover of Imports (in 
months) 
9. Debt Service Ratio (%) 
28.7   22.5   18.2   23.5  23.2 
10.2   3.6   20.4   20.2  18.9 
15.8   10.3   40.6   39.6  NA 
45.9   35.4   14.9   10.5 
9.8 
7   41.7   95.9   68.8  68.9 
146.5   8.6   21.3   29.3  27.5 
227   24.6   42.3   57.4  NA 
2.5   8.8   9.5   7.8 
8.1 
35.3   16.6   4.4   5.9 
7.5 
10. External Debt (US$ billion) 
11. Net International Investment 
Position (IIP) (US$ billion)  
12. IIP/GDP ratio*(%)  
13. CAD/GDP ratio 
(* end September 2014) 
83.8  101.3  317.9  442.2  455.9 
-
353.7 
-  -16.5  -12.1  -17.7   -17.8 
-
207.0  
-
332.7 
-  -76.2  
3   0.6   2.8   1.7 
2.0 
Foreign exchange reserves: the first line of defence 
F.  
33.  Foreign  exchange  reserve  forms  the  first  line  of  defence  to  calm  volatility  in  the  forex 
markets  and  provide  adequate  liquidity  for  “sudden  stop”  or  reversals  in  the  capital  flows. 
Bilateral  and  multilateral  safety  nets  are  also  helpful.  One  response  to  the  global  financial 
crisis was signing of bilateral swap agreements by the Federal Reserve with select central 
banks. Availability and adequacies of such bilateral/multilateral backstop arrangements is not 
an easy option during crisis times. The Asian crisis triggered a realization that large reserves 
are needed to face a crisis as a self-insurance policy. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
34.  Since  1991,  the  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  has  steadily  increased  from 
US$ 5.8 billion to about US$ 333 billion, an all-time high. India’s foreign exchange reserves 
are the end consequence of current account and capital account dynamics. Most of India’s 
foreign exchange reserves are held by the Reserve Bank of India principally foreign currency 
assets and gold, SDR allocation and Reserve Tranche Position in the IMF are held by the 
Government. 
Major aspects of reserve management 
35. Reserves are held essentially to instill confidence in the markets and investors, act as an 
insurance during periods of crisis and provide pool of resources for meeting the intervention 
needs  during  periods  of  extreme  volatility  and  manage  BoP  mismatches.  Reserve 
management is essentially the art of maintaining adequate liquidity, when required, ensuring 
safety  of  capital  and  generating  reasonable  returns  under  what  is  popularly  known  as  the 
Safety, Liquidity & Return (SLR) framework. It, therefore, revolves around decisions involving 
trade-off  between  risk  and  return. The  prolonged  low  interest  environment,  post the global 
financial  crisis,  has  substantially  affected  the  return  on  reserves,  which  in  2013–14  was 
1.21 per  cent.  This  has  led  to  suggestions  on  the  need  to  enhance  returns  by  either 
diversification  into  non-traditional  asset  classes  and  currencies.  Such  strategies,  however, 
have  their  own  share  of  risks.  For  example,  during  phases  of  market  turmoil,  safe  haven 
flows may result in losses in investments made in EMDE’s currencies and assets. The higher 
expected  returns  on  non-traditional  assets  could  be  wiped  out  during  periods  of  market 
turmoil. 
36. We should also remember that holding reserves has a cost. This cost has a quasi-fiscal 
implication  as  the  cost  of  sterilization  is  either  borne  by  the  Government  or  by  the  central 
bank itself. There are different approaches to measure the cost of maintaining reserves. The 
most common approach is to measure it as the opportunity cost of investment in domestic 
securities. It can also be looked at as cost-of-carry, being the difference between the cost of 
capital borrowed from outside minus the return on reserves. The cost of reserves, however, 
should be weighed against the benefits, such as, providing a stable exchange rate regime by 
smoothening extreme volatility. A stable exchange rate regime benefits market participants 
as it reduces uncertainty and hedging costs. But the benefits of adequate reserves are not 
easily quantifiable whereas the costs are more explicit. Therefore, any cost-benefit approach 
to reserve adequacy involves a judicious assessment of the risks of an economy that is on a 
path towards a more open capital account. 
Adequacy of reserves 
37. Traditional metrics of adequacy are import cover, ratio of short term debt/volatile capital 
flows to reserves and ratio of reserves to broad money. In the Indian context, import cover 
increased  to  8.1  months  as  at  end  September  2014  from  6.6  months  at  end  September 
2013. Ratio of CAD to foreign exchange reserves has improved from 30.1 during 2012–13 to 
10.6 in 2013–14.The ratio stood at 166.0 in 1990–91. Ratio of short-term debt to the foreign 
exchange reserves, declined from 34.2 per cent as at end September 2013 to 27.5 per cent 
as  at  end  September  2014.  Ratio  of  volatile  capital  flows  (defined  to  include  cumulative 
portfolio inflows and short-term debt) to the reserves declined from 97.2 per cent as at end 
September 2013 to 94.7 per cent as at end September 2014. India’s net IIP has, however, 
been negative for a long time and has deteriorated from US$ 326 billion in March 2013 to 
US$ 353 billion in September 2014. Therefore, while some metrics indicate improvement in 
some  aspects  of  our  external  sector  vulnerabilities,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency  as 
India is basically a current account deficit economy with large dependence on foreign capital 
flows which are susceptible to periodic phases of sudden stops and/or reversals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
The challenges ahead 
G.  
38.  The  existing  benign  global  economic  environment  could  see  some  volatility  in  2015, 
when some reversal of global liquidity, particularly, through the action of the Federal Reserve 
is likely. Reversal of monetary policy stance by the Federal Reserve is likely to be cushioned 
by continuance of easy policy of other major central banks. China’s exchange rate policy in 
the context of ongoing slowdown also presents an external risk to Asian currencies including 
the Rupee. As economic slack diminishes with recovery in the domestic economy, the upturn 
in the investment cycle will require higher non-oil non-gold imports. Easing of norms for gold 
imports  could  lead  to  a  widening  of  CAD  in  2014–15.  Even  though  international  crude  oil 
prices  are  projected  to  stay  low  as  price  war  intensifies,  the  re-emergence  of  geopolitical 
risks,  particularly  in  Middle-East  and  Ukraine,  may  keep  oil  prices  relatively  firm  and  thus 
may have implications for India’s oil import bill. This may pose upward risks to India’s CAD. 
Further,  notwithstanding  a  modest  recovery  in  exports  and  adjustment  of  the  Rupee 
exchange rate in 2013–14, there are downside risks to exports due to uncertainty about the 
global growth outlook 
39. Lower CAD, surge in foreign exchange reserves and exchange rate stability are signs of 
a more resilient external sector. Improvements in external sector indicators, however, do not 
warrant  any  policy  complacency.  Spillovers  from  renewed  external  pressures  through  the 
seven  channels  mentioned  earlier  may  resurface  and  thus  pose  a  challenge  for  India’s 
external  sector.  External  sector  strength  is  a  function  of  global  developments,  fiscal  & 
monetary actions of advanced economies as well as domestic economy and policies. Given 
our  limited  role  in  influencing  the  global  developments,  the  policy  focus  has  to  be  on 
improving  domestic  macroeconomic  fundamentals  so  as  to  minimize  the  impact  of  such 
spillovers. In particular, policy attention is required for redressal of sector-specific structural 
issues  that  affect  growth,  inflation,  CAD,  fiscal  deficit  and  overall  competitiveness  of  the 
economy, a conducive business environment to ensure a better mix of capital flows will focus 
on stable non-debt creating flows and improved governance. What gives confidence to India 
watchers within & outside the country is that significant steps are being taken in the policy 
and execution space of the country. 
Summing up 
H.  
40. Financial crisis, as a phenomenon, has been recurring at frequent intervals – every crisis 
is new but the impact is, in many ways, similar. For India, external sector vulnerabilities are 
relatively lower than in the past but adverse spillovers of global macro-economic and geo-
political developments on the domestic sector cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is necessary to 
remain focused on the structural and cyclical challenges arising through the 7C channels in 
the  context  of  our  increasing  inter-linkages  with  the  global  financial  landscape.  Foreign 
exchange reserves act as a first line of defence but acquisition and holding of reserves has 
its own costs and challenges. While reserves provide us cushion to meet unforeseen market 
developments  in  the  short  run  it  is  sound  macro-economic  management  that  is  the  best 
insurance  in  the  long  run.  One  takes  heart  from  the  fact  that  inspite  of  uncertain  global 
environment, India is much better positioned now than before to seize what The Economist in 
its latest issue (February 21, 2015) calls “a rare opportunity to become world’s most dynamic 
big economy” 
Thank you all for a patient hearing. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
