  Vítor Constâncio: Interview with Thomson Reuters 
Interview  with  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Thomson  Reuters,  conducted  by  Mr  Paul  Ingrassia,  Mr  Balazs  Koranyi  and  Mr  John 
O’Donnell on 14 September 2015. 
 Is quantitative easing working? 
It  is  working  and  effective  in  many  ways.  The  ultimate  metric  to  assess  success  is  the 
inflation  rate  normalization  around  our  medium  term  target.  That  is  achieved  through  the 
improvement of financial conditions in general, by the effect of our policies on expectations, 
the cost of capital, and rebalancing of portfolios. All of those channels have been working. 
Since last year, the lending rates of banks have gone down by more than 70 basis points and 
in  several  more  vulnerable  or  periphery  countries,  like  in  Italy  and  Spain,  more  than 
100 basis points, whereas our main policy rate has gone down only by 20 basis points. For 
the first time since 2009, in our survey with SMEs, the number of firms reporting that access 
to  credit  has  improved  was  higher  than  firms  saying  the  opposite.  After  years  of  negative 
growth rates, credit to the private sector is now growing at an annualized rate of 2 percent. 
So, all of these are good indications that our policy is improving financial conditions. 
Still, you’re contemplating a change in the asset purchase programme. What would be 
the triggers for such a change? 
We said in January that we were aiming at achieving a sustained path of inflation towards 
our objective and we are far from that objective right now. We want to achieve that sustained 
path. We thought it was relevant to remind everyone that we said from the beginning that we 
would keep the policy until we achieve our goals. 
Many people say there’s not a whole lot you can still do. How would you respond to 
them? 
We said at the last press conference that the size, composition and duration of our present 
large  scale  asset  purchase  programme  can  be  changed.  The  total  amount  that  we  have 
purchased represents 5.3 percent of the GDP of the euro area, whereas what the Fed has 
done  represents  almost  25 percent  of  the  U.S.  GDP,  what  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  done 
represents 64 percent of the Japanese GDP and what the U.K. has done 21 percent of the 
UK’s  GDP.  So  we  are  very  far  from  what  the  major  central  banks  have  done  using  these 
instruments. But this is not a benchmark, I mentioned that as an illustration. There is scope, if 
the necessity is there. 
If the price of oil does not continue to go down (it cannot go down indefinitely), we will see a 
jump in inflation in the last quarter of this year. But we may have before that some months of 
negative inflation. 
Until  now  we  have  not  seen  a  reason  to  doubt  that  the  programme  will  work.  The  staff 
projections  are  recent,  predicated  on the completion  of the  whole  programme  and foresee 
inflation at 1.7% by 2017. But we are prepared for any contingency. 
What can monetary policy do for growth and potential growth? 
Monetary  policy  affects growth  via  financial  conditions,  which  affect  expenditure  decisions, 
investment and the aggregate demand. What is more difficult for monetary policy is to affect 
potential  growth.  That  depends  very  much  on  the  growth  of  labour  supply,  technological 
progress,  increasing  productivity,  organization  of  production.  That’s  the  supply  side.  The 
effects of monetary policy on that are very indirect. Europe has a big problem of low potential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  growth. It starts with demography: the working population is decreasing, so productivity has 
to be increased even more to compensate for it. Potential growth is very low and in present 
conditions,  we  fear  that  this  will  be  a  protracted  period  of  low  growth.  This  prospect  of 
protracted low growth is shared by all advanced economies. So Europe has to do more in 
terms of supply side reforms, investment, productivity growth to get out of this situation. 
Is embracing immigration important for Europe? 
In general yes. But there are two dimensions to this: one is the medium to long term issue of 
immigration  and  demographic  developments,  and  the  other  is  the  short  term  crisis  of 
refugees that raises a lot of logistical issues, among others. 
To  me,  it’s  clear  that  immigration  is  one  of  the  things  that  can  improve  the  demographic 
potential  of  Europe,  which  is  necessary,  if  Europeans  think  and  care  about  the  welfare  of 
future  generations.  The  size  of  the  working  age  population  of  the  euro  area  is  declining 
0.6 percent  a  year  until  the  2030s.  That’s  huge.  To  change  the  demographic  trends, 
promoting  birth  is  not  enough,  is  also  has  to  be  done  through  immigration,  if  this  is  to  be 
corrected.  If  not,  we’re  creating  a  great  difficulty  to  growth  and  to  the  welfare  of  future 
generations. This is a very acute problem because for years Europe has been doing the sort 
of collective demographic suicide and no one is thinking about this. 
In  the  short  term,  the  backlash  against  immigration  has  been  dramatic.  It’s  because  the 
unemployment rate in Europe is a very high 11 percent, which is destabilizing the continent. 
In human and social terms, the costs are enormous and the reactions we see to immigration 
stem  from  that.  It  is  very  important  to  reduce  unemployment  and  slack  in  the  economy. 
Fortunately,  in  the  present  situation,  the  price  stability  objective  and  the  engineering  of 
growth go hand in hand. 
Does slow wage growth present a challenge for the euro zone? 
Countries have been adjusting. Now several of those countries are growing. There are other 
countries  in the  core  of the  euro  zone  where  one  could  see  that  wages  could  grow  more. 
Wages have been subdued in spite of the recovery. This will end if the recovery continues 
and that will help later inflation rates to normalize. 
What is the outlook for the global economy and China? 
The situation is uncertain. There are three sources of uncertainty. One is the strength of the 
recovery in the U.S. We need a strong recovery in the U.S. Another one is China. We need 
that  China  will  be  able  to  stabilize  the  situation  and  keep  growing.  Then  we  have  the 
uncertainty of what will be the reaction of emerging markets to the normalization of interest 
rates in the U.S. 
If the recovery in the U.S. is stronger than it looks right now, that will be the more important 
thing for the world economy. China can still stabilize its situation and to keep growth above 6 
percent is achievable in the short term. The more uncertain situation is in emerging markets. 
We don’t know what will be the impact of interest rate normalization on the corporate bond 
market in those countries. 
Are we witnessing a structural shift in the global economy? 
China  and  other  countries  could  not  continue  to  grow  forever  at  9  or  10  percent  a  year. 
Growth in those countries was bound to decelerate. It is not a structural shift. The potential 
for  growth  in  emerging  markets  is  still  there.  What  is  more  difficult  to  envisage  is  an 
acceleration of growth in advanced economies to the level we were used to before the crisis. 
We  are  facing  this  sort  of  configuration  for  quite  some  time.  This  does  not  mean  that 
unemployment  would  continue  to  increase  because  we  may  have  enough  growth  to  push 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  down unemployment to more healthy levels. There is growth (1.5% in euro area, 2.5% in US) 
and this can accelerate, depending on the international environment. But we will not see the 
same sort of potential growth as before for a while. 
Could Europe experience what Japan has experienced? 
I  don’t  think  so.  The  development  in  wages  will  be  always  different  from  Japan.  There  is 
more rigidity in wages in a recession (in Europe) and that is an important factor and that is 
why  I  never  really  feared  we  would  have  actual  deflation  in  Europe. Wages  will  not  be  as 
flexible  down  as  they  were  in  Japan.  Most  of  euro  area  GDP  comes  from  services  and 
inflation  in  services  is  basically  about  wage  developments.  It  is  very  difficult  to  go  to  a 
situation of deflation in Europe. That’s a difference with Japan. 
Will divergence continue in the euro zone? 
No. We saw an initial phase of catching up and convergence. Then came the crisis. If you 
look  to  the  development  of  the  economy  in  the  U.S.  and  Europe,  the  recoveries  are  very 
similar until 2011. Then Europe had a double dip because of the recessionary adjustment. 
After  painful  adjustment  and  many  reforms,  Ireland,  Spain,  Portugal,  Slovenia  and  Cyprus 
grew faster than the euro area average in the first half of this year. The only exception is Italy 
which is growing slightly less than the average. 
We have growth again. We need to strengthen the confidence in peripheral countries. That 
has to be achieved by deepening integration. The Greek turmoil raised doubts. These doubts 
have to be now closed by additional institutional reforms. 
What doubts were raised about the euro? 
It raised doubts for the markets that countries like Greece could cope with the challenges of 
monetary union. There was never any doubt among the majority of member countries. We 
maintain  that  the  euro  is  irreversible.  Legally,  no  country  can  be  expelled.  The  actual 
prospect of that happening was never for real. 
Do you fear that some people in Europe may lose faith in its institutions? 
At  the  ECB,  we  are  doing  the  utmost  within  our  mandate.  We  are  aware  that  there  are 
excessive expectations about what central banks can do. Unemployment is destabilizing the 
continent. European values are being eroded in several countries as a result of the fear that 
unemployment creates. It is for other policy makers to do their job. 
Does a change in the stance of the Federal Reserve have implications and has market 
volatility become a permanent feature? 
We don’t know what the reaction of markets will be. Monetary policy is not about fine tuning 
volatility  in  financial  markets. We  have  medium  term  objectives  and  that  helps  to  stabilize 
expectations. Central banks should be independent from financial markets and not follow all 
their fluctuations. Excessive volatility is not good because it is a sign of uncertainty. There is 
a new situation now. Market liquidity, the facility to buy and sell without affecting prices too 
much,  is  reduced  after  the  crisis.  Market makers  have  reduced  their  inventories.  Business 
seems to be less profitable. Regulatory reforms made liquidity a bit less cheap. Markets are 
adjusting to this situation and that can lead to volatility. 
Are capital controls compatible with monetary union? 
They  are  temporary.  The  situation  in  Greece  after  the  agreement  on  the  programme,  has 
stabilized.  We  would  expect  the  new  government  will  show  strong  ownership  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  programme. The situation of liquidity of the banking sector has improved in Greece after the 
agreement was reached. The stage is set for a gradual dismantling of the capital controls. 
They will be eliminated as they were in Cyprus. 
Are you confident the IMF will join a bailout for Greece? 
The IMF has endorsed the policies that were included in the memorandum. To join a new 
programme,  the  IMF  has  two  conditions:  one  about  debt  sustainability  and  the  other  on 
ownership  of  the  programme  by  the  Greek  authorities.  Regarding  the  debt  sustainability 
analysis, the discussions will take place at the time of the first review. You have seen various 
analyses showing that you cannot just consider the debt sustainability analysis in terms of 
debt ratios. A big part of the Greek debt is under concessional terms for quite a period of 
time. Everyone expects convergence of analysis will be possible. A haircut has been refused 
by the member states and I certainly hope it will not be necessary in view of the numbers. 
The  more  one  digs  into  the  numbers,  the  more  that  sort  of  conclusion  seems  to  emerge. 
That’s a matter for the negotiations. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
