  Andreas Dombret: Digital Darwinism and the financial industry – a 
supervisor’s perception 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Speech at the EBS (EBS University of Business and Law) Symposium, 
Oestrich-Winkel, 18 September 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for the opportunity to contribute to this EBS Symposium. As a banking supervisor, 
I am happy to share with you my thoughts on digital Darwinism in the financial industry. 
Digital transition from an evolutionary perspective 
2. 
Dinosaurs  are  an  often-used  means  of  illustrating  how  “Darwinism”  works.  We  still  don’t 
really  know  why  those  creatures  –  which  ruled  the  earth  for  millions  of  years  –  suddenly 
became extinct. Some make volcanic eruptions responsible; others cite meteorites or a sharp 
drop in sea level as a possible explanation. In any case, the assumption is not that dinosaurs 
ceased  to  exist  because  they  could  not  cope  with  their  new  environment  or  adapt  quickly 
enough. Applying this diagnosis to the financial sector, where banks have reigned throughout 
the  last  few  centuries,  and  supposing  that  the  digital  transition  indeed  constitutes  a  new 
environment  for  banks,  one  may  pose  a  rather  provocative  question:  are  banks  dinosaurs 
that will one day become extinct? You may guess that I do not share this doom scenario, so 
let me start out by describing my views on the evolution of the banking business. 
The digital era may indeed be considered a new environment for banks. Digitalisation of the 
financial sector is an irrevocable change that came about due to several factors. 
First, the digitalisation of the financial sector has been fuelled by the development of highly 
effective, state-of-the-art technologies like broadband networks, advances in data processing 
and  the  ubiquity  of  smartphones.  And  there  is  a  premise  that  is  common  to  virtually  all 
technological  advances  in  market  economies  in  the  last  few  centuries:  when  a  product 
becomes  available,  sooner  or  later  it  creates  its  own  demand  and  puts  market  forces  into 
action. 
That means technological and social changes are intertwined. Bank customers are becoming 
increasingly  open  to  digital  banking.  Think  of  innovative  concepts  such  as  online  video 
consultation  services,  digital  credit  brokerage  and  the  incorporation  of  social  media  into 
banking.  Banking  is  still  a  “people  business”,  but  it’s  no  longer  reduced  to  proximate  and 
personal relationships. So there is plenty of demand for use of the technological potential of 
digital  banking:  cheap  and  quick  automatised  processes,  solutions  for  complex  financial 
issues, service tailored to customers’ individual needs. 
A fundamental challenge that banks now face is that in some business fields, we may expect 
a  sudden  and  rapid  change  of  the game  that  is  being  played.  One  rather  obvious  case  in 
point  is  that  of  payment  services.  Service  providers  such  as  PayPal  or  Apple  have 
implemented  payment  systems  geared  to  consumers  in  a  digital  environment.  Once 
customers become used to a new way of paying, competitors offering similar products will 
certainly have difficulties trying to convince customers to switch providers. The pioneer may 
have a decisive advantage. 
Now, in evolutionary terms, the question is whether banks can adapt quickly enough. Banks 
have used IT for decades, but these fast-moving times present wholly new possibilities for its 
use: P2P lending becomes feasible, internet and mobile applications are sprouting up and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  internet  giants  such  as  Google  or  Facebook  are  cultivating  “big  data”  methods.  These 
enterprises have grown up with – at times – entirely new perceptions of business, work and 
life.  And  they  have  the  appropriate  staff.  That  may  be  crucial.  It  is  one  thing  to  build  new 
ideas, but quite another to incorporate them into the company DNA. 
Traditional  banks,  on  the  other  hand,  typically  do  not  have  a  digital  DNA.  Theirs  is  an 
analogue world in which they have refined their knowledge about banking over decades and 
built  up  a  customer  relationship  based  on  trust. Think  of  areas  like  investment  advice  and 
corporate finance as well as banks’ own business of generating synergies between business 
strands. The question now is: what part of their knowledge is still valuable and what part do 
banks need to reframe? 
However, we cannot predict how the financial sector will look in ten years’ time. There are 
just too many “unknown unknowns”. Still, there is a recurring fallacy that reduces evolution to 
a  narrow  one-way  street.  If  there  are  new  market  entrants  whose  businesses  are  well-
adjusted to the digital environment, banks should be inclined to imitate their behaviour. But – 
to be clear – there is no one-size-fits-all strategy for digital banking. As in other industries, 
there  will  always  be  demand  for  more  differentiated  strategies,  for  example  individual  and 
personalised  services  as  opposed  to  algorithm-based  advice.  Also,  we  should  not  be 
surprised to see the focus return to a key component of the banking business: establishing 
safety and trust. 
Furthermore, the digital age does not simply redistribute market shares of a fixed revenue 
pie: there are also entirely new opportunities for desirable businesses. 
Convenient  banking  is  valuable.  Banks  could  benefit  from  this,  either  through  greater 
customer loyalty or through additional business volumes resulting from extra services. Win-
win schemes are also conceivable in credit markets. “Big data” methods can generate highly 
informative  individual  risk  profiles.  This  could  enable  banks  to  extend  loans  to  private 
customers  and  small  businesses  which  would  otherwise  not  receive  any  financing.  Even 
investment counselling could benefit. Video-based consulting, for example, does more than 
reflect modern life style of customers; it may also reduce costs for banks by rendering some 
branch offices unnecessary. 
Other  keywords  of  digital  openings  are  “co-creation”,  where  customers  participate  in  the 
development of products, and “multichannel banking”. But my aim today is not to present an 
all-encompassing  overview  on  digital  bank  business  ideas.  Instead,  let  us  move  one  step 
back and look at the bigger picture. Reshaping the financial sector doesn’t need to be left to 
new  market  entrants.  This  creative  challenge  can  also  be  taken  up  by  established  banks. 
Supervisors, too, have an interest in seeing banks engage in innovation if this enhances the 
functionality of the financial sector and stabilises profitability in the medium and long run. 
To sum up, there is an “open end” to the evolution of the digital financial sector. If you ask 
diehard  evolutionists  for  a  forecast  of  the  future,  they  will  merely  point  to  a  trial-and-error 
process  that  should  eventually  give  us  an  answer.  For  an  individual  company,  that  is  of 
course not helpful. As a banking supervisor, I am not inclined to attempt a market forecast. 
Still, there is a bottom line for banks from the line of thought I outlined earlier, namely that it 
is appropriate neither to blindly imitate nor to stick to old habits. The message to every player 
in  the  financial  industry  is  simple:  rather  than  being  caught  off-guard,  banks  have  to 
participate actively in shaping future banking services. A new game is being played, and new 
strategies need to be developed and executed decisively. 
Cyber risks – an evolutionary attachment to the digital bank 
3. 
Along  with  the  digitalisation  of  industries,  there  is  another  evolution  that  warrants  our 
attention. It is a development that is neither intended by the visionaries and trailblazers of the 
digital world nor beneficial. I am referring to the evolution of cybercrime. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  While we cannot predict how banking will look in ten or twenty years’ time, we can be almost 
certain that risks of fraud, theft and manipulation in banks through cyberspace will continue 
to rise. The reason is straightforward: digital channels can be used to steal a lot of assets 
with comparatively little effort today. 
Nowadays, a large proportion of banks’ assets and value-generating capability is stored on 
hard  drives  and  servers.  The  technical  infrastructure  facilitates  the  managing  of  bank 
accounts and grants access to money. But it also provides access to vast sources of data. 
There have been several incidents recently of truly large-scale data theft. Company secrets, 
too, are at stake. If, for example, the trading algorithms of your bank became known to others 
through illegal activities, they could be exploited in the market, causing huge losses to banks. 
In the same way, politically motivated acts of sabotage jeopardise trust in financial functions 
and integrity. 
Looking at those on the other side of cybercrime, the potential attackers – they often have 
access  to  far  more  powerful  weapons  than  before  and  convenient  access  through  the 
internet. Targeted attacks on IT systems can originate from anywhere in the world. Hackers 
often need little more than a laptop with internet access. 
Why do we have to expect a continuous evolution in this field? Attack vehicles like computer 
viruses differ widely and may target any chink in a bank’s defence, rather as human viruses 
attack biological systems. Its logic follows the arms race between criminals and law enforcers 
that can be traced down through human history, but is now taking place with digital weapons. 
What makes this evolution more dangerous still is that we now face a highly complex digital 
world  where  progress  is  constantly  being  made  in  technologies  and  innovations.  But, 
crucially,  you  cannot  risk  a  trial-and-error  process  here.  Once  an  easy  point  of  attack  is 
identified in the IT infrastructure, the word will quickly spread and criminals from all over the 
world will try to exploit the weakness. 
On  top  of  this,  we  need  to  bear  in  mind  that  cyber  and  general  IT  risks  are  not  only  of  a 
technical nature. The human factor often plays a crucial part. Employees may act in gross 
negligence,  or  they  may  be  tricked  by  a  Trojan  horse  or  a  phishing  mail.  In  complex  IT 
systems,  even  small  system  errors  can  quickly  cause  enormous  damage.  The  error-prone 
human  factor  can  only  be  eliminated  by  installing  an  appropriate  system  of  controls  and 
incentives. In today’s world, this is an important management task. 
Adaptation as a managerial task 
4. 
Before IT-related problems came to affect the very core of the digital economy, they  were 
commonly shifted to the IT department. But this approach to IT risks is outdated. Awareness 
of digital risks and setting up a strategy are now a leader’s duties. If your business crucially 
relies on digital processing, any strategic decision at the company level requires knowledge 
and  understanding  of  risks.  Besides,  we  frequently  observe  that  banks  find  it  difficult  to 
reorganise  their  IT  systems.  While  a  complete,  “big  bang”  overhaul  may  be  preferable,  it 
often  meets  with  resistance  from  many  parts  of  the  company.  To  avoid  being  locked  into 
more and more outdated structures, banks should not just consider the expected short-term 
benefits when designing their IT strategy. 
Furthermore, the digital world demands from banks’ managers something I would describe 
as unbiased attentiveness towards new technologies. If banks don’t think “digitally”, they’re 
going to find it difficult to compete for digital customers. 
They  have  to  reassess  their  client  relations  and  even  rethink  different  lifestyles  and  social 
trends.  The  individual  needs  and  wishes  of  customers  are  more  pivotal  than  ever  before. 
Take  a  look  at  social  networks,  at  online  shopping  or  even  at  information  research  – 
consumers are already used to having their own needs catered for. Consequently, banks will 
have to get into the habit of looking at things from the customer’s perspective. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Let us also bear in mind that competition is becoming more global and more transparent, the 
competitors more diverse. In addition to FinTech companies, other industries with a strong IT 
focus  are  only  one  step  away  from  the  banking  world.  This  means  that  the  lines  between 
industries are becoming blurred. Now more than ever, banks need to be aware of what the 
competition is doing so that they can review and refine their own strategies. 
From an evolutionary perspective, adaptability is another essential attribute. The digital world 
welcomes experimentation, is prone to sudden trends, and is constantly changing. Although 
the banking industry may not always be subject to all of this constant movement, adaptability 
is  definitely  becoming  more  important.  So  a  flexible  IT  infrastructure  that  supports 
adaptability, for example, will be vital. Business models can also be more open and flexible in 
structure. Just think of the “digital ecosystem” strategies banks are now deploying. 
Towards a resilient sector 
5. 
As a banking supervisor, I am wholeheartedly in favour of the goal of a stable sector. But this 
should not be understood as adopting a static view towards stability. For a workable financial 
industry, it is not decisive whether services are provided offline or online, by humans or by 
automated services. Our yardstick needs to measure whether the sector continues to fulfil its 
duty towards the real economy, which is to transform risks and provide payment and other 
financial services. That’s what is meant by a resilient financial sector. 
To  that  end,  we  have  to  ensure  there  are  no  “dead  ends”  to  the  digital  evolution  in  the 
financial  industry.  I  refer  to  IT-related  risks  in  particular.  If  we  rely  on  computers  and 
digitalised processes, we have to make sure that they are reliable and trustworthy. Sector-
wide  reputation  and  functionality  are  at  stake.  Nowadays,  a  customer’s  personal  payment 
information is stored not only at the bank but at a multitude of service providers and retailers 
as well. How can a bank ensure the safety of its payment services against a cyber-attack on 
a retailer’s network or on that of a third-party vendor? Combined efforts should be seen as 
insurance. You never know who will be the next victim of an attack. And attacks don’t stop at 
borders, so cooperation of this kind is also needed at the global level. In an interconnected 
and  therefore  interdependent  financial  sector,  strengthening  the  common  defence  should 
also be in the banks’ very own interest. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Let  me  restate  my  views  on  “digital  Darwinism”.  Adaptation  to  a  digitalised  financial  world 
does not simply require banks to develop new and ground-breaking ideas. It has more to do 
with a well-adjusted strategy – which means that it’s not just a race between development 
departments, but between leaders. As a supervisor, I therefore urge that we do not interpret 
digital competition as a race merely for the most advanced technologies, but for the right mix. 
This  is  why  I  am  not  in  favour  of  comparing  banks  to  dinosaurs.  Traditional  banks  may 
typically  have  a  pre-digital  DNA,  but  they  are  capable  of  learning,  adapting  to  a  digital 
landscape and cooperating with technological pioneers. And each bank needs to find its own 
strategy. Banking business itself is as irreplaceable as ever before. 
So what will not change? Business success will continue to hinge on entrepreneurial skills. In 
an  increasingly  digital  finance  sector,  the  role  of  banking  will  still  be  to  serve  the  real 
economy.  And  banking  is  based  on  trust.  To  keep  this  in  mind  will  be  key  to  ensuring  a 
thriving and stable financial sector. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
