Minouche Shafik: Goodbye ambiguity, hello clarity – the Bank of 
England’s relationship with financial markets 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England, at the University of Warwick, Coventry, 26 February 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I’d  like  to  talk  to  you  this  evening  about  the  Bank  of  England’s  relationship  with  financial 
markets. In particular: how we use our balance sheet and how we gather market intelligence. 
I  appreciate  my  saying  that  may  immediately  make  you  regret  giving  up  your  Thursday 
evening to hear a central banker speak! But let me make the case that the central bank’s 
balance sheet and the way we understand financial markets is at the very heart of modern 
policy making. And let me also argue that the journey from “constructive ambiguity” toward 
greater  clarity  around  how  we  interact  with  markets  is  essential  for  the  effectiveness  of  a 
modern central bank. 
The Bank of England’s balance sheet is the means by which we create money and hence the 
source  of  our  monetary  policy  responsibilities.  It  is  the  vehicle  through  which  we  provide 
liquidity  insurance  to  the  financial  system,  a  crucial  part  of  our  financial  stability  objective. 
And it is the point at which the implementation of macro policies meets the micro-reality of 
interactions with individual institutions. In all of these the Bank has proven agile in its ability 
to respond to the financial crisis and the changes in its responsibilities. 
Just as importantly, our interactions with markets give us a window through which to gather 
information about developments in financial markets. We refer to this as Market Intelligence 
(or  MI).  The  purpose  of  MI  is  to  ensure  that  the  Bank’s  policy  decisions  are  made  and 
implemented with a detailed understanding of the financial market context in which the Bank 
operates. The way we go about MI is changing – as set out in a Review we have published 
today – and I will take the opportunity to talk you through what I see as the key points. 
A recurring theme throughout these remarks is that the days when “constructive ambiguity” 
was  seen  as  a  helpful  foil  for  central  bankers  are  behind  us.  In  today’s  complex  and 
globalised  financial  system,  Governors’  eyebrows  and  fireside  chats  are  no  match  for  a 
clearly communicated framework in which information will be gathered and decisions made. 
The way we were: a brief history of money & liquidity provision 
2. 
Let me begin with a little historical perspective. The Bank of England was founded in 1694 
during a time of war with France and was tasked with arranging a £1.2 million loan to the 
government. This was funded by members of the general public, and “Dividend Day,” when 
payouts were made to the public, is still immortalised in a painting that hangs in the Bank 
today. 
At the time, there was excitement about the idea that a stable banking system could be a 
source  of  liquidity  to  fund  the  expansion  of  the  economy.  So  in  addition  to  being  the 
government’s  banker,  the  Bank  also  engaged  in  commercial  activities:  taking  deposits  in 
exchange for which it issued notes – and providing loans by discounting commercial bills. 
That  was  321  years  ago.  The  Bank  of  England  you  see  today  has  its  roots  in  a  relatively 
more recent act of Parliament. I refer of course to the 1844 Bank Charter Act, which paved 
the  way  for  the  Bank  to  become  the  monopoly  supplier  of  bank  notes,  and  effectively 
responsible for monetary policy in the UK. The Act also had the effect of limiting the amount 
of  commercial  business  the  Bank  could  undertake,  so  it  chose  to  concentrate  not  on 
competing with the emerging joint-stock and clearing banks, but instead to focus on its role 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
as banker to the banks, and supplier of liquidity of last resort. It could be argued that this was 
the point at which the Bank’s financial stability role was born. 
In subsequent years, as the Bank sought to define this role, it was helped by the advice of 
Walter Bagehot, a keen student – and sometime critic – of the Bank of England’s reaction to 
banking crises over history. By 1873 Bagehot had seen enough to declare that the correct 
policy for the Bank to pursue in order to head off an incipient panic would be to lend “freely 
and  vigorously…on  all  good  banking  securities”,  but  to  do  so  only  “at  a  very  high  rate  of 
interest...that no one may borrow out of idle precaution.”1 
Bagehot  had  two  other  pieces  of  advice  for  the  Bank  that  are  relevant  today.  First,  he 
advised that there should be a “clear understanding between the Bank and the Public that, 
since  the  Bank  holds  [the]  ultimate  banking  reserve  [it]  will  recognise  and  act  on  its 
obligations”. Second he advised that the Deputy Governor must be “a man of fair position” 
who  “must  not  have  to  say  ‘Sir’  to  the  Governor”.  This  is  a  slightly  old-fashioned  way  of 
saying  that  the  Deputy  Governor  should  be  independent  minded,  that  the  Bank  should 
empower  its  staff  and  must  always  remain  credible  with  the  public.  (Even  though  Bagehot 
foresaw  many  things,  even  his  liberal  mind  hadn’t foreseen  the  day  when  the  Bank  would 
have more than one Deputy Governor, and among them a woman!) 
A balance sheet that has evolved to meet the needs of monetary policy 
3. 
From a £1.2 million loan to the government in 1694, the Bank’s balance sheet has grown a 
long way to its current size of £400 billion. As Figure 1 shows, most of that expansion has 
come in the past 7 years, in large part reflecting the implementation of monetary policy since 
the  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2008.  Maintaining  credibility  in  the  money  we  issue  has 
been an objective of the Bank from inception. Since the early 1990s this has been pursued 
through an inflation targeting regime, and most of that period the tool of choice for monetary 
policy was interest rates. 
In the wake of the financial crisis and ensuing recession, however, Bank Rate was cut to a 
historic low of 0.5% – a level that was at the time considered to be the effective lower bound 
as further cuts could reduce the profitability of the banking sector and constrain the supply of 
credit to the economy. When more stimulus was needed, the MPC used a different tool – the 
Asset  Purchase  Facility  –  to  deliver  the  needed  stimulus  by  expanding  the  balance  sheet 
using  newly  created  central  bank  reserves  to  purchase  £375  billion  of  government  bonds 
with a range of maturities out to 55 years. 
Of course what was once considered radical has become mainstream by today’s standards. 
Indeed other central banks have gone further as the circumstances of their economies have 
dictated. The European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have stated their intention to 
purchase  significant  amounts  of  private  sector assets,  and  some  central  banks  have  used 
their  balance  sheets  to  purchase  other  countries’  assets  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  their 
exchange rate at a certain level. 
The  key  point  is  that  even  though  interest  rates  had  been  the  marginal  tool  of  monetary 
policy  for  several  decades,  monetary  policymakers  never  forgot  that  this  was  only  one 
manifestation  of  the  central  bank’s  unique  ability  to  create  narrow  money.  And  when  the 
effective  lower  bound  was  reached,  stimulus  could  continue  to  be  provided  by  expanding 
central banks’ balance sheets in new ways. 
Someone  recently  said  to  me  that  Quantitative  Easing  (QE)  is  “like  magic,”  as  if  central 
bankers are sorcerers with the capacity to conjure up economic miracles. I wish. In fact QE 
works  through  the  more  prosaic  channels  of  reducing  longer-term  interest  rates  in  the 
                                                
1  Bagehot (1873). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economy, and encouraging private sector investment in riskier assets by reducing the supply 
of long-duration government bonds, a phenomenon we call portfolio rebalancing. 
But  the  underlying  point  that  the  effect  of  this  new  monetary  policy  tool  is  less  intuitively 
understood is well taken. That makes effective communication and accountability important 
to monetary policy and indeed all central bank policies. These points were made very clear 
by Kevin Warsh’s recent review of transparency and the MPC. As a result, this August the 
MPC will begin publishing the minutes of its policy meetings and the Inflation Report at the 
same time as its policy decisions, giving markets and the public a clearer understanding of 
what underlies the judgements we make. 
Looking forward, it seems to me that the most likely next move in monetary policy will be a 
gradual  and  limited  increase  in  interest  rates.  The  current  weakness  in  headline  inflation 
largely reflects transitory – albeit sizeable – factors such a close to 50% decline in the price 
of oil, and the appreciation of sterling over the past two years. The underlying picture is one 
in which domestic demand is expected to continue growing robustly, facilitating a pick-up in 
wage growth, which we are starting to see, and a return of inflation to target. 
But we don’t have a crystal ball, and should circumstances turn out differently, the MPC has 
the means, the will and the responsibility to return inflation to 2%. On the upside, should the 
remaining  slack  in  the  economy  be  absorbed  more  quickly  than  expected,  the  MPC  can 
increase rates more quickly than currently implied by market yields. 
On the downside, should we perceive that low inflation is beginning to have a self-reinforcing 
effect through inflation expectations, we will have several tools at our disposal. One would be 
to increase rates more slowly than currently implied by market yields. Another would be to 
expand the Asset Purchase Facility and with it the Bank’s balance sheet. Another would be 
to cut Bank Rate further: the banking system is now operating with substantially more capital 
than it did in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. So reductions in Bank Rate are less likely 
to have undesirable effects on the supply of credit the UK economy than previously judged 
by the MPC. 
Some day we will also need to exit QE (though that will not come at least until Bank Rate has 
reached a level from which it could be materially cut were more stimulus required). Such a 
decision will be taken in pursuit of our inflation target. But I can assure you that this will be 
done in an orderly and clearly communicated fashion to avoid undue disruption in financial 
markets, including through close coordination with the Debt Management Office. 
Expanding and clarifying liquidity insurance 
4. 
How  we  use  the  balance  sheet  also  needed  to  evolve  to  meet  our  financial  stability 
objectives over the course of the financial crisis. In the decades prior to the crisis, the need 
for  the  Bank  to  provide  liquidity  support  was  infrequent  and  usually  on  a  small  scale.2  As 
such,  in  2007  the  Bank  had  a  relatively  limited  list  of  institutions  that  had  access  to  its 
balance sheet through what is called the Sterling Monetary Framework (SMF), along with a 
conservative list of collateral acceptable in its published facilities. And there was little clarity 
about  the  circumstances  under  which  the  Bank  would  extend  liquidity  support  for  financial 
stability purposes. 
Despite this less-than-ideal starting position, the Bank ultimately embraced the provision of 
liquidity to the system over the course of the crisis, with the expressed aim of reducing the 
costs  of  disruption  to  critical  financial  services.  This  came  about  via  an  alphabet  soup  of 
schemes,  including  DWF,  ECTR,  ELTR,  FLS,  ILTR,  and  SLS.3  Common  to  all  was  a 
                                                
2  See Plenderleith (2012) for details of episodes of lender of last resort since 1973.  
3  More information about these schemes is available on the Bank’s website: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
recognition that to achieve its aim, the Bank needed to provide liquidity against a wider range 
of collateral, to a wider range of counterparties, for a longer term. 
Two other innovations are noteworthy. 
• 
First, in some circumstances the Bank lent in a currency other than sterling – a first 
for our liquidity insurance operations.4 
Second, the Bank acted as a market maker of last resort in the sterling corporate 
funding markets – making small targeted purchases and sales of commercial paper 
and corporate bonds.5 
 Many of these changes were made in the heat of the crisis. And since the 2012 Winters and 
Plenderleith  Reviews6  much  effort  has  been  exerted  in  hardwiring  them  into  our  operating 
framework to make it clear to market participants how we  would act in future. As Figure 2 
shows, the membership of the Bank’s Sterling Monetary Framework has increased from 70 
in 2007 to 139 and counting. And the collateral we will accept in our regular operations now 
extends  from  AAA  bonds  all  the  way  to  own  name  raw  loans.  Changes  such  as  these 
provided the basis for Governor Mark Carney’s declaration that the Bank of England is “open 
for business.” 
I think changes made since 2007 indicate that we are also “open about our business.” The 
Winters  Report  highlighted  that  ambiguity  around  the  Bank’s  published  liquidity  insurance 
framework is rarely constructive. And the Bank is committed to providing clarity around the 
circumstances  under  which  it  would  provide  liquidity  in  the  event  of  market-wide  or  large 
idiosyncratic stress: 
• 
The  Bank’s  Red  Book7  clearly  sets  out  the  aims  and  objectives  of  the  Sterling 
Monetary Framework with regard to the provision of liquidity insurance. 
Each SMF participant has a “relationship manager” and we aim to give them clarity 
about the circumstances in which they can expect to borrow. 
We  have  improved  our  external  accountability  by  producing  an  Annual  Report 
overseen  by  the  Bank’s  Court  which  assesses  how  the  framework  has  performed 
relative to its objectives. 
  But hardwiring the lessons learned from the last crisis into our operations will not necessarily 
provide the agility to provide the liquidity insurance that may be required in the future. For 
that reason, our approach to liquidity insurance continues to evolve: 
• 
In November 2014 we extended eligibility for membership of the Sterling Monetary 
Framework to include broker-dealers and Central Clearing Counterparties (CCPs), 
giving  non-banks  access  to  our  permanent  liquidity  insurance facilities for  the first 
time. 
The range of acceptable collateral continues to extend: we have started to approve 
pools of auto loans and invoice finance receivables as eligible collateral for the first 
time. And we have started work to ensure there are no technical obstacles to our 
ability to accept equities as collateral should the need arise. 
                                                 
4  The Bank introduced US Dollar repo operations in September 2008, and their usage peaked at the equivalent 
of  $86bn  in  October  2008.  The  Bank  also  provided  a  peak  of  US$25bn  to  RBS  via  Emergency  Liquidity 
Assistance. 
5  The Bank’s commercial paper purchase schemes opened in February 2009 with a peak usage of £2.4bn. The 
corporate bond purchase scheme opened in March 2009, with a peak usage of £1.62bn. 
6  Plenderleith (2012) and Winters (2012). 
7  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/sterlingoperations/redbook.aspx. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 The Bank will commence work in the second half of 2015 to assess the feasibility of 
establishing  a  Shari’ah  compliant  facility.  By  providing  an  additional  highly  liquid 
asset for Islamic banks, such a facility would be a significant step forward in their 
liquidity management capabilities. 
We are continuing to develop our capacity to lend in currencies other than sterling. 
• 
Although we are providing clarity around how the central bank would react in the event of 
market-wide  or  large  idiosyncratic  stress,  it  is  important  that  some  of  our  facilities  retain 
elements  of  discretion.  For  example,  the  benefits  of  Discount  Window  Facility  and 
Emergency Liquidity Assistance could be undermined by immediate disclosure, if speculation 
about individual firms were to threaten financial stability. In this respect, both the Winters and 
the  Plenderleith  reports  recognised  that  a  lag  between  usage  and  public  disclosure  can 
provide  a  good  balance  between  our  financial  stability  objectives  and  our  duty  to  be 
accountable to the public. 
Co-ordinating liquidity support with micro-prudential policy 
5. 
Historically, one of the arguments for having ambiguity over the Bank’s provision of liquidity 
insurance, particularly against a wide range of collateral, was that clarity would induce moral 
hazard.  The  more  certain  banks  could  be  of  the  availability  of  liquidity  insurance,  the  less 
incentive they would have to manage their own liquidity prudently through private markets. 
Acting as a mitigant against this, the expansion of the Bank’s liquidity provision capabilities 
has gone hand in hand with two other key developments: the introduction of stronger liquidity 
regulation  requiring  banks  to  hold  more  liquid  assets  (Figure  3),8  and  the  creation  of  a 
resolution regime which makes it more credible that firms will be allowed to fail in an orderly 
manner. 
Taken  together,  liquidity  insurance,  the  resolution  regime  and  microprudential  supervision 
provide a framework of incentives for banks to manage their liquidity. And their co-existence 
within  the  Bank  of  England  makes  co-ordination  of  these  policies  substantially  more 
straightforward. 
Having  supervisors  close  at  hand  can  also  help  in  the  decisions  around  the  provision  of 
lender  of  last  resort  facilities.  In  such  a  situation,  a  central  bank  should  not  lend  to  an 
institution which is insolvent. This means that the Bank will need to make a judgement as to 
whether or not the entity it is lending to has a viable medium term future, or that the Bank has 
a credible exit strategy. 
In  practice,  distinguishing  between  illiquidity  and  insolvency  can  be  difficult.  A  close 
understanding of a firm is invaluable in providing the information needed to judge the long 
term viability of its business model, and in providing short term assessments of its liquidity 
position.  Supervisors  are  well  placed  to  provide  such  information  and  their  knowledge  of 
institutions,  coupled  with  our  risk  managers’  assessment  of  the  collateral  made  available, 
greatly enhances our ability to make these judgements. 
The  free  flow  of  such  information  is  of  course  possible  when  there  is  an  institutional 
separation between supervision and the lender of last resort. But my early experience is that 
having them under one roof greatly enhances our ability to co-ordinate and optimise policy in 
the public interest. 
                                                
8 
Initially  in  the  form  of  strengthened  FSA  liquidity  requirements,  subsequently  the  implementation  of  the 
Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio, which will in turn be supplemented by the Net Stable Funding Ratio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 10 
Gathering market intelligence in a more complex and transparent world 
6. 
Given  its  responsibilities  for  monetary  policy,  macro-prudential  regulation  and  micro-
prudential supervision, it is quite rightly expected that the Bank’s policy decisions are taken 
with  a  detailed  understanding  of  the  financial  market  context  in  which  the  Bank  operates. 
Since  its  inception,  the  Bank’s  market  operations  have  long  provided  a  key  input  to  this 
understanding, by providing first-hand information from financial institutions. 
Between  the  years  1786  and  1989,  this  was  epitomised  by  the  “Senior  Broker  to  the 
Commissioners for the Reduction of the National Debt.” Clad in a top hat, and invariably with 
a  tightly  rolled  umbrella  (see  Figure  4  for  an  example),  the  holder  of  that  position  was 
responsible for announcing (in person) changes in the Bank’s minimum lending rate, and at 
the same time gathering opinion on the state of the gilt market. 
He was expected to report to the Gilt Edged Division three times a day, providing information 
about market activity, the quantity of buying and selling, and the gilt maturities and coupons 
that  were  in  particular  demand.  He  was  also  responsible  for  reporting  on  the  mood  of 
investors  and  advised  the  Bank  on  the  appetite  for  stock,  institutional  cash  positions  and 
expectations.9,
Even  if  top  hats  are  a thing  of  the  past,  the  essence  of  Market Intelligence  (MI) gathering 
remains  the  same  today:  our  staff  maintain  a  regular  dialogue  with  financial  market 
participants to draw on their expert knowledge and perspective of the markets in which they 
operate.  This  takes  place  through  bilateral  meetings,  group  discussions,  and  phone  calls, 
supplemented by all of the screens and data analysis on our modern trading floor. 
But  compared  to  the  time  of  the  “Senior  Broker”,  the  coverage  of  Market  Intelligence  has 
expanded dramatically. The markets in which the Bank operates (i.e. short term money, fixed 
income and currency markets) continue to provide the natural starting point for our Market 
Intelligence. But in recognition of the fact that threats to the Bank’s ability to achieve its core 
purposes  can  have  their  origins  anywhere,  coverage  has  now  expanded  to  23  different 
markets as far afield as structured products and emerging markets, covered by 80 analysts 
across the Bank for whom MI is a significant part of their job. 
This first-hand information differs from what can be gathered from our Bloomberg screens, 
analyst reports, and research – and it provides an important perspective on both short-term 
moves and long-term trends. It permeates every part of the organisation: every morning the 
Governors  get  together  to  receive  an  in  depth  briefing  on  financial  markets  from  Chris 
Salmon, the Executive Director for Markets, and part of my job is to brief the MPC on recent 
market developments and its implications for monetary policy. 
MI  also  feeds  into  more  strategic  issues  and  the  policy  decisions  of  the  Committees.  For 
example,  the  delicate  decision  of  how  the  MPC  should  communicate  its  opinion  that  the 
effective lower bound for Bank Rate has declined was in part informed by the opinion of our 
money market desk who were able to tell the MPC what the existing assumptions were in the 
market. 
And  I  expect  market  intelligence  to  make  a  strong  contribution  to  the  FPC’s  pursuit  of  its 
medium  term  priority  of  ensuring  the  existence  of  diverse  and  resilient  sources  of  market 
based finance. Recent episodes (such as a sharp decline and reversal in US Treasury yields 
in October, a close to 50% decline in the price of oil and the removal of the Swiss Franc peg) 
have  reminded  us  that  volatility  in  financial  markets  has  certainly  not  been  consigned  to 
                                                
9  As described in Wormell (1985). 
10  Also  known  as  “the  Government  Broker”,  the  Senior  Broker  to  the  Commissioners  for  the  Reduction of  the 
National Debt was by convention a senior partner of Mullens & Co, a firm of stockbrokers, until 1986 when the 
job formally moved into the Bank of England. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
history. A key question for both the FPC and the PRA Board will be whether markets’ ability 
to  recover  reflects  their  resilience  to  shocks;  or  conversely  whether  these  incidents  are 
symptomatic of an underlying fragility. Market Intelligence can play a key role in answering 
that question. 
But  the  expanded  responsibilities  of  the  Bank  have  also  revealed  that  elements  of  our 
approach need to be strengthened. In particular, a recent report by Lord Grabiner indicated 
concern that the Bank’s systems and controls have not always kept pace with the changing 
role of the Bank. 
Today we are publishing the results of a thorough Review11 of our MI function. From it I would 
highlight  three  key  points  that  will  remove  some  unconstructive  ambiguities  around  the 
gathering of MI: 
• 
First the Bank has published a “Market Intelligence Charter” which explains in clear 
language  the  terms  of  the  Bank’s  engagement  with  market  participants,  and  its 
rationale for gathering MI. 
Second the Bank is strengthening the set of policies (including escalation, recording 
and compliance policies) that govern MI, and expanding the training accompanying 
those policies. 
Third, the Bank will establish a Bankwide executive level committee to oversee and 
agree the priorities for the Bank’s MI programme to ensure it retains flexibility, focus, 
and  relevance  to  the  policy  challenges  of  today  and  tomorrow.  In  addition,  a 
dedicated  MI  Division  will  co-ordinate,  synthesise  and  disseminate  MI  around  the 
bank. 
  The ability of the Bank’s MI function to provide information to senior policymakers over the 
past 8 years, as the first waves of the crisis first rushed onto the Bank’s doorstep, and then 
as solutions flowed back out across the system, has been vital to our effectiveness. The staff 
who do this work are a credit to the institution. As public servants they contribute every day 
to  delivering  our  mission  to  promote  the  good  of  the  people  of  the  United  Kingdom  by 
maintaining  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  changes  we  are  making  public  today  will 
ensure they can continue to do that important work effectively. 
Open about our business 
7. 
The Bank’s balance sheet has been at the heart of the financial system for over 300 years, 
and remains our most important policy tool. The innovations and adaptations in recent years 
have meant that it has been central to the flexible and effective response to all of the major 
policy challenges faced by the Bank since the onset of the financial crisis. And I am sure it 
will be a vital part of everything we do in future. 
Over  that  period,  we  have  re-learnt  one  of  Bagehot’s  lessons  –  that  ambiguity  is  rarely 
constructive. Policy is at its most effective when it is clearly communicated. We have taken 
major  steps  to  improve  communications  around  our  monetary  policy  decisions,  the 
framework we use to provide  liquidity to the financial system, and the way  we use  Market 
Intelligence. Those changes show that the Bank of England is not just “open for business,” 
we are also “open about our business.” 
 
                                                 
11  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/mireview.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Figure 1:  
Bank of England Balance Sheet as a share of nominal GDP 
Per cent
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 0
3
8
1
0
4
8
1
0
5
8
1
0
6
8
1
0
7
8
1
0
8
8
1
0
9
8
1
0
0
9
1
0
1
9
1
0
2
9
1
0
3
9
1
0
4
9
1
0
5
9
1
0
6
9
1
0
7
9
1
0
8
9
1
0
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
Sources: ONS, www.measuringworth.org/datasets/ukgdp/result.php# and Bank 
calculations.  A  variant  of  this  chart  was  originally  published  in  a  speech  by 
Andrew  Haldane  (2009),  “Banking  on  the  state,”  http://www.bankofengland. 
co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf. 
Membership of the Sterling Monetary Framework 
Figure 2:  
Sterling Monetary Framework members
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Source: Bank of England. 
 
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 Sterling liquid assets relative to total asset holdings of  
Figure 3:  
UK banking sector(a) 
Per cent
16
Narrow Ratio(a)
Broad ratio(b)
Reserve ratio(c)
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 Sources: Bank of England and Bank calculations. 
(a)  Data  for  building  societies  are  included  from  2010  onwards.  Prior  to  this, 
data are for UK banks only. 
(b) Cash + Bank of England balances + money at call + eligible bills + UK gilts. 
(c) Proxied by: Bank of England balances + money at call + eligible bills. 
(d) Cash + Bank of England balances + eligible bills. 
 Figure 4:  
Sir Nigel Althaus (left), Senior Broker to the  
Commissioners for the Reduction of the National  
Debt, 1982–1989, with Roger Daniell (right), his deputy 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
(2013) 
“The  UK  at 
the  heart  of  a 
renewed  globalisation”, 
References 
Warsh,  K.  (2014)  “Transparency  and  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee”, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/warsh.pdf. 
Bagehot (1873) “Lombard Street”, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Carney,  M 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech690.pdf. 
Carney,  M  (2014)  “One  Mission.  One  Bank.  Promoting  the  good  of  the  people  of  the  
United  Kingdom”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/ 
speech715.pdf. 
Clapham, J, (1944) “The Bank of England A History,” Cambridge University Press. 
Fisher,  P  (2010)  “Managing  Liquidity  in  the  System:  The  Bank’s  Liquidity  Insurance 
Operations,” 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/ 
2010/speech450.pdf. 
Fisher, P (2012) “Liquidity support from the Bank of England: The Discount Window Facility,” 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2012/561.aspx. 
Giuseppi, J (1966) “The Bank of England”, Evan Brothers Limited. 
Hauser,  A  (2014)  “Lender  of  last  resort  actions  during  the  financial  crisis:  seven  practical 
lessons  from  the  United  Kingdom,”  in:  Rethinking  the  lender  of  last  resort,  BIS  Papers, 
No. 79, pp 81–92. 
Plenderleith,  I  (2012)  “Review  of  the  Bank  of  England’s  Provision  of  Emergency  Liquidity 
Assistance 
in  2008–09”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/ 
2012/cr1plenderleith.pdf. 
Tucker, P (2004) “National Association of Pension Funds Investment Conference: Keynote 
Speech,”  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2004/ 
speech216.pdf. 
Tucker,  P  (2014)  “The  lender  of  last  resort  and  modern  central  banking:  principles  and 
reconstruction,” in: Rethinking the lender of last resort, BIS Papers, No. 79, pp 10–42. 
Winters, B (2012) “Review of the Bank of England’s Framework for Providing Liquidity to the 
Banking  System”,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr2 
winters.pdf. 
Wormell, J (1985) “The Gilt-Edged Market”, George Allen & Unwin Publishers. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
