  
 
Benoît Cœuré: Domestic and cross-border spillovers of unconventional 
monetary policies 
Remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  at  the  SNB-IMF  Conference  “Monetary  Policy  Challenges  in  a  Changing  World”, 
Zurich, 12 May 2015. 
 I would like to thank Roland Beck, Fédéric Holm-Hadulla and other colleagues at the ECB for their contribution to 
the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the European Central Bank’s website. 
Summary 
Discussion  has  recently  emerged  on  the  global  financial  market  implications  of  diverging 
monetary  policy  cycles.  Central  banks  in  large  advanced  economies  can  free  themselves 
from the global financial cycle and regain monetary independence, provided that they show 
clarity  in  purpose  and  resolve  in  implementation.  The  global  exchange  rate  adjustments 
should  be  therefore  seen  as  a  natural  by-product  of  such  move  towards  monetary  policy 
independence  and  divergence.  Monetary  policy  always  has  unintended  consequences,  no 
matter where  it  is  pursued.  At the  ECB we take  our  decisions with  a  view to  attaining  our 
primary objective of price stability. But without prejudice to this objective, we take financial 
stability  risk  seriously  and  monitor  closely whether  severe  imbalances are  emerging  in  the 
financial sector. 
 Dear Managing Director, dear President, ladies and gentlemen, 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  an  intense  discussion,  both  at  the  national  and  the 
international  level,  about  the  potential  financial  market  implications  of  unconventional 
monetary policies. 
At the international level, policy makers have been particularly concerned with the surge in 
capital inflows, and the resulting exchange rate appreciation pressures in emerging markets. 
More  recently,  amid  monetary  policy  normalisation  in  the  United  States  and  additional 
monetary  policy  easing  in  the  euro  area,  including  through  the  launch  of the  public  sector 
purchase programme (PSPP), a new, but conceptually related discussion has emerged on 
the global financial market implications of diverging monetary policy cycles. 
At the national level, the main concerns were spillovers to equity and real estate markets, 
and the worries about the emergence of asset price bubbles as a result of unconventional 
policy measures. 
As  responsible  central  bankers,  we  should  be  mindful  of  these  two  concerns.  In  my 
presentation today, I would like to share my views with you on both. 
International spillovers of diverging monetary policy cycles 
Over  recent  quarters,  macroeconomic  conditions  have  diverged  across  major  advanced 
countries,  with  solid  economic  growth  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  being 
accompanied by a tepid recovery in Japan and until recently in the euro area. Given that the 
central banks of the countries I have just mentioned have clear domestic mandates to fulfil, 
this  had  inevitably  led  to  diverging  monetary  policy  cycles  among  major  advanced 
economies.  At  the  same  time,  many  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  are  displaying 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  slowing growth rates, while also partly benefiting from the disinflationary impact of the decline 
in oil prices, which creates additional leeway for monetary easing. 
Taken these developments into account, the global economy is currently characterised by an 
environment of diverging monetary policy cycles. While the US Federal Reserve (and to a 
lesser extent the Bank of England) has signalled its willingness to embark on steps towards 
monetary policy normalisation, many central banks across the world are on an easing bias – 
in fact, more than 20 central banks have eased monetary policy since the start of 2015. 
This  pattern  of  global  monetary  policy  divergence  has  per  se  not  been  unprecedented.  In 
fact, when considering interest rate level differentials between the United States and the euro 
area  as  a  simple  indicator  of  differences  in  global  monetary  policy  cycles,  it  appears  that 
current divergences are not out of line with what was happened in the past: while differences 
in short-term policy rates currently do not reveal the full amount of divergence (see Chart 1, 
black  line)  due  to  the  zero  lower  bound,  long-term  interest  rate  differentials  can  give  us  a 
better  gauge  for  measuring  differences  in  global  cycles  (see  blue  line).  According  to  this 
yardstick, global monetary policy divergence is indeed elevated, with the spread between the 
US Treasury and German 10 year yields being today north of 150 basis points. But we have 
had comparable episodes in the past, in particular when Europe was lagging behind the US 
cycle, which happened in the early 2000s and again in the mid-2000s. 
Importantly, global monetary policy divergence is also a sign of monetary policy autonomy. In 
fact, while there has been a lot of discussion in recent years about a loss of monetary policy 
independence  in  the  presence  of  a  global  financial  cycle  (which  Hélène  Rey  famously 
referred  to  as  the  “dilemma,  not  trilemma”)1,  recent  interest  rate  developments  vividly 
illustrate the independence of ECB monetary policy. You can think of the recent development 
as a two stage process, triggered by the successive monetary policy decisions of the ECB. In 
the first stage, short-term euro area interest rates were clearly de-coupled from US rates in 
the summer 2013 when the ECB, in the wake of the Fed’s taper tantrum, decided to issue its 
own forward guidance. In the second stage, since August 2014 when the ECB announced 
various credit easing packages and in particular since the announcement of the ECB’s PSPP 
in January, ECB unconventional monetary policy has become the main driver of long-term 
interest rates in the euro area. Long-term rates have declined considerably  in response to 
the announcement, in line with our intention to further ease financing conditions in the euro 
area,  rising  somewhat  very  recently  as  part  of  market  correction  of  earlier  gains  (see 
Chart 2). In this regard, the ECB’s PSPP programme is having effects on notably term and 
inflation risk premia that are similar to those witnessed previously in the Unites States. The 
ensuing  de-coupling  of  long-term  interest  rates  can  also  be  seen  in  dynamic  correlations 
between yields on 10  year German Bund and US Treasury bills  which have declined (see 
Chart 3). 
The de-coupling of long-term rates shows that the well-known trilemma in the international 
macro is still relevant, at least for large advanced economies. This holds true despite recent 
evidence that argues in favour of a dominant global financial cycle triggered by the economic 
centre’s monetary policy (namely that of the United States), which influences other countries’ 
national monetary policies mainly through capital-flows, credit growth, and bank leverages, 
making the types of exchange rate regime of the non-centre irrelevant. But as I have argued 
above,  predicting  the  end  of  the  dilemma  was  maybe  pre-mature  in  the  case  of  large 
advanced economies. 
                                                
1  See Rey, H. (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy independence”, 
paper presented at the 25th Jackson Hole symposium, Wyoming, August 2013. Mundell (1963) outlined the 
hypothesis  of  the  monetary  trilemma  as  a  policy  trade-off  between  the  choices  of  monetary  autonomy, 
exchange rate stability, and financial openness. See Mundell, R. A.: “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy 
under  Fixed  and  Flexible  Exchange  Rates”,  The  Canadian  Journal  of  Economics  and  Political  Science, 
Vol. 29, No. 4 (November, 1963), pp. 475–485. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The lesson from our recent experience is that central banks in large advanced economies 
can  free  themselves  from  the  global  financial  cycle  and  regain  monetary  independence, 
provided that they show clarity in purpose and resolve in implementation. 
For emerging markets and smaller advanced economies, there is also evidence that  while 
the global financial cycle has indeed been a dominant factor for the last two decades, the 
arrangement  of  open  macro  policies  such  as  the  exchange  rate  regime  and  financial 
openness still have direct influence on sensitivity to the financial cycle2. 
Explaining  the  difference  in  this  respect  between  large  advanced  economies  and  EMEs 
would take us far beyond today’s discussion. Let me only suggest that the existence of deep, 
diversified  local  currency  denominated  capital  markets  makes  a  crucial  difference  to  help 
decouple from the global financial cycle. This incidentally suggests that Capital Market Union 
as it is currently planned in Europe, on top of its allocative benefits, can help strengthen our 
economic and monetary independence. 
The global exchange rate adjustments should be therefore seen as a natural by-product of 
such move towards monetary policy independence and divergence. While the exchange rate 
is not a policy target for the ECB, it is nonetheless important for growth and price stability. 
Also,  the  exchange  rate  movements  we  have  seen  over  the  past  few  months  are  not 
unprecedented  relative  to  the  experiences  of  other  major  central  banks  with  regards  to 
announcements of quantitative easing policies (such as QE2 and QE3 in the United States 
and QQE in Japan, as well as the Bank of England’s APF).3 
This  notwithstanding,  global  policymakers  need  to  be  mindful  that  global  monetary  policy 
divergence can also lead to some tensions that are due to global monetary policy spillovers. 
Many discussions in the context of global monetary divergence have centred on the issue of 
monetary policy spillovers and the exposure of emerging market economies to volatile capital 
flows. 
Yet, as I have argued elsewhere4, there is no broad international consensus on the size and 
persistence of such spillovers.5 More generally, there is little evidence that capital flows to 
emerging markets have been excessively volatile over most recent years, contrary to what is 
often claimed. They have been strong since the global financial crisis, decreased somewhat 
                                                
2  See  Aizenman,  J.,  Chinn  M.  and  Ito.  H,  (2015)  “Monetary  Policy  Spillovers  and  the  Trilemma  in  the  New 
Normal:  Periphery  Country  Sensitivity  to  Core  Country  Conditions”,  NBER Working  Paper  No.  21128,  April 
2015. 
3  QE 1 which was implemented at the height of the financial crisis was followed by a sharp appreciation of the 
US dollar. Similarly, the euro appreciated after the announcement of outright monetary transactions (OMT). In 
both cases the main channel of transmission was a reduction of (global) risk aversion. 
4  See “Policy coordination in a multipolar world”, remarks by Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of 
the  ECB,  at  the  5th  annual  Cusco  conference  organised  by  the  Central  Reserve  Bank  of  Peru  and  the 
Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee: “70 years after Bretton Woods: Managing the interconnectedness of 
the world economy”. Cusco, 22 July 2014. 
5  See also Chen, Q., Filardo, A., He, D. and Zhu, F., “International Spillovers of Central Bank Balance Sheet 
Policies”, Working Papers, Bank for International Settlements, November 2011. It studies the macroeconomic 
effects of US QE on 17 advanced and emerging economies in the period from 2007 to 2013. The authors find 
that the estimated effects of US QE on the emerging economies – while quite diverse across countries – are in 
many  cases  larger  than  those  in  the  advanced  economies,  including  the  United  States.  In  the  case  of  the 
ECB’s unconventional monetary policy, international spillovers are likely to be more limited, however – at least 
the empirical evidence available so far suggests that it did not lead to international portfolio rebalancing across 
regions and assets. This may, however, have changed after the launch of the PSPP. See also Fratzscher, M., 
Lo  Duca,  M.  and  Straub,  R.,  “ECB  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy  Actions:  Market  Impact,  international 
Spillovers  and  Transmission  Channels”,  paper  presented  at  the  15th  Jacques  Polak  Annual  Research 
Conference hosted by the International Monetary Fund, 13 14 November, 2014; and Georgiadis, G. and Gräb, 
J.,  “Global  Financial  Market  Impact  of  the  Announcement  of  the  ECB’s  Extended  Asset  Purchase 
Programme”, Working  Papers,  No  232,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  Globalization  and  Monetary  Policy 
Institute, March 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  during the  taper  tantrum  in  2013  and  do  not  appear  to  have  been  markedly  influenced  by 
recent signals by the Federal Reserve towards monetary policy normalisation. With regard to 
the  PSPP,  there  is  also  no  evidence  that  recent  ECB  measures  have  led  to  increased 
international portfolio re-balancing from the euro area to emerging market economies. 
While we need to keep an eye on international spillovers, it is not clear whether monetary 
policy  coordination  would  lead  to  a  superior  outcome.  In  particular,  from  a  theoretical 
perspective, it is not clear whether an optimal domestically oriented monetary actually leads 
to more international spillovers.6 
As recently argued by Charles Engel, research on monetary policy coordination is too scarce 
to  draw  any  firm  conclusions7.  In  particular,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  optimal  non-
cooperative policy leads to more spillovers than would occur under a cooperative policy. In 
addition,  examples  of  successful  co-ordination  in  the  real  world  are  few  and  limited  to 
exceptional crisis times  as documented in an IMF study by Ostry and  Gosh (2013)8, quite 
apart from the political and institutional obstacles to such co-ordination, starting with the fact 
that central banks have domestic, not global mandates. 
But taking a sceptical view of formal policy coordination does not imply that the central banks 
of the large advanced economies should not be mindful of the consequences of their actions. 
This brings to mind two policy consequences. First, clear and consistent communication is of 
the  essence.  Forward  guidance  has  proven  relevant  and  useful  and  it  remains  a  valuable 
asset in today’s uncertain environment. Second, knowledge of monetary policy spillovers can 
be enhanced. At the ECB, we are still learning about the transmission channels of our asset 
purchase  programme  and  their  international  consequences.  And  the  extent  to  which  the 
spillovers  from  this  programme  to  EMEs  will  offset  those  from  US  monetary  policy 
normalisation is yet to be understood. There remains much to be learnt by the global central 
bank community when it comes to monetary policy spillovers. 
Domestic spillovers 
Turning  to  domestic  spillovers,  another  question  that  has  frequently  been  raised  after 
unconventional policies were launched is whether they are prone to create financial stability 
risks  in  general  and  asset  price  bubbles  in  particular.  Some  have  even  argued  that  asset 
price bubbles were necessary condition for economic recovery in the early 2000s.9 So, are 
bubbles an unintended consequence of unconventional monetary policies that we should live 
with? 
First  of  all,  monetary  policy  always  has  unintended  consequences,  no  matter  where  it  is 
pursued.  By  altering  short-term  interest  rates,  central  banks  affect  the  inter-temporal 
decisions of households. Inter-temporal redistribution is at the heart of monetary policy that is 
aimed at ensuring price stability, and it thus has effects on the income distribution of savers 
and spenders. 
But  monetary  policy  also  affects  the  distribution  of  income  along  the  intra-temporal  and 
spatial (cross-country) dimension. Changes in short-term interest rates affect consumption, 
savings  and  wealth  in  different  ways,  depending  on  the  characteristics  of  individual 
                                                
6  See in particular the seminal paper by Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoff (2002), “Global implications of self-oriented 
national monetary rules,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No 2, pp. 503–35. 
7  See  Engel,  C.  “International  Coordination  of  Central  Bank  Policy”,  NBER  Working  Paper  20952,  February 
2015. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20952.pdf. 
8  See Ostry, J.D. and Gosh, A.R. “Obstacles to International Policy Coordination, and How to Overcome Them, 
International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note, SDN 13/11, December 2013. 
9  Summers, L. (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound”, 
Business Economics 49(2). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  households  in  different  jurisdictions.  But  all  these  effects  can  be  considered  temporary, 
indirect and unintended, i.e. a side effect of a strategy that is aimed at ensuring price stability 
in the economy.10 
That said, it would be a logical fallacy to conclude that all domestic spillovers are acceptable. 
Bubbles  are  a  case  in  point.  Bubbles  are  a  possible,  but  not  an  inevitable  result  of 
unconventional  monetary  policies.  And  if  they  are  welcome  at  all,  then  only  in  a  severely 
constrained,  second-best  world.  But  in  this  case,  we  should  ask  ourselves  how  we  can 
overcome the constraints that prevent better policy outcomes, rather than settling for bubbles 
to temporarily mask the constraints. 
Let me elaborate. 
Facing the threat of a persistent low-growth and low-inflation environment and a binding floor 
on  standard  policy  rates,  many  central  banks  have  resorted  to  unconventional  measures. 
These  measures  were  aimed  at  further  pushing  down  nominal  interest  rates  along  the 
maturity  spectrum  to  track  the  secular  decrease  in  the  natural,  “Wicksellian”  real  rate  of 
interest. Thereby,  they  helped  induce  firms  and  households  bring forward  their  investment 
and  consumption  spending  in  comparison  with  that  in  a  no  policy-change  scenario  and, 
ultimately, bring the natural rate back to more normal levels. 
I am convinced that there is no alternative for us than acting this way in order to deliver on 
our mandate. Yet, there is a danger associated with the temporary, yet potentially extended 
period where low interest rates are needed to stimulate investment and consumption. With 
real interest rates below potential growth, private agents may just borrow to purchase assets 
in limited or rigid supply (e.g. real estate property). In this dynamically inefficient11 world with 
structurally weak growth prospects, this may actually become an attractive way for savers to 
generate  returns  on  their  savings  that  investments  in  the  productive  sector  are  unable  to 
generate. 
In this case, we end up with a “rational bubble”, which – as you will have noticed – follows 
the dynamics prominently highlighted by Jean Tirole12. While unconventional monetary policy 
is not a necessary condition for this type of bubble to emerge, it may render it more likely – 
and more violent in the event of its materialising. 
So what are the consequences of such bubble? 
In the short-term, it may indeed generate a temporary boost to the economy. And for a while 
this  boost  would  be  difficult  to  distinguish  from  the  regular  workings  of  asset  purchase 
programmes, which actually embed asset price increases as a desired effect, which passes 
on the initial impulse to broader financing conditions via portfolio rebalancing. 
But  this  boost  would  ultimately  be  very  costly.  Not  only  does  it  does  it  come  with  welfare-
decreasing  macroeconomic  instability,  but  it  also  brings  about  an  arbitrary  redistribution  of 
wealth that may, in the worst case, undermine social cohesion and trust that the central bank 
is  acting  within  its  narrow  price  stability  mandate.  And  moreover,  it  can  create  financial 
stability  risks  elsewhere,  generating  negative  spillovers  from  what  should  otherwise  be  a 
normal international adjustment process. 
Against  this  background,  it  would  be  wrong  to  treat  bubbles  as  a  welcome  replacement 
therapy to a sustainable growth model. Instead, macroeconomic and structural policies have 
                                                
10  See “Monetary policy in a fragmented world”, speech by Benoît Cœuré, at the 41st Economics Conference of 
the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 10 June 2013. 
11  Constellations of dynamic inefficiency imply, from a long-run perspective, that the real growth rate exceeds the 
real interest rate on physical capital. 
12  Tirole, J. ( 1985): “Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations” Econometrica, Vol. 53, No. 6 (Nov., 1985), 
pp. 1499–1528. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  to set the necessary conditions so that investment in productive sectors becomes attractive 
again and investment in bubble-prone areas is discouraged, so that total factor productivity is 
increased and the natural rate of interest ultimately reverts to what is normal. 
These principles underlie our views on the right policy mix for the euro area. 
We  take  monetary  policy  decisions  with  a  view  to  attaining  our  primary  objective  of  price 
stability. Thereby, we establish a stable nominal anchor for the private sector, which in turn is 
a fundamental precondition for overall macroeconomic stability. 
Without  prejudice  to  this  objective,  we  take  financial  stability  risk  seriously  and  monitor 
closely whether severe imbalances are emerging in the financial sector. In this context, we 
consider the financial stability risks related to our policy measures to be contained. Should 
risks emerge, macro-prudential policy  is best suited to safeguard financial stability.  Macro-
prudential instruments can be targeted more efficiently to those sectors and countries where 
systemic  risks  may  be  materialising13.  Finally,  we  encourage  national  authorities  to  do 
whatever is in their power to place the euro area on a more dynamic growth path, thereby 
creating attractive investment projects that generate high, but fundamentally justified, returns. 
These are the conditions for unconventional monetary policies to bring economies back to a 
stable and sustainable growth path, both at home and abroad. 
 
 
                                                 
13  “Reinforcing financial stability in the euro area”, speech given by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, 
at the OMFIF City Lecture, London, 8 May 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
