   Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The impact of oil price volatility and its 
implications for the economy and for macroeconomic stability 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Dialogue 
on “The Impact of Oil Price Volatility and its Implications for the Economy and for Macroeconomic 
Stability”, Kampala, 25 February 2015. 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
1.  
The theme of my talk will be uncertainty about the future path of oil prices and what this means for 
the medium to long term future of the Ugandan economy. Uncertainty is a very important concept 
in economics, in particular because it has profound implications for long term investment decisions 
by the private sector. Uncertainty in respect to oil prices, and thus public revenue in oil producing 
economies, also has important implications for fiscal sustainability. 
In the second half of 2014 the global oil market suffered one of its largest price shocks for many 
years.  Inevitably,  this  has  led  economic  agents  to  re-examine  their  long  term  forecasts  for  oil 
prices. For example, one of the sources of economic forecasts that we use in the Bank of Uganda 
had made a forecast, in March 2014, of crude oil prices at $148 per barrel in the second quarter of 
2019,  The  same  source  has  now  revised  down  its  forecast  for  the  crude  oil  price  in  the  same 
period to $81 per barrel, a fall of 46 percent. I do not intend to offer my own opinion on the price of 
oil  over  the  long  term,  because  it  is  almost  impossible  to  make  such  a  forecast  with  any 
reasonable  degree  of  confidence.  The  2014  oil  price  shock,  unexpected  as  it  was,  has  forced 
many  analysts  to  question  the  assumptions  which  previously  underlay  their  long  term forecasts 
and, as a result, the future path of oil prices has become much more uncertain. 
The greater uncertainty about the future price of oil has prompted major oil companies to put on 
hold  their  investments  in  high  cost  oil  production  projects,  such  as  deep  water  drilling  in  the 
Atlantic Ocean. Oil companies are now much less confident than they were before mid 2014 that 
long term oil prices will be high enough to allow these high cost projects to be viable. 
The key point that I want to emphasise is not that long term oil prices will necessarily be lower 
than previously forecast, it is that the future long term path of oil prices has become much less 
certain. In 10 years time, global oil prices could be above $100 per barrel, but they could also be 
less than $50 per barrel. Furthermore, even estimating the probability that oil prices will be $100 
per barrel, or $80 per barrel or $40 per barrel, is very difficult. This is the essence of uncertainty: it 
involves risks which cannot objectively be quantified. 
Uncertainty and investment 
2.  
Important  innovations  to  the  theory  of  investment  decisions  were  made  by  economists  in  the 
1980s. Researchers such as Ben Bernanke, Robert Pindyck, Dani Rodrik and Ricardo Caballero 
demonstrated  that  decisions  by  private  sector  investors  to  undertake  irreversible  investments  – 
that is investments with sunk costs – are very sensitive to risk and uncertainty about future prices, 
costs  and  other  variables  which  affect  the  financial  viability  of  the  investment.  Faced  with 
uncertainty about such variables, investors have incentives to delay their irreversible investments 
in order to wait for more information which will reduce that uncertainty. This is known as the option 
value of waiting. The greater is the risk and uncertainty about the future path of variables which 
affect the viability of an investment, the higher is the option value of waiting and the larger are the 
incentives facing the investors to delay their investment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   What  does  this  mean  for  Uganda?  Uncertainty  has  implications  for  investment  in  both  the  oil 
industry and the rest of the economy. Let me start with the oil industry. 
Most of the capital investments in the oil industry are irreversible, especially those involving large 
scale infrastructure such as pipelines, so the option  value of  waiting will  be a factor influencing 
investment  decisions  in  the  industry.  Given  the  uncertainty  about  long  term  oil  prices,  the 
probability that future oil prices will be too low to enable investments in the oil industry in Uganda 
to be commercially viable over the lifetime of the projects is not zero. You may reasonably take the 
view that the probability that oil prices will be too low to ensure the viability of investments is small, 
but it cannot be dismissed entirely. Investors in the oil industry face a tangible risk that global oil 
prices over the long term will render their investments unviable. That risk is higher today than it 
was prior to the fall in global oil prices in mid 2014. 
As  a  consequence,  investors  in  the  oil  industry  face  incentives  to  delay  or  slow  down  their 
investments as they wait to see how global oil prices might evolve. That does not mean that oil 
companies will not invest in Uganda’s oil industry, but it does mean that they will be more cautious 
about committing resources to irreversible capital projects than would have been the case before 
the fall in global oil prices. It is likely, therefore, that the pace of capital investment in oil production 
and  the  associated  infrastructure  will  be  slower  than  had  been  anticipated  before  the  global  oil 
price fall. 
The uncertainty about the future path of oil prices will also have implications for private investment 
decisions  in  the  non  oil  sectors  of the  economy.  Oil  revenues  expand  the  national  income  of  a 
country. An increase in national income raises demand for consumption and investment goods. 
The demand for traded consumption and investment goods can be met through higher imports, 
but the demand for non traded goods, such as most services and housing, can only be met from 
domestic production. Hence to enable the economy to maintain internal balance, between supply 
and  demand,  the  structure  of  production  within  the  economy  must  shift  in  favour  of  industries 
which produce non traded goods. The larger is the increase in national income derived from oil 
revenues, the greater the shift in the structure of production from the traded goods sectors to the 
non traded goods sectors. To bring about this shift in the structure of the economy, there must be 
capital  investment  in  the  non  traded  sectors,  together  with  a  reduction  of  investment,  or  even 
disinvestment, in the traded goods sectors. This shift in the production structure of the economy is 
facilitated by an appreciation of the real exchange rate, entailing a rise in the prices of non traded 
goods  relative  to  those  of  traded  goods,  thereby  making  non  traded  goods  production  more 
profitable and traded goods production less so. Private investors have incentives to invest in the 
non traded goods sectors because they expect demand for non traded goods to increase in the 
future when the country begins to spend its oil revenue. 
The global price of oil has important consequences for national income. In essence the bulk of the 
national  income  derived  from  oil  takes  the  form  of  public  revenues,  because  the  oil  companies 
themselves are foreign. Production sharing agreements in the oil industry are structured so that 
most of the risk of price volatility is borne by public revenues. A fall in global oil prices translates 
directly  into  a  fall  in  public  revenue  and  hence  a  fall  in  national  income.  Consequently,  the 
uncertainty  about  the  level  of  future  global  oil  prices  also  translates  into  uncertainty  about  the 
amount of national income that will be derived from oil and hence the magnitude of any future rise 
in  demand  for  non  traded  goods  in  the  Ugandan  economy.  With  future  demand  being  more 
uncertain, private investors have incentives to delay irreversible investments in these sectors. This 
will  not  be  offset  by  any  increase  in  private  investment  in  the  traded  goods  sectors  of  the 
economy, because the future viability of these sectors is also uncertain. As a result, we can expect 
the  uncertainty  about  future  global  oil  prices  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  private  investment, 
which in turn will cause real economic growth rates to be lower than they would otherwise have 
been. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The uncertainty about oil prices also has  implications for the exchange rate. Increased national 
income and expenditure as a result of the exploitation of natural resources leads to real exchange 
rate  appreciation.  Economic  agents  will,  therefore,  expect  that  the  exchange  rate  will  be  more 
appreciated  in real terms  in  the future,  when  the  country  begins  to  spend  its  oil  revenue.  If the 
exchange rate is expected to appreciate in the future, it will actually start to appreciate now, as 
rational investors purchase assets valued in the domestic currency. The more uncertain outlook 
for oil prices has almost certainly led economic agents to revise their expectations about the path 
of the real exchange rate in the long term, which in turn will affect the exchange rate now. I think 
that  it  is  very  likely  that  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  our  exchange  rate  came  under  strong 
pressure in the final quarter of 2014 and in January of this year. 
Fiscal policy 
3.  
Finally, I want to discuss the implications of oil price uncertainty for fiscal policy, which is crucial 
for macroeconomic stability. As I have noted, most of the national income earned from oil accrues 
to  the  Government  in  the  form  of  public  revenue.  The  Secretary  to  the  Treasury  has  already 
spoken on this issue so I will keep my remarks brief. 
We have to be honest and recognize that it has become more likely that public revenues from oil 
over  the  long  term  will  be  lower  than  we  had  previously  expected.  The  uncertainty  of future  oil 
prices  will  affect  public  revenues  through  two  channels.  First,  it  is  possible  that  oil  production 
volumes  will  be  lower  if  irreversible  capital  investments  in  the  oil  industry  are  delayed,  as  I 
discussed earlier. Secondly, the public revenue earned from each barrel of oil pumped out of the 
ground will probably be lower. The latter effect could be very significant given that the Government 
bears most of the risk of price volatility. Of course oil prices could recover strongly over the long 
term  thereby  yielding  substantial  revenues  for  the  Government.  But  there  is  also  a  probability, 
which  cannot  be  dismissed  as  negligible,  that  oil  prices  will  not  be  high  enough  to  enable 
Government  to  earn  much  revenue  from  oil.  As  a  consequence,  there  is  a  huge  amount  of 
uncertainty about the magnitude of public revenues over the long term. 
Given this uncertainty, it is imperative that Government should be very cautious about incurring 
expenditure  commitments,  the  financing  of  which  is  contingent  on  substantial  inflows  of  oil 
revenues  in  the  future.  Such  commitments  could  include  both  a  large  expansion  of  the  public 
wage  bill  and  large  public  investment  projects.  If  Government  were  to  undertake  such 
commitments and future oil revenues are too low to fully finance them, the fiscal position would be 
unsustainable;  the  Government  would  face  a  fiscal  crisis.  This  is  what  happened  in  many  oil 
producers in the early 1980s, when the oil price fell sharply. 
Fiscal  sustainability  is  essential for  macroeconomic  stability.  If the  country  were  to face  a fiscal 
crisis, interest rates would spike, inflationary expectations would rise, the exchange rate would fall 
sharply  and  capital  would  flow  out  of  the  country.  In  these  circumstances,  it  would  be  almost 
impossible  for  the  central  bank  to  maintain  macroeconomic  stability  through  monetary  and 
exchange rate policy. The message that I want to convey is that we must have a far sighted long 
term fiscal policy which recognizes the inherent risks to the magnitude of future oil revenues and 
ensures that fiscal sustainability will not be put at risk, even if this means adopting very cautious 
spending plans in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. 
Conclusion 
4.  
Volatility  and  uncertainty  makes  macroeconomic  management  more  difficult.  Nevertheless,  the 
uncertainty over future oil prices does not presage disaster for Uganda. Even if oil prices are very 
low  in  the  future  and  very  little  public  revenue  is  earned  from  oil,  our  economy  can  continue  to 
thrive and grow if it is well managed, as it has been for the last 25 years. What would be disastrous 
for our economy is if we fail to recognize the significant risks entailed in the uncertain future path of 
oil prices and incur expenditure commitments which subsequently prove to be unaffordable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
